THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD: THE SECOND PART.

BY ALEXANDER ROSS.

THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD: The Second Part, IN SIX BOOKS: Being a CONTINUATION
of the famous HISTORY of Sir WALTER RALEIGH, Knight: Beginning where he left;
Viz. at the End of the MACEDONIAN Kingdom, and deduced to these Later-Times:
That is, from the Year of the WORLD 3806. Or, 160 Years before CHRIST, till the
end of the Year 1640. after CHRIST: BY ALEXANDER ROSS. WHEREIN The most
Remarkable Passages of those TIMES, (both Ecclesiastical and Civil) in the
greatest States, Empires, and Kingdoms, are Represented: Together with a
CHRONOLOGY of those TIMES, etc. and an Alphabeticall-Table by the AUTHOR.

In Historia hoc praecipue salubre ac frugiserum, omnis te exempli documenta in
illustri posita intueri: ut inde tibi tuaeque Reipub. quod imitere capias; inde
foedum inceptu, foedum exitu, quod vites.

Live. lib. 1.

LONDON, Printed for John Saywell, and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign
of the Greyhound in little-Britain without Aldersgate, M: DC. LII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY EARL OF ARUNDEL and SURREY Primier Earl, and Earl
Marshal of ENGLAND, Baron HOWARD, Mowbray, Segrave, Brewes of Gower,
Fitz-Allan, Clun, Oswaldstry, Matravers and Graystock, etc.
MY LORD:
ANtiquity did wittily adumbrate and represent unto us a Wise man, by the
Fiction of double faced Janus, with a Serpent by him, biting his tail;
intimating, that hereby wise men take notice, and make use both of things
present and past; and withal are not unmindeful of their End, expressed by the
Serpent biting his tail. Now that which makes a man truly wise, and double
faced with Janus, is History of things past; without the knowledge of which, a
man has but one face, and looks only upon things before him; and such are
Children, says Tully, though they be aged; whereas History makes men ripe and
aged in Knowledge, though they be children in Years. God has appointed two
Guides and Conductors of Man's life, while we are Pilgrims here in this Valley
of Tears; namely, Precept and Example: The Law furnishes us with Precepts,
History with Examples; which make our way more short and easy then the other,
as Seneca tells us: (Longum iter per praecepta, breve and efficax per exempla)
These two Guides are like the two Pillars that conducted the Israelites through
the Desert; and indeed, they are both so needful, that without them, we shall
never attain to the Land of Promise, the Canaan of our Happiness. And as
History is necessary to all, so chiefly to those who are set upon the Pinnacle
of Honor, whose actions are obvious to all eyes, and obnoxious to all men's
censures; who being placed upon Watch-Towers, had need of better eyes, and a
longer perspective then those who live below; Now History is the Perspective
that lets them see the danger a far off: Had it not been for the knowledge of
History, Lucullus the Roman had never subdued Mithridates the King of Pontus;
nor had Xanthippus the Lacedemonian overthrown the Romans; whereas before this,
the Carthaginian Commanders, for want of Historical Knowledge, were still
worsted by the Roman Armies. In Histories great Men will find what uncertainty
and vanity there is in outward splendour; what it is that makes true and genuine
Nobility, and discriminates it from that which is supposititious and
adulterate; and it will show them that there is no confidence to be given to
humane strength, Policy, nor Actions.

Edocet humanis quae sit fiducia rebus.
They that sit at the Helm of Government, had need of the Historical Compass to
steer by. Among other emoluments which accrue to Princes by History, they will
find them to be their truest friends, and wisest Counselors, both in
admonishing and reproving them: For this cause Demetrius Phalerius advised King
Ptolemy to read Histories, that from them he might learn truth; For Friends,
either out of fear or shame, will not tell Princes of those faults, which
History blusheth not to demonstrate. Besides, great Men receive this benefit by
History, That they are incited to virtuous actions, by the examples of those
brave men who went before them. So was Alexander by reading the Story of
Achilles; and Caesar by reading the Stories of Alexander; and the Turk by
reading the actions of Caesar. Thus Aenaeas animates his Son. Tu facito mox
quum matura adoleverit aetas
Sis memor, and te animo repetentem exempla tuorum,
Et pater Aenaeas, and avunculus excitet Hector.
And as they are encouraged to virtuous Achievements by History; so for the
same Achievements they shall be made glorious by History to all Posterity;
which will be of longer continuance then Brazen or Marble Statues: Therefore
Theseus was more beholding to Connidas the Historian who wrote his life; then
to Silamon that painted, or Pharrhasius that ingraved him to the life: And for
this cause the Historian was more honored by the Athenians, then the other two;
for Statues express the Lineaments of the body only; but Histories demonstrate
the Endowments of the mind: Statues are for a time; Histories for perpetuity;
which had Pericles known, he would rather have entertained the Historian to
register his actions, then Phidia the Painter to Delineat his Picture fighting
with the Amazon upon Minerva's Target; which is long since lost; but the
History remains. In a word, I may call History with Polybius, and Aristotle,
(...) the truest kind of Learning, and usefullest exercise in the world.

Now my Lord; considering with my self, that what I have spoken here, is the
object both of your knowledge and practice; And duly weighing your noble
extraction, your Learning, and love to learned men; your goodness, wisdom, and
affability, with those other eminent parts in you, wherein you are nothing
inferior to any of your honorable Progenitors; I was ambitious to send abroad
this Piece under the shelter of your Honors Patronage, knowing it will receive
the better acceptance, if it be graced in the Frontispiece with your Noble
Titles. The chief end of this Dedication, is to show to the world the dutiful
respect and zeal I bear to the Ancient, and Honorable Family of the HOWARDS;
and withal to your own Eminent Parts, by which you shine among others, (Velut
inter stellas Luna minores.)

Your Honors most humble Servant, ALEXANDER ROSSE.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Had scarce cast Anchor in the Harbor, and finished my Navigation in the Sea
of Sir Walter Rawleighs History, which I bounded within the narrow Streights of
an Epitome, when I was solicited by some of my Friends, to hoise Sail again,
and to lanch into the Ocean of the General History of the World, that I might
finish what he had begun, and begin where he had finished; descending from the
times where he brake off abruptly, into these later Years, that so there might
be a complete Abridgement of all Memorable Passages from the beginning of the
World till these present times. The Task I found somewhat difficult, being
forced to be both Shipmaster, Pilot, and Mariner my self alone, as not having
any Amanuensis; but was fain to read, digest, contract, and write all my self:
Yet considering I was now at leisure, and naturally hated Idleness, the Mother
of mischief, and the Devils Cushion, as the Fathers call it; and that I was
not born for my self, but sent hither to do service in this great House of
the World; to employ the Talent committed to me, and not to wrap it up in a
Napkin; to impart the light of my Candle to the Family, and not to hide it
under a Bushel; to work in the Vineyard, and not to stand idle in the
Marketplace all the day long; to labor whilst it is Day, before the Night
come wherein no man can work; and to be so employed, that when my Master
comes, he may say, Euge serve bone; considering also how precious time is, how
quickly gone; how long a Lesson, and how short a Life (as Theophrastus
complained) Nature has given us; how great the account is we are to make up,
of so many Hours, Days and Years spent, either idly, or wickedly, or
impertinently; and how uncomfortable must the end of those be, who spend their
Seneca.
days like Sardanapalus, or Hogs rather, in eating, drinking, sleeping and
playing, having no remorse with Titus for so many days and years which they
have lost, wherein they have done no good, but like fruitless Fig Trees cumber
the ground: When I considered, I say, these things, I adventured rather to
undertake this Task, then with Solomon's Sluggard to fold my arms, to sleep and
slumber away the short remainder of my Days in Idleness, or vain and sinful
Pleasures; There are above three parts already of the Glass of my Life run
out, being now almost 62 years of age, I desire that the fourth part may not be
worse, for that were (desinere in Piscem) to look like a Siren or Mermaid, to
begin in the Spirit, and end in the Flesh, with the foolish Galatians; I shall
be loath to degenerate with Hercules, of whom the Poet speaks: (Caepisti melius
quam desinis ultima primis
Cedunt dissimules hic vir, and illa puer.) Ovid.

I have been hitherto a careful dispenser of my time, and a Niggard of my
days, having employed as few of them as I could in Idleness, and even from my
youth I have been more conversant among the dead then the living, though I have
seemed to some of Epicurus his swinish Scholars, no better then one of those
mad men in the Gospel, who dwelt among the Graves; yet I have found more true
content among these Dead men then ever I could enjoy among the living. But why
should I call those dead, who are now more alive in their Works, then when they
were alive in their Bodies, having attained to that life commended by the
Orator (De quis nulla unquam conticescet aetas, quae memoria vigebit saeculorum
omnium, quam ipse aeternitas semper Cicero.
intuebitur) I have been content hitherto, rather to converse in the Stoicall
School of Zeno, then in the voluptuous Garden of Epicurus; and with Caesar
(Equitare per Britannos Scoticus pati pruinas) then with Florus, cursitare per
tenebras, pulices pati rotundos) But let men spend their days as they list, or
as their good and bad Genius induces them, I am sure, that they who have
employed their time in doing good according to their Calling, shall find true
content and comfort on their deathbeds, when they are departing hence, to him
that sent them hither; and who will exact a strict account of their time spent.
Whereas the others must needs at their departure be accompanied with grief and
horror, remembering the precious hours and years they have misspent, saying
with old Evander, (O mihi praeteritos referat si Jupiter annos!) Virgil.

Which the Poets did elegantly and wittily express unto us, by showing that
none went over the River Styx into the Elysian Fields, but such as had Charon
for their Pilot; that is, The comfort and joy of a good conscience, which will
never prove the guide or companion of pleasure and sin.

Some tell me, that it is now time for Me to give off writing, being old, and
having the burden of 62 years on my back. To whom I answer, That my age as yet
(blessed be God) is to me no burden; as it is to some who find it heavier
then Aetna was to Enceladus. I cannot accuse my age, as he said: (Nihil habeo
Cicero.
quod accusem Senectutem meam.) But I may say with the old Italians in the Poet
-- Nec tarda senectus (Debilitat vires animi, mutatve vigorem) Virgil.

and to whom God has given, crudam viridemque senectam, a vivid and vegit old
age, he expects of them more fruit in that age; who is so apt to write or speak
as he who has experience with maturity of Judgment, Wisdom and learning?
which cannot be in young men; (Temeritas florentis aetatis, prudentia, Cicero.
Senectutis) young men may be fit in the great Ship of a Commonwealth, to hale
the Ropes, to hoise the Sails, to draw the Pump, to weigh the Anchor, and to
clamber up the Masts; but old men are fittest to sit at the Stern, to Steer the
Ship, and to keep her from falling on the rocks and quicksands. Wine is ever
best when it is old, and Fruits are sweetest when ripest. Young men are for
action, Old men for direction; young men may see farther, but old men can judge
better; the one may have a quicker Corporal, but the other has a nimbler
Mental sight: (...). Therefore Isocrates, Plato, Plato.
Homer, Hesiod, Sophocles, Ambrose, Augustine, and many more, wrote most of
their excellent Works in their old age. So I will with Solon be content, (...),
both to grow Old with Teaching, and Learned with Age.

It were weakness in me to claw the Reader with flattering terms for his
approbation or favorable censure of these my pains, and to beg his good word
for my good will in compiling this Epitome; for he that is Learned, Judicious,
and Ingenuous, cannot speak ill of what is meant well, nor discommend his pains
that are undertaken for a Public benefit; as for the carping Mome who has a
sting with the Wasp, but no honey with the Be, who can be content to take his
ease, and carp at other men's pains, which every Dunce can do, being far more
easy to play the Mome then the Mime, to reprehend, then to imitate; as for
such, I say, they can no more refrain their tongues from carping and reproving
even those things they know not, then Rats and Mice can forbear gnawing of
Books and Papers they understand not; which does argue want, both of judgment,
learning, and ingenuity; for the inseparable companions of Momus, are Pride and
Envy: Lasiness and Ignorance his Parents, which the Poets wittily expressed, by
making him the Son of Night and Slumber.

I will not here digress into the commendation of History, which Tully calls the
Light of Truth, the Witness of times, the Cicero.
Mistress of Life, the Messenger of Antiquity, and the Remembrancer of Life. It
is indeed one of the most delightful and profitable employments of a man's
life, to read Histories, which stirs up men to virtue, and deterrs from vice,
whilst they read how the one is rewarded, and the other punished; it makes a
man serviceable, both to the Church and State; it is a Study fit for Divines to
illustrate and confirm their Doctrins, whilst they exhort to Virtue, and dehort
from Vice; it shows them also the increase and decrease of Religion, with the
diverse concomitants thereof; it is fit for the Lawyer, to show him the original,
diversities, and changes of Laws and Governments; for the same cause it is a
fit study for all Princes, Magistrates, and Politicians, without which their
Government will be but lame: and no less necessary is it to Soldiers,
especially to Commanders and Captains, where they may see the diverse causes,
events, attendants, and Stratagems of War. Physicians also, Philosophers, and
Poets may reap no small benefit by reading of Histories. Alexander made himself
so expert a Warrier as he was, by reading the Life and Actions of Achilles.
Selymus the Turk caused the Actions of Julius Caesar to be translated (whereas
his predecessors slighted all Histories as fabulous) and by reading of these,
he became so expert a Soldier, that in a short time he overrun a great part of
Africa and Asia. So Caesar was animated by reading the Life of Alexander, to
undertake his great exploits. Plutarch tells us that Paul Aemilius who subdued
Perses the Macedonian King, spent all his idle time in reading of Histories,
Plutarch.
which made him so good a Soldier. Charles the Great was so affected with
Histories, that usually as he sat at dinner and supper he caused them to be
read to him. And Alexander Severus Lampridius.
never undertook any great Action, till first he had consulted with Historians.
And because of the great benefit which redounds to a Kingdom or State by
History, we read how anciently Histories have been honored. Polybius that wrote
the Roman History, and their Wars with the Carthaginians, was honored Pausanias.
at Megalopolis with a Statue on a high Pillar: The History of Tacitus is
commanded by Tacitus the Emperor to be placed in all Libraries, and lest it
should perish, he caused it every year to be written ten times over. Pompey the
great honored Cicero
Theophanes the Historian with the Privileges of the City of Rome. Titus
Vespasian bestowed great wealth and honors on Josephus the Jewish Historian,
whose Statue was erected at Joseph.
Rome: And so did Julian the Apostate upon Aurelius Victor, the Roman
Historiographer. The Egyptians who were careful Sigonius.
to preserve their Histories and ancient Monuments, slighted the Grecians for
their neglect herein, accounting them no better then children. And we read of
Alphonsus King of Arragon, that he doated upon Livies History. But how needful
History is for Governors and Princes, let Claudian speak in his own Language to
Honorius the Emperor.

Interea, Musis animus dum mollior jnstes,
Et quae mox imitere legas: nec desinat unquam
Tecum Graia loqui, tecum Romana vetustas.
Antiquos evolve duces, assus^e futurae
Militiae; Latium retro te confer in aevum.
Libertas quaesita placet? mirabere Brutum:
Perfidiam da^nas? Metii satiabere paenis.
Triste rigor nimius? Torquati despue mores.
Mors impensa bonum? Decios venerare ruentes.
Vel solus quid fortis aget, to ponte soluto
Oppositus Cocles, Mutii te flamma docebit.
Quid m^ra perficiat; Fabius: quid rebus in arctis
Dux gerat, ostendet Gallorum strage Camillus.
Discitur hinc nullos meritis obsistere casus.
Prorogat aet^rnam feritas tibi Punica famam
Regule; successus superant adversa Catonis:
Discitur hinc quantum paupertas sobria possit:
Pauper erat Curious, reges cum vinceret armis
Pauper Fabritius, Pyrrhi cum sperneret aurum.
Sordida Serranus flexit dictator aratrae.
Lustratae Lictore casae, fascesque salignis
Postibus affixi, collectae Consule messes,
Et sul cata diu Trabeato rura colono.
Which are thus Englished by an ingenuous Gentleman.

THy mind to Books (whilst yet it is plyant) bend,
And what thou soon should imitate, intend;
Often confer, and set before thine eyes
The Roman, and the Greek Antiquities:
Peruse those ancient Captains, and prepare
For all the hardships of thy future War:
Reflect upon Rome's elder Annals, there
If purchased Freedom any pleasure bear,
Brutus thy wonder and applause will be:
Art thou an enemy to treachery?
Metius thy spleen in's death shall satisfy;
Is too much rigor cruelty? despise,
Torquatus fatherless severities.
Is death sustained, an honest bravery?
Then reverence the falling Deity*
What single valor may perform alone,
Number-prest Cooles with his bridge broke down,
And Scevolas burning hand will let thee know;
What wise delay may compass, Fabius show;
How Captains should in worst extremity
Deport themselves, Camillus Victory
Over the Gauls will teach; And hence we find
No Chance can master the deserving mind,
Thee, Regulus, the Punick cruelty
Has purchased an eternal Elogy:
Cato's misfortunes triumph over success.
What an excesless fortune may express
We hence may learn, Curious even then was poor
When he subdued proud Kings by armed power:
Fabritius.
Who Pyrrhus gold despised was poor enough;
Serranus the Dictator held the plough;
The Lictor then the Cottage walked around,
The fasces tied to willow posts were found,
The Consul housed the Corn, the Country than
Was tilled by a Senatoricall Husbandman.
History is also useful to Oratorie, as Tully often shows; without which an
Orator either in persuading or dissuading, will prove defective. It is also
necessary for Schoolmasters; therefore Quintilian will have Poedagogues to
read History to their Scholars, whereby they may have matter for their
Exercises and Orations: To be brief, History has this pre-eminence above
Oratory and Poetry, that Oratory has been rejected by the Lacedaemonians;
Poetry by Plato, Tertullian and others, as two pernicious instruments in a
Commonwealth, to pervert men's minds; but History was never yet rejected by any;
and how can it, abounding with so much profit and pleasure; for what can be
more profitable then to learn Wisdom by other men's follies, to get experience
by other ^ns cost and labors, and to be safe by other men's dangers (Foelix
quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.) History is like a Watchtower on which we
may see dangers a far off, and so avoid them; and what can be more pleasant
then to see a Tragedy acted to the life; which only is to be seen in History;
for here we shall see the whole world, but as a Stage on which men of all sorts
have acted their parts; Princes, Prelates, Pesants of all ages acting the same
things, on the same Stage; who after they have laid aside their discriminating
Vizards, and personating garments, they are all alike, as they were before they
put them on: For Kings and beggars have the same way of coming in, and the same
way of going out: Mors Sceptra ligonibus aequat: Diogines cannot distinguish
King Philips skull from the rest; nor is there any difference in Carons Boat,
between the greatest and the meanest; all must Row there alike.

This History which I have compiled out of many Writers, contains all the most
memorable passages and events which have been Recorded since the second
Macedonian War, in which that Kingdom ended about the year of the World 3790.
and the 155 Olympiad after the building of the City, Anno. 593. about 250 years
before Christ's Nativity; where Sir Walter concludes his History; so that from
that time till this are about 1900 years; in all which space you shall see upon
the same Theater of the World, the same Tragedies of Wars, Plagues, Famins,
Oppressions, Tyrannies, Thefts, Murders, Fires, Earthquakes, Inundations,
Massacres, Ruins of Castles, Temples, Palaces, Desolation of Countries,
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, Devastation of Towns and Cities, Alteration of Laws
and Governments, Transportation of Colonies of men, women, and children, from
one place to another; I say you shall see the same Tragedies (with some
variation of Circumstances) reiterated by different Actors, succeeding each
other in their Generations: If you ask me to what purpose have all these stirs
continually bin, and yet are still in the World; I answer, to no other purpose,
but that insatiable, covetous, and ambitious Minds may have more of this
earthly Turf to crawl and dominier upon (as if they wanted elbow-room) and some
more clods of earth, whereof a little will content them, when their vast and
ambitious thoughts are laid as low as their carcasses; then shall a short and
narrow Coffin contain those, whom one, or more Kingdoms will not content:
Within how little room was that Pellaean Youth shut up, whom one World could
not satisfy: E^ vix totam Hercules implevit Urnam, the huge body of Hercules
did scarce fill an Urn, when he was burned to ashes. What madness is it then to
turn the World upside-down, to cheat, oppress, and murder one another, for
more room, whereas a little will serve a contented mind; one world can contain
many Elephants; many woods, fields, medows, hills and dales cannot suffice one
covetous and ambitious mind; tantus amor nummi, and dominandi insana cupido;
but if we will truly consider the shortness of our life, the eternity that
comes after, the vanity, uncertainty and meannesse of the things we struggle
for; we shall find on our deathbed, that we have been striving all this while
for Goats wool, an Asses shadow, Moonshine in the water, for butterflies,
nutshels, toies, and babies of clours, with children, saving that Majora
ludimus, and grandioribus pilis, we sport our selves, and trifle away our time
with greater bables then they do; so that we do little better then gather peble
stones with Caligula and his Army, and hunt all our days after flies with
Domitian: and when we have toiled our selves in vain, we may say with Peter,
That we have labored all night, but have got nothing. In Lucian when Mercury
lifted up Charon Lucian.
to the top of Parnassus, which they placed upon Ossa, Pelyon, and other high
hills, he saw from thence (...), etc. a various and confused multitude, whose
life was full of troubles, some sailing, some fighting, others pleading, some
ploughing, some hoarding up their moneys, and others begging: the houses looked
like mole hills, and the men like Emmets, the Cities seemed to him like
bee-hives, wherein each Be had a sting, wherewith they did nothing but sting
one another; some domineering like Hornets, carrying and pulling the weaker;
some like Wasps, others as Drones; round about them did fly, hopes, fears,
madness, covetousness, anger, hatred, besides multitudes of diseases; as
Fevers, Consumptions, Inflammations, Swords, Thieves, Judges, Tyrants, and so
forth, (...): If (says he) Men would' in time acknowledge themselves to be
Mortal, and that after they had finished their short pilgrimage here, they
must forsake all terrene things; and awake out of their sleep, having been in a
Dream, and would live more prudently and circumspectly, they would be less
troubled in the hour of death, and not depart howling and weeping to Charon, as
they use to do: but the Poet Buchanan tells us, in few words, men's vanity in
this point.

Percipias rerum sit quantula portio, verbis
Quam nos magnificis in regna superba secamus.
Partimur ferro, mercamur sanguine fuso,
Ducimus exiguae glebae de part triumphos! etc.
O pudor! O stolidi, praeceps vesania voti!
Quantula pars rerum est in qua se gloria tollit?
Ira fremit, metus exanimat, dolor urit, egestas
Cogit opes ferro, insidiis, flamma atque veneno.
Scilicet and trepido servent humana tumultu.
Which may be thus Englished:

Behold how small the measure is of things,
Which proudly parted is by earthly Kings.
We share with swords, and with our blood we buy,
Small Turfs on which we ride triumphantly, etc.
O shame! O madness of our rash desires!
What is it at which vain glory thus aspires?
We fret, fear, grieve, we wants with wealth supply
Got by fire, sword, poison and treachery,
We Are full of tumults, fears and vanity.
Why then shall we set our affections, and dote upon this Earth, which compared
to Heaven, is but a Point; how inconsiderable and small then are the pieces of
this point we strive for: we cheat, lie, steal, swagger, fight, swear, and
forswear; we cut the throat, and squeese the blood of each others heart; yea,
we sell our Souls to the Devil, and hazard the loss of eternal happiness, for
the uncertain, vexatious, fugitive vanities of this world; we lay out our Money
for that which is not Bread, says the Prophet; and we dig for, ^or make to our
selves Cisterns that will hold no water; quantum est in rebus inane: O the
vanity, emptiness, and madness of men, that consider not how their life is but
Persius.
a span in length; their body like glass or earthen pitchers for britlenesse;
the things they so much covet, are but smoke, or that vain Emperors painted
Banquet, which did a while please the eye, but no ways satisfy the stomach.
And how the things we neglect are truly satisfactory and eternal, whilst we
with Aesops. Frog and Mouse, fight eagerly for nothing; Death, that great Kite,
which is still hovering over our heads, comes and carries us all away in his
talons. Why should we dream of long continuance here, when we see the great
Empires, Monarchies, States, Cities, and Magnificent Buildings of former times,
all fallen into dust and nothing. Nunc segetes ubi Troja fuit, Troy is Ovid.
a cornfield; Jerusalem a heap of stones, In aeternos collapsa cineres, says
Hierom, fallen into perpetual ashes; and Rome is ruin Hierom.
according to the old Prophecy, (...). of which Bellay the French Poet sings,
as he is translated by Spencer.

Thou stranger which for Rome in Rome here seek'st,
And naught of Rome in Rome perceiv'st at all;
These same old Walls, old Arches, which thou see,
Old Palaces, is that which Rome men call.
Behold what wrack, what ruin, and what wast,
And how that she which with her mighty power,
Tamed all the world, has tamed her Self at last;
The prey of Time, which all things does devour.
Rome, now of Rome is the only funeral,
And only Rome of Rome has victory;
Ne ought save Tyber hastening to his fall,
Remains of all: O worlds inconstancy!
That which is firm does flit and fall away,
And that is flitting does abide and stay.
So then that once glorious City and Queen of the world, is but now, as
Buchanan calls her, Tantum veteris cadaver Urbis, a carcass only, or bare
sceleton of that ancient City. When Sulpitius sailed by the ruins of Corinth,
and other ancient Cities, he writes to Cicero (who was much grieved for the
loss of his daughter Tullia) showing he had no reason to be discontented at the
death of a mortal Woman; whereas the carcasses of so many Cities in one place
lay flat with the ground: (Nos homunculi indignamur si quis nostrum interlit,
cum uno in loco tot oppidorum cadavera projecta jaceant) the uncertainty
therefore, and vanity of humane affairs, even in their greatest glory, have
induced many brave men to quit their Dignities and high places, and to betake
themselves to privacie; thus Dioclesian and Maximilian were contented to lay
down their Imperial Ornaments and Power, and to descend to a mean, yet a more
secure condition of life; so that Dioclesian preferred his Garden of Pothearbs
to all the Roman honors. Amadeus Duke of Savoy found more content and
happiness in his Monastery then in his Duchy: And of late years, Charles the
fifth, Emperor, after so many Triumphs and glorious Achievements, was pleased
to exchange all his dominions and Imperial Robes, for a Monks Habit, and a
place in the Monastery of St. Laurence in the Escuriel, five miles from Madrid:
And it is no wonder that Princes and great Men many times are out of love with
their own greatness, if we consider the perpetual anxieties, fears, cares,
jealousies, discontents and dangers they are subject to; so that King Antigonus
truly told his son, If he knew with what cares and troubles his Crown was
stuffed, he would not take it up if he found it on the ground: therefore it is
said of Pythagoras, whose Soul had lodged in so many Bodies, That he lived
happier when he was a Frog, then when he was a King; the high Hills, not the
low valleys, are most weather-beaten, as the Poet tells us.

Saepius ventis agitatur ingens
Pinus: and celsae graviore casu Horatius.

Decidunt turres, feriuntque summos Fulmina montes.
The blustering Winds more often far
Against lofty Pines do threaten War:
Brave Towers with greater ruin fall,
And thunders highest hills enthrall.
I will conclude this Digression with that saying of Petronius Petronius.
concerning the City Croton: Omnes hic aut captantur aut captant, aut cadavera
quae lacerantur, aut corvi qui lacerant. In this world all men either deceive
or are deceived, they are either. Ravens to tear others, or carcasses to be
torn in pieces by others. This world is a Sea full of great and small fishes;
if great, they are devourers; if small, they are devoured.

Now as for this Piece which I have extracted out of diverse Historians, and
contracted into a brief Epitome, I have endeavored to set down in it all
remarkable Passages in as little room as I could. If any say that I have been
too brief and succinct in some things, he must know I write not a large
History, but an EEpitome, in which if I had bin more prolix, the book would
have swelled into too great a bulk. For this cause, and that the series of the
Histories might not be interrupted, I have not inserted any Theological,
Political, or Chronologicall Discourses or Digressions, as Sir WALTER RALEIGH
has done in his History, whereby his book is so voluminous; for what I have
written here, is merely Historical; and I hold it fittest to reserve such
observations to a book by themselves apart, which perhaps hereafter I may
publish, if it shall please God to afford me so much time, health and
opportunity. As for any encouragement, I expect none in this illiterate Age,
wherein Ignorance is honored and Knowledge slighted, by our unlearned
Lacedaemonians; but the best is, Learning and Wisdom are justified of their own
children, and Virtue is a reward to her self.

Virtus repulsae nescia sordidae, Horace.

Intaminatis fulget honoribus:
Nec sumit aut ponit secures
Arbitrio popularis aurae:
Virtus recludens immeritis mori
Coelum negata tentat Iter via,
Coetusque vulgares and udam
Spernit humum fugiente penna.
Virtue that never repulse admits,
In taintlesse honors glorious sits,
Nor takes or leaves dignities,
Raised with the voice of vulgar cries.
Virtue (to worth heaven opening wide)
Dauntlesse breaks through ways denied,
And (taught) the rabble to despise,
Forsaking Earth, to Heaven flies.
The compendiousnesse of this Chronologicall History, or Historical
Chronology (call it which you will, for it contains both) will be useful and
acceptable to most sorts of men: 1. To those who have no time nor Leisure by
reason of their other studies or employments in the world, to read over the
many Volumes of Histories which have been written: In reading of this, they
shall not need spend much time, which is but short, and every wise man will be
willing to husband it as well as he can. 2. To those who have no Patience to
dwell too long upon prolix and tedious Hystories, from reading of which many
are deterred, as growing weary before they be half way, despairing ever to
attain the end of their journey. And indeed it is no wonder when we consider
that Ars longa, vita brevis, that our life is a short Winters day, in which we
are to go a great and tedious journey, and therefore had need to make the more
haste; a man shall arrive sooner into the Harbor in a small Pinnace, then in a
great Ship. It Is better and healthier to rise with an appetite from a short
dinner, then with a surfeiting or fastidious stomach from a tedious Feast. 3.
To them who have already read the Histories at large, who commonly loath to
read them over again, to them I say, this Book will be as a Table, Index, or
Remembrancer, to put them in mind of the chief things they had heretofore read;
so that here they may have a short Collation after a long Feast. 4. To those
also (Quibus r^s angusta domi) who either cannot because of their narrow Means;
or will not because of their narrow Minds, part with too much money on Books;
in this, they that cannot reach to the price of a long Gown, may buy a short
Cloak. Lastly, This benefit will accrue to all men who read this History, that
they shall buy at a far cheaper rate the Experiences of others Recorded here,
then they can buy their own; for they that live long and travel far, pay
soundly for their experience; but they who read Histories enjoy the experience
of all that lived before, which is far greater and much cheaper.

I have for the greater ease of the Reader, subjoyned a Chronology to this
History, wherein as in a small Map may be seen the chief memorable Passages
that have fallen out in the World, since the Overthrow of the Macedonian
Kingdom, till these present Times. History, indeed, is the Body, but
Chronology the Soul of Historical Knowledge; for History without Chronology,
or a Relation of things past, without mentioning the Times in which they were
Acted, is like a Lump or Embryo without articulation, or a Carcass without
Life. I have not digested this Chronology as others do, according to each
particular year, but have reduced the whole time into so many Decads or Tens,
so that we see at one view what has fallen out every ten years; which way is
more ready to be found, and more easy to the Readers memory. Besides, I find
much difference among Chronologers, and much incertainty in their Computation
of years; it is not yet agreed what year of the World Christ was born in, there
being four or five years difference in the Computation; nor can Chronologers
yet agree when the World began: It is ordinarily Recorded that Julius Caesar
Reigned five years; whereas in truth his Reign lasted not above three years
and 8 months; so that there are wanting of five years, almost 16 months; for
the first year of his Reign contained but 6 months and a few days; and his
fifth year but 2 months 15 days; for he was murdered the 15 of March: so that
Emergent years, wherein Computations take beginning from some memorable
Emergent Accident, fall out some times in the middle, sometimes near the end of
the Tropicall year, so that a part is used for the whole year; Besides, there
is no certainty when the Olympicks and the City of Rome had their true
beginning, and yet our Computation depends upon them. The Julian year also
which we use, is longer then the Tropical or Caelestial by eleven Horary
Scruples, whereof each Hour contains 60. the Era of Nabonassar in the space
of 1460 Julian years, gains one whole year; so that 1460 Julian, make 1461
Nabonassarian years, because these years consist of 365 days, without
Intercalation of the remaining 6 hours, which every fourth year makes a day;
and as there be diverse Computations of years, so they have diverse initiations,
the Olympiads take their beginning from the New Moon next the Summer Solstice,
the year of Iphitus contained 10 Olympiads, or 40 of our years: the threefold
Seleucidan Computation, has different beginnings; for that which is called the
Judicial, begins the 13 of March, the Alexandrea^ or Antiochian, takes
beginning in Autumn; the Chaldean in the subsequent Spring; so that the
Antiochian Year begins in the middle way between the Iudaical and Chaldaical.
The Dionysian Egyptian Computation begins the 25 of March, the Macchabaean the
24 of November; the Spanish begins the 1 of January, but 6 years later then the
Julian, because it was brought into Spain 6 years later then into other places:
The Computation from the Consulship of Augustus, begins the 22 of September;
the Actiac Era is twofold, one begins the 2 of September, when Augustus at
Actium defeated Antony; the other begins the 29 of August of the next following
year; to wit, from the taking of Alexandria, and the death of Cleopatra: the
Augustan Computation begins the 14 of February, when Octavius was styled
Augustus by the Senate. Dioclesian Era begins the 29 of August, which is yet in
use among the Ethiopian Christians; the Hegira or Arabic and Turkish
Computation begins the 16 of July, in the year of Christ 6^2 and consists of
Lunary years; the Iezdagrid or Persian Era begins the 16 of June, Anno Christi
632. These and many more differences may be seen in Scaliger, Calvisius,
Helvicus, Petavius, Genebrard, and other Chronologers. I have in this
Chronology set down the years of Popes and Princes Reigns, but have omitted
the odd months and days for brevity sake, as being a thing of small
concernment: I have likewise in every Decad, distinguished the Church Affairs
from the States to avoid confusion; and I have set down the number of Synods in
each Decad, but not the Circumstances of the Place, Acts, and occasion of their
calling (except of some that are more famous) to avoid prolixitie, and that the
Book might not swel too big: There are also some Passages touched in the
Chronology, which were omitted in the History; and what is either wanting or
brief in the Chronology, will be found more fully in the History, that there
might be no defect in both together, though the one may seem to be lame without
the other.

Lastly, I have in this Work performed the part of an Historian, not of an
Orator, or Tragaedian. Two things are commendable in an Historian, to wit,
brevity and simplicity; brevity to distinguish History from Oratory; simplicity
of words and phrases, to discriminate it from Tragedies, in which high and
lofty Expressions are used to move the Affections. In History nothing is aimed
at but a bare narration of things acted, or words spoken, which ought to be
delivered without the painting of Tropes and lacivious dressings of luxuriant
phrases, which oftentime adulterate the Truth; whereas she should be naked
without any gordious attire, or gaudy trappings, for such are for a want on
courtesan; not for a modest matron. Therefore Alcibiades confesses that he
could never give credit to the Polished and painted speeches of Pericles; and
could never but give credit to the simple and naked Expressions of Socrates.
History then is to be sought for, not in the delightful Cave or Grove of the
Muses, but in that deep and horrid well where truth lay hid so long; yet I
deny not but an honest woman may be comely attired, and Historical narrations
may be sweetened with some Oratoreall Flowers; but Ne quid nimis: in this the
Historian who writes at large, must be very sparing, much more he who writes an
Epitome. Perhaps some will object to me, that S. Hierom commends Livie for his
Milkie Rivers of Eloquence, the Flowers of Nectar, the Marrow of Honey, and the
Attic junkets that are in him. To whom I answer, That S. Hierom in this
Commendation looked upon the Orations and Speeches set down in that History,
rather then on the Historical Narrations themselves; Now in these speeches
Scaliger observes, that Livie plays the Poet rather then the Historian, in
fastening such Eloquent speeches on those who were never guilty of them.

To conclude all, I wish that Gentlemen who read Histories, may receive the
same benefit in the cure of their spiritual maladies by which the Soul is
infected, that Alphonsus King of Spain, and Ferdinand, King of Sicily, obtained
in the cure of their bodily Diseases; for that Health which neither of them
could have Badin.
from the Physician, they had from the Historian; for the one by reading of
Livie, the other by reading of Curtius, recovered their health again. Now this
spiritual benefit they shall obtain in reading Histories, if they will but
diligently observe how God has showed his Presence to the World in all Ages,
by guiding this Universe in Justice and Wisdom; by Punishing wicked men in his
Anger, and Rewarding good men in his Mercy; if they will look upon the various
Examples of Virtue and Vice; of Humane Imbecilities, of various Changes in
Kingdoms, States, and all Governments, of the Mutabilitie that is in men's
minds, of the Inconstancy in their affections, of the Cunning and Falsehood that
are in Promises and Covenants, and the Vanity that is in all Humane Felicity:
They will truly find that there is no such Antidote against the Infection and
Poison of Sin, as the reading of History: And so I bid thee farewell.

A. ROSSE.

A SUMMARIE OF THE SECOND PART OF THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD
The First Book: Entreating OF the Times from the end of the Macedonian
Kingdom, till the Reign of Nerva the Roman Emperor; containing 273 years.
The Second Book: Entreating OF the Times from Nerva the Roman Emperor, till
the Reign of Constantine alone; containing 233 years. The Third Book:
Entreating OF the Times from Constantine the Great, till Charles the Great;
containing 476 years. The Fourth Book: Entreating OF the Times from Charles
the Great, till Philip the Emperor in the West, and the French Empire in the
East; containing 400 years. The Fifth Book: Entreating OF the Times from
Philip Emperor in the West, and the French Empire in the East, till Wenceslaus
the German Emperor; containing the History of 200 years. The Sixth Book:
Entreating OF the Histories of the World, from the year 1400.
THE CONTENTS Of the Chapters in the First Book of the Second Part of the
HISTORY OF THE WORLD.
CHAP. I. OF Antiochus, Epiphanes, and the Jews under the Macchabees. 2. Of
the affairs of Egypt and Syria, under Ptolemy, Philometor, Demetrius,
Alexander, and others. 3. Of Cappadocia, Pontus, Bithynia, and Asia minor,
under Ariarathes, Attalus, etc. 4. The last Carthaginian War under Scipio, etc.
CHAP. II. Corinth is taken. 2. The affairs of Egypt. 3. The affairs of Judaea
under Simon and Hircanus. 4. The affairs of Syria under Tryphon, Demetrius,
Alexander, etc. 5. The Roman Wars at home, in Sicily, in Spain, and in Asia.
CHAP. III. The Jewish affairs, under Hircanus, Aristobulus, and Alexander. 2.
The Egyptian affairs under Cleopatra, Philometor, and Alexander. 3. The Syrian
affairs under Seleucus, Eusebes, Philip, Demetrius, etc. 4. The Roman Wars with
Jugurtha, the Cimbri, the Thracians, and Sicilian Slaves. CHAP. IV. The Civil
Wars of Rome, under Marius, Sylla, Cinna. 2. The Roman War with Mithridates.
CHAP. V. The affairs of Syria, under Tigranes. 2. Of Judaea, under Alexandra.
3. Of Egypt, under Ptolemy Auletes, etc. 4. The Sertorian, Spartick, and
Mithridatick War, with Cataline' s Conspiracy. 5. Pompey's actions, and some
Roman passages about Cicero and Clodius. CHAP. VI. Caesar's exploits in Gallia,
Germany, and Britain. 2. The affairs of Rome, under Pompey, Crassus, and
Marcellus. 3. Crassus his miscarriage in Asia. 4. Some passages of Judaea and
Egypt. 5. Of Cicero and Cato. CHAP. VII. The fatal Civil war between Caesar and
Pompey. 2. Caesar's diverse Victories in Thessalia, Egypt, Africa, Pontus, and
Spain. 3. Pompey's death, and Caesar's. CHAP. VIII. The affairs of Judaea under
Antigonus and Antipater. 2. The actions of Octavius in his younger years. 3.
The actions and death of Cassius and Brutus. 4. The actions and end of Sextus
Pompeius. 5. The actions of Antonius and Lepidus. CHAP. IX. The affairs of the
Jews under Antigonus, Hyrcanus, Herod, and Archelaus. 2. The affairs of Rome
and Egypt, under Antonius and Augustus. 3. The Birth of CHRIST; the life and
death of Augustus; and the Insurrections in Judaea. CHAP. X. The life and death
of Tiberius and Sejanus, with their Cruelties. 2. The Baptism, life and death,
resurrection and ascension of CHRIST. 3. How the Gospel began to spread. CHAP.
XI. The life and death of Caligula; and of the Roman and Jewish affairs under
him. 2. The life and death of Claudius; and of all the memorable accidents in
Rome, Parthia, Judaea, and elsewhere under him. 3. Of Agrippa and Antipas. CHAP.
XII. The wicked life and death of Nero. 2. The affairs of Germany, Britain,
Parthia, and Armenia at that time. 3. The miserable condition of Judaea,
Galilee, etc. CHAP. XIII. The affairs of Rome under Galba, Otho, Vitellius,
Vespasian, Titus and Domitian. 2. The utter destruction of Jerusalem, and
slavery imposed on the obstinate Jews. 3. Some passages of Parthia, Armenia,
and other parts.
The Contents of the Chapters in the Second Book.
CHAP. I. OF the Roman affairs under Nerva, Trajan, and Adrian. 2. Of the
affairs of Jews and Christians during that time. CHAP. II. The Roman affairs
under Antonius Junius, Antonius Philosophus, and Commodus. 2. The affairs of
the Christians, and of foreign Nations at that time. CHAP. III. The affairs of
Rome under Pertinax, Didius, and Severus. 2. Severus his actions in the East,
and in Britain. 3. The Christian affairs during that time. CHAP. IV. The Roman
affairs under Caracalla, Macrinus, Heliogabalus and Alexander. 2. The affairs
of Christians, Persians and others during that time. CHAP. V. The Roman affairs
under Maximinus, Philip, Decius, Gallus, Valerian, Galienus and others. 2. The
Christian, and foreign affairs of those times. CHAP. VI. The Roman affairs
under Claudius, Aurelianus, Tacitus, Probus, Proculus, Bonosus, Carus,
Numerianus and Carinus. 2. Of Zenobia, and of the Christian and foreign
affairs. CHAP. VII. The Roman affairs under Diocletian, Maximianus, Galerius,
Constantius, and Maxentius. 2. The horrible persecution of Christians under
them. 3. Of the Persian and foreign affairs of those times. CHAP. VIII. Of the
Roman affairs under Constantine, Maxentius Maximinus and Licinius. 2. Of the
Christian persecutions, and foreign affairs during that time.
The Contents of the Chapters in the Third Book.
CHAP. I. THe life, actions and death of Constantine the Great. 2. The history
of his foursons. 3. The Church affairs under these Emperors. CHAP. II. Of
Julian, Jovinian, Valentinian, and Valens. 2. Of the Church, and foreign
affairs. CHAP. III. Of Gratianus, Theodosius, Arcadius, Honorius, and
Theodosius the younger. 2 Of the Goths, Vandals, and other barbarous Nations.
3. The Church affairs of those times. CHAP. IV. Diverse alterations in the
Empire under Theodosius, Martinus, Leo and Zeno. 2. The Western Empire ruined
by the Goths, Vandals, Huns and Heruli. 3. Diverse foreign passages of those
times, and of the Church affairs. CHAP. V. The Roman affairs under Anastasius,
Justinus and Justinian. 2. Of the Persians, Goths, and other barbarous Nations
of those times. 3. The affairs of the Church. CHAP. VI. Of Justin, Tiberius,
and Mauritius. 2. Of the Persians, Goths, Longobards, Suevi, Avares, and others
of these times. 3. The affairs of the Church then. CHAP. VII. The affairs of
the Empire under Phocas Heraclius. 2. Of Mahomet and the Sarazens. 3. Of the
Church, and diverse foreign passages of these times. CHAP. VIII. The affairs of
the Empire under Constans the 2. Constantine 4. Justinian 2. Philippus Bardanes
Anastasius 2. and Theodosius 3. 2. The affairs of the Sarazens, Longobards,
Spaniards, French and others. 3. The affairs of the Church in that time. CHAP.
IX. The Roman affairs under Leo the third, and Constantine the fifth. 2. Of
Pipinus, and foreign affairs. 3. The Church Affairs of these times. CHAP. X.
The affairs of the Empire under Leo, Irene and Constantine. 2. Of foreign
affairs under Charles the Great. 3. Of the Church Affairs in those times.
The Contents of the Chapters in the Fourth Book.
CHAP. I. THe affairs of both the Empires, under Charles in the West, under
Nicephorus, Michael, and Leo in the East. 2. Of the Nations subdued by Charles.
CHAP. II. The affairs of the Empire under Ludovic and Lotharius in the West,
under Michael Balbus, Theodosius, Theodora, Michael the second in the East. 2.
Foreign affairs of those times, and of the Church. CHAP. III. The affairs of
the Empire under Ludovic the second, Carolus Calvus, Ludovic the third, and
Carolus Crassus in the West, and of Basilius in the East. 2. Of foreign affairs
of these times. CHAP. IV. Of Carolus Crassus and Ludovic the fourth in the
West. 2. Of Leo and his son Constantine in the East. 3. Of the affairs of
Italy, Germany, Spain, Scotland, and other passages of those times. CHAP. V.
The affairs of Italy, Germany, France, and other neighboring Countries under
Henricus Auceps, and Otho the Great. 2. The Eastern affairs under Constantine
and his son Romanus. 3. The affairs of the Church. CHAP. VI. The Eastern
affairs under Nicephorus, Phocas, Zimisces, Basilius, and Constantine. 2. Of
the Western, under Otho the second. 3. Of the Turks, and some other passages of
those times. CHAP. VII. The affairs of the Western Empire under Otho the third,
Henry the second, and Conradus the second. 2. Diverse passages of England,
Scotland, Italy, France, and other parts of Europe. 3. Of some Popes. CHAP.
VIII. The affairs of the Eastern Empire under Argyropolus, Michael, Calaphates,
Zoe, Theodora, and Monomachus. 2. Of the Turks and Popes of those times. 3. Of
the Polonian, Hungarian, English, Scottish, and other affairs. CHAP. IX. The
troublesome affairs of the West under Henry the third, and Henry the fourth. 2.
The affairs of Italy, Spain, Portugal, Sicily. 3. The Popes of those times.
CHAP. X. The Eastern affairs under Stratioticus, Ducas, Diogenes, Michael,
Botoniates and Alexius. 2. The Holy-War, and Kings of Jerusalem, and new Orders
of Knighthood. 3. The affairs of Cyprus, Portugal, England, Scotland, and the
Popes of this time. CHAP. XI. The Western affairs under Henry the fifth, and
Lotharius Duke of Saxony. 2. The Eastern under Calo-joannes. 3. The affairs of
France, Spain, England, Denmark, etc. with the Popes of those times. CHAP. XII.
A brief History of Egypt from Augustus till the Turkish conquest. 2. The
Western affairs under Frederick Barbarossa. 3. Diverse passages of Italy,
Germany, Denmark, and the other Holy-War. 4. Diverse Occurrences, and the Popes
of those times, with some passages of Tartaria. CHAP. XIII. The Eastern affairs
under Manuel Comnenus, Andronicus, Alexius, Isaacius and Alexius Angeli. 2. The
affairs of France, Spain, Denmark, Constantinople, Rome, England and Scotland
in these times, with diverse other passages. 3. Henry the 6. Emperor.
The Contents of the Chapters in the Fifth Book.
CHAP. I. THe troubles of Europe under Philip, Otto the fourth, and Frederick
the second, Emperors of the West. 2. The affairs of the Holy Land. 3. Of the
Danish and other Europian affairs. CHAP. II. The true estate of the Eastern
Empire. 2. The affairs of France, Tartary, Denmark, Poland, England, Scotland,
Spain, and other places. 3. The Popes of these times. CHAP. III. Fredericks
posterity. 2. The affairs of the Western Empire under Rodulphus, and others.
3. Of France, England, Scotland, and other places. 4. Of the Popes of these
times, and other memorable things. CHAP. IV. The Eastern affairs, under
Michael Palaeologus, Andronicus the elder and younger. 2. The Turkish and
Tartarian affairs. 3. The affairs of Hungary, Poland, Denmark, the
Low Countries, chiefly Holland, and the Switzers. CHAP. V. The affairs of
Germany, under Adolphus, Albertus, Henry the 7. and Ludovic of Bavaria. 2. The
affairs of Sicily, Naples, Florence, Rome, Millain, and other parts of Italy,
with the adjacent Countries, from the year 1298. till 1347. CHAP. VI. The
Eastern affairs, under the Palaeologi. 2. A brief History of the Turks, till
the year 1412. 3. The brief History of Sweden, Denmark and Norway, till the
same year 1412. CHAP. VII. The affairs of Italy, Germany, Bohemia, the
Netherlands, under Charles the 4. and Wenceslaus Emperors. 2. The wars between
Venice and Genua for the Isle of Tenedos, from the year 1349. till 1400. CHAP.
VIII. The lives of the Popes, from the year 1305. till 1389. 2. The History of
Holland and the next Provinces, from the year 1298. till 1404. 3. The History
of Savoy, from the beginning till the year 1397. CHAP. IX. The French story
from the year 1313. till 1380. interwoven with diverse passages of England,
Flanders, Spain, Germany, Italy, etc. CHAP. X. A prosecution of the French
History from the year 1380. till 1407. In which are interlaced diverse passages
of Italy, Flanders, Navar, Africa, Britany, England, Scotland, Spain and
Hungary. CHAP. XI. The History of England, interwoven with some passages of
France and Scotland, from the year 1301. till 1350. CHAP. XII. A prosecution
of the English story, from the year 1350. till the year 1399. CHAP. XIII. The
History of Scotland from the year 1306. till the year 1377. CHAP. XIV. A
prosecution of the Scottish History, from the year 1377. till the year 1400.
The Contents of the Chapters in the Sixth and last Book.
CHAP. I. THe affairs of Italy, Germany, Hungary and Bohemia, under Wenceslaus,
Rupert, Sigismund, Emperors. 2. The Council of Constance and Basil, with some
other passages from the year 1400. till the year 1439. CHAP. II. The History of
Swethland and Denmark, from the year 1412. till the year 1587. Of Denmark and
of Swethland, till 1590. CHAP. III. The History of Holland, and the
neighboring places, from the year 1404. till 1514. with some passages of
Utricht, till 1580. CHAP. IV. The History of Savoy, and the neighboring parts,
from the year 1397. till the year 1452. CHAP. V. A prosecution of the Savoyan
History, from the year 1452. till the year 1503. CHAP. VI. The Helvetian
History, from the beginning till the year 1481. CHAP. VII. A prosecution of the
Helvetian History, till the year 1521. CHAP. VIII. Of the Helvetian
Confederates, till the year 1602. CHAP. IX. The Swedish History, from the year
1590. till the year 1631. CHAP. X. The prosecution of the Swedish History under
Gustavus, from 1631. till the midst of 1633. CHAP. XI. The Savoyan History from
the year 1504. till the year 1580. CHAP. XII. The History of Hungary, from the
beginning till the year 1532. CHAP. XIII. A prosecution of the Hungarian
History, from the year 1532, till 1629. CHAP. XIV. The affairs of Germany,
Hungary, Poland, Turkey, Bohemia, Austria, Millan, Naples, Cyprus, and Borussia,
under Albert and Frederick, Emperors, from the year 1438. till the year 1480.
CHAP. XV. The prosecution of the affairs of Germany, Italy, France, Spain, and
the other neighboring places, under Maximilian the Emperor, with the
Coronation of Charles the fifth, from the year 1486. till 1520. CHAP. XVI. The
affairs of Italy, Germany, Netherlands, with the actions of the Popes of those
times, and the Council of Trent, etc. under Charles the fifth, Ferdinnand and
Maximilian, from the year 1520, till 1576. CHAP. XVII. The affairs of Portugal,
Africa, Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, Poland, Hungary, Transylvania,
Bohemia, Russia, Venice, etc. under Rodulphus 2. Emperor, from the year 1576.
till 1612. CHAP. XVIII. The affairs of Germany, Denmark, Swedeland, Holland,
Russia, Italy, Hungary, Bohemia, Transylvania, Poland, Grisons, France,
Switzers, etc. under Matthias and Ferdinand 2. Emperors, from the year 1612.
till 1626. CHAP. XIX. A continuation of the History of Germany, Denmark,
Swedeland, Holland, Poland, Italy, etc. under Ferdinand 1. from the year 1626.
till the end of 1630. CHAP. XX. A continuation of the affairs of Turkey, Persia,
Egypt, Greece, Armenia and other adjacent parts, under Mahomet 1 Amurath 2.
Mahomet 2. Bajazet and Selymus, from the year 1412. till 1520. CHAP. XXI. The
Turkish History under Solomon, Selymus, Amurath 3. Mahomet 3. Achmat, Mustapha,
Osman, and Amurath 4. from the year 1520. till the end of 1636. CHAP. XXII. The
affairs of France, under Charles 6. Charles 7. and Lewis 11. from the year 1407,
till the year 1483. interwoven with the History of Burgundy, and other
bordering places. CHAP. XXIII. The prosecution of the French History under
Charles 8. Lewis 11. Francis 1. Henry 2. Francis 2. Charles 8. Henry 3. Henry 4.
Lewis 13. from the year 1483. till 1633. wherein the lives of the Popes, the
affairs of Italy, Spain, and other bordering Countries are touched. CHAP. XXIV.
A prosecution of the English History, under the reigns of Henry 4. Henry 5. and
Henry 6. from the year 1399. till the year 1460. containing diverse passages of
the French and Scots affairs. CHAP. XXV. A prosecution of the Scottish History
under Robert Duke of Albany and Mardo Earl of Fife Governors; also under James
1. James 2. Kings, from the year 1400. till the year 1460. CHAP. XXVI. The
English History under King Edward 4. Edward 5. and Richard 3. from the year
1460. till the year 1485. CHAP. XXVII. The English History under the reigns of
King Henry 7. and Henry 8. from the year 1485. till the year 1548. CHAP.
XXVIII. The affairs of Scotland under king James 3. and James 4. from the year
1460. till the year 1513. CHAP. XXIX. The Scottish History, under king James 5.
and his young daughter queen Mary, from the year 1513. till 1544. CHAP. XXX. A
continuation of the Scottish History under the two Regents, Hamilton and the
Queen Mother, from 1544. till 1560. CHAP. XXXI. The continuation of the English
History under king Edward 6. and Queen Mary, from the year 1546. till 1558.
CHAP. XXXII. The English History, interwoven with the History of Spain, France,
Ireland, and Netherlands, under Queen Elizabeth, from 1558. till 1602. CHAP.
XXXIII. The History of Scotland under Queen Mary, from the year 1560. till the
year 1567. CHAP. XXXIV. A continuation of the Scots History under King James 6.
from 1567. till 1602. CHAP. XXXV. The history of England and Scotland together,
from the coming in of King James to be sole Monarch of the whole Island, from
the year 1602. till 1625. CHAP. XXXVI. A continuation of the history of
Great Britain, under King Charles, from the year 1625. till the year 1641.
A CATALOGUE Of such Historians and Chronologers, which are made use of in the
compiling of the ensuing HISTORY.
AMmianus Marcellinus. Venerable Bede, a Saxon-Presbyter, wrote many learned
books, among the rest five books of the History of his own Nation: He lived
about the year 731. Flavius Blondus an Italian; He was Secretary to Pope
Eugenius 4. He wrote the Roman History from the year 407. till the year 1400.
He lived about the year 1440. Hector Boethius a Scotish-man, lived about 1500.
in the University of Aberden, and wrote 17 Books of the Scots History, with a
Description of Scotland and its Kings. C. Julius Caesar wrote 7 Books of the
Gallic war, the 8. was written by Hircius. Of the Civil war with Pompey 3
Books. These were printed at Venice and Basil, an. 1521. Georgius Cedrenus a
Greek Historian, wrote a compendious History from the Creation till the year of
Christ 1057. He lived about the year 1070. Marcus Antonius Coccius Sabellicus,
lived about the year 1500. His works are printed in 4 Tomes: in the first is
his History from the Creation, divided into 5 Enneads or Nines, that is 45
Books; in the second is the Continuation of the History by six Enneads, the
last of which has but 2 Books, so that there are but 47 Books, there is also
in this Tome the Venetian History; in the third are 29 Books, and in the fourth
10 Books of Examples: he wrote also diverse other Tractates. Paulus Diaconus of
Aquileia, was Secretary to Desiderius King of the Longobards, at what time he
was taken by Charles the Great, who overthrew his Kingdom, about the year of
Christ 774. He wrote 6 Books of the affairs of the Longobards, and some think
he wrote those Books of the Roman History, which are annexed to the History of
Eutropius. Evagrius Scholasticus, wrote the Ecclesiastique History in 6 Books;
beginning where Sozomen ended, till the 12. year of Mauritius the Emperor,
about the year of Christ 597. Eusebius Pamphili Bishop of Caesaria; He lived in
the time of Constantine the Great, whose life he wrote in 4 Books; he wrote
also 10 Books of the Church History, besides a Chronicle, and some other works.
Eutropius Presbyter, wrote 1 Book of Chronology, and 10 Books of the Roman
History, printed by Aldus at Venice. L. Annaeus Florus lived in the time of
Hadrian and Trajan. He wrote 4 Books of the Roman History: Some think he was
the Abreviator of Livy, which is unlikely, because he recedes from him in
diverse passages; He is by some called Seneca, and some think that Seneca the
Philosopher wrote this Story; but the diversity of style, times and other
circumstances show the contrary. Herodian lived in the time of M. Antoninus
Emperor; he wrote the lives of 13 Emperors, in 8 Books. Rogerus de Hoveden,
wrote two Books of English Annals, ending at King John, who reigned about the
year 1199. Roger lived about the year 1190. Flavius Josephus a Priest at
Jerusalem, coming to Rome, wrote 7 Books of the Jewish wars, and 20 Books of
their Antiquities, from the Creation till the 14. year of Domitian, and 2 Books
against Appion the Grammarian. These books of the Jewish wars, Antiquities, and
against Appion, were first printed in Latin at Venice, an. 1499. and in Greek
at Basil, an 1544. Isidor Bishop of Sivil, who died about the year 636. He
wrote many books, among the rest, an Universal Chronicle, a Chronicle of the
Goths, the History of the Vandals, the History of the Suevi, of the
Ecclesiastique writers, etc. Titus Livius Patavinus, wrote 3 Decads of the
Roman History, besides other Pecces: his works were printed in 2 Tomes in fol.
an. 1578. William of Malmesbury an English Monk, who lived about the year 1130.
Contemporary with S. Bernard, Peter Abbot of Cluny, Hugo de Sancto Victore, and
Richardus de Sancto Victore. He wrote 5 Books of the English Kings till Henry
the first, and 5 Books of the English Bishops, with some other Historical
Tractates. John Mayor a Scotish-man, lived about 1500. and besides other books,
he wrote the History of Great Britain. Marianus Scotus lived about the year
1083. He was a Monk, and wrote a Chronicle from the Creation till the year
1083. Martinus called from his Country Polonus, Bishop of Consentinum, and the
Popes Confessor, to wit, Innocent 4. He wrote a Chronicle printed at Basil,
with a Chronicle of Marianus Scotus, in the year 1559. in folio; He writes the
lives of the Popes and Emperors till his time, to wit ann. 1285. Matthew
Palmerius a Florentine, lived ann. 1440. at the time of the Council of
Florence: He wrote a Chronicle beginning at the year 449. till the year 1449.
Matthew Palmerius of Pisa lived at the same time, and continued Matthews
Chronicle, from the year 1450. till the year. 1481. Matthew Paris, a Monk of
St. Albans, in the time of King Henry the 3. He wrote the English History from
William the Conqueror, till the 35 year of Henry the 3. that is, from the year
of Christ, 1067. till the year 1250. Matthew Westminster a Monk, wrote three
Books of the Flowers of History; He lived about the year 1377. Johannes
Nauclerus lived about 1500. He wrote a Chronicle of memorable things from the
Creation till the year 1500. Nicephorus Callistus a Greek Historian, lived in
the time of Andronicus the elder; to whom he Dedicated his History, about the
year of Christ 1300. He begins his History from Christ's Nativity, and ends in
the year 625. It contains 18 Books. Nicephorus Bishop of Constantinople, lived
in the time of Pope Leo 3. ann. 811. He wrote a Chronicle extant in Bibliotheca
Patrum. Paulus Orosius a Spanish Presbyter, and a disciple of St. Augustine, he
wrote 7 Books of Histories from the Creation. C. Velleius Paterculus wrote two
Books of the Roman History, printed at Basil, Lions, Geneva, and Venice, ann.
1571. Baptista Platina, born at Cremona, he flourished about the year of Christ
1451. besides other Books, he wrote the lives of the Popes. Plutarchus
Chaeroneus born in Boaetia, he flourished in the time of Trajan; He wrote many
Books, among the rest, the Lives or Parallels of the famous Greeks and Romans,
this Book was first printed by Aldus at Venice, an. 1519. Prosper Aquitanicus a
holy and learned Bishop, besides many Theological pieces, he wrote a Chronicle,
beginning where Eusebius and St. Hierom left; he lived about the year 460. C.
Crispus Salustius, wrote the conspiracy of Cataline, the war of Iugurtha, with
other things, whose fragments are only exstant: these were printed at Lipsic,
ann. 1539. Sigebertus a Monk, lived in the time of Pope Gregory the 7 ann.
1101. He wrote a Chronology from the year of Christ 381. till the year 1111.
Socrates and Sozomen, wrote the Church History, beginning where Eusebius ended,
till the time of Theodosius the younger. C. Suetonius Tranquillus, wrote the
lives of the first twelve Caesar's, printed at Lions ann. 1539. He wrote also
diverse other books. Sulpitius Severus Presbyter, a learned and wise man, as St.
Austin calls him in his 205 Epistle; he lived in the time of Hierom and
Ruffinus, and was born in Aquitania; He wrote (besides a Dialogue, diverse
Epistles, and the life of St. Martin Bishop of Turon) two Books of the sacred
Story. Aeneas Sylvius born in Sena of Tuscany, who was afterward Pope Pius 2.
besides many other Books which he wrote: He set forth the History of Bohemia
from the original of that Nation, till George that succeeded Ladislaus; this
work was first printed at Basil, ann. 1532. His Fasciculus Rerum Expetendarum,
at Colen, ann. 1535. Cornelius Tacitus was born in the time of Claudius the
Emperor, and was in great account with Vespatian and Titus. He wrote 16 Books
of Annals, 5 Books of Histories, one Book of the German manners, and one Book
of the life of Julius Agricola. Johannes Zonaras a Greek Monk, wrote three
Books of Annals, containing the Universal History from the Creation, till the
death of Alexius Comnenus, who died about the year 1118.
Of later and modern Writers, these have been perused.
Bogistai Philippi a Chemnitz, Belli Sueco-Germanici, Vol. 10. Stetini. 1648.
Caesar Baronius, first a Priest, then a Cardinal, compiled the Ecclesiastique
History from Christ's Nativity till the year 1200. in 12 Tomes. He died ann.
1607. Olaus Magnus Archbishop of Upsale, wrote the History of the Sueves.
Adolphus Brachelius his History of these latter times from the year 1618. till
the year 1650. Busbequius who was Ambassador at Constantinople for Ferdinand
and Maxmilian Emperors, about eight years together, wrote four Epistles
containing all the memorable passages in the Turkish Dominions at that time.
Camdeni Anglica-Normannica, etc. Carrion; set out a brief Chronicle which is
explained and enlarged by Philip Melancthon and Caspar Peucerus. Iohannis
Cluverii Epitome. Bartholomaeus Facius of Genua, wrote ten Books of the actions
of Alphonsus first king of Naples; He wrote also a Book of the Venetian wars
with Genua; and diverse other Tractates. Genealogia Austriaca, cum figuris.
Francis Guicciardin a Patritian of Florence, wrote the History of his time in
20 Books in Italian; which Caelius secundus Curio translated into Latin,
Printed at Basil in folio, an. 1566. Historia Normannorum. Paulus Iovius wrote
the History of his time in 45 Books; besides the History of the Turks from
Ottoman, and ends with Solomon. Opus Chronographicum Opmeeri and Beyerlink.
Paraei Medulla Historiarum. Petavii rationorium temporum. Pezelii Mellificium
Historicum. Polydor Virgil wrote the History of England till Henry the eight.
Respublicae variis voluminibus, 120, 16. and 24. Impres. Amst. Lugd. Bat. etc.
Saxo Grammaticus, wrote 16 Books of the Danes and Norwegians to the time of
Canutus; this Saxo was Provost of Roscheld. Martinus Cramerus wrote the History
of the Polanders. Joseph Scaliger, son to the learned Julius, who besides his
Notes and Observations upon Varro, Festus, Virgils Epigrams, Catullus,
Tibullus, Propertius, Manilius, Ausonius, and others; he wrote that useful
work De Emendatione Temporum, and Thesaurus Temporum, or Chronology upon
Eusebius; he lived and died at Leiden, ann. 1609. Carolus Sigonius Professor of
the Latin tongue at Bononia; wrote the History of Italy, and diverse other
Books, as De antiquo jure Romanorum, De repub. Iudaeorum, De repub.
Atheniensium, De Imperio occidentis, etc. I. Josias Simlerus, a Divine in
Zurich, wrote many Books, among the rest, two Books of the League and
Commonwealth of the Switzers: He died at Zurich or Tigurum, ann. 1576. John
Sleidan wrote the History of the Church and State under Charles 5. in 26 Books;
and withal an Epitome of the four Empires of the World. Famianus Strada de
Bello Belgico. Iac. Aug. Thuanus, second President of Paris. wrote a large
history from the year 1543 till 1608. and was continued till 1618. Antonii
Thysii Compendium Historiae Batavicae. Turselini Epitome. Raphael Volateranus
wrote 38 Books of Historical Commentaries, besides diverse other works; He lived
about the year of our Lord 1503.
English Chronicles and Histories.
Lord Bacon's, King Henry 7. Baker's Chronicle. Camden's Elizabeth. Daniel and
Trussel's Chronicle. Godwyn's Annals. Lord Herbert's King Henry 8. Martin's
Chronicle. Speed's History. Stow's and Munday's Chronicle.
Histories of Scotland.
Buchanan. Iohnston. Knox his History of the Scots Reformation. Lesley. Udal's
Queen Mary of Scotland. A Manuscript of the Battle by the River Avinum in
Scotland, fought between the Earls of Huntly and Errol against the Earl of
Argile, in the year 1594. written by Mr. Alexander Machoz, an Eyewitness
thereof.
French Histories.
Paulus Aemilius. D' Avila's History of the Civil wars of France. Belle-Forest.
Histoire du Monde, f. 3 vol. Histoire du Chesne. Dupleix. Froissard. De Serres.
Lumiores pohr l'Histoire de France. Le Mercury Francois. Philippe de Commines
of the actions of Ludovic 11. and Charles 8. Thivet.
Histories in general made use of.
Ayscue's History of England and Scotland. Civil-wars of England. Council of
Trent. Dutch-History. Sir Clement Edmunds upon Caesar's Commentaries. Estates
and Empires. Fuller's History of the Holy-war. Godwyn's Roman and Jewish
Antiquities, and Rous his Greek Antiquities. Heylin's Geographie. History of
Portugal. Hungarian-History. Imperial-History. Interest of Princes, by the D.
of Rohan. Machiavel's Florentine History. Powel's History of Wales.
Spanish-History. Swedish-Intelligencer, with the later Occurrences, printed by
Mr. Bourn and Butter. Turkish-History. Venetian-History, fol. Howel's Survay of
Venice. Wars of Christendom, till 1640. by the Count Galliazzo Priorato. For
the Chronology, these have been chiefly consulted with. Bellarmini
Chronologia. Calvisii Chronologia. Davidis Chytraei Chronologia. Gilbertus
Genebrardus, the Kings Professor of Divinity and the Hebrew tongue at Paris,
wrote four Books of Chronographie, with diverse other pieces. Iac. Gordonii
Lesmorei Chronologia. Helvici Chronologia. Isaacson's Chronology. With some
others.
October. 22. 1651.

IMPRIMATVR,

NA: BRENT.

The Second Part OF THE UNIVERSAL HISTORY OF THE WORLD.
THE FIRST BOOK, ENTREATING Of the times from the end of the MACEDONIAN
KINGDOM, till the Reign of NERVA the ROMAN EMPEROR, containing 273. years.
CHAP. I.
Of Antiochus Epiphanes, and the Jews under the Macchabees. 2. Of the affairs
of Egypt and Syria, under Ptol. Philometor, Demetrius, Alexander, and others.
3. Of Cappadocia, Pontus, Bithynia, and Asia minor, under Ariarathes, Attalus,
etc. 4. The last Carthaginian War under Scipio, etc.

ANtiochus Epiphanes (as we showed in the end of the first part An. Mundi. 3806.
of this Universal History) having submitted himself to the Romans and left
Egypt, he returns into Asia, where he showed himself to be Epiphanes, or
illustrious in nothing but in wickedness, and indeed Epimanes a mad man; for
he gave himself to all kind of scurrility, riot, gormandizing, cruelty,
oppression, sacrilege, he robbed the Temple Jerusalem, beat down the walls of
the City, made the Jews to offer Sacrifice to the Heathen Gods, dedicated the
Lords Altar to Jupiter Olympius; burned the Holy Scriptures, tortured Eleazer
the Scribe being 90 years old, and his Brethren, and perpetrated many horrid
acts, murdering and captivating incredible multitudes of Jews. This monster of
men, notwithstanding, the Samaritans in hatred of the Jews honored with divine
titles; which caused Matthias the Priest, and one of the Assamonean family, to
bestirre himself, who having killed a Jew for polluting himself with
idolatry, assembled a multitude of his kindred and alliance, and all such as
loved God and their Country, who brake down the profane Altars, circumcised
children, and Matthias growing aged and unfit for action, gave the charge of
the Army to Judas Maccabeus his son, and appointed Simon to look to the State.

Apollonins the Kings favorite having invaded Judea, was by Judas overthrown
3807.
and slain: so was Seron the Governor of Syria, to whom succeeded Lysias, who
sends an army of 40000. foot and 7000 horse against Judea under the conduct of
Ptolemy, Gorgias, and Nicanor; Judas with 3000 falls suddenly on Gorgias his
camp, (himself being then absent) which he burns and spoils, so that Gorgias
was forced to forsake Judea, Lysias sends a new Army of 60000 horse and foot,
which Judas with 10000 overthrew, killed 5000 of the enemies, and obtained a
great booty; then he began to purge the Temple which was left desolate three
years. He repairs the Lords Altar, appoints priests, keeps the feast of
Dedication, and gards the Temple with soldiers, that the priests might not
3809.
be hindered in their functions: but hearing of great preparations against him,
by the Edomites, Sidonians, Syrians, Ammonites, and Arabians; resolves to
hinder their combination. Therefore he first falls upon the Edomites and subdues
them: Ammonites, and Arabians, and sends Simon against the Phenicians; in the
interim leaves Josephus, and Azarias to govern Judea, with a charge not to
hazard their army upon a battle; but they being more forward then wise, would
needs besiege Iamnia, where Gorgias brake out suddenly upon them, and routed
them with the loss of 2000. Antiochus being disgracefully repulsed by his own
subjects, as he was going to plunder the Temple of Diana Elymais, and hearing
of the great losses his armies had received in Judea, falls desperately sick,
and dies, having reigned 12. years, to whom succeeded his son Eupator, a
child.

Lysias who took upon him the government of the young King, invades Judea
Betzura, then besieges Jerusalem; but hearing that Philip (whom Epiphanes on
his deathbed had appointed governor) was now settled in Antioch, and meant to
rule the kingdom, causes the young King to make peace with the Jews, which
was performed, and Judas proclaimed President, who put to death Menelaus the
priest, the chief plotter and cause of these last wars; to whom succeeded
Alcimus in the priesthood: but two years after the death of Epiphanes, Eupator
and Lysias were both slain by their own servants, after that their army had
revolted to Demetrius, the son of Seleucus, who being an hostage at Rome, came
suddenly into Syria, and seized upon Tripolis, and claimed the Seleucus, who
came by the elder son of Antiochus the great. In the mean while Alcimus accused
Judas of rebellion, and caused Demetrius to send an army under his conduct and
Nicanors against Judas; this army Judas overthrew, and so was made high priest
by the people, and then enters into league with the Romans, but the next year
he was overthrown in a battle by Bacchides and slain; whose death was the
occasion of much misery and oppression in Judea. His people for whom he had
done so much, treacherously forsook and left him to be sacrificed by his
enemies, and so multitudes flocked 3813.
to Bacchides, who by him being put into offices, used all the cruelty they
could upon the friends and followers of Judas.

Ionathas is then made Governor by the people, who in a battle upon the
sabbath day was set upon by Bacchides, the fight was fierce, Bacchides lost a
1000 men. Ionathas with his army escaped to the other side of Jordan, in the
mean while Bacchides fortifies Bethell, Gaza, and Jericho, with other towns,
Ionathas plundered the Amorites for killing his brother John. Alcimus the
priest, as he was going to pull down a wall within the Temple, was suddenly
struck with a palsy and dyed. Bacchides returns to King Demetrius and
Jonathas lived quietly for two years; in which time a plot against him was
detected, and 50 of the plotters were put to death. Upon this his enemies
invite Bacchides again into Judea, upon hopes of an easy victory, but he found
such strong opposition and harsh entertainment by Jonathas and Simon, that in a
rage he fell upon those that Jonathas, who for four years lived quietly and
governed Judea.

About this time Ptolomie Philometor, who had been driven out of his kingdom
by his younger brother, is restored again; and an agreement concluded, 3816.
that one of the brothers should reign in Egypt, the other in Cyrene, in the
mean while Ariarathes King of Cappadocia dies, he had one son Mithridates, who
died young, but his two supposititious sons Ariarathes and Olofernes who
contended for the kingdom, Demetrius assisted Olofernes and made him King. But
the Romans took part with Ariarathes, and established him in his kingdom in
spite of Demetrius. About which time C. Marius the Consul subdued the
Dalmarians, for molesting the Illyrians, confederates of the Romans; and they
were at last totally conquered by Cor. Nasica the Consul. About this time Spain
rebelled against the Romans, and Antioch against Demetrius for his tyranny,
inviting Alexander who called himself the son of Antiochus, and claimed in
right of his father the kingdom of Syria. He was assisted by Ptolemy King of
Egypt, Ariarathes King of Cappadocia, and Attalus King of Asia who succeeded
his brother Eumenes, that had reigned almost 50. years. Alexander having all
this strength, Jonathas, whom he declared high priest; two great battles were
sought, in the first Alexander was worsted, but in the second he obtained the
victory; in which Demetrius Soter or Savior, so called for the justice he did
upon Heraclides and Timarchus, (the two great oppressors 3822.
of Babylon) lost both his life and kingdom, Alexander married the daughter of
Ptolemy Philometor.

Demetrius Soter had two sons, the eldest called also Demetrius was invited by
Apollonius governor of Coelosyria, to take up arms against Alexander, who
gave himself to all kind of luxury. This Demetrius having the assistance of
the Cretans, comes suddenly into Syria, but was overcome by Ionathas, and lost
8000 of his Jonathas takes in Ascaton and Joppa, burns Azotus to the ground,
and overthrowes the Idol Dagon: for which good services he is highly rewarded
by Alexander. Shortly after this, Prusias King of Bithynia (who fawning upon
the Romans kissed the threshold of their Senate, calling the Fathers his Gods)
was for his wicked 3828.
life slain by his own son Nicomedes, being assisted by Attalus King of
Pergamus. Prusias indeed had intended to have slain Nicomedes, and to have set
up his other the Romans had sent three Ambassadors to reconcile the father with
his son. These were the three which Cato said, had neither head, feet, nor
heart, because the one had many scarres in his head, the other was gowty, and
the third was none of the wisest.

Ptolemy was much incensed against Alexander his son in law for his tyranny
and dissolute life. Wherefore he comes into Syria with a great army, pretending
he meant to defend Alexander against his enemies, the gates of the cities are
opened to him, so that all the sea coast even to Seleucia is delivered up to
him, then having taken his daughter Cleopatra, and bestowed her upon Demetrius,
he entered Antioch and put both the Crowns of Syria and Egypt on his head.
Alexander brings an army out of Cilicia, but is overcome and flies to Arabia;
all his soldiers revolting to Demetrius, Zabdiel or Diocles a prince of that
country, cut off his head, and sent it to Ptolemy, who not long after dyed,
whilst the Chirurgians were curing of the wound he had received in his head.
He Cyrene.

The third and last Carthaginian war was occasioned by the difference between
Masanissa and Carthage about some lands. The Romans would have reconciled 3823.
the difference, and Masanissa was willing for peace sake to yield up his
right. But such was the pride of Carthage, that they would hearken to no
reason: besides, against the articles of peace, they had prepared an army and
fleet. Gisco, Amilcars son, was a great stickler, and cause of this war, and so
incensed the people against Rome, that the Roman Ambassadors were fain to fly,
for fear of affronts. The Roman Senate was much exasperated against Carthage,
yet by the persuasion of P. Cor. Nasica, ten Ambassadors are sent thither to
try, if they would hearken to reason; the wars in Spain at this time, made the
Romans the less willing to quarrel with Carthage. The Ambassadors returning
to Rome acquainted the Senate with the preparations of Carthage both by land and
sea; wherefore war is denounced against Carthage; and it was debated in the
Senate, whether that city should be utterly destroyed or not. Nasica would have
it reserved, showing it suited not with policy to destroy that place, which
exercised the Roman forces, and kept their arms from rusting; nor was it
consonant to the clemency of Rome, to destroy and undo such multitudes of
people. But Cato told the Senate, that so long as Carthage stood, Rome could
never be secure and quiet; this opinion prevailed. As soon as the war was
proclaimed, Vtica submitted presently, and so did Carthage, delivering up their
ships and towns, which L. Martius, and M. Manlius Consuls, burned in the sight
of Carthage. Then command was given that all the chief citizens should depart
from Carthage, and build them a city 10 miles off from the sea. This command
was rejected, and so they all resolved to defend themselves and city; upon this
the Consuls set down before it, and on Romans were sometimes worsted; sometimes
the Carthaginians: this war was managed chiefly by P. Scipio Aemilianus, the
son of Aemilius, but adopted by Scipio the son of that Scipio who overthrew
Hannibal. This P. Scipio Aemilius had done good service in Spain; where he
obtained a murall or wall crown, and being Tribune of the soldiers, advanced
the Roman cause much in Africa. He was chosen Consul younger then was usual.
After the Carthaginians both men and women had fought stoutly in their own
defense, at last they yielded. The women had showed such courage that they cut
off their hair, and made ropes thereof for the

This city had stood 700 years, it was 24 miles in compass: the castle called
Byrsa, held out some time after the city was taken. This last Carthaginian war
fell out in the 604 year of Rome, the 52 year after the second Punick war, and
lasted 4. years: they procured their own destruction by sending an army against
their articles of peace of 58000 men in Masanissa's country, which army was
destroyed by famine, and the forces of that old King, for he was 94 years old
when he dyed, at 86 he had a son, and used to go bare-headed in all weathers.
Before the city was taken Scipio gave way to all that would to be gone: 50
thousand departed. Asdrubal submitted himself to the Consuls mercy, but his
Scipio saw Carthage on fire, he wept, repeating that verse, Illa dies veniet
cum fato Troia peribit; and presaging that the like calamity might befall Rome
it self; as it did under Totila the Goth, 700 years after. Masanissa's kingdom
was parted between his three sons Mycipsa, Gulussa, and Manastabelis, by the advice of Scipio, who by the old King was chosen arbitrator for that purpose.

CHAP. II.
1. Corinthians is taken. 2. The affairs of Egypt. 3. The affairs of Judea under
Simon and Hyrcanus. 4. The affairs of Syria under Tryphon, Demetrius,
Alexander, etc. 5. The Roman wars at home, in Sicily, in Spain, and in Asia.

THe same year proved fatal as well to Corinth, as it did to Carthage. The
Achaeans and Boetians 50. years after Greece was made free by Tit. Flaminius,
rebelled against the Romans, to whom the Spartans had complained of the wrongs
done them by the Achaeans: Ambassadors are sent from Rome to Greece, to
dissolve the confederacy of the Achaeans, and to restore every town to its
liberty; Critolaus the Achean praetor gathers great forces together, which
Metellus who then had the charge of Macedonia quickly dispersed and slew, the
Praetor himself in his flight was drowned in the fords. Diaeus the next Praetor
undertook the war, against whom L. Mummius the Consul marches with 23000 foot,
3000 and 500 horse: the Achaeans had not about 14000 foot, and 600 horse, who
were quickly cut off by the Romans in the presence of their wives and children.
Diaeus having first killed his own wife, poisoned himself. Metellus had taken
in Thebes and Megara, and was now la^ing siege to Corinth: but Mummius sends
him into Macedon, and sits down before Corinth, which at last he took by storm
and burned: all were put to the sword except women and children, which were
openly sold in the market. The chief ornaments and monuments of this rich
city, were transported to Rome, such abundance of gold, silver, and brass
statues were melted in that conflagration, that meeting all together Hales son
of Hippotes. 3828.


After these great victories over Carthage and Achaia, the Romans by degrees
falling from their masculine virtues, gave themselves over to ease, luxury and
magnificent buildings. In Asia, Egypt, and Syria, both princes and people
Philometor Physcon, so called from (...) the great gut (because he had so great
a belly that he could not stand or walk without a staff) succeeded King, and
called himself Ptolomie Euergetes, but by the Alexandrians he was named and
that deservedly (...) for his wicked life: he had a good schoolmasters, to
wit, Aristarchus the Samothracian, a famous Grammarian; and he wrote some books
himself. But became such a tyrant, that his subjects weary of his cruelties
fell upon his house, and burned it to the ground: he fled away in the dark to
Cyprus. Cleopatra his wife and sister is proclaimed Queen of Egypt; upon this
Physcon divorceth her, and marries with his own daughter; he murders his son
which he had by her, and sends his head, hands and feet, for a present to the
mother Philometor, who kindly entertained Onias the high priests son, and gave
him leave to erect in Heliopolis a Temple, no less magnificent then that of
Jerusalem, and punished the Samaritans for building a Temple at Garizim
contrary to the Law of Moses.

Demetrius Nicanor the son of Demetrius, having recovered his fathers kingdom
of Syria, he caused Jonathas the priest and captain of the Jews, to give off
the siege of Sion; and permitted to him the government of Samaria, Galilee, and
soppe: but he became insolent with too much prosperity; he disbanded his old
native soldiers, and retained the Mercenaries, which give offense to Diodotus
his General, who perceiving how diverse cities weary of the Kings cruelty began
to fall off from him, caused Antiochus the son of Alexander, who was the son of
Epiphanes, to be sent for out of Arabia, and sets him up, having in a battle
overthrown Demetrius, and driven him into Cilicia. He imployes the help of the
two brothers Jonathas, and Simon, who had done good service for Demetrius at
Antioch, and by their assistance he drives out of Gaza, Bethzura, and all
Galilee, Demetrius his commanders. In the mean while Jonathas fortifies Judea,
3830.
and renewes the Covenant with the Romans and Spartans. But Diodotus otherways
called Tryphon, desirous to be King himself, resolves to make away with
Antiochus, and fearing the greatness of Jonathas, whose affection was true to
the young King, persuades him to disband his forces, and come to Ptolemais;
whither when he came, he was seized upon, clapped up in prison, and his guard
being a 1000 soldiers were all slain. At last having treacherously murdered
both Jonathas, and young Antiochus, made himself King of Syria: he caused the
young King to be cut of the stone, pretending he died under the cure.

Simon in the government of Judea succeeds to Jonathas: he obtaines the favor
of Demetrius, takes in the tower and garrison of Sion, overcomes Gaza, and made
his son Hircanus General of his forces, and so advanced the Jewish affairs,
that after Demetrius they never admitted any Macedonian to reign 3832.
over them. In the mean time Demetrius suffering Tryphon for a while to reign
in Syria, made war against the Parthians, who under Mithridates their King, had
subdued the Bactrians, Medes, and Elimaeans, extending their Monarchy from the
hill Caucasus to Euphrates. Therefore Demetrius by the help of the Persians,
Greeks, Elimaeans, and Bactrians, did in diverse battles overcome the Parthians:
but at length under pretense of peace he was taken and carried in the sight of
those cities

Tryphons luxurious life and government began to be wearisome to his soldiers;
therefore they fell off from him to Cleopatra the wife of Demetrius; she was
then at Seleucia with her sons, and employed Antiochus the brother of her
captive husband, to pursue Tryphon with an army; which he did in hope to get
both the kingdom and the Queen to boot. He overthrowes Tryphon drives him out
of upper Syria, and shuts him up within the Castle Dora. But escaping thence to
Apamea he was slain, having reigned 3 years in Syria. Antiochus forgetful of
the assistance he hadfrom Simon the Jew, against his enemy, sent Cendebeus to
subdue Judea, Simon overthrew him, having sent against him an army of 20000 men
under the conduct of his two sons Judas, and John, so that Cendebeus was forced
to fly into the Castle Cedro: but Simon was treacherously murdered at a
feast, by his son in law Ptolomie whom he had made governor of Jericho. Simons
wife and two sons were also put in chains; Hircanus or John the third son
escaped by 3838.
times, who succeeded to his father and drove the parricide out of Judea. Upon
the death of Simon, Antiochus Soter, (so called from preserving of Syria, and
Sedetes from his country) besieged Jerusalem, and in it Hyrcanus, so that there
was great famine in the city, being the 7th. year wherein the land rested from
tillage. And the feast of Tabernacles being come, Hyrcanus obtained truce for
seven days Antiochus, who sent thither also to the feast bulls with guilt
horns, gold and silver goblets full of spices: and made a great feast for the
soldiers, wherefore he was call Pius. Hyrcanus in retaliation of so great
favors, pays tribute to Antiochus: He takes out of David's sepulcher 3000
talents: with five hundred of these he buyeth his peace, with the rest he
hireth soldiers, which he imployes for the Kings service against the
Parthians, and there having overcome the Hyrcanians, he obtained the name of
Hyrcanus.

Demetrius Nicanor being weary of his private life, though he lived plentifully
and like a prince, having married the daughter of Arsaces, King of Parthia: yet
as soon as his father in law was dead, he endeavored to fly into Syria, but
Phraates Arsaces, sent a troop of horse who overtook him in his journey and
brought him back to his wife; a stronger guard then was set over him, yet he
escaped again, and was retaken; and reproved: and to let him see his childish
levity, the King presents him with some golden dice, or huckle bones to play
withal. In this interim, Antiochus with an army of 80000 men expert soldiers,
besides cooks, bakers, skullions a multitude, invades the Parthian, and having
fought three battles, obtains a great victory, and takes in Babylon. Diverse of
the eastern Princes being weary of the Parthian government, submitted
themselves to him, so that the Parthians were confined within their ancient
bounds. In the mean time Phraates sends Demetrius with some Parthian forces
Antiochus into his own country, which was now in danger. Antiochus had
quartered his army in diverse cities; which being offended with the burden of
free quarter, and the soldiers insolences, revolted from him to the
Parthians, and falling on the dispersed soldiers, killed them. Antiochus
hearing of this, marches with such forces as he could at that time raise, and
encountreth with the Parthian King: but being forsaken by his soldiers he was
slain. Phraates bestowed on the dead body princely obsequies, and married with
the daughter of Demetrius, whom Antiochus had brought along with him. Phraates
repenting that he had sent away Demetrius, would have recalled him again, but
it was too late: for the troops of horse he sent to apprehend him, found him in
his kingdom. Phraates employed his captive soldiers against the Scythians,
and was killed by the Grecians.

Demetrius having regained the kingdom of Syria, was solicited by Cleopatra
Queen of Egypt his mother in law, to raise an Army against Ptolomy her husband
3843.
and brother too, who had devorced her. Demetrius set presently upon Ptolomy,
but withal lost his own Kingdom of Syria; for first the Antiochians, then
the Apamenians, and at last all the other Cities wearied with Demetrius his
Ptolemy understanding, that his Sister Cleopatra had fled with the chief wealth
of Egypt to Demetrius her son in law into Syria; sends one Zebina a young man
home to Protarchus a Merchant, with an Army to conquer Syria, pretending that
he was the adopted son of King Antiochus: the Syrians were glad to accept of
any King, rather then endure the cruelties of Demetrius, admitted this Zebina,
calling him by the name of Alexander; in the mean while the Parthian King sent
the corpse of Antiochus in a silver coffin to be interred by Alexander, who
expressing much sorrow (as if it had been true) obtained the love of the
people. Demetrius being overcome by Alexander, was at last forsaken by his own
Wife, and sons, so that he was forced to flee Seleucus was killed by his
mothers appointment, for crowning himself without her consent; the other son
Grypho, so called from his big nose, was crowned by his mother; so that he
carried the title of King, but the whole Government of the Kingdom was given
her; but Alexander having got Syria, insolently began to slight Ktolomy by
whose help he obtained that Kingdom: therefore Ptolemy being reconciled to his
sister; resolved to destroy the now upstart King Alexander, wherefore he sends
to Gryphus a great Army, and bestows his daughter Tryphena on him in marriage,
by which means the Cities fell off again from Alexander, who being Antioch,
where wanting money to pay the soldiers, he commands them to seize upon the
golden Image of Victory in Jupiters Temple, scoffingly saying that Jupiter had
lent him Victory for a while; shortly after commanding Jupiters own golden
statue to be taken down, he was set upon by the people, and forced to fly; at
last his soldiers being overthrown in a storm he was forsaken, and taken by
some robbers, by whom he was brought to Gryphus, and slain.

About this time, the Jews enjoyed their liberties under Johannes Hyrcanus, who
having renewed the League with Rome, repealed all the Acts of Antiochus
Sedetes; he subdued Idumea, and forced it to receive Circumcision, he pulled
Alexander. He made Antiochus Gryphus leave the siege of Jerusalem which he had
begun, this Gryphus was like to be poisoned by his mother Cleopatra out of a
desire to reign alone; which desire made her betray her husband Demetrius, and
murder her eldest son. Gryphus had secret information of the poison prepared
for him, which when it was presented by his mother to him, he caused her to
drink it up her self, and so she perished by her own device. After this
Antiochus 3848.
Gryphus reigned 8 years peaceably, till he attempted to poison his Brother
Antiochus Cyzicenus of the same mother, but begot of his Uncle Antiochus
Sedetes, these two brothers quarrelled so long about the kingdom of Syria till
they Gryphus by Herodian, Cyzicenus by Seleucus, the son of Gryphus. In the
mean while Ptolemy King of Egypt dies having reigned 29 years; the
government of Egypt was left to his wife, and to one of his sons.

The Romans about this time had their Arms exercised at home by the Gracchi in
Sicily by the slaves in Spain by Viriatus, in Asia by Aristonicus. Tiberius
Gracchus 3839.
Tribune of the people was petitioned by the poor soldiers to have the Laws
called Agrariae, put in execution: by these Laws none of the soldiers could
enjoy above 500 acres of land; neither must the richer sort buy the poorer out
of their estates: Gracchus urged the execution of these Laws, as also that the
treasure left by King Attalus might be distributed among the poor. In these
things he was opposed by the rich men chiefly by C. Antonius the Consul, and
Octavius the Tribune, from whom Gracchus in an unusual way took away the
Tribunate, he also strove to continue in his Government against the Law: upon
this Scipio Nasica the chief Pontifiee calls up the Senate to the Capitol, who
being accompanied thither with a great multitude; made Gracchus his friends
forsake him, Satureius, and 300 Citizens with him, whose bodies were flung into
Tibris, the body of Tiberius lay unburied; this fell out an. urbis 6^0. About 4
years after Carbo the Tribune of the people, made a motion in the Senate, that
the same man might be chosen Tribun as often as he pleased; this was seconded
by C. Gracchus, Tiberius his brother, but mainly opposed by Scipio Emilianus,
who the next morning was found dead in his bed, not without suspicion of poison
by Sempronia his wife, and sister of Gracchus the 56 year of his life. Carbo
killed himself. C. Gracchus and Fulvius having seized upon the hill Aventin
with an armed multitude were slain by Opimius the Consul: besides, 3000
citizens were killed in that sedition. Opimius after this was condemned

The Servill war in Sicily began by means of one Eunus a Syrian, who
encouraged the slaves (complaining of their hard usage) to rebel, this Eunus
made them believe he was a Prophet, sent to foretell their prosperous success;
for confirmation of this he used to breath flames out of his mouth, having had
within a nutshell fire and sulphur; the slaves chose him for their King; the
prisons were broke open, and a great army of slaves were quickly raised.
Another slave one Cleon of Cilicia gathered together 70000 runnegadoes; these
overthrew the Roman Pretors, the charge of this war was committed to C.
Fulvius the Consul; after him to Piso, then to Rupilius, who after diverse
events overthrew the slaves; Cleon was slain in the fight: Eunus was taken in
a cave, where he hid himself, and died in prison being eat up with lice. These
troubles were presaged by the birth of an Hermophrodite in Rome, by the growing
of corn upon trees in the fields of Bononia and by the eruption of fire out of
Etna in Sicily.

Viriatus a Portugal of a robber in the high ways, became a terror to Rome;
for he overthrew the two armies of C. Vetelius the Praetor, and of Plautius
Claudius, erecting the Roman Ensigns for Trophies on his Mountains; about that
time 300 Lusitanians encountered with a 1000 Romans, and killed 320 of them
having lost themselves 70 men. Appius Claudius the Consul, was beat by the
Salassii, but in Q. Fabius Consul drove away Viriatus from the siege of
Vacceia, and took the City with many forts and castles, he cut off the hands of
500 Princes, who upon his invitation had yielded themselves to him. Pompejus
the next years Consul was beaten in Numantia having lost the greatest part of
his army, and many men of quality, at last Viriatus after 14 years war; being
betrayed to Servilius Cepio, was slain by him, but the traitors received not
any reward or thanks from Romans. Cepio's army was rewarded by Iun. Brutus
Consul the with lands, and a City called by them Valentia.

About this time the Plague was so hot at Rome, that scarce were there found
men enough alive to bury the dead; this calamity was presaged by the birth of a
hermophrodite at Rome, which by the Haruspices was drowned, S. Cecilius,
Metellus, and C. Fab. Max. Servilianus Consuls; another was burned alive about
the beginning of the Marsian war. Much about this time T. Manlius Torquatus
caused his son Iunias Silanus Praetor of Macedon to be put to death, for
oppressing the Macedonians with unjust taxes, then also was C. Matienus accused
for deserting his army in Spain, for which he was whipped under the furca or
gallows, being a long pole laid upon two erected forkes, and was sold for a
slave.

Mancinus the Consul at Numantia had such ill success in his wars, that he
was forced to make a dishonorable peace, which the Senate would not ratify;
for 30000 Romans were overthrown by 4000 Numantians. Mancinus was made to
stand naked with his hands bound behind him, at the gates of Numantia till
night, being forsaken by all his friends, and exposed as a spectacle of misery
to his enemies. But Iun. Brutus in the inward parts of Spain overthrew Lepidus
the Proconsul was beaten by the Vaccei, and that deservedly; for they would
have submitted to him, the Senate interceded for them, as being a harmless
people, yet he would needs provoke them to fight, in which skirmish he lost
6000 Romans, the rest fled. Rome to vindicate the losses and affronts sustained
by the Numantians to C. Pulvius joined P. Scipio, who was chosen Consul by all
the Tribunes before his time; for none could by the Law be Consul twice, till
after the expiration of ten years. Scipio therefore besieges Numantia, which
was seated on a hill, having walls 3 miles in compass. This town Pompey,
Popilius, and Mancinus; Scipio did not suddenly fall upon them, but first
trained and exercised his soldiers, reducing them by degrees from their
idleness and loose behavior, to the old military severity, he was a man both
fortunate, courageous and magnificent, for he gave a list of the rich presents
sent him from Antiochus Sedetes, that the Senate might distribute them to the
best deserving soldiers, whereas other Generals used to conceal their
presents sent them from Princes. The Numantians would have submitted upon
tolerable conditions, which when they could not obtain, having drunk largely
(not wine, which that country did not afford) but a liquor made of wheat,
prepared as we do our malt of barley; made a sally out upon the Romans, but
seeing they could do

Aristonicus in Asia made work for the Roman arms, he was the bastard son of
Eumenes, King of Pergamus. Attalus Philometor being now dead, and having left
An. Vrbis. 622.
his vast estate to the Romans; Aristonicus made have to take possession of his
brothers Kingdom, he draws many to side with him; he took by storm Myndus,
Samos, and Colophon, which towns held for the Romans, against him was sent
Licinius Crassus Consul and High Priest with a good army assisted by Nicomedes
King of Bithynia, Mithridates King of Pontus, (against whom the Romans
afterward made war) Ariarathes King of Cappadocia, Pylemenes, King of
Paphlagonia a great battle was fought, and great slaughter on both sides; but
Crassus lost the day and his life too; for being almost taken prisoner by a
Thracian, he struck him in the eye with his rod, which so exasperated the
Barbarian that he run Crassus through with his sword, and so he escaped by
his death his shame and captivity; upon the news of this overthrow, Perpenna
the Consul hastneth to Asia, falls suddenly on Aristonicus being secure,
forces him to fly to Stratonice the town, which being besieged, and almost
famished, yielded; Aristonicus Attalus. Perpenna fell sick at Pergamus and
died. Aquilius put an end to the Asiatick war, who by poisoning the Wells and
springs caused diverse Cities to yield. Aristonicus was strangled in Prison at
Rome; which now enjoyed both the vices and wealth of Asia.

Whilst Plautius, Hypseus, and Fulvius were Consuls Africa was so infested
with Locusts, that after they had destroyed all the fruits, corn and grass,
they were carried headlong into the Sea by a strong wind, and drowned; but
with tides they were driven on the shore, and there left upon the ebbing of
the Sea, whose putrefied bodies so infected the air, that thereby all living
creatures were poisoned, so that there died in Numidia 800000 souls upon the
coast of Carthage and Utica above 20000, and in Utica it self there died 3000,
so that in one day there were carried out of the gates of the City 1500 dead
bodies; about this time the Gauls marching in a great Army to aid the the
Allobroges, were overthrown by Q. Fab. Max. the Nephew of Aemilius in the
flight 120000 were killed and drowned in the Roan whilst their bridge of boats
broak under them. Bituitus the King and his son were imprisoned in Alba.

CHAP. III.
1. The Jewish affairs under Hyrcanus, Aristobulus and Alexander, the Egyptian
affairs under Cleopatra, Philometor, and Alexander. The Syrian affairs under
Seleucus, Eusebes, Philip, Demetrius, etc. The Roman Wars with Jugurtha, the
Cimbri, the Thracians and Sicilian slaves.

THe Jews under Hyrcanus, by the favor of the Romans enjoied peace abroad,
Moses, they denied Angels and Spirits, the Immortality of Souls, and the
Resurrection: the Esseans, that is, laborers from Asa, to consider and
contemplate; (for they gave themselves to spiritual and corporal exercises)
living a strict life, spending their time in reading, praying, studying of
Physic) doing good works, chiefly of charity to the poor; who had all things
in common, 3870:
and lived apart by themselves. Hyrcanus favored the Sadduces, and rejected
the Pharisees traditions he besieged Samaria, and laid it even with the ground.
Antiochus entered Judea, thinking to raise the siege, but was driven out again
by Antigonus and Aristobulus, the sons of Hyrcanus then returning with new
Forces from Ptolemy King of Egypt; began to wast and spoil the country, but
having lost the greater part of those 6000 men he brought with him, was forced
to give off. Shortly after this, Hyrcanus dies having ruled Palestine 31
years, his son Aristobulus changed the pincipality of Judea into a Kingdom,
and was the first that wore the Diadem since the Captivity: he reigned not
above one year; having murdered his brother Antigonus with his own hand,
fearing that Iturea, to him succeeded his youngest brother Alexander Ianneus.

This Alexander began his reign with the murder of one of his Brothers, the
other he permitted to live a private life in his reign. Ptolemy Lamyrus killed
30000 Jews, feeding the captives with the flesh of their slain countrymen,
after this he took Gadara, Amathus, and Gaza; he had diverse encounters with
Demetrius, and was oftentimes troubled with the factions, and conspiraces of
the Jews against him, 800 of the rebels he caused to be crucified whilst he
was feasting Alexandra successor; whom he advised to continue the siege of the
castle Ragabe beyond Jordan, and to keep good correspondence with the
Pharisees, who 3898.
were then the prevailing faction and to deliver his body to them to be used at
their pleasure; which was done accordingly, and interred honorably, having
reigned 27 years and lived 49.

The kingdom of Egypt was left by Ptol. Physcon to his Queen Cleopatra, and to
that son whom she should choose; she affected Alexander the younger, but was
forced by the people to choose the elder; who was surnamed Lathurus, because he
obtained the kingdom as it were secretly and by stealth; for the hatred of his
mother he was nicknamed Philometor. His mother made him repudiate his dear 3856.
wife, and sister Cleopatra, and marry with the younger sister Selene.
Cleopatra being devorced married in Syria with Antiochus Cyzicenus, who shortly
after by Gryphus, but lost the battle, and was forced to fly to Antioch.
Gryphus besieged the Town and took it; he would have preserved Cleopatra, as
being sister to his wife Triphena, but this cruel woman sent soldiers to
murder her, after she had taken Sanctuary; but shortly after in another
battle Cyzicenus had the better of his brother, who took Gryphus his wife,
whom he caused to be killed for murdering of her sister.

Cleopatra Ptolemies mother caused the people to rise against him, she
banished his wife Selene after she had borne him two sons, she made Alexander
the younger son King, and persues with open war her eldest son into Cyprus,
who Chelcias and Ananias the sons of Onias, who built the Temple in
Heliopolis, for these two were faithful to her. Whilst Gryphus and Cyzicenus
were striving for Syria, Alexander besieges Ptolemy and wastes the countries
of the Gazeans and Dorenses; these expecting no succor from the Kings of Syria
call in Lathurus Alexanders brother, out of Cyprus, who perceiving that his
brother Alexander meant to betray him, falls with fire and sword upon Judea,
and overthrows Alexander in a battle near Jordan, he killed 30000 Jews, takes
Ptolemais with diverse Castles which he throws down, and was in some
possibility Chelcias and Ananias the Jews, she recovers Ptolemais, and frees
the Jews from the fear of Lathurus, but Alexander fearing his mothers cruelty
betook himself to a private life. Cleopatra fearing lest Cyzicenus should
assist her eldest son to recover Egypt, sends great Forces to Gryphus, and
calls back her son Alexander to his kingdom; but intending to murder him,
which he knew well, therefore having got her into his power, he slew her: the
people understanding this paricide, drove him out of his Kingdom, and
re-established Ptolemy again in his Throne.

Antiochus Gryphus being slain the 29. year of his reign, his son Seleucus
succeeded, who made war upon his Uncle Cyzicenus, at last took him, and
killed him not long after, his son Antiochus Eusebes revenged his fathers
death, by driving the murderer quite out of Syria, who flying into Cilicia,
for his exaction was burned in the Palace with his friends, his brother
Antiochus was also overthrown by Eusebes and lost both his Army and life.
After him Philip Gryphus his third son reigned in a part of Syria. Demetrius
Euserus the fourth son was by Ptolemy Lathurus or Lamyrus as Plutarch calls
him, sent for out of Cnidus and made King of Damascus. Antiochus Eusebes
stoutly opposed these two brothers, but yet shortly after was slain, as
Galadens. So Philip and his brother Demetrius enjoyed the Kingdom of Syria,
this Demetrius was called in by the Jews against their own King Alexander who
in their civil wars had killed above 60000 Jews, he drove Alexander to the
Mountains after he had slain all his Mercenary soldiers, but upon a supply
of 6000 Jews Alexander made him to retire back; this Demetrius would have
driven his brother out of Syria; who for his own defense calls in the Arabians
and Parthians, these forced Demetrius to yield, and sent him prisoner to
Mithridates the Parthian King; shortly after he sickned and died. Then did
Philip enjoy Syria alone, but not long, for Antiocbus Dionysius having seized
upon Damascus, endeavored to get the kingdom of Coelosyria from his brother
Philip, but whilst he was making war upon Aretas King of Arabia, Philip
invaded Damascus, and thought to carry it by treason, but was disappointed, in
the interim, Antiochus fighting against the Arabians was killed. Aretas
challenges Coelosyria, and overcomes Alexander King of the Jews near Adid.
About this time Appion brother of Lathurus by a concubine died, and left

About the time that Hyrcanus besieged Samaria, the Romans overthrew Iugurtha
and seized upon Numidia. This Iugurtha was Masanissa's Grandchilde, 3861.
but adopted by Mycipsa. He made war upon his brother Hyempsales and killed
him: the like faet he intended against the other brother Adherbales, but he
fled to Rome; wherefore Iugurtha sends thither by his Legates a great sum of
money to draw the Senate to consent, that the kingdom between him and
Adherbales might be divided. Legates with M. Scaurus are sent. But the Romans
perceiving Iugurtha's cunning and bribery, in corrupting their legates,
Calphurnius Bestia the Consul is sent into Numidia, but the crafty King bought
his peace, and seemingly submitted himself. He is sent for by the Senate, and
upon the public faith repaires thither; in the interim he causes Massiva
competitor of the kingdom, being the nephew of Masinissa, to be murdered;
wherefore Sp. Albinus is sent over with an army, which the King corrupts with
his gold, hereupon the army makes a voluntary flight, and gives him the
victory. Metellus to revenge this dishonor, falls upon the King in earnest,
being no ways moved either with bribes, threats or prayers, wastes and plunders
all his country, seiseth upon his capital towns, and drives him quite out of
his Kingdom, pursuing him through Mauritania Getulia. At last Marius is sent,
who being an upstart himself raised an army of the meaner sort, and with
incredible valor took Capsa a city environed with sands and serpents. He took
also Molucha built upon a rocky hill, and inaccessible. Shortly after he
overthrowes not only Iugurtha, but also Bocchus king of Mauritania, who laid
claim to Numidia as being next in blood: this Bocchus had in his army 60000
horse; the fight continued three days: at last by the help of a great storm
of rain, which so moistened the African targets and weapons that they were made
unserviceable, the Romans prevailed. This battle was fought near Cirtha the
ancient town and court of Masanissa. Bocchus to ingratiate himself with the
Romans, catched Iugurtha by a train and delivered him by Sylla the Legate to
Marius. At last this crafty King, who Marius his Chariot, and presently after,
was strangled in prison. Marius was the first that ever entered the Senate in a
triumphant garment: he was continued diverse years in his office because of the
Cimbrick war.

The Cimbrians having much of their country overflowed by the sea, were forced
3859.
to seek out new plantations. They first fall upon Illyria where they overthrew
Papyrius Carbo the Consul: then they send a Petition to Silanus that they A. U.
642.
might have leave to plant themselves some where; their request being denied,
they resolve to plant themselves by force of arms: therefore they fall
furiously Silanus, then upon Manlius, then upon Caepio, and overthrew all their
three armies. Then the Tigurius overcame L. Cassius the Consul upon the borders
of the Allobroges or Savoyens. Aurelius Scaurus also was beat with his army by
the Cimbrians, and himself killed by King Belus for dissuading him to pass the
Alps, saying the Romans were invincible. At the river Rhodanus C. Manlius, and
Q. Servilius Caepio, were defeated by the Cimbrians, 80000 Romans were slain,
besides 40000 pages, and drudges who carried wood and water for the army.
Caepio is condemned at Rome for his temerity to be strangled, and flung over
the Scalae Gemoniae, and his whole estate confiscated; his daughters died all
miserably after they had been abused; this judgment fell on Caepio for his
sacrilege upon the Temple of Tolosa. The Cimbrians having wasted all about
Rhodanus, and the Pyrenaeans entered Spain, but were driven out by the
Celtiberians: Then returning into France, they joined their forces with the
Teutones, and having divided their army into three parts, haste to cross the
Alps; Marius being now Consul the third time, sets upon the Teutones at
Teutobodus their General was slain: the women petitioned for their lives,
which being refused, they first dash out their childrens brains, then they hang
themselves.

The Cimbrians having beaten Q. Catulus the proconsull from the Alps, enter
Italy: against whom Marius being now the fifth time created Consul is sent. 3871.
He taking his opportunity with the advantage of the sun and wind, being
assisted Catulus his forces, falls upon them unawares, and routs them; 140000
of them were slain, 60000 taken. Marius by this victory was honored with the
Consulslip the sixth time; thus the Cimbrians invincible elsewhere, were easily
conquered in Italy, being softened by the delights thereof. The Cimbrian women
despairing of mercy, killed one another. Marius his triumph was accompanied
with a sad dysaster; for Publicins Malleolus murthred his mother; for which
wickedness he was the first that was sowed in a sack and flung into the sea:
this Cimbrick war continued 8. years. Strabo thinks these Cimbri to be from the
Cimmerii, and others, that both are from Gomer the son of Japhet: the
Teutones were Westphalians as Melanchthon gathers out of Tacitus and Ptolemie.
The

About this time the Thracians sometimes the Macedonian tributaries rebelled,
wasting Thessalie, and Dalmatia, even to the Adriatic sea. The Scordisci a
people most fierce in Thracia, says Florus, (but Stadius will have them a
people in Gallia upon Ister) totally routed the army of Portius Cato. Didius
beat them home again into Thracia. Drusius confined them within Danubius.
Minutius wasted them along the river Hebrus, in which many of them were
drowned, the ice deceiving them. Piso went as far as Caucasus and Rhodope.
Curio entered Dacia on the North side of Danubius. Lucullus marched to Tanais,
and the lake Maeotis. These Barbarians were destroyed with fire and sword; many
of the captives

Licinius Narva Praetor of Sicily, about this time, gave occasion to the slaves
to break out again into an open war. He was commanded to set all the Ingenui
at liberty, because of the Cimbrian wars, which he refused to do; whereupon 30
slaves began the rebellion, and grew quickly into a great body, against whom
Titinius a captain of the high way men was sent; whom the slaves slew: and
being increased to 6000 made one Salvius a Soothsayer their King: then they lay
siege to Morgantina, and beat off Licinius as he was coming to raise the
siege. Salvius seeing the Romans run away, made proclamation, that none should
be killed who Athenio a Cilician Astrologer, and captain of the whole legion,
joins himself to Salvius who calls himself now Tryphon, and makes his regal
seat at Tricala, which he fortifieth with walls and trenches, having the command
of 40000 men: against him Licinius Lucullus is sent from Rome with 18000. (...)
who falls upon the slaves, kills 20000 of them, in this conflict Athenio was
wounded, the rest fly to Tricala which they held out against Lucullus; in the
interim, Tryphon dies. Athenio succeeds him: against him M. Aquilius colleague
to Marius in his fifth Consulship is sent, he kills Athenio fighting stoutly, and
was wounded himself in the head, he overthrowes the 10000 that were left, and
the last 1000 being taken prisoners, were condemned to be thrown to the beasts,
which they prevented by killing one another.

CHAP. IIII.
1. The civil wars of Rome under Marius, Sylla, Cinna. 2. The Roman wars with
Mithridates.

C. Marius hitherto the pillar, now the caterpillar of his country, sheathes
the conquering sword of Rome into her own bowels, which he had unsheathed
against her enemies: Having got himself to be made Consul the sixth time by
bribery and Apuleius Saturninus Tribune, he endeavored to renew the A. Nomius
the competitor of Saturninus to be murdered, and Metellus Numidicus to be
banished, to the great grief of all the nobility: and because he was afraid
that Memmius would be chosen Consul, Saturninus by his procurement, caused him
to be murdered. Glaucia, who aimed at the Consulship, was a main man for
Saturninus; the Senate and people enraged at these murders, made such a tumult
in the forum, that they fell to skirmishing, Marius sided with the strongest
party, which was the Senate, and drove Saturninus into the Capitol where he was
besieged, and the Conduit pipes which conveyed water thither cut off;
Saturninus openly professed, that Marius was the cause of all the trouble. Upon
his submission he Curia: but the people breaking in furiously fell upon
Saturninus, and tore him in pieces with Saufeius and Tabienus-Glaucia was drawn
out of Claudius his house, and slain. Cn. Dolobella with L. Geganius as they
thought to escape through the herb market, were killed also. These
incendiaries being slain and their estates confiscated, Cato and Pompey
motioned that Metellus should be recalled home, but they were opposed by
Marius, and Furius the Tribune, and honest Rutilius was banished into Smyrna,
where he spent his time in study.

Metellus being brought back into the city with great honor, so discontented
Marius, that he went to Mithridates king of Pontus, to incense him against
Mithridates, who for his service against Aristonius, was rewarded by the Roman
Senate with Phrygia the greater. When he was young he used so many Antidotes
fearing the treachery of his governors, that when he was old, he could, not
poison himself. He spent 7. years together in hunting, never all that time
entering into any house; so fearful he was to be murdered: but when he came to
reign, he enlarged his Dominion by subduing the Scythians, and driving
Ariebarzanes the Romans friend out of Cappadocia, whom Sylla restored again: he
spoke 22 languages.

Livius Drusus Tribune of the people stirred up the Italians against Rome, A.
U. 659.
they being denied the privileges of the city, and understanding Drusus their
patron was privately murdered, fell upon C. Servilius the praetor, who was sent
as a Legate to the Picentes, Samnites and others, and slew him with diverse other
Romans. Hereupon Cn. Pompeius the Praetor was sent against the Picentes, with an
army which was beat by them. So was Jul. Caesar by the Samnites. Rutilius the
Consul was slain with 8000 Romans by the Marsi; which slaughter Marius repayed
with the overthrow of 8000. Marsians. Caepio with his army was overthrown by
the Vestini, but Caesar having renewed his forces subdued the Samnites and
Lucanians: upon news of this victory the Senate put off their Soldiers cassock
which they had put on in the beginning of this war, and was their habit of
mourning, and betook themselves again to the gown. After this Marius puts 6000
Marsians to the sword, and disarmes 7000. Sylla raises the siege from Aeserina
where the Romans were shut up. Pompey overthrew the Picentes. These good
successes made the Senate put on their Laticlavia or white coats imbroidered
with studs of purple resembling broad nailheads. Cato overcame the Etrusci,
Plotius the Vmbri. Pompey took the rich Judacilius poisoned himself.

Posthumous Albinus Sylla's Legate was in a tumult murdered by the soldiers A.
U. 661.
which occasioned the death of 18000 Samnites. Cato for extolling his own
actions above those of Marius, was knocked down by Marius his son. C. Gabinius
is killed. The Vestini and Marrucini are plundered, Pompedius and Obsidius
Italian Commanders with their whole army are overthrown by Pompeys Legate
Sulpicius at Asculus. Pompey caused all the commanders to be whipped and
beheaded, and the servants to be sold. At Rome the Senate and Roman Knights
Livius the Tribune threated Caepio with death for resisting him, and beat
Philip the Consul. But shortly after was so wounded in a tumult, that he was
carried home half dead. Validus was stabbed with a knife; Philip and Caepio
were suspected for this murder.

Mithridates upon these troubles in Italy, takes occasion to invade
Paphlagonia, Galatia, and Cappadocia; threatens also Bithynia, and stirs up
all the East against the Romans. Sylla then besieging Nola, is chosen to go
against Mithridates, but he resolved to take Nola first; whereupon Marius being
now 70 years old, by the help of Sulpitius the Tribune, obtained the charge of
this Mithridatick war, and got the act for Sylla to be repealed. The Tribune
not content with this, kills Sylla's son in law, and sends to Sylla to deliver
up his Sylla in a rage hastneth to Rome, skirmisheth with the faction of Marius
and Sulpitius, and drives them out of the city. Marius both father and son with
10 more are by the Senate denounced enemies to the State; Sulpitius was betrayed
by his servant, and killed; the servant demanding his reward, was made free;
but for his treachery to his master was flung down from the Tarpeian rock.
Marius the son goes over to Africa. Old Marius hiding himself in some
Marshes, was by the Minturnians condemned to die, but the executioner being
de^erred by the majesty of the man, returns without doing him any hurt. So he
sails over to his son into Africa. Sylla reigns at Rome; his Colleague Q.
Pompeius Consul is slain by Cn. Pompeius

Mithridates in the mean time subdueth Phrygia and Asia, and causes all the
Romans that were found in Asia to be slain in one day. The city Rhodus held out
for the Romans, and beat Mithridates by sea. He sends Archelaus into Greece
with an army of 120000 men, who subdue Achaia and Athens. But whilst Sylla was
about to raise the siege from Athens, the fire of discord breaks out again at
Rome under Corn. Cinna and Cn. Octavius Consuls. Cinna would have Marius, and
the others banished by Sylla to be recalled; herein Octavius resists him, and
drives him out of the city. Marius in the interim returns from Africa. The
army at Nola under Appius Claudius joined with Cinna; the Italians whose cause
Cinna much favored, unite themselves in a great body to him. So that the army
consisted of 30 legions. Cn. Pompeius the father of great Pompey, after much
wavering encounters with Sylla under the city walls, where a great-battell was
fought. In it were two brothers, the one having killed the other ignorantly,
who as he was stripping his dead corpse, perceived it to be his brother; and
with grief stabbed himself over his brothers body, so both were burned
together in the same pile. Cinna and Marius divide their army into four parts,
two whereof were committed to Sertorius and Carbo: after many skirmishes and
much slaughter, Cinna is received into the city, and after him Marius. Pompey
is struck dead with a thunderclap, his army destroyed by the plague. Octavius
is murdered, and his head exposed to the public view before the Rostra or
pleading place, which was a great building within the forum Romanum, and in it
a pulpit called Rostra beset with the sterns of ships taken from the enemies.
The head of Cn. Antonius was presented upon Marius his table; C. Caesar, and
Fimbria were murdered in their Crassus both the father and son were slain in
the sight of each other. Bebius and Numitor were dragged by the hangmen through
the Forum. Catulus killed himself. Merula, who was made Jupiters priest,
besprinkled his Idol with his own blood: no rich man at that time could
escape. 3884.
Cinna and Marius create each other Consul, without calling the Comitia or
Parliament. But shortly after Marius dies, being distracted in mind. In these
troubles many of the nobility fled to Sylla in Achaia and Asia; who had
recovered Athens from Mithridates, and had killed above 200000 of his men, and
had taken near as many prisoners.

L. Flaccus succeeds Sylla, he was hated of the army for his covetousness,
Fimbria who succeeded him. This had good success against Mithridates, took
Pergamus, and almost had taken the King in it. He overthew Ilion the town; and
recovered a great part of Asia from Mithridates. Sylla in the interim overthrew
the Thracians wasting Macedonia. Cinna and Papirius Carbo made themselves
Consuls for two years: L. Valerius Flaecus, and other peaceable men, sent to
Sylla to have peace established; but Cinna raised an army: and as he was
forcing the soldiers to go on shipboard at Ancona was stoned to death: then
Carbo was Consul alone. Sylla took Asia, Bithynia, and Cappadocia from
Mithridates. Fimbria being forsaken by his army which 3888.
went to Sylla, made his own servant to kill him. Sylla returns this answer
Cinna might be restored. This was resisted by factious Carbo and his crew.
Sylla's Legates who were sent with articles of peace, were abused by the Consuls
Narbonus and Corn. Scipio Asiaticus, both whom Sylla overcame near Capua, and
let Scipio go without any hurt. So moderate was he both in his victories over
his country men, and careful rather to subdue the common enemy, then to
revenge particular wrongs; Pompey the son of him who took Asculus, having
raised an army of Volunteirs, joined him self with Sylla, and so did all the
Nobility.

Young Marius and Carbo, Consuls, to be revenged on the Senate siding now with
Sylla, beset the Curia with soldiers under Damasippus the Praetor; and Pontius
Telesinus General of the Samnites, with an army of 40000 fought so with Sylla
at the port Collina, that the city was in danger to have been destroyed
utterly; for he said that Italy should never want wolves to devour their
liberties, until the wood that sheltred them were cut down. The fight
continued till it was past midnight, at last the Samnites retreated, and
Telesinus the next morning was found gasping for life; whose head Sylla caused
to be carried about Praeneste where Marius was; who now despairing tried to
escape, but was prevented and slain. Then Sylla obtained the title of Happy, if
there be happiness in shedding of blood, for he slew above 70000 in his wars
Marius and Telesinus, by Metellus, Lucullus and the Servilii he overthrew the
armies of Carbo. He killed 8000 of those that yielded to him, 2000 of those
that were Proscripti (whose goods were confiscated, and the persons themselves
to be banished) suffered death. Marius his brother was murdered by degrees,
first having his hands and feet cut off, then his eyes put out; he killed all
the Prenestinians, he killed Carbo in Sicilie and many other cruel acts he
did, then he was made Dictator; none having had this honor till now, since
Hannibals departure out of Italy, which was 120 years space: he had 24 fasces
or bundles of rods with axes carried before him, he weakened the Tribuniciall
power, by debarring them from making Laws and public speeches. He filled up
the Senate with Knights; and killed his friend Lucretius Asella for offering
without his consent to demand the Consulship: he increased the Colleges of
Priests and Augures to 15. he sold the goods of the banished and debarred
their children of all honors; he took Nola, and divided the lands of the
Samnites, among 47. Regions. By Cn. Pompejus he overcame and Domitius that was
banished; and Iarbas king of Numidia; he was severe against the banished and
those that received them, that Bastia the wife of Metellus refused to let him
in though disguised, wherefore he slew himself, besprinkling his unthankful
gate with his own blood, at last being slighted by the people and Senate having
laid down his Dictatorship 2 years after he dyed at Cume of the lousy
disease, and his body was burned honorably in the campus Martius. M. Lepidus
would have repealed all his acts; but by Catulus his fellow Consul he was
banished Italy, and dyed in Sardinia. About this time the Roman Capitol, and
the Delphic Temple were burned. These Civil broiles at Rome were presaged by
fire from Heaven, by unusual hail and

CHAP. V.
1. The affairs of Syria under Tigranes. 2. Of Judea under Alexandra. 3. Of
Egypt under Ptolemy Auletes, etc. 4. The Sertorian, Spartic, and Mithridatic
war; with Catilius conspiracy. 5. Pompis actions and some Roman Cicero and
Clodius.

SYria being now torn in pieces by Civil wars, Aretas reigning in one part,
and Antiochus in another, Tygranes King of Armenia is sent for, Mithridates
3891.
not being able to assist them, because of his wars with the Romans, and
Ptolemy King of Egypt they durst not trust, as aiming at Syria himself.
Therefore having subdued the Gordyeans, Atropatenians, and Mesopotamians,
crosses Euphrates and seiseth upon Syria and Phenicia; he besieges Ptolemais
with 50000 men, at last he took it, and in it Cleopatra Selene, being
banished Antiochus was driven to a corner of Cilicia, and Tigranes possessed
the greater part of Syria for 18 years together, in whose time there perished
by Earthquakes there 17000 men, and many towns, a presage of the great change
that was at hand, for the whole kingdom of the Seleucidae, was seized upon by
the Romans.

Alexandra Alexanders widow now reigned in Palestine under whom the Pharisees
were so powerful, that they ruled all and put many good men to death, who did
not favor their faction. Alexanders eldest son Hyrcanus was then High Priest.
Aristobulus the younger had no command, the Queen sent rich presents to
Tigranes whilst he lay before Ptolemais, by which means she kept her country
in Aristobulus seiseth upon diverse Towns and Forts, and so makes himself King,
causing Hyrcanus to content himself with the Priesthood.

In Egyt Lathyrus being dead, another Ptolemy succeeds. He was accounted the
son of Lathyrus by a Concubine. Ptolemy the son of Alexander was with Sylla,
whom he made King of Alexandria, but the Citizens not enduring his insolency
killed him the 19 day of his reign; his brother succeeds, and him they
banished; at last Araletes who called himself Bacchus succeeded, famous in
nothing but in luxury, and piping, for which he was called Auletes.

The valiantest of all those whom Sylla proscribed was Q. Sertorius, whose
valor was known both in Africa, the Baleares and the Fortunate Islands, at
last Spain under him rebelled; he overthrew L. Manlius Proconsul of Gallia,
and M. Antonie Legate, by Hirtuleius the Questor; he took in many towns, and
threatened Italy it self. But Q. Metellus Pius overthrew Hirtuleius his Army in
Betica now called Granata or Granada; and Pompey (who being as yet but Questor,
was honored with Consular authority, a Sertorius overcame both Metellus and
Perpenna, who within a while lay siege to the Town Calagurium; which made
Sertorius jealous of his friends, many of whom he put to the sword upon
suspicion of treason. Mithridates upon this enters into league with Sertorius
by whose help he overthrew M. Aurelius Cotta the Consul near Chalcedon, 12000
Romans were lost in the Sea fight, 5000 in the land skirmish. Metellus and
Pompey were fain to give over the siege of Calagurium: at last Sertorius being
betrayed by some of Antonies and Perpenna's fugitives was slain at a feast,
this Perpenna and Marius were afterward destroyed with their Armies by Pompey,
who recovered Spain after 10 years war by the Roman Commanders striving for
mastery. Calagurium was starved

The Spartick war follows immediately upon the Sertorian, one Spartacus a
Thracian soldier, then a highway-man, at last a Gladiator or Fencer, with 74
A. U. 679.
more Fencers being shut up in Capua by Lentulus, broke loose, and betake
themselves to the hill Vesuvius, then Claudius Pulcher besets them round, but
they suddenly fell upon Claudius his camp and surprised it; the like they did
to P. Vorenus Praetor, or chief Justice; then they overrun Campania plundering
all, even Nola and Nuceria, Thurus and Metapontum, their Army increased daily,
malcontents from all places flocking to them, for want of better arms they
made themselves Targets of twigs covered with beasts skins and Spartacus had
the Fasces carried before him, which were taken from the Pretors. These Rebels
overcame both Lentulus and Cassius, and intended to fall upon Rome; but M.
Licinius Crassus first overthrew 30000 of the Gauls and Germans, who assisted
Spartacus, then he fell upon Spartacus his own Army and killed 60000
fugitives; took 6000 prisoners, the rest that thought to escape to Sicily for
want of shipping, were seized upon, and killed with Spartacus their Captain.

The war was scarce ended, when the Romans were forced to send an Army to
suppress the Dardanians and Scordisci (a people of Pannonia, some say of
Thracia) who overrun Macedonia; these Scordisci used to drink out of dead men's
Ap. Claudius was sent, and Curio Scribonius: ships are also rigged out to
suppress the Cilician Pirates who much infested the Sea. P. Servilius subdued
Cilicia and Pamphilia, took the chief Towns of Lycia, and overcame the Isauri,
whence he was called Isauricus; these Isauri are at the foot of Mount Taurus;
the first Roman that passed this Mountain was this Servilius. Cononius the
Proconsul conquered Dalmatia and after 2 years siege took Solone a great City.

Mithridates having broke the league he made with Sylla, invaded Cappadocia by
Tygranes his son in law: against him the two Consuls Licinius Lucullus and
Aurelius Cotta are sent. Cotta was worsted and driven into Chalcedon.
Mithridates removes thence and sits down before Cyzicum a rich and popular
Cyzicus whom Ulysses killed; this place was an inlet to Asia, but Lucullus
comes and raises the siege, and drives him into Byzantium. Mithridates lost
then also his fleet of 100 ships, with all his provision and furniture; and
it is thought, that he lost by Sea and land in the siege of Cyzicum above
300000 men, amongst whom Varus dyed, with diverse o hers proscribed by Sylla.
Yet Mithridates though thus weakened will not yield but stirs up the Armenians,
Iberians, Caspians and Albanians against Lucullus, who had now sent to the
Senate his Laureat Letters in token of victory; for so Conquerors use to do.
Rich Lucullus, Crassus, and Cn. Pompejus were now Consuls: they restored the
Tribunitian power again, which Sylla had weakened. Cotta a little before had
advanced the order of Knighthood; at that time M. Tul. Cicero being Questor
drove Verres Praetor of Sicily out of his place by his eloquence, accusing him
of oppression: And such corruption was at Rome, that L. Gellius and C. Lentulus
Censors, removed 64 Senators from their places. Lucullus in the interim
recovers Mithridates his Army, and pursues him to Comana: the crafty King to
hinder the Romans from pursuing him, caused money and rich things to be strawed
in the way, and so with 2000 horse he escaped to Tigranes, who did not admit
him into his presence, but gave order he should be used like a King.

Mithridates now despairing of himself, sent Bocchus his Evneuch to his Palace,
to kill all his wives sisters, and Concubines, which being done, the Governors
of almost all the Garrisons fell off from him to Lucullus, to whom Lachares
Mithridates his son sent a crown of gold: he took diverse Sea towns,
Tygranes and defeats his army for refusing to deliver up Mithridates and
overthrowes 300000 men being invited by the Grecians, he besieges and takes
Tygranocerta lately built: he makes Antiochus the son of Cizycenus King of
Syria. Mithridates flies to Pontus; Tygranes into the remotest parts of
Armenia; whom Lucullus could not pursue because of the winter, but upon a
mutiny in Lucullus his Army for want of pay, the soldiers refused to march.
Which gave opportunity for Tygranes and Mithridates to renew their Forces.
Mithridates slew C. Triarius, Lucullus his Legate, and overthrew his Army, among
the dead bodies were found 150 Centurions and 24 Tribunes slain: the Sea even
to Hercules pillars, were so filled with Pirates by Mithridates Metellus called
therefore Creticus, and the Sea scowred of Pirates by Pompey, which was done in
40 days space, such of the Pirates as escaped had lands assigned them in
Cilicia, far from the Sea, that in stead of piracy, they might be exercised in
husbandry.

Cn. Manilius the Tribune, being assisted by Cicero and Caesar got an act to
pass that Pompey should have the charge of the Mithridatick war; this caused
great emulation between Pompy and Lucullus. Pompey accused Lucullus of avarice
and profusion, calling him the gowned Xerxes, and he again accused Pompey of
pride and ambition; yet notwithstanding full power is committed to Pompey
Euphrates: who having made a bridge of Boats, falls upon Mithridates suddenly,
and routs him in one battle, then pursues him to Colchi; but Ororzes king of
Albania and Artecus King of Heberia with 70000 in ambush thought to entrap him;
but he understanding the plot beset the wood, where they were, and set it on
fire, that the enemy was forced to submit and give hostages: in the mean while
M. Lucullus Governor of Macedonia overthrowes the Bessi a people in Thracia
near Pontus about hill Aemus, and made all their country tributary whilst the
other L. Lucullus was taking in Nisibis upon Tigris.

Pompy being now sure of Mithridates, marches against Tigranes his associate
who having overthrown the Seleucidae called himself King of Kings, he had
3906.
three sons by Mithridates his daughter, one of them he slew for rebelling,
the other he killed in hunting, for not helping up his Father when he fell
from his horse, but supposing him dead with the fall, took the Crown from his
head, and set it on his own: the third son Tigranes, rebelled against his
father, and being overthrown fled to Phraates King of Parthia, and from him,
humbly to Pompy: so did old Tigranes, who prefented him with 6000 talents; and
the soldiers with 500 drachms: whereupon he obtained pardon, and the
Government of the greater Armenia, conditionally that he did surrender all his
late conquered countries. He surrendered all Syria, from Euphrates to the Sea,
which he had taken from Antiochus Eusebes. Young Tigranes obtained the lesser
Armenia which he did not long enjoy; for whilst he was conspiring with the
Parthians against his Father, he was apprehended by the Romans, led in
triumph, and dyed in prison. Pompey having built Nicopolis in the lesser
Armenia, he bestows the Kingdom of Cappadocia upon Aribarzanes with the
Provinces of Sophena and Antiochus Comagenus, the son of Eusebes, though he
petitioned for it.

Shortly after this Catalin with Lentulus, Cethegus, and many other
discontented Gentlemen conspire against the State. Cicero that year was made
Consul, 3909.
who by his industry detected the plot, and by his eloquence overthrew it.
Lentulus with some noble men are apprehended, imprisoned, and executed by the
Consuls command, and Cato's persuasion, though Caesar spoke against it. Catilin
being driven out of the City, raised an army in Italy, which was destroyed,
Mithridates was betrayed by his son Pharnaces, who had got the Armies good
will; he fearing to be delivered up by his son to the Romans, attempted to
poison himself, but could not, being his body was so used to antidotes. Which
is no wonder, for we read of some who have fed altogether on poison, and could
not eat any other food. Galen speaks of an old woman at Athens who lived
altogether on Hemlock; and Albertus Magnus knew a maid whose ordinary diet were
Spiders. But Mithridates did by the sword, which he could not by poison: he was
69 years old when he killed himself, he reigned 57. Pharnaces by sending his
fathers corpse to the enemy, obtained the Kingdom of Bosphorus.

Antipater the Idumean about this time fomenting the discord between Hyrcanus
and his brother Aristobulus about the kingdom of Judea, had drawn thither
50000 men under Aretas King of Arabia Nabathea, he overthrows Aristobulus in a
battle and shuts him up within Jerusalem, during the siege, Onias that holy
man was stoned to death by the besiegers, because he would not pray for their
success: therefore God punished them with famine. Aristobulus procured M.
Scaurus for 400 talents to raise the siege: he pursues them in the flight and
kills 7000 of them, among the rest Antipaters brother who had raised the war.
Pompey was now at Damascus taken lately from Areats by Metellus and Lollius
Legates or Lievetenants General to Pompey. Aristobulus presents Pompey with
Bacchus kept this Vine. Pompey having heard both the brothers plead dismissed
them with a promise that he would shortly visit them; as soon as he had settled
the Nabathean affairs; but Aristobulus seiseth on the Castles, and to shelter
himself from Pompey, whose anger by this means he had procured, hastened to
Jerusalem, but fearing lest Pompey who was now marching after him through the
woods of Jericho, should overtake him, submitted himself, and obtained pardon,
Gabinius is sent to Jerusalem to receive the moneys, but is kept out by the
soldiers, wherefore Aristobulus is secured, and Jerusalem besieged. Piso
Pompey's Legate is received into the City and Palace, but is kept Pompey entered
into the Holy of Holyes, but meddled not with the Treasures: Olymp. 179. Cicer.
and Anton. Coss.
He restores Hyrcanus to his Priesthood, but not to the Crown: he restores
Samaria, Azotus, Pella with other Towns overthrown by the Jews, to their
ancient Inhabitants: he carried with him to Rome in chains Aristobulus with
his two sons, one of which namely Alexander made an escape by that way and
raised new troubles in Judea, against whom Gabinius is sent, to him Alexander
submits and delivers up the Castles he had taken, all which Gabinius
demolished, Alexanders mother being gracious with Gabinius obtained his pardon;
and procured 5 Courts of Justice to be erected through Judea in 5 Cities, to
wit, in Jerusalem, Gadara, Amathus, Jericho, and Saphora.

Pompey having cleared the Sea of Pirates, overthrown Mithridates, subdued
Armenia, and all the neighbor Nations to Egypt, bestowed Gallogrecia or 3891.
Gallatia on Dejotarus, Paphlagonia on Attalus, Colch on Aristarchus, and 16000
talents on the Armies: returns to Rome, where with great solemnity and Pompey
the great, he enters into a League with Caesar, who having conquered Lusitania
in his Pretorship was now Consul, and with M. Crassus; these three divided the
Senate into factions, only Cato with a few others preferred the public good to
their own private interests. Caesar promotes the Agrarian Laws, by which the
Public Lands are assigned to the common people, and 20000 men are sent to
plant. Cicero is banished, his goods plundered, and his house pulled down by
the means of P. Clodius a rich, but a wicked man, who was found in women's
apparel in the solemnities of Bona Dea. He by bribery having got himself 3913.
to be made Tribune, never rested till Cicero was banished, who with Caesar
accused him for murdering Lentulus and Cethegus, when he was Consul; thus
Cicero was forced in the night time to depart the City, and returned not in 16
months, after which time he returned, and was received with great joy.

About this time Clodius the Tribune got an Act to pass against Cyprus, that
the wealth thereof should be brought into the public treasure: this he did to
be revenged on the King of Cyprus, who refused to ransom Clodius when
heretofore he was taken prisoner by the Pirates: the King hearing of this Act
poisoned himself. Cato is employed in this business, who brings with him to
Rome all the wealth of Cyprus. Ptolemy had nothing left him now but Egypt, his
brother being dead, and Cyprus lost; therefore labors earnestly, to make the
Romans Berenice his eldest daughter, though he had sons, because she only was
legitimate, this Queen shortly after her marriage strangles Cybiofactes her
husband for his sordid baseness; and marries with Archelaus, who called
himself the son of Mithridates, whereas he was indeed the son of that Archelaus
who warred with Sylla in Greece.

CHAP. VI.
1. Caesar's exploits in Gallia, Germany, and Britain. 2. The affairs of Rome
under Pompy, Crassus and Marcellus. 3. Crassus his miscarriage in Asia. 4. Some
passages of Judea and Egypt. 5. Of Cicero and Cato.

C. Iul. Caesar having got 6000 talents from Auletes King of Egypt, to
re-inthrone him, undertakes the Government of Gallia and Illyricum with 4
Legions for 5 years, and to strengthen himself the better, bestows his
daughter 3915.
Iulia upon Pompey. He overthrew 47000 Helvetians, who not content with their
own habitations, burnt down their own walls, and strive to obtain new
Plantations. After this Caesar overthrowes Ariovistus King of the Germans, who
refused to come to him being sent for, saying he was a better man then Caesar,
and refused to depart out of Gallia, showing that Caesar had no more power to
meddle with his affairs, then he had to meddle with Caesar's: this stout
answer of the Kings so dismayed the soldiers, that even the chiefest and
stoutest of the maine body began to make their last wills: but Caesar bravely
roused their drooping spirits by his eloquence: Ariovistus did so beset his
army round with wagons and carts, that no hope there was of flight, multitudes
of women were employed, with their cries and stretched out arms to dissuade
the soldiers from cowardice, the Germans came in so fast upon the Romans that
they had no use of their darts, but fell to their swords hand to hand: the
Germans defended their heads with their Targets, but the Romans fell so
furiously on, that they plucked their Targets out of their hands, which caused
the Germans to fly; in which flight multitudes were killed; Ariovistus escaped
over the river Rhene, but

The Belgae fearing the loss of their liberty, raised an Army of 272000 men,
with whom Caesar would not encounter but broke them with delays, and weakened
them with often skirmishes; in which he had always the better: he subdued the
Soissons in the Province of Rhemes: with the Bellovaci or people of Beauvais
and the Ambiani also, or people of Amiens in Picardie. These gave Caesar
hostages for their fidelity: but the Nervii or those about Tornay, with the
Aduatici about Beaumont were not so easily mastered; their liberty was not
lost, without the loss of much blood, both of the Romans and of their own: the
Veragri and Seduni inhabiting the Alps did much trouble Servius Galba his
Caesar was gone into Italy, Galba was left there for to secure the passages for
Merchants that traveled that way. He by a sudden irruption put the enemy to
flight: Caesar supposing Gallia had been quiet, marches into Illyricum; the
country being commanded to victual his Army, raised great Forces against him,
and were assisted by the Osisini, Lexobii, Morini, and others inhabiting the
Sea coast of Britain and Normandy; they also send for aid out of great
Britain over against them: it behoved therefore Caesar to provide shipping,
which he did; and though he was much crossed both with the tides and winds,
and unserviceablenesse of his ships, yet partly by the Roman valor, partly by
the stratagem of sharp hooks fastened to long poles laid athwart, by which the
ropes of the cross masts was cut, so that the sails fell Caesar got the
victory. About the same time Q. Titurius Sabinus subdued the Eburones, or the
people of Eureux, and P. Crassus mastered Gasconia not without much expense of
blood.

The year following Pompey and Crassus being Consuls again, the Germans passed
over with a great Army, the Rhene, but were so defeated, that there perished of
them partly by the sword, partly by submersion in the river 430000; then did
Caesar make a bridge over the Rhene, and drove the Suevi into their woods and
bogges, in this interim Cato being angry that Vatinius obtained the 3917.
Pretorship which he sued for, endeavored to hinder the passing of that Act by
Pompey was made Governor of Spain, Caesar of Gallia and Germany, and Crassus
of Syria for 5 years: but the Act passed, Cato was laid in chains, and this
Triumvirat ruled all in Rome. Gabinius is sent against the Parthians, with
order to restore Ptolemy to his kingdom, and put out Archelaus whom the
Egyptians had chosen for their King. Ptolemy remunerates Gabinius with the
wealth of Egypt, puts Berenice to death, with the wealthiest men of his
kingdom.

Caesar passed over the Sea into great Britain; whose sudden arrival so
affrighted the Inhabitants, that they presently delivered up to him their arms
and hostages; he did not march far at this time into the Island, because a
great part of his Cingatoriges one of their Kings and so returned with a great
booty; in the mean while Aristobulus escaped out of prison, and makes new work
for Gabinius by seizing upon a Fort which he could not hold above two days.
Wherefore he was apprehended and sent back again to Rome with his son
Antigonus: but Alexander the son of Aristobulus raised suddenly an Army in
Judea and encountered with Gabinius, but he lost the day, and withal 10000
Jews. Gabinius having settled Judea, went against the Nabatheans, and defeated
them. But he was accused at Rome for letting go Mithridates and Orsanes the
sons of Phraates, who being banished by their brother Orodes, fled to the
Romans for protection, but he was bribed, and so gave out that these two had
made a private escape; he was also accused by Cicero lately returned from his
banishment, that he had oppressed Syria with covetous exactions, and had
re-established Ptolemy Sibylla's oracles. Pompey and Caesar took Gabinius his
part, and made Cicero to defend him, whom he had before accused, so that he got
the name of Transsuga, or turne-coat. Gabinius notwithstanding was condemned by
the people, and M. Licinius Crassus put in his place.

Crassus more covetous then his Predecessor, robbed the Temple of Jerusalem of
10000 talents, and a golden beam weighing 300 minae. Every mina weighs 12
ounces and a half, which was more then the Roman pound, by 4. drachmes, He
invaded the Parthians, having no Commission from Rome, and plundered
Mesopotamia. Orodes sent to know why he broke the peace, he answered,
Seleucia his chief City should know the reason. Hereupon Orodes sends to keep
Artabazes the son of Tygranes from aiding Crassus, who passing over Euphrates
being warned to the contrary was circumvented by the Parthians who laid an
ambush for him; there was killed the son of Crassus a gallant young man, with
many Senators and Consular men; at last Crassus was taken by Surenas the
Parthian General and killed; they powered melted gold into his motuh, to show
his covetousness; for he was wont to say, he was a poor man that could not
maintain an Army in the field: some of the Romans escaped to Carrae a City in
Mesopotamia beyond Edessa, where Caracalla also died. Cassius Longinus having
recollected the dispersed Forces quelled the insurrections Antiochus Comagenus
and beat the Parthian Army from Antiochia, having slain their two chief
Commanders, Osaces and Pacorus. Cicero had now an Army in Cilicia, his own
Province, where he took in the City Pindevissus, showing that he deserved to
be called Pindevissinus, as Scipio to be called Africanus, how ever, he was
called Imperator Epist. fam. l. 2. epist 10.
or Lord General.

Whilst the state of things went thus in the east; Caesar in the west was much
vexed by the Gauls; Ambiorix their General had circumvented Cotta and Sabinus
Caesar's Legates and by the help of the Eburones, and Advatici, overthrew the
whole Roman Legion, then joining themselves to the Nervii, set upon Q. Cicero's
winter quarters, and besieged him: he presently by a letter tied to a Javelin
implores Caesar's help, who returns him an answer in Greek fastened to the loope
or string of the dart, which the bearer fling within the Fort. The Gauls being
60 thousand strong, left the siege, when they heard of Caesar's coming and march
directly against him, he by a counterfeit flight draws them to a place of
disadvantage, where he killed multitudes of them, and disarmed the rest.
Labienus overcame the Treviri and slew Induciomarus their Leader, Caesar
fearing the revolt of the Gauls procured from Pompey, being then at Rome, 3.
new Legions, then he passes over the Rhene to chastise the Germans, for
sending supply to the Treviri; but understanding that the Suevi in the entry of
the Forest Hircynia Ambiorix; who sheltred himself in the Forest of Arden or
Arduena, and so he lost his labor.

About this time T. Annius Milo killed P. Clodius his Competitor for the
Consulship A. U. 700.
in via Appia which was a street paved by Appius Claudius the Consul reaching
from Rome to Brundusium; this murder was done at Bovillae a Town in Latium not
far from Rome, the body of Clodius being brought into the Curia Hostilia, or
Councell-house, built by King Tullus Hostilius, was by the incensed multitude
burnt with the whole building together, the City honors were taken violently
by those that were strongest, for there were no Magistrates lawfully called, so
that they were forced to make Pompey Consul the third time, who began to
suspect Caesar's power, and Caesar envyed Pompey's honors, for the death of
Iulia Caesar's daughter, dissolved the amity that was between these two great
Commanders, Pompey to take off the envy of his greatness, chose Q. Scipio for
his colleague. Cicero pleaded for Milo, but not so resolutely as he was wont,
because Pompey had filled the room with armed men. Milo was banished and
retired himself to Marseiles.

Caesar was forced to be absent from the City, because of the Gauls rebellions
and conspiracies, therefore Pompey past an Act, that Caesar should not be
prejudiced in his Consulship, though in this he was thwarted by M. Cato: yet
Pompey made Marcellus Consul; and Curio Tribune, Caesar's greatest enemies: the
Gauls thinking that Caesar's employments at home would keep him from coming to
the Army, began again to struggle for their liberty, the Carnutes now called
Chartres, fell first upon the Roman Factours, killed them; and seized on their
Estates. Averni now called Auvergne, which is 140. miles distant, Vercingitorix
Celtillus his son, whose Father ruled over all the Gauls, raised a mighty Army
out of diverse countries, pressing all sorts of men to take up Arms under pain
of death. Caesar hearing of this preparation, resolves with all speed to
prevent the uniting of the enemies Forces. He places strong Garrisons in all
parts bordering upon the enemy; through snowie Mountains he marches into the
bounds of Auvergne, and had got all his Legions together, before the enemy
knew of his coming, he took in three great towns at one clap.

At that time Avaricum now called Chasteau neust or Bourges en Berrie was a
strong city and chief of the Bituriges; Caesar's soldiers being enraged, that
the Gauls had burnt down 19 towns round about, purposely to starve the Romans,
laid siege to that city, took it by storm; and put all to the sword, men,
women, and children of 40000 scarce 800 escaped, who went to Vercingitorix.
After this Caesar divided his Army, four Legions he sent against the
Parisians and Senones, whose forefathers under Brennus their leader, burnt
Rome, and besieged the Capitol, six legions he conducteth himself against the
Auverni, or Auvergne, and sits down before Gergobia now Clermont in Auvergne,
within this strong city were 80000 men. Here Caesar lost 46 Centurions, by the
temerity of his Caesar sends into Germany beyond the Rhene for a supply of
Horse and Foot, by whose help he overcame Vercingtorix, who assisted the
Hedui, then he befiegeth Alexia, a city, now a Village in the Duchy of
Burgundy called Alise, and by famine forced them to surrender. There were now
flockt together of Gauls 240000 Foot and 8000 Horse, which vast Army after
many days fight was overthrown by Caesar. Vercingetorix, beholding from the
Town: this great defeat of his Army, surrenders all, and so the Hedui return
again to the Roman obedience.

Labienus had now subdued the Parisians. Caesar in the interim marches against
the Bellovaci, a people that lived about Bayeux, and subdues them. Others being
weary of waire submit now themselves to the Romans. Uxellodunum called Cadenac
in Quercy held out against Caesar till thirst forced them to yield, for there
was but one spring of water that served the Town, which Caesar cut off. He
spared their lives, but cut off their hands to witness their rebellion. After
A. M.
this he places Garrisons every where, so that partly with fear, partly with
fair words he brought all Gallia in subjection. About this time died Ptolemy
Auletes King of Egypt in the 29 year of his reign, to whom succeeded Ptolemy
Dionysius the last King of Egypt, he was now 13 years old, and married his
sister Cleopatra, who afterward married with M. Antony.

CHAP. VII.
1. The fatal civil war between Caesar and Pompey. 2. Caesar's Diverse
victories, Pompey's death and Caesar's.

GAllia being now quieted by the loss of 400000 men besides many more
prisoners, Caesar returns into Italy where he is received with Sacrifices,
3924,
joy, and triumphs by all the cities through which he went: an Act passed in
the Senate, that Caesar should part with two of his Legions for the Parthian
war, which he condescended to; but understanding by Curio the Tribune, (whom
Caesar by paying his debts, of an enemy had made his friend) that M. Marcellus
Pompey, and so were retained in Italy, and withal that it was motioned in the
Senate that Caesar should lay down his Commission, and deliver up the Army; he
perceived that his enemies went about to ruin him; wherefore he refused to
part with his Army, except Pompey might do the same. This was held reasonable
by Curio, but Pompey's friends would not assent; wherefore Caesar is commanded
to repair to Rome, as a private man, and to petition for what he desired, and
if he did not by a certain day deliver up his Army, he should be proclaimed
enemy to the State. Caesar knowing that Pompey ruled the Senate, and that
Marcellus, Lentulus, and Cato his mortal enemies meant to bring all his
actions in question if he should come Marcellus and Lentulus Consuls, denounced
enemy to the State, and commanded not to pass the river Rubicon now called
Rugum, which divided Italy from Gallia of old.

Now begins this fatal War, which was presaged by an eclipse of the Sun, and
caused by the ambition of Pompey, who retained his Armies in Spain all the
three years space that he ruled in Rome, and yet could not endure that Caesar
should enjoy the like privilege; he was favored by the Senate, Caesar by the
Army, both presumed on the justice of their cause, but neither of them had any
goodness or justice, who did sacrifice their countries safety to their private
Caesar passes over Rubicon, and comes to Ariminum, where he acquaints the 5
Cohorts he had with him to be his Guard, of his wrongs, and that he meant to
restore the Tribunes that were banished, these five Cohortes were half a
Legion, which consisted often Cohortes, every Cohors of three Maniples, and
each Maniple of two Centuries or 200. so his guard confisted now of 3000 men.

The first Town Caesar took was Auximum or Osimum: which so terrified Rome,
that Marcellus and Lentulus the Consuls with the rest of the Magistrates
forsook the city. In the interim Caesar takes 7 Cohortes which were at Sulmo
from Lucretius, and procured the 3 Legions which with L. Domitius were at
Pompey who a little before bragged that if he did but knock the Italian ground
with his foot, he should have armed men enough, hearing of Caesar's strength and
preparations, intends with most of the Senate to leave Italy, therefore they
betake themselves to Brundusium a Sea Port in Calabria upon the Hadriatic Sea,
from whence was the ordinary passage into Greece. Caesar dispatcheth letters to
several places of Italy, complaining of Pompey, and desiring he might be
brought to answer Cesars accusations, he desired the quarrel might be ended
without bloud-shedding; for that end, he attempted to surprise Pompey in
Brundusium, but though he set guards upon the harbor, yet Pompey escaped by
night; therefore Caesar repaires to Rome, being now secure, enters the Senate,
shows how he is forced to take up Arms in his own defense. Then he seiseth
upon the Treasury, which Pompey in his sudden flight neglected; and having
broken open the doors he takes 4135 l. weight of Gold, and almost 900000 l.
weight of silver: thence he goes to his Legions at Ariminum, and from thence
over the Alps to Massylia, which shut the gates against him. He gives charge
to Trebonius with three Legions L. Afranius, M. Petrejus, and M. Varro,
Pompey's three Generals. These in diverse battles he overcame Afranius
Petrejus. and M. Varro in the further Spain yielded, and delivered up his
Legions to Caesar. Cato was driven out of Sicilia by Curio, Cotta out of
Sardinia by Valerius; Tubero out of Africa by Varrus. Massylia also submits,
which is plundered of all, except life and liberty.

Pompey was now Master of the Sea; and gave a check to Cesars victories, for
Octavius and Libo Pompey's Legates did circumvent Dolobella and Antonius that
were for Caesar, and who were appointed by him to guard the mouth of the
Hadriatick Sea. C. Antonius held the Curicttic or Corcyrean shore, but
submitted, and yielded Octavius his Fleet. Libo drove Dolobella from Illyricum
or Dalmatia: the Ships also that Basilus sent to help Antonius were catched by
the Pompejan Cilicians, with a new trick of ropes made like gins hid under the
water. Curio also Cesars Legate, after he had overthrown Varrus in Africa, lost
both himself and Cesars Army, in a rash battle with Iuba King of Mauritania.
Pompey chose Epirus, now Albania, a country famous for good horses, to be the
seat of the war: and Caesar having made all the Provinces sure behind him,
makes all the speed he can to encounter with Pompey, therefore ventures in a
small Pinnace to cross the Sea in the midst of Winter, and in a storm; Caesar.
When he came on shore; and had gathered his Forces together, being impatient of
delays, used all means possible by plundering of Towns, and taking in Forts,
to draw Pompey to a battle, which he warily avoided, hoping by tergiversation
to break the courage of Cesars Army, but Pompey's soldiers did interpret his
procrastination, cowardice: so that Caesar said truly when he went to Spain,
that he went against an Army without a Captain: but when he came into Epirus,
that he went against a Captain without an Army, for his soldiers were young
gallants, and raw in military affairs. Some skirmishes there were between the
two Armies. Caesar fell upon Torquatus and his Legion, being in Garrison, Pompey
came with his whole body to rescue him. Whereupon Caesar left the siege to
encounter with Pompey, Torquatus follows him from his Garrison in the rear,
but Cesars Soldiers perceiving their danger, betook themselves to their
heels; so that Caesar could by no means hinder their flight: and if Pompey had
not recalled his army from the pursuit, he had got the day, and the quarrel
had been ended, which made Caesar say, that Pompey knew not how to conquer. Many
Roman Knights were knights were killed, with 30 Centurions, and 4000 common
soldiers.

Upon this defeat, Caesar makes have through Epirus into Thessalia in Greece,
famous for the Giants war against Jupiter; and there chooses the Pharsalian
3924.
Philippici from the town Philippi close by) for his campania. Pompey follows
after, whose Army consisted of 40000 Foot; in the left wing were 7000 horse; in
the right 5000. besides the Auxiliary Forces of the East, with the Nobility,
Senators, Pretorian and Consular men. Caesar had not above 30000 Foot, and 1000
horse, but stout soldiers all. The battle continued doubtful for a while,
till the German cohortes fell so furiously upon Pompey's Horse, that they were
forced to give ground, and at last betook themselves to a disordered flight,
the Cesarians pursue them with a command from Caesar that they should aim at the
Pompejans faces, and withal to spare their fellow citizens. Of the Pompejans
were slain 15000. and 33 Centurions, Pompey himself escaped with the two
Lentuli, Favonins the Pretorian and his son Sextus. Some persuaded him to go
to Parthia, others to his friend King Iuba of Africa, but he chose rather Egypt
for his retreat, hoping to be kindly used by young Ptolemy, for old courtesies
bestowed by Pompey on him, and his Father; therefore he came first to Larissa,
then by Sea to Mitylene; Cornelia into Egypt, the base King sends to receive
Pompey into his own Ship, and a warrant there to kill him, being persuaded
thereto by Pothinus the Eunuch, and his Tutor, by Theodotus also, and Achillas
his General; for they feared that Pompeys intertainment would draw all the
Roman Forces thither, therefore Achillas and Septimius now a Colonel, but
heretofore a Captain in Pompey's his Army, first murders this brave
Commander, and then cuts off his head in the sight of his wife and children; he
was 58 years old.

Pompey's Generalship was proffered to Cicero, which he refused, and betook
himself privately to Brundusium. Caesar not made insolent with his victory,
Theodotus presents him Pompeys head and ring, at sight of which he weeped, and
checked the murderers, then he went to Alexandria, and demanded contribution,
the Kings Governors pretend poverty, Achillas is commanded to dismiss his
Army of 20000 men; but he marches with him against Caesar, a battle is fought
in which the Kings Fleet is set on fire, the flame whereof consumes a part of
the city, and in it, Ptolemies famous library of 400000 volumes: in the Isle
Pharus was a great fight in which Caesar lost many men, and Pompeys murderers
slain, Caesar himself hardly escaped into a cockboat, which with the weight of
the Alexandria being forced to yield, Caesar bestows Egypt on Cleopatra, the
Kings body was found in the mudde.

Pharnaces the son of Mithridates took occasion by this Roman discord to
rebel against him. Caesar marches, and at the first encounter overthrowes 3925.
him, so that he truly said, I came, I saw, I overcame, Pharnaces having fled
to Bosphorus Cimmerius in the mouth of the lake Meotis, distant from Bosphorus
Thracius 500 miles. Here Pharnaces who would have betrayed his Father
Mithridates, is betrayed by his friend Asander and murdered.

Pompeys faction enraged against Caesar, breaks out in two places; in Africa
3926.
under King Iuba, Scipto Pompeys Father in law, and Cato Governor of Utica; in
Spain, under Cu. Pompejus great Pompeys eldest son. At Rome also they began
to stir, but Antonius General of the Horse to Caesar, appeased the tumult with
the murder of 800 citizens: in Africa, Scipio, Iuba and Afranius Caesar, 10000
men were slain, and 60 Elephants taken. Cato at Utica killed himself, having
first read Plato's Book of the immortality of the soul. Iuba hired Petreius to
cut his throat, which he did, and then killed himself with the same sword.
Scipio being kept back by contrary winds from Spain, murdered himself on
Shipboard. Torquatus also was killed. Caesar commanded Pompeys daughter and his
Nephews to be slain, but Cato's son, and others that begged for mercy, were
pardoned.

Caesar upon his return to Rome, was honored with four triumphs, answering his
four conquests of Gallia, Egypt, Pontus, and Africa, he made a sumptuous feast,
and exhibited magnificent shows, he pardoned M. Marcellus upon the Senats
entreaty, and called him home from his banishment, for which Act of clemency he
is highly commended by Cicero in his incomparable oration for M. Marcellus; but
before he could return he was murdered by Magias his client at Athens. After
the war was ended a list was taken of the citizens, and there were not found
above 150000 whereas four years before, about the beginning of the war, there
were reckoned above 400000 citizens. Caesar was now made Consul the fourth time.
He prepares Pompey's two sons, Cn. and Sextus, but both their Fleets were
spoiled at Sea, after diverse towns were taken by both sides, a great battle
was fought near the city Munda, wherein Caesar at first was defeated, but upon a
fresh encounter he got the day. Cn. Pompejus fled into Munda, but Caesar making
a rampire of dead bodies, took the town, Pompey fled, but was overtaken and
killed by Ceronius, the younger brother escaped. T. Labienus that had done so
much good service in Gallia for Caesar, but now adhering to Pompey's faction,
was slain.

The civil war being every where composed, and Caesar returning from Spain was
honored with the fifth triumph, the title of pater patriae, and of perpetual
Dictator, and that he should be (...), that is, Holy or inviolable, but he
continued Ides or midst of the next March he was slain, this was not above
five months. His great honors, felicity, and pride had procured him envy: for
when the Fathers before the Temple of Venus came to confer these honors on
him, he sat still in his chair of state, and did not stand up, as he ought:
and though he refused to wear the crown which M. Antonie put on his head, in
the Lupercall solemnities, but sent it to Jupiter in the Capitol: yet when one
had placed a crown on the head of his Image, he was content it should remain
there, wherefore he thrust the two Tribunes out of their office, for
questioning the man that crowned his image. A plot being then contrived by M.
Brutus, C. Tribonius, C. Cassius, D. Brutus his favorite, and some others, he
was murdered in the Curia of Pompey, having received 23. wounds, whereof the
second was only mortal which he had in his breast, his murderers fled to the
Capitol, resolved to make an act of Oblivion, to fling Cesars body into the
Tibris, and to seize upon his estate, but they feared the greatness of
Antonius and Lepidus. Such was the tragical Catastrophre of this brave
Commander; who had fought fifty pitched battles with the common enemies of
Rome, besides his many victories in the civil war. He made many wholesome
Laws, he reformed the Roman Calender by the help of Sosigenes the Mathematician
of Alexandria, he not only conquered his enemies, but his passions also, in
advancing his greatest adversaries to honors Pompey's cabinet at Pharsalia,
and Scipio's at Thapsus, he burned all their Letters without looking into any
one of them. He who was carried so often in triumphant Chariots, and whom no
foreign force could subdue, is now conquered by a few traitors at home, and
carried by three of his meanest servants. So horrid was this murder, that the
Sun is said to hide his face from it, by an eclipse: and so far was his death
the cause of peace, as his enemies thought, that it presently occasioned more
civil wars; and so little were his enemies secured by his murder, that none
of all these traitors outlived him above three years, but all perished
miserably, yet deservedly, even some of them with the same sword that wounded
him; he was 56 years old when he died.

CHAP. VIII.
1. The affairs of Judea under Antigonus, and Antipater. 2. The actions of
Octavius in his younger years. 3. The actions and death of Cassius and Brutus.
4. The actions and end of Sextus Pompejus. 5. The actions of Antonius and
Lepidus.

ARistobulus being sent back in chains to Rome, Caesar in hatred to Pompey sets
him free, and gives him the command of two Legions, but being in the way seized
upon, by the Pompejans he was poisoned, and lest his son Alexander Scipio
Pompey's Father in law at Antioch: but after the death of Pompey, Hyrcanus and
Antipater did good service for Caesar in Egypt, in helping to subdue Ptolemy.
Wherefore Hyrcanus is established in the Pontificat, and Antipater is made
Governor of Palestina, whose son Phaselus is set over Jerusalem, and Herod
the other son over Galilee. This Herod caused Ezechias the high way man, with
many others to be slain, which so offended the 70 Elders, that they sent out
their warrants to bring him to justice for meddling with their authority, he by
the counsel of his Father Antipater, gets him a strong guard of Soldiers, to
Simeon (called the just,) rise up and tell the Council that Herod deserved
death, for this his presumption. Which so incensed Herod against them, that he
never was at quiet, till he had quite overthrown that Council, which he
did, as soon as he was made King, and killed all the 70 except old Simeon,
who escaped, being preserved by God, to receive Christ in his arms, and to
prophecy of his Salvation.

At Rome C. Octavius Cesars nephew by his sisters Daughter Atia, or Accia,
being adopted by his Uncles last will, and constituted heir to 9 parts of his
estate, 3929.
which was called Haeres ex dodrante, resolves to revenge his Uncles death, he
was now about 19 years old, and of such parts and hopes, that Caesar meant to
Caesar, and that they saw the brave disposition of Octavius, and because
Antonies impotent Government was distasteful to them; as likewise to the Senate
and people, who had been also exasperated against Antonie by Cicero's
invectives. M. Antonie likewise being mad that Octavius a youth, was
preferred to him, in Cesars will, resolves to crush him betimes; but the people
having large legacies left them by Caesar, adhere to Octavius, whom they call
Caesar from his Uncles, but now his Fathers name. D. Brutus being designed
Octavius his Forces; the Senate also sends him the Consular Ornaments, gives him
power to make war against Antonie: and honors him with the title of Imperator
or L. General. Hirtius also, and Pansa the Consuls conjoyne their Armies with
Octavius. M. Brutus seiseth upon Vatinius his Army in Greece, and on the
Province too for the use of Octavius; and in Epirus wrests the Legions from C.
Antenius, Maroks brother.

Octavius began his Government upon the death of Julius Caesar, which was 282
years after the death of Alexander; before the birth of Christ 42. and about
the 711 year of the city: shortly after this C. Trebonius one of Cesars
murderers was killed in Asia by Dolobella that succeeded him, this Dolobella
was C. Cassius at Laodicea, D. Brutus being besieged by M. Antonie in Mutina
now Modina a Town in Lombardie or Galllia Cisalpina he is assisted by Octavius,
Pansa, and Hirtius, the siege raised, and Antonie forced to fly into France;
in this fight Pansa and Hirtius lost their lives, but honored with a public
Sepulture. A triumph is appointed for Brutus, but no notice taken of Octavius,
for the Pompejan faction began again to bare sway at Rome; he perceiving how
he was slighted, and that in scorn he was called child, sent Cornelius a
Centurion with 400 soldiers to the Senate, to demand the Consulship for
Octavius in the name of the whole Army: the Senate seeming averse was threatened
by Cornelius, who drew his sword, and told them, that if they would not yield
to Octavius his request, the sword should force them; the messengers returning
to Octavius without satisfaction, he by Letters invites Antonius and Lepidus
into Italy with their Forces, who being united into a body, sit down before
Rome, whereupon Octavius is presently made Consul, who banisheth all that had
any hand in Cesars death, and accuses Cassius with the two Bruti of his
murder. Plancus Brutus his Colleague, and Asinius Pollio a great Anti-pompejan
deliver up both their Armies Antonius. D. Brutus is forsaken by Plancus and his
soldiers, and is killed by Antonius.

Lepidus and Antonius being both proclaimed enemies by the Senate, and Octavius
slighted as was said, they had no other way to save themselves but by uniting
their Forces, therefore Octavius imbraceth the occasion, and closes with
Antony, who otherways was resolved to join his Forces with Brutus and Cassius
who had the command of 17 Legions, but Octavius unworthily banisheth Cicero the
eloquent mouth of that glorious City, leaving him as a prey to Antonius his
sworn enemy, who sent some of his troopers to murder him, which they did; and
placed his head and right hand on the Rostra, to the great grief of the Fulvia
Antonies wife, abused the head with all kind of indignities. In that
prosciption of these Triumviri were banished besides knights 130. Senators, and
not only Cicero, but all his family also: but Cicero's son was recalled.

Cassius in the mean time possesses Syria, and vexes Judea with taxes.
Malichus who had poisoned Antipater, is by his son Herod slain, Hyrcanus not
3930.
daring to revenge this death of his friend Malichus, then Cassius takes
Rhodes, and Brutus subdues the Lycii, then they pass over with their army to
Macedonia where near Philippy Octavius and Antony fight with them, this second
battle was fought with various success, in that fatal field; the wing in
which Brutus was, had the better of Octavius, then sick and not in the camp,
but Cassius his wing was Brutus had been in the like condition, forced his own
servant to kill him, the soldier whom Cassius had sent to bring tidings to
Brutus, returning too late, found his General dead on the ground, wherefore
accusing his slownesse to be the cause of Cassius his death, fell upon his own
sword. Brutus a few days after fought again; but as his death and overthrow
were foretold by his evil Genius the night before, so it came to pass. For
seeing his Army defeated, he thrust Stratos sword through his left side, and so
died immediately. Here died the sons of Cato, Hortensius, Lucullus, Drusus,
Livius, Quintilius, Varius, and many more brave men.

Sextus the son of great Pompey at this time returning from Spain, first seized
upon Antonius stays to settle the Transmarine Provinces, Octavius returns to
Italy, which he finds full of tumults. For Fulvia Antonies wife stirred up the
old soldiers against him; and L. Antonius the Consul, Marks brother accused
also Caesar to the soldiers of his unjust dealing with them, and having raised
an Army, marches to Perusia, at this day Perut a city in Hetruria: in which
Caesar hesiegeth him, who being forced by famine yields: and obtains his life,
so did Fulvia, and Plancus, and all the soldiers upon submission obtain

Ambassadors from all parts repair to M. Antony in Bithynia; among the rest
were the prime men of the Jews, with an accusation against Phaselus and Herod:
for incroaching upon Hyrcanus his Government, and for banishing unjustly
Antigonus the son of Aristobulus: but Herod prevented them by bribing Antonius,
and by the marrying of Hyrcanus his Niece, and so he obtained the title of
Tetrarch: at Tyrus the Jews are some put to death, some imprisoned by Antony,
for 3931.
accusing Herod again: but the next year Antigonus taking occasion of Antonies
dallying with Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, calls into Syria Pacorus the son of
Orodes King of Parthia, who with force and fraud seized upon Hyrcanus, and
Phaselus. Herod prevented the plot laid against him: the Parthians took and
plundered Jerusalem, and then delivered it over to Antigonus, who cut off
Hyrcanus his ears, that he might be incapable of the priesthood. Phaselus
dashed out his own brains, to prevent the tortures intended by his enemy.
Herod being weary of following Antonius, takes sail for Rhodes, and from thence
to Rome: Antony to make his peace with Caesar, marries his sister Octavia,
having first put away his wife Fulvia, and betrays his friend Q. Ruffus to
Augustus, against whom he was plotting mischief: Therefore Caesar to gratify
Antony, makes Herod King of Judea, and Antigonus for joining with the
Parthians, is denounced Traitor. Ventidius and Silon Antonies Legates are
commanded to establish 2393. Olymp. 184
Herod in his Kingdom, but they being bribed by Antigonus in three years
space did nothing.

Sextus Pompejus had now got all Sicily, and hindered provision from coming to
Rome, therefore upon the desire of the people, Caesar and Antony conclude a
peace with him; and permitted him the Government of Sicilia and Achaja, Pompey
contrary to the Articles of peace entertained fugitives, and Caesar received
Mena who revolted from Pompey with 60 Ships. Him Octavius made Admiral of the
same Fleet against Pompey, who had filled the Sea with Pirates a great battle
was fought at Sea; but after Caesar had got the better, he lost many of his
Ships by a storm on Sylacaeum upon the coast of Calabria, a place infamous for
Shipwracks: Caesar had also a second loss near Tauromenium Naufragum Scylaceum.
Virg. Aen. 3.
a Town in Sicily; he lost also diverse Ships, some whereof where burned by
Mena who revolted to Pompey, the same runnigado revolted again to Caesar with 6
Triremes who gave him his life, but never employed him any more: in the last
Pompey, Agrippa Cesars Admiral took and sunk 103 Ships, of Pompeys, who hardly
escaped to Asia with 17. where by command from M. Antony, Titius slew him.

Caesar had called Lepidus out of Africa with some Legions to aid him; but the
vain man bragged that he and not Caesar had defeated Pompey; therefore he
challenges Sicily to himself, and permits his soldiers to plunder Messana;
at which insolences Caesar being offended, comes into Lepidus his Camp, to
expostulate with him, Lepidus commands his guard to knock him down, but he
wrapping his upper garment about his arm, received the blows without hurt, and
having laid hold on the Eagle, puts spur to his horse, and carries it to his
Lepidus his quarters, whose Soldiers after some small skirmishes revolts to
Caesar; Lepidus being forsaken puts off his Generals habit called Paludamentum
or Chlamys, and in mourning submits himself to Caesar, who gave him his life and
goods, but degraded him from his honor and charge, and then banished him. Caesar
now having 44 Legions under his command, which began to mutiny about their pay,
he discharged 20000 of them, restored 30000 slaves to their masters, and
crucified 6000 who were masterlesse: then he returns to Rome, where he is
honored with the lesser triumph or ovatio, so called from ovis the Sheep,
sacrificed then by the Conqueror.

In the East Ventid^us Antonies Legate defeated the Parthians in a great
battle, slew Pacorus, and carried about his head on a pole, that the revolted
cities 3933.
might see it: but Antony desirous to enlarge his Dominions, would needs with
16 Legions march through Media and Armenia against the Parthians, where he
lost two Legions, and was like to have lost all; had he not hearkened to the
counsel of a Roman captive, who being taken in the Crassian overthrow, came by
night into the Roman camp, and wished them not to march any further, but to
return with all have through the woods and hills; which they did accordingly,
yet were so beset with Parthian Archers, that had they not kneeled, and kept
off the the storm of arrows from their heads, by holding up their Targets they
had been all lost; th^n Antony returning into Armenia, seiseth upon Artavasdes,
the King, puts him in golden chains, and bestows that Kingdom on his son,
which he had by his wife, or Concubine rather Cleopatra; but afterward Artaxias
recovered his Fathers Kingdom.

CHAP. IX.
The affairs of the Jews under Antigonus, Hyrcanus, Herod, and Archelaus. 2.
The affairs of Rome and Egypt under Antonius and Augustus. 3. The birth of
Christ, the life and death of Augustus, and the insu rrections in Judea.

Judea, Galilee and Samaria, were now in a combustion, because Herod an Idumean
had got the Kingdom. Herod finding small aid in Antonies Legates, makes Antony
himself, who at that time besieged Samosata, a town upon Euphrates, and
assisteth him to take it, whereupon he obtaines two Legions under the command
of Sosius, to subdue Jerusalem. With these he revengeth the death of his
brother Joseph, and of his six Cohortes who were overthrown by Machera; which
gave occasion to the Galileans to drown all they found of Herod's faction in the
Sea of Tyberias, and because Pappus had killed his brother Joseph, and
Antigonus cut off his head: Therefore Herod having overcome the Galileans cuts
off the head of Pappus, and sends it to Phaeroras his younger brother: After
this he besieges Jerusalem with 11 Legions and 6000 horse; besides the Syrian
Auxiliaries: the Jews stiffly held out against the besiegers, and would 3935.
not be advised by Sameas a prime man in the Sanhedrin to submit to Herod, till
first the lower city and outward Court of the Temple were taken, and at last
the rest of the City and Temple was stormed, upon the Fast day the enraged
soldiers spared neither man, woman, nor child, so that Herod was forced to
hire them to give off, asking them whether they meant to make him a King of
bare walls: Herod had used all the means he could to make that stiff-necked
people accept him for their King, he besieged them in three Sabbaticall years,
when they could receive no fruits of the earth for their releife; he married
with Mariamne the daughter of Alexander Antigonus his brother, he professed the
Jewish Religion, he promised them all the happiness they could desire under
any King; Zorobabel, Nehemias, and other Princes, after them by Priests, and
the 70 Elders, and at last by the Assamoneans 126 years.

Antony by the persuasions and bribes of Herod, first crucified Antigonus and
then beheaded him; and because he knew there would be small security for him,
so long as any were left alive, that might claim title to the Kingdom, he
invited Hyrcanus home from Babylon; Herod made great show of love to him, in
proffering a share of the Government, in calling him Father, and using him with
all civility, till he had set himself fast in the saddle, and then destroys
him; he highly esteemed Pollio the Pharisee, and Samias his Disciple, two prime
men of Herod, he bestows upon Hananelus the Pontificat; but upon the
entreaty of Alexandra; (whom notwithstanding he still suspected and
persecuted) he took it from him, and conferred it on Aristobulus Mariamnes
brother; but being jealous of him also, in the second year of his Pontificat he
drowned him, for whilst he was swimming, Herod caused two that were swimming
with him, as it were in sport, to hold his head under the water, till he was
stifled; of this Alexandra complained, and so did Cleopatra who desired a part
of the kingdom of Judea; but Herod with his bribes pacified Antony, and
frustrated Cleopatra, whom he would have killed, had he not been dissuaded by
his friends.

M. Antony having wholly devoted himself to Cleopatra, and to all
licentiousness, and puffed up with pride, wealth, and flattery, begins to
despise Octavius, he puts away Octavia his sister, he refuses to part with his
triumvirat though the time was expired, he calls himself Father Liber, he
desires that Egypt and all the Provinces even to Euphrates may be conferred on
his two sons by Cleopatra. Caesar understanding of this after his returning
into the City, upon the conquest of Dalmatia, Antony and Cleopatra, which was
easily assented to; therefore he was made Consul the third time, his Colleague
was Messala Corvinus. Antony having subdued Artabanes King of Armenia, and
having forced him to deliver up his treasure, which was very great, was now
full of money, yet Caesar exceeded him in number of Ships, of good Commanders
and soldiers. Plancus, Dolobella and Domitius revolted to Caesar. M. Agrippa in
the sight of Antonies Fleet took Leucas a town in Leucadia, Patrae a City in
Achaja (famous for the Martyrdom of St. Andrew) and Corinthalso. The two
Fleets fought at Actium a promontorie in Epirus, where Augustus after this
built a town and called it Nicopolis from his victory; the fight lasted
doubtful two hours, at last Cleopatra takes her flight with 60 fail. Antony
follows after; the soudiers seeing this, submitted to Octavius, who pardoned
them. The same success he had by land against Antony the next year. Caesar
persued Antony and Cleopatra into Alexandria, the war is renewed, but Antonies
Fleet revolting; his foot Forces being beaten, and at last all his horfe
defeated, he fled into the Palace, and run him self through with his own
sword, and then fell into the arms of Cleopatra, whom he thought had been
killed, and in her bosom breathed out his spirit: the Queen courted Augustus
with presents, and thinking to gain his love, betrayed to him Pelusium near
Arabia Petrea; but fearing Caesar would carry her in triumph; seeing Alexandria
and all was lost, she poisoned her self by applying an Aspe to her Breast;
thus ended the Civil War.

Herod in this mean time being incensed against the Arabians, for killing his
Ambassadors, raises a great Army, and in two battles utterly defeats them:
3942.
then hearing of Antonies death and overthrow, he was much perplexed: fearing
lest Caesar would unthrone him, for assisting of Antony; therefore he resolves
to repair to him; and to make his peace if possible; but doubting lest Hyrcanus
might step into the throne in his absence, he puts him to death upon suspicion
that he held secret intelligence with Malichas King of Arabia: whereas indeed
he wrote him a letter upon the importunity of his daughter Alexandra, only that
Herod's jealousy over him: so Herod having secured all at home, repaires to
Caesar at Rhodes, to whom submitting himself, and promising him the same
measure of service and love he showed to Antony, and presenting him with 800
talents, he was received into favor, and the kingdom confirmed on him.

Caesar returning into the City obtained 3 triumphs, the Illyrian, Naval, and
3943.
Egyptian. M. Lepidus the Triumvirs son for offering to raise a new war is
put to death; so all things in the Roman Empire being now composed, which now
was the twentieth year after the Civil war of Caesar and Pompey; Octavius
Augustus; and the month Sextilis is name August V. C. 725.
from him, as Quintilis was called July from Julius. Dalmatia which held out in
rebellion 220 years, the Alps inhabited by barbarous people, Spain which had
been vexed with 200 years war, and all other places submitted 3945.
to Augustus: the Parthians also sent back to him the Roman Ensigns, which
were taken by Orodes from Crassus, and by Phraates from Antonius: the Temple of
Ianus which had stood open 200 years, was now shut by Augustus being 36 years
older, it was now shut a second time in his reign, after the subduing of the
Cantabrians and Astures in Spain, and of the Salassians in Insubria, 3946.
that part of Italy where Millan now stands, Egypt which had stood almost 300
years under the Ptolemies or Lagidae, so called from Lagus father of the first
Ptolemey, yielded her neck to the Roman yoke; this general peace gave way for
the birth of the prince of peace now at hand; who came in the fullness of time
to destroy idolatry, which was now at the hight; for at Rome the Pantheon or
Temple was built for all Gods. At Ephesus, Nicea, Nicomedia, and Pergamus.
Temples were dedicated to Julius and Augustus, at Ephesus, the city of Rome is
made a goddess, Herod upon suspicion murders his virtuous wife Mariamne, and
his mother in law Alexandra, with the Sanhedrin of the 72 Senators, and sets up
the golden eagle over the porch of the Temple.

Augustus took order for furnishing the city yearly with corn, from Egypt he
sent honest and able Proconsuls into all the Provinces, he reformed the Senate,
and reduced the number of Senators to 600. He gave order to the Priests to
transcribe the genuine Books of the Sibyls, and to burn the supposititious:
he overthrew the house of Vedius Pollio, for feeding his lampreys with men's
flesh: he maintained a strong guard over himself, to prevent the mischievous
plots Varus with his three legions in Germany; that sometimes he would beat his
head against the wall, crying out O Varus, restore the Legions. He would not be
called Dominus, or Lord by any.

Herod rebuilt Samaria and called it Sebaste from Augustus, he beautified
Turris Stratonia and called it Cesaria; he erected many Towers, and placed
Garrisons in Simon Boethus, and bestows on him the Priesthood; ^e builds a
Temple to Caesar near Panea, by the springs of Jordan, and to keep the Jews from
stirring at this Idolatry, he remits to them the third part of their tribute,
and to make some show of piety in the midst of his 3953.
impieties, in the 18 year of his reign, he inlargeth the Temple with a
magnificent building called the Court of the Gentiles, because they might enter
thither, it was 100 cubits long, and 120 high with large porches, and marble
pillars, the outward work was 8 years in building, a year and 5 months more
were spent in the inward ornaments; it was finished the 28 year of his reign, 9
years before Christ Aristobulus and Alexander being falsely accused by Salome
his sister, and Antipater their brother by the fathers side, which Antipater
was afterward also put to death by Herod: thus was he the butcher of Hyrcanus
his father in law, of Alexandra his mother in law, of Mariamne his wife, and of
his own 3 sons, so that as Augustus said, it had been better to be Herod's
swine, then his son. 3969.


Whilst Herod is thus raging against his own bowels, our blessed Redeemer
Jesus Christ is born of a pure Virgin; the report of whose birth did so
trouble 3971.
Herod, that he caused all the Bethlemitish children under two years old to be
murdered; and before the expiration of the same year he died, being tortured
so long Antipater, he left the kingdom to Archelaus and the Tetrarchie to
Herod Antipas, but Augustus divided the kingdom into two parts, to Archelaus
he gave one part, to Antipas and Philip the other, Archelaus in the 10 year of
his reign was accused before Augustus for his cruelty and tyranny, the Jews in
a tumult demanded justice of those that had incensed Herod against Judas and
Mathias two famous Lawyers; Archelaus sent a Tribune to suppress the tumult,
whom they hurt with stones; whereupon he sent his army against them, who at
their Paschall solemnity killed 3000 of them. 8000 Jews repair to Rome with a
complaint against Archelaus, whom they accused for conferring the Pontificat
upon unworthy men, and 3982. A. C. 11.
such as he pleased; therefore he is banished to Vienna about the twelfth year
of Christ, his goods confiscated, and Judea annexed to the Province of Syria,
this was done the eleventh year of his reign.

Agrippa Augustus his son in law by the help of Tiberius Nero, and Drusus
Germanicus brought under the Germans, Pannonians, Dalmatians, and Rhetians.
Agrippa being dead, Tiberius is made fellow Tribune with Augustus, but being
offended at the shining virtues of Cajus and Lucius, having asked leave of
Caesar, went to Rhodes, where he remained 8 years: these two Cajus and Lucius
were Augustus his nephews. Drusus and Tiberius were his sons in law. Drusus
dyed in the 30 year of his life: Tiberius undertook his charge in Germany,
which he made a stipendiary province. Cajus Caesar Augustus his nephew by Livia
being wounded in Armenia, where he spent most of his time, returned in his old
age to Italy, where he dyed at Lycia or Limyra, his brother Lucius in his
journey to Spain dyed at Massylia. Tiberius therefore with his brother Agrippa
are adopted by Augustus: but Agrippa was afterward rejected, so in Tiberius
alone remained the hope of succession, he subdued utterly the Dalmatians,
Marcomans, Pannonians, and other barbarous nations: but Quintilius Varus being
too secure was defeated by the Germans, under Arminius their Captain; which
overthrow so troubled Augustus, that he appointed watch and ward over all the
city, and out of sorrow suffered his hairs and beard to overgrow, yet this
Arminius was quelled by Tiberius, who beyond the Rhene destroyed all with fire
and sword.

Augustus sends his nephew Germanicus the son of Drusus into Germany, and
appoints Tiberius for Illyricum; but at Nola falling sick he recals Tiberius
now in his Plaudite, if he had acted his part well on the stage of Mortality; so
having bid farewell to Livia his wife, who (as it is thought) poisoned him with
figs, he departed the 76 year of his life, the 57 year of his Empire, and 44
years after the Actian war. He was a moderate wise, and fortunate Prince; he
added to the Empire 3985. V. C. 766. A. C. 14.
Egypt, Pannonia, Aquitania, Rhetia, the Vindelici neighbors of Rhetia, with
all the Sea ports of Pontus: he subdued the Germans, the Daci: he recovered
Armenia from the Parthians; he was honored with gifts from Scythia and Judia:
he made Galatia a Province; he made Rome marble, which before was brick; he
erected a stately porch and Bibliothec in his Palatine house; he appointed
watchmen, Cornelius Consul, though he plotted to murder him. He loved Mecaenas
deerly, even when he called him carnifex or Butcher, and upon that word from
him rose up, and would not pronounce the sentence of condemnation against some
traitors. He was modest in apparel, wearing no other, but what his wife,
sister, daughters and neeces made. He was temperate in his diet, sparing in
wine, an honourer and lover of learning, he was a good scholar himself, and
wrote diverse tractats, he left a breviary of the whole Empire, a list of all
the soldiers in pay, of the money in the treasury, and of the sums that were
due. He erected an Altar Quirinus, or as the Evangelist says, Cyrenius being
President of Syria, who was afterward sent to confiscate Archelaus his goods
that reigned in Judea, Idumea, and Samaria, as his brother Herod Antipas in
Galilee and Peraea; their mother was Marthace a Samaritan. Philip was Tetrarch
of Trachonitis and Batanaea.

The insurrection of the Jews against Archelaus, gave occasion to Judas, Simon
and other ambitious spirits, under pretense of liberty to set up a King of
their own, but they were quickly suppressed by Quintilius Varus who afterward
was killed in Germany; he with three legions, and Arabians Auxiliaries appeased
them, and crucified about 2000 of the rebels. Much about this time Christ being
12. years of age disputed with the Doctors in the Temple. Judas a Galilean
because of the Roman 3982. A. C. 11.
taxes persuaded the Jews to deny the payment thereof, teaching that they were
a free people, and that no mortal should call himself Prince or Lord. Hence

CHAP. X.
The life and death of Tiberius and Sejanus, with their cruelties. 2. The
baptism, life, and death, resurrection and ascension of Christ. 3. How the
Gospel began to

Tiberius the son of Livia, and son in law to Augustus married with Iulia the
daughter of Augustus whom afterward he starved with hunger: his former 3985. A.
C. 14.
wife which he divorced was Agrippina daughter to that Atticus, to whom Cicero
wrote his book of Epistles; he had 2 years before Augustus his death, adopted
Germanicus his brother Drusus son, he concealed the death of Augustus, till he
had made away with young Agrippa his only nephew left, who might have hindered
his succession: he made show of unwillingnesse to accept the Empire, showing
truly yet dissemblingly, what a dangerous beast it was, but this was only to
clay tempered with blood; and because of his intemperate drinking he was nick
named Caldius Biberius Mero, for Claudius Tiberius Nero: and Augustus did
foresee his nature, when he said, the Romans should live miserably under such
thin Iaws; he was learned, but cruel and covetous, of a dissembling nature,
frowning on those whom he loved, and fawning on those whom he hated: he was
better at extemporary, then premeditate counsels. Out of his pretended modesty,
he would not at first be called Emperor, nor Pater Patriae, and because he knew
that the armies Germanicus to be Emperor, which he modestly refused, he
submitted himself to the Senates election; he passed by injurious language,
saying that in a free State tongues should be free. In all things he submitted
himself to the Senate, and speaking against heavy taxes, he said: that good
shepherds use to shaer, not to flay their sheep. He was severe against
adultery and robbery, and insurrections, and either suppressed or restrained
the abuse of Sanctuaries.

At a certain Funeral one cried out aloud, desiring the dead corpse to tell
Augustus that his legacies which he left to the people were not paid, by
Tiberius, who presently apprehends the party, and having paid him his share
commands him to be slain, and then to report the truth to his father Augustus.
He reduced the kingdom of Cappadocia after the death of old Archelaus into the
form of a Province. Tiberius, Germanicus triumphed over diverse German nations,
between the Rhene and Albis now called Elbe or Elve; Drusus Caesar's son is sent
A. C. 17. 3988.
to Germany to be trained up in the wars, and to appease the Germans, now at
civil wars amongst themselves. At this time 12 cities of Asia were overthrown
with earthquakes; of these he repaired Philadelphia, Magnesia, and Apollonia.
Germanicus in the East endeavored to re-enthrone Vonon the Parthian, thrust
out by Artabanus, but could not prevail. He made Zeno King Polemons son of
Pontus Governor of Armenia, shortly after he is poisoned at Antioch by Piso,
being secretly 3990. A. C. 19.
encouraged to commit this wickedness by Livia Augusta. Germanicus was much
lamented being a Prince, mild to his enemies, and courteous to his friends; but
Piso murdered himself at Rome.

About the 21 year of Christ the image of Ianus fell down at Rome, Tiberius
destroyed the spurious books of the Sibyls, he drove out of the city the wanton
solemnities of the Egyptian Isis, as also the Jewish religion, because the wife
of Saturninus had intercepted great sums of money, conveyed to Jerusalem; the
Jews were some banished, some killed, he would not yield that Arminius the
Romans used not to suppress their enemies by treachery, but by valor. Yet
this Arminius was shortly after slain, by the treachery of his friends. Caesar
now being rid of Germanicus, began openly to show his truculent nature, he
maintained Valerius Gratus President of Palestina in his covetousness; who had
changed four High Priests in a short time, to wit, Annas, Ismael, Eleazer, and
Simon, and had now set up Caiphas, no less cruel then Tiberius.

Aelius Sejanus heretofore the catamite of Apicius the glutton, who wrote a
book centies HS.
of glutony, and having found upon the casting up of his accounts but 100000
Sestertia left for his kitchen, hanged himself; I say this Catamite but now
stale and Tiberius advanced to great honors, and power, purposely to
circumvent and ruin all good men. He used to suborne false witnesses, to
entrap honest men, and especially if they were wealthy; so that no good man
could live in Rome at that time with any security: the Senate was brought into
such a servil condition, that they durst not contradict or deny any thing,
though never so unjust, that Caesar or Sejanus would have done. Drusus Tiberius
his only son is poisoned by Sejanus his means; because upon a quarrel between
them, Drusus struck him 3994. A. C. 23.
on the Face, who never left till he had made Livia with whom Sejanus committed
adultery, poison her husband, upon promises that he would marry her, and that
she should have a share in the government: this murder was concealed 8. years
together. Sejanus seeing this murder succeeds so well, resolves to make away
with Germanicus sons, who were to succeed next into the Empire: he could not
work any thing upon Agrippinas chastity, therefore he goes about to accuse her
and her 3 sons of treason: he also falsely accused and condemned Silius their
friend, as if he intended to poison the Emperor; but he prevented his tortures
by his voluntary death, and self-murder. Dolobella desired and deserved the
honor of a triumph, for suppressing Tacfaronas, who by the help of the King of
the Garamantes, committed great outrages in Africa; but Sejanus denied him this
honor, and conferred it on Iunius Blesus, his uncle, who had not defeated and
killed the enemy as Dolobella did: he countenanceth and rewards informers, he
animates Q. Vibius Cerenus was falsely accused by his own son, that he meant to
raise war in Gallia, and to destroy the Prince. Cecilius Cornutus, once Praetor,
being also falsely accused of sending many to raise a rebellion, killed himself.
Cremutius Cordus was accused for praising M. Brutus in his Annals which he
published, and for saying that Cassius was the last of the Romans, who after he
had cleared him self, went out of the Senate and ended his life by abstinence.
Order was given by the Senate that the Aediles should burn his books, which
notwithstanding were preserved.

About this time Poppaeus Sabinus subdued the High-land Thracians for refusing
to muster their best soldiers for the service of the Romans. Sejanus
petitioneth Caesar that he might marry with Livia, which being denied him, he
persuades him to remove himself from the City tumults, and to solace himself
with a private and quiet life in some pleasant place far from Rome. By this
means he knew that his own power should be the greater; that no access could
be had to the Emperor, nor no letters sent but by the soldiers, which were at
his devotion: he made show of friendship to Agrippina, and told her that she
should beware of eating or drinking with her father in law, who meant to poison
her, but she not knowing how to dissemble, could not be persuaded at table,
either to eat or drink; or be cheerful. Tiberius commending the goodness of
the Apples that were set down before him, gave one of them to his daughter in
law, which she would not taste, but delivered it to one of the waiters.

Caesar pretending to dedicate a Temple to Jupiter at Capua, and another to
Augustus at Nola, removed to Campania, purposely to be far from the City, that
so the suspicion of his cruelties and oppression might be concealed, in respect
of place, though not of deeds: that he might make his majesty more terrible by
that great distance; and to avoid his mothers company, whom he had made his
colleague in his government: therefore he shut him self up in the Isle of
Capreae, where he Artabanus the Parthian to possess Armenia, the Dacians and
Sarmatians to wast Mesia and the Germans to spoil Gallia, to the great
dishonor and danger of the Empire.

The beginning of the year was polluted by the shameless murder of Titius
Sabinus an honorable Gentleman, for his affection to Germanicus, and his
family, he Latiaris and others to speak some words in commendation of
Germanicus, the afflictions of whose family he bewailed; as also the
misgovernment of Sejanus. Upon this he is presently accused, condemned, and
haled to Tiberis with his garment turned over his head, where he was drowned,
though his dog in the water strove to keep his masters body from sinking, but
in vain, this was done on the Calends of January: not long after died Iulia
Augusta, or Livia Tiberius his mother; who neither did visit her in her
sickness, nor with his presence honor her funeral, on which he would suffer
no cost to be bestowed as the Senate had intended; she being gone who held in
the exorbitances of Tiberius and Sejanus; Agrippina is accused of plotting with
the Army, wherefore she is banished, her eye beat out by a Centurion, and at
last famished to death. Nero and Drusus her sons are also accused as enemies,
and both starved with hunger, Nero in Pontia an Island in the Tyrrhen Sea, and
Drusus in the Palace.

Whilst the world groans under the tyranny of Tiberius, John Baptist the son
3999. A. C. 28.
of Zacharias the High Priest preaches repentance to the Jews, and baptizeth
them, showing that the Lamb of God was coming to take away the sins of the
world, and who should baptize them with water and with the Holy Ghost. Then he
4000. A. C. 29.
into the wilderness to be tempted by Satan, whom having foiled he goes to
Galilee; and chooses his Disciples, with whom he goes to Cana, and there at a
marriage turns water into wine: thence to Jerusalem, and at the Feast of
Easter purges the Temple of buyers and sellers: from thence he goes again
into Galilee, when he understood that John was cast into prison by Herod
Antipas, for reproving 4001. A. C. 30.
his incest with his brother Philips wife, taxing the ingratitude of his
country, he goes to Capernaum, where he heals a Rulers son, Peter's mother in
law, with many others, thence going about into other cities, he preaches the
Gospel, and works miracles.

The next year he went up to the Feast of Easter: then he cured him that lay at
4002. A. C. 31.
the pool of Bethesda 38 years. He vindicates his Disciples from breaking the
Sabbath. He sends abroad his Apostles to preach and cure diseases. He heals the
Centurions servant, and restores the widows son at Naim to life: so he did the
daughter of Iairus, he casts out devils, and rebukes the winds. In the mean
time Herod at the entreaty of Herodias, beheadeth John Baptist, for which
cruelty he was justly punished with the terror of an evil conscience,
thinking Christ had been then risen again from the dead, and with the loss of
his Army, defeated by Aretas king of Arabia. Easter drawing near Christ retires
to the Desert, where he fed 5000 4003. A. C. 32.
men, besides women and children, with five barley loaves and two fishes, having
left twelve baskets full of crumbs; upon this they would have made him king;
shortly after he fed 4000 men with seven loaves. He foretells his Disciples of
their persecutions and deaths. Then he transfigured himself on mount Thabor;
and after that he informs his Apostles of the nature of his kingdom, and that
they should not lord it over others, as worldly kings do over their subjects.

About the end of his third year, Christ went up to Jerusalem to the Feast of
Tabernacles; then he sends abroad 70 other Disciples to preach and work
miracles: Lazarus being 4 days dead: Whereupon multitudes follow him riding to
Jerusalem, 4004. A. C. 33.
with olive branches and palms in their hands. Then he whipped the buyers and
sellers out of the Temple. Caiphas and his father in law Annas, hired Judas to
betray his Master; which he did for 30 pieces of silver, in the night time
whilst Christ was at his devotion: who with his word made the soldiers that
came to apprehend him, fall back to the ground. Then being carried to the High
Priest, he was accused by him, and the Elders of sedition; Pilat would have
absolved him, but durst not; fearing the displeasure of Tiberius; therefore he
condemned him to be crucified, for saying he was a king. But the miracles at
his death, and his glorious Peter's first Sermon 3000. afterward 5000 were
converted, the Priests and Elders storming at this, imprisoned and whipped the
Apostles, and stoned Steven; but to no purpose: for the Gospel still
increased, and Saul the great persecutor is converted, and becomes a fervent
preacher; so in 7 years space was confirmed the covenant made to Abraham and
Peter, Paul, John, Philip, and Barnabas: began to communicate 4005. A. C. 34.
to the Gentiles: and so according to Daniels Prophecy the 70 weeks are
finished the daily sacrifice ended; sin is abolished and everlasting
righteousness established.

At Rome such cruelties were exercised by Sejanus, that many brave men killed
themselves: his flatterers sacrificed to him, as well as to Tiberius, and swore
by his Genius. So great was his power, that Tiberius grew jealous of him;
therefore he sent letters privately to the Senate, to imprison Sejanus, which
was done accordingly, by Regulus the Consul, and Laco captain of the watch. His
Images are broken down and melted. He was flung down from the top of the
Gemonian ladders, and Claudius his son, is first defloured by the hangman, then
strangled; for it was not lawful to put a virgin to death. All his friends
were either slain, or banished, or disgraced; and his body flung at last into
Tibris. After his death Tiberius was more cruel then before, by which it
appeared that Sejanus was but the instrument of his cruelty. The Statue of
liberty notwithstanding is erected in the Forum; a presage that Rome should be
ere long freed from Tiberius his tyranny; who being desired by Gallus Asinius
whom he had condemned to die, that he would hasten his death he answered: I am
not yet friends with you.

The reasons that moved Tiberius to destroy his favorite were many. viz.
dangerous words from Sejanus against the Prince: his causing of him to retire
to Capreae: his great power: his marriage with Livia Drusus widow: his ruining
of the house of Germanicus: his great train of servants: his desire to be
Tribune; and for that he held Drusus prisoner, and C. Caesar at his mercy: and
yet Tiberius suspected and hated Cajus: at last he dyed, the 78 year of his
age, having reigned 23. Some think he was poisoned by Cajus; others, that he
was stifled by Macro Colonel of the Guards and Cajus his creature. Which
Tiberius perceived when he told Macro, that he did well to look toward the Sun
rising. Tiberius was a wicked Prince, hated and feared of his people; and so
fearful himself by reason of his guilty conscience, that he trembled still
when it thundered; so that then usually he wore a bay garland, he was wont to
call King Priamus happy, for surviving all his children. His body was carried
by the Soldiers to Rome, and there solemnly burned: The people cursing him,
and wishing the Mines or Gods of the dead, not to admit his soul in the
company of the just.

CHAP. XI.
1. The life and death of Caligula, and of the Roman and Jewish affairs under
him. 2. The life and death of Claudius, and of all the memorable accidents in
Rome, Parthia, Judea, and elsewhere under him. 3. Of Agrippa and Antipas.

C. Caesar Caligula so called from the buskin or shoe he wore in the camp,
4008.
where he was born, was begot of Germanicus the son of Drusus; his mother was
Agrippina Augustus his Niece; the daughter of Agrippa. His succession was
joyful to Rome, wearied with the insolences of Tiberius: and because of the
great love the City bore to Germanicus poisoned by Piso, whose death was much
Tiberius. It was said of Caligula, that he was a good servant, but a bad
master; for he was very obsequious to Tiberius. At first he showed some tokens
of goodness by calling home the banished and condemned Citizens, and freely
pardoning them. By giving full power to the Senate to determine all matters
without appeal to him. He slighted the information of a plot intended against
him; saying, he feared no plots, having never wronged any man hitherto. He
banished Antipas to Lions with his concubin Herodias, being accused of
oppression by Agrippa.

But he was an enemy to Christ, in persecuting him in his members, whom
Tiberius would have honored as a God, when he desired the Senate to admit him
among Cajus also commanded his own image, with thoseof the heathen Gods to be
erected in the Temple of Jerusalem. He persecuted the Jews, and rejected their
Petition, and Philo their agent: he bestowed on Herod Agrippa golden fetters
4010.
in lieu of his iron ones, because he wished the sudden death of Tiberius who
imprisoned him, and the succession of Caligula; then made him king over Philips
and L^sinias tetrarchy: he erects a temple to himself, and in it his own image,
which he clothed daily in the same habit he went in himself: he would make show
of conference with Jupiter, as if he had been his equal. He appointed Priests
and solemn sacrifices for himself. He commanded Petronius President of Judaea
to dedicate the Temple of Jerusalem to his deity: which upon the Jews
importunity Petronius refused to do; wherefore he is condemned to dye by
Cajus. But before he heard of this sentence Cajus was slain. He threatened
destruction to the Jews of Alexandria being accused by Appion the Grammarian;
but Philo pleaded for their innocence, and comforted them with the assurance of
Gods assistance when man's help is furthest off; which fell out to be true upon
the death of this monster, who spared not his own brother Tiberius, whom he
murders treacherously by a Tribune. He caused M. Silanus his father in law to
cut his own throat: he deflowred 4011. A. C. 40.
his three sisters: he banished Agrippina and Livilla, he murdered Macro and
his wife Ennia: Having condemned at one time some Gauls, and some Greeks, he
bragged that he had subdued Gallograecia.

This tyrants whole pleasure was in shedding of blood, and tormenting of men
with lingering deaths, commanding them so to be slain that they might feel
themselves dye. His wish was, that all the Romans had but one neck that he
might strike it off at one blow. Whose common phrase was, Let them hate me so
they fear me. He complained that in his time there were no public calamities,
as fire, pestilence, famine, earthquakes. All kind of carnal pollution he
exercised publicly in his palace. He spent above a 100 and 20000 Sestertia in
one year idly; that being spent he raises intolerable taxes, and persecutes
all rich men for their wealth and fills the city with bawdy houses for gain. He
threatens Germany and Britanny with war: he made a bridge of ships over the Bay
of Ba^ae almost four miles long. He threatened Gallia with a war, but employed
his soldiers to gather and fill their helmets with shells and pible stones,
returning in triumph to Rome for plundering Neptune. He bragged that he turned
Sea into Land, and day into night, when he built his bridge and beset it on
both sides with torches in the dark. He intended to have murdered all his
chief Senators and Knights, and then to remove to Alexandria or Antium; for in
his closet were found two scroles containing the names of the chief Senators
and Knights, the one he called the sword, the other, the dagger; he had also a
great Chaerea Cassius, and Corn. Sabinus Tribunes, who gave him 30 wounds;
stabbed his wife Caesonia, and beat out the brains of his 4012. A. C. 41.
young daughter. He lived 29 years, and reigned or raged rather 3 years and 10
months.

In the mean while the Gospel spreads. Paul confuteth the Jews in their
Synagogues: he is commanded the 3 year of his Apostleship to preach to the
Gentiles; and so is carried by Barnabas to Cilicia; and Peter is sent to
Cornelius whom he converts with his whole family. But Satan bestirs himself to
hinder the work of Christ, and causes the Dragon with 7 heads and 10 horns to
oppose the woman. Pilat being thrust out of his office by Vitellius the
Governor of Judea, murders himself. And Caiphas was forced to resign the
Priesthood to Jonathan the son of Annas. Antipas and Herodias dyed miserably,
and in want; he was banished for keeping correspondency with the Parthian, his
Tetrarchy is given to Agrippa his accuser; so that now he has Judea, Samaria
and Caesarea subject to him.

So hateful was the misgovernment of Tiberius, that the Senate met in the
Capitol, 4012. A. C. 41.
to abolish the Caesarean family, and to assert their former liberty. But the
soldiers made Claudius the son of Drusus and Uncle to Caligula Emperor, as he
was hiding of himself. For which favor he promised to each soldier 40
Sestertia, Tiberius, nor the fury of his brothers son Caligula: and this
benefit his folly afforded to the State; that he being of a timorous and
flexible nature, suffered himself to be ruled by wise men. Who caused him for
example sake put Chaerea, (who was also called Cassius,) to death. Sabinus the
other Tribune killed himself. He repealed all the Acts of Cajus: he restored
the Senate to their authority: he mitigated the rigor of some laws: he caused
those slaves to be made free, who in their sickness were neglected or exposed
by their Masters; and he took away the power of life and death which they had
over the slaves: he punished the ingratitude of manuwissed servants Caligula,
who would have abolished Homer and Virgil. He confined the Roman bounds,
Eastward with Euphrates, Northward with the Rhene, and Danubius, and Southward,
with the Mauritanians: He went in person, and subdued the Britains, and added
the Orcades to the Roman Empire.

Agrippa used all means to make the Jews faithful to him, at Jerusalem he was
a strict observer of the Jewish Religion: he removed first Theophilus, then
Simon from the Priesthood, and conferred it upon Ma^thias the brother of
Jonathan: he hung up in the Temple of Jerusalem the golden fetters sent him by
Cajus. And to please James the brother of John, and imprisoned Peter, intending
4013. 4014. A. C. 43.
to murder him at Easter; but an angel delivered him. The 3 year of Claudius
at Antioch Christ's followers were called Christians. Agrippa in the midst of
his glory at Caesarea, whilst the people in flattery called him God, was so
struck with a loathsome disease, that in 5 days he died, being consumed with
lice and vermin, the 44. year of Christ, to whom succeeded Cuspius Fadus in
Judaea. For Agrippa's son was not yet fit for government. The famine foretold
by Agabus, about this time was great, every where, but Helena queen of Adiabene
a country in Assyria helped the Christians with money to buy corn: Then it was
that Theudas a false. Messiah, raised 400 Jews against the Romans, but the
tumult was quickly appeased, the rout routed, and he killed: Then Matthew wrote
his Gospel. Paul and Barnabas converted Sergius Paulus the Roman Pro-consul in
Cyprus to the Faith. And struck Elymas the Sorcerer with blindness. Then was
Paul caught into the third Heaven, and shortly after he with Barnabas preach
the Gospel through all Asia. So do Judas and Sylvanus.

At Rome Claudius is in danger of his life by the tumultuous people, for Anous
Martius. He made the great Aquaeducts called from him Aquae Claudiae,
furnishing the City with water, whose springs were 40 miles off. But he was
unhappy in his wife Messalina, an insatiable beast, committing uncleanness
without shame or moderation with people of both sexes: which occasioned
Claudius to give himself also to unlawful pleasures and lusts: and whilst he
was at Ostia with his Concubines, she at Rome publicly married with C. Silius:
for which cause he put her to death: and withal abolished all strange
religions in Italy, and suppressed the Druides, and advanced the ancient
Aruspices.

In Parthia were great civil wars. Gotharzes intending to kill his brother
Artabanus invaded the kingdom. The Parthians fearing his cruelty set up his
other brother Bardanes; who having raised an army meant to march as soon as he
had taken Seleucia, which he was then besieging: But in the mean while
Gotharzes strengthened himself, and Meherdates King of Assyria did seize upon
Armenia. But shortly after common danger made the brothers friends. Bardanes is
hindered by Vibius Marsus Legate of Syria, from Armenia: he was afterward killed
by his own followers, as he was hunting. Gotharzes for his riotousnesse is
hated of the Parthians, who weary of his tyranny, send private petitions to
Claudius, beseeching him to establish Meherdates the son of Phraates, in his
Fathers

Whereas the secular solemnities were wont to be acted but once in 100 years,
40 18. A. C. 47.
which is the age of a man; yet Claudius caused them to be proclaimed sixty
eight, others say sixty three years after they had been acted by Augustus.
About this time Claudius places a King over the Cherusci, a people in Germany,
who was descended of Arminius, but bred in Italy. He sends Corbulo to suppress
the rebelling Frisians. The Hedui in Gallia (now the seat of the Burgundians)
had the privilege of Senators in Rome. The army being purged and mustered,
which was called in Rome condere lustrum; and was performed every fifth year,
there were found at this time 69 hundred, and 44 thousand Citizens. Messalina
being dead, Claudius his free men ruled there; chiefly Posidio his Eunuch;
Polybius, whom he set between the Consuls; Pallas, whom he honored with
Pretorian robes, and Narcissus his Secretary. When he complained of the poverty
of his Exchequer, it was answered, that he should be rich enough, if his
Liberti or Freemen would admit him into their company. These tyrannised over
the people, and caused the old man to fall in love with his brothers daughter
Iulia Agrippina. Pallas the maker of this incestuous match having had the use
of her body, caused Claudius to adopt her son by Domitius Aenobarbus; he was
called Nero, and became both son and 40 21. A. C. 51.
son in law to Claudius, to the overthrow of Germanicus, whom he begot of
Messalina. This Agrippina sent a Colonie to that City of the Vbii, which from
her was called Colonia Agrippina. Upon a second tumult of the people for want
of corn, Claudius hardly escaped with his life. In his reign, says Pliny, was
seen the Phoenix in Egypt; but Tacitus will have it in the reign of Tiberius,
which was the 34 year of Christ, shortly after his resurrection, who is the
true Phoenix. But I have elsewhere proved that the Phaenix is no fabulous bird.
Exercit. in Gene.


Fado being Governor of Judaea of a Jew became a Gentile, under his successor
Ventidius; an impudent soldier, showing his naked genitals in derision to the
Jews, raised such a sedition at the feast of unleavened beard, that in it 20000
Jews were slain. Meherdates hoping by the help of Cajus Cassius to obtain
Parthia, and failing of that aid which was promised by the Adiabent and
Edessens, fell into the hands of Gotarzes; who cut off his ears, after Gotarzes
succeeded Vonones who lived obscurely; his son Vologeses succeeded. The Jews
and Samaritans inveterate enemies, were animated by their Governors, Cumanus
president of Judaea, and Felix of Samaria, to molest each other by inroades,
which they did, sometimes spoiling and killing each other in ambushes,
sometimes in open battle. But Quadratus the Governor of Syria set the
Province at quietness, and revenged the death of the Roman soldiers, then
being authorized by Claudius Cumanus, but advanced Felix into the Tribunal
among the Judges, though both were equally guilty. Cumanus is sent to Rome with
Ananias the High Priest, and Ananus the Captain. Claudius the 12 year of his
reign bestowed Iurea and Trachonitis on Agrippa the younger. Felix presuming on
his brother Palla's greatness intised Drusilla from her husbands bed, and
married her. Aziri king of Emesa was her husband.

About this time Claudius banisheth the Jews out of the City, for raising
tumults 4020.
against the Christians. With them Aquila and Priscilla of Jews now made
Christians, are forced to fly to Corinth; where Paul met them, having preached
Paul converted or 4020. A. C. 50.
at least confirmed Dionysius the Areopagite, in the Faith by his doctrine and
miracles. From thence he wrote to the Thessalonians, at Corinth he found Silas
and Timothy returned from Macedonia, and being much opposed he preached the
Gospel to the Greeks. In the 13. year of Claudius a Sow brought forth a Pig,
having the sharp talons of an hawke. Which portended Nero that shortly
succeeded, for he was a rapacious tyrant, and the son of a Strumpet.
Agrippina being affrighted at a speech let fall from Claudius in his drink,
which was, that it was fatal for him to bear with his wives lewdness, and
then punish them, she infused poison into a Mushrome, in which he delighted
Xenophon the Physician to thrust a feather down his throat dipped in strong
poison; pretending it would make him vomit: so he dyed in the 64 year of his
age, having reigned 13 years and 9 months. She 4025. A. C. 55.
concealed his death, till Nero his son in law had strengthened himself in the
Empire.

In his time Helena Queen of Adiabene was converted: so was Ezates the King,
and Abbas king of Edessa. Philip the Apostle was crucified at Hierapolis in
Asia for preaching Christ, and then was stoned to death. Simon Magus was
honored with a Statue, and the title of Holy God. And yet the Mathematicians
were Simon Magus? Paul escaped stoning at Lystra. Peter restores dead Tabitha
to life. In the Aegean Sea there started up an Island of 30 Stades. Claudius
caused the lake Fucinus now called Lago do Marso to be drawn dry, by the daily
toil of 30000 workmen, but to no purpose. In his time also departed the Virgin
Mary, being 59 years old. Peter's wife was martyred; and the Synod of the
Apostles held the 16. year after Christ's resurrection, and the 8. year of
Claudius his reign.

CHAP. XII.
1. The wicked life and death of Nero. 2. The affairs of Germany, Britain,
Parthia, and Armenia at that time. 3. The miserable condition of Iudaea,
Galilee, etc.

NEro the last and worst of all the Caesar's (for he outrun Caligula his Uncle
in 4025. A. C. 55*
all kind of wickedness) began his reign the 55 year of Christ, he being then
17 years of age he commits the government of all things to his mother. He
solemnised the Funerals of Claudius. He made great show of a virtuous Prince
for 5 years, promising he would be another Augustus. He either remitted or
mitigated heavy taxes. When being desired to subscribe to the condemnation of
one, who was to suffer; his answer was: I wish I could not write. Burrhus was
his tutor for military affairs, Seneca for Philosophy and Oratory: In his
childhood he learned all the liberal Arts. But his Mother kept him back from
the study of Philosophy, affirming (but foolishly, and like her self) that it
was repugnant to princely Government: and that Seneca might make his own
Oratory the more admired by Nero, he hindered him from reading the ancient
Orators; therefore he applied himself to painting, graving, singing, and
versifying.

Under Nero Pontus was made a Province, he began to shake off his mother for
reproving his doting upon Act the freed woman. He removed Pallas her
favorite, and match maker with Claudius, from all Government; and being jealous
of Britannicus the true son of Claudius, who was now 14 years old, and of a
towardly disposition, and whom Agrippina threatened to establish in the Empire,
Nero by the help of Locusta a naughty woman, poisoned him; who falling down
dead at the drinking thereof, made all at the table amazed: but Nero, as if he
knew nothing, gave out that he was subject to the Falling sickness. But the
same night he caused his body to be burned, and to be buried in Campus Martius;
at which Locusta. Then he went about in servill apparel, among the bawdy
houses, where he received many a knock, which he bore patiently, because he
would not discover himself. He allowed to Valerius Massala, and other decayed
gentlemen yearly stipends. Wars between the Romans and the Parthians increased
daily, under Domitius Corbulus about Armenia, which had been conquered by
Lucullus and Pompey, but now fallen off. At last Tiridates King thereof was by
the help of Antiochus Comagenus, and Pharasmenus forced to yield to Corbulo
after he had taken A^taxata the chief City, and evened it with the ground.

After this Nero being taken with the love of Poppaea first made her his
Concubine 4033. A. C. 63.
(her husband Salvius Otho consenting to it) then he married her, having first
murdered his own wife Octavia the daughter of Claudius. About this time the
Frisian Ambassadors at Rome, perceiving that in Pompeys Amphitheater the
Ambassadors of those Nations who were faithful to Rome, sat among the
Senators; they also sat down, saying that no nation was more faithful to Rome
then the German, which was taken well by the spectators. About the same time
also the Hermunduri quarrelling with the Catti, both being German people about
Salt pits, the Catti were overthrown. Poppaea often solicited Nero to make away
his mother, as if she intended his death. Therefore he put her in a ship
Anicetus his freed man to murder her. At which horrid act the Sun suddenly
was darkened, and at Rome a woman was brought to bed of a Snake, and Nero
himself tortured with an evil conscience, and with the ghastly sights of his
mothers ghost, persuing him with whips and firebrands; he gave himself after
this to all uncleanness, and cruelty: For he caused himself to be married in
the manner and apparel of a Virgin. Upon the sight of a Comet, he caused many
of the Nobility to be murdered, saying, that Comets usually portend Mortality.
He used to fish with golden nets, and to wash himself in precious ointments. He
used to sing to the harp, and to be still exercised in the race of chariots.
But in the Paulinus was taking in of Mona or Anglesey, the Britains invade the
Roman Colony at Camalodunum or Maldon in Essex, where 70000 Romans and their
associates were killed, but Paulinus returning with an army of 10000 killed
80000 Britains. His successor Turpilianus lived idly without acting any thing.

At Rome 400 slaves are killed, because Pedianus the town Prefect was
murdered by a slave. Burrhus is poisoned by Nero, by which Seneca's power was
much weakened. Pallas also is poisoned; Octavia's head is brought into the city
by Anicetus who killed Agrippina, and great solemnity is used in the Temples;
the base and degenerated Senate in the interim applauding and flattering Nero in
all his actions. Caesennius Paetus who basely yielded Armenia to Vol^geses the
Parthian, was pardoned by Nero. But Corbulus forced Tiridates to lay down his
regal diadem at the feet of Nero's image, and to receive it from Caesar's hand.
Nero also was the first that persecuted the Christians openly in the 10 year of
his reign. Paul is accused by the Jews before the Deputy of Achaja, and is by
him absolved. From thence he went to Ephesus, then to Jerusalem, and then at
Antioch he told Peter, that none should be compelled to Judaism who had
submitted Apolles had baptized; and they spoke with fiery tongues. Then he
disputed in the school of Tyrannus, and by handkerchers and aprons he wrought
miracles confirming the Gospel in Asia. So that the books of Exorcists were
burned, and the worship of Diana at Ephesus overthrown; at which Demetrius the
Silver-smith stormed, and raised a tumult, out of which Paul escaped, and went
to Macedonia, leaving there Timothy, to whom he wrote an Epistle, and another
to Titus Bishop of Crete. After this he wrote to the Corinthians from Philippi,
4024.
he thought to have returned to Ephesus, but being in danger of the Jews, goes
Titus and Luke he writes again to the Corinthians, and from thence to the
Romans. In his journey at Troas he restores Entychus to life, then at Jerusalem
he was set upon by the Jews, but was rescued by Claudus Lysias: and comforted
by Christ himself. He pleads before Claudius, Felix and Drusilla. But Felix
is afrighted at the last judgment; being guilty of the murder of Jonathan the
High Priest, and of his own incontinent life.

Felix having set up Ismael a tyrant in Ionathans Pontifical chair, and having
4026.
delivered over Paul bound to his successor Portius Festus, to please the
Jews whom he had offended; he is called home to Rome, where he had justly
suffered Pallas by his greatness protected him. Festus sends Paul to Rome, as
himself desired, whither he arrived the next year after his shipwreck, and is
committed to the charge of Afranius Burrhus. He lived two years in his own
house with his keeper: in which time he converted some Jews. From thence he
wrote to the Galatians and Ephesians. He 4028.
sends abroad diverse Disciples; calls Timothy and Mark out of Asia: He wrote to
the Philippians by Epaphroditus, to the Colossians, and to Philemon by
Tychicus, showing that he hoped to be set free by Nero, who troubled not
himself with any religion, but with that of the goddess Syria. By Timothy also
Paul wrote to the Hebrews: being delivered out of the mouth of the Lion, and
dismissed after Nero. He goes to Asia with Luke, who then wrote the Acts of
the Apostles: he taught also in Macedonia, Italy, Spain, and other places.
Peter was at this time in Rome, who came thither the second year of Claudius.
Here he wrote his two Epistles. Paul returns again to Rome, and is beheaded by
Nero. He had familiarity with Seneca. Peter with his prayers overcame Simon
4038. A. C. 68.
Magus, who offering to fly in the air by his Magic, fell down and broke his
neck. Peter is crucified, and many Christians killed upon suspicion that they
had set the City on fire, which was done by Nero himself. Who whilst the City
was on flames sung the Iliades of Troy. Many Christians were covered with wild
Beasts skins, and cast to dogs to be torn by them; some were burned; Lucan the
Poet, 4036.
Seneca the Philosopher were slain with many other worthy and innocent men, as
if they had been conscious of Piso's conspiracy. Petronius Arbiter was killed
also. This tyrant banished Rufus Musonius the Philosopher with many other brave
men; and killed his own wife Poppaea being great with child, with a kick of his
foot. There did die also in one Autumn 30000 of the Plague.

After this he crowned Tiridates, and killed Corbulo that conquered him; he
went to Greece where he acted the Stage Player, and then attempted to cut the
Isthmus of Peloponnesus. So having wasted the treasure, he falls to exactions
and rapine, permitting no rich man to enjoy his own. He spoiled all trading:
he destroyed all his kindred; but the world being weary of 14 years slavery
under such a monster, began to cast off the yoke. Wherefore the Gauls under
Julius Vindex, and Spain under Galba revolted: the news of which being brought
to him at Naples, he swounded. He had heard of Vindex his revolt the same day
he killed his mother. But when he heard that the other armies were fallen off,
that Galba was marching against him, that he was proclaimed Traitor by the
Senate, that he was condemned to have his head set in a fork, and whipped to
death; about midnight he stole out of the city, with Sporus his Eunuch (to whom
he married himself, after Poppaea) and a few more, he being also afrighted
with an earthquake, and the ghastly apparitions of those he murdered, cries
out, have I neither friend nor foe left? and so falls on his sword, and
Epaphroditus dispatcheth 4039. A. C. 69.
him the 33 year of his life and the 9 month; the 13 year of his reign and 8
month.

In Judea Ananias the son of Annas the High Priest put to death with many
others, James the son of Alphaeus and brother of our Lord, after he had been
Bishop of Jerusalem 30 years. Ananias being deposed for his lewdness, Agrippa
sets up Jesus the son of Damnaeus, and shortly after another Jesus son of
Gamaliel, which caused civil quarrels. Albinus governed Judea a while
tyrannically, to whom Gessius Florus, as great an oppressor as the former; who
laughed at the Jews Petition which they preferred to Gallus Deputy of Syria,
against him. Florus exasperated the Jews by his sacrilege, and they him by
railing and upbraiding speeches, denying to deliver up the chief authors as was
demanded, wherefore the soldiers plundered the city and killed diverse. The
Jews finding no redress of their oppressions, about the 12 year of Nero, fell
upon the castle Massada, and killed all the Romans in it. Eleazer Nephew of
Anna the High Priest who 4038.
mocked Christ, persuaded the Priests not to sacrifice any more for Caesar.
Agrippa's garrison of horse is driven out of the city, and the Roman Garrison
contrary to faith and promise murdered. Ananias the Priest, with diverse others
are killed for Depart hence. Armed men were seen in the air. One Jesus the son
of Ananus for diverse years cried out woe to Jerusalem, and with this woe in
4033.
his mouth he dyed.

Gallus Governor of Syria, came before Jerusalem with an Army, but was repulsed
Ananus the Priest, and Josephus the son of Matthias. But the Christians got out
of Judea by times, fearing the sudden ruin of that country. Vespasian famous
for his success in Britanny and Germany, is sent by Nero into Syria. His son
Titus was his Legate or Deputy. Sepphoris the chief city of Galilee, opened
their gates to Vespasian: there quickly he got an army of 60000 out of Egypt,
Syria, and the neighboring places. Joseph's Forces being too weak to make
resistance, Gadara is taken, then Japha where 15000 Galileans are slain, the
Samaritans on Mount Garizim are defeated by Sextus Cerealis, where they
Josephus, was taken by Vespasian with the loss of 40000 Jews the 13 year of
Nero. Josephus yields himself to Vespasian, and isby him kindly used. Ioppe,
Tiberias, Tarichea are taken. So great was the slaughter of Galileans, that the
whole Lake of Gennasereth was infected with the dead bodies. Above 30000 were
sold, 6000 are sent to Nero, to dig the Isthmus. Titus his horse was slain
under him, but having backed an other, he killed his enemy.

Galilee being subdued Vespasian intends to fall upon Judea, but resolves to
defer the siege of Jerusalem, because he understood by some fugitives, that
they were like to destroy one another within the city, which now was the nest
of all unclean birds, and the sink of thieves and rogues, which had no fear of
God before them. The rich went to wrack, the High Priest Ananus was thrust out,
and one Phanneas an ignorant clown put in his place. The people are incensed
against the Zelotes, who seemed to be most eager for their law. Now the Temple
is become a den of thieves, and receptacle of all the seditious rout. The
Zelotes are besieged, who in the night let in 20000 Idumeans, they fall to
skirmishing so fiercely that 8000 were found dead the next morning. Ananus the
High Priest, and most of the prime citizens are killed, besides 12000 of the
meanner sort. Vespasian Placidus the Tribune destroyed. 15000 were slain by
the sword, besides unknown multitudes which were drowned in Jordan, and in the
dead Sea. But as Vespasian was preparing to set down before Jerusalem, news
are brought of Nero's death, which somewhat retarded the war.

CHAP. XIII.
1. The affairs of Rome under Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian, Titus and
Domitian.

SErgius Galba in Spain was chosen Emperor by the soldiers, and confirmed by
the Senate. He had been Commander over the German and Spanish Forces, but 4038.
A. C. 71. V. C. 824.
so severe, that when he came into the camp, they used to say: Soldiers learn
to fight, this is Galba, not Getulicus. He was infamous for sodomy, gluttony
and covetousness. When the soldiers demanded of him a donative, he answered
that, He used to choose, not to buy soldiers. Which speech was very
distasteful, for the soldiers used to receive from their Generals donatives
or military rewards, Adorea a measure of corn, or a chain, or a bracelet, or
horsetrappings, or hasta para, a spear without an iron point; or else garlands.
Therefore as Galba was never too well loved by the soldiers, so now he is
extremely hated; and so much the more, because he was now altogether ruled by
Cornelius Laco, Ti. Vinius, and Icelus, all three infamous; the first for
pride, the second for covetousness, and the third for sluggishnesse. These
three in scorn were called Galba's pedagogues or tutors. He was slain by the
soldiers in the Forum, as he came to appease the tumult of Otho's Legions,
who would have him to be Emperor, His head was cut off by a private soldier,
and carried about on a pole, that Otho might see it; but he desired rather to
see the head of Licinius Piso Galba had adopted, and thought to have made him
his successor in the Empire. This head also was brought to Otho; and Galba's
three tutors were killed. Thus ended Galba being 73 years old, and having
reigned 7 months: the Senate would have erected a statue for him, but Vespasian
hindered it, because he had heard that Galba had employed some soldiers to
murder him in Iudaea.

Otho succeeded, but reigned not above three months, he perceiving that Galba
preferred Piso to him; partly by bribes, partly by fair words, induced the
soldiers being angry with Galba, to murder him, and then to confer the Empire
on himself. But shortly after hearing that Vitellius was made Emperor in
Germany by his soldiers: he resolved to end the controversy in a battle.
Three battles were Otho had the better: But in the fourth he was defeated; and
then out of impatience, he slew himself, the 38 year of his age, to the great
grief of the people, who had great hopes of his good government. He was so well
beloved of his soldiers, that diverse of them, looking on his dead body killed
themselves* in his younger years (its thought) he was Nero's Catamit, and rival
for Poppaea.

Aulus Vitellius returning victor to Rome, was saluted Emperor by the Senate. In
his younger days Tiberius made use of him for his body, Cajus for his skill in
charrioting, Claudius and Nero for his cunning in dicing. He was so poor, when
^e was sent to Galba to Germany, that he was fain to let out his house and to
shut up his wife and children in a hired chamber: he was so kind to the
soldiers, that they chose him Emperor, but when he was viewing the dead
bodies in the camp where Otho's army was defeated, he let fall an unsavory
word more unpleasing to the ear, then the dead carcasses were to the eye: A
slain enemy smells well, but a citizen better. He made himself perpetual
Consul: he was a notorious glutton. His brother Vitellius bestowed a supper on
him, at which besides other cheer there were 7000 birds and 2000 fishes. He
barborously murdered Sabinus Vespasians brother, with all the Flavians in the
Temple of the Capitol, by setting it on fire Vespasian. As the Spanish had
done before to Galba, the Praetorian to Otho, and and the German to Vitellius;
who had used all means possible to keep the soldiers fast to him, but in
vain; wherefore seeing himself circumvented by his enemies, and forsaken by his
friends, he hid himself, in the palace, but being drawn out thence, was carried
about naked, with his hands bound behind him, and with the point of a sword
his chin held up, that all might see his impudent face, which the people
defaced with dung and dirt, and so is dragged to the 4040.
Gemonian ladders, and there is beat to death with innumerable blows. Having
lived 57 years, and reigned 8 months, he with his son and brother are drowned
in

In this civil war Cremona was burnt and sacked after it had stood 286 years,
no thing was left untouched, but the Temple of Mephitis or goddess of stin^,
which stood without the wall. In the ci^y were killed 50000. In Iudaea fire and
sword raged every where, chiefly at Jerusalem. One Johannes son of Livius,
and one Simon, two seditious ringleaders filled the Temple with blood and dead
bodies. Vespasian understanding the good success his Army had in Italy against
the Vitellians, made have homeward, and leaves his son Titus, with some choice
Regiments to subdue Jerusalem; almost subdued by intestine wars.

The short but furious storm of civil war being overblown, there succeeds a
sudden serenity under Flavius Vespasianus, who had been Deputy in Germany under
Claudius: and had fought 30 battles with the Britains. One time being in Nero's
company he was like to have been killed by him, because he gave no better ear
to his music whilst he was singing: as he was concealing of himself from
Nero's fury, the government of Iudaea, with an army is conferred on him.
Whilst Otho and Vitellius were tearing the Roman State in pieces, he was
encouraged by his friends to undertake the Empire, which he refused, till
Tiberius Alexander president of Egypt, had revolted to him with his Legions;
whose example others followed: and so at last being persuaded by Mucianus
promising him the aid of his Army, Sohemus, Antiochus, Agrippa, all powerful
Princes and Commanders; Queen Berenice also with all the Provinces of Asia and
Achaia proffer their assistance; besides he is animated by the priests,
Aruspices, and diverse prodigies, chiefly of a cypress tree which fell down,
and the next day rose up again of it self in his ground, more green and
fragrant then before. Antonius primus also a stout Commander under Galba,
having the command of the 7. Legion, submits to Vespasian, with many other
Legions. Julius Sabinus who had named himself Caesar, lay hid 9 years together
under ground in a cave with his wife, by whom he had two sons, this vain man
with an army of malcontents, set upon the Sequanians, and is beat by them;

Jerusalem in the mean time is torn with three factions, to wit, of Simons and
John's who had the walls and city, and of Eleazars in the Temple. Which John got
possession of, by cutting off Eleazars Forces. Titus sat down before the walls;
4401.
the besiegers made diverse sallies, but were still beat back with loss: the
famine within was great; for being the time of unleavened bread, multitudes of
people had flocked thither. So great was the famine, that from the midst of
April to the first of July, there dyed within the walls above 700000: some were
glad to eat their own execrements, some their own children. Many fled out of
the city, of which number 2000 in one night had their bellyes ripped by the
soldiers, thinking they had hid their gold there. At last the city being
entrenched round about was taken the 8. of August. And two days after the
Temple (which Titus would have saved but could not) was burned with multitudes
of people in it. In one porch there were burned 6000. there dyed in all 11
hundred 1000. Of Captives there were taken 97000 as Josephus who was present,
witnesses. Titus levelled all with the

Titus returning to Rome had the honor of a Triumph bestowed on his father and
him: in this triumph was carried the golden table, and golden candlestick and
the Law, which was laid up afterward in the palace. The two chief actors in the
rebellion, Simon and John, were both beheaded in the Forum. Caecilius Bassus
took the two castles Herodion and Machaerus, partly by storm, partly by
surrender. He siew 3000 that fled into the woods: all the land of Judaea was
sold by Caesar, except Emaus, which was bestowed upon 800 soldiers for their
habitation. The didrachma l. of our money, which by the law was payable to the
Temple by every Jew above 20 years old, is commanded to be brought every year
into the Capitol: the castle Massada which held out last, under Eleazer nephew
of Judas Galilaeus, who had 1000 soldiers in it, was set on fire by Flavius
Sylva; the garrison within being desperate killed one another, except some
children, and two women that hid themselves. So likewise diverse Jews having
fled to Egypt, suffered all kind of tortures rather then they would acknowledge
Caesar for their Lord, who were notwithstanding slaves to their own wills and
wickedness. This obstinacy made Vespasian destroy the Jewish Temple at
Heliopolis, which had stood 333 years, since it was built by Onias. The Jews of
Cyrene being seduced by one Ionathas Catullus the Governor, who slew 3000 of
them; and accused as many more of rebellion both at Rome and Alexandria amongst
whom was Josephus the historian, but this tyrant miserably died shortly after.

The Alani, a people originally Scythian, about this time breaking through the
Caspian straigths, which are narrow passages eight miles in length through
rocks, but scarce the breadth of a cart. Fall upon Media and Armenia with fire
and sword, so that Tiridates king of Armenia hardly escaped. Vespasian denied
to aid the Parthians in this case, being they were not under the protection of
Rome. King Vologeses in his letter to Vespasian calls himself king of kings.
Which vain title Vespasian reproves not, but returns it modestly to him in his
answer. Now was Achaja, Licia, Rhodus, Byzantium, Samos, Thracia, Cilicia,
Comagene made Provinces. In his time diverse Cities were overthrown with
earthquakes, which he restored. Not long before his death appeared a Comet,
which he merrily said portended not his death, but rather the Parthian Kings,
who wore long hair.

Vespasian was a wise and moderate Prince. He set all things aright which were
amiss. In his time the Temple of Ianus is shut, which is now the sixth time,
since the beginning of Rome. In 120 triumphs, never was it known that the
Father and son triumphed in the same chariot till now. Neither since the
beginning of the Empire, had any Emperor a son which succeeded him, till
Vespasian. He passed by Demetrius Cynicus, but slighted them, saying; I use not
to kill barking dogs. Only he was taxed for using so many ways to raise money,
which he excused, by showing how the Treasures had been exhausted by the
loosnesse of his predecessors: which made him sell pardons sometimes, and use
his officers like spunges. When Titus reproved him for laying a tax upon urine,
holding the money to his nose, he told him that the money did not smell, though
the urine did. In his time Linus Bishop of Rome was martyred. He dyed of a
flux, but would dye standing, as it became an Emperor, he was 69 years old.

Titus called also Vespasian, the delight of mankind, from his goodness so
4050. A. C. 80. V. C. 830.
named, was excellent both in literature and arms; in all virtues he exceeded
his father. In his younger years he was riotously and wantonly given, spending
much time idly with Queen Berenice, that many were afraid he would have Nero;
but on a sudden he so reformed himself and his Court, that he put away
Berenice, and all about him that were lewdly affected. He never took any thing
by oppression, and yet no Prince more munificent. He never suffered any
Petitioner to depart without hope, saying: No man ought to depart out of the
Princes presence with a sad countenance. He confirm^d all favors granted by
his superiors to any, by one Edict. Whereas the former Emperors gave new
Patents for every particular favor, as if they had been the first doners. One
night at supper calling to mind that he had not granted any favor that day, to
any man, he cries out: Alas friends we have lost a day. He was so mild that not
only did he pardon two prime men, that conspired against him; but at a public
show he made Powers are given by fate, and in vain do men attempt any great
action, out of fear to lose, or hope to obtain. When he understood that his
brother Domitian intended treason against him, he told him weeping, that he
needed not seek to obtain that by treachery, which he was to have of him
willingly; and the rather because he had already made him his colleague in the
Empire. He banished all informers; and relieved those that were oppressed,
chiefly those of Herculanum and Pompeii, which two towns were overthrown with
an Earthquake and the eruption of the hill Vesuvius, which in Titus his time
flamed out 3 days and nights together. Where the older Pliny lost his life in
Titus to the great grief of all good men dyed shortly after, the Provinces
grieving as if they had lost a Father. It was thought that Domitian poisoned
him, he lived 39 years, 5 months and 25 days. 4052. A. C. 82.


Flavius Domitianus making more have then good speed to be Emperor, caused his
brother to be stretched out for dead, before the breath was out of his body. In
the beginning of his Government, he gave himself to catching and killing of
gnats and flies, as if he had wanted employment: so that one asking if Caesar
had any company with him, it was answered by Vibius Crispus, not so much as a
fly. He repudiated his wife, and then received her again. There was in him a
strange medly Caecilius Rufinus out of the Senate because he delighted in
dancing. He suffered not whores to inherit: he punished informers, saying; that
not to punish such, were to encourage them. He was at first liberal and
abhorred baseness: he was so skillful in arching, that ^e could shoot his
arrows between ones fingers stretched out, and not hurt them. He was careful
in repairing of decayed Liberaries, and supplying of them with coppies from
Alexandria and elsewhere. But he was of a cruel and fierce nature, given to
lust also and wantonness, which he showed in his younger

Astrologers had foretold Domitian, that he should be murdered; which made him
fierce, and suspicious of almost every man. He never loved any man but in show,
and his pride was such, that with Calig^la he assumed the title of Lord and
God. His hatred to the Jews, made him rage also against Christians, for under
him was the second persecution, in which John the Evangelist was banished to
the Isle Pathmos where he wrote his Revelation: understanding that one of the
seed of David should be universal King, he caused all of that seed to be
sought out and killed. He either banished, or disgraced, or murdered the prime
men of the Senate. He slew his nearest kinsmen, upon pretense that they favored
Christianity. Under him Clemens, lost his life; immediately followed thundering
for 8 months, so often, that he cried out, Let it now strike, whom it will. The
Capitol with the tops of some other buildings, and his own chamber were
thunderstruck. His treasury being exhausted, he gave himself to rapine and
ex^ortion. He intended once to have disbanded diverse regiments and garrisons,
to lessen his charges, but fearing the incursion of barbarous nations, he
changed his mind, resolving to Titus his daughter Iulia. L. Antonius who had
the charge of High Germany, being provoked by his wicked life, and some
distasteful language, revolted; but Domitian having overthrown him by Norbanus
Appius, and L. Maximus, grew more insolent and cruel then ever. It Is thought
that he poisoned that excellent man Julius Agricola, father in law to Tacitus
the historian; though he seemed to be sorry Agricola subdued the Britains, and
by his fleet was the first that discovered it to be an Island. He also subdued
the Orcades: for which good services he was highly extolled by the people, and
Domitius his false conquests, and real triumph were cried down; for though his
armies were beat in Maesia, Dacia, Germany, and Pannonia, yet he bragged that
he had subdued his enemies, and hired diverse multitudes, which gave out they
were his captives, to the end he might obtain a triumph: this love of the
people hastened Agricola's death.

Domitian being hated of all men, was murdered by Parthenius his chamberlain,
Stephen his Steward, and Domitia his wife, who loved Paris the Stage Player
4067.
better then her husband: these hired some freed men, who with many wounds
Domitia found in his closet a list of diverse whom Domitian meant to murder,
among which she found her own name; but before he was killed, Nerva's friends
had got his consent to accept of the Empire, lest the soldiers should mutiny:
he reigned 15 years, and lived 45. The Senate ordered that his body should not
be carried in a bed or hearse, but in a common beer, and that his name should
be every where razed. His death was foretold by Proculus in Germany: and the
same hour that Domitian was killed at Rome, Apollonius (at Ephesus) got up on
a high stone, and cried out, saying; Well done Stephen, kill the murderer. Not
long before his death, a Crow upon the Capitol spoke in Greek; all shall be
well. In Domitian's time, the Picts out of Scythia settled themselves in
Dionysius the Areopagite preached the Gospel to the Parisians. Then did the
Ebionites or Pythagorian Christians, (commanding abstinence from all flesh, and
confounding Law with Gospel,) begin to broach their heresies, as also the
Nicolaitans urging community of wives. These Tertullian calls the Patriarchs of
heretics.

The Second Book OF THE SECOND PART, NERVA the ROMAN EMPEROR, till the Reign of
CONSTANTINE alone, containing 233 Years.
CHAP. I.
1. Of the Roman affairs under Nerva, Trajan and Adrian. 2. Of the affairs of
Jews, and Christians during that time.

COcc^jus Nerva a good but a short-lived Prince, whose justice was such in
public, that he was not afraid to spend his life in 4067. A. C. 100.
private: he repealed the unjust acts of Domitian calling home the exiled, and
restoring every man to his own again. Some think he was born in Narnia a City
of Umbria; some in Crete. Parthenius that Domitian was dead. He melted all the
golden and silver Images of Domitian, and converted them to money. He suffered
no man to be accused or troubled for religion. In Domitians time it was lawful
for any man to accuse another; which made Fronto say, that it was ill living
under that Prince where nothing was lawful, but worse under him where all
things were lawful. By virtue of Nerva's edict. John the Evangelist returns to
his Episcopal charge at Ephesus. Where he publishes his Revelation and
Gospel against Cerinthus who denied Christ's Divinity: and his three Epistles
also, though some have questioned the two last, but injuriously. In his
Epistles, by the Antichrists Simon Magus and Menander, (being Samaritans and
affectors of Divine honor) with the Nicolaitans, Cerinthians, and Ebionites.
Nerva also took off many public sines, he provided carefully for the poor,
that there might be no beggars in Italy, he was so loath to burden his people
with taxes, that he would rather make use of his own revenews. Though
Calphurnius Crassus for his treason in laboring to draw the armies from Caesar
deserved death, yet he only banished him to Tarentum.

The soldiers (but against Nerva's will) killed Petronius, Steven and
Parthenius the murderers of Domitian; they first cut off Petronius his
genitals, and flung them Casperius Aelianus bought his own pardon for a great
sum, and out of his insolency caused Nerva to thank the soldiers publicly,
for killing the three traitors, perceiv^ng how needful a stout, and strong
bodyed man was to rule; he neglecting his own kindred publicly adopted Trajan
a Spaniard to be his heir and successor, preferring virtue to kindred or
country: therefore Trajan is first made Caesar, then Emperor, with him he
lived 3 months. He dyed of a Fever the 65 year of his life, having reigned one
year and 4 months. His death was accompanied with an Eclipse of the Sun. Cor.
Tacitus commended him in a Funeral oration.

M. Vlpius Trajarus being at Colen received the Ensigns of the Empire sent
4069.
him from Rome. He was a man endowed with piety, wisdom, valor, and all other
princely virtues; and a great lover of learned men. He delivered his sword to
the Captain of the Guard, willing him to use it for him, if he did well, but
against him if otherwise. He told the Senate one day that he had a command sent
him from Jupiter to maintain the ancient religions of Rome, which were now
weakened by the increasing of Christianity, for many of their Temples lay
desolate, and few sacrifices were offered. Therefore now began a new
persecution against Christians. Simeon the son of Cleophas our Saviors
kinsman, and Bishop of Jerusalem, was there crucified being 120 years old.
Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, at Rome was flung to the wild Beasts. Clemens
Bishop of Rome, whom Paul mentions in 4079.
his Epistle to the Philippians, was beheaded; though some think he suffered
before this time. Trajan did not directly persecute the Christians for their
Religion, but because they were accused for Magicians in that they wrought so
many miracles. 2. Because they had their meetings and conventicles, against
which severe laws were made. 3. Because they had so many jars and contentions
amongst themselves, by which they might occasion commotions in the City; and
indeed these jars were caused by the heretics. Yet Pliny the younger
Proconsul then of Bithynia Trajan, writes that he found no fault in Christians,
but only that they met to sing hymns to Christ before day, whom they
worshipped for their God. And that they bound themselves by Sacraments not to
steal, or commit adultery, or any such wickedness. Therefore Trajan wrote
back, that such as were accused should be spared if they would worship the
Roman Gods. By which the heat of persecution was abated. About this time dyed
John the Apostle being nigh 100 years of age.

Trajan had 5 years war with Decibalus King of Dacia, which now is Transylvania
and Nalachia. This war began in Domitians time, at last Trajan subdued the
Daci, but with great loss, for there wanted linen to bind up the wounds of
Trajan was fain to tear his own robes. Decibalus being killed, the country
beyond the Rhene was made a Province. In his time Arabia Petraea was taken. At
Rome Trajan exhibited sports or spectacles, wherein 10000 wild beasts were
slain, and as many gladiators did fight. He made war upon Armenia and Parthia,
because the Armenian held his crown of the Parthian, and not of him. He
recovered Armenia, and killed Pharnaces their King. Diverse kings did homage to
him. He subdued a great part of Persia, with Babylon, Seleucia, Edessa and
Ctesiphon. He made Assyria, Armenia, and Mesopotamia Provinces. He built a
Fleet in the red Sea, to go for Judaea; therefore 4081.
the Senate gave him the title of Optimus: and appointed him as many triumphs as
Trajan was punished at Antioch with an Earthquake, for murdering of Ignatius
bishop thereof, multitudes of people were destroyed there. The city being then
full, because of the Emperors abode there. Trajan having escaped out of a
window, was so affrighted, that for a great while, he durst not lie within
doors.

The next spring Trajan renews the Parthian war, and that he might encourage
his soldiers, he went on foot before them. But as he was preparing for his
voyage many places fell off from him; diverse of his Garrisons destroyed.
Against these rebels Lucius Quietus, and Maximus, are sent. Maximus is killed.
Lucius recovers Nisibis and Edessa. Seleucia is taken by his Deputies, and
burned. Agarens his Army was forced to give off, being beaten with thunder,
lightning, and whirlewindes. He was infested with swarms of flies, that he
could not keep them off from his meat and drink. Shortly after this he fell
sick, being poisoned, and dyed 4088.
in Cilicia the 64 year of his age, having reigned 19 years 6 months and 15
days. After whose death, the Parthians returned to their own Government. He
erected many stately buildings at Rome, setting his name every where, for which
cause he was in scoff^ called Wall-flower.

About the 18 year of Trajan, the Jews began again to rebel: in Cyrene they
murder Greeks and Romans promiscuously: the like they did in Egypt and
Alexandria. In Cyprus they slew about 240000. they cut many by the middle, and
many they flung to wild beasts, and such was their madness, that they eat
man's flesh. But they were shortly after subdued by Lucius and Turban: and it
was made death for a Jew to enter Cyprus. So barbarous were these Jews, that
they girded themselves with the guts yet bleeding of those they slew, and
clothed themselves with their skins. The ashes of Trajans body were translated
from that town of Cilicia where he dyed, called Silinus, and from him
Trajanopolis, and brought to Rome with great solemnity, where he was buried
alone, being against the laws of the 12 Tables for any to be buried in the
City. His ashes were buried Trajan now stands S. Peter in brass richly gilt,
by Sixtus Quintus then bishop of Rome. Trajan after his death was defiled; and
called Dacicus from his victories over the Daci, which were engraven on his
pillar. The Senate used to salute every Emperor newly made with these words:
Happier then Augustus, better then Trajan.

P. Aelius Adrianus, the son of Adrian the Senator, who was cousin german to
4088. A. C. 118.
Trajan, was by him adopted, or at least given out so by Plotina Trajans wife,
and was now Governor of Syria, who for his own worth and neernesse to Trajan,
was Julius Severus out of Britain into Syria to chastise the turbulent Jews,
whose Captain Bencochad, that is, the son of the Star (alluding to that
Prophecy, A Star shall arise out of Jacob) called himself the Messiah, to make
his power the greater. He held in Judaea for some years 50 castles, 980
Villages, and fortified the town Bethoron, whence he sallied out diverse times
upon the Romans. But Adrian returning into Syria besiged Bethoron 3 years and a
half: at last took it by storm, and in it Captain Bencochab, but indeed
Bencozba the son of a Lie, as the Hadrian rebuilt Jerusalem, and called it
Aelia by his name, in which he permitted Christians to dwell, but not the Jews;
yea he made it death for any ^ew, either to go near it, or to look on it: only
such as paid a great sum of money, were permitted to go thither and bewail
it. The Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus was now built, where Salomons Temple
stood. Therefore the town was now called Aeliaa Capitolina. The Jews also were
forbid to circumcise themselves: all their strong Forts were oaerthrown.

Adrian being confirmed in the Empire, he made away those whose greatness he
suspected, chiefly Celsus, Nigrinus, Palm, and Lucius, being four eminent
Consular men. Having quieted all in the East, returns to Rome, and remits many
debts due to the Exchequer, and withal the sum of money which was used to be
presented to the Victor called aurum coronarium, in lieu of the golden
coronets, which of old they wont to give him. Psamatosseris whom Trajan had
made king of Parthia was slighted by them, and so by Hadrian was made king of
the next bordering countries. He was very courteous, affable, and familiar with
his friends, chiefly when they were sick. He still kept the soldiers in
exercise, ever in time of peace, and used to feed with them on cheese, lard,
and pusca; which was a drink made of vinegar and water. In this he imitated
Scipio Aemilianus, Metellus, and Trajan. Being more desirous of peace then war,
and finding the Britains still molested by the Scots and Picts, he built a wall
80 miles long, to keep them out. He killed his crabbed wife, for saying she
had taken a course, that he should never have any children to the destruction
of mankind. He killed also Apollodorus an Architect for finding fault with his
errors in building. He was of a various yetcunning and dissembling nature. He
seldom kept his promise. He was still inquisitive of men's secrets, he was also
lasciviously given, but quick witted, and ready at answers. He had skill almost
in all Arts; and had a rare memory, and a strong body; for he used to go about
the Provinces on foot, and to outwalk his followers. He reduced all
Manufactures into Companies or Corporations. He could not endure that any
should profess an Art, wherein he was not exquisite, and therefore would hire
some for money to give off their profession. He would go bare headed in the
coldest weather. He loved his horse Borysthenes so well, that he erected a
monument for him, with an Epitaph. He was affable to the meanest. He was
careful of the poor, and would not suffer Masters either to kill, or sell
their slaves to Fencers nor Panders. He advanced what Aristides the
Philosopher, and Quadratus the Bishop, both Athenians, defended by their
apologies: whereby his rigor was somewhat tempered. He had adopted Aelius whom
he called Caesar before he was Emperor, but he died; therefore he made Aurelius
Antonius his successor* called afterward Pius for rescuing diverse Senators from
the fury of Adrian, who killed Servianus his sisters husband, and his nephew
Fuscus for finding fault with his adopting of Antonius. When Servianus was to
dye, he prayed that Adrian might wish for death, and not obtain it; which fell
out to be so, for he was tortured with a lingering disease, that he wished his
friends to kill him, and offered diverse times to kill himself, had he 4104.
Many Physicians had killed the King: His bones were laid up in that great
building erected by him, and called Moles Adriani; now the castle of S. Angelo.
He lived 72 years, and reigned 21 and 11 months. Similis the captain of his
guard, having got leave to spend the remainder of his life privately in the
country, lived there 7 years, after he had resigned his place; and caused this
Epitaph to be engraven on his tomb: Here lies Similis who spent many years
but lived only seven.

In Adrians time lived the heretic Carpocrates, author of the Adamites and
Gnostics, Eustachium called Placidus before his baptism, martyred; he had done
good service under Vespasian against the Jews, and under Trajan against the
Daci. He was first cast to the Lions, but they spared him, at last he was
burned in a hot brazen Bull. In his time was Nicomedia overthrown with an
Earthquake, so were Nicopolis, Nicaea, and Caesarea. He called the city
Uscuduma in Mysia, from his own name Adrianopolis. To vex the Jews he set over
one of the gates of Aelia the picture of a Hog; a creature hated by them, and
by which he would represent their hoggish qualities; then it was as some think
that the candidates of the Empire, began to be called Caesar's; though some were
called so before. Aquila of Pontus was converted to Christianity; but being
reproved for spending too much time in Astrology: he circumcised himself, and
became a Jew, and translated the Bible in Greek, but corruptly.

CHAP. II.
1. The Roman affairs under Antoninus Pius, Antoninus Philosophus, and Comdus.
2. The affairs of the Christians, and of foreign Nations at that time.

ANtonius was surnamed Pius by the Senate, for his acts of piety in building of
4109. A. C. 139.
Temples, advancing of Priests, honoring of learning, assigning large Salaries
throughout the Provinces to Philosophers and Rhetoricians; in sparing and
pardoning all criminals in the beginning of his reign, saying; that he ought
not to begin his reign with blood; in preserving Adrian from killing of
himself, and in maintaining the Empire in peace and plenty all his life. He
was a just, mild and learned Prince, who as he advanced men of parts, so he
hated idle drones, and discountenanced needless Artists by abridging them of
their maintenance. He was indeed another Numa Pompilius: Only out of the common
error of these times, he did not much favor the Christians. Yet he was content
to tolerate them, being pacified by the apologies of Justin Martyr and others.
He honored the Senate, and they him. He would not give way that all the Acts
of Adrian should be repealed: there was but one Senator in all his time
banished, namely Atilius Trajanus who for affecting to be King was proscribed
by the Senate. He forbad burying of the dead within cities. His abode was most
in the city, for the greater ease of Ambassadors: he seldom made progresses,
showing how chargeable

Antoninus his father Aurelius was a Transalpin Gaul. Arrius Antoninus his
Grandfather by the mother had been twice Consul. He was comely in his
personage, but more in his conditions. So great was his authority that the
Indians, Bactrians, and Hircanians made him Judge of their differences. He
appeased all sedition^, not with cruelty but gravity: he qui^ted the Jews,
Britains, Mores, Daci and Germans. He placed a King over the Lazi a people in
Scythia. He kept off by his bare letters the Parthian King from Armenia. In no
Princes time was there less blood shed then in his, whose saying was the same
with that of Scipio's: I had rather save one subject, then kill 10000 enemies.
In times of dearth he relived Omulus his house, he inquired whence he had his
marble pillars. Omulus answered, that in another man's house he should be both
deaf and dumb; with which answer he was well pleased. He rebuilt diverse towns
overthrown with Earthquakes.

In his time Pope Sixtus suffered Martyrdom, not by any edict from the Prince,
but by the malice of the Senate against Christianity. Then sprung up Valentinus
the heretic, with his spawn of Cani^es, Sethites, and Ophites, or
Snakeworshippers. As also Cerdon and his scholar Marcion whom Polycarpus called
the devils first begotten son: and Apelles who gave Christ a sideriall or
aeriall body. Telesphorus with some others were martyred. So was his successor
Pope Higinius. Antoninus dyed the 70 year of his life, and 23 of his Empire. In
his time was seen in Arabia a mained Serpent, which eat up his own tail; 4
Lions so tame that they suffered themselves to be taken; and barley grew upon
some trees.

Marcus Antoninus Philosophus being adopted by Pius and approved by the Senate,
succeeded Emperor, to whom he joins his brother Lucius Verus as his Colleague;
so now two Emperors reign together. Marcus was every way an excellent Prince,
both for arms, and learning; who used to frequent the Philosophy Schools,
after he was Emperor: but Lucius was given to delights and luxury; which Marcus
by his goodness covered as much as he could; and lest his vices should be
Vologesus, who had defeated the Roman Army, and molested Syria; but Lucius at
Antioch and Daphne, gave him self over wholely to his pleasures, and committed
the care of the war to his Deputies, among which Avidius Cassius defeated
Vologesus, took Seleucia upon Hydaspes with 400000 men, and burned the town: he
took also Ctesiphon, and demolished Vologesus his houses.

The Parthian war being ended, and Armenia settled, Lucius after 5 years
returns to Rome, where with his brother he was carried in triumph. He brought
from Parthia not only Mimicks, Stage Players, Fiddlers, and Jugglers great
store; Apollo's Temple, when the chest was opened such a pestiferous vapor
burst forth, as multitudes were infected by it. At Rome they died so fast, that
the dead were carried out by cart-loades. After this Marcus and Lucius go
against the Germans; who had all conspired against the Roman Empire; but when
they came to Aquileja, Ambassadors met them from all parts petitioning, that
they might be pardoned for their defection. Lucius would have gone back, but
Marcus would not, fearing that this repentance of the Barbarians was
counterfeit, only to keep off the Roman Armies from their countries: so having
passed 4140. A. C. 170.
the Alps, and fortified Italy, ^ey quieted Pannonia. Lucius longing to be at
Rome again returns, but in the way being taken with an Apoplexy speechless,
dyed the third day, having reigned with Marcus 11. years, some think he was
poisoned by Faustina, the wife of Marcus.

Marcus undertakes alone the war against the Marcomanni or Moravians with their
confederates, and because the plague had destroyed many, therefore as in the
Punic war, so now use is made of slaves, gladiators, and robbers; and that he
Polycarpus, Pius, and Anicetus, and diverse other martyrs, partly by the second
apology of Justin, partly by plagues, famine, earthquakes, rebellion, and
conspirations, and partly by this strange defeat of the Barbarians, at the
prayers of the Christian Legion, which ever after was called The thundering
Legion.

Whilst Marcus was making Provinces of Marcomannia and Sarmat^a, Avidius
Cassius giving out that Marcus Antoninus was dead, rebelled in the East,
drawing all within Mount Taurus to his faction: Wherefore the Emperor makes an
expedition into the East, the soldiers finding he was alive, fell upon Cassius
and his son, and killed them both, his head was brought to Antoninus, but he no
ways rejoicing at the sight, commanded it to be buried. He pardoned Antioch,
and the other cities that adhered to him: he was highly beloved of all the East
parts. Egypt did honor him for his Philosophy. His wife Faustina infamous for
adultery, dyed suddenly near the hill Taurus, whom the Emperor commended and
concealed her faults, for by her means he got the Empire; therefore being
wished by some to put her away for her adulteries, answered: If I devorce my
wife, I should restore her dowry. At Athens he gave annual stipends to
professors of all sciences, at Rome he gav^ gowns to the soldiers, saying
those cities flourished most where Philosophers were rulers, or rulers
Philosophers. He was much addicted to Stoicall Philosophy, he was very moderate
both in rewards and punishments. He was never without good Lawyers about him;
he desired to hear what the people said of him, that he might amend what was
amiss. He hated cruelty, therefore would not suffer the gladiators to fight
with sharp swords. He thought it more reasonable that he should follow the
advice of his friends being many, then that they should follow his being but
one. He suffered not men and women to bath together* nor did he permit riding
or coaching within cities, he was still present at their Parliaments,

The Sarmatians, Marcomans and their neighbors rebelled again; so that Marcus
was fain to be there in person. After three years war he subdued them, shortly
4151. A. C. 181.
after he fell sick, and dyed the 19 year of his Empire, of his life the 58. to
the great grief of all good men, a happy Emperor, had he been childlesse, for
his son Commodus was a wicked Prince. When Marcus was asked to whom he would
recommend his son, answered: if he be good to God and you. He was offended when
his friends weeped for him in his sickness, wishing them rather to weep for
the public ca^amities. In his time Lucius king of the Britains was converted
to Christianity, by those whom Pope Eleutherius sent thither to preach. Lucian
the great enemy of Christianity, was then torn by dogs. Then Montanus the
heretic with his Maximilla and Priscilla, began to divulge their false
prophesies, these were the authors of the Cataphrygian heretics, which lived
about Phrygia. Montanus called himself the Paraclet that was promised. Tatianus
then lived; he was ^ather of the Encratites, that is continent; for they
abhorred marriage and wine, hence they are called Aquarii and Hydro-parasta^ae,
with diverse other heretics. Then was Pope Aniceius martyred and Soter his
successor, with many other

Commodus succeeded, who by reason of his wicked conditions and his mothers
looseness, was thought to be the son of a Sword-player, rather then of
Verus, 4151. A. C. 181.
such an excellent Father, and this suspicion grew the rather, because he
delighted much in sword-playing, even openly upon the Theater, and in the
Amphitheaters he used to fight with wild Beasts. He murdered many of the
Senators, and such as excelled in virtue and nobility; he showed his cruelty at
12 years of age in causing the man that was washing him in the warm bath to be
flung into the fiery furnace, because the water in which he washed was hotter
then ordinarily. He gave himself to all kind of luxury and uncleanness. He
set none but the worst men over the Provinces. He became so hateful, that his
own sister Lucilla conspired his Quadratus, and Tarentenus captain of the
guard^; Claudius Pompejanus who was employed to kill him, coming into his
chamber drew his sword, saying, this sword the Senate sends you. But before he
could do any thing, he with the rest of the conspirators were laid hold on
and killed. Lucilla was first banished, then executed. So was Crispina Augusta,
and the whole family of the Quintilians with many more.

After this Commodus was wary into what company he came, he would suffer none
to speak to him, but by Perennius captain of the Guard, who knowing the length
of his Masters foot, counseled him to take his pleasures, and he would look
to the managing of affairs. In his time Vulpius Marcellus overthrew those
Adrians wall. The plague was so hot at Rome that there dyed oftentimes 2000 a
day. Commodus in the interim with 300 Concubins, and 300 Sodomites in the
Palace gave himself to feasting and riotousnesse. But Perennius having got the
power into his hands, made his sons Generals over the Illyrian armies, and
got them with bribes to alienate the soldiers from the Emperor, whom he meant
himself to murder. This plot was detected by one in the habit of a
Philosopher; who with a staff in his hand, and a powch hanging from his
shoulder, being half naked, runs to Commodus as he was sitting in the Theater,
and tells him it was not a fit time for him to solace himself with public
shows, when Perennius his naked sword was hanging over him. Perennius
presently caused the man to be apprehended, and burned for a mad dangerous
fellow, but afterward money was brought to Commodus having the image of
Perennius. Hereupon command was privately given to cut off Perennius and his
son, which was done accordingly. But Cleander a worse favorite succeeded. He
of a servant became the Captain of the Guard, and High Chamberlain to Commodus,
who did what he could to aleniate both the soldiers and people from the
Emperor, he exposed all places of honor and trust to sale. He both called home
the banished, and preferred them to great places. He killed Byrrus who had
married Commodus his sister, because he complained to his brother that Cleander
affected the Empire* He murdered also many others, that disliked his ways.
Commodus in the mean while gave himself to

One time whilst Commodus in the Suburbs was sporting and delighting himself,
the people in a tumultuous way came with a petition against Cleander, for
buying up all the corn, which occasioned both the plague and famine at Rome,
Cleander commanded the guard to fall upon them, who killed and wounded many of
the unarmed multitude driving them within the city gates, the people within
fall on the soldiers, and what with stones from the tops of the houses, what
by other means, multitudes of them were killed, the city being all in an
uproar, Fadilla the Emperors eldest sister came weeping, and tearing her hair
and garments to the Emperor, telling him that he and his Empire would be
suddenly ruined if Cleander and his complic^s were not punished; the Emperor
having understood the truth of things, which had been concealed from him till
now, sent presently for Cleander, whose head being cut off, he caused to be set
on a high pole, and showed to the people, at sight of which they were appeased,
and the soldiers that fought for him, affrighted. Such was the peoples hatred
against Cleander, that they murdered all his friends and children with their
Cleander begot those children of Commodus his concubins. Then the Emperor
though fearful of plots returns to the city.

In his time many monsters were born, the Temple of Peace into which many rich
men had sent their wealth for security, was burned to the ground; this was held
a sad presage of wars and miseries, which fell out true; for many stately
edifices in the city were consumed with fire; so was the Temple of Vesta, the
Palladium that was brought from Troy and kept hid all this while, was now seen
whilst the Vestall Nuns did rescue it from the flames, and carried it
publicly to the Emperors Court. He no ways troubled with these disasters runs
on in Commodus be called Hercules Amazonius Exsuperans; and presented himself
to the people in the Lions skin, and carrying Hercules his club. He changed the
names of the months, and called them by his own names and titles. He caused his
statues to be set up, which after his death the people overthrew, and set up
the statue of liberty. He fought openly in the Amphitheaters with wild Beasts,
which he caused to be brought thither from all parts: he killed 100 lions, so
skillful he was in arching that he never missed. He showed himself one time
naked among the gladiators, sometimes he would show himself in women's
apparel; he caused all the criples about the City to be assembled in one
place, and clothing them like Giants representing serpents feet; he played the
Jupiter, shooting at them his arrows. He had set down in a book the names of
those he meant to murder, among which was Marcia his concubine, for giving of
him good counsel; Laetus Captain of the Guard, with many other rich men, whose
wealth he meant to bestow upon his soldiers and gladiators, but the book being
found Marcia poisons him; and le^t it might fail, Narcissus strangled him; the
Senate upon the report of his death, proclaims him an enemy to God and men,
razeth hisname, and throws down his Statues.

The Capitol in his time was set on fire by thunder, in which the Bibloethec
with the records, and other writings were burned. Then it was that Pantenny
preached Christ to the Indians, and there found S. Matthews Gospel brought
Bartholomew the Apostle. Victor Bishop of Rome excommunicates the Eastern
Churches for observing Easter with Polycarpus on the 14 day of the Moon; which
rashness is reproved by Irenaeus Bishop of Lions. Theodotion sets out a new
Greek translation of the Bible, which is the third. The Christians lived
quietly all his time, for Martia whom he so loved did much favor them. He
reigned 12 years and 9 months, he lived 31 years and 4 months. In his time,
they found out a trick at Rome, to kill men, by shooting at them poisoned
needles out of secret places.

CHAP. III.
The affairs of Rome under Pertinax, Didius, and Severus. 2. Severus his
actions in the East, and in Britain. 3. The Christian affairs during that time.

COmmodus being dead, it was divulged abroad by Martia, Laetus, and Electus who
was High Chamberlain, that the Prince dyed of an Apoplexy, 4164. A. C. 194.
to which he was subject in his drunkenness. And they resolve to fix the
Publius Helvius Pertinax who had been Consul and Governor of Maesia, Dacia,
and Syria. He was an Italian born, a brave Commander, and one of those to whom
Marcus committed the care of his son Commodus. In the night time Laetus,
Electus, and some others brought news to Pertinax* being in his bed, of the
death of Commodus, and that he was fittest in respect of his age, valor and
good services to the State; he at first feared they came to mock, and then to
murder him; but finding their sincerity, accepts their counsel and advice,
Laetus and Electus prepare the Army to receive Pertinax, who no sooner came,
but he was with joyful acclamations saluted Emperor and Augustus by the people
first, then by the soldiers: and so having taken the Oath of allegiance, they
follow the Emperor Pertinax went to the Senate; but would not have the fire or
other ensigns of Principality carried before him, till he obtained the Senats
approbation, which he doubted, being of mean parentage in comparison of the
former Emperors: but the whole Senate unaminously salutes him Emperor, which
honor he desired to avoid, beseeching the Fathers that they would confer it on
Glabrio the noblest of all the Patricii. But Glabrio refused it, so that
Pertinax was forced to sit down in the chair of state, who having made a
speech, and offered sacrifice went home.

At the bruit of Pertinax his being Emperor, all good men rejoiced, the
barbarous Nations sent Ambassadors to congratulate. The people found that he
would Commodus with his boys and Concubines, and the money he raised by the
sale (which was great) he bestowed on the soldiers for a donative. He lessened
the Emperors charges, cutting off superfluous expenses. He showed himself mild
and affable to all; he would not have the Senate call his son Caesar till he
deserved it. But he was not so bountiful as affable. The soldiers repine at
his strictness, being accustomed to rapine, oppression; and lust. Wherefore
they resolve to make him away; and choose another: Therefore they suddenly rush
into the Palace; Jupiter the revenger, and covering his face with his robe
fell down dead, having received many wounds. Some think that Laetus who made
him Emperor gave him his deaths wound. He lived 67 years, and reigned almost 3
months: the Senate deified him; and buried him honorably.

Didius Iulianus nobly born, and very rich, but ambitious, bought the Empire
which the soldiers proffered to sell to him that gave most. Flavius Sulpitianus
Father Pertinax offered a large sum for it, which they refused, because of his
affinity with Pertinax. Therefore Julian by them is chosen, who promises to
set up again all the statues of Commodus which were cast down, and to give them
the same privileges they had under him: wherefore they gave him the name of
Commodus, they conveyed him to his Court, through the streets, but covered
their heads with their targets, because of the stones flung on them from the
tops of the houses; the people, in stead of acclamations, saluted him and them
with imprecations, for buying and selling the Empire. Didius gave himself
wholly to his pleasures and riotousnesse; he failed also in his promises to
the soldiers, for he could not pay the promised sum, out of the treasure which
was exhausted by Commodus, nor out of his own Estate, which came short of what
he bragged; therefore the soldiers began to dislike him: the people did
continually rail at him; and sends to Niger then Consul and Governor of Syria,
that he would accept the Empire. He being in good hope to obtain what was
proferred (seeing that Didius was hated both by the people and soldiers)
assembles the Syrian Army, which loved him well, because his government was
gentle and pleasant, in that he gave Augustus, puts on his Imperial robes, and
carrying the fire before, they convey him to the Temple at Antioch.
Ambassadors from all the East in parts repair thither to congratulate,
proffering their assistance; but Niger thinking himself secure, gave himself to
his delights, and neglected the opportunity of repairing to Rome, wherefore
Severus an African, a stout and crafty man, being Governor of Pannonia, and
perceiving in what condition the Empire was in, and being encouraged by his
dream, wherein he thought that the horse which carried Pertinax through the via
sacra, flung him down, and sub mitted his back to Severus; he I say by fair
promises and bribes, obtains Pertinax, by whose name he would be called, and
exhorts them to make have with him to Rome, the Imperial Seat, that they may
first seize on it.

The armies having saluted Severus Emperor; he loses no time, but with all
4164. A. C. 184.
speed, enters Italy, before any there knew his intention. All the Cities
living in long peace, and being affrighted at the greatness of his armies,
opened their gates, and proclaimed him Emperor, Julian hearing of Severus his
approach, raises money for the soldiers, which they took from him as a debt,
not as a gift: and seeing that he was hated by the people, slighted by the
soldiers, and despised by the Senate, he wrote letters to Severus, proffering
to make him his Colleague Severus, which they did, and withal gave charge to a
Tribune to put him to death, which he had bought with so much money. Didus
being slain, Severus sends for the Pretorian Guard which Didus lived 60 years,
and reigned 66 days.
murdered Pertinax, wishing them to leave their Arms behind, and to come only
with bays in a triumphing manner to rejoice with him; they did accordingly,
suspecting nothing; but upon the Emperors command, they were encompassed round
by the Army, stripped naked, and chekt for their murdering of Pertinax, and
banished 100 miles from the City. He might have killed them all, but would not
begin his reign with blood.

Severus coming to Rome was received by the Senate and people, with joyful
acclamations. He distributes large gifts among the people and soldiers, makes
large promises of his good Government, but some of the old Senators suspected
the Fox. Who having stayed a while in the City, prepares to march into the East
against Niger, who was sporting himself at Antioch. Great preparations are
made both by Sea and Land. But fearing lest Albinus then Governor of the
Britains, who was a Patrician and Commander of warlike Nations not far from
Italy, might in his absence invade the Empire, thought it his best way to
invite him by his letters, to share with him in the Government, and to commit
the care of the City to him; which Albinus willingly accepts. Thus Severus
having made Niger, with whom he had diverse battles, in the Hellespont, at
Cizycus an Island in Propontis, at Nicomedia in Bythinia upon Pontus over
against Thracia, and in Cilicia, at last he quite defeated him; and caused his
head to be carried about the Camp on a pole. He banished his wife and children,
and at last murdered them. So he did kill those Senators and men of note that
adhered to Niger. He beat down the walls of Byzantium, and turned it to a
village, he punished Antioch, Palestina, Arabia, the Parthians, and all the
other places which sided with Niger. After this, returning to Rome, he made
war upon Albinus, who in the first conflict got the better of Severus: who
having recruited, his Forces being now 50000 strong, at Lions encounters again
with Albinus; whom after a long and doubtful skirmish, he at last defeated:
but he was fain to tear his robes, and run furiously upon his soldiers with
his naked sword, as they were flying away, or else he had lost the day. Albinus
is brought to him sorely wounded, whose head he caused to be cut off, and sent
to Rome with letters, expostulating with the Senate for their affection to his
enemy: many of his favorers both in Spain and France he put to death, and
enriched his coffers with their confiscated estates. He murdered without any
indictment 43 of the Nobility: he cast Narcissus to the Lions for strangling of
Commodus, whom in hatred of the Senate, he styled God: he calls himself the son
of Marcus, and brother of Commodus, and called his son Bassianus by the name of
Antoninus. He extinguished Albinus his whole race.

Whilst Severus was busy in these civil wars, the Parthians seized upon
Mesopotamia, against them he sends a great Army, takes Seleucia and Babylon;
and Ctesiphon also, where the Parthian Kings used to wi^, and in it 100000 men,
but for want of provision he was fain to quit this place again. He laid siege
also to Atra a strong and well walled City in Mesopotamia standing on a high
hill; but by reason the place was so strong, the Inhabitants so resolute, the
air so intemperate, and the sickness in the Army so great, he was forced to
raise the siege. In Laetus for being too well beloved of the soldiers, as also
Julius Crispus for reciting some verses in Virgil, which he thought reflected
on him: Many other brave men he put to death on frivolous pretenses. Plautianus
was his great favorite, without whom he acted not any thing; this man being
raised from nothing to that greatness, that he ruled all, even the Emperor
himself; made it death for any man to look on him whilst he passed through the
streets. People were commanded to swear by his fortune. Severus honored his
daughter Plautilla with the marriage of his own son Antoninus; more wealth was
bestowed on the Bride, then might suffice 50 queens: his ambition was such,
that he aimed to be Emperor, therefore imployes one Saturninus a Tribune, to
murder him and his son Antoninus in their chambers; but Saturninus discovered
the Plot to Severus. Plautianus is sent for, hoping the Princes had been
dispatched, but found them both alive, who having accused and reproved him,
caused him instantly to be slain. Plautilla is banished with her child, and
afterward both killed by Antoninus, who with his brother Geta, began already to
tyrannise over the people.

Severus his Government was so rigid and cruel, that he was truly called
Severus, and Pertinax. He was a great punisher of thieves and robbers; he flung
to the wild Beasts one Bulas a Captain of the High-way-men. His last expedition
he makes into Britain, where he lost, partly by the unwholesomenesse of the
waters, and partly by the Caledonii about 50000 men. But he at last forced them
to lay down arms: his son riding behind him, had almost killed him, if he had
not Severus is carried in his Litter, being then ill of the Gout; whose
presence made all submit; he caused all the Authors of that sedition to be put
to death, except his son; and sitting in his chair of State bid the soldiers
Buchanan. l. 4 makes this wall 80 miles distant from Hadrians.
take notice, that the head commanded, not the feet. He repaired or enlarged
Hadrians wall, which before was 80. now is 130 miles long. He dyed at York
being 66 years old, in the 18 year of his reign; his two sons being
reconciled, carried his ashes in an alablaster urn to Rome. Thus dyed he, whose
cruelty made Rome wish he had not been born, and whose unworthy successors
made them 4184. A. C. 212.
wish he had not dyed.

In his time lived Theodotus a Tanner at Constantinople, who denied Christ's
Divinity, he rejected the Gospel and Revelation of St. John, wherefore he with
his Disciples were called Alogi, that is, without the Word or reason: there was
another Theodotus about that time, affirming Christ to be inferior to
Melchisedec; then sprung up the Melchisedecian heretics, affirming Melchisedec
to be an angel. Then lived the Praxeani or Patropassiani, so called from
Praxeas the Author, who affirmed the Father to have suffered on the Cross. The
Christians were falsely accused for worshipping an Asses head; and for being
enemies to Monarchy. Hence Victor was martyred with diverse others: the
Patrician heretics affirmed that Satan was the Author of man's Body. Lenides
Father of Origin then suffered; young Origin could scarce be kept back from
suffering with his Father, whom by his letters he exhorts to constancy. This is
that Origin who gelded himself and wrote the Hexaplon or Six-fold Exposition of
the Bible distinguished into six columns. The 1. Hebrew in Hebrew letters. The
2. Hebrew in Greek letters, the 3. the Septuagints Interpretation, 4. that of
Aquila, 5. of Symmachus, 6. of Theodotion. Then also suffered for Christ,
Philip Governor of Egypt, Irenaeus Narcissus B. of Jerusalem falsely accused of
adultery, and his 3 accusers strangely by God punished, the one by fire, the
other by a loathsome disease, the third with blindness.

CHAP. IV.
The Roman affairs under Caracalla, Macrinus, Heliogabalus, and Alexander, 2.
The affairs of Christians, Persians, and others during that time.

THe ashes of Severus being brought into the City by his two sons in great
pomp, and interred in great solemnity, he was deified by the Senate, to whom
4184. A. C. 212.
succeeded his two sons Co-Emperors; but Caracalla his eldest son by Martia,
began his reign with the blood of his brother Geta, the son of Iulia, whom he
murdered in his Mothers arms; after the murder he runs into the camp,
persuading the soldiers to protect him, for he had escaped a great danger, his
brother having an intent to kill him; which was false. He likewise slew his
fathers Physicians, for preserving him so long alive: he was called Caracalla
from the barbarian garment he wore. He married his mother in law Iulia, she
animating him thereto, was to give laws, not to receive any. He caused to be
put to death all that favored his brother Geta, 20000 at least, besides
Papinianus captain of the Guard, for saying, that it was easier to commit
paricide, then to excuse it. Because the Alexandrians called him Oedipus, and
his wife Iocaste, he gave the city to the plundering of the soldiers, who
murdered there multitudes of all sorts. He burned Aristotle's books, because he
thought that he had a hand in poisoning his scholar Alexander. He regarded none
but the soldiers, feeding them still with money. When Iulia told him, that he
was too prodigal; he laid his hand on his sword, saying: I shall never lack
money, so long as this is with me. He delighted much in Necromancy and
conjuring; one Commodus, he heard a voice, saying: Go to thy punishment. Under
pretense of making a league with Abgarus King of the Osroeni a people between
Syria and Mesopotamia, he cast him into prison, and seized on his country. The
Armenians fell from him. He would do any servill work with the soldiers, he
slighted the Senate: he coined false money, and offered the sword that killed his
brother to Serapis the Egyptian God, which sword afterward was melted with
lightning. He took great pleasure in fencing, and killing of wild beasts. In
France he caused many officers to be put to death. In Germany he killed many
thousands, and then called himself Germanicus. In Asia he fell upon the
Parthians, pretending that Artabanus had denied to marry his daughter to him
according Macrinus whom he had made captain of the Guard.

The Emperor having received letters from Rome, as he was at his sports, gave
them to Macrinus to read, among these he found one, written by some soothsayers
to the Prince, wishing him to beware of Macrinus, for he aimed at the Empire.
Macrinus knowing in what danger he was, if Bassianus should know of this
letter; hir^s one Martialis to kill him; which he did; the soldiers pursued
this Martialis on horse back as he was flying* and with their arrows shot him
dead. Macrinus hearing that the Emperor was slain, came weeping over the 4188.
A. C. 218.
dead corpse, as if he had known nothing. Serapion of Alexandria foretold that
Macrinus should succeed to Bassianus; this Serapion Antoninus killed after the
lions had spared him. He lived 29 years, and reigned 6 years two months.

In Caracall^'s time the Tertullianists sprung up who taught the traduction of
souls, and that after death they were converted into devils* Origin (called
Adamantinus for his indefatigable pains,) writes diverse books, and visits the Sea Antoninus had sucked the breasts of a Christian, who in his youth promised
much goodness, and was so tender hearted, that he wept, when he heard of any
that were to be flung to wild beasts; but when he was Emperor, God made him a
scourge to the Romans who had shed the innocent blood of many Christians.

Opilius Macrinus an African, as untoward in conditions, as he was in
countenance, was made Emperor by the Syrian Armies, and confirmed by the Senate,
4188. A. C. 218.
not out of any affection to him, but out of hatred to Bassianus, being guilty,
both of paricide, incest, and all kind of wickedness. He made war with the
Parthians, Iulia Augusta for some harsh words she had let fall against him, and
afterward procured her death: as he did of all others who repined at his birth
and Government. For his cruelty he was called Macellinus from macellum a
shambles, for his house was little better. Therefore for his cruelty,
voluptuousness, and parcimony toward the soldiers, he was hated by them. He
used to burn adulterers alive, binding fast their bodies together. He enclosed
two soldiers into two oxen, their heads sticking out, that they might speak
and breath, and so there they remained till they dyed: for a rape committed on
their hostess. He called Diadumenus his son, Antoninus, knowing how grateful
that name was to the soldiers, and made him Caesar, and his colleague in the
Empire. But Mesia Iulia's sister, which was the wife of Severus, had two
daughters Soaemis Concubine of Bassianus, who of her begot Heliogabalus and
Mammaea, the mother of Alexander. Severus begot of her by Varius Marcellus.
This Maesia by bribing the soldiers, got them to fall off from Macrinus to her
son Heliogabalus. Macrinus sent Julian to destroy both the mother and son, but
the soldiers killed Julian, and adhered to Heliogabalus, whereupon a battle
was fought, in which both Macrinus and his son were slain. He used to punish
informers with death, if they failed in their proofs, if not, he rewarded them;
but still with disgrace: he lived 54 years, and reigned 14 months.

Varius Antoninus Heliogabalus was elected Emperor, with no less applause then
4189. A. C. 219.
rejected with indignation. He was called Varius because some think Varius
Marcellus Antoninus from Bassianus, who by Soaemis was said to be his father,
and Heliogabalus, or as it is in ancient coins Elagabalus, from the name of
the Idol, whose Priest he was, either from the Hebrew El-Gebal, the God Gebal,
or from (...) the sun, and the Syriac Gabal, which signifies Bounds or
Confines, because the Sun bounds or confines the year, by his motion in the
Ecliptic. This Idol was a statue of a triangular figure, representing the Sun
whose Priest he was. He loved his mother so well, that he was altogether ruled
by her. He set up the service of his Syrian God upon Mount Palatine, intending
to have him worshipped every where. He exposed all honors to sale. He put
Pomponius Bassus and many other worthy men to death, for prying into his
manners. He married Bassus his Aquila Severa a vestall Virgin, and afterward
married himself to men, as if he had been a woman. He sacrificed men to his
Idol: he fed his dogs with goose livers: his Palace was a mere bawdy house, he
never spent less on a supper, then 30 l. weight of silver. He caused 10
thousand pound weight of Cobwebs from all parts of Rome to be brought to him,
by that showing the greatness of the city. He caused himself to be drawn into
his Court, by 4 great dogs, and never would wag any where without 600 Chariots,
showing that the Persian King never traveled with less then 10000 Camels: he
spent whole days together among roses and sweet ointments: he sent yearly
presents to his flatterers, to wit, vessels full of snakes and scorpions, and
boxes full of flies, calling them tame Bees: he wore no shoes but what were
beset with rich jewels: he used to have tame Lions and Leopards at his table:
he married his Idol of the Sun to the Palladium or Image of Pallas, which he
caused to be brought into his chamber; then divorced them because she was
armed, and made a match between his Idol and Urania, which represented the
Moon; which Idol was consecrated by Dido, and held in much veneration by the
Africans; this Urania had a great dowry conferred on her; and

When Heliogabalus saw that the Senats affection was more set upon Alexander
his cousin German, whom they had made Caesar, then on himself; he adopts him,
but shortly after repenting, endeavored to murder him, because he would not
Sardanapalus, for so they called him; yet for this time they spared him, upon
hopes he would reform (being yet but young) and put away from him his evil
Counselors, but he grew rather worse; and sought to murder Alexander:
wherefore the soldiers fell furiously upon his followers, and parasites, cut
them in pieces, and slew the Tyrant in the privy, where he went to hide
himself; whose body was dragged up and down, and flung at last into the river
being fastened to a great stone. His mother, with whom he used to commit incest
was slain with him; and an Act made, that never henceforth any woman should be
suffered 4193. A. C. 223.
to come into the Senate: for her son was wont to bring her thither. He lived 18
Tractitius and Tiberinus, he gave way to the rebuilding of Nicopolis or Emaus
in Palestina, upon the entreaty of Julius Africanus a learned Christian. He
thought to have abolished all religions except that of his Idol, or else to
transfer all religions, even the Christian to Mount Palatine.

Aurelius Alexander, by birth a Syrian, was son to Varius, and Mammaea, he
would neither be adored nor flattered, nor take upon him the name of Autoninus
or Magnus; 4193. A. C. 223.
yet for his strict life and Government, he was called by the soldiers
Severus. He countenanced Christians. His mother was a Christian, and a great
lover of Origin. He was much addicted to learning and learned men. He kept the
soldiers Heliogabalus his preferring to stay in their places: and never
bestowed. preferment but on those that seemed to be unwilling. He cared not for
rich apparel, saying that Principality consisted in virtue, not in ornaments.
He was mild, courteous, and affable. He would have had all offices, trades, and
callings, masters and servants, to wear distinct apparel. He repaired all
Cities demolished with Earthquakes, but would bestow no gold on Temples*
showing that it was needless there. He forbad the use or abuse rather of
Evnuchs. He admitted no magistrate, but such as the people approved he that
buys must sell. He caused one to be stifled with smoke, for selling promises of
preferment: the Executioner in the mean time crying, He is punished with smoke
that sold smoke. He had in his private chapel the Images of Christ, Abraham,
Apollonius, and Orpheus. He would have built a Temple for Christ, but that he
feared the Gentile Temples then would be forsaken. He made much of that
Christian sentence, Do to all men, as you would have all men do to you.
Understanding that one Camillus sought to be Emperor, and to make a rebellion,
he thanked him for affecting that charge, which good men did avoid, then did he
make him his Colleague, clothed him richly, and made him undertake the managing
of the wars with him, till he was weary, and so upon his desire was dismissed,
and sent safely home. The Christians had got a public place to exercise in,
which the Cooks challenged did belong to them. Severus told them, that it was
a place fitter for the worship of God, then the dressing of meat.

Artaxerxes the Persian King came into the field with a mighty Army in which
were 700 Elephants, 1800 hooked Chariots. He having subdued the Parthian King
Artaba^us, and united both Kingdoms: he demanded restitution of all the
Severus returned him this answer, that he were best make much of what he had in
possession, and not meddle with the Roman confines, lest he buy his demanded
purchase at too dear a rate. This answer not being satisfactory, but injuries
increasing daily, a battle was fought, in which the Romans took 300 Elephants,
200 Chariots, and defeated 100 and 80 thousand horse, and Mesopotamia was
recovered; the Persians redeemed their Captives, and never durst in 40 years
space take the field again: the Romans also lost many of their men in this
battle. They had also good success in Armenia, Mauritania, and Illyricum. The
enemies lands were bestowed Severus had quelled the rebelling Germans, and had
commanded the disbanding of some seditious Legions, he was murdered with his
mother Mammaea by the German soldiers who could not endure to be curbed,
having enjoyed so much liberty under Heliogabalus: this murder was committed
by the instigation of Maximinus that barbarous Thracian, pretending that his
exactions upon the Provinces, caused by his covetous mother, were
insupportable. One of the Druidae soretold him this fatal stroke, by wishing
him to beware of the soldiers. He dyed near Mentz in Germany, in the year of
his life 29. of his Empire 13. His chief Counselors were Vlpianus the great
Lawyer, and Julius Paulus.

Vlpian was a great enemy to Christians, causing many of them to be put to
death; but he himself was killed in the night by the Praetorian Guard. Pope
Callistus was flung into a deep well and drowned. Cal^podius the Presbyter then
suffered; so did Hyppolitus a learned Christian. Under Vlpian Governor of the
City, the Sect of Valesians then flourished; who after the example of Origin
gelded themselves; therefore were called Eunuchs: then was Origin excommunicate
for his errors. Caecilia the Virgin was then martyred. Hierom about this time
translated the Hebrew Bible into Latin; because there was great altercation
about the LXXs Translation, being then three editions; to wit, Origens, Lucians
the Martyr, and that of Hesychius. Then Gregorius Thaumaturgus so called, and
Magnus too, for his great learning and wonders, was martyred. He was Bishop of
Neocaesaria, the scholar of Origin; his name before was Theodorius; then
Ammonius a Christian Philosopher professed publicly at Alexandria; then were
there common burial places made without the City for Christians, called
Coemeteria, Areae, Tumbae, Catatumbae, Cryptae, etc.

CHAP. V.
The Roman affairs under Maximinus, Philip, Decius, Gallus, Valerian, Galienus
and others. 2. The Christian and foreign affairs of those times.

MAximinus a Thracian, whose father was a Goth, and his mother an Alan, 4026.
A. C. 236.
or Scythian; was the first that without the Senats decree, by the soldiers
was made Emperor; to whom he joined his son for his Colleague: he being
conscious of his mean parentage, hated the Senate and Nobility, whom he
murdered Gordianus being now 80 years of age Emperor, against his will, he was
Deputy Consul of Africa; the army having killed Maximinus his Procurator, put
upon Gordian the Imperial robe, and saluted him with his son by the name of
Augustus: he was brought to Carthage in great pomp, whence he wrote to the
Senate, Maximinus, 4028. A. C. 238.
approved his election, gave order to destroy all Maximinus his friends; they
declare him and his son enemies to the State; and Letters are directed to all
the Provinces, to shake off their allegiance: which enraged Maximinus: he
bribed the soldiers, and makes have for Rome.

Capellianus a Commander under Maximinus in Africa, raised an army against
Gordianus. The old Emperor sends his son with sufficient forces to encounter
him: the skirmish was hot, in which young Gordian was killed; as soon as the
Father hears of his sons death, knowing the cruelty and strength of Maximinus,
and the perfidiousnesse with the weakness of the Africans, he strangles
himself. Then did Capellianus either banish or murder all that were of
Gordianus his side. Maximus Papienus the city Captain, and Clodius Balbinus, of
an ancient and noble Family, to whom they join the young nephew of Gordian by
his sister. Maximus marched forth with an army, Balbinus stayed in the city to
appease the tumults; for the Senators fell upon the Pretorian guard for prying
into their secrets, and the Guard fall upon the people; fire and sword rages
through the city, neither could the tumult be appeased till young Gordian was
presented to the people.

When Maximinus had entered Italy, his army was pinched with famine, all the
provision of the country being carried into strong Towns and Garrisons.
Aquileja shuts the gates against him: he besieges it round; but the
Inhabitants made stout resistance, continually annoying the soldiers with
darts, stones, firebrarnds, burning pitch and brimstone; and when their Engines
grew useless for want of strings or cords, the women made strings of their
hairs. Maximinus being mad that he could do no good upon the town, thinking it
had been the lasinesse or cowardice of the soldiers, put many of the
Commanders to death, which so exasperated the soldiers, that whilst Maximinus
and his son in the heat of the day were resting in the tent, they rush in and
killed them both, saying: Of a naughty brood, one whelp is not to be left
alive. Their heads on long poles were ca^ried about Aquileja to be seen, and
thence to Rome, to the great joy of the people and Senate, which had sacrificed
to their Gods, that Maximinus should never return alive. Thus dyed he who of a
shepherd, and then of a footboy to Severus became Emperor. His nimblenesse in
running, keeping pace with Severus his horse, made him a Tribune, his son was a
comely youth, but haughty and wicked, permitting men to kiss his knees and
feet: their bodies were flung into the river, and their heads disgracefully
used, then burnt in Campus Martius, the people stiling him Cyclops, B^sisiris,
Antaeus.

He raised the sixth persecution against Christians, out of malice to Alexanders
Family, because many of them professed Christianity, and to palliate this
cruelty, it was given out that the Gods had sent diverse earthquakes lately for
tolerating Christianity, and neglecting their service. Then was Pontianus
Bishop of Rome martyred, and within a month his successor Anterus with many
others, chiefly Clergy men.

Maximus and Balbinus striving for superiority, the former standing upon his
valor, 4209. A. C. 239.
the latter on his nobility, gave occasion to the soldiers who loved neither
of Gordianus is proclaimed Augustus being 13 years old, or as others say 16.
His short reign was presaged by a great earthquake, and such an eclipse of the
Sun, that they were ^ain to burn candles by day: he suppressed the faction of
Africa raised against him by Sabinianus; then married with the daughter of
Misitheus a wise and learned man, whose advise he always used. After this he
opens the Temple of Ianus, and denounces war against Sapores the Parthian
King, who had invaded Mesopotamia. He goes into Maesia, subdues his enemies in
Thracia, drives the Persians out of Antiochia, and takes many other towns from
the enemy: he fills all the Garrisons and frontier Towns with provision; but
after the death of Misitheus his father in law, he was slighted by the army for
his youth, and one Philip Gordian the third, in the 20 or 22 year of his age,
having reigned 6 years. This privilege the Senate bestowed upon his family that
none of them should be called to public offices or employments against their
wills. This Epitaph was set up for him on the confines of Persia in Latin,
Greek, Persian, Hebrew, and Egyptian letters Divus, Gordianus ^nqueror of the
Persians, Goths, Sarmatian^, subduer of the the Roman seditions, conqueror of
the Germans, but not of the Philips. About this time Helcyonides suffered
Martyrdom, whose breasts were first cut off, and flung to wild beasts, then she
was tortured with fire, and at last beheaded.

Philip the Arabian of obscure parentage succeeded with his son Saturninus,
whom now he calls Philip: he made peace with the Persian, built Philippopolis in
Arabia, made a great Pan for water beyond Tibris where water was scarce, and
celebrated the thousand year of the city with secular sports, in which were
showed to the people all sorts of wild beasts, as Lions, Leopards, Tigers,
Elephants, etc. which Gordian had provided for his Persian triumph. But such
multitudes of torches there were in the night time that a great part of the
city took fire; Philip Philip having sent Decius against the rebelling
Pannonians, was by him stripped both of his life and Empire. For Philip hearing
that Decius was made Emperor by the Pannonian soldiers, left his son in the
city, and marches against him with an army, the battle was fought at Verona,
in which Philip 4220. A. C. 250.
is slain and his army defeated; upon the news of this, his son is slain at
Rome being 12 years old, they reigned 6 years.

About this time the Arabian heresy, concerning the dying or sleeping of the
souls with their bodies, and their rising again the last day, was refuted by a
Synod held in Arabia, and by Origin who disputed against them. Then did Cyprian
succeed Donatus in the Bishopric of Carthage: who scoffingly was nicknamed
Caprian by his adversaries. The Christians in Alexandria, are persecuted, among
the rest, Apollonia the Virgin, who suffered all her teeth to be beat out, her
jaws broken, and at last to be burned, rather then she would blaspheme. The
Helcesaites denying Paul's writings, and holding mental faith sufficient,
without orall confession, are refu^ed by Origin.

Decius a Pannonian born, is with his son Decius confirmed in the Empire by the
Senate. In their reign was a great persecution. Babylas was marty^ed at Antioch,
Alexander at Jerusalem, Fabianus at Rome, all Bishops. Babylas did first see
his 3 sons martyred, exhorting them to constancy, then suffered himself, his
wife looking on, who buried their dead bodies. He had wars with the Goths or
Getes of whom 4222. A. C. 252.
he killed 30000. but shortly after his son was killed, and he himself
driven by the Goths into a lake where he was drowned, nor could his body be
found afterward: they reigned two years. In the great and seventh persecution,
which was about their time, Paul, (and after his example) others retired for
security into the wilderness, whence begun the order of Anachorites to
increase; then also did Gregorius Thaumaturgus retire into the desert.

Gallus after the death of Decius and his son was chosen Emperor by the
soldiers and confirmed by the Senate. It Is thought that they both lost their
lives by his treachery: he concluded a dishonorable peace with the Goths,
making himself their Pensioner: then he went to Rome with his son Volusianus
whom he made Caesar, and his Colleague in the Empire: he adopted Decius his
other son, and then murdered him: his cruelty against Christians, and his
careless government drew in the Scythians, Goths, Burgundians, and Persians,
who wasted the borders of the Empire lying near them: besides the plague from
Aethiopia raged 15 years through the Empire. Emilianus General to Gallus, in
one battle Gallus understanding, marched with his son against him; but they
were both slain in the second year of their reign, and Emilianus 3 months after
was killed by his soldiers 4224. A. C. 254.
in the 40 year of his age.

About this time Novatus and his sectaries lived, who called themselves
Cathari, that is, Puritans, they denied hope of pardon to those that fell in
time of persecution: he was condemned by a Synod of 60 Bishops called by Pope
Cornelius; and so he was by Cyprian and by the Bishops of Africa. Sabellius
then taught that there was but one person of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.
Origin about this time died being 68 years old, who at Alexandria had endured
diverse tortures for Decius seven young men at Ephesus, to avoid the persecution
fled into a cave, where being shut up by their persecutors, slept in the Lord;
hence they were called The seven sleepers; then Pionius Bishop of Smyrna,
Agatha the Virgin, and many others were martyred. Pope Cornelius also suffered
martyrdom about that time.

Lucius Valerianus being now aged is made Emperor in Rhetia: his son Gallienus
4231. A. C. 261.
is made Caesar. Valerian had gone with much credit through all degrees of
honor, at first he was a great friend of the Christians, till he was perverted
by a certain Valerian having left the Government of the West to Gallienus,
makes an expedition into the East against the Persians who had taken Antiochia
and Caesarea: he did what he could to keep out the Scythians, but in vain, for
they brake in with such multitudes, that they burnt and sacked Trapezus,
Chalcedon, Nicomedia, Nicaea, and many other towns, carrying away infinite
booties and numbers of people. At last finding his army wasted Sapores the
Persian, he offered to buy his peace, but Macrinus his Egyptian witch, who had
incensed him against the Christians, betrays him to Sapores, who so long as
he lived used him as his footstool when he took horse, at last flead him
alive; his son Gallienus deified him after his death, whom he neglected in
his life. For he rejoiced when he heard his Father was dead; that being freed
from a censor, he might give himself to his pleasures, leaving the East at
random, which was invaded by Macrinus, or Macrianus, with his two sons
Macrinus and Quietus.

So weary were the soldiers of Gallienus, and so giddy headed, that in his
time they chose no less then 30 Emperors, every army setting up their own
General. The Gauls and Germans were driven out of Italy, with their Emperor by
Gallienus. Ingenuus is overthrown by him at Mursia, and whole Cities left
desolate. Regilianus is defeated also by Gallienus, and Piso in Thessaly by
Valens, is killed and he by the soldiers shortly after. Aurelius in Illyricum
overthrowes Macrianus, who came thither out of Asia with 44000 men: he with his
son Macrinus were both killed, and 30000 of his soldiers became prisoners to
Aurelius. His other son Quietus and Balista, were defeated and slain by
Odenatus. Thus was Maerianus punished with his two sons, for his treachery
against Valerian, and the Christians: and Gallienus for his favor to them
began again to flourish: he proclaimed peace through all the Provinces, and
permitted Christians to have their meetings in their Cameteria. Aemilianus
Governor of Egypt and Thebais for his cruelty against Christians, was in a
conflict taken prisoner by Theodotus, Gallienus his General, sent to Rome, and
there strangled in prison: he had been made Emperor by the soldiers, who so
tyrannised that Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, was glad to fly with many more
to the Deserts of Arabia: where in stead of preaching, he spent his time in
writing. Causoleus brother to Theodotus defeated Trebellius, whom the Isaurians
a people in the lesser Asia had made Emperor. Yet henceforth they shook

In Gallienus his time Posthumus rebelled in Gallia, and armed the Franci a
people near the Rhene, not known or named before this time in any Historian. He
governed with great moderation for 10 years, at last was slain by his
soldiers. In his time also besides the misery of war, there were diverse
earthquakes, and such darkness for many days together, that people dyed with
fear. So great was the plague at Rome and Achaja, that 5000 dyed in one day.
Macedonia is overrun by the Goths; Asia by the Scythians, who spoiled and
burned the Temple Diana; Sicilia by the slaves; Gallia and Spain by the Francs.
Saloninus Gallienus his son is killed by Posthumous, and Gallienus himself
wounded; his father a prisoner and slave in Persia. Yet for all this Gallienus
must triumph at Rome over the Persians by whom his father was beaten; so that
scoffingly among the Persian captives at Rome, inquiry was made for Valerian
the Emperor.

The valor and fidelity of Odenatus, General of Gallienus in the East, is
remarkable; for when all seemed to be lost, he raises an army, takes in
Nisibis and Mesopotamia, defeates Sapores, and makes him fly, seiseth on all
his treasures and Concubines, sends the captive Persian Nobility to Rome, to be
insulted over; in requittall of which good service, he makes Odenatus his
Colleague, in Augustus, and on his money stamped his victories. In the mean
while the Scythians returning home with their booties and captives, were most
ofthem drowned by shipwreck. And such is the uncertainty of military felicity,
that Odenatus by the treachery of Meonius his cousin german is slain with his
son Herodes; and Maeonius shortly after by the soldiers. Zenobia the
masculine wife of Odenatus undertook the Government in her childrens minority,
so dexterously, that she kept all about her in subjection: So was Posthumous
after all his good services slain in Gallia by Lollianus, and he by Victorinus,
the son of Victorina, who like another Zenobia by the help of Tetricus and
Marius, stopped Victorinus a brave Emperor, but given to women, is murdered by
the means of a woman the wife of Attitianus, whom he loved. Marius a Blacksmith
is made Emperor, and the third day after was murdered by his servant. Then was
Tetricus mad^ Emperor by Victorina. He was of a noble extraction, and Governor
of Gasconie: his son Tetricus is made Caesar.

Gallienus wholely addicted to his pleasures neglected the Government: among
diverse of his ridiculous Acts, this is one; he caused a certain fellow for
selling glass jewels in stead of true, to be brought to the place, where he
was to be cast to the Lions; but instead of a Lion, he lets a Capon out of the
coop upon him; whilst the people stood wondering at this toy, he caused this
to be proclaimed: the cheater is cheated. His carelessness drew Aureolus with
an Army of Rhetians and Pannonians toward Rome, whom Gallienus met and drove
him into Millain; having defeated his Army. But Gallienus was not long after by
Martianus and Heraclianus murdered in the dark, as he suddenly ran out of his
tent, upon a noise that the enemy was breaking in upon him. Aureolus was guilty
of this murder; for he deviced letters in which were written the names of the
Tribunes and chief Captains of Gallienus his Army whom he meant to slay; these
Letters Gallienus was suspected, and so murdered, having reigned 9 years
alone, and 6 with his Father. He was deified by his successor Claudius; but
vilified by the Senate, who decreed that his friends and courtiers should be
flung down the Gemonian ladders, and prayed the infernal Gods, that his place
might be among the wicked.

Gallienus was a wicked Prince yet mild toward the Christians, who put an end
to the persecution by his Father Valerian, under whom Pope Xistus was martyred;
Cyprian beheaded; and S. Laurence the Deacon, broyled. About this time was the
great dispute concerning rebaptization. Cyprian made heretical baptism
Dionysius of Alexandria; only he made void the Baptism of those heretics which
denied the Trinity. He also refuted the Millenaries opinion of Christ's 1000
years reign. About this time sprung up the Angel-worshippers, called Angelici,
who were quickly extinguished; and the Apostolici, who held it sin to possess
either goods or wives: then was Samosa^enus who denied Christ's Divinity,
condemned by the Synod at Antiochia: and deposed afterward by Aurelian.

CHAP. VI.
1. The Roman affairs under Claudius, Aurelianus, Tacitus, Probus, Proculus,
Bonosus, Carus, Numerianus and Carinus. 2. of Zenobia, and of the Christian and
foreign affairs.

FLavius Claudius a Dalmatian, was by the Senate and soldiers named Emperor. He
was styled by the Senate, Father, Brother, Friend. He overthrew 4239. A. C. 269.
Aureolus in a battle and slew him. He defeated the Alemans, near the lake
Benacus. The Goths, and Scythians, to the number of 300 and 20000. fall upon
Tetricus had all Gallia and Spain, the chief strength of the Commonwealth,
when Zenobia had all the Archers with her, yet the Barbatians were still put to
the worst both at Maesia, Martianopolis, Byzantium and Thessalonica. Multitudes
of them fled to the hill Hemus, where without pursuing of Claudius, they dyed
of the plague and famine. The Romans carelessely busied about their plunder,
lost 2000 of their men by the Scythians in their flight, returning upon the
Romans; but this loss was repayed with the slaughter of 50000 Scythians.

About this time Zenobia Queen of Palmyrena a Town and Country of Syria,
Probus Admiral of those Seas under Claudius drove out the Garrison again, and
with an Army of Egyptians and Africans, defeated the Palmyrenians; but shortly
after being betrayed by Timogenes the Egyptian, he killed himself. The
Scythians invaded Crete and Cyprus, but could do no good by reason of the
sickness that followed them; of which Claudius dyed at Sirmium in Pannonia
near Danubius. He was not only deified, but had a golden statue erected to him,
near Jupiter in the Capitol; and a golden Target with his Image on it in the
Curia. He dyed of the plague with which also the Roman Army was infected.

Q^intillus his brother succeeded, a Prince of excellent parts had he lived;
but he dyed the 17 day of his Empire, being slain by his soldiers for his
severity; or as others say, at Aquileja he killed himself for anger, that
Aurelianus was made Emperor by the soldiers. In Claudius his time the
Christians began to be persecuted afresh. An edict being published that all
Christians should keep within their prisons, otherwise they should be
punished if any of them were found abroad.

Aurelianus was elected Emperor by the soldiers; he had given good proof of
4241. A. C. 271.
his valor in the time of Claudius by expelling the Goths out of Thracia. In
the Sarmatian war he slew in one day with his own hands 48 of his enemies, and
in diverse battles above 950. He was born in Syrmium of mean parentage, his
mother was a priestesse of the Sun. He was a valiant but cruel Prince. He
caused a soldier for committing adultery with his hostess, to be torn asunder
between the bows of two trees. He kept the soldiers in such awe, that they
durst not quarrel, nor be seen in Taverns, nor suffered to steal or rob the
least thing without punishment. He recovered all the Roman bounds invaded by
the Barbarians. He overcame the Marcomans, and in 3 great battles, to wit, at
Placentia, at the river Metaurus and in the Fields of Ticinum now called Papia
in Insubria. But not without Zenobia, now Queen of Egypt, and of the East; in
the way he had many skirmishes with the Barbarians. Thyana shut the gates
against him, whereat he vowed he would not leave one dog alive in the town; yet
when it was betrayed, he spared it, killing only the Dogs for his oaths sake,
and He that was not faithful to his country, would be faithful to none: then
he recovers Antiochia, and afterward defeates Zenobia, (after the Roman Horse
had fled) by the Foot encouraged to fight, by a divine apparition. So at last
Zenobia being discomfited, he enters Emissa victoriously.

Aurelian having quieted the Syrians, Persians, Saracens, Armenians, and
Egyptians, besieges Palmyra, and in it Zenobia, whom he had already overthrown
in battles. She finding the town in danger, makes an escape, toward Persia upon
Dromodaries, but is overtaken and brought back to Aurelian, who reserves her
and her children for the triumph. He spared the town, but slew Longinus the
Philosopher, and the other Authors of this war. Having pacified the East, he
returns to Achilleus to his enemy. Aurelian upon this returns in fury, levels
the town with the ground, and kills men, women, and children. Then returning to
the West, he makes Egypt quiet; thence he marches against Tetricus in Gallia,
who delivers up his Army, which he could not rule to Aurelian; some of these
Legions he subdued, the rest submitted to him. So having quieted East and West,
he is carried in triumph through Rome, and was the first that wore the Diadem
with Robes all of gold and rich stones. After Zenobia had been led in triumph
with her children, they were permitted to live privately at

In his time the coyners of false money, fearing to suffer, rebelled, and
raised an army of 7000 in the city; whom Aurelian overthrew, and cruelly used.
He condemned also many of the Nobility. He removed the Roman Garrisons out of
Dacia which he could not keep, and placed them in Maesia. He increased the
city provisions, he made an amnesty or act of Oblivion, and put down all
informers. He punished exacting and corrupt Officers most rigorously. He was
rich in gold and jewels, which he laid up in the Temple of the Sun. At last
having denounced war against the Persians, in the way between Heraclea and
Byzantium, he was murdered by his Secretary Mnesteus, who fearing to be
questioned for some 4246. A. C. 276.
bribes he had taken, and for exaction, counterfeited the princes hand, and
sent abroad among the soldiers the names of those whom Valerian meant to cut
off; but falsely. The soldiers thinking this to be true, plotted his death.
But when truth was discovered, Valerian was honored with a Temple, and
Mnesteus flung to the wild beasts.

In his time Samosatenus Bishop of Antioch, was maintained in his heresy by
Zenobia, then Queen of all that Country. Whilst Aurelian was putting pen to
paper to subscribe an edict against the Christians, his arms were taken and
shaken Plotinus the Philosopher, and Porphyrie his scholar, first a Christian,
afterward becomes the bitter enemy of Christ, against whom the eight* or (with
others) the ninth persecution was raised, in which Pope Felix was martyred. Now
the Manichees spread, and Manes their Patron is flead alive by the Persian
King, for undertaking to cure his sick son with his prayers, which he could not
do, for the child dyed. In the Sea of Antioch Domnus succeeded to Samosatenus,
and to him Timaeus. Aurelian reigned 6 years.

To him succeeded Claudius Tacitus, chosen by the Senate, six months after
Aurelians death; for all that time the soldiers refused to choose any, leaving
the election Aurelian, and put to death all that had a hand in his murder: his
brother Florianus succeeded as heir, without consent of Senate or Army, 2747. A.
C. 277.
wherefore he continued not much above two months, for understanding that
Probu^ was chosen Emperor by the Armies, and was marching against him, he fell
into a deep melancholy, and killed himself; others say, he was killed by his
Guard, being 23 years old. He affected the Empire, which his brother Tacitus
refused; Tacitus the Historian, placing him in every Library: he was very spare
in his diet, and modest in his apparel, wearing no richer then private men use
to wear; nor did he suffer his wife to wear jewels: he never suffered a night
to pass, in which he did not either read or write somewhat: He was too good
for the Romans to enjoy long.

Aurelius Probus succeeded, being a good man both in name and life. He was an
4247. A. C. 277.
Hungarian born, and son of Maximus the Tribune. The soldiers made him Emperor
against his will; and when it was propounded, that none should be chosen but he
that was valiant, just, holy, modest, and mild, all cried out with one voice,
God save Augustus Probus. He was made a Tribune, before he had a beard: he
executed justice on those that plotted the death of Aurelian and Tacitus: but
spared them that followed Florian, because he was the Princes brother, and no
tyrant: he drove the Germans out of Gaul, and recovered from them 60 Cities,
and killed almost 400000 Barbarians. 9 German petty kings humbly submitted, and
fell flat at his feet. He suppressed the Getes and Sarmatians: then marching
into the East, he cleared those countries of oppression, robbers, and high way
men: he made peace with the Persians. And translated 100000 Bastarni (a people
of Sarmatia) into the Roman Territories: he suppressed the Vandals and others
who rebelled: he overthrew Saturninus Warden of the East Marches. Him the
Egyptians against Probus sent him mild Letters, and promises of pardon, but the
soldiers would not trust him; wherefore he was fain to subdue him by force of
arms; whom he overthrew in diverse battles, at last besieged him, whom the
soldiers took and slew, though against Probus his will. He overcame also
Proculus whom the Gauls had saluted Emperor. And Bonosus the great Drinker,
called therefore the Hanging Tankart: this man was employed by Aurelian, to
entertain Ambassadors purposely to fox them, that thereby he might fish out of
them their secrets. He being overcome by Probus strangled himself. But his wife
(being a noble Goth and a good woman) he respected and bestowed on her whilst
she lived a yearly Pension. But the wicked soldiers could not long brook so
good a Prince; for they hated him because he would not suffer them to live
idly like drones, and to feed upon the sweat of other men's labors, therefore
he employed them in making vineyards throughout Gallia, Pannonia and Maesia:
and as he was employing them to drain the fens of Syrmium, where he was born,
there he was murdered, having fled into a tower, but to no purpose. He reigned
about 6. years, and lived 75.

Thus ended that good Emperor, whose Epitaph was this: Here lies Probus 4252.
A. C. 282.
the Emperor, truly Probus, or good. Conqueror of the Barbarians, Conqueror of
the Tyrants. After his death the soldiers grew exorbitant, taking on them the
full power to choose the Emperor, which the Senate out of covetousness, or
cowardice, or factions, neglected. In his time Trophimus and others were
martyred at Antioch. Pope Eutychianus who had buried with his own hands 42
Martyrs, suffered martyrdom himself.

Carus Captain of the Guard succeeded. Him Probus had recommended to the Senate
for a brave man. He suppressed the Sarmatians, making irruptions upon Pannonia
and Thracia, and made them quiet after he had killed 16000 of them, and taken
prisoners 20000. He had two sons, Carinus and Numerianus, these he named
Caesar's: he commits to Carinus (a wild young man) the charge of Gallia; and
Numerianus a solid and eloquent Prince along with him into the Persian War.
He enters Mesopotamia with a great Army, and takes it. Then marches along to
Ctesiphon without resistance, and obtaines the title of Imperator Persicus. But
having passed beyond the bounds of the Empire, he was struck with thunder, and
dyed suddenly in his Pavilion. His best son Numerianus was subject to soar
Eyes, which now ware so weak with weeping, that he was carried in a Litter.
Arius Aper his Father in law, aiming to be Emperor himself; murders
Numerianus, and conceals the fact, giving out that he could not come abroad
because of his soar eyes; but the smell of the dead carcass revealed the
murder; whereupon Diocletian is chosen Emperor by the Aper slain by the said
Diocletian; so the Druide told him, that he should be Emperor when he killed
the Boar; which now was fulfilled: for Aper is a Boar.

Carinus the other son, and another Heliogabalus for wickedness, hearing his
Father and Brother to be dead, grew worse then before. He overthrew and
killed Julian and his Army, who aimed at the Empire. In diverse battles he with
stood Diocletian. At last he was killed by his own soldiers. He did so
degenerate from his Fathers virtues, that he denied him to be his son. Numerian
was a good Poet, and like to prove an excellent Prince. Thus Carus and his two
sons reigned about two years. Carus lived 43 years. Numerianus 20. and
Carinus 18. to Numerianus was erected an Image of brass.

CHAP. VII.
The Roman affairs under Diocletian, Maximianus, Galerius, Constantius, and
Maxentius. 2. The horrible persecution of Christians under them. 3. Of the
Persian and foreign affairs of those times.

VAlerius Diocletianus born in Dalmatia, his Father was Secretary to Amilinus
the Senator: his mothers name was Dioclea. He fin^ing the Empire 4254. A. C.
284.
subject to so many distractions, did choose a Co-Emperor, Maximianus of
country parents, but a good soldier. He called him Herculeus, and himself
Iovius, after he had subdued the Persians and Egyptians. They also chose two
Caesar's to assist and succeed them. Diocletian chose Galerius Maximinus a
Thracian, Maximinus elected Flavius Constantius Chlorus, whom Carus meant to
have made his successor, and to have killed his flagitious son Carinus.
Maximianus marches into France, and suppresses the insurrections there of the
country people, and robbers, called by them Bagaudae. These four thus divided
the Empire between them. Maximianus Herculeus obtained Italy and Afric.
Constantius all beyond the Alps Northward. Galerius all the coast of Illyricum
to 4261. A. C. 291.
Pontus. Diocletian undertook the rest. By marriages these great Commanders
united themselves, for Diocletian bestowed his daughter Valeria upon Maximinus.
Max. Herculeus gave his daughter in law Theodora to Constantius. Diocletian
subdues Egypt, and in it Achilleus who called himself Emperor,

Maximinus Caesar is sent against the Persians, by whom he first was beaten.
Wherefore was harshly used by Diocletian, when he came to meet him, for he
suffered him in his purple robe to run before his chariot a mile or two. At
last having recruited his army with old soldiers, marches through Armenia
against the Parthians; falls suddenly upon Narsus the the Persian King, wounds
him, and drives him to the mountains, and takes his wifes, children* Nobility,
prisoners; and plunders his Palace and treasure: and if Diocletian had not
hindered him, he M. Crassus, Valerian, and some others miscarried; yet* Trajan,
Odenatus, Carus, Probus, and this Maximinus Galerius, had good success.
Carausius invaded Britain, which he held 6 years, till he was traitorously
killed by his Colleague Alectus, whom in 4 years space Constantius by
Asclepedat us captain of his Guard, overthrew, and added Britain again to the
Empire.

About this time the Marcomans and Carpi were conquered again; in the mean
while the city was well governed, for all oppressions and wickedness were
severely Diocletian gave himself to excess in wearing cloth of gold, in
treading upon silk and purple carpets, beset with precious stones. In causing
himself to be called God, and to be adored after the manner of Caligula, and
Domitian. So Herculeus gave himself over to all licentiousness, being a man of
as stern a countenance as conditions. These Emperors triumphed at Rome, where
the wives, sisters, 4272. A. C. 382.
and children of king Narsns were led before the chariot, Constantius in
iGallia Belgica did then wage war against the Alemans, who after he had by them
been driven into the town, where he was taken up by ropes over the wall, (the
gates of Lingon or Cangresse being shut) killed 5 hours after, when his army
was come, about

The Empire flourished all this while, Rome, Carthage, Milan, and Nicomedia A.
C. 306.
were fenced with new walls; and the barbarous Nations feared the Romans. But
Diocletian about the 19 year of his reign with Maximianus, began to rage
against the Christians, beginning first with the soldiers whom they casheered,
and some they slew. Then public edicts are made for pulling down the
Christian churches, for burning their Bibles; for degrading of such as were in
honor, and inslaving such as were free. All Bishops and Pastors of Churches,
who would not deny Christ, or offer incense to Idols, were commanded to be
slain. Then promiscuously the sword raged against all sorts of Christians. More
cruel were these Cosmus and Damianus after all sorts of torments, at last were
beheaded with three more of their brethren. Sebastianus a Commander in the
army, was first wounded with many arrows, afterward recovering was whipped to
death. None were suffered to draw water, nor grind their corn, till they had
offered incense to the Idol. Pope Cajus suffered Martyrdom, so did that Noble
Roman Gabinius, with his daughter Susanna. A whole Legion of Christians after
two decimations, were all at last cut off by the command of Maximianus. So were
the two Captains, Cerion and Victor with their Troops. Marcellus the
Centurion with his 12 sons were martyred; and so were Zenoche Tribune with
all his soldiers: with many other brave men and women* In a church of
Bithynia, on the day of Christ's Nativity were burned multitudes of people. In
one month there dyed 17000 Martyrs. In Egypt there dyed by Martyrdom 144000 in
ten years space, besides 70000 banished. No less cruelty was used in Africa,
against those who would not be Traditores, that is would not deliver up their
Bibles to be burned. In France among many other Martyrs, Victorinus Bishop of
Poytiers suffered. In Spain Vincentius the Deacon. Osius Bishop of Corduba, and
many more; Agnes, Eucratis, the two Eulalae, with diverse other Virgins showed
more then humane courage in suffering unspeakable tortures; whereas Pope
Marcellinus fainted as Peter did before him.

Diocletian and Maximianus being satiated with innocent blood, tortured with
diseases, and an evil conscience, f^ll mad, and so both in one day resigned
up 4274. A. C. 304.
their Empire, being content to live privately; Diocletian was then at
Nicomedia, Herculeus at Millain. This betook himself into Lucania, the other to
his native soil at Salonae. Both raging, that they could not with all their
cruelty suppress the religon and name of Christianity. Diocletian poisoned or
stabbed himself, being 68 Maximianus dyed of a loathsome and torturing disease
in his bowels in the 68 year also of his age.

Constantius Chlorus, and Galerius Maximinus, are declared Emperors.
Constantius was favorable to the Christians, a Prince of an excellent temper,
who cared not for wealth, holding himself sufficiently rich, if his subjects
were rich. When Diocletian upbraided him for his poverty, he presently gathered
great store of wealth, which having showed, he restored again to the right
owners. He was the son of Eutropius, a noble Roman, and of Claudia daughter of
Claudius Augustus. Though Italy, Africa, Gallia, Germany and Britain were
allotted to him for his share of the Empire; yet he contented himself with
Gallia alone; which he ruled with

Galerius was a good soldier, and a handsome man, born in Dacia, of mean
parentage, for his father was a husbandman, and he himself a Cow-heard, whence
he was called Armentarius. He gave out that his mother had begot him of a
Dragon, as Olympia did Alexander. He was indeed a Dragon to the Christians, for
his persecution was the bloudiest of all, to prevent which, multitudes of
people fled to desert places and rocks. Urbanus president of Palestina put
Appianus and Edaesius his brother with many others to cruel deaths. But he
himself was by Maximinus, (whose cruel commands he so readily obeyed)
sentenced to death. But Firmilianus worse then he, raged over dead carcasses,
denying them burial; Pamphilus saw, that his body and 12 others lay four days
in the streets untouched by any beast, took the boldness to bury them. And
Firmilianus shortly after sheathed the same sword in his own bowels, which he
unsheathed against Christians; so fierce was this Dragon against all that
professed Christ, within his Dominions of Palestina, Egypt, Syria, Mesapotamia,
Pontus, Cappadocia, and Bithyni^, that he burned a whole town of Christians at
one time. The Governor of Provinces proffering rewards to those that should
find out new tortures.

About the 8. year of this bloody Tragedy, both Judges and Torturers began to
grow weary of acting, for they perceived that Christians ran as cheerfully to
Martyrdom, Constantius was a friend to the Christians, who did not suffer
under him, but in the two years of Diocletian and Maximianus. One day
Constantius would try the sincerity of his Courtiers, commanding all that did
worship Christ, either to renounce him, or forsake his Court; many went, many
stayed: those he recalled, these he expelled, showing that they who were not
faithful to their God, could not be faithful to him that was but a man.

Maximinus having also obtained the Government of Italy, appoints two Caesar's.
Severus for Italy, and Maximinus his sisters son for the East, both being
I^yrians. He kept Constantine by him as an hostage, under pretense of religion.
For he saw in him though a child, more then a manly spirit. Therefore he
endeavored to expose him to danger, sometimes wishing him to sight with some
barbarian, or with a Lion. But he perceiving his life aimed at, fled, and to
re^ard the pursuers, killed all

The Praetorian soldiers at Rome being bribed, declare Maxentius the son of
Herculeus Emperor. Upon this Herculeus makes haste for Rome, hoping to be
re-invested in the Empire, which he unwillingly lost; to that purpose writes
letters to Diocletian, that he would reassume again his command and dignity,
who returns this answer, that he found more pleasure in planting his
pot-hearbs, then ever he did in ruling over the Romans. But Severus Caesar is
sent by Galerius to Maxentius, He sits down with his army before the city: but
his soldiers forsake him, and join with Maxentius. Severus betakes himself to
Ravenna: but Maximianus cunningly enticed him to come forth, whom he carries to
Rome, where he is put to death. After this Maximianus in a full assembly went
about to discover his sons nakedness, and to show how weak he was, and
unfit for Government; but for his labor he was ^ailed at by the soldiers.
Thence he went to Gallia to Constantine, to whom he had given his daughter
Fausta in marriage; pretending that he was banished by his son; and that he
was desirous to live with Constantine; but indeed his intent was to kill him;
which his daughter Fausta perceived, and

About this time Licinius the Dacian was made Emperor by Galerius, who dyed
4280. A. C. 310.
shortly after, having reigned Emperor 13 years. For having left Licinius to
rule the Illyrians and Thracians, he went to Rome to suppress Maxentius; but
finding him strongly maintained by the soldiers, whom he bribed, and fearing
his own soldiers would be bribed to betray him, departed out of Italy, and
shortly after died of an uncurable wound, his genitals being putrefied, and
Marcellinus, Serena Dioclet ians wife, S. Catharine, Lucianus who was the
seventh that turned the Bible into Greek, and many more suffered martyrdom. In
the Council of Rome consisting of 300 Bishops. Marcellinus condemned himself
for offering incense to Idols. Donatus the Numidian storming that Caecilianus
was preferred to him in the Bishopric of Carthage, broached his schism, which
in a short time became an Caecilianus, that he was one of them who delivered up
the Bible to he burned, but he was absolved by Constantine. Theophilus was made
the first bishop of the Goths.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Roman affairs under Constantine, Maxentius, Maximinus, and Licinius.
2. Of the Christian persecutions, and foreign affairs; during that time.

COnstantine was the son of Constantius Chlorus, and Helena, not a Bithynian
as some think, but a Britain, he with Maxentius, Licinius, and Maximinus ruled
the Empire. Alexander who had then a command in Afric, would have been a fifth
Emperor, he was a Pannonian, and of mean parentage, but Rufus Volusianus being
sent by Maxentius did quickly suppress him. So Africa was now exposed to the
fury of Maxentius who raged in Carthage, and all about with fire and sword. At
first he showed some favor to Christians, but being confirmed in his Empire,
he persecuted them with as great fury, as ever did his predecessors. Neither
Virgins nor Matrons could escape the fury of his lust, but such as fled, or
dyed. He abused many noble women, and then sent them back to their husbands. He
studied magic, and to that purpose he cut up the bowels of diverse children,
and ripped up the bellies of many mothers.

After the East had rested a while from persecution, upon the recantation of
Gallerius his successor, Maximinus fell with fresh fury on the Christians,
imputing to them all the miseries that had fallen on the Empire; and
recriminating them with pollutions and abominations whereof they were no way
guilty; he commands all the Idol Temples to be repaired, their sacrifices
renewed, and the Christian religion to be quite banished. But by Divine Justice
it came to pass, that plagues, famine, and unusual diseases never raged in
the world so much as now, that Christians are persecuted, who notwithstanding
the miseries they endured did show the fruits of their Religion, by burying
the dead bodies of their enemies, which lay scattered up and down the streets.
But the Armenians by force of arms compelled Maxentius to permit them the free
exercise of Christian religion. Maxentius exercised his cruel and barbarous
nature against the Nobility of Rome and Italy, which Constantine understanding,
resolves to ease the Empire of such a tyrant. Wherefore having quieted Gallia,
to make himself the stronger, he marryeth his sister to Licinius; Diocletian
was invited by these two Emperors to the wedding; but he excused himself by
reason of his age and weakness. Upon this denial he receives menacing
letters, showing that he favored Maximinus and Maxentius, whereupon he fearing
some disgraceful death, poisoned himself, as was said. He was an ambitious and
proud man, as may be seen by assuming to himself Divine honors, and by changing
the ancient computation of years, causing the account begin from the first year
of his reign, this was called Era Diocletiani, and continued 248 years, Yet
he was a fearful man, chiefly

Constantine hastneth to Rome, the noise of whose approach affrighted
Maxentius. Yet an Army is sent to retard Constantines march, at Verona the two
Armies meet: Maxentius lost the day; who was little troubled, either at the
loss of his Army, or the disaster of his father; at last with much ado, he
ventures with a fresh Army against Constantine, 9 miles from the City, who
obtaines a second victory; Maxentius flying back to Rome, and entering upon a
bridge of boats, over the river, his horse stumbled, and he fell into the
water, where he was drowned Constantines were not half so many. The report of
this overthrow was not at first believed in the City, till Maxentius his head
was brought in upon a pole; then there was great joy; for both Senators and
people were delivered from the massacre intended by the Praetorian Guard upon
them; which murder was plotted by Maxentius, and should have been executed by
his soldiers, whom Constantine for this put to the sword, and destroyed their
fortifications.

Whilst Constantine was in doubt whether he should go against Maxentius or
not, there appeared to him about noon, the sign of the Cross in the air, and
on it these words engraven, In this thou shall overcome: which sign the next
night Christ himself confirmed by his own presence to Constantine, bidding him
make use of this sign against his enemy. Upon this victory edicts are sent
abroad for the free exercise of Christian religion. Maximinus in the east
hearing of his fellow tyrants death, out of fear desisted from persecuting of
the Christians, yet he did not permit their assemblies. But Licinius in a short
time delivered the Church from this oppressor; for understanding that his
soldiers had forsaken him; he pursues him from Illyricum Diocletian,
Maximianus, Galerius Maximinus, Maxentius, Valerius Maximinus, Severus,
Galerius his Colleague, and Alexander tyrant of Africa, there remains only
Licinius with his Colleagues; but not long.

Licinius giving too much heed to Magicians and Soothsayers, began first to
inhibit the meeting of Bishops; then prohibited women to come to Church,
commanding them to be instructed at home by those of their own sex, shortly
after Constantine, who both maintained Christianity and learning, being a
scholar Licinius, desiring him to be favorable to Christians, according to
the league made between them: he was proudly answered, that he had no reason to
meddle with his part of the Empire. Whereupon Constantine with his son Crispus,
marched against Licinius in Thracia, where near Odrissa, since called
Adrianopolis, he defeated him; from thence Licinius flies to Bythinia in Asia,
and raises a new army, which Constantine overthrew by the power of Christ, the
representation of whose Cross he carried still in his Banners, and on his
Coin.

Licinius sends his wife Constantines sister to procure his pardon, which was
granted, conditionally, that he should live privately with his wife at
Thessalonica. But Valens whom Licinius had chosen for his Colleague, was put to
death by Constantine. Zosimus writes, that Constantine not only pardoned, but
also received him again as Co-Emperor, and named his son Licinianus fellow
Caesar, and successor with his own sons Crispus and Constantine. But six
years after, this peace was broken, and Licinius driven out of Thracia into
Chalcedon, where he chose Martinianus for his Caesar. And as Eusebius writes,
they were both overthrown by Constantine, who having received his imperial
robe sent by his wife, pardoned him again, and sent him to Thessalonica,
Martinianus, they were both put to death. Licinius reigned about 15 years, and
lived almost 60. About these times the Christian Religion was much propagated
through Scotland, by means of the Britains who fled thither to avoid the fury
of Diocletian. But Christianity was embraced in Scotland above 100 years before
this, by Donaldus their first Christian King, in the year of Christ 199. about
the time that Severus came over to Britain, to suppress the Scots and Picts,
which had made diverse incursions upon the Roman Territories there, and had
committed great slaughter upon them. For which cause he was forced to build a
wall and fortifications to keep out these Northern Britains, a people free,
and no ways disposed to receive the Roman yoke.

The third Book CONSTANTINE the Great, till CHARLES the Great, containing 476
Years.
CHAP. I.
The life, actions and death of Constantine the Great. 2. The history of his
four sons. 3. The affairs of the Church under these Emperors.

THE Church hitherto Militant, begins now to be Triumphant, which being
delivered from a longer captivity, then that of 4294. A. C. 324.
Babel, is settled by a greater Captain then Zorobabel; Constantine the great
Eagle carries this woman upon his two Dagon falls to the ground; Bishops and
Doctors, chiefly those that suffered are highly rewarded; controversies are
silenced; therefore Constantine gives, order for calling of Councels, and will
himself hear the difference between Caecilian and Donatus, by his Deputies who
absolve Caecilian and condemn the turbulent spirit of Donatus, and his sect.
Constantine compelled no man to embrace Christianity; yet suffered none to
commit Idolatry: he would have Christ to be professed freely; not by
constraint. He will not use that bloody course against Pagans which they
Diocletian, not of Constantine. But this fair day of the Churches peace was
quickly overcast by the black cloud of Arianisme, which like a sparkle being
kindled at Alexandria by Arius Presbyter, there did spread it self soon after
into a flame through Egypt, Lybia, and the rest of the world. The Emperor
willing to quench this fire betimes, sends Osius Bishop of Corduba, with
letters, desiring them to study mo^ piety, and less controversy, lest they
become a mocking stock to 4295. A. C. 325.
the Infidels. But seeing he could not thus prevail, he calls a Council at
Nicea in Bithynia of 318 Bishops, besides innumerable Presbyters and Deacons.
Sylvester Constantine sitting down in his gilded Throne, exhorted them, to
decide the controversy by Scripture, and to lay aside all emulation and
strife. In the end Arius is condemned and banished; and the eternal
consubstantiality of the Son of God with his Father is confirmed. The
controversy also about Easter is abolished, and it is commanded to be kept,
the first sunday still, after the Equinoctial full Moon, and not with the
Jews, the 14 day of the Moon. All other controversies between the Bishops he
ended by flinging the papers in the fire. He commanded the Lords day to be
observed, he put down the Gladiators, and would not suffer any Christian to be
slave to a Jew. He did not permit the Governors of Provinces to infringe the
Bishops Decrees and Canons. He caused the Church goods to be restored, which
were held by the city, and many other excellent laws he made in savor of
Testators, Orphans, and Virgins. He always heard Sermons standing,
acknowledging thereby what reverence was due to Gods Word.

After the overthrow of Arius, Constantine celebrates the 20 year of his
reign, and entertaines the Bishops with a great Feast, on whom he bestowed
gifts. He kissed the scars of Paphnutius Bishop of Thebais, and of Spiridion
bishop of Cyprus, blessed that were wounded for Christ. It was this Paphnutius
that stood up in the Council in defense of the married Clergy. Constantine
reproved Acesius bishop of the Novatians, for denying the Communion to those
that had fallen, and wished him to set up a ladder, and climb up himself
alone to heaven. But the Arians did not cease to spew out their malice against
the Orthodox, by false accusations, whereas other ways they could not hurt
them. In the mean time Constantine gives order to pull down the chapel of
Venus, built over the Holy Sepulcher, and in lieu thereof to erect a Temple to
our Savior; and a town, which he called new Jerusalem. His mother Helena built
churches in the places of Christ's Nativity and Ascension. She searched and
found the Holy

Crispus was Constantines eldest son, who being falsely accused by his
stepmother Fausta, that he would have ravished her, is by his Fathers command
put to death, and she afterward being found guilty of this murder, is killed
in a scalding bath. He caused also Licinianus his sisters son to be slain.
Then he repaires and beautifies Byzantium, and calls it from his own name
Constantinople, and having translated thither many Noble Families, and wealth
from Rome, and erected magnificent buildings and Temples there, it was called
new Rome: he buildes again the walls which by Severus 130 years before were
thrown down; and gives the Hormisdas the Persian king fled to him for aid. He
upon spleen of his Nobility was put by his right, being the eldest son, and
cast in chains; the younger brother Hormisdas wife delivered him, by sending
him a fish, and in it a file, wherewith he filed off his fetters, and in the
clothes of an Eunuch passed unknown through the drunken guard; and so got to
Armenia, and from thence had a convoy to Constantine: who had sent to Sapores
the old Persian King to surcease persecuting the christians, as he did; upon
the instigation of Jews and Magitians, he killed above 16000 Christians.

Constantine in his latter days began to waver, for the Arian faction wrought
upon his sister Constantia, the wife of Licinius, and she upon him, to recall
Arius from banishment. Eusebius also bishop of Nicomedia, with other Arians
falsely accused Athanasius successor to Alexander in Alexandria, and in a
council held Eustachius bishop of Antioch, whom they falsely accused of
adultery. Athanasius is banished to Treviri, but by a Synod of 80 bishops in
Egypt, he is absolved from the Arians unjust sentence, who condemned him for a
magitian: but Arius having fraudulently subscribed and sworn to the Nicean
creed, having another under his arm, was received by the Emperor, and order
given to Alexander bishop of Constantinople to receive him publicly into 4306.
A. C. 336.
the church there, seeing the Alexandrians refused to communicate with him: but
the next day as Arius was going in pomp toward the church, he stepped aside to
ease himself, and in the privy, his guts and soul went together. He dyed belike
of a rupture; this was it that Alexander in his prayers did so earnestly desire
the night before.

Constantine had three sons besides Crispus whom the stepmother Fausta the
daughter of Maxentius murdered, that her own sons might succeed; the eldest
Constantinus was made Caesar the 10 year of his Fathers reign; Constans the
second son in the 20 year, and Constantius the youngest in the 30. In lieu of
Crispus unjustly slain, and much lamented by Helena his Grandmother, and the
whole city. The good old Emperor having celebrated the marriage of his son
Constantius, and answered the Ambassadors of India and Iberia, as he was going
4307. A. C. 337.
against the Persians, and was baptized in the Suburbs of Nicomedia, departed
this life the 63 of his age, and the 32 years of his Empire. His death was
foretold by a comet* his body was interred with great solemnity in the Apostles
Church which he built at Constantinople. He was much lamented by the Romans,
such was his piety that he taught his armies to pray, and gave them a set form
of his own making. He caused his Image to be stamped on his coin, in the gesture
of one kneeling and praying to Christ: In his time Meletius bishop, for his
misdemeanors was degraded, and then out of spleen became Arian. Clodomerus
King of the Francs invaded Gallia, the two Feasts of cxaltation and invention
of the Cross were Patrick. Christianity increases in India, Iberia and
Armenia.

Constantine a little before his death, upon the importunity of the soldiers
made Dalmatius his brothers son Caesar also; but by the same soldiers he was
oppressed, and so the Empire was divided between the three brothers.
Constantine the eldest had for his share Spain, Gallia the Alps and Britain,
Constans (whom others call Constantius confounding the names) had Italy, Afric,
Graecia, and Illyricum. Constantius or Constans obtained the East. Constantine
having restored Athanasius, as his father had ordered, quarrelled with his
brother about Italy and Afric, and was overthrown by Constans his army; having
received many wounds 4310. A. C. 340.
as he fell from his horse near Aquileja, and is flung into the river Alfa,
the 3 year of his reign, the 25 of his age. Coustans was at first a valiant and
just Emperor, but afrer growing gowty, he began lascvious and cruel. He
subdued the Francs oppressing Gallia: he maintained Athanasius and the Nicean
creed: but one day as he was hunting, Chrestius, Marcellinus and Magnentius,
conspire against him, and murder him. Ungrateful Magnentius forgot that one
time Constans saved his life, by casting his robe over him, when the soldiers
would have killed him. Constans dyed the 13 year of his reign, he had been
Caesar 3 years before his fathers 4320. A. C. 350.
death, he was 27 years old, some say. 30. Magnentius made himself Emperor of
the East. Vetranius General of the Illyrian and Pannonian Forces, invaded the
Constantius by an eloquent speech he made to both the armies ready to fight,
made Vetranius lay down his command, the 10 month after he had taken it up, and
content himself with a private life. At Rome Nepotianus sisters son of
Constantine the Great, having slain the Governor of the city is made Emperor
in such a tumult, that the streets ran with blood, and all places were filled
with dead bodies. The Persians also invaded the Empire.

Constantius finding how unable he was alone to manage the Empire, makes Gallus
his cosen German Caesar, and marryeth to him Constantina his sister, who had
been married to Annibalianus Governor of Armenia. Magnentius also makes
Decentius Caesar, beyond the Alps. These having many times skirmished, at last
encountered with all their strength near Mursia, where Magnentius the Gaul is
defeated, having lost 36000 men, and Constantius 30000. This victory was deer
bought, for by the loss of so many men, the Empire was much weakened, so that
the barbarous Nations could not be kept out. Magnentius fled to Lions, where he
killed himself with his own sword, the 4 year of his Empire; 4323. A. C. 353.
and about the 50 of his age. Decentius hearing of his overthrow and death,
strangled himself. Gallus Caesar quieted the Jews who would have made them a
new King; he killed many thousand of them, and burned Cesarea, and Tiberias.
This Gallus was of a fierce and bloody disposition; so was his wife. They
caused many innocent men to be murdered, upon false accusations of informers,
she thought she might do any thing, being the Emperors sister. But they both
were invited by flattering letters to come to Constantius. She feared her
brothers cruelty, yet adventured to see him; but having come to Bithynia, she
fell sick of a Fever and dyed, Gallus was apprehended at Pola a town of
Istria, where he was accused of all 4324. A. C. 354.
his cruelties; he laid the blame of al upon his wife; but there he was
beheaded, the 4. year of his tyranny.

Silvanus was chosen in his room by Constantius; he was a Gaul by birth, but of
an aspiring nature, who aiming too high was killed by the soldiers, within a
month of his advancement. Constantius having now no Competitor, begins to
exercise his cruelty, accusing many, as if guilty of plotting with Magnentius
Gallus, and Sylvanus against him. He banisheth also many Orthodox Bishops. And
because the Francs, Alemans, Saxons, and Quadi made irruptions upon Gallia, he
chose Claudius Iulianus the brother of Gallus, and having sent for him from
Athens, makes him Caesar: and gave him command over the Transalpin countries,
he subdued the barbarous Nations thereabout; and took king Chonodomarius
prisoner: and regained the ancient bounds of the Empire. He took also prisoner
Badomarius chief King of the Alemans. He defeated the Saxons and Quadi;
Augustus by the Army. Constantius by Ambassadors counsels him to content
himself with the title of Caesar; who replies that he will be no less
officious and obedient, under the high title of Augustus then before.

Constantius overcame the Sarmatians, who had over run Illyricum, but having no
success against the Persians, and understanding that Julian was marching
against him with an Army, out of impatience and long watchings, fell into a
violent fever and dyed, at Mesocrene near the foot of mount Taurus, having
reigned 24 years, 8 alone, 16 with his brother and Magnentius. He had fought 9
battles with the Persians, but with little success: the last was lost by the
wilfulness of his soldiers. Eusebia. He favored the Arians, being induced
thereto by the same Presbyter that wrought upon Great Constantines sister. He
was 41 years old when he dyed; his genius that was wont to be cheerful with
him, a little before his sickness looked sad upon him.

In his time Athanasius was much vexed by the Arian Bishops, for returning to
his charge without Episcopal approbation; for bringing into the Church the
word Consubstantiall not found in Scripture. He to avoid Constantius his fury,
Julius at Rome; in his absence one George sits down in his chair at Alexandria:
and Eusebius at Antioch in a conventicle of 80 bishops, expels the word
consubstantiall; and possesses the chair of Constantinople, which belonged to
Paulus the true bishop. But after his death Paul is received again by the
Catholics; but Macedonius is ordained by the Arians, and ratified by the
Emperor, who sent Hermogenes with some Forces to thrust out Paul. But the
people killed the captain, and burned down his house. For this sedition the
city is fined, Paul banished, and Macedonius with the loss of 3000 citizens
gets up into the chair. By the favor of Constans and Pope Julius, Athanasius
returns to Alexandria, and is banished the third time, being accused for
converting the Poors corn to Constance, and desires a free Synod. His
fellow-sufferer Paul, by the Arians malice perished in his exile: and
Macedonius himself, who held the Holy Ghost to be the servant only of the
Father, and the Son, was shortly expelled by the Arians, because he would not
call the Son of God a creature.

Constans calls a Synod of 300 Westerns, and 800 Eastern Bishops at Sardica in
Thracia, in which Athanasius is absolved by the Western bishops, and is again
restored to his charge, to the grief of the Eastern Clergy: but Constans being
dead, Constantius was much abused by the Arian bishops, chiefly by Valens who
prayed with Constantius, whilst his Army was fighting with Magnentius, and got
him the first news of the victory; he with diverse others, still waited on the
Emperor, soliciting him against the Catholics; whom George at Alexandria did
eagerly persecute. Photinus bishop of Syrmium is condemned by a Council held
there, for giving Christ no other beginning but from Mary. Aetius and his
scholar Eunomius, dissent in this from the Arians in denying Christ to be like
his Father. A Synod is called by Constantius at Millan in which Pope Liberius,
Hilarious bishop of Poytures with diverse others are banished Athanasius. But the
Arians dissenting among themselves, and with the Orthodox gave occasion of
calling another Synod at Ariminum in Italy of 400 bishops. But there could be
no reconciliation. Whereupon a Synod is called at Seleucia, in which much
digladiation there was about the word (...) or like; whether was meant the
similitude of essence or of will. But nothing could be agreed upon, wherefore
the Arians fly to Constantinople, and forced many Orthodox bishops to receive
that fallacious Symbol, which was compiled in the Synod of Seleucia, in which
the word usia, or substance was put out, and concluded that the Son was like
the Father, and that he was not a creature like other creatures: but some who
refused to subscribe were banished. Hilarious is sent back to France, as being
found too hard a disputant for the eastern bishops.

About this time Apollinaris starts up, affirming that the Word assumed the
flesh, but not the soul, or mind, and that God was the mind or soul of the
flesh assumed. Constantius was a great enemy to superstition; he punished all
that consulted with cunning men or witches. He removed out of the Forum, the
image of Cybele. Many Jews were converted to Christ upon the sight of a fiery
cross in the air, reaching from Golgotha to Mount Olivet.

CHAP. II.
Of Julian, Jovinian, Valentinian, and Valens. 2. Of the Church, and foreign
affairs.

FLavius Claudius, Iulianus the son of Censtantius Constantine the Greats
brother, whose mother was Basilina a Noble Lady. In his youth he was bred 4331.
A. C. 361.
a Christian under the bishop of Nicomedia, and for his pregnant wit and
eloquence was made reader in the church. He was studious and expert in the
Greek tongue. But being too familiar with Libanius the Sophister, with
Iamblicus, Maximus, and other Philosophers, he became a heathen, a magician, a
persecutor of Christians, and a right Apostate. He used to diffame great
Constantine, calling him an innovator and disturber of the ancient laws. He
put none to death for religion, but pretended other causes: he shut up all
schools of learning among Christians, knowing that learning was an enemy to
Gentilism. He opened the Idolatrous Temples, and commanded sacrifices there to
be offered. He stamped upon his coin Jupiter, setting the crown on his head;
Pallas putting on his cloak, and Mercury giving him the scepter. He robbed the
church of her revenues, telling the Clergy that they should be the fitter for
heaven, because it is written, Blessed be the poor. He suffered no military
honors to be conferred Nazianzen and Cyrill refuted. He would not permit
Christian children to learn Rhetoric, fearing lest they might wound the
Gentiles with their own quils. He encouraged the Jews in hatred of
Christianity, to set up again their own State and religion, promising them
great immunities and privileges. Upon this the Jews began to rebuild the
Temple, but they were feign to give off by reason of thunder, hail, fire, and
earthquakes which destroyed many thousands of them. Where ever they cast their
eyes they saw crosses on their garments and tables; the Delphic Temple also,
was much about this time overthrown with thunder and earthquakes, as Julian was
sending thitherto know by the Oracle what success he should have against the
Persians. It had been overthrown before and spoiled 4 times, namely by the
Phlegians. 2. by Xerxes his soldiers. 3. by the Phocenses 4. by Brennus; but
still it was rebuilt again; by the overthrow of these two Temples, Judaism, and
Gentilism were deadly wounded.

It Is recorded of Julian (whom Athanasius called a cloud soon vanishing) that
in private he put diverse Christians to death for their religion: among the rest
Artemius Governor of Egypt, which made the Alexandrians fall furiously upon
George their Arian Bishop, and murder him. This George had used to inveigh
Julian threatened to revenge this murder of George, but was taken off with fair
words, and the Persian war: which he was preparing for. Understanding that
Apollo could utter no Oracle, because the christians had buried some of their
Martyrs near to him, he caused their bodies and relics to be removed, the
people in the interim singing that of the Psalmist: Confounded be all they
that worship graven Images. At which Julian was vexed inwardly, but could not
help it, but vowed to sacrifice the blood of christians to his Gods, if he
prevailed Apollo's Temple at Rome was burned down.

Sapores who was made King before he was born, 24 years of age, made irruptions
upon the Empire. Julian with 65000 soldiers took diverse Forts and Towns from
the Persian, and wasted all Assyria. Having crossed the river Tigris, he burnt
his boats, as if he had conquered all: but being brought into an ambush by a
fugitive, where he was beset with famine and Persian armies, was shot in the
liver, by an unknown hand; he in a rage flinging the blood of his wound in the
air, cries out, Thou have overcome me O Galilean, and so dyed the 31 year of
age, having reigned alone 1 year, 8 months, and 10 years with Constantius. His
wife was Helena great Constantins daughter, of whom he had no children, her
Matrix being poisoned by Eusebia the Empress, so he dyed childlesse. Maris
bishop of Chalcedon was blind, whom Julian mockingly told him, that he could
not have so much as eyes from his Christ. I thank Christ for it (says he) for
so I shall not see thee, who art the great plague of the world. Athanasius
after the death of George was restored again to Alexandria; but presently was
forced to hide himself a while from Iulian's fury; in which time he compiled
his excellent Symbol. Nazianzen writes of Julian, that he was unstable in his
head, eyes, and feet; at first he exhorted them to agree among themselves, and
not to trouble themselves with points of Religion,

Iovinian or Iovian succeeded, he was chosen for his fathers sake Varonianus a
Noble Pannonian, and who had done good service. Iovinian was a good christian,
4333. A. C. 363.
a bountiful Prince, and a handsome man. He was forced upon the ill success
of Julian to make a dishonorable peace with the Persian, upon these articles.
1. That five regions beyond Tigris with some castles should be surrendered to
the Persian. 2. That Nisibis and Singara, which the Romans held ever since
Mithridates till now, should be delivered to the Persian, but not the
inhabitants. 3. That the Romans should not aid Arsaces King of Armenia the
greater Iulians time had apostatised. He shut up all the Idol Temples again, and
restored the true worship of God, with the churches revenues, and Valentinian
(who had been banished) to his former charge of the Army. He recalled the
banished Bishops, chiefly Athanasius, to whom he wrote for a copy of that truth
in Religion which he was to follow. Upon this Athanasius calls a Synod at
Alexandria, where the sum of the Catholic Faith was compiled, and sent to the
Emperor.

As the Emperor was returning from Persia, the Semi-Arian Macedonian heretics
met him, crying out against the Arians, and striving to insinuate themselves
into his favor, but he rejected them, professing that he would give no ear to
contentions. Acacius the great Arian, Bishop of Caesarea, who had been a great
stickler for Arianism, is now (but hypocritically) content to subscribe to the
Nicaean Creed in the Council of Antioch held by Meletins Bishop there, who
Iovinian could abide no disputes in Religion, but advanced those who were
moderate and peaceable men. He dyed in Illyricum suddenly of a surfeit the 8
month of his Empire, and of his age the 33 year. In his time Vlphilas the Arian
Bishop of the Goths found out the Gothic letters, and was the first who turned
the Bible into the Gothic tongue. He was interred near to the Capitol, and his
obsequies kept in Pannonia; before his death a comet appeared, and the Library
at 4334. A. C. 364.
Antioch was burned.

Valentinian the first succeeded, he had been Tribune of the soldiers under
Julian, who casheered him for striking a heathen Priest, that besprinkled him
with Holy water in the Church porch, as Julian was sacrificing to his Idol. But
Iovinian restored him. He was a Pannonian born, his fathers name was Gratian,
who was so strong that five soldiers could not with all their strength wring a
rope out of his hand, which he had then to sell. The Army urged Valentinian to
choose a consort; one told him, that if he loved his kindred, he had a brother;
if the State, he should seek out some other. This speech angered him; but he
said nothing till he came to Constantinople, and then pronounced Valens
Co-Emperor: no man daring to oppose him, they two deposed most of Iulians
officers. About this time the barbarous Nations on all sides invaded the
Empire, the Picts Saxones, Scots, and Attacots, (a Nation in the South of
Scotland, or North of Valentinian sets up his seat at Millan, Valens at
Constantinople, where he was infected by Eudoxus the Arian bishop, from thence
he removed to Antioch, where he cast the Catholics out of their churches.
Petronius his Father in law did so pole the people with extortions that they
set up one Procopius to be Emperor of Constantinople, Armies are raised, and
Bithynia is taken. The Thracians and Goths are invited to side with them. The
posthume daughter of Constantius, the Emperor is carried about the Army, as if
this new Emperor intended her good: Cizycus is taken; but when Procopius should
have fought Valens, his soldiers forsook him, and he was brought to Valens,
who gave order he should lose his head, and be quratered; many also of his
side suffered with him: thus ended that civil broil.

At this time a great schism was in Rome, about the election of the Pope
Damasus and Vrsicianus striving for it; the faction was so great, that many
were killed; at last Damasus carried it. He was the first that authorized the
Latin Version before the Greek: but the Clergy retained their old Psalms; he
caused the Creed of Constantinople to be sung in stead of the Nicen. Lucifer
bishop of Sardinia brought a schism into the church, for refusing to admit
those Arians into Ambrose then translated from the Greek into the Latin church
the singing of hymns and Anti-hymnes; he was made bishop, being Governor of
Millan, for he being commanded by Valentinian to suppress the sedition that
was risen about the election, he himself was elected by the approbation of all.

After Valentinian had suppressed the Alemans, and was recovered from a
desperate sickness, he named his young son Gratianus Emperor: so now are
4337. A. C. 307.
three Emperors. He began to be a rigorous punnisher of every small offense
in the Army. He suppressed the Scots and Picts incursions upon the Britains:
whom still they vexed in the Romans absence. He subdued the Randon the Aleman,
and fortified the Rhene. Valens also suppressed the Persians, and killed their
King Arsaces. At Rome Maximinus rages upon all sorts of people. One Theodorus
at Antioch foretold that the four first letters of his name did belong to
Gratians successor, meaning Theodosius, but this Theodorus with some other
Mathematicians were burned, and diverse Philosophers beheaded, Iamblicus
poisoned himself. For Valens rashly condemned all such learning, not
discriminating between good and bad, nocent and innocent. In the West
Valentinian did Firmus their Emperor, whom in diverse battles Theodosius
defeated. This Firmus flying to the neighbor king Igmazanes for help, but
finding none, killed himself. The Quadi also rebelled because Garrisons were
placed beyond Isther, and Gabinius the king was slain by Caedestius Perca at a
feast treacherously; therefore they fell upon Pannonia, and had almost taken
the daughter of Constantius, who was going to be married to Gratian, if Messala
Governor of Pannonia had not by post brought her back to Syrmium. The
Sarmatians also break out, but they were so beaten by Theodosius then a young
man; that they were forced to beg for pardon and peace from Valentinian,
excusing themselves, that this Valentinian in a violent passion reproved them
for this frivolous excuse, and their ingratitude, and upon the vehement
stirring of his spirit fell into a Fever, and within few days dyed, having
reigned about 15 years, and lived 55.

Valentinian had two wives, Severa the mother of Gratian, and Iustina mother of
Valentinian the second. This being as yet but 4 years old is made Emperor, of
that part, by the Army which might be endangered without a head, seeing Valens
and Gratian were far off, and could not help them. So he is Emperor of Italy,
and Afric, and Illyricum. In the mean while the Hunns an unknown people Valens
for aid. He unwisely receives these barbarians within the Roman territories,
who being pinched with famine, in great multitudes pass over the Danow, and
enters Thracia with their Arms, which they were commanded to deliver up, when
they petitioned for help: but Maximus and the other Roman Governors were
careless. Valens was forced to leave the Persian war, and to aid Thracia,
which was oppressed by the Goths, to whose assistance there did flock all sorts
of discontented persons: besides as Gratian was coming with an Army to aid his
Uncle Valens, he was set upon Gratian defeated and killed 40000 of them. Valens
unwilling that Gratian should have any share of his victory, would not stay for
his assistance, but ventured with his Army upon the Goths, Alans, and Hunns,
who defeated him, and at last burned him in a cottage whither he had retired,
to dress his wound he received by an arrow. He lived almost 50 years, and
reigned about 14. This, next to that of Cannae, was the greatest blow that ever
the Romans had; the Goths also lost abundance of men, both in this battle,
and in their siege of Adrianapolis; he was a cruel and an illiterate prince,
who could endure any religion except the Orthodox. Which against his brothers
will he persecuted. As he was subscribing an edict for banishing of Basil out
of Caesarea, his arm was Athanasius, having been bishop of Alexandria 46
years. In the time of Constantius he hid himself 6 years in a dark cave, where
he saw not the Sun all the time of Julian, he hid himself in Alexandria, under
Valens he lay hid 4 months in his fathers tomb. To him succeeded Peter, but
because he was Orthodox, Valens thrust him out, and set up Lucius the Arian.

CHAP. III.
Of Gratianus, Theodosius, Arcadius, Honorius, and Theodosius the younger. 2.
Of the Goths, Vandales, and other barbarous Nations. 3. The Church affair^s of
those times

GRatianus was born at Syrmium; this was a learned and good Prince; who 4349.
A. C. 379.
after the death of Valens called home the banished Catholics. He would
neither take the title nor habit of the High Priest, as others used to do. He
was moderate in his sleep, diet, and delights. He permitted liberty of
conscience, Theodosius out of Spain, and made him Co-Emperor, by whom he
subdued the Alans, Hunns, and Goths, Nations not touched by Alexander; and he
overthrew them at such a time, when the Roman army was almost lost, and when
the enemy had furnished themselves with the Roman horse and arms. Gratian
reigned with his Father Valentinian 8 years, with his Uncle and brother three,
with the same brother and Theodosius 4350. A. C. 380.
four, with these and Arcadius 6 months. Theodosius was baptized at
Thessalonica, and after his great victory in Thracia which he set free, entered
Constantinople, and was made Emperor.

Valens had placed in diverse towns of Asia, the sons of the chief Barbarians to
be civilized and educated. These understanding of the great overthrow of their
countrymen, resolved to sacrifice to their Ghosts, these towns they dwelt in;
but were prevented by Julius who had the charge of them: for one day he
assembled them all together, as if he meant to reward them, and suddenly by
the soldiers laid in ambush, slew them. Theodosius made much of the Fugitives,
and mixed them with his own soldiers. He was a Prince endowed with as many
virtues as ever any, and nothing inferior to Trajan his countryman, from whom
he derived his pedigree; but he exceeded Trajan in being more temperate, and
less ambitious. His diet was simple, his apparel was plain like others; his
modesty was such, that he forbid the marriage of cousin germans. He Cinna,
Marius, Sylla, and such like tyrants. He overthrew Idolatry, and established
the true religion.

Gratian began to grow careless, and to prefer the Alans before the Roman
soldiers, so that he became hateful to them. Maximus Theodosius his fellow
soldier, angry that no honor was conferred on him, in Britain made himself
Emperor, then passing over into France, Gratians soldiers being angry with
him, 4353. A. C. 383.
entertained Maximus for their General, who driving him to Lions, killed him,
having lived 28 years. He was a good Orator, whose Epistle to S. Ambrose,
wherein he professes the Nicen Faith is yet extant. In his time Audaeus in
Syria, Audeani and Anthropomorphites. To these were coetaneall the Messalians,
called Euchites and Enthusiasts, who bragged much of prayer, and of the Spirit,
in the i nterim living an idle life. Priscillianus then lived in Spain, who
renewed the heresy of the Gnostics, he with his followers were banished out of
Spain, and in Gallia being brought before Maximus Emperor, there were punished
with death. The Messalians or Euchites were called Valentiniani, because in his
time they first appeared. Vigilantius and Iovinianus heretics affirmed, that
all sins were equal. The Saracens and Goths turn Christians, but withal,
Arians. Theodosius calls a Synod at Constantinople, where Macedonius is
condemned, and the Divinity of the

Gratian being dead, Theodosius chose his brother Valentinian the second, yet a
child for his colleague. Iustina his mother supplied his room, in his minority;
she had a fair face, but a foul soul, infected with Arianism. She would have
expelled Ambrose out of Millan, but he resisted the soldiers that were sent
into the Church to apprehend him, saying the Church was Gods House, not the
Emperors. Maximus who had the charge of Britain, Gallia, and Germany, not
content with this share aimed at Valentinians also, wherefore having past the
Alps, he drove Valentinian out of Italy, who fled to Theodosius for help, the
rather because he had new married with Galla, the daughter of old Valentinian
and Iustina; for he had buried his former wife Placilla mother to Arcadius
already created Augustus, and his brother Honorius. He resolves therefore by
reason of this affinity with Valentinian, and the justness of this cause, to
assist him. Andragathius General of Maximus his Forces, had fortified the
passages of the Alps, but hearing of Theodosius his preparation, forsakes the
Alps, and by a naval expedition, intends Theodosius unexpectedly passes the
Alps now open, falls upon Aquileja, where Maximus thought himself secure,
takes him, and kills him. Andragathius hearing that Maximus was slain, flings
himself overboard into the Sea. So Valentinian recovered Italy and his Empire,
and by the persuasion of Theodosius embraces the Catholic Faith. Theodosius
in his victory showed great elemency in sparing Symmachus and others of Maximus
his faction. Victor Maximus his son General of the French Forces was now
dead, whereupon Valentinian repaires thither, and governed Gallia about 5
years. Theodosius goes to Rome, and there shuts up the Idol Temples, and
reformes many abuses. Valentinian at last by Eugenius his Secretary, and
Arbogastus the Arbogastus upon suspicion of treason. He told Valextinian to his
face, that he received no preferment from him, nor had he power to casheer
him; and so put himself out, and killed his Lord.

Arbogastus presuming on the soldiers favor raised a great Army, and declares
Engenins Emperor, who unwillingly accepted it; knowing he should be Emperor
but in Title. These two intended to re-establish Idolatry: but Theodosius
hearing of these great preparations, betakes himself to his prayers, then
marches with his small army against the enemy, carrying the Cross for his
standard. Arbetion with a part of the enemies Forces went over to him. In
Theodosius, for whom the Heavens did fight. Eugenius fell flat at the Emperors
feet, but was killed by the soldiers. Arbogastus killed himself. Theodosius
returning victorious to Rome, declares his son Honorius Emperor, and appoints
Stilico for his Tutor. He perceiving how unwilling the Romans were to leave
their old Idolatry, under which they had flourished 1200 years, seiseth upon
all the revenues that belonged to the Priests and to the Idols, and so Idolatry
began to decay: and the poor in stead of Idols were relieved: yet Gentilism
could not be as yet quite extirpated.

Whilst Theodosius was at Millan in a popular tumult, at Thessalonica,
Vldericus the Governor there was killed. Upon this the Emperor in anger sent
thither some Troops to revenge his death, these killed about 7000 men. Ambrose
Bishop of Millan, hearing of this, debarred Theodosius from the Communion, who
publicly acknowledging his error, showed serious repentance, and made a a law
that 30 days should intercede between the sentence and execution. For
Theodosius though an excellent Prince, yet was oftentimes rash and rigid in
punishing, as may be seen in the Antiochians whom he caused to be plundered
and inslaved, for breaking down the statue of Placilla the Empress. Yet was
afterward pacified by Flavianus the Bishop, and so he was reconciled Ambrose
persuaded to thrust them out of all Cities into the Suburbs. After this good
Prince had reigned 16 years, he dyed at Millan, the 50, others say the 65 year
of his age, and left the Empire to his two sons, his body was buried at
Constantinople.

The Goths not long before Theodosius chose them a King, Alaricus by 4365. A.
C. 395
name, who persecuted the Christians. Afterward he embraced Arianism, in which
the Goths continued 213 years. Theodosius subdued them; to whom they
submitted, but afterward chose Alaricus for their king. The Helvidians or
Antidicomarianits lived about these times; then also ceased the Olympiads, and
the Indictions were instituted. Isdigerdes persecutes the Christians in Persia.
Gregory Nazianzen surrendered for peace sake his Bishopric of Constantinople,
to whom succeeded Nectarius who abolished private confession, upon an abuse
offered by a Deacon to a Noble woman: a Synod was held at Constantinople, and
another by Damasus at Rome.

After Theodosius, Arcadius succeeded in the East, Honorius in the West. These
two were bred under Arsenius a Roman Deacon, whom Theodosius one day coming
Arsenius might have had any preferment from his scholars, but he refused all,
and lived an Eremit. They had two Governors in their minority; Arcadius had
Ruffinus a Gaul and a wicked man; Honorius had Stilico: to Gildo was committed
Africa. Ruffinus drew Alaricus the Goth into Greece, where he committed many
outrages. Stilico married with Serena, the daughter of Theodosius his brother,
of her he had a daughter Mary by name, whom he married with Honorius. Then
sends Captain Gaina with an army to Arcadius, in whose presence they kill
Ruffinus. So Stilico was rid of a corrivall. Gildo by defrauding 4368. A. C.
398.
But him also Stilico destroyed by the help of his brother Mascelzel, who hated
Gildo his brother, for some wrongs received from him, therefore he overthrows
him in a battle, and drives him to self-murder. Afterward Mascelzel by
Stilico's treachery was drowned in the river.

The two Emperors having now got some breath after these tumults, in imitation
of their Father, command all Idolatrous temples to be overthrown, and the
gladiators to be abolished. Chrysostom was then sent for to be Bishop of
Constantinople; who reproved Gaina to his face for aiming at the Empire; and
endeavoring to overthrow Eutropius who succeeded to Ruffinus in the Emperors
Gainas conspiring with his countryman Tribigildus, began to make show of a
civil war. Tribigildus wastes many places in the provinces, against him Gainas
is sent, who of purpose increases the fear, and labors with Arcadius to
banish or put to death Eutropius for his own security. So Gainas a Goth and
Arian is received within the City, desires to exercise publicly the Arian
heresy, telling the Emperor that it did not stand with his honor, that he who
was the Roman General should exercise his Religion without the walls. But
Chrysostom resisted him, telling him of his ingratefulnesse, and turbulent
nature. But the Traitor intends to invade the city and Empire, wherefore under
pretense of recreating himself, removes into the country, carrying some Forces
with him, and leaving some in the city to act for him. But whilst they thought
to surprise the Arcadius not doubting of treachery, placed no guards in the
city. But some armor which he was conveying away being found, Gainas is
proclaimed traitor, and all the Goths in the city, were by the enraged
multitude murdered; even those 7000 that had taken sanctuary in the Temple.
Then Travittas being made General, overthrew Gainas in a Sea fight, and drove
him home into his own country, whom at last the king of the Hunns overthrew in
a battle, and then put him to death.

The Alani about this time made inroades upon the Empire. Stilico the Vandall
Alaricus to seize upon Illyricum, and all this was to make his own son
Eucherius Emperor. He employed also his countrymen the Vandals, with the
Alans, Sueves, Goths, and Huns against Gallia and Germany. The Vandals under
Croscus their General did much havoc in Gallia. Alaricus king of the Visi
goths, or Western Goths, drove the Alans and Sueves with the Vandals thence
into Spain. Stilico's ambition was raised by the great victory he got over the
Scythians, of which 200000 under their king Rhadagaisus break in upon Italy,
having laid wast many towns by the way. He vowed the blood of Christians for
a sacrifice to his gods. But Stilico so shut him up within the barren hills of
Fesulae, that they consumed away with the plague and famine, their king was
laid in irons, and strangled, and they were sold by flocks like sheep, a crown
then could buy a whole flock; but they dyed shortly after. In the mean while
Arcadius dies, being 31 years old, having reigned 14 years alone, and 4378. A.
C. 480.
13 with his Father. His Empress Eudoxa dyed a little before, having a dead
child in her womb.

In his time the Monks who in Diocletian's persecution began, were increased
to great numbers: they persecuted Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, for denying
to God a humane shape, this Theophilus was an enemy to Chrysostom, because he
befriended the Monks which he had excommunicated, for commending Origens
books. Chrysostom stood for Origin, whom Epiphanius Bishop of Salamis in
Cyprus resisted condemning these books, which Methodius Bishop of Lycia, then
of Tyrus, compared to the Syrenes for their many allegories. Epiphanius was
reproved by the Monks for condemning these books before a Council was
called, and so as he was returning home dyed by the way. Chrysostom for being
too free in his speech, chiefly against Eudoxa the Emperesse, whom he calls
Herodias, Eudoxa, which made Arcadius being uxorious banish him the second
time, then he dyed on the borders of Armenia, a year before the death of
Arcadius, two years before Rome was taken by Alaricus. But Pope Innocentius
excommunicated the Emperor and the Eastern Churches for condemning of
Chrysostom.

Arcadius left one son Theodosius behind him, a child of 8 years, to the
tuition of Isdigerdes king of Persia, hopeing by this means that the Persians
would forbear to molest the kings pupil by incursions on his territories. He
was a mild and religious Prince, well educated by his sister Pulcheria, who in
his minority ruled the Empire with great commendation. About this time a
certain paralytick Jew by baptism was recovered, and Marutha^ Bishop in
Mesopotamia by his prayers freed Isdigerdes from his continual headache, and
his son from the evil spirit with which he was possessed, so that the king
was like to turn Christian had not his Magi hindered him.

The same year that young Theodosius began his reign, Honorius understanding
Stilico's treasons caused him to be put to death at Ravenna with his
confederats. Stilico's daughter that was married to Honorius, is restored to
her mother Serena. His son Eucherius is executed at Rome, and the wives and
children of the Goths are by the enraged soldiers through all the towns of
Italy murdered. The Goths to be revenged, assembled themselves in a body of
30000 under Alaricus, 4379. A. C. 409.
who finding no justice from Honorius, by a secret command as he said,
marches toward Rome, without meddling with any towns by the way; to hinder him:
he seized upon the harbor and stopped all provision. He laughed when he heard
the citizens would fight; saying: that thick hay is easyer cut then thin.
Innocentius caused all the Images to be stripped of their ornaments and jewels,
to make l. weight of gold, and 30000 of silver, to pay Alaricus, who upon
receipt thereof, removed the siege. But Honorius refused to give hostages, and
to ratify the peace which the city had made with Alaricus, wherefore he
intercepted the soldiers which Honorius sent to guard the City.

Honorius continuing in his obstinacy sent for the Huns to assist him, and
remitted to Constantine the Tyrant, all the Territories beyond the Alps, then
did the Britains, Celtae, and A^morici recover their liberty, by expelling all
the Roman Officers. Alaricus besieges Rome again, and forces the citizens to
make Attalus their Governor Caesar, and to join their Forces with him against
Honorius. But the Army of Attalus which he sent to subdue Africa, was cut off
by Heraclianus Governor there under Honorius. Alaricus would willingly have
made peace with Honorius, and to that purpose sent diverse Embassies, but
Honorius had vowed the contrary. Attalus with a great Army drew near Ravenna
where Honorius was, which so affrighted him, that he profferred to make
Attalus his colleague, which he refused, in a proud and scornful way;
whereupon Alaricus divested Attalus of all his honor, and princely ornaments,
which he Honorius, hoping thereby that he would hearken to peace. But Sarus
and Iovius the two great Commanders of Honorius his Armies, would not give way
to any peace. Wherefore Alaricus by treason takes Rome, and sackes it; when the
4380. A. C. 310.
news thereof came to Honorius, that Rome was taken, he thought the messenger
had spoke of his great Cock, which he named Rome. Alaricus gave order that
none should be slain who took Sanctuary: but he could not keep the soldiers
from pillaging and burning. So great was the famine in Rome before it was
betrayed, that the people desired a price might be set upon men's flesh.
Alaricus stayed not in the city above three days, for he feared lest Theodosius
Honorius his brothers son, might be coming with his Eastern army, wherefore
having wasted Italy, as Ataulphus.

This Ataulphus married with Placidia Honorius his sister, who by her
allurements was persuaded to make peace, and go into Spain, that Honorius
might suppress the new upstart tyrants, which invaded the Empire, to wit,
Constantine, Constans, Gerontius, Iovinus, Sebastian, Sarus, and others. Which
was effected by the means of Constantius and Vulphilas his General.
Constantine at Arelatum is besieged, taken, and slain by Constantius: his son
Constans is killed by Gerontius, and he by his own soldiers: Iovinus also is
slain. Attalus is carried away with the Goths into Spain, and being taken at
Sea, had his head cut off. Heraclianus Constantius recovered Gallia from the
Goths. Athaulphus for desiring to make peace with Honorius is killed in Spain
by his soldiers: and so was his successor Sugericus, for the same cause. After
whom Mallia was elected by the Goths, to break the peace, which the two former
kept; but he remembering the miseries, which the Goths formerly suffered for
violating the peace, made a firm league with Honorius, gave him choice
hostages, and sent him back his sister Placidia, who afterward married with
Constantius that brave commander, and of him had Valentinian, afterward
Emperor. In the interim the Vandals and Suevi did continually war with the
Goths, to the great advantage of the Romans. But the Burgundians being
grievously Uptarus king of the Huns, resolve to serve Christ, and so having
received baptism, they fall suddenly upon the Huns, and in one battle kill
30000 of them. Since which time they constantly maintained the Christian
religion.

In the East Baraanes the Persian, upon the instigation of his Magi persecuted
the Christians, which Isdigerdas tolerated, and because Theodosius would not
restore those that fled to him, he is threatened with war: but Ardaburius the
Emperors General defeated the Persian Armies, and slew 10000 of their prime
soldiers, which they called immortal, 100000 Saracens being suddenly taken
with a panic fear, as they were flying from the Romans over Euphrates were
drowned. Palladius in three days space brought from Mesopotamia to
Constantinople. About this time Honorius dyed of an Hydropsie at Rome the 30
year of his Empire, and the 40 of his age. He had made Constantius 4393. A. C.
423.
his sisters husband Co-Emperor, but he dyed 5 months after his inauguration.
About these times lived Pelagius the great patron of free will, Helvidius also,
Audaeus and Benosus heretics. From Atulphus the Spaniards reckon their kings,
for before him Spain was possessed by Vandals, Alans, and Sueves. The French
begin their Chronicles from Faramund their first king, and General of the
Francks. Vasconia is so called from the Visigoths which drove out thence the
Vandals, Alans and Suoves into Spain, and 19 years after they drove the
Vandals, thence into Africa, they also overthrew the Alans and Sueves, and
reigned there about 386 years, until they were destroyed by the Mores.
Innocentius the first drove the Novatians out of Rome. The Britains being
forsaken by the Romans, became a prey to the Scots and Picts; from whose
oppressions that they might be delivered, they invited to their own destruction
the Saxons or Angles out of Germany. The Gauls also shook off the Roman yoke,
and called in the Francks, whilst Alaricus Palladius by Pope Celestine is sent
into Scotland, to convert them from the Pelagian heresy. He was the first
Bishop there, before him that Church was governed by Monks. About these times
dyed S. Hierome in Bethlem 91 years old, and about 11 or 12 years after, S.
Augustine in Hippo in the 76 year of his age, the 40 of his Bishopric. The
University of Bononia is instituted by Theodosius.

CHAP. IV.
Diverse alterations in the Empire under Theodosius, Martianus, Leo and Zeno.

Upon the death of Honorius, Castinus General of the Army, advances John the
Secretary to the Empire; who sent Ambassadors to Theodosius for his favor and
approbation. But he imprisons the Ambassadors, and 4395. A. C. 425.
sends Ardaburius the Praetor against him, whom John near Ravenna beset round.
Which being known, Theodosius sends Valentinian the son of Placidia his Aunt,
whom he had made Caesar to recover the Western Empire. Asper the Ardaburius
was sent before, whom a shepherd in an unknown habit, conducted through a Lake
into Ravenna. Ardaburius is set free, John is subdued, and Castinus banished.
So Valentinian by the consent of all Italy is made Emperor. Bonifacius and
Aetius by Theodosius are allowed for his Generals. But these two by their
emulations, and Valentinian his negligence ruined all. Spain, Gallia, Britain,
and west Lybia are lost. Aetius instigated the Emperor against Boniface
Governor of Africa, who understanding of the danger he was in, and what was
intended against him by Valentinian and Placidia, called in Guntharius and
Gensericus kings of the Vandals then in Spain. These with fire and sword wast
Africa, and Boniface understanding that Aetius his letters, which he sent him
were false concerning the Emperors intentions against him, would fain have
thrust the Vandals out of Africa again, but could not, wherefore he comes to
Rome, and in a set battle defeats Aetius, but shortly after he dyed, and left
4402. A. C. 432.
Afric to the Vandals, who besieged Hippo, in the 3 month of this siege S.
Austin dyed.

After this Aetius is reconciled to the Emperors. Numidia is given to the
Vandals and a peace concluded with them. Aetius forces the Burgundians, and
Litorius, the Goths then besieging Narbon, to hearken to peace. Theodosius his
wife Athenais daughter of Leontius the Athenian Philosopher, was baptized, and
Eudoxia. She expressed some places of Scripture in Homer's verses, as Proba
Falconia did before her in Virgil's. This Eudoxia had a daughter by Theodosius
of her own name, who was married to Valentinian in Constantinople. Eudoxia the
mother went the next year to Jerusalem, whence she brought Peter's chains, in
memory of which she caused the first of August to be kept holy, which before
was observed in honor of Augustus his victory over Antonius and Cleopatra. In
the 30 year of Theodosius there were earthquakes which lasted many months
together, overthrowing houses and towns, which presaged great commotions and
changes in the State. In these earthquakes a certain young man was suddenly
taken up in the air, and let down again, who told the people, that they must
all sing: Holy God, Holy and strong, Holy and Immortal, have mercy upon us.
Hereupon they all sung Kyrie eleison, and the earthquake ceased. But the Empire
began more and more to decline. For Theodosius let loose the rains to his
covetous Funuchs.

The Goths first defeated Valentinians Army, took Litorius his General
prisoner, and forced the Emperor to sue for peace, and to surrender a part of
Gallia. In the interim Gensericus possesses himself of Carthage, the next
year he crosses Theodosius sent Forces thither, but to little purpose. Shortly
after, that scourge of God Attila king of the Huns, wastes Thracia and
Illyricum: takes in all Castles, and Cities, except Adrianopolis and Heraclea.
So that Theodosius was fain to hire him to be gone, for 6000 lib. weight of
gold, and a yearly tribute. But pretending not long after, that his tribute was
not duly paid, he renews the war; and being confederate with Gensericus, he
arms the Scythians, Ostrogoths, Sarmatians, Marcomans, Saxons, and diverse other
nations, making show that he would drive the Goths out of Gallia, and makes the
Goths believe, that he was the greatest enemy the Romans had. But Valentinian
having discovered his cunning plot, unites himself to all the kings of Gallia,
to Theodoricus of the Goths, Gundericus of the Burgundions, Merovenus of the
Francs, and Sangibanus king of the Alans; all these under Aetius his General,
he employeth against A^tila. In the large fields of Catalaunum or Chaalons the
battle was fought, on both sides were slain 162000, besides 90000 of the
Gepidae and Francs, which before the great battle had killed each other in the
night time. The Francs held with the Romans, the Gepidae with the Huns.
Theodoricus king of the Goths, or of Spain was killed by a fall from his
horse, as he was riding about his soldiers, animating them to fight. Attila
after the battle durst not venture out of his Camp. It Is thonght he had in
his Army 500 thousand men.

Theodosius the second being 50 years old, dyed of a bruise which he had by a
4420. A. C. 450.
fall from his horse, he reigned 42 years after his father. In his time lived
Pope Leo a great Champion against Eutyches Archimandrita or Abbot of
Constantinople, who held but one nature in Christ. Him Flavianus the Bishop
excommunicated, Eutyches appears to Leo, who condemned his Colleague of
temerity: and the heretic by the means of Chrysaphius the Eunuch got a
Council to be held at Ephesus, in which Dioscorus of Alexandria guarded by
soldiers was president. Here Flavianus was condemned, and Eutyches absolved.
The Bishops then present out of fear were fain to subscribe to Dioscorus.
Flavianus was kicked out of the Council by Dioscorus, and dyed three days
after. It Is said that Dioscorus troad on him after he was dead. This second
Council of Ephesus was called (...), or the Domnus of Antioch repenting that
he had voted with that impious Synod, incensed the Emperor against Dioscorus,
to appease whose anger Chrysaphius made Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople, and
removed Pulcheria from the Court, upon false surmises. But Theodosius upon
better information banisheth the Eunuch, recals his sister to the Court again,
and reproves his wife, who pretending a vow went to Jerusalem. But the death of
Theodosius, and wars of Attalus hindered the full decision of this heresy till
the third year of Martian.

Before this, in the 24 year of Theodosius the second, the first Council of
Ephesus Nestorius the Syrian Bishop of Constantinople, who held there were two
persons in Christ. Against him Cyrill of Alexandria wrote, whose doctrine was
received by the Church of Constantinople. Nestorius is banished beyound Thebes
in Egypt, where he dyed, his tongue being eat out with worms: this
Ecclesiastical broil raised by Nestorius was presaged by the murder done in
the Church of Constantinople. Not long before; some slaves being threatened by
their Masters, took sanctuary in the Church, from whence they were commanded to
depart, but they having killed a Priest, and one more that resisted them, at
last murdered one another. And not only was the Church infested with
Nestorians and Eutychians, but with Pelagians also and Novatians, against whom
diverse Councels were assembled; and the Novatians by force of arms were forbid
the exercise of Religion. The Jews about this time were driven out of
Alexandria, and those of Crete being deluded by a false Mos^s, who persuaded
many of them to leap into the Sea, promising he would divide it for them, as
the true Moses once did, were drowned, and the rest being wiser were converted.

The Goths being gone, Attila lays siege to Aquileja, which he took and
overthrew, with Millan, Ticinum, and Vincentia: the Veneti or Heneti, a people
Attila fled into those little Islands of the Sea, and laid the foundation of
Venice. Pope Leo so pacified 4424. A. C. 454.
Attila, that he went not further, but returned with his army into Gallia,
where he was defeated by Thursimundus, and so retreated into Scythia, where he
dyed in his marriage bed: for though he had many wives, yet he would marry with
Hildico a young maid and daughter of the King of Bactria, that night being
inflamed with wine and Venus, he surrendered his bloody soul, being choked with
blood in his sleep which gushed out of his mouth in great abundance. Not long
after Valentinian was murdered by Maximus who was then a great man at Rome,
and whose wife Valentinian had abused by sending her husbands ring to her
Maximus aleniates Valentinians affection from Aetius, as if he aimed at the
Empire. Whereupon Aetius who had done him so much good service, is by his
command put to death; Valentinian (as one told him) had done better to have cut
off his own right hand. Maximus causes two of Aetius his 4425. A. C. 455.
soldiers to kill him, which they did, and thus was his magic, lusts, and
murder punished in Campus Martius the 30 year of his Empire. About this time
the Saxons being called by the Britains against the Scots, drove those they
should have aided into Wales. The Acephali were the Eutychian spaune, who held
that Christ was to be worshipped but in one nature, which was made up of the
divinity and humanity.

Martianus succeeded to Theedosius, he was a Thracian by birth, and the
General of Theodosius his Army in Africa against Gensericus, and in Syria
against the Persians. Pulcheria being now a Virgin of 50 years, advanced him to
the Empire, and married with him conditionally, that he should make no use of
her bed, for she meant to dye a Virgin. He had been taken heretofore a prisoner
in Africa by Gensericus, to whom he swore that if ever he were Emperor, he
would hold perpetual peace with the Vandals. For when he was sleeping among
the rest of the captives in the field, Gensericus observed how an Eagle spread
her wings over Dioscorus of Alexandria was condemned; and it was determined,
that in Christ remained the two natures without confusion, mutation, division
or separation, united in one person.

The quarrel was no sooner ended, but upstarts another between the two
Patriarchs of Rome and Constantinople about the primacy; Leo challenging the
headship Attila was wasting all the Western Empire. Earthquakes every where,
and flashes of lightning in the air. Leo disliked the definition of the
Council, and impugned it with public and private Epistles written to the
Churches. Valentinian and Aetius being killed, the Barbarians without fear
broke in on all sides upon the Empire. The Francs were now subject to Merovius,
after Feramundus and Clagio; they took possession of Paris, and the Isle of
France. The Visigoths under Theodoricus were seated in Spain, whence they
expulsed the Suevi. At Rome Maximus married with Eudoxia the daughter of
Theodosius, and wife of Valentinian. Possessing both wife and Empire together
by force of arms. But when foolishly he had discovered to the Emperesse, that
he was the cause of Valentinians death; she desiring to be revenged, invited
Gensericus out of Africa by private letters. Gensericus glad of this occasion,
hastens to Rome with a great Fleet. Maximus being unprovided, thought to escape
by flight, but his own soldiers stoned him to death. The Princes fly away,
the City is delivered to Gensericus, which the soldiers for 14 days Titus
brought from Jerusalem; this plate Bellisarius afterward, having recovered
Africa, sent to Constantinople, and by Justinian it was remitted to Jerusalem:
the City also in many places was fired; but consecrated places upon the
entreaty of Leo were spared, much of the spoil was cast away by shipwreck, as
they returned home.

The tyrant carried with him to Africa Eudoxia with her two daughters, which
she bare to Valentinian, Placidia, and Galla, Eudocia, with many more
Captives. He married Eudocia to his son Hunnericus; Placidia to Olybrius a
Roman Senator. Others write that Gensericus to appease Martianus who was
Placidia with her mother; but before they came Martian was dead, and so Leo had
them. Gallia now is divided among the Burgundians, Goths, and Francks. But on a
sudden Avitus whom Maximus had made his General invaded the Empire of France,
which he was forced to lay down again, and to accept of the Bishopwrick of
Placentia. But thinking himself not safe there, returned into Gallia where he
dyed of grief. Him shortly after followed Martianus who dyed the 7 year of his
Empire. He was a 4426. A. C. 456
peaceable and religious Prince.

Leo succeeded to Martianus, he was a Thracian, and had been a Tribune of the
soldiers, he was the first Emperor that was crowned by a Patriarch. Anatolius
Proterius their Bishop. He made Majorinus General of his Forces, and sent him
to govern the West, which he did for 4 years, at last was killed by Ricimerus,
whom he had invited with his Army to expel the Alans out of Gallia. Leo made
a league with the Ostrogoths, who drove Hernacus the son of Attila into
Scythia, and the Sueves out of Spain. Ardaricus King of the Gepidae, a people
among the Getae, the first who freed himself from the slavery of Attalus his
sons, received Dacia from Leo. The Goths had Pannonia, a part of the Alans
had the lower Maesia. After Majoranus, Severus reigned 3 years, under him
Ricimer defeated the Alans, 4431. A. C. 461.
breaking in upon Italy, and killed Beurgus their King. By a Candle left
burning in the Forum carelessely, Constantinople took fire, which could not be
quenched in 4 days. Antioch, Gallia, and others parts were shaken with
Earthquakes, which occasioned Mamertus Bishop of Vienna to institute larger
Litanies, which afterward were wont to be sung still the sixth week after
Easter. Severus being killed by Ricimer the Goth Anthemius is sent to Italy by
Leo, upon the entreaty of the Romans, his daughter Ricemer married, and so was
quiet a while. 4445. A. C. 465.
In the mean time Gensericus is defeated in a Sea fight. Leo's Fleet was 1000
and 100 ships; but shortly after, Basiliscus the brother of Verina Augusta,
(whom Leo upon the recommendation of his two great Generals Aspar and
Ardabutius Basiliscus being an Eutychian, and willing to please his two
Patrons, that the Arian heresy might flourish. Ricemer also the Arian
besieges his Father in law Anthemius in Rome, which he took, and then
murdered him, having reigned 5 years; but he shortly after dyed, to whom
succeeded Anicius Olybrius, who 4452. A. C. 472.
dyed 4 months after. Then did Leo upon the importunity of Aspar, create his
son Caesar, at which the peope repined, that an Arian should reign over them.
but not long after Leo finding Aspars treachery, commanded both him and his two
sons to be slain and bequeathed by will, the Empire to his Grandchilde by
Ariadna his daughter.

To Olybrius succeeded Glycerius at Ravenna; he bribed the Goths to keep out of
Italy, and so did Leo to keep them off from Greece. Who shortly after dyed of a
looseness, having reigned 17 years. He named Julius Nepos for the western
Empire, who coming to Italy by Sea, removed Glycerius after he had reigned 5
years, and made him a Bishop in Dalmatia. In Leo's time Childericus King of
the Francs, was banished by the people (for his insolency) into Thuringia, and
by them Aegidius a Roman Commander is chosen: but 8 years after Childericus
Merovnus held. About this time dyed Pope Leo, to whom succeeded Hilaricus. And
at Constantinople to Genandius succeeded Acacius. Studius a Consular man set up
an order of watching Monks who were to sing divine Service, and to watch by
turns night and day: in Constantinople. There a certain painter represented
Christ in the form of Jupiter, whereupon his hand withered. Vesuvius brake out
into great flames, with the ashes whereof many countries were covered: in
memory of which, an annual solemnity was ordained to be kept at
Constantinople. Eutyches and Dioscorus refusing to stand to the decrees of the
Council of Chalcedon, Iacobites, so called from Jacob the Syrian, and the
Haesitantes or Diacrinomeni, which doubted whether or not they should receive
the said Synod. The Rogation solemnity was then instituted by Mamercus Bishop
of Vienna: In which the time was spent in fasting, praying, singing, and
weeping, it was occasioned by the Earthquakes of Vienna, and the irruption of
Wolves and other wild Beasts into the City, which destoyed many people: then
did Rabbi Jonathan perfect the Thalmud of Jerusalem.

Leo's Nephew being dead in his infancy, deformed Zeno Leo's son in law, a
Cilician of obscure parentage, and father to the foresaid Infant, succeeds in
the Nepos in the Western, whom Orestes drove into Dalmatia, as Nepos had done
Glycerius before. Nepos his son called Momyllus, is made Augustus, and for
his small stature is named Augustulus. But he shortly after is banished by
Odoacer King of the Heruli, who being called in by the friends of Nepos,
overrun all Italy, slew Orestes at Placentia, and took Rome; which is now the 4
time it is taken. 1. By the Gauls. 2. By the Goths in the time of Honorius. 3.
By the Vandals in Martians time. 4. Now by the Heruli. And 5. it was afterward
taken by Attila. In the reign of Justinian, as we shall see, Odoacer named
himself King of Italy, abolished the Consular dignity, transferred the seat of
his Kingdom to Ravenna, and so that glorious Empire Augustus ended in
Augustulus, 522 years since Augustus Caesar.

In the East Basiliscus brother to Verina the Emperesse, made war against Zeno,
A. C. 476*
she animating her brother against her son in law, Zeno being a coward, fled
with his wife Ariadne to Isauri near mount Taurus in Cilicia, where he was
born; there he lived one year and 8 months. In the mean time Basiliscus as
bad as Zeno, advanced the Eutychian heresy, and forced Acacius to side with
him against the Council of Chalcedon. But within two years his Army under
Harmatus fell off to Zeno, against whom they were sent, and brought him back to
Constantinople, who sent away Basiliscus with his wife and children to a Castle
Basiliscus his time, the Library of Byzantium took fire, in which 120000 books
were burned. Zeno being nothing bettered by these troubles, names for Caesar
Basiliscus son to Harmatus the traitor; he first kills Hermatus the father,
not daring to trust him who betrayed his Master, then after he had named his
son Caesar, according to his promise, he makes him a Clergy man. Zeno's
son dyed, before he attained the Empire. And he himself being one day dead
drunk fell down speechless, his wife Ariadne buryeth him before he was quite
dead, no man offering to help him, though he groned lamentably, and so dyed
having reigned 17 years. 532 years after Iul. Caesar's death.

Two years before Zeno dyed, Theodoricus the son of Amalus King of the
Ostrogoths, having overrun Thracia and Maesia, threatens Constantinople. Zeno a
better flatterer then a soldier, invites his enemy into the City, made him
Consul, and bestowed diverse honors on him; and at last persuaded him to go
against Odoacer in Italy. Theodoricus an active Prince was easily persuaded to
this, being troubled that Italy the mistress of the World should be subject
to the obscure Nation of the Heruli, and finding that Odoacer having Phaebas
Prince of the Rugi upon the Baltic sea (whose seats were now possessed by the
Longobarbs) was secure at this time; hastens into Italy, and defeates him at
the bridge Sotius, then gives him a second overthrow near Verona, whence he was
called Veronensis. In the third encounter he drives 4460. A. C. 490.
him within Ravenna, who having made a sally upon Theodoricus in the night, was
beat back again; a part of the Army was left to besiege the town, with the
rest Theodoricus marches about Italy, makes peace with Hunericus King of the
Vandals in Africa, and frees Sicily from their oppression. This Hunericus worse
then Gensericus his father, upon the instigation of the Arians, banished and
slew 400000 Catholics. He cut out some of the Preachers Odoacer after he had
been besieged three years in Ravenna, was slain by Theodoricus, who having
recovered Italy, recommended the care of Rome to the Senate, and made Ravenna
the seat of his Kingdom. But being an Arian he imprisoned Pope John, till he
dyed there, for not permitting the Arians to have Churches. He imprisoned at
Ticinum two Senators, Symmachus and his son in law Boethius; then seized upon
their estates, and slew them. Not long after, at supper, as he was looking on
the head of a fish; he thought he saw Symmachus with Symmachus was not he
that in the time of Theodosius wrote against the Christians.

About Zeno's time the South Saxons erected their Kingdom in England 32 years
after their arrival. The Jews at Tiberias by the help of Rabbi Ben Aser, and
R. Ben. Nepthali found out those Hebrew pricks which we use at this day in
stead of vowels and accents, which are read in some words otherwise by the
Eastern Jews about Babylon, then by the Western. Enricus King of Spain was the
first there, that gave laws to the Goths in writing. Pope Gelasius compiled
the Canon of the Mass, and the Collects or short Church-prayers. Clodovens the
Remigius Archbishop of Rhemes, who gave him the name of Ludovicus. The holy Oil
was then (if we may believe it) brought by a Dove from Heaven, with which he
was, and his successors are at this day anointed.

CHAP. V.
The Roman affairs under Anastasius, Justinus and Justinian. 2. Of the
Persians, Goths, and other barbarous Nations of those times. 3. The affairs

ZEno being starved in his tomb, for want of food eat up his own flesh,
Ariadna his wife not suffering any to help him; advances to the Empire
Anastasius, with whom it is thought she was too familiar in her former 4461. A.
C. 491.
husbands time; therefore now makes have to marry him. He was before but a
Court Scribe or Secretary, called Silentiarius, for Secretaries should be
silent, he was nick named Dicorus because the apple of his eyes were of two
colors. Euphemius Patriarch of Constantinople, refused to crown him, till he
had subscribed to the council of Chalcedon: which in policy he did, showing
great justice in the beginning of his reign; in abrogating those acts by which
taxes were raised by unlawful ways, as of public stews, and such like; he
banished all informers from the city; and would suffer no offices to be bought
and sold. He banished Longinus, Zeno's brother, for aspiring to the Empire, at
last slew him for arming the Isauri against him. He forced the Arabians who
had overrun Mesopotamia and Palestina, to make peace with him. He took Amida
from Cabades the Persian King. Whom his subjects imprisoned for making it
lawful that

Anastasius being settled in the Empire, began to show himself in his true
colors being disguised before. He demands back his handwriting, by which he
had promised never to molest the Orthodox professors. He banisheth Euphemius,
and sets up Macedonius in his place, from whom violently he extorted his
handwriting, and then banished him, advancing Timotheus his flatterer, and
Pander. He banished also the chief of the Orthodox Clergy. He built a wall 280
furlongs distant from Constantinople, to keep off the barbarous incursions of
the Inhabitants Vitalianus the Thracian with his Mysians and Scythians from
plundering the country all about Byzantium; who also beset the City with a
Fleet of Ships. But Anastasius sent Martinus captain of his guard with an army
against him, and by burning glasses, which Proclus the Mathematician had made,
set all the enemies ships on fire: yet he was fain to beg for peace, which
was granted conditionally, that the Orthodox Bishops which Anastasius banished,
be recalled home; and that a Synod be called. Which was assented to, and
Vitalianus is made muster master of Thracia, and rewarded with a great sum of
gold. Pope Hormisdas sent to Anastasius about this Synod, but upon some
discontents, or miscarriage of the Legates, they Flavianus Bishop of Antioch was
assaulted by the Eutychian Monks, because he would not abjure the Council of
Chalcedon, but the townsmen fell upon the Monks, killed many of them, and drove
many into the river Orontes, where they were drowned. Hereupon Flavianus is
banished again, and the Eutychian Severus set in his chair, who being incensed
against the Monks of Syria for aiding Flavianus, he slew 300 of them, and would
not suffer them to be buried. Anastasius adding to the hymn of the Trinity
these words, who was crucified for us; as if he meant, that the deity was
crucified, occasioned such a tumult in the people, that he could scarce appease
them, though he laid down his crown before

In the second year of Anastasius, Odoacer was killed by Theodoricus, who was
4463. A. C. 493.
King of Italy 33 years; he repaired the decays of Rome, and was bountiful
to the people. Clodoveus then King of France, partly by the instigation of his
wife, a Burgundian, and partly because of his vow which he made, became a
Christian, for he vowed so to be, if he obtained the victory over the Alemans,
which he had. He overcame also Gundebaldus of Burgundy, and Theodoricus the
Goth King of Aquitania, so having enlarged the bounds of France, he set up his
Court at Paris, he was angry with Anastasius for diverting the Bulgarians, (a
people unheard of till now) from Illyricum, and Thracia, where they were
seating themselves, Theodoricus overthrew, and added Syrmium with Pannonia to
his Dominion. Anastasius made Clodoveus a Patrician, and named him Augustus,
whence great jealousies arose between Clodoveus and Theodoricus, and then wars
in which 30000 Francks were killed by the Goths. Pope Anastasius being dead, a
bloody quarrel arose at Rome, about the election of a new Pope; some stood for
Symmachus; some for Laurentius. The quarrel lasted 3 years, till Thedoricus
ended it, who assigned the honor to Symmachus that was first nominated. About
this time the Catholics in Africa were set at liberty by Gundamundus the
Vandall, but they were banished afterward by Thrasamundus. One Olympius as he
was blaspheming the Trinity, was visibly burned by a fire dart from heaven.
Theodoricus the Arian killed one Diaconus whom he loved well, because he
became an Arian for the Kings sake, saying: He that will not be faithful to
God, will never be faithful to the King: for he hated those that changed their
religion. Severus the Eutychian Bishop of Antioch would have converted
Alamundarus the Saracen king to Eutychianism. The King fained himself to be sad
for the death of Michael the Archangel: the Bishops told him an Angel could not
dye, to whom he replied: How then could Christ dye, if 4488. A. C. 518.
he was only God? and so stopped the Eutychians mouths.

Anastasius having lived 88 years, and reigned 27. was struck dead with
thunder. In his time the Acephali or headless heretics, having no Bishops to
patronise them, divided themselves into many sects: to wit, Trithaits, Agonets,
Theopaschites, Jacobites, Armenians, etc. A people of Persia called Immeres,
who had been Jews, after Solomon had visited their Queen, but turned again to
Gentilism, sent to Anastasius for a Bishop, and so embraced Christianity.
Alamundarus also the Saracen Prince was baptized. The Babylonian Thalmud was
now finished by the Rabbis, about 100 years after the Thalmud of Jerusalem,
and 29. years after, the invention of the Hebrew pricks. The feast of Michael
the Archangel is Anastasius dreamed before he dyed that 14 years of his life
should be cut off, for his heresy; he was forewarned also that he should dye
by thunder. His statues and his wifes are dragged through the streets of
Byzantium by the enraged people.

Justinius a Thracian born, of a Sow-herd became Emperor, by bribing the
soldiers. For Amantius the Eunuch and great Chamberlain to Anastasius, had
given to Justinius a large donative to be distributed among these soldiers, who
did vote for his friend Theocritus whom he meant to make Emperor, Justinius
preferred himself, and so got the soldiers to vote for him. Amantius being
thus deluded conspired with Andrew the Chamberlain, and Theocritus against
Justinius, but the plot being discovered, they were all three slain. Amantius
had dreamed a Justin to show his zeal 4889. A. C. 519.
to the Council of Chalcedon, called his wife Dupicina by the name of Euphemia
the martyr, in whose church that Council was held. He recalled the Catholics
from banishment, exiled the Arians and Eutychians, thrust Severus from his
Bishopric of Antioch, and condemned him to lose his blasphemous tongue.
Vitalianus muster-master under Anastasius, and very intimate with Justin was
(as its thought) by his command murdered in the palace. In whose place
Justinian his sisters son was chosen.

Cabades the Persian king having wars with Justin, he hired for gold Zeliobes
King of the Huns, to assist him. Who being invited by the Persian for a greater
Justin, and assisted the Persian. Justin by his letters acquainted Cabades how
this dishonest King had served him, who could not deny, but he had received
the money, whereat Cabades being incensed slew him, and many more of the Huns
with him, which had not escaped by flight; (there were 20000 of them) and peace
was made with Justin for his sincerity, which lasted not long: for Tsathius
King of the Lazors or Colchi revolting from the Persian, came to Justin,
receives the Christian religion and is baptized, therefore he is called King
by Justin, and is sent back to Colchis, which then was subject to the Persian.
This caused a quarrel; the Colchi and Huns join with Justin against the
Persians. But Cabades being aged and sickly, desired his son Cosroes might
be adopted by Justin; Proclus his Treasurer dissuaded, as being dangerous both
to himself, and to Justinian. Upon this the quarrel grew greater; and now not
only is Cabades Iustins enemy, for advancing Tsathius, but Theodoricus
Veronensis also, for persecuting the Arians. Pope John the first successor to
Hormisdas with Boethius and Symmachus, came to entreat Justin, that he would
not be too rigid against the Arians, lest Theodoricus should use the same
rigor in his Dominions against the Catholics. These Ambassadors were
honorably entertained, and great joy there was to see a Pope in
Constantinople, who because he was above the Patriarch, Justin would be
crowned by him; he was the first Emperor that was crowned by the Pope;
Theodoricus hearing of this was enraged, thinking these Ambassadors had
plotted with Justin, against him, and his Western Dominion, therefore he
starved John in prison, and slew the other two (as was said) with their
followers; he dyed shortly after 4496. A. C. 520.
himself.

His daughter Amalasunta succeeded with her young son Athalaricus, they
reigned together 8 years, and restored to the Francs those parts of Gallia,
which the Grand father had taken. After the death of Alaricus, Amalasunta made
Theodatus her cousin german Colleague with her in the kingdom, whom she used
to Alaricus, that it stood not with the greatness of a Prince to be under the
mothers ferula. But she for her good will toward her son and cousin, lost
her life; for by command of Theodatus she was strangled in a bath. But Eudoxia
daughter to Valentinian the third so instructed her son Childericus, that he
having obtained the kingdom of the Vandals in Africa, by the death of
Tharsimund, broke the Oath which his Father made him swear, to persecute the
catholics, and hearkening to his mother, called home all the banished Bishops.
Justin in the mean time having reigned 9 years, and lived 77 dyed of grief,
for the overthrow of Antiochia by Earthquake, in which Euphrasius Justinian
Emperor. In his time the Manichees were utterly destroyed by King Cabades in
Persia, because they poisoned his son Phatuarsas with their heresies, and were
tampering with him, to bring innovations into the kingdom. Clodovejus four
sons divided the kingdom amongst them, and to entertain peace with Alamaricus
the son of Alarinus they marry their sister Clotilda to him. Alaricus 2 King of
Spain, and Aquitain married with Amalasintha daughter to Theodoricus King of
Italy. She was learned in the Greek and Latin tongues, besides diverse vulgar
languages; whereas Justin the Emperor could neither write nor read. Alamaricus
married with Tottilla the daughter of king Clodovejus, whom he used roughly
for holding firm to the Catholic Religion, which caused a war between
Childebertus (who succeeded Clodoveus) and Almaricus, who here lost his life.
S. Benedict instituted the order of the Benedictin monks. Slavi a people of
Scythia invaded Istria and the borders of Venetia; these in the time of
Mauritius transplanted themselves into Bohemia and Polonia. The Histrians upon
the coming of these Slavonians removed to the Isle Capraria or Aegilon in the
Tuscan Sea, abounding in Goats; here they built Justinopolis. The Longobards
invade Pannonia, whence they drive out the Huns and Ostrogoths. Theodoricus
restores Spain and Aquitania to his Nephew Amalaricus. About this time lived S.
Brigid that famous Scots Lady, who was very intimate Patric.

Justinian succeeded, a Catholic Prince, learned and fortunate, by reason of
his 4497. A. C. 527.
good Commanders, but covetous and wretched, extorting great sums from the
people, which he spent on his buildings and soldiers. He so broke the Persian
with that war which Justin began that he forced Cosroes the son of Cabades to
sue for peace. He slew also the rebellious Jews, he caused Tribonianus and
other Lawyers to abbreviate and reduce into method, the old laws confused and
dispersed in many volumes. Whence we have the Codex, the Digests and
Institutions. The rest of Antioch is overthrown with a new earthquake, and in a
dangerous sedition at Constantinople above 30000 were slain. For Hypatius
Pompejus and Probus Anasiasius, being armed by the people who were weary of
Iustinian's taxes, invaded the Empire, first pillaging for five days together,
all that were loyal to Justinian. But Hippatius and Pompejus were both slain,
as they were offering to seize upon the Palace, by Belisarius who being before
in some disgrace, did now by this fact reingratiate himself with the Emperor.

In Afric Gilimer having killed Hildericus the son of Hunericus, and Eudoxa
Valentinians daughter, took the kingdom of the Vandals by force. Justinian who
interceded for the life of Hildericus, finding his request slighted, and
Hildericus murdered in the prison, sent Belisarius with an Army, who drove
Gilimer into Numidia, took Carthage, which had been 95 years out of the Romans
possession, since Gensericus took it. Gilimer being besieged and forced with
famine, was taken and carried in silver fetters by Belisarius to Justinian, who
as he was led in triumph cried out Vanity of vanities, and all is vanity. Thus
was the kingdom of the Vandals extinguished in Africa, which had continued
since their first coming thither 108 years. Justinian divided Afric into
seven Provinces, three Consular, and four Praetorian: that is, three were
appointed by the Consuls and people, Belisarius being made Consul is sent into
Sicily to revenge the murder of the Queen Amalasventa, who in prison implored
the Emperors help. Belisarius having seized upon Sicily, Theodatus sends Pope
Agapetus to Constantinople to make his peace with the Emperor. Agapetus
condemned Anthimus the Patriarch of heresy, and having got Menna to succeed
him, dyed shortly after at Byzantium, to whom by the appointment of Theodatus
Silverius succeeds. Belisarius takes Naples, upon which Theodatus is slain at
Ravenna by his soldiers for his carelessness, and so he was punished for the
murder of Amalasventa his cousin german. Vitiges is made King by the Goths.
Belisarius was invited to Rome by the citizens, who takes it and repaires the
walls; Belisarius; Vitiges joining with the Francs, raises an Army of 150000
men, lays siege to Rome, Belisarius stoutly defends it, so that 30000 Goths
were at this siege destroyed in one day. The siege lasted above a year, in
which time there were 69 skirmishes, and the Goths at last driven from the
siege. Pope Silverius being accused of treachery is by Iustinian's command
banished into Pontia an Island in the Tyrrhen Sea, called Porce. In whose place
Belisarius sets up Vigilius, and then raises the siege before Ariminum. But
the Goths assisted by the Burgundians, take Millan upon surrender, and put all
to the sword; it is thought at least 300000. of all sorts, the women were
bestowed on the Burgundians. 50000 dyed of the plague at Picenum, and so great
was the Vitiges being in great straights, solicited Cosroes the Persian to make
war upon the Emperor, who otherwise was like to bring all his Forces into
Italy. But in the mean while Belisarius took Ravenna, Vitiges submits to him;
the Goths proffered to Belisarius the Empire of Italy, which he refused, and
retorning home upon Justinians command, carried with him Vitiges. In whose
stead the Goths beyond Padua set up Theudibaldus, who having scarce reigned a
year, was killed. Araricus succeeded, who was slain shortly after; then Totilas
was made King. He thrusts the Romans out of Ravenna, and overthrowes them in a
pitched battle.

Belisarius upon his return is employed in Syria and Persia against Cosroes,
at 4511. A. C. 541.
which time the plague so rages at Constantinople, that there dyed 10000 a
day. Cosroes burns Seleucia and diverse other cities. In Italy Neapolis is
recocovered by the diligence of the Goths. The Garrison is friendly dismissed,
and the Inhabitants almost starved, are kindly used. So strict was the
Discipline of the Army, that Totilas executed a kinsman of his for lying with a
maid, whose whole estate he bestowed on her. Italy being in danger to be lost
again. Belisarius is called back from Persia, and sent to Italy, where he
could do but little good, because the old soldiers were either al gone, or
else they were grown stubborn. Therefore Totilas takes Rome again, being
betrayed, and almost all starved, and overthrowes Occa King of Cantium having
invited the Saxons against Arthur King of the Britains, was disappointed; for
they were not permitted to land, wherefore they take pay under the French King.
Serditius King of the South. Saxons, seiseth on the Isle of Wight, which he
bestowed upon Stuffa and Whitgar, who destroyed the old Britains. Whitgar
called the Castle there Whitgarsburg, now briefly Garesburg.

Belisarius returns again into Italy, takes Tarentum, Spoletum, and Rome,
which he fortysieth; but the Persian war being renewed by Cosroes, he was
again commanded thither. Whose departure gave occasion to Totilas to overrunne
again all Italy: he obtaines also Rome by the treason of the Isauri; which
now he fenceth for himself. Not long before this, the Danes being driven out
of France, fell upon Frisia. The Lombarbs came out of their countries before
this, Sujon being then king of the Danes, they under their Captain Alboinus, on
the borders of Pannonia overcame Cunimundus King of the Gepidae, to whom
Syrmium and much of Dalmatia was subject. Shortly after Narses whom Justinian
sent to Italy in stead of Belisarius sends for these who did him good service
in subduing the Goths: in a short while after Totilas in Tuscia was overthrown
4522. A. C. 552.
and killed. So Rome and Italy became subject again to Justinian, from whence
the remainder of the Goths were quite expulsed, who chose Tejas for their King.
He having reigned one year, was in a battle overthrown at Cumae, and slain.
The 22 year of the Gothic war. Aligernus Captain of the Cumaean Garrison,
yielded himself to Narses. Shortly after the Francs and Alemans, as they
entered into Italy, and fell to plundering, were set upon, stripped of all their
booty, and of 30000 Scairs 5000 returned home, the rest being consumed by the
sword and the plague. So Italy being quieted, and Cosroes forced by many losses
to sue for peace, both Rome and Constantinople were shaken with earthquakes,
upon which follows the plague, which swept away multitudes of people: Justinian

Belisarius though now aged, yet was employed against the Huns, who had broke
in upon Chersonesus and Greece, these also he overthrew, and cleared the Empire
of them. But after all his good services, upon suspicion of treason he was
imprisoned, some say he was forced to beg for alms; but he being found
innocent, was restored to his wealth and honors, and two years after dyed in
peace. Justinian also dyed the same year, having reigned 38 years and 7
months. In his Theodorus. 4535. A. C. 565.
Bishop of Mapsvesta in Cilicia, Theodoritus Bishop of Cyprus, and Ibas Bishop
of Edessa were condemned, which had moved many dangerous disputations savoring
of Nestorianism; Origin was also condemned, though Vigilius the Pope would not
be present or give his assent, for which cause he was banished, but recalled
by Narses the Eunuch, and in his return dyed of the stone in Sicily. In this
Council also were condemned the two Originists, Didymus and Euagrius, for
teaching that the souls were extant before the bodies, that the Devils should
be saved, and that the pains of hell were not eternal. Justinian occasioned
much barbarousnesse and ignorance in his time, by converting the salaries
allowed Sophia, dedicated to the eternal wisdom of the Father. He held
before he dyed, that Christ's body was immortal and incapable of suffering
from the time of his birth: which opinion he forced upon all men, and because
Eutychius the Patriarch of Constantinople would not give his assent to it, he
was banished, and Johannes Scholasticus substituted in his place. In his time
David an Indian king, upon a victory he had over the Homerits a people of
Ethiopia, became a Christian, and had a Bishop with some Monks sent into his
country, two of these Monks brought home with them Silk-wormes, which were
before unknown to the Romans, and so they learned Justinius had commanded
Christ's Nativity to be kept, so did Justinian festum occursus Simeonis (...),
the purification of Mary, and afterward Mauritius her sleep or death. Then did
the Avares a people of the Huns obtain from Justinian a place in Pannonia to
inhabit, upon the removing of the Longobards from thence into Italy. Gethes
King of the Heruli, Gorda King of the Huns, Abasgi and diverse other people upon
Tanais become Christians. The Sarmatians and their new King Julian were
destroyed. Toletum is taken by the Francs, who plunder the Churches thereof.
The heretics called Agnoetae, held that Christ knew not the day of judgment.
Pope Agapetus for calling Justinian Diocletian, in that he became an
Eutychian, was smitten on the face by a courtier; some think Justinian dyed
mad. Narses of the booties which he took from the Goths, built a Temple at
Venice to Theodoricus the Martyr, where now is the Church of S. Mark. Rupertus
Bishop of the Francs converted the Boii or Bavarians to Christ. The last of the
Consuls was Basilius, in whom ended that honorable Office. Childebertus and his
brother Clotharius, takes diverse towns in Spain, and bring away with them the
coat of Vincentius, the martyr, to whom they build a church in the Suburbs, now
called S.

CHAP. VI.
1. Of Justin, Tiberius, and Mauritius. 2. Of the Persians, Goths, Longobards,
Suevi, Avares, and others of these times. 3. The affairs of the Church then.

Justinius the second a Thracian born, and Nephew to Justinian by his daughter,
Justin deposed Narses being accused by the Romans for his oppression, and
Longinus is sent in his place. In whom began the Exarchat of Ravenna; the
Emperors Deputies being called Exarchi. Sophia the Empress, scoffingly sent
word to the Ennuch, that he should return to spin among the women. He
returned her this answer, that He would spin her such a thread, as neither she
nor her husband should be able to untwist. Whereupon he calls the Longobards
into Italy, who under their King Alboinus, made no scruple to exchange poor
Pannonia for rich Italy, 4538. A. C. 568.
thither they came accompanied with the Saxons and other Nations, leaving
Pannonia to the Huns, but conditionally, that if things fell not out to their
minds in Italy, they might enjoy again their old habitations. This migration
of the Lombards into Italy was presaged by the rushing of armed men in the air.
Narses having raised the storm, forsook Rome, and sheltred himself in Naples,
Pope John the third (who succeeded Pelagius) followed after, desiring his
return to Rome; but not long after they both dyed, and left Italy as a prey to
the Barbarians. In the interim

Albonius having possessed himself of Gallia Cisalpina, called it Longobardia,
now Lombardie. He spent 3 years and 6 months in the siege of Ticinum, which
he took, and made the seat of his kingdom, and called it by the name of
Papia. Three dukedomes were erected: one called Forojulium now called Friuli,
the second at Spoletum, and the third at Beneventum. But Alboinus in the 4.
year of his reign ended his life by drunkenness. He had killed some years
before Cunimundus king of the Gepidae, whose wife being dead (she was the
daughter of Clotharius Rosimunda the daughter of Cunimund. One day at Verona in
a feast, he drunk to her in a cup made of her Fathers skull, desiring her to
be merry with her Father. She in a rage prostitutes her body to Helmiches the
kings page, and to one Perido a resolute soldier, desiring no other reward but
the murder of her husband. Upon this Alboinus is murdered in his chamber, as
he was sleeping after dinner. Helmiches flies with adulterous Rosimund to
Longinus the Exarch. She falling in love with an other poisoned Helmiches, as
he was coming out of the bath; he perceiving that he was poisoned, drew his
sword, and forced her to drink up the rest of the potion: thus three murderers
are justly punished.

To Alboinus succeeded Clephus, who having reigned tyrannically 1 year and 6
months, was murdered by one of his servan^s. After him the Longobards chose
them Dukes, as they were wont. These subdued a great part of Italy, and made
wars upon Gallia, these lasted 10 years, till one of them fell off to
Longinus the Exarch. About this time the peace was broken by Justin with the
Persian for he with held the payment of 500 l. weight of gold which he used to
pay to Cosroes. He armed Arethas the Ethiopian King against the Parthians, and
undertook Martianus Iustins General, defeated the Persian, and besieged
Nisibis; but Justin most foolishly took away Martianus commission, and
substituted Acacius as great a coward as himself. This made the Army in a rage
give off the siege, which the Persian perceiving; presently Hormisdas the son
of Cosroes* sends Ardamanes with new Forces, which far and near wasted the
Eastern Empire; so that Sophia the wife of Justin (who was now become
phrenetick upon his bad success) was forced to sue for peace. Justin being
recovered, by the advice of his wife made Tiberius a Thracian, but a good
soldier, his successor, to whom he gave many wholesome admonitions, in which
he showed himself a better Counselor, then an Emperor. And so Clotharius.
Two French Bishops Sagitarius and Salonius were degraded in the council of
Lions, for arming themselves like soldiers, and going to the wars; but upon
their appeal to Pope John they were restored, yet afterward continuing in their
lewd courses they were degraded again in the Council of Cabilon. Herebertus or
Charibertus, the son of Lotharius or Clotharius King of Paris, for putting his
wife away unjustly, and committing incest with his two sisters, was
excommunicated by Germanus Bishop of Paris, and suddenly after dyed.

Tiberius Constantinus was made Co-emperor with Justin before his death, and
was crowned with his wife Anastasia by Eutychius the Patriarch. He was a just,
mild and bountiful Emperor, chiefly to the poor, wltom Sophia the Empress
reproved, as being too prodigal; he answers, that he should never want wealth
on earth, as long as he laid up treasures in heaven by relieving the poor.
For as he caused a marble stone to be taken up, on which was engraven the
cross, counting it unchristian like to tread upon it, he found many talents
of gold buried there. He was also informed of the great treasure which Narses
had hid; with this wealth he relieved the poor, and made war against the
Persians which had broke in upon Armenia, and recovered all that had been lost
under Justinian and Justin. Cosroes being aged and grieving for his losses
dyed; and made a Law that no Persian King hereafter should make war against the
Romans. Tiberius having found such good service from Mauritius in this last
Persian war, bestowed his daughter Constantina on him, and having crowned
them both, made him his successor in the Empire. He showed himself so
gracious to the captives, that he sent them home without any ransom. He
releived the Romans with corn from Egypt, when they were almost famished, and
ready to surrender to the Longobards, or long bearded Barbarians, who were
grown very insolent, because Tiberius was wholely employed about the Persian
war.

Tiberius before he was made Emperor by Justin, was sent against the Avares,
4436. A. C. 576.
and passing over Caucasus, sat down upon the banks of Ister, and threatened to
take Syrmium. In this expedition Tiberius escaped narrowly from being taken.
But at last he made peace with them. Coganus their King desired Tiberius to
send him some Carpenters to make baths for him after the Roman fashion; but
when the Carpenters came, he forced them to build him a bridge over Danubius,
that he might on all occasions plunder the Roman Provinces. Tiberius having
reigned with Justinius 3 years and 11 months, and by himself 4 years, dyed
of a surfeit, eating too many mulberries. In his time Pelagius the second being
consecrated Pope without the Emperors knowledge, sent Gregory then a Deacon, to
excuse him to Tiberius, whom he could not acquaint with his consecration,
because the city was besieged: then did Gregory begin his Commentaries on Job;
and caused Eutychius the Patriarch to renounce his Origenicall opinions. Such
violent Arians were in the Goths in Spain, that King Lemugildus slew his own
son Elmingildus, because he forsook the Arian heresy. Many Jews in his
time became Christians. It Is thought that Cosroes dyed a christian, and that he
sent two golden crosses, with other rich presents to the Church of S. Sergius
in Donatus then, was the first that brought into Spain the monastical
profession.

Mauritius a Cappadocian born, succeeds: an excellent Prince had he not been
4553. A. C. 583.
covetous. Having taken Alamundarus the Saracen in the Persian war, and sent
him prisoner to Sicily, he had wars next with Caganus King of the Avares, who
bad taken Syrmium the chief city of Pannonia, and exacted a yearly stipend from
the Romans. And not content with this, he sends the Sclavi to plunder and waste
Mauritius by his General Commentiolus suppressed; and recovered all the Roman
prisoners, and the booty. Hormisdas the Persian King slighting his fathers
command, makes wars upon the Romans. Against him Mauritius sends Philippicus,
on whom he bestowed his sister in marriage. The Roman Army had rejected their
General Priscus for his insolency, and chosen Germanus, but by the entreaty
and eloquence of Gregory; they received Philippicus for their General, who had
good success against the Medes and Persians, but Martyropolis was betrayed to
the Persian by Sitta the Decurion, whereupon Commentiolus is sent in
Philippicus his place. He overthrowes the Persian near Martyropolis. Hormisdas
being angry with Baras his General, (who had subdued the Baras was again
overthrown by Romanus Mauritius his Praetor. Upon this Hormisdas takes away the
Generals place from him, and in a scoff sends him a woman's garment. Baras to
be revenged of this disgrace, faines letters as from the King written to the
armies, in which he upbraided them for their cowardice and effeminatenesse, and
withdrawes also a good part of their pay. The soldiers thinking these letters
to be real, swear fealty to Baras. Bynodoes a great man whom Hormisda had put
in irons was set at liberty by his brother Basta; who seize on the King, and
imprison him. These having called a Parliament; condemn the King as unworthy
of Government, because of his cruelty, and needless wars, besides his other
crimes. Hereupon he is deposed, imprisoned, and exoculated, his wife, Cosroes
whom he hated is made King. This new King used his Father at first very
kindly, but being exasperated by his railing language continually against him,
at last commanded him to be cudgelled to death. This fact made him odious to
his people, who fell from him to Baras. Hereupon Cosroes flies away on post
Horses to the Roman camp: He was received by Probus the Patrician, and
recommended to Mauritius, whom he animates against Baras. Narses is sent with
the Army, who overthrowes Baras: besides many thousand Persians that were
slain, 6000 were taken prisoners. Cosroes is restored to his kingdom; who
puts all the captives to Mauritius a general peace is concluded in the East.
But the wars with Caganus King of the Avares is not yet at an end. Many
doubtful battles are fought betwixt them. And many inrodes are made by the
Sclavi. But Mauritius in the 10 year of his reign removed Caganus out of
Thracia by this trick. He feigned some letters and sent them to Priscus the
Praetor, who was then besieged in acastle by Caganus; he wishes him to hold
out the siege, for the Barbarian should be forced to remove suddenly; because
the Fleet which he had sent to waste his coast, had already made great havoc
in his country; Chaganus having intercepted these letters, and supposing them
to be true, raised the siege and marched homeward. But for 6 years after there
were continual wars; so that Chaganus sacked 40 cities of Dalmatia. Mauritius
out of covetousness, and the bad counsel of Commentiolus, gave way that
Caganus should take many of his soldiers prisoners, because they refused to
contribute toward the charges of their arms and clothes, yet took 12000
captives, whom he offered to release for a small sum, which Mauritius out of
hatred and avarice refused to pay. Wherefore Chaganus in a rage put them all to
the sword, and would not depart thence, till

Mauritius was so little sensible of what he had done, that he absolved
Commentiolus, when he was accused as the chief actor in this treachery, and
his accusors were punished; which so incensed the people, that they slung
stones at the Emperor as he was going to the Church. He had after this some
victories over the Avares. But shortly after a Monk running with a naked sword
through the streets cries out, Mauritius shall shortly be killed with the
sword. A comet burned for whole 6 months. At last his heart smote him, for the
murder of the soldiers, and desired that he might be prayed for; In his sleep
he thought that he stood before Christ's Tribunal, where he was asked,
whether he would be punished here or hereafter: he answered here Lord, and so
he was by Phocas; of whom he understood by Philippicus, that he was a rash
young fellow, but unconsiderable, and a coward; then said Mauritius: if a
coward, then a murderer. This Phocas was a Centurion, he had been Yeoman of
the stirrup to Priscus the Patrician; but now a great stickler against
Mauritius his government. Who used his army undiscreetly and rigidly, abridging
them of their pay; and refusing to let them have any provision but what they
should take from the enemy, and therefore wilied them to take up their Winter
quarters among the Slavonians. Upon this the Army did mutiny, and lifting up
Phocas on a Target, as the custom was, they salute him Emperor; Peter
Mauritius his brother who had charge of the Army is forced to fly. In
Constantinople they would have made Theodosius the son of Mauritius, or else
Theodosius his father in law Germanicus Emperor; but Mauritius had already
imprisoned Philippicus who married his own sister, upon suspicion. He cudgelled
his son. Germanicus took sanctuary in a Church, whence Mauritius would have
pulled him out, but the uprore so increased, that he is driven our of the
City; Phocas is received, who having sworn to maintain the Orthodox Religion,
is crowned by Ciriacus the patriarch. 5 days after Mauritius is pursued by
Phocas and taken at Chalcedon, where he fell sick. In the presence of Phocas,
Mauritius his two younger sons are slain, then his 3 daughters, at last
Constantina their mother and daughter of Tiberius, though some write Mauritius
having seen the execution of his sons, and his own at hand, cries out: Just
art thou O Lord, and righteous are thy judgments: and so submitted his neck to
the sword. After their heads were cut off, their bodies were left on the shore
for the gazing objects of the people; but at last they were buried in the
Church by a certain Eunuch. The eldest son Theodosius was fled to the
Persians by his Fathers advice: but he was so eagerly pursued, that he was
overtaken, and by a command from Phocas, slain also. Shortly after Germanus is
killed, and his daughter the wife of Theodosius; and at last all that had any
relation to Mauritius even his youngest child of all, which was but an Infant,
4572. A. C. 602.
Mauritius refused. He reigned 20 years, three months, and some odd days.

In his time the Saxons being weary of the Longobards Government, returned to
their own country, which was now possessed by the Suevi, between whom there
arose such a quarrel about the removing of the Sueves; that 20000 were killed.
The Lombards after they had bin ruled 10 years by Dukes, they chose them a King
whom they named Flavius, because this was an honorable name among the Romans;
on him they conferred the half of their goods, that he might maintain the
greater state. Mauritius hired Childebertus the French King, to oppose him,
which caused great troubles in Lombardy. Such inundations of waters there were
in Italy, that Tibris overflowed the walls, a great Dragon swimmed through the
city down toward the Sea, upon which followed the plague, whereof Pope
Pelagius dyed: this sickness lasted many years. Gregorius is made Pope; who
by letters desired Mauritius not to confirm this election, but this honor was
forced on him; and not without cause was he called great, if we consider either
his doctrine, or life. He appointed Litanies against that Gregory sent Austin
with some other Monks to instruct the Saxons in the Christian Faith, who had
now been settled 150 years in England. Antioch 61 years after the former
earthquake was shaken again, in which there dyed 60000 people. Gregory Bishop
of that City was strangely preserved, for no sooner was he gone out of the
house, but it immediately fell down: John Patriarch of Byzantium assumed the
title of Oecumenicall Bishop; which Antichristian pride in him Gregory sharply
reproved. In Spain Ricaredus the son of King Lebuigildus who killed his son
for being a Catholic, drove the Arian heresy out of Spain, and obtained the
title of Catholic King. He overthrew 60000 French, who had broke in upon
Spain. He was both a good and fortunate Prince, who having reigned 15 years
dyed at Toletum. Chilpericus King of France was slain by his subjects, at the
persuasion of his wife Fredegunda, for his cruelties, and heresies; a Synod of
62 Bishops in Toledo is held against Arianism. With Religion, learning
flourished in these South parts of England, till Charles the great, who sent
for Beda's scholars hence to teach in France and Italy. The Slavi set
themselves in Istria and Dalmatia, which from them is called Slavonia: Gregory
calls himself the servant of servants. He introduces many ceremonies, sets up
diverse Monasteries, one in his own house, and six in Sicily, and sends abroad
Columbanus out of Ireland preaches to the Picts.

CHAP. VII.
The affairs of the Empire under Phocas and Heraclius. 2. Of Mahomet and the
Saracens. 3. Of the Church and diverse Foreign passages of these times.

PHocas who murdered his Master, and by sedition; got the Empire, by tyranny
4581. A. C. 611.
years. That Army of his which murdered Mauritius is overthrown by Cosroes.
And he who cut off the head of his Master, had his own head at last cut off
with his arms and genitals. Not only he, but the whole Empire suffers, for
his cruel paricide. The Persians subdue Phenicia, Syria, and Palestina, they
wast Galatia, Paphlagonia, and Cappadocia. In Europe the Avares overrunne
Thracia, and kill every where the Roman Legions. In Antioch the Jews murder
the Christians, and among the rest Anastasius their Patriarch, whose body they
burned. The Jews for these outrages are condemned to lose first their
genitals, then their heads. Phocas was a notorious drunkard, who being taxed by
some Heraclius Governor of Afric, enters into a league with Priscus and
Gregoras Patricians, that he who first did dispatch Phocas, should be
Emperor. Heraclius the son of this Heraclius, by a Fleet of Ships obtaines
Constantinople. Photius a Noble man, whose wife Phocas had abused, breaks into
the Palace, flings down Phocas from his thrown, lays him in Irons, and brings
him to Heraclius, who kicking him with his heels, caused his genitalls with
which he abused so many women to be cut off, and at last his head; some say he
was burned in a brass furnace. It Is remarkable that of all Phocas his Army,
which consented to the death of Mauritius, there are but two left alive, in
less then 8 years space.

Caganus King of the Avares enters Lombardy, kills Gisulphus, king Agilulphus
his General, and besieges Forojulium, and takes it by the treachery of
Romilda the wife of Gisulphus, to whom he promised marriage. Caganus hating
the treachery and leachery of Romilda, performed his promise for one night, and
lay with her, then he delivered her to the lust of his soldiers, who having
abused her, thrust a long pole through her. But her daughters more modest then
the mother, preserved their chastity, by keeping in their breasts the flesh of
chickens, Samon a French Merchant their King, under whom they defeated the Huns
in a battle. Agilulphus Duke of Taurinum in Lombardy is chosen King by
Theudolinda (the widow of the former King Autharus) whom she married, and made
a good Christian; her Gregory had by his letters seasoned with the Catholic
Religion. This King made peace with France, and with the Exarch, and caused al
Church Lands to be restored, Vittericus obtained the kingdom by murdering the
son of Recaredus the former king, and he himself in the 7 year of his reign
was murdered by his own subjects at a feast. Gindemarus that followed reigned
2 years, and Sesibutus his successor 8 years. Pope Gregory dyed the 2 year
of Phocas, to whom succeeded Sabinianus, and after him, Boniface the third, who
obtained of Phocas, that Rome should be the head of all other Churches. He was
willing to comply with the Pope, knowing how conducible this was to his
affairs; Boniface the third, 8 months after this dyed, to whom succeeded
Boniface the fourth, who turned the Pantheum dedicated of old to all the Gods,
to a Church dedicated to Mary and all the Saints. Cosroes took Jerusalem from
the Romans, and Sesibutus King there.

Heraclius a Patrician, and son of Heraclian or Heraclius Governor of
Africa, 4589. A. C. 619.
is made Emperor by the Senate and Army. He with his wife Fabia Eudoxia were
crowned by Sergius the Patriarch. He endeavored first to make peace with the
Persian, but could not, except he would reject Christ and worship the Sun. In
the interim the Jews insult over the Christians, having bought from Cosroes
their conqueror 90000 of them, which they barbarously murdered. Jerusalem
being taken; the Persians seize next upon Alexandria, Egypt, and Libya,
subduing Heraclius, and in the 7 they took Carthage: and at the same time
Caganus was pillaging Thracia. At the same time also Johannes Limigius
successor to Smaragdus in the Exarchat, and after him Eleutherius for their
tyranny in Italy are slain by the soldiers. Heraclius who could not make
peace with Cosroes, makes it with Caganus; and so removes his European Armies
to the east: Exhorting them to remember the wrongs done to Christianity by
Cosroes. They first enter Armenia, and defeat Sabarus the enemies General
there. In the 13 year of his reign he marches through the heart of Persia,
killing many thousand of Persians, and overthrowing their groves, and fire
which they worshipped. He had so many captives, that in Albania where he
wintered, he

About this time appeared Mahomet the Saracen, being left a poor orphan, he A.
C. 623.
married his rich mistress Chadiga, whom he made believe that his falling
sickness was but a consternation of his mind, proceeding from the sight of the
Angel Gabriel, who used to appear to him: which lie was confirmed by Sergius
the Monk, who was banished out of Byzantium for his Nestorianism, by whose help
and of an impostor Jew, he compiled a gallimafry of errors out of Christian
Jewish and Heathenish writers, which he called Alcoran, wherein he denies
Christ's Divinity, and the Trinity; approving Circumcision and Polygamie. Of
this absurd and impious book I have spoke, in my caveat against the Alcoran. He
was forced to fly from Mecha; being in danger to lose his life for his
errors. This flight the Arabians call Hegira, that is, the persecution, from
whence they compute their years. Cosroes mad at the success of Heraclius,
plunders all the Christian churches of his Dominions, and forces them to
embrace Nestorianism, already professed by the Armenians and Georgians. He
invites the Bulgarians, Avares, Gepidae, and Sclavi to invade Constantinople.
Herarclius hearing of this, calls in the Chazari or Turks to the number of
40000. Byzantium A. C. 626.
is besieged by the Barbarians, who ten days after were forced to fly.
Heraclius marches as far as Ninive, where he defeates the enemy, kills
Razates their General, and many of their prime men. Cosroes shuts himself up
in Seleucia, and fends Spartarius to kill Chardarigas, who with Sarbarus
besieges Chalcedon, because he suspected that he entertained correspondence
with Heraclius. This business of killing Chardarigas was discovered, at which
the Persians were discontented, and the rather because Cosroes refused to
hearken to any peace with Caesar. Gundabundas a Colonel to Sabaros revolts to
the Romans; many of the Commanders falls off to Siroes the Kings eldest son,
whom he meant to dis-inherit, and to crown Merdaces his son, by another venture.
Upon this Heraclius Siroes conclude a peace; wherein it was agreed that all
places and captives should be restored. Siroes the new chosen king pursues his
father, overtakes 4598. A. C. 628.
him in his flight, and lays him in irons, then showing him his gold and
jewels; which he had bought at so dear a rate from the Romans, by the loss of
so much blood, he left them with him to feed upon, for he was was kept 5 days
without food; then having seen Merdaces whom he designed for his successor,
with his other sons murdered before his face, by Syroes command he was shot
to death with arrows, and so he lost both his crown and life by the Romans; of
whom he had received both. Thus the captives and plunderings being restored on
both sides, the Cross and Zacharias Bishop of Jerusalem, then a captive, were
restored. Heraclius

Heraclius understanding by the Astronomers that his Empire should be laid
wast, by those of the circumcision; he thought the Jews had been meant, and not
the Saracens: wherefore he forces them to embrace the Christian profession;
and those that refused he banished out of his Dominions, commanding them not to
come within 3 miles of Jerusalem. The same was done by Sisebutus in Spain, and
by Dagobertus the French King in France, against the Jews, of whom diverse
joined themselves with Mahomet, supposing him to be their Messiah, till Mahomet
4602. A. C. 632.
having in 9 years space enlarged his Dominion by force and craft, his wives
made him away: he dyed being 40 years old, the 22 year of Heraclius. His
stinking carcass which had lain 3 days on the ground unburyed, was put in an
iron chest, and sent to Mecha. He promised his Disciples he would rise again
the third day, but forgot it. The Saracens soldiers who had served under
Heraclius, were slighted by one of Heraclius his Eunuchs, who had charge to pay
them their arreares, but he paid them with ill language, calling them dogs, so
being incensed for want of their pay, and with ill words, they stir up the
whole Nation of the Saracens, being accustomed to robbing, against Heraclius.
Abubecher their leader, Mahomet's kinsman, take Gaza, and the passages of Mount
Sinai, being a while resisted by the Governor of Caesarea Palestina, two
years after Abubecher dyed; Homar succeeds. Who fell upon Arabia, and took
the city Bozra, then drove Theodorus Heraclius his brother to Edessa.

Heraclius sends an Army of 40000 under Theodorus Sacellarius and Bahanes,
against the Saracens, Sacellarius was first defeated, then Bahanes having the
disadvantage of ground, and the wind which drove the dust in his face. Homar
seiseth upon Damascus, then upon Phenicia. Thence he falls upon Egypt and makes
it tributary: In the 26 year of Heraclius he sits down before Jerusalem, and
in two years space takes it. To Sophronius the Bishop, and to all the
Christians of Palestina he promised security. In the 28 year of Heraclius
Antioch is taken, Muhavias is made Amaras or Praetor of Egypt, as far as
Euphrates. Then Hyaidus another of their Generals takes Edessa, Darae, and
Mesopotamia. The next year they enter Persia where king Syroes was dead,
having reigned one year. Hormisdas succeeded, whom they defeated and put to
flight, and took the three daughters of Cosroes prisoners, with all the kings
wealth and furniture, and so in a short time Sara Abraham's wife. Heraclius
being grieved at this great success of the Saracens 4611. A. C. 641.
or Hagarens rather, dyed of an hydropsie, having reigned 31 years. His
incestuous marriage with Martino his brothers daughter, and his heretical
prefession, in holding there was but one will and operation in Christ, as
Sergius Bishop of Constantinople, and Cyrus of Alexandria had taught him, were
the causes of these miseries which fell on the Empire. Martina his incestuous
widow having poisoned her son in law Constantine the third, after he had
reigned 4 months, not without the knowledge of Bishop Sergius undertakes the
Government. But having ruled half a year, she was condemned by the Senate to
have her tongue cut out, and her son Heraclionas to loose his nose, and both to
be banished. Constans the son of Constantine and nephew of Heraclius obtained
the Empire. Pyrrhus the Patriarch who succeeded Sergius, upon a sedition raised
against him, fled to Africa, to whom succeeded Paul.

About these times Edwin king of Northumberland was christened by Paulinus,
whose successor Oswaldus propagated the Gospel farther in those parts.
Isaacius Paulinus a Bishop.
Exarchat of Ravenna robs Pope Horonius of his treasures. One Mauritius keeper
of Records, aiming to be king of Italy, is by this Isaacius apprehended and
slain. In Lombardy Rotharis succeeded Ariobaldus, who set down in writing the
Laws of the Lombards 77 years after their coming into Italy. Muchavius the
Saracen Brunchilide the Queen mother of Childericus who had caused much
effusion of blood, by setting the French kings at variance among themselves,
and had been the death of ten kings, was by king Lotharius of France condemned
to lose one foot and one arm, then to be tied to the tail of an unruly horse,
and torn in sunder. To Lotharius succeeded Dagobertus in Austrasia, Neustria
and Burgundy. His other son Aribertus succeeded in Aquatania. Rupertus or
Robertus Bishop of Woorms first, then of Ratisbone converted Theodon Duke of
Bavaria to the Christian faith; Lupus Lupus Bishop.
being banished by Lotharius baptizeth Duke Boson in Austria. The Nestorian
heresy by means of Cosroes spreads far in the East, and continues to this day,
whose

Pope Boniface the fifth made Sanctuaries of Churches and Altars; so did
Honorius and Theodosius long before. The Jacobites so called from Jacob the
Syrian increase much. Pope Honorius the first in the 4 Council of Toledo is
excommunicate and degraded by the Bishops. The West Saxons are converted by the
preaching of Berinus; sent thither by Pope Honorius. Severus a Bishop in Spain
is martyred. Chilenus a Scotch man converted to the Faith the Atrebates or
people of Arois, about Arras. The University of Cambridge was erected by King
Sigebert, or as some will have it repaired or enlarged by him, but founded by
Cantaber King of Spain many years before, when he lived here in exile. Cyrus
Heraclius refused to allow it the Saracens subded it. Heraclius was the last
elective Emperor; after him it became hereditary. The Saracens seize on
Persia, which had continued in the race of Artaxerxes 413 years; that is from
Artabanus the last Parthian king till Hormisdas 2 the last Persian king.
Dagobertus king of France erects many Monasteries and Churches; he covered S.
Dennis with silver, and made the Duke of Britany do him homage. Rotharis king
of Lombardy placed in every Church two Bishops, an Orthodox and an Arian, which
occasioned much mischief and factions. In Italy Sosphronius was the last Bishop
of Jerusalem. From hence till the year 1100 that it was recovered by the
Christians, if there were any between they were only titular. Pope Severinus
sat in the chair a year two months: his successor John the fourth 1 year 9
months, to him succeeded Theodorus or Theodosius 6 years 5 months. Pope John
by his letters reproves the Scots for their Pelagianism, and undue observation
of Easter. Peter was the last real Bishop of Alexandria; for now after the
Saracens had got it, the Bishops were but titular; the Saracens make Babylon
the seat of their kingdom, which before was in Damascus: Amiras or Caliphas,
that is a successor; because Ebubezar was the first Caliphas or successor of
Mahomet, the Governors of their Provinces, they name Sultans.

CHAP. VIII.
The affair of the Empire under Constans the second, Constantine the fourth,
Justinian the second, Philippicus Bardanes, Anastasius the second, and
Theodosius the third. 2. The affairs of the Saracens, Longobards, Spaniards,
French,

COnstans the second son of Constantine the second succeeded. He was a
Monothelite, 4612. A. C. 642.
and a persecutor of Orthodox men. By Theodorus Calliopas the Exarch, Pope
Martin was seized upon, and sent to this Constans who banished him into
Chersona where he was starved to death, because he condemned the Monothelites
in a Synod held by him; in whose chair he set up Eugenius. He murdered his
brother Theodostus, though a Clergy man, with the horror of which murder he
was so affrighted in his sleep (for he dreamed that his brother presented him
with a cup full of blood) that he resolved to transfer his seat from thence to
the Mother deserves more honor then the daughter, but he was dissuaded by his
wife, children, and friends. Yet he went over into Italy, and made war upon
Romoaldus king of the Longobards: from whom he took some towns in Apulia, and
was set down before Beneventum; but hearing that Grimoaldus Prince thereof was
coming to raise the siege, Caesar removed to Naples, and there being beaten by
Romoaldus he marches to Rome. Pope Vitalianus with all the Clergy and people
met him. A cloak interwoven with gold was by Constans presented to S. Peter
which he had better been without. For Caesar robbed the Churches and City too
of all their brass ornaments, for 12 days together, and stripped the Pantheon
that was covered with brass, then he laid heavy taxes upon Sicily, Calabria,

In the 11 year of Constans his Empire there rained ashes, upon which followed
a cruel plague; a Ghost was seen to knock at men's doors, and as often as he
knocked 4639. A. C. 669.
so often there dyed some out of that house; a year before his death, Sapor
Governor of Armenia who revolted to Muhavias had his brains dashed out against
a wall by his horse. In his time Homar having built a Moscu at Jerusalem was
stabbed by a Persian, to whom succeeded Hormanus, who defeated Gregory the
Patrician in Africa, Constans, and so imposed a tribute on that part of Africa.
The next year which was the seventh of Constans Muhavias in a Fleet of 1700
ships invaded Cyprus and took Constantia the Metropolis of that Island. He
conquered also the Island Aradus after much opposition. Constantinople was
delivered from a siege by two sons of a certain Trumpeter, who broke their
prison doors, slew Amiras and set the Fleet on fire, but Muhavias prepared a
new Fleet with which he beat Constantines near Phenice a harbor of Lycia, the
Sea was died with the Roman blood, the Emperor was fain to disguise himself in
a poor habit, and so escaped. Then also did the Saracens subdue the Isle of
Rhodes, and in it break down the Colossus of the Sun, which a certain Jew
bought. The brass of that statue loaded 900 Camels.

Shortly after this the Saracens fell out among themselves. Some of them
followed Muhavias, some Aly Mahomets son in law, who called himself the true
Prophet, saying, that the Angel Gabriel was sent to him, and not to Mahomet,
but by a mistake. Muhavias during this division was humbled, and content to pay
a yearly pension to the Emperor, which afterward when things were settled he
refused to pay. He subdued Haly and his faction, by intercepting the waters, so
that Constance. Pope Vitalianus brought the use of Organs into the Church,
Eligius Bishop of Novio magum converted Flanders to Christ, Zechius a Croatian,
by birth a Sclavonian, having committed murder at home, fled into Bohemia, and
there planted. His brother Lechus planted in Polonia, so called from pole which
in Sclavonic signifies a plain or champion country. The posterity of Zechius
planted Moravia and Lusatia. But Russia and Pomerania were peopled by the
children of Lechus. Sigebertus in France, fearing he should be childlesse made
Hildebert son of Grimoaldus his successor. But beyond hope having got a son,
whom he called Dagobert, he commits the care of him to Grimoaldus, and then
dyed. Grimoaldus having Dagobert sent him into Scotland, and made his own son
Hildebert king. The French hating this treachery, sues him before Clodoveius,
who imprisoned him, thrusts out Hildebert, and sets up his own son Hildericus
King of the Austrasii. Clodoveius spoiled all the Sepulchers of the Martyrs, of
their wealth, which his Father Dagobert had bestowed on them; and distributes
all to the poor. But to make amends he exempts the Monastery of St. Dennis
near Paris, which his Father had built, from the Jurisdiction of the Bishops.
To him succeeded Ebrunus; about this time the French Kings growing dissolute
and careless, left the managing of the kingdom to the Governors of the
Palace. Homar ordained that every month the Alcoran should be read. Azomon the
fourth from Mahomet much Theodiscus a Greek Bishop of Hispalis or Sivill, was
unbishopped for corrupting Isiodores works, wherefore he becomes an Arabian
heretic, in detestation of this wickedness, the primacy of the Church of
Spain is translated from Hispalis to Toledo. Eugenius the first, ordained that
Bishops should have peculiar prisons for Delinquent Clergy men. Cindasuindus
king of Spain, repaires the Churches which were demolished by the heretics,
Peter succeeds to Paul in the seat of Constantinople. To Pope Eugenius who
sat almost 3 years succeeded Vitalius who was Pope 14 years: from the first
year of Clotarius, which was the 662 year of Christ, till the 750 which is
about 90 years, to wit, till Pipin the Father of Charles the Great, the Major
Domus or Steward of the Muhavias Gizad expelled the Romans and Vandals out of
Africa; Pope Adeodatus succeeded to Vitalius, and sat 4 years.

Constantinus the 4th called Pogonatus from his great beard which he wore when
he 4639. A. C. 669.
returned from Sicily, whither he went to revenge his Fathers death, was made
Emperor in his Fathers time. He overcame and slew Mezentius the Armenian whom
the Sicilian Legions had saluted Emperor. Constantine the Patrician, and all that assisted Mezentius were taken by the help of Theodorus Calliopa the
Exarch, and punished: the Eastern Princes, would have had Tiberius and
Heraclius Constantines two brothers Constantine making show as if he assented,
sent for these Princes, and slew them as seditious persons, and made his
brothers incapable of the Empire, by cutting off their Noses. The Saracens in
the mean time waste Africa, and took 80000 prisoners. They take also Syracuse,
they besieged Byzantium 7 years, in which time they lost many ships and men,
and were at last forced to return home, in which return they lost by a sudden
storm all their ships, but this loss they repaired, and shortly after they
lost their ships again, by the invention of Callinicus the Mathematician, who
by a new invented fire called Marinus or Graecus, which burned in the water,
consumed them all, with the loss of 30000 men. This fire from Callinicus the
Grecian is called Graecus; but indeed before this the Romans made bals of fire
which would burn in the water. The Saracens had also another loss by the
Mardaits in Mount Libanus: they made them sue for peace, which was granted for
30 years, paying yearly during this time 3000 l. weight of gold, 50 men, and
so many of their best horses to Caesar. Upon the report of this peace, Caesar's
European enemies, fearing lest their countries might be made the seat of war,
by presents and entreaties, obtained also peace of the Emperor: the year
following A. C. 679.
out of Scythia upon the lower Mysia not far from Byzantium, called from them
Bulgaria, and this from the river Bolga, whose springs are from the lakes of
Moscovia: against these Constantine marches with an Army, which made the
Bulgarians keep themselves within their trenches. This war was like to hold;
Caesar being troubled with the Gout, went to the baths of Mesembria, a city in
Thracia. His soldiers thinking that he had fled for fear, began all to fly,
which the enemy perceiving, pursued and killed multitudes of them: and subdued
the Sclavonians; Constantine was forced to pay them a tribute, that they might
not annoy the Roman territories. About this time dyed Muchavias Prince of the
Saracens, to whom succeeded Gizildus.

Constantins care now was, having peace abroad, to quiet all controversies in
the Church also: therefore calls a Synod at Constantinople of 280 Bishops. This
4653. A. C. 680.
was the sixth Oecumenicall Council, in which the five former were confirmed,
and the Monothelites condemned for heretics: among which were Sergius,
Pyrrhus, Cyrus, Paulus, Petrus and Pope Honorius, who lived in the time of
Heraclius. But some excuse him in that he held there were not in Christ two
contrary wills. Theophanes the Abbot was made Bishop of Antioch. Alexandria and
Jerusalem, sent no Bishops, being now in the possession of the Saracens. Pope
Agatho his Legates had the chief place in the Council next the Emperor. Who
^ased Rome of the money which was wont to be paid to the Emperor, for the
Popes ordination, Exarchs.

In Constantins time Partharis king of the Longobards, after the death of
Grimoaldus is called home from his banishment, and is made King. Bamba King of
Spain, having reigned 10 years with great commendation, and after he had
subdued the Saracen Pirates on the Coast, became a Monk. Hildericus or
Childericus the French King, for causing Bodilo a noble man to be whipped, was
with his wife great (with child) killed by this Bodilo, as he was hunting; and
so Theodoricus, Adeodatus succeeded Donnus who was Pope five years, his
successor was Agatho who sat two years. Under him began the sixth general
Council held in Constantinople, but it ended under Pope Leo the second, who
sat not above 10 months. At this Synod the Popes Legate celebrated the Mass
in the Latin tongue before the Emperor and people in the great Church of S.
Sophia in Constantinople. In this Synod the Monothelits were confuted out of
the writings of the Greek and Latin Fathers.

Caesarea Queen of Persia with her husband and 40000 Persians are baptized at
Constantinople. This Pope Leo brought into the mass the holy kiss or osculum
pacis. In Spain to Bamba succeeded Eringius; in that time Maildulphus a a
Scotchman, was a famous professor of Greek and Latin tongues in England. To
Leo succeeded Benedict the second, who was Pope 10 months, who sent Chilianus
to preach the Gospel in Germany, chiefly in Franconia. His successor Johan
the fifth, was Pope 1 year. He ordained that the Pope should be consecrated in
the Church of Lateran by the Bishops of Ostia, Portunus, and Veliternum, which
custom yet continues, whereas before, he was only carried to St. Peter's chair
where he sat while Abdimelech King of the Saracens, recovers Persia,
Mesopotamia, Armenia, and Hircania, having overcome his two enemies, Mustar in
Persis; and Said in Mesopotamia. Conon in the Popedom succeeded to John, and
sat 11 months. Constantine reigned 17 years.

Justinian the second succeeded Constantine, son of Anastasia the Empress. He
4666. A. C. 696.
by Leontius his General subdued diverse Nations in the East, whilst the
Saracens were at difference among themselves: for Abdimelech had great wars
with the Kings of Persia and Arabia, whom he subdued, and so he put an end to
the Mahumetan civil war, In the 5 year of Justinian, with whom the Saracens
made peace, by restoring to him Africa, and paying daily 1000 pieces of silver,
with one Justinian would clear Libanus and the adjacent Mountains of all the
Mardaites, which much infested the Arabian cities. But in so doing Caesar
weakened the Empire, for so long as these Mardaites held the Mahumetans play,
they troubled not the Empire, but when they were removed, the Saracens power
increased. He also weakened himself by breaking the second year of his reign
the league, which his Father made with the Bulgarians. At first he had the
better, but afterward, he lost his Army, and was forced to fly almost alone to
Byzantium. In the 7 year of his reign, having entertained 30000 Selavi, and
trusting to his power, broke the peace with the Saracens, pretending that the
money which was paid him for a tribute, was not stamped with his Justinian
hardly escaped, who coming to Leucate, commanded the remainders of the Sclavi
to be killed and flung into the Sea. After this the Agarens made havoc of the
Roman Provinces, and Sabbatius the Armenian Praetor, delivered up Armenia to
them.

The Arabians overrun Africa, to whom Sergius the Patrician betrayed the city
Lazica. But John brother to the Emperor Leontius recovered Africa again, and
Leontius had been imprisoned 2 years by Theodosius and Stephanus the Emperors
favorites, but having escaped out of prison, was by the Patriarchs help made
Emperor. He cut off Iustinian's nose, and banished him to Chersonesus, having
reigned 10 years. The two sycophants Theodosius and Stephanus, were by his
command dragged through the streets, by ropes fastened to their feet, and
afterward were burnt. Leontius after three years reign was by Tiberius
Apsimarus (whom his Army had made Emperor, upon his return from Africa)
served, as he served Justinian; for he cut off his Nose, and then thrust him
into a monastery: then he sent his brother Heraclius into Syria against the
Saracens, who took and slew of the enemies about 200000. The Armenian Mahumet
Prince of the Arabians, subdued the Armenians again, and burned their princes
alive. Yet in Cilicia he was defeated by Heraclius who took multitudes of the
Saracens prisoners, and sent them to his brother Abismarus for slaves, who
about this time sent Theophylact into Italy as successor to John in the
Exarchat. After this Justinian escaped out of prison, and married with Theodora
the sister of Chaganus, with whom he lived a whole year in Phanogoria a town
of Sarmatia. But the Barbarian king being corrupted with gold from Abismarus,
promised to betray him, which he understanding by his wife, fled to Trebellis
the Bulgarian king, by whose Arms he was restored, the 10 year of his A. C.
703.
Abismarus fled, but was overtaken and brought back, multitudes of the people
who had abused Caesar with ill language as he lay before the City, were
slain. Leontius and Abismarus being in irons fell flat at the Emperors feet,
who troad on their necks, the people crying out: Thou shall walk upon the Aspe,
and the Basilisk, and then they were both beheaded. Callinicus the Bishop had
both his eyes thrust out, and was banished to Rome, and Cyrus set up in his
place, who had encouraged the Emperor in his banishment to recover his right.
Abismarus had reigned 7 years. It Is said of Justinian that still when he wept
or blew his cut nose, he caused one of Leontius his faction to be slain. For he
had vowed before when he was like to be drowned in a storm, that if God would
preserve him then, he would show no mercy to his enemies.

Things thus settled, King Trebellis being honorably rewarded was dismissed;
but afterward Justinian quarrelled with him about the extent of their borders:
the Bulgarians being suddenly set upon by the Imperialists, fled to the
mountains, whence afterward perceiving the Greeks to be secure, came down and
made such Justinian in have got on shipboard, and returned with dishonor to
Constantinople. Afterward he sent an Army against the Chersonaeans, among whom
he had been exiled. They in the beginning of his designs would have destroyed
him; therefore he causes them to be cruelly murdered, and their Grandees to
be burned: and delighted himself to see 73000 of their youths drowned in a
storm. The Chersonaei being thus barbarously used, and their childrens heads by
Iustinian's command dashed against the walls, implore aid from the Chazari, and
persuade Philip Bardanes, lately returned from banishment, and made Admiral of
the Seas, to invade the Empire, with him joines Elias the Praetor, whose
children Justinian murdered in their mothers breasts, and married her to an
Indian cook. Bardanes with Elias rise against Elias took, and in it Justinian,
whose head he cut off with his own hands; and slew his son Tiberius whom he
begot of Theodora, and had made his colleague in the Empire. 4682. A. C. 712.
This was the last of Heraclius his race, who of all the Emperors had the
happiness alone, to have a sixth successor of his own blood. Justinian reigned
7 years after his banishment. He was nicknamed Rhinotmetus from his cut nose;
his tongue also was cut out by Leontius after he had been animated by the
Astrologians, and Calinicus the Bishop (whom Justinian had first designed for
the slaughter) to invade the Empire. In his time a Synod was held in the palace
called Sergius who succeeded Conon opposed this Synod, wherefore Justinian
commands him to be brought to Constantinople; but in vain, for the Army at
Ravenna resisted, and did not suffer the Pope to be touched. Besides Kilianus
that was sent to convert the Franconians in Germany, who was murdered there.
Wigbertus with diverse other preachers from England, were sent to convert the
Frisians, Danes, Saxons and others.

At this time Cunibertus the son of Bertarius was King of Lombardy. Him
Alchisus Duke of Trent, whom Cuniberius saved when his Father Bartarius would
have killed him, drove him out of his kingdom. But Alchisus tyrannising over
the Clergy, was hated, and Cunibert is restored; who defeated Alchisus in a
battle, Cunibert succeeded his young son Ludbert; whom he recommended to the
care of Duke Asprandus. But Regnibert Duke of Taurinum made war and overthrew
the young King with his Governor Asprandus; and so made himself King. He dies
within one year of his reign, to whom succeeded his son Aripertus the
second, who reigned 12 years. He killed the lawful heirs. Ludbert, whose
Governor Asprandus fled into Bavaria, where he lived in exile 9 years: then
being assisted by Dithbertus Duke of Bavaria, he returns to Lombardy, where
he overthrowes in a great battle Aripertus the usurper, and in his flight at
Ticinum kills him. This Aripertus bestowed Cerduella king of the West Saxons
was baptized at Rome, and there dyed, to whom succeeded Ina. Conredus King of
the Mercii, that is, of Nottinghamshire and Darbyshire, taking Offa the son of
Sigerus King of the East Saxons with him, at Rome puts on the habit of a Monk.
In Spain all the Jews are made slaves, their goods confiscated, and their
children delivered to Christians, to be bred by them. Felix Archbishop of
Ravenna, for refusing to be subject to the Pope, loses his Bishopric and
both his Eyes.

In Spain Iulianus a Grandee whose wife King Rudericus abused, called the
Saracens out of Africa, who oppressed the Goths, and in a great battle
overthrew Rudericus and killed him. The Saracen General was Tarichus, from
whom the Mountain Gibraltar, upon which he pitched his camp, was called of old
Gebel-Tarich. So now the Saracens possess Spain, and drive the remaining
Goths to Biscay and the Pyrenaean hills, and the Astures, whose Captain Pelagius
was the first King there. In France Pipinus Duke of Ostrasia was Master of the
Palace under Theodoricus, Clodoveus and Child^bertus the French Kings, whose
power he exercised; he made Lambertus Bishop of Trajectum, or Utricht, Alpaida
Pipins concubine, of whom he had Carolus Martellus. She caused her brother
Dodon to murder the bishop, to expiate which wickedness she erected a
College of Canons; but the murderer was eat up with vermin, the stink of
whose body was so o^ious, that he was flung and drowned in the river Mosa.
Egicas King of Spain was like to be murdered by the Jews, which was the cause
of their hard usage there, as is said. Sergius was Pope 13 years, he added
diverse Litanies to the Mass. His successor was John the sixth, who sat 3
years.

Paulus Anazar of Heraclea in Magna Graecia is chosen the first Duke of Venice
under Abismarus 252 years since the building of that City. The Egyptians
Caliph. Afric which was recovered by Belisarius from the Vandals, and had
continued since subject to the Romans 170 years, is now possessed by the
Saracens. The West Goths had now reigned in Spain 256 years, but (as is said)
already, are driven into corners, which is ^46 years since by the Huns they
were thrust out of Scythia. So the Saracens have now all Spain (except Gallicia
the seat of the Astures and Cantabrians) which they enjoyed 800 years
together. The Visigoths yet possess Aquitania, but ten years hence they are
driven out by Carolus Martellus, Vitisa the son of Egicas King of Spain,
orders the Clergy to keep what Concubines they will, and forbids them to obey
the Pope. Ulid king John succeeded Zosimus for 20 days, and after him
Constantinus 7 years, whom Justinian in Nicomedia honorably uses, to whom he
confessed his sins, and received absolution, lying prostrate at the Popes
feet. He was the first Emperor that ever kissed the Popes Feet.

Philippicus Bardanes having murdered Justinian, obtains the Empire for 2
years and 9 months. The Pope rejects him as an heretical Emperor, for he
abrogated the sixth Synod, and reestablished the Monothelites, upon the request
of that Monkish Astrologer who foretold him, he should be Emperor. Cyrus John
an heretic is advanced. He prodigally exhausted the treasures which were left
by his predecessors, suffering in the interim Thracia to be exhausted by the
Bulgarians, and Asia by the Saracens: wherefore he was hated by his Peers, two
of which, to wit, Theodorus and Buramphus deprived him of his eyes, as he was
reposing himself after dinner, this was done by the advice of Artemius the
chief Secretary, who the next day 4685. A. C. 715.
is proclaimed Emperor. Pope Constantine, absolves the Emperors subjects from
their allegiance to him. Artemius or Anastasius the second reigned one year and
3 months. He prepares a great Fleet against the Saracens, and takes order that
Byzantium be furnished with 3 years provision. But the Army upon a sudden
Theodosius of Adramyttum, a Collector of Subsidies, and a quiet man, to accept
the Empire against his will. Anastasius upon this lays down his Imperial
Ensigns, is made a Monk, and is sent to Thessalonica; he was both a good
scholar, and a good Catholic. He put down John the heretic, and set Germanus
in the chair of Constantinople. About this time dyed Pipinus. Carolus Martellus
is imprisoned by his stepmother Plearudis Pipins widow; but Dagobertus being
dead, he escaped out of prison, and recovered his fathers dignity, which he so
managed, that he established his posterity in the kingdom of France.
Theodosius was Emperor not much above a year, for understanding that Leo
Isauricus was made Emperor by the Army, and that his son Theodosius was taken
prisoner; he resigned up his interest to the new Emperor, and having 4687. A.
C. 717.
received the public Faith for his indemnity, he with his son enter into holy
Orders, in which they spent the remainder of their days at Ephesus, in his his
time Musalmas the Saracen took Pergamus.

CHAP. IX.
The Roman affairs under Leo the third, and Constantine the fifth. 2. Of
Pipinus, and Foreign affairs. 3. The Church affairs of these times.

LEo the third called before Isaurus Conon from his country Isauria, had been
Governor of Albania in Iustinian's time, and subdued the Abasgi a people of
Scythia. Now in the beginning of his Empire he is exercised by the Saracens,
who with a Fleet of 3000 ships besiege Constantinople almost 3 years, but of
this great number scarce 5 escaped, but were all consumed with famine, plague
war, thunder, storms, and artificial fires in the water. The Bulgarians
alone killed 22000 of them, as they were plundering of the country. In the
mean Sergius Praetor of Sicilia, with one Gregory, aim at the Empire, but
they were quickly suppressed by Leo; Gregory was killed, Sergius upon
submission ^is pardoned. Leo in his third year overthrew Nicetas Xylinites and
seize upon his whole estate for assisting Artemius (who was now banished in
Thessalonica) to recover the Empire. Artemius with his Bulgarian Forces arrive
at Byzantium, hoping the City had been for him, but finding it otherwise, the
Bulgarians for money betray him to Leo, who put him, with all that were of his
plot, to the sword. The plague at this time was so hot at Rome and Byzantium,
that it consumed 300000 Inhabitants. Tybris overflowed the walls of Rome: the
Jews were again Messiah, a Syrian born. Which caused Leo to force baptism A.
C. 718.
upon them, for which some of them were so desperate, that they burned
themselves with their families. One Radbodus a German Prince and Heathen, as he
was ready to be baptized, asked whether there were most of his Ancestors in
heaven or in hell, it was answered in hell; with that he pulled his foot out of
the water, saying: I will rather follow many then a few; but within three days
after he dyed: So Gizid a Saracen Prince was persuaded by a Jewish Impostour,
that he should reign a long time, if he would abolish the Images of Christ,
and of the Saints, which he went about to do, but dyed the next 4695. A. C.
725.
year after.

Leo in the 10 year of his reign commanded all Images to be abolished.
Philippicus Bardanes had commanded the same before, but was resisted by Pope
Constantine, as Leo is now by Pope Gregory the second, who would not suffer any
tribute to be paid to the Emperor out of Rome and Italy, because he took upon
him to alter religion. This gave occasion of great troubles in Italy, between
the Pope and the Exarch, till it came to that pass, that the Emperor lost all
his power in Italy, and had almost lost it in Byzantium; for not only were his
officers murdered by the tumultuous multitude, but the City also was assaulted
with new Fleets of Saracens and others, which were forced with loss to be
gone. Leo deposes Germanus the Patriarch and other Bishops, for resisting his
command Anastasius Patriarch, whom Gregory in the Synod which he assembled
condemns, and then dies the 16 year of his Popedom, to whom succeeded
Gregory the third, no less zealous for Images then his predecessor, against
whom Leo sent a Fleet of ships, which miscarryed in a storm. Upon this the
Pope calls a Council, and excommunicates all enemies to Imageworship. This so
enraged Leo that he did cruelly put to death diverse learned men and others, who
distiked his proceedings against Images. Oecumenicus professor in the College
of Constantinople is burned with his books. Hereupon Rome and Italy by
Gregory's means fall off quiter from the Greek Empire. A league is made
beteween the Pope and the French against Luitprandus the Longobard, who was now
besieging Rome. Corolus Martellus causes Luitprandus to raise his siege and be
gone. Leo seeing all his revenues in Italy to be stopped, gave order to
confiscate all the Popes revenues in Sicily and Calabria. He purposed to be
revenged upon Italy, but was hindered by the incursions of the Saracens upon the
Eastern Empire. Gregory having excommunicated the Emperor, 4711. A. C. 741.
dyed the 10 year of his Popedom, whom Leo followed shortly after. He reigned
24 years and 2 months: before his death the walls of Constantinople, Nicea,
Beda; and John Damascen for patronising Images, was banished among the
Saracens. Leo dyed of a bloody flux.

In this Leo's time Eudon Duke of Aquitania, calls into France the barbarous
Saracens to suppress the greatness of Martellus, they under Abdiran their
General take Garunda and Bordeaux. Charles being aided by the Lombards and
Germans, subdues the Saracens, and kills their General. Eudon, repenting for
calling in the Saracens, turns head against them. It Is thought there were
killed in that war 375000 Saracens, of the French only 1500. Pope Gregory sent
to congratulate with Martellus this great victory, and withal to implore his
Leo's Government, they kill the Duke of Campanie with his son, and soon after
Paul the Patrician and Exarch, whose successor Eutychius is excommunicated by
the Pope. The Romans swear to defend Gregory against the Emperor. The Exarch
with Luitprandus King of Lombardy, enter into a league to suppress Rome,
Beneventum and Spoletum, and to reduce them again unto the Empire. But Gregory
made all quiet, and a peace is concluded. Tiberius who thought to be King is
killed. Inas King of the West Saxons commanded that each house should pay a
penny to St. Peter yearly. Luitprandus confirms the donation of the Alps, the
Patent whereof written in golden Gregory the second, ordained that on every
Friday in Lent there should be fasting and solemn mass. He sent Boniface or
Vinefred to convert the Frisians and their neighbors, who is made the first
Bishop of Ments. Under Martellus S. Willibore converted the Westphalians.
Whilst Pergamus was besieged by the Saracens, they were persuaded by a
Magitian to rip open the belly of a woman with child, and to wash their right
hands in the child's blood, which they did in hope of victory. But they lost it,
with the town, in Gods just fury.

Pelagius descended of the Gothish Kings, is made the first King of Asturia and
Legion or Leon, by the remaining Christians of Spain, four years after
Ruderic had lost Spain to the Saracens. He took for his arms a red Lion in
a white field, which yet the Kings of Leon wear to this day. From him is
descended without interruption Philip, the now King of Spain. The Kings of
Navar and Aragon are descended from Garsias Ximenius the Goth, and first king
that reigned among the Pyreneans. The Christians that were permitted to live in
Spain were called Mozarabes, because mixed with Arabians. This liberty
continued till Alphonsus the seventh. About the year 1100 that the Almoad
Arabians came into Spain, they suffered no Christians to live among them.
Martellus subdued Burgundy and Aquitania, slew Eudon, and drove the Saracens
quite out of France. Alphonsus the first King of Galicia, son in law, and heir
to Pelagius Abathaminus Calypha nephew of Abdimelech having subdued Egypt,
built Cayro where Memphis of old stood. From him Cayliph became a title of
honor, both in Egypt and Babylon, or Baldac. About this time dyed Carolus
Martellus, who would not be called Mejor Domus as his predecessors, but Prince
of France. He left two sons Carolomanus and Pipinus to rule France. These
suppressed the Saxons: then C^rolomanus became a Monk.

Constantine the fifth, son to Leo Isauricus called Iconomachus, for being an
enemy to Images, was crowned at two years old, therefore the first that was
called Porphyrogenitus. He was called Copronymus from fouling in the Font when
he was baptized, which some held as a presage that he would pollute Religion.
He was suspected to be a Nestorian. Whilst he was employed in the Saracen war,
Artabasdus his sisters husband, by the aid of Anastasius the Patriarch, set up
the Images in Byzantium again, and for this cause was saluted Emperor by the
people; which caused three years wars. In the end Constantine took Artabasdus
and his son, these he blinded. Anastasius the Patriarch he caused to be carried
about the city upon an Ass, with his face to the Asses tail, but afterward
Caganus, who after she was baptized was called Irene. But his hatred to
Images, relics, and intercession of Saints: his persecuting of Priests and
Monks who sided not with him, forcing them to marry, causing them to be beaten
and banished to Cyprus, which was then invaded by the Saracens: his buyring,
burning, drowning and breaking of pictures and Church ornaments, made him
odious to the people and Clergy, many calling him the young Leopard, and brat
of the old Lion; some cal^ed him Caballinus, because he loved to wallow in

Constantine calls a Synod at Constantinople, in which were present 338 Bishops,
who condemned Image Worship. This Council he named the seventh Oecumenicall,
notwithstanding the Popes opposition. He was not content to demolish statues
and Images, but violates the Temple of Euphemia the Martyr, in Stephen the Monk
out of his cloister, because he taught men to despise worldly greatness. He
killed and banished many of his Grandees; he made all men swear against
worshipping of Images. Constantine the Patriarch who succeeded to Anastasius,
was accused of secret plotting and correspondency with the banished Princes,
for which cause he was banished, and then basely murdered. It was treason to
say, Mother of God help us: or to watch at the tombs of the dead. He took some
towns of Armenia from the Saracens, and filled Byzantium again Zeletines
their new King, who was therefore murdered by his people, and shortly after
his successor Sabinus was banished for desiring peace: but the Emperor
coming upon them with new Forces, made them sue for peace, which they
obtained: but Telerichus their King resolved to break it, by assaulting
suddenly the Roman Forces. For that purpose an ambush is laid, which was
discovered to Caesar by some of the Bulgarian Nobles. He without shedding of
blood seized on the ambush, and took all that lay in it. Telerichus perceiving
his plot was discovered, Caesar, for this cause he desires the names of such
men as might be fittest to be employed in this Negotiation, and such as Caesar
might put most trust in; diverse of Tilerichus his friends were nominated
unawares; these the Tyrant murders supposing they had discovered the plot.
Constantine to be revenged on the Barbarian for his treachery, resolves to fall
again upon Bulgaria, but in the interim he is taken with a burning Fever,
which was so hot, that he cried out, he was in burning flames, and so dyed,
having reigned almost 35 years. He had been three times married, his first wife
was Irene the Bulgarian mother to Leo, whom he married with Irene Attica, who
made him a 4745. A. C. 775.
Grandfather, by the birth of his nephew to Constantine, in the 30 year of his
Empire.

In this Emperors time, the Turks breaking out of the Caspian straits
overrun Armenia and Iberia; and being richly laden with booties, return home.
This was about the year of Christ 763 and 764. At which time there fell out
such a cold winter, that the Euxin sea was frozen 30 foot deep, and 100 miles
over. Upon this followed such a hot summer, that the springs were dried up.
Mountains of ice broke down the walls of some towns. To Luitbrandus in Lombardy
Ratchesius, who forgetting the 20 years peace he made with Pope Zacchary, and
which he confirmed by an oath, besieged Perusia. To his camp the Pope repaires,
and so wrought upon him, with presents, and his eloquence, that to expiate the
violation of his oath, he resolves to enter into a Monastery, and did
accordingly, with his wife and sons: but his brother and successor*
Aistulphus took another course. For he seized upon Ravenna, and the whole
Exarchat, and drove Eutychius the Exarch to Byzantium. This Government had
lasted in Italy 182 years under 10 Princes.

Aistulphus withheld from the Pope those towns which he said belonged to St.
Peter. Wherefore Pope Stephen who was the first that sealed his bulls with lead,
Pipin had received of Pope Zacchary; which was this: Pipin had two brothers;
the one Carolomannus was entered into a Monastery; the other Gryphon was killed;
wherefore he affecting the kingdom of France, by his letters desires to know
of Zacchary, whether a stupid Prince or an active subject were fittest to rule.
The Pope understanding his meaning, gives present order to Boniface being
lately made Archbishop of Mints, to anoint Pipin King of France, so
Chilpericus being held unfit for government, was forced to lay down the
Scepter and Crown, and to content himself 4720. A. C. 750.
with a Monks hood. He was the last of the Merovean race. Thus Pipin being
established in his throne by the Popes means, could do no less then assist
him to recover his own; wherefore having passed over the Alps with an Army, he
wrests from Aistulphus the Exarchat, and Pentapolis: and for the good of his
soul he bestowed as a patrimony on the Church Ravenna, Bononia, Imola,
Faventia, Ferraria; and in Pentapolis, Ariminum, Pisaurum, Ancona, Auximum and
Urbinum, of old these provinces were called Aermilia, Flaminia, and Picenum. At
this day they are named Romandiola, and Marca Anconitana.

No sooner was Pipinus returned to France, but Aistulphus repenting of his
bargain, besieges Rome with an Army, wasting all the country about with fire
Pipins help being implored again, Aistulphus is forced to pay the third part of
his treasures, and a tribute to the French. Shortly after he broke his neck
with a fall from his horse, as he was hunting. Pipin having with a long war
wearied Guaiofarius Duke of Aquitania, for denying of the Churches rights, and
the Duke at last being killed by his people, enlarges his Dominion by the
addition of Aquitania. Constantine the Emperor in hope to recover the Exarchat
of Ravenna, sends presents to Pipin, and among the rest a rich Organ, the first
that was ever seen in the West. But to no purpose, for it was answered him,
that those countries were purchased for, and given to S. Peter: so Pipin dyed
at Paris. To Charles he left Austrasia, to Carolomanus his other son, Burgundy
and Alemannia. Gascony is divided between them. He founded the A. C. 768.
Bishoprics of Saltzburg, Ratisbone, Aichstart and Frisinge. Burchard founded
the Church of Herbipolis or Wirtsburg, and Boniface the Abbey of Fulden in
Germany.

Aistulphus being dead, Ratichisus had a mind to recover the Kingdom of
Lombardy, slighting Desiderius who from the Duke of Tuscia came to sway the
Scepter of Lombardy, but Pope Stephen changed his mind; he having confirmed
Desiderius, received from him Faventia and Ferraria. In Spain to Alphonsus
succeeded his son Fro^olas, who overthrew Iuzaphus a Prince of the Saracens
on the borders of Gallicea, after which time Spain was no more tributary to
Miromalinus the Babylonian. For Abderamen thrust out Iuzaphus and made himself
king of Corduba. The Saracens were now distracted into factions, so that their
Dominion was divided among diverse. Abubales had Persia, Salimus Egypt,
Habdallas Syria, who having killed the other two obtained Magi, for offering by
the virtue of certain enchantments to fly in the air, whence they fell down
and hurt themselves. Habdallus Prince of Arabia dyed the same month that
Constantine did. The same year Adelgisus son of Desiderius King of Lombardy
fled to the Emperor Charles the Great, having invaded his Fathers kingdom,
which had continued 206 years. Charles was set on by Pope Hadrian, because
Desiderius laid claim to all the lands granted by Pipin to the Roman Church.
And Charles had devorced his wife Bertha the daughter of Desiderius, which made
him a greater stranger then before, to the Lombards; wherefore passing over the
Alps with his Army, he gave Desiderius, whom he defeated, and drove into
Ticinum; at last took him upon surrender of the town, whom he sent with his
wife into France; for his son Adelgisus was gone to Constantinople. So
Charles obtaines all Italy except Neapolis, and the Provinces belonging to
Sicily. He restores to Pope Hadrian the Exarchat and Pentapolis. Who having
called a Synod makes Charles a Patrician, and power is given him to invest
Bishops. Two years before A. C. 775.
this Italian war, the French made war upon the Saxons, as yet heathen
Idolaters, who exercised Charles his arms 33 years. The Church was much
beholding to these two Princes, Pipin and Charles, for their munificence
toward her, for propagating Christianity, and suppressing Heathenism, Judaism,
and heresies, for a settled Parliament in Paris, the work of Pipin, who was the

CHAP. X.
The affairs of the Empire under Leo, Irene, and Constantine. 2. Of foreign
Charles the Great. 3. Of the Church affairs in those times.

LEo the fourth succeeded to his Father Copronymus. He was also called A. C.
775.
Porphyrogenitus, because in his childhood he was made Co-emperour with his
Father, and was clothed with a purple robe. He banished his brother Nicephorus
with diverse more, upon suspicion, that he aimed at the Empire. By his
preswasion Telerichus King of Bulgaria being banished by his own subjects, was
baptized, and married with Irenes cousin german, then he was made a Patrician.
Leo was persuaded to make his young son Constantine Mahdy contrary to his
oath persecuted the Christian within his Dominion, so that diverse suffered
Martyrdom. Leo persecuted and punished the Image-worshippers as his Father
did. The fifth year of his reign, he woulds needs set upon his head the
Sacred Crown beset with rich jewels which Mauricius had dedicated in the
Church of S. Sophia upon the wearing of this 4750. A. C. 780.
Crown, his head swelled with carbuncles, then he fell into a violent fever,
and so dyed.

Charles the son of Pipin succeeded prosperously in his wars against the
Saxons, Westphalians, Huns, Angarians, Hessians. Rodgundus the Longobard with
diverse others. In all his conquests he settles Christianity. He gave many
honors, and created many Nobles, of such as had done him good service. He had
also good success in Spain against the Infidels, but in his return he lost
the greatest part of Eginhardus, Anshelmus, Roland, and many more of his chief
commanders. The Saxons under Witskundus their General oftentimes rebelled, and
were still subdued, they were supplied still with Auxiliaries of Danes, and
Vandals, but at last Witikundus was baptized in the year of Christ 785. Charles
erected the Bishoprics of Paderborn, Minden, and Osnaburg in Germany. About
this time Ximenius the first King of Navar dyed, to whom succeeded Garzicas
Eunicus, who relieved Pampilona, and took many castles and garrisons from the
Moors. One Lescus was the first that taught the Polonians about this time to
shoe horses.

Irene Leo's widow, with her young son Constantine rule the Empire. She was a
great defender of Images. Having understood that her husbands brother had
plotted treason against her, she caused them to be shaven, and then made
Priests of them, and banished all those that favored them. To make her sons
Empire the more firm, she contracts him to Charles the Greats daughter, for
that purpose sends Eliseus the Eunuch to instruct her in the Greek tongue and
customs. She overthrew in diverse battles Elpidius Praetor of Sicilia, and
forced him to fly over to the Saracens in Africa, because he would have set up
Nicephorus Constantines Uncle. She let the Saracens enjoy Afric quietly, being
afraid of their power, and made the Empire tributary to Aaron the Saracen
Prince. Paul Tarasius his successor advises Irene to call a general Synod,
which was done by Pope Adrians assistance, whose Legates were there. The place
was first at Byzantium, then Nicea of Bithynia. In this 7 general Council was
undone whatsoever had been done by Leo Isaurus, and his son and grandchild
concerning abolishing of Images. The 6 year of her reign a great commotion was
raised, which disturbed the proceedings of the Synod, so that the Bishops being
350 in all were forced to rise: the Empress making show of an expedition
against the Saracens, demands all the arms of those who were of the contrary
side and enemies to Images, which when she had gotten she banisheth

After this she dissolves the contract made between her son and Rhotilde,
and made him against his will to marry with one Mary an Armenian. She sends
also Adalgisus the son of Desiderius, with some Commanders to make new
stirs in Lombardy against Charles; because he had seized upon the Dukedom
of Beneventum. But Adalgisus is overthrown by the French and Lombards in a
battle, wherein he was taken and put to death. Constantine perceiving that his
mother did what she listed, and was altogether ruled by Stauratius ferula;
resolves to take the government upon himself. But she on the other side will
not part with any share of her power; keeps her son at home under correction
being 20 years of age; banisheth all who adhere to him, and makes the
soldiers swear fidelity to her alone, and not to acknowledge any power in him
whilst she was alive. But the Armenian Armies were constant in their loyalty
to Constantine, and would not acknowledge the mothers sovereignty, whose
example moved other soldiers, against their oath, to fall off from the
Empress. Therefore Constantine by their help takes the reins in his own
hand, commands Stauratius to forbear meddling with State affairs, and
confines his mother to her palace at Eleutherium, which she had lately built,
in which she was entertained with all princely respect, and the next year he
intending an expedition into Bulgaria, and another into Arabia, restores her
again to her former power; which when she had obtained, she fell to vex and
Nicephorus, Christophorus, and Nicetus to be apprehended, and their eyes to be
put out, which cruelty made him to be hated, chiefly of the Armenians, and to
make himself the more odious he puts away his wife Mary, pretending she
would have poisoned him, whereas it was known she was a virtuous and religious
Lady: then he being puffed up for some good success he had lately against the
Saracens, takes one Theodate a Virgin out of the Nunnery, and makes her his
Empress, which iucensed the Monks against him, who accused him of bigamy, for
which he banished them.

Constantine makes a second expedition into Bulgaria, to take off (if he could)
Stauratius with bribes and flatteries work upon the Army, whose good will she
obtained. Upon this the Emperor is called home from the Saracen war, the
intent was to apprehend and secure him, which was done accordingly; he thought
to have escaped, but could not, wherefore he is brought back to the City, and
his eyes are put out, 5 years after he had so served his Uncles, and 4768. A.
C. 798.
on that very day. Not long after he dyed, his death was accompanied with 17
days darkness, the eye of the world disdaining to look on those who had
thrust Charles for confirming a solid peace, for parting the Empire between
them, and for the making up of a match between Charles and her; he likewise
sends Ambassadors to Constantinople to the same effect; but whilst they were
there a great change fell out; for Irene being sick, it was given out by some
of the Grandees, that she had nominated Nicephorus the Patrician to succeed her
in the Empire; upon this, he is saluted Emperor by the Armies, to whom he
gives the oath of allegiance, Irene in the Palace, makes her deliver up all her
treasures; then banisheth her to the Isle Lesbos, where she was secured with a
strong guard, there she pined away with grief, and dyed, having reigned 23
years. Nicephorus dispatcheth the Ambassadors with letters to Charles,
desiring a ratification of the peace, propounded by Irene. Charles having again
subdued the Saxons, he translates a great number of them into Flanders and
Brabant. He beat the Sclavi and Vinidi, as they were plundering of Magdeburg.
He takes Thassilo son in law to Desiderius, who by his wifes persuasion had
renewed the rebellion. Him he condemns of treason, and then sends him to a
Monastery. Charles also suppressed the Hungarians, who were Thassiloes
associates, and had invaded Germany. So having after 8 years war subdued the
Huns, and quieted Pannonia, Charles assembleth a Synod at Francfurd of 300
Bishops, wherein Nestorianism is condemned, which Elipandus and Felix two
Bishops had renewed, and it was defined, that Christ according to his flesh was
the true son of God, and not adopted, and that in his humanity he should be
worshipped, no less then in his Divinity. Image worship is condemned, and the
second Synod of Nice rejected. Alphonsus also King of Asturia and Gallicia in
Spain wearyed with payment of Virgins which was exacted by the Saracens, in
way of attribute, resolves to fight them, and did accordingly, in which battle
he defeated them, took Lysbone, killed many 1000 of them, and freed a great
part of Spain from the Saracens yoke. The Ensigns of this victory he sends to
Charles. After Stephen the fourth, or third as some say, who sat 4 years
succeeded Adrian the first, who sat 23 years. He ordained that every day 100
poor people should be fed in the Lateran Court. In Leo's time a coffin or
chest of stone, was dug out of the ground. Christ shall be born of a Virgin.
In him I believe, was engraven on it, the dead body that was found in it, is
thought by some to be Plato's, this was found a little before Charles with the
Avares and Boii, whose last King Tassilo he took with his son, and put them
in a Monastery. About this time England was invaded by the Danes. In the year
791. the University of Paris is erected by Charles, whose first professors
were four Monks, all Beda's scholars, to wit, Rabanus, Albinus, Claudius and
Scotus; not Scotus subtilis the Franciscan, who lived long after: he erected
also the Universities of Papia, of Ticinum, of Osnaburg, and renews that of
Bononia fonnded by Theodosius. To Hadrian succeeded Leo the third, who sat 4
years: he lost both eyes and tongue by the malice of the Romans. He escaped
out of prison, and was restored by Charles. In his time the Empire was
translated from Greece to France. But which was a greater wonder; Leo was
restored

The fourth Book OF THE SECOND PART ENTREATING Of the times from CHARLES the
Great, till PHILIP the Emperor in the West, and the French Empire in the East,
containing 400 Years.
CHAP. I.
The affairs of both the Empires under Charles in the West, under Nicephorus,
Michael, and Leo in the East. 2. Of the Nations subdued by Charles.

CHARLES having obtained the name of Great for his conquests over the Saracens,
Saxons, Danes and many other barbarous 4770. A. C. 800.
Nations, is brought to Rome by Pope Leo, who having Charles was at Paderborn
in Saxony with his Army, when the Pope came; who made no delay to follow his
ghostly Fathers conduct to the Imperial City with his Army, where having
called a Synod to examine the crimes objected against the Pope; he was told,
that the Bishop of Rome was not to be judged by any man. And therefore no crime
being there alleged against him, he cleared himself by his own oath, and
so was absolved, and placed again, to the great grief of his enemies, in his
pontifical Charles; in S. Peter's Church upon Christmas day* (...) Pope
solemnly pronounces him Emperor, setting the crown on his head, and the people
with loud acclamations, saying: Long life and victory to Charles Augustus,
crowned by God, the Great, the Peacemaker, Emperor of the Romans. Hence came
the custom, that the Western Emperors received their Crowns from the Popes.
For the Eastern Emperors had been now for a long time slighted at Rome, ever
since they opposed Images. Charles now intends to subdue Sicily, but is
retarded by Irenes Emhassadors, who promised marriage with her; this Embassy
was acceptable to Charles, who hoped by this marriage to unite the two Empires
again. But Aetius the Eunuch, who endeavored to have his brother Leo then
Governor Nicephorus (as we have said) obtained the Empire.

Nicephorus a perfidious and covetous man, spared not those by whose help he
obtained the Empire. He got by his fair promises Bardanas the Patrician whom
the Eastern people had proclaimed Augustus, to relinquish his title, swearing
he should receive no prejudice by it; no sooner had Bardanas divested
himself, and entered of his own accord into a Monastery, but Nicephorus under
hand caused his eyes to be thrust out, and then wept, as if this had been done
without his knowledge. Then he makes Stauratius the son (for the father was
dead) his Co-Emperour, and shortly after fighting against the Saracens, he
lost the battle, narrowly escaping himself. He fortifieth Ancyra of Galatia,
and other towns to keep off the Saracens incursions: but basely he made
himself, his son, and his Empire triburaries to the Mahometans, who under
Aaron being 300000 strong, overrun Romania. He promised to pay yearly 300000
pieces of silver for the Empire, and 3000 for himself and his son: binding
himself also not to repair the Forts demolished by the Arabians. But shortly
after Nicephorus as his manner was broke the league; which brought the Saracens
upon Cyprus, who overthrew Aaron dies, to whom succeeds his son Mahomet, he
had civil wars with his brother which was pernicious to the Christians and
Arabians of those places, many Churches and Monasteries were destroyed. In the
interim Nicephorus gives himself to wantonness, he abuses two Ladies of
great beauty, and bestows one Theophania another man's wife, an Athenian, and
of kin to Irene, upon his son.

Nicephorus fearing Charles his increasing greatness sends Ambassadors to
proffer A. C. 810.
him Italy, except so much as lay upon the Sea between Naples and Sipontum John
their Duke: whom Nicephorus would have forced again upon them. But the French
under Pipinus were sent by Charles to assist the Venetians. Who finding
Obelerius the Tribune thrust out of the City, for favoring the French, fell
foul upon the Venitians; but having lost many of his men, and done no good,
was forced to make a dishonorable retreat to Ravenna: yet Charles suffered the
Greeks to enjoy Venice. Nicephorus the 9 year of his reign invades Bulgaria,
to Crunnus king thereof, who had seized upon the soldiers pay by the way, as
it was conveying from the Emperor to the camp. He had also taken Sardica, and
killed many 1000 Romans. But was willing to make his peace with Nicephorus; and
to give satisfaction; which proffer was rejected, and an army is sent to wast
Bulgaria. But suddenly in the night Crunnus falls upon his camp, made great
slaughter among the Romans, and killed Nicephorus himself in his pavillion,
whose head Crunnus fastened on a long pole, and carried it about. Most of the
Nobility were slain, all the arms and the imperial wealth in the Camp were
carried away; Stauratius Caesar received a wound in his neck, and fled to
Byzantium, where many who hated the son of Nicephorus, intended to make
Curopalates Procopia Stauratius his sister Emperor. Michael Curopalates
perceiving the peoples inclination toward him, and fearing lest he should be
prevented, procured also the soldiers good will, so the next day the Senate
being called, he was saluted Emperor the third month after the death of
Nicephorus. Stauratius hearing the acclamations of the people, put on a Monks
habit, in which 3 months after he dyed of his wound, which did stink and fester.

Michael being settled desired the friendship of Charles and Pope Leo,
propounding a match between his son and one of Charles his daughter. After this
he led an Army against the Bulgarians, but with ill success, for the
Barbarians prevailed, who wasted Thracia and Macedonia, and drove the
Christians out of Beroea and Anchialum; Copronymus were sent for out of
Panormus, to free the Empire from the Barbarians: these Michael punished with
banishment, and the loss of their eyes. Crunnus propounded peace to Michael on
this condition, that he might enjoy the ancient bounds of Bulgaria, and have
liberty to receive fugitives; which being denied him, he falls upon Mesembria,
and by the help of a certain Arabic Christian, whom Michael had defrauded of
his pay, took it, and in it much treasure. Shortly after he gave such an
overthrow to Michaels Army, that he having lost all, and in despair ever to
recruit again, fled and changed his robes with a Monks habit, and left the
Empire to Leo the Armenian. Theophylact Michaels son, being already called
Emperor, had his genitalls cut off, and he with his mother Procopia and
brothers were banished. Nicephorus reigned 9 years. Stauratius the younger one
year, and Michael almost 2 years. The Danes before this had invaded England,
and carried away great booties, they were called Normans, a general name to
all the Northern people, their King Godefrid had wars with Charles, with whom
he quarrelled for invading the Nordalbing Saxons, now called Holsatians. Two
years after Godefrid with 200 ships arrived in Charles, he was killed by a
soldier. To him succeeded Hemingus his brothers son, the same year that
Pipinus king of Italy, Charles his eldest son who beat the Beneventins, and
Venetian Captains, departed this life; when upon the restoring of Venice to
Nicephorus, peace was concluded between the Greeks and Francs. The next year
peace was concluded between the Francs and Danes; Hemingus sent him diverse
presents A. C. 811.
and then dyed, to whom succeeded Sigefridus and Anilo, who both were slain in
battle, and 11000 with them of the Danes; Hazald and Reginfrid obtained
Denmark the same time that Michael got the Empire of Byzantium. But these
brothers were driven out of their kingdom by another faction, who had lived
Charles dyed of a Fever and Pleurisy the 72 year of his age; having 4784. A.
C. 814.
been King of France 47. of Italy 42. and Emperor 14. years. He was
honorably buried at Aquisgranum, now called Aix, (where he dyed) in our Lady
Church built by himself. He was a wise, valourous, learned and fortunate
Prince. He built diverse religious houses, Churches and Colleages, he
instituted the 12 Peers of France. He built a most sumptuous bridge over the
Rhene near Mintz. This bridge was counted half a mile in length, ten years
were spent in building it: which a year before his death was burned down,
some say by casualty, Ricolphus the Archbishop, because in the night time many
robberies were committed there. He gave Teutonick names, (that being his own
tongue) to the winds and months. He appointed proper Lessons for each
Festival day, to be read in Churches. He was canonized by Pope Alexander at
the desire of Frederic the first Emperor; and a hymn appointed to be sung to
him at Aix. He subdued the greatest part of France, of Spain, of Italy, besides
Pannonia, Saxony, Histria, Dacia, Liburnia, Dalmatia, and many barbarous
Nations. The Greeks with presents sought his friendship, so did Aaron Prince of
the Saracens, who sent him an Elephant, a rich clock, and other Princely gifts.
He bequeathed by his last will all his treasures on charitable and pious
Charles had four wives, 1. Hermingardis daughter to Desiderius King of
Lombardy, whom he put away. 2. Hildegardis daughter to Godefrid Duke of
Alemans, who bore to him 3 sons, Charles, Pipin, and Lodovic, and four
daughters. 3. Fastrada a French Lady. Luitgarda an Aleman. By his Concubines he
had other children, one of them called Pipin, who was crooked, with some others
plotted treason against him, which he prevented, and cast his son into a
Monastery. Among his three sons lawfully begotten he divided his Empire, to
Pipin he gave Italy, to Charles Germany, to Ludovic France and hither Spain,
but Pipin and Charles dyed before their Father. Pipin left one son Bernhardus
and 5 daughters. Charles dyed the year after his brother, having subdued the
Sorabi a people in Lusatia, and killed their King Miloducus.

After the death of Charles the Great's two sons, the Saracens and Moors
invaded Italy, Charles sends his Grandchilde Bernardus, who took from them
Nicea in Gallia of Narbon, and Centum cellae in Hetruria, which some think to
be Civita vechia. Pope Leo the third, after he was restored by Charles, sat 16
years, so in all he was Pope 20 years. Egbert subdued all the South part of
Great Britain, and ordained it should be ever after called England. In Charles
his time 10000 Saxons with their wives and children are planted in Brabant and
Flanders, and many Flemings are sent into Saxony. The 12 Peers of France which
Charles instituted were 3 Archbishops, 1 of Rhemes, 2 of Laudon, or Laon, 3 of
Lingon or Langres. These were also Dukes: three Bishops; and Counts or Charles,
England also submitted to him, who sent thither Guido to subdue it. The clock
and candlesticks which the Persian king sent to Charles he bestowed upon our
Lady Church at Aquisgranum or Aix in Province. The Saracen King of Gallicea
being subdued by Charles, received the Christian Faith. The Northern people
that molested the Christians in Ireland Crunnus the Bulgarian King was not
contented to carry about Nicephorus his head on a pole, but he also at last
made a cup of it to drink in. Charles erected 9 Cathedral Churches, to wit,
Monster, Winden, Osnaburg, Brem, Paderburn, Verden, Hamberg, Hildemen and
Halberstad in Saxony. He used to have read to him in supper time S. Austin of
the City of God. He caused Paulus Diaconus write the lives of the Saints.

In the East to Michael succeeded Leo the fifth. He subdued Crunnus that was
now puffed up with so many victories, and gave him a deadly wound by an arrow,
who after this victory over Crunnus, commanded the abolition of Images,
Nicephorus the Patriarch, for withstanding his edict, and set up Theodatus in
his room. Michael Balbus conspired against him: for which treason he is
condemned to be burned, but by the entreaty of his Empress he put off the
execution to his own destruction, till the solemnity of Christ's Nativity was
passed. In the mean while he kept the key of the prison: but in the night
time not being able to sleep, he rises and goes into the prison, where he
sees Balbus sleeping soundly upon the bed, and Papias his Keeper lying on the
ground. At which Leo was much moved, and with his hand gave threatening signs,
for Papias affection to his prisoner: one of the watchmen upon Leo's departure
awaked Papias, and told him of the Balbus and tells him what had happened: upon
this they tell the Assasinats, that they must dispatch the Emperor quickly, or
else Balbus who was condemned, would discover them. They being affrighted at
this, without delay put on Priests habit, and join themselves with the singing
men in the Quire, having their swords under their garments, so while the
Emperor was singing Divine Hymns, with the rest they fall upon him, cuts off
his head and hand; then run into the prison, breaks off the fetters from
Balbus, and proclaims him Emperor: then crowns him in the same Chapel where
Leo was killed: they banish his wife, and 4 sons, after their privy members
were cut off. Leo reigned 7 years and 5 months.

CHAP. II.
The affairs of the Empire under Ludovic and Lotharius, in the West, under
Michael Balbus, Theodosius, Theodora, Michael the second, in the East. 2.
Foreign affairs of those times and of the Church.

LUdovic (called the godly from his bounty to the Clergy and the poor,) about
A. C. 814.
a month after his fathers death, removes from Aquitain to Aix; where he began
his reign. He renewes the league with Leo the Emperor of Leo being dead
succeeds Stephen the fifth, who crowned Ludovic at Rhemes the third year of
his reign. To Stephen who sat but 4 months succeeded Paschalis who was Pope 7
years. Ludovic was like to be killed by the fall of a porch or gallery at Aix,
by which fall he was hurt in his body, and mortified in his mind. At the same
time Sclaomirus King of the Eastern Sclavonians revolted from him, and Bernhard
in Italy raised an Army against him. But when Ludovic was marching with his
Forces against Bernhard, his soldiers forsook him, and so he surrendered
himself to his Uncle. Ludovic having assembled a Council at Aix, condemns
the chief authors of Bernhards sedition; the Clergy men he punishes with
degradation, and the Laity with loss of their Anselmus Bishop of Millan, and
Theodulphus bishop of Orleans or Aurelia. Bernhardus a few days after he had
lost his eyes dyed, which made Ludovic grieve for his rash sentence. Not long
after this Irmengardis his wife dyed, by her he had 3 sons, Lotharius, Pipinus,
and Ludovic: but the loss of his wife was recompensed, by the regaining of a
lost kingdom: for Sclaomir was brought captive, who not being able to excuse
his rebellion, is divested of his kingdom.

Ludovic after this married with one Iuditha, a Bavarian and his near
kinswoman, A. C. 826.
this marriage cost Frederic bishop of Utrecht his life, for he spoke against
it, as unlawful, whereupon Iuditha sent some Assasinats who murdered him at
the Luidevicus King of Hungary; which war ended with the death of Luidevicus.
Bernhard King of Italy being dead in the monastery, where his Uncle put him,
Lotharius is made King of Italy, and Caesar by his father Ludovic, who married
to him Irmengardis the daughter of one Hugo. Afterward he sent him into Italy,
and desires Paschalis the Pope to proclaim him Emperor. This Paschalis was
elected Pope by the Romans, without the Emperors knowledge; at which he was
displeased; but quickly pacified again by the Popes excuse: who purged himself
by oath, that he had no hand in the murder of the Emperors servants at Rome.
To Poschalis succeeded Eugenius the second who sat 4 years, and then gave
Gregory the fourth, who sat 16 years.

In Ludovic's time the Danes by Ebbo Archbishop of Rhemes were converted to
Christianity, who caused Heraldus (that was lately after his banishment; settled
again in Denmark by Caesar's means) to be baptized at Mintz, with a great
multitude of Danes. About the time that Ranimir successor to Alphonsus in
Spain obtained a great victory of the Saracens, wherein were slain 40000
Barbarians: but this joy lasted not long, for the Dane was expelled by
Godefrids sons; the Saracens out of Spain wasted Barcinone or Barcellone in
Arragon now, but in Aquitain of old: the Bulgarians plundered Pannonia; for
which cause many of their Commanders and Officers for their neglect were
casheered. Boniface Earl of Corsica who plunders the coasts of Africa, and does
not suffer the Saracens to settle their wealth in Sicily, which they took
lately from the Governor thereof under Balbus. Ludovic was severe against the
rich apparel of the Clergy. But the Nobility perceiving that he was
altogether ruled by his wife Iuditha, they stir up Pipin King of Aquitania
against his Father, as unworthy to reign any longer; with him in this
conspiracy Lotharius is joined, lately come out of Italy. Iuditha is commanded
from the Court, and the Emperor himself is threatened to be put into a
Monastery, but the controversy was quickly taken up, the Emperor and his
sons are reconciled; the Authors of the rebellion are shut up in
Monasteries, Iuditha is absolved, and restored to her dignity again, and
Ludovic to his Empire by the Germans help. Barnhard Earl of Barcilona who was
accused of adultery with her, (which was the maine cause of this rebellion of
the sons against the father) profferred to vindicate his innocence by his
sword; but no adversary being sound, he cleared himself by oath, and is also
restored to his honor. Pipin would not give his consent to this, wherefore he
is confined to Aquae in Aragon: but he escaped thence into Gascony. Which Pipin
should be secured at Trevers; but he having made his party in Gascony strong,
and his brothers being animated by bad Counselors to join with him, they
resolve to take arms, and to force their father to give over the Empire, the
rather because they thought his love was altogether set on Charles the balde,
his son by Iuditha. With these Pope Gregory the fourth combines, threatening
to excommunicate the Emperor, out of a grudge, because Ludovic commanded that
the Popes election should not be valid, unless it were examined and confirmed
by his Legate. At length both Armies meet near to Basil, ready to fight, but the
Pope cunningly goes over to Ludovic, pretending to reconcile him to his
sons, but indeed to protract time, Ludovic being thus forsaken, went over to
his sons camp hoping to be kindly used by them, but he was put in prison, and
his power wrestedd from him. This unnatural fact was so odious to Varinus and
Bernhardus, that they send Lotharius a challenge, either to set his father at
liberty, or else to fight with either of them. He laid the fault upon the
Bishops, and so leaving his Father in the Monastery of St. Dennis, retires to
Burgundy, where he begins to fortify himself, and to raise arms: in the mean
while Ludovic by the help of his friends is restored again to his right, and
Lotherius being forsaken by his brothers, Ludovic and Pipin, Ludovic stopped
all passages toward Italy, that none might come thence into Germany without
his knowledge. Ebbo that converted the Danes with diverse other Bishops are
degraded, and banished for their seditious counsels, the rest of the evil
counselors are pursued by Divine justice, for in the space of 7 weeks the
plague swept them all away, in whose destruction Ludovic rejoiced not, but
prayed for them. Pipin the fifth year after he was repossest in his power was
struck with an untimely death, which was ushered by a comet, at the fight of
this Ludovic presaged some evil coming, wherefore he

After this, by the persuasion of Iuditha, he divides his Dominions among his
sons. To Lotharius he gives the Empire, with Italy, and the South part of
France, even to the river Maesa. The rest of France he bestows on Charles the
Balde Iuaitha's son, and to Ludovic he bequeathed Germany; who not contented
with his portion, laid claim to all beyond the Rhene, and so began to make new
commotions. Augustus hastening to appease them is forewarned by a terrible
eclipse of the sun, that the light of the Empire should be removed, which fell
out true the same month. For the Emperor dyed of grief, and of an Inposthume
near Mintz the 64 year of his life, the 28 of his Empire. Drogo his brother
Bishop 4810. A. C. 840.


Michael Balbus a Phrygian born, a defender of heresies, a hater of
disputations, a countenancer of all Religions, a denyer of the Resurrection,
and of Devils, a maintainer of whoredoms, a rejecter of lawful oaths, the
sink of all wickedness: as he nefariously got the Eastern Empire, so he ruled
it, or rather misruled it. He was called Balbus from his stammering tongue. He
could neither read nor write, and therefore suffered no children to be taught
to read, left they should be learneder then himself. One Thomas who called
himself Constantine, a Tribune, and who had defeated the Hagarins, strove to
be Emperor; therefore with a great army besieges Byzantium: but Winter
coming on he was forced to raise the siege, and return the next spring. Many
encounters he had with Balbus: but at last by the help of the Bulgarians Thomas
is defeated, and flies to Adrianopolis where he was apprehended, upon the
surrender of the City by famine, and tortured to death, his hands and feet
being first cut off. Perinthus the Metropolis of Thracia, called also Heraclea
from Heraclius, held out a great while against Balbus in defense of Thomas. So
did also Panium, but they were at last taken. In the 823. 828.
slaves of the Islanders. The Saracens of Afric invade Sicily, which they took
by the treachery of one Euphemius, whom the Praetor of the Island should have
executed for the abusing of a Nun; Balbus strove to recover these, but was
still beat off with loss. Dalmatia likewise shook off the Grecian yoke, and
became a kingdom. Thus the Eastern Empire being torn, Balbus dyed of a Frenzy
and Strangury, or as 829.
some say of a Bloody flux, having reigned 8 years.

To him succeeded Theophilus his son, who justly punished the murderers of Leo
Armenius, though they advanced his father Balbus from the prison to the Throne.
He punished his wifes brother for building so close to a widows house, Lazarus
a Monk, for painting or coloring of Images. He confessed that he never had to
do with any woman but his own wife, except one Lady, for which he was sorry.
He was a great lover of Music. With diverse success he made excursions upon
the Arabians. He took Sozopetra in Syria, Amira's native place, in requital of
which Amira took Amorya in Phrygia (whence Theophilus derived his pedigree)
killed many thousands in it, and imprisoned the Nobility, whom Theophilus would
have ransomed, 841.
but could not, whereupon with grief he fell sick and dyed the 13 year of
his reign, the next year after Ludovic's decease, but before his death he
Theophobus whom the Persian Army of 30000 men had named Emperor.

In the reign of these Emperors Garsias King of Navar dyed, to whom after 4
years interregnum succeeded Eunicus who was anointed King. The Bulgarians had
received the Christian Faith the former age, but were since returned to
Gentilism, they are made Christians again under Ludovic. A. C. 817. afterward
An. 860 they were totally converted under Theodora. Near Tulle in Belgica a
maid lived 3 years without meat or drink. The Paulicians then flourished in
Phrygia and Lycaonia, these were a new sect of Manichees patcht up of Judaism,
Gentilism, and Christianism; these were favored by Balbus. By the skill of
George a Venetian Priest, Ludovic water Organs were made at Aix. Ludovic parted
with his right of election of the Popes and confirmed the Emperors former
grants to them. S. Marks body is translated from Alexandria by Sea to Venice,
to which a magnificent Church is erected. The Feast of all Saints which had
been 220 years before this time, observed in Rome, is now by Ludovic imposed
upon France and Germany: the Saracens plunder in Italy, and rob the Vatican at
Rome, but in their return they made shipwreck. Alphonsus the third surnamed
the Great, reigns in Spain, Egbert in England, Kenneth the second son of
Alpinus in Scotland.

To Ludovic succeeded his son Lotharius in the Empire. He would have
subjected Ludovic to content himself with Bavaria, and Charles with Gascony,
which they must hold of him in Fee. These scorning to be subject to their
brother, and to loose their Patrimony, understanding also that he had raised
an Army against them, resolve to join their Forces together, and to withstand
Lotharius: a bloody battle is fought near Antissiodorum or Aexer in Province,
in this conflict above 100000 men were slain, on both sides, Lotharius lost
welnigh all his Army, and he was fain to fly to Aix, where he recruits his
army; the next year his brothers meet him again in the field; but his soldiers
being mind-full of their last great defeat, forsook him, so that he was forced
to fly again. Yet does not mean to give over, but recollects his Forces, and
encampeth near Matiscon a town in Burgundy, thither his brothers came with
their Army; as they were ready to fight, the Peers of the Empire did so mediate
between them, that Ludovic should have Germany for his share, Charles should
enjoy France, and Lotharius Italy with the Empire, and so much of Germany as
lay between the two rivers, the Rhene and Mosell, hence the country was called
from Lotharius Lotharingia. Pipin the son of Pipin had Aquitania, which
Charles not long after aimed Pipins two sons, to wit, Pipin and Charles into
two Monasteries, whence they made an escape, but were brought back at last.
Ludovic Germanicus bestowed on Charles the Archbishopric of Mints. Charles
killed also Bernhard, his mothers favorite of old. Ludovic Germanicus subdued
the Abotriti a people bordering upon Bulgaria, and killed their King, who was
the cause of their revolt, and set Dukes or Governors over them. He caused 15
Bohemian Dukes to be baptized, and brought all their country in subjection.

About this time, the Normans with a great Fleet plundered the coast of France,
and by the river of Loire entered into the bowels of the country as far as
Charles not being able to force them, persuaded them by money to be gone out of
his Kingdom. They had first infested the Spanish shore, but were beat off by
King Ranimirus, they molested also England, Frisland, and Saxony, they
overthrew Hamburg, which Charles the Great built as a bulwark to keep them out.
At last they took the Isle Valacra, and called it Seland: so after they had
done much mischief abroad, and had vexed France 20 years, they returned to
Denmark laden with gold, where they destroyed one another with civil wars.
Lotharius the Emperor understanding that the Romans had a mind to deliver up
the City to the Greek Emperors, he made a journey thither; punished the
authors of this plot, changed the Magistrates and reassumed his ancient right
in confirming Ludovic Emperor and Lord of Italy. He places Charles in that
part of France which of old was called Gallia Narbonensis, and Braccata,
containing Languedoc, Provence and Dalphine. Lotharius the youngest is settled
in Lotharingia or Lorrain: so being weary of the world, and sorry for the great
mortality that was in all his Dominions by the plague, willing also to expiate
his rebellion against his father; lays aside his Empire, and enters into a
Monastery called Brumia near Trevers, where the next year after he dyed,
having reigned 15 years. His son Charles did not live long after his father.
Lotharius having put away his wife Ditberga, married his Concubine Baldrada
Lotharius had two sons by his Concubine; Lotharius the third and Hugo Duke of
Lorrain. Ludovicus Germanicus 869.
had long wars with the Sorabi, Bohemians, and Marcomans. He had three sons,
Carolomanus the eldst who dyed of an Apoplexy, Charles surnamed the gross and
Ludovic. His daughter Ludgarta, lived a monastical life; to Ludovic the third
son of Germanicus the Empire fell.

In the reign of Lotharius the Arabian Mores plundered the coast of Campania,
Sergius the second Pope, before his Popedom he was called Os porci or Swines
face, of which being ashamed he changed his name to Sergius, whence it came to
be a custom afterward for every Pope to change his name. He sat 3 years, to
whom succeeded Leo the fourth, who fortified the City against the Saracens, and
by the help of the Neapolitans and Cajetans overthrew their fleet. The
Islanders of Corsica and Sardina, were forced to leave their habitation to the
Saracens, and to dwell at Rome, Leo was the first that forbid laymen to be in
the Quire at Mass time. He caused Cloisters or Schools to be built near the
Churches. Leo fate 8 years, to him succeeded Benedict the third, who sat 2
years. After whom sat Nicholaus the first 9 years. He excommunicated
Lotharius. In Spain Halaaragmau the third, and after him his son Mahomet
reigned, who 3 times persecuted the Christians. The Saracens take the Isle
Lipara, and in it they found the relics of S. Bartholomew, which they abuse
and disperse.

At Constantinople Theodora the wife of Theophilus the Emperor, reigned in her
son Michael's his minority. She was given to Images, therefore repeals the acts
of Theophilus against them, deposes John the Patriarch, and sets up Methodius,
Bogores their king, for being a Christian, but he overcame them in a battle,
and by Theodora obtained the enlargement of his territories. The Paulician
Manichees, fell off totally from the Arabians, and infested the Provinces of
the Empire with many incuisions. About this time Godaliscus the Monk
misunderstanding St. Austins Doctrine of Predestination; taught that God
absolutely decreed the salvation and damnation of men; and that Christ did not
dye for all. After Hincmarus Bishop of Rhemes, and Rabanus Bishop of Mints had
refuted him, Lodovic drove him out of Germany. Then lived Etelwoolph King
Kenneth the great in Scotland was yet alive. He by a stratagem of fish skins,
with which in the night he was clothed, and speaking through a bugles horn,
encouraged his Nobles to give battle the next day to the Picts which they did
accordingly, supposing they had been warned by an Angel; and obtained such a
victory as quite extinguished the Picts Nation.

Michael having shut up his mother in a Monastery, undertakes the Eastern 855.
Empire. He was a drunken fool, a slave to his pleasures, his belly, and his
flatterers, he spent the whole treasure his mother Theodora left, upon his
luxury and pleasures, and at last was fain to make money of his robes and
housholdstuffe. Petronas gave them such an overthrow, that he killed their
King Amirus, and took his son prisonner: but after Petronas was dead, the
Saracens took head again, and seized on the Cyclades Islands, and with their
incursions infested the Greeks in Syria, Michael besieges the City Samosata
in Syria, but was beat off with almost the loss of his life. He made Bardas
his Uncle by the mother, Caesar, and committed all to his managing. This Bardas
advanced learning, by erecting Schools, and professors of all Arts, to whom
he allowed good maintenance. He made great use of one Leo a learned man, who
in the Isle Andros had been taught Rhetoric, Arithmetic and Philosophy by
Michael Psellus. Amirumnes Theophilus this Michael's father, a great sum of
money, if he would part with Leo, to teach the Sciences in his Dominions: but
Theophilus considering the great happiness and honor that learning brought to
Greece, and unwilling the Agarens should out strip the Grecians in knowledge,
would not part with Leo whom he made Bishop of Thessalonica, which dignity he
lost under Theodora, for subscribing against Images. But Bardas for his
Bishopric, gave him the Mastership of all the Colleges which he erected. This
same Bardas was excommunicate by Ignatius the Patriarch for devorcing his wife.
But he thrust Ignatius out of his place, and set up Photius a learned man:
whose Bibliothec and Nomocanon are yet extant, with Balsomons

In this Emperors time the Rossi or Roxolani, whom at this day we call Moscs
and Moscovites, inhabiting the North side of Taurus, with a Fleet invade the
Euxin Sea, and lay siege to Byzantium, but were forced to return by stormy
weather, without effecting any thing. Michael grew every day worse and worse
and still more sottish: one time being in his sports, news were brought him
that the Beacons were on fire, which signified the Saracens had invaded the
Empire. He caused the watchmen and Beacons to be removed, that his sport might
receive no interruption. He mocked all reverend ceremonies in the Church,
cau-sing them to be acted in an Apish way, by histrionicall young fellows. He
had raised one Basilius an Horse-courser, to be master of his horse; he was a
poor exile; but said to be descended from the ancient family of the Arsacidae.
He was so 866.
well beloved by Michael, that he heard his false accusations against Bardas,
whom he suffered to be murdered in his own sight, because he used to reprove
him for his fooleries. Then he marries this Basilius to Eudocia his own
Concubine, and proclaims him Caesar; in his mad humor he used to cut off the
noses or hands and heads too sometime of his most familiar friends, in sport.
The new Caesar Basilius (who frowned to see this sight) Have not I power (says
he) to make this man an Emperor as well as thee? Basilius fearing that Michael
might speak in earnest; in the night when he was drunk and a sleep, he brake
into his chamber 867.
with his associates and murdered him, having reigned alone 11 years with his
mother 14. Basil of a horse-courser becomes Emperor, and rules the East 17
years.

CHAP. III.
The affairs of the Empire under Ludovic the second. Carolus Calvus. Ludovic
the third, and Carolus Crassus in the West, and of Basilius in the East. 2.
Offorrain affairs of these times.

LVdovic the second Lotharius his eldest son was made Co-emperour with his
Father, he with the help of his brother Lotharius stoutly opposed the Saracens
at Beneventum: but having lost a great part of the Army by sickness, Adalgisus
Prince of Salernum, who in the Emperors absence revolted to the Greeks, with
all the towns of Samnium, Campania and Lucania. Ludovic to be revenged of this
treachery, returns into Italy, and recovered the revolted towns, even Capua
at last which had made long resistance, and drives the Saracens out of
Campania. But he showed himself a weak Prince, in suffering himself to be
deluded and persuaded by Adelgisus, to disband his Army; which when he had
done, Adelgisus with fire and sword set upon his Palace having no sufficient
guard, and forced him to swear that he would never come again within the
confines of Beneventnm, and that he would not revenge this wrong. But Ludovic
was absolved shortly after by the Pope from Adelgisus with an Army, drove him
out of Italy into Corsica, and punished his friends that remained. So having
settled Italy, he dyed at Millan the 20 year of his reign, without issue male,
which ministered 875.
occasion of quarrel for the Empire, between his Uncle Charles surnamed the
Balde king of France, and Ludovic king of Germany. But this controversy was
betimes composed in a Synod, called by the Pope, in which by general consent
Charles is named Emperor, and is crowned by Pope John the eight, at Rome whom
some call John the ninth.

Basilius the Macedonian having by the murder of Michael obtained the Greek
876.
Empire. He first of all redemands the money which Michael had profusely spent,
Photius the Patriarch suspended him from the Communion for his murder,
wherefore he deposes him, and sends for Ignatius who had been banished: having
discovered a plot of his Grandees against him. He invests his three sons
Constantine, Leo, and Alexander with the Imperial Ensigns: Of his fourth son
Stephen he made a Clergy man. Against the Eastern Agarens he fought with good
success, and overrun all Asia even to Euphrates, where he took in many
Castles, and so returned in triumph to new Rome. He restores Photius again to
his Patriarchat, Ignatius being dead; and yet Photius for opposing Images had
been condemned 878.
by a Synod at Constantinople. Basilius by Nicephorus Phocas drove out of
Apulia (which with some other places adjacent belonged upon agreement to the
Greek Empire) the Carthaginian Saracens which had invaded it, and took Ragusium
(a Ludovic the second Emperor, and of the Venetians. He overthrew the
Saracens power at Sea, and converted many Jews to Christianity, to the
profession of which he persuaded also the Rossi: and so he did the Bulgarians,
whose King having entered into a Monastery, delivered the government to his
son; but shortly after perceiving that he was falling back to Gentilism,
reassumes his own power, deposes his son, and pulls out his eyes, and then
makes his other son King. Basilius also overthrew the Mahumetans, and slew
Chrisochires their Prince, who had invaded the Greek Territories. He took in
Caesarea of Cappadocia, and laid waste many of the countries of the Agarens.
The Saracens of Tarsis with their Amiras wrote defying letters to Basilius
showing that neither he, nor the son of Mary should be able to break his
power: against these Bragadoces Andrew a Andrew is deposed for not taking in of
Tarsus, and Stypejota, whose tongue was nimbler than his hand, was sent. He
carelessely sat down before the walls, and neglected to entrench himself,
wherefore he was suddenly surprised by the Saracen horse.

Ludovic and Basil joining their Forces together suppressed the Western
Agarens, and took the Sultan prisoner, who being brought in triumph to Capua,
and suddenly laughing at the volubility of the chariot wheels, was asked why
he laughed, he answered, that he saw in the whirling about of the wheels, the
Symbol of humane inconstancy. For this saying Ludovic received him into favor,
but he was deluded by him, when he persuaded him to transplant to some other
places Ludovic meant to remove them, whereupon they fell off from him, and
carried back the Sultan into Africa, yet at last they were forced to submit to
Ludovic. Basil having reigned 20 years, one day in his hunting was wounded by a
Stagge, of which wound he dyed: the Stagge got him by the girdle on his horns,
a Courtier for drawing his sword to cut the girdle, was unjustly put to death,
as if he intended to kill the Emperor. He left behind him three sons
above named, the fourth Constantine was dead, his daughters he shut up in
Monasteries. About these times some write that Pope Joan the woman lived, whom
some call John the seventh, some John the eight. Nicolaus the first sat 9
years, to him succeeded Adrian the second, who was Pope 5 years. Photius the
Patriarch calls a Synod at Byzantium against Pope Nicolaus, upon this a schism
is made between the Greek and Latin Churches; and then openly the procession
of the Holy Ghost is opposed by the Greeks. Cyrillus and Methodius preach to
the Sclavonians, and Dalmatians. Pope Adrian the second was the first that
crowned Elfred the sixth King of England. Then was the University of Oxford
erected, where 3 Colleges were built by the King. Some think the foundation of
this Academy was laid in the Britains time in Wiltshire, and from thence
translated by Elfred to Oxford. In Scotland reigned Donadus the fifth,
Constantine the second defeated the Danes in Fife, and in a second battle was
defeated by them.

Charles the Bald Grandchilde to Charles the Great, succeeded in the Empire, to
Ludovic. He by bribes got the Popes good will, and therefore was preferred 875.
to his elder brother Ludovic, who entered upon France in his brothers absence,
but shortly after dyed abroad. About 37 years after the decease of his father
Ludovicus Pius; his son Carolomannus held Bavaria, Bohemia, Moravia,
Carinthia, Pannonia three years. His other son Ludovic held Belgium, France,
Saxony, and Thuringia, with the Earoli. Charles the gross obtained Suevia,
Alsa^ia and Lorrain, till he got the Empire* Carolus Calvus his second wife was
Rothildis the widow of Lotharius, the deceased Emperor, by whom he had
children, but they all dyed. He was a proud, but a cowardly prince; having
made Boson his wifes brother Duke of Italy, prepares an Army against his
brother who had invaded France, but understanding he was dead, resolves to
employ his Army of 50000 men against his brothers sons, therefore hastes
toward Germany. Ludovic 876.
Carolus Calvus falls desperately sick upon this overthrow, but being
recovered, he is sent for to Italy against the Saracens, who were fallen upon
the Popes territories; as soon as he arrived thither, he makes Boson King,
and sends his Army against Caroloman his cousin German; and then out of fear
flies to Rome, Caroleman forsakes Italy. Calvus about to return to France falls
sicks at Mantua. It Is thought he was poisoned by Zedechias a Jew 877*
his Physician. His brother Ludovic King of Germany dyed the year of Christ
882. Caroloman of Bavaria deceased two years before A. C. 880. Charles the
Gross succeeded in the Empire.

About that time Pasquintan and Varfrand Dukes of Britanny, having killed
Solomon their King, fell at odds between themselves; a cruel battle is
fought, in which Pasquintan though backed by the Normans, is defeated by
Varfrands small Army, and when Pasquintan renewed his Forces, he was put to
flight by Varfrand though sick in bed. Pope Johan, the eight who sat ten
years, crowned 3 Emperors in 4 years space, to wit, Charles the Balde,
Ludovic the Stammerer, and Charles the Gross. Swarms of Locusts in France for
one days space darkened the air; till flying to the British Sea, with a sudden
blast of wind are all drowned; 874*
upon this follows the plague and famine, which consumed the third part of the
people.

Ludovic the third surnamed Balbus or the the Stammerer, the son of Calvus,
having with much pomp and magnificence entertained Pope Johan the eight at
Lions is by him invested Emperor, and crowned by Hincmar Archbishop of Rhemes*
879*
He did not live long after, nor did he any memorable act: for he dyed the
second year of his reign, not without suspicion of poison. He sent his crown as
he was dying with his regal robes to his son Ludovic as yet but young. To
whose share France fell, to his other son Caroloman, Burgundy. Ludovic in the
year 882 dyed, Caroloman 882.
in 884. The Normans under Rollon their Captain seat themselves in that part,
Theodoricus was created the first Earl in Holland.

Carolus the third surnamed Crasso or Gross, the youngest son of Ludovic the
second King of Germany, obtained the Empire from the posterity of Ludovic the
third, he was brother to Ludovic the French King (who dyed a year after his
eldest brother Caroloman) and great grand child to Charles the Great. His two
brothers being dead, all Germany, Italy, and France did now belong to him. He
was forced to let the Normans quietly enjoy that part of France called Normandy
from them: and upon Godefrid the Norman he bestows Frisia with the daughter of
Lotharius. His brother Ludovic took a part of Lorrain from the French. He
Brunno the builder of Brunswick. His brother Caroloman dyed of the Palsy. This
Charles the Gross overthrew Hugo and Boson, who laid claim to the Kingdom of
France. He thrust out Hugo's eyes, and clapped him up in a Monastery. He drove
Boson out of Vienna, then posted to Rome where he was crowned by John the
eight. Ludovic being dead, the Normans rage with fire and sword in Germany,
they plunder Utricht, Collen, Trevers (whose Bishops they slew) with many other
towns. Ludovic's only son at Ratisbone falling from a window broke his neck.
Charles having made peace with Godefrid King of the Danes o^ the Normans, he
caused him to be baptized. Pope John the eight having sa^e 10 years was
poisoned, and then knocked in the head, his successor Martin the second sat not
much above one year. Vido Earl of Tuscia, and Duke of Spoleto being guilty of
treason, to avoid punishment, calls into Italy the Mauritanian Saracens against
him. Charles sends his Kinsman Berengarius, who overthrowes Vido. He at last
cleared himself Charles his favor. Caroloman the son of Balbus is wounded by
a Boar as he was hunting, which cost him his life. Charles after much
happiness, and many victories, was feign to come under the tuition of his
brothers son Arnulphus, whom the Francs, Saxons, Bavarians, and other Germans
made their King at Francfurt. Because Charles had cast off his chaste and
lawful wife, and had given too much advantages to the Normans enemies of his
Kingdom: therefore 888.
finding all his friends to forsake him, he sent presents to Arnulphus desiring
some maintenance for his life, which he obtained, and the next year dyed,
having reigned almost 9 years.

In his time Rollon being settled in Neustria or Normandy bordering on the
Britans, and Gallicocean, the capital City whereof is Rothomagum or Roan,
received Charles the Simples (or as others say) Charles the Grosses daughter in
marriage, and a new name also, for he was named Rupert, from whom descended the
Norman Dukes, among whom was Richard the second, who by his sword conquered
Apulia, Calabria and Sicilia, having driven out thence the Greeks and Saracens.
This Carolus Crassus had for wife Richardis daughter to the King of Scotland.
About these times the African Agarens, overthrew Syracusis; Abdalla a new
Caliph of Africa, abjured Mahomet, and followed Haly; and withal changed the
Saracen rites and Prayers; his nephew Elmedinallas having obtained Egypt set up
his regal seat at Cair, equal to that of Babylon. The Rossi or Russi were
miraculously converted to Christianity; Basil sent for that end, cast his Bible
in a flaming fire, which was found among the ashes untouched by the fire. It is
reported of the Emperor Basil, that desiring to see his son Constantine who
was dead, one Theodorus a Monk, represented him, as if he had been alive, for
this Basil's other son Leo, accuses him for a witch, but Basil favored and
admired him. Theodorus to be revenged of Leo, counsels him to wear a dagger
in his boots privately, as a spell against all danger, and then informs his
Father, that Leo meant to kill him, for he carried a dagger in his boots for
that end: the dagger being found, Leo is laid in Irons, at which the people
were much afflicted, crying out, Alas Lord Leo: these words a Parrat learned,
and one day as Basil was at dinner speaks them; at which he Leo is set free.
About that time also the Danes invade England again, and are expulsed, except
such as became Christians. Theophylact is sent by Photius the Patriarch to be
Bishop of Bulgaria. Charles the Gross was the first that dated his Letters and
Patents with the year of Christ: whereas the Eastern Princes, even until the
Council of Basil used no other computation in their subscriptions, but that of
the World, according to Eusebius his account, which is erroneous. To Martin
succeeded in the Popedom Adrian the third, who sat one year. He renews the
Decree of Pope Nicolaus the first, to wit, that the Pope should be chosen by
the Clergy and people of Rome without the Emperor. To him succeeded Stephen
the sixth, or as some say the fifth, he sat 6 years.

CHAP. IV.
Of Carolus Crassus and Ludovic the fourth in the West. 2. Of Leo and his son
Constantine in the East. 3. Of the affairs of Italy, Germany, Spain, Scotland,
and other passages of those times.

THE posteritity of Charles the Great, lawfully begotten failed in Carolus
Crassus; for Ariulphus was of the fourth degree from him, or his Nephews 887.
Nephew, that is, the son of Carolomanus Germanicus by a Concubine He
succeeded his Uncle Crassus, who had a son called Bernhard, by a concubine:
Ludovic Balbus had a posthume son named Charles, but these were passed by,
and the French choose for their King Odo or Otho the Earl of Paris, who had
stoutly defended the City against the Normans* Him Arnulphus permitted to be
King, conditionally that he did homage and fealty to him: the Italians chose
for their King Berengarius the son of Eberhard, Duke of Friuli: others chose
Vido Duke of Spoletum, who defeated Berengarius in a battle, and forced him to
fly to Arnulphus. Vido having got the Empire of Italy, enjoyed it but 3 years.
For Berengarius by the help of Arnulphus obtained it, who stripped him of his
Empire, and drove him to Spoletum. He dyed the 3 year of his Empire, 894. 899.
Lampertus Emperor in name dyed in hunting. Rodulphus the son of Conradus
and Grandchilde of Hugo Abbas makes himself King of Burgundy, the Normans
break in upon France and Germany: the Hungarians upon Italy, Pannonia,
Carinthia, and Moravia: the Christian Britains in a battle killed 15000 of the
Inhabitants that were Gentiles. Arnulphus brought the Hungarians first into
Germany, by whose help he overthrew the rebelling Bohemians. The Normans at
first defeat Arnulphus his Army, but in a second battle are so defeated by him
that scarce were any left to carry home tidings. The Danes who were then the
chief of the Normans lost two Kings Godefrid and Sigfrid with 16 Ensigns*
Berengarius being assaulted by an Army under Lambert Vido's son was forsaken
for his tyranny by his own soldiers, and so lost his Kingdom. Otho King of
France is driven out by Charles the simple son to Balbus.

Arnulphus is forced to make another journey into Italy against Lambert, who
was crowned by Pope Formosus. He lays siege before Rome, and enters it by the
guide of a Hare: which the soldiers pursuing with ^hooting toward the walls,
and the Watch thinking that they were coming to assault run away: and so the
imperial City, which from Pope Leo was called Leonina is surprised 896.
by a Hare. Arnulphus is crowned there by Formosus, and his enemies are put to
death, the Romans take the oath of allegiance to him: the government of the
City is committed to one Foroldus. Lambert in hunting was killed by Hugo Earl
Arnulphus is crowned, the Germans claim title to the Empire. The wife of Vido
and mother of Lambert was then at Firmum, which she held out against
Arnulphus. She cunningly sends to him by his servant a 899.
poysonable drink, which put him in a Lethargy, and so the siege broke up.
Arnulphus the third year after his imperial inauguration dyed of the lousie
disease. This Kingdom of Italy begun by Berengarius, continued 80 years, till
the 32 year of Otho the great, who thrust out Adelbertus. The Italian Kings
were these, 1. Berengarius. 2. Vigo. 3. Lambertus. 4. Ludovic the son of
Boson. 5. Hugo. Lotharius with his father. 7. Berengarius the second. 8.
Adelbertus. To Adrian succeeded Pope Formosus who sat 5 years: some think
that Charles the simple; the French King after the death of Otho, was the first
that wore in his coat the three lillies. Rodulphus about this time erected the
kingdom of Burgundy. To Formosus succeeded Boniface the sixth, or as some say
Romanus, who was Pope 26 days. His successor Stephen the seventh sat one
year. He hated Formosus so much, that he condemned and abrogated all his
Decrees: drew his body out of his tomb, robbed it of all its pontifical
ornaments, and having cut off three of its fingers, commanded it to be flung
into Tibris. Romanus succeeded who sat 3 months, and to him John the ninth,
who was Pope 2 years. It was agreed that the Bishop of Rome should be called
Pope, and the Bishop of Constantinople Patriarch, and both Oecumenicall or
Universal.

To Basil in Constantinople succeeded Leo his son, called the Philosopher 899.
for the love he had to learning. He remembering the wrong done him by
Theodorus Santabarenus the Monk in belying him to his Father, first degraded
him (for now he was a Bishop) then caused him to be whipped, and then banished to
Athens, where his eyes were thrust out by his command: and because Photins
favored Stephen placed in his room. He was disliked by his people, for
doting upon his Concubine Zoe, whom after his wifes death he married. He made
wars upon Angaeus or Berengarius Duke of Lombardy. He raised such customs
upon the Bulgarian goods, that they took up arms against him. Leo not being
strong enough to master Simeon the Bulgarian King, calls in the Turks bordering
upon Isther, these were called then Hungarians, they at first defeated the
Bulgarians, but at last were defeated by them: the battle was so great, that
of the Bulgarians were slain 20000. and most of the Imperialists were killed.

One Basilius cousin german to Zoe, conspired with some others against Leo, but
the plot was discovered by Samonas an Agaren, and Basil is banished. Leo's
third wife was Eudocia who dyed in childebed. On the day of Pentecost as Leo
was going into the Church, he was knocked down with a cudgel, and narrowly
escaped death. One Alexander was suspected to be the Author of this plot: but
nothing could be proved against him, yet he was quartered and burned. Leo
entertained friendship with Arnulphus, and sent him diverse presents. He would
one night try how vigilant his guard was, by disguising himself, and bribing
them with money, the first and second guard took money and let him pass, but
the third would upon no terms, but beat him and imprisoned Constantine which
he had by his last wife and to his brother 911. 900.
Alexander.

Ludovic the fourth son of Arnulphus succeeded his father in the West-Empire.
His tutors were Otho Duke of Saxony, and Hatto Archbishop of Mints. In his
minority there were many civil broiles. Zuendebold Arnulphus his bastard was
killed by his own subjects whilst he was striving to reduce them to his
obedience. Ludovic the Emperor for a great sum of money made France
tributary to the Hungarians, who upon this becoming insolent fall with fire and
sword upon Ludovic the son of Boson drove Berengarius out of Italy into
Bavaria, and upon this disbands his army thinking all was safe, but Verona
which favored Berengarius calls him again into Italy, who coming suddenly
with his Army in the night seiseth upon Ludovic, and deprives him both of his
eyes and kingdom: so Berengarius is saluted Emperor. About this time Nicolaus
the Patriarch excommunicates Leo the Greek Emperor for his fourth marriage;
Nicolaus was entreated to absolve him, but would not, wherefore Leo deposes
him, and sends him into a Monastery, and then sets up Euthymius Sincellus in
his room. After Leo's death, his brother Alexander governed the Empire, or
rather neglected it, giving himself to voluptuousness and gormandising.

In Germany there were civil wars also in Ludovic's time; for Adelbert Earl of
Bamberg, for 7 years stood out in rebellion against the Emperor, the Bishop of
Mitzburg, and Conradus Earl of East Franconie, opposed Adelbert or Albert, who
in this expedition lost his two brothers, wherefore to be revenged he
treacherously murdered Conradus. Ludovic summons him to appear and to give
account of this murder; but refused, whereupon an Army is levied against him.
Ha^to Bishop of Mintz persuades Albert to submit himself to the Emperor,
which he did; and then immediately being condemned of high treason, he lost his
head: his posterity afterward became Marquesses of Austria. There brake out
also civil wars in Lorrain, and other places of the Empire, which brought the
Hungarians out of Thrace into Bavaria, wasting Pannonia by the way. Ludovic
with all the strength he could make fights them for three days together; in
this battle he lost the flower of all the German Nobility, and himself was
forced to fly* the Hungarians pursue their victory with fire and sword, so
that Ludovicus was feign Charles the Great, from the beginning of whose Empire,
to the death of this Ludovic were 111 years. He dying childlesse ministered
occasion of much trouble in the Empire, till by consent Henricus 912.
Auceps was elected.

Alexandor Leo's brother on his death bed recommended the care of his brothers
son Constantine being yet but 7 years old, to his mother, and to some of the
Nobility: having made Phocas General of all the Land Forces, and Romanus an
Armenian Admiral of the Seas: but Constantinus Ducas the son of Andronicus
Ducas, and cut off his head. Then these Tutors began to tyrannise, which ca^sed
commotions in the City; and drew the Bulgarians against them, who sat down
twice before the city; the siege could not be rai^ed without much entreaty, and
great sums of money: they pillaged Hadrianople twice, and in their last
expedition they wasted Thracia, and made incursions upon Macedonia. Constantine
longing to see his mother Zoe, who was banished from the Court by Alexander;
she is sent for, who shortly after takes upon her the government, and removes
most of Constantines Tutors.

Romanus the Admiral having removed Constantines mother from the government
Constantine seiseth upon whom he shaveth and makes Priests of them: and then
ruled all alone. He recovered in Italy from the Lombards Beneventum. He had no
luck against the Saracens. He quieted the Turks with money which he could not
do with arms, and converted many of them to Christ, at last he was poisoned
by his own son Romanus, after he had reigned 54. years, 13 with his father,
Uncle and Mother, 26 with Romanus his father in Law, and 15 years alone: but
the poison being not strong enough to kill him, he recovered and betook
himself Olympus with one Theodor cus Syzicus a devout man: his life was equal
to his reign, for he lived 54 years. Phocas General of the Land Forces was
oppressed by the greatness of Romanus, and his eyes put out. Romanus slighting
his son in law Constantine so much, that he was fain to get his living by
painting; Had made his own son Christopher Emperor, but he dyed shortly
after. At last Constantine being deluded and abused 26 years together by
Romanus, and his two other sons; by the help of Stephen his kinsman he lays
hold upon Romanus whom he shaved, and banished to Prota a small Isle in
Bosphorus Thracius. His 2 sons as they were with him at dinner, were suddenly
by his command laid hold Romanus company in his exile, in which one of them
Constantine by name, as he was striving to escape lost his life.

To Pope John the ninth, who called a Synod at Ravenna in which he rescindeth
all the decrees of Pope Stephen, succeeded Benedict the fourth, who sat 3
years: after him came Leo the fifth or sixth, who after 40 days was cast into
prison by Christopher the Priest, who invaded the Popedom; this having sat 7
months, was by Pope Sergius the third assisted by the French King imprisoned
and afterward made a Monk: so was also Christopher after he had sat 7 months.
Sergius the third succeeded, who was Pope 7 years. He rebuilt the Lateran
church from the ground which fell down in his time. About these times Gregory
called the Great, King of Scotland, subdued the Danes and Northern Britains,
went over to Ireland, besieged Dublin, and took it, where he was made Protector
of Ireland, during the minority of young Duncan the Prince. After his return
into Scotland, he began to build the City of Aberden in a pleasant place
between the two rivers of Dee and Done famous for Salmons, which beyond Seas
are of more account, and dearer then any other Salmons. In King Milcolumbus his
time, about the year of Christ 943. Cumberland with Westmerland are annexed to
the Crown of Scotland

The race of Charles the Great having now failed; Conradus Duke of East
Franconi (his son that was killed by Adelbertus) is by the Peers of the
Empire 912.
made Emperor. Against him conspire Arnulphus Duke of Bavaria, Giselbert Duke
of Lorrain, and Burghard Duke of Suevia, who send for Carolus Posthumus out of
France, with whom Henry the son of Otho joins his Forces. This dissension had
broke out into a civil war, but that the eruption of the Hungarians into
Germany hindered it; these came with their whole strength upon Bavaria, but were
defeated by Duke Arnulphus, with whom having made their peace, they Conradus
was feign to buy his peace, by payment of an annual pension. After this he
proscribes his enemies, and drives Arnulphus out of Bavaria, who returns
thither again, after the Emperors death. He beheaded the two brothers of the
Duke of Lorrain: he suspected the greatness of Henry the son of Otho Duke of
Saxony, and the rather because he was one (...) those who had formerly
conspired against him; therefore he employed Hatto the Bishop of Mintz ^ocatch
him; Hatto by a golden chain thought to have intrapped him, or else by Conradus
his army to force him; but Henry very wisely avoided the treachery, and
fortunately defeated the Army. Hatto Conradus falls sick; who notwithstanding
that Henry was his enemy, yet knowing his power and worth, names him Emperor,
and so dyed: he reigned 7 years, and was the first of the German Emperors.

To Pope Sergius the third, succeeded Anastasius the third, who sat 2 years.
918.
About this time a new order of Benedictin Friars, was instituted in Burgundy
by one Otho or Oddo. Ennius the Goth King of Arragon drove out the Moors that
were returned to Arragon and Celtiberia: there were at this time three eminent
men in Spain, namely Ferdinand, who obtained the Kingdom of Cast^le and Legio.
2. Garcias King of Navar, and 3 Sanctius King of Arragon. Garcias

CHAP. V.
The affairs of Italy, Germany, France, and other neighboring countries under
Henricus Auceps, and Otho the Great. 2. The Eastern affairs under Constantine
and his son Romanus. 3. The affairs of the Church.

HEnricus Auce^s or Henry the Fowler (so called because he loved fowling)
Arnulphus the Emperor by his daughter Ludgarda was 919.
the first Saxon Emperor, Arnoldus Duke of Bavaria, thought by force of arms
to obtain the Empire: but when both his Army and Henrys were ready to fight, he
so mitigated Arnold with his wisdom and eloquence, that he submitted to the
Emperor, and from him received power to establish the bishops of his own
jurisdiction. The Hungarians for non-payment of the tribute promised by Ludovic
the Emperor, overrun Henry's countries of Saxony, killing all the men that
were above 14 years of age. Henry though sickly at that time, yet raised an
Army, and fought the Hungarians near Me^burg in the confines of Saxony* He
charged his soldiers to keep off with the Targets the first flight of arrows
shot at them, and then suddenly to rush in upon them as they were making ready
to shoot again, which they did accordingly, and by which means they got the
victory, driving these Turkish Farmers-like sheep before them: few of them
escaped, but either then were killed, or shortly after by the imprisoned
malefactors who were set at liberty to pursue and destroy the rest of those
Hungarians. So having quieted Germany, he erects diverse Offices called
Marquisats, for Schls^ic, whence came the word Danimarchia or Denmarck: against
the Henets he erected the Marquisat of Brandeburg: against the Polonians and
Bohemians the Marquisats of Lansberg and Misne: and against the Sorabi or
Suevi, the Marquisat of Lusatia. He began also to build the Churches of Misnie
or Meyssen in the upper Saxony, of Brendeburg, and of Havelburg. He caused
Charles the simple (so called for his stupidity) to submit the kingdom of
France to the Empire, and to restore the kingdom of Lorrain, which he took
from Rudbert the son of King Odo, which Rudbert he killed in a battle, when
he claimed from Charle^ the kingdom of France. Charles was shortly after
apprehended in Gascony, and there committed to prison where he dyed the year
following: his son flew into England. Rodulphus King of Burgundy takes
possession of France, his kinsman Ludovic having extorted from Berengarius the
kingdom of Italy, which he shortly after lost, and his eyes to boot. But
Berengarius recovered Lombardy, who would have forced Lambert to buy the
Bishopric of Millan, and put diverse of his Princes in prison, wherefore the
Italians call in Rodulphus of Burgundy* Berengarius to resist him, hires the
Hungarians, and by their help takes or kills his factious subjects, except Earl
Giliberd whom he dismisses; but within 30 days Giliberd forgetful of this
courtesy, brings Rodulphus back into Italy, who being received Berengarius
has nothing left him but Verona. Three years after Berengarius got an Army
together of persons disaffected to Rodulphus; a bloody battle is fought, in
which Berengarius is defeated, and shortly after murdered by one Flanbert whom
he had advanced, who for this murder was hanged by Melo Berengarius his friend.

The Hungarians after the death of Berengarius rage through Italy, take and
burn Ticinum. Rodulphus doats upon Ermengardis the strumpet, and neglects the
public affairs; wherefore he is forsaken by his friends, is forced to fly^
back into Burgundy and to leave the kingdom of Italy to Hugo Earl of Arles,
who kept good correspondency with both the Emperors. In this mean time Guido
Marquess of Tuscia husband to Marozia, who was thought to be Sergius the
third's Concubine, enter's the City with an Army, kills Peter Pope John's
brother, in his presence stifles the Pope himself in prison with a pillow held
to his mouth, sets up John the eleventh, who was thought to be the bastard of
Pope Sergius by this Marozia. After the death of Guido this King Hugo marries
her; by whose means he got Rome, but was expelled again by Albericus the son
of Guido the Marquess by this Marozia. The King raging at this affront,
revengeth himself upon Lambert Guido's brother, and puts out his eyes, then
creates Boson Duke of Thuscia, and bestows Provence upon Rodulphus, that he
might not lay claim to Italy: after this Hugo overthrows Arnoldus Duke of
Bavaria at Verona, and drives him back into Germany. But he could not recover
Rome from A^bericus, though he had bestowed his daughter upon him, nor could he
hinder the Saracens from wasting Fraxientum* or keep off the Africans from
plundering Genua. God blasting all his enterprises, for his sacrilege and
whoredoms with his Concubines, among which was B^rtha the widow of Rodulphus
King of France.

Henry the Emperor overcame the Sclavi, besieged Prague, and made a league
with Wenceslaus Duke of Bohemia, who the year after was treacherously
murdered by his brother Bolesla^s in the Church. He killed also 120000 Vandals
in a great battle near the Baltic sea, for wasting Saxony. He made Vornius
King of 925. 936.
Denmark pay him tribute, he suppressed also the Rhedarii a people of
Sclavonia, and caused many of the Northern people to receive Christianity.
Among the rest he made Chiupa King of the Danes to be baptized. At last having
again defeated the Hungarians, and distributed among the poor, that tribute
for which they had raised this war, He dyed of a palsy the 18 year of his
936.
reign.

At Constantinople Stephen the Patriarch was now dead, Tryphon a Monk is named
his successor, but conditionally, that after a certain time he should resign
his Bishopric to Theophylact, son to Romanus the Emperor, being yet very
young, this Tryphon was unwilling to do, till he was persuaded to write down
his name on a blank; and then Caesar's friends filled it up with a resignation
of the Patriarchat; to which Tryphon was forced to stand, being (though
ignorantly) subscribed by him: and so a boy of 16 years old was made Patriarch.

Inger King of Russia with 15000 sail besieged Byzantium, but they were so
defeated and dispersed that few of them returned home. Ludovic son to Charles
the Simple, after his Fathers death is called home by Hugo. This Ludovic was
called transmarin from his his traveling beyond the Sea. He found France
Henry: but he was thrust out thence 939.
again by Otho the son of Henry, and Giselbert Henry's son in law, and
Governor of Lorrain, with the rest of those that rebelled are killed by Otho.

Otho the first surnamed the Great, for his happy government of the Empire 36
years, the son of Henry by Mathilda the Saxon was anointed at Aix by the
Bishop of Mintz. He first suppressed the Bohemians, and then put an end to a
long and seditious war raised against him by disaffected persons, to their own
ruin. Tancmarus Otho's brother because he had not the Marquisat of Brandeberg
Eberhard, Count Palatin, and Giselbert Duke of Lorrain, and so fell upon the
town Barduic, and sacked it, but shortly after he was taken and slain.
Eberhard arms Henry Otho's other brother against him, who is assisted by
Frederic of Mintz, the Emperor having subdued the sons of Arnold Duke of
Bavaria, who were in arms one against the other about their Fathers
inheritance, and having repaired Magdeburg or the confines of Saxony, which he
bestowed on his wife for her dowry, marches over the Rhene against his
enemies, whom he subdued by good counsel more then by force. Many of them
being struck with Divine terror flung down their arms; and the rather when
they perceived how resolute he was in defending the Churches rights, and
Conradus Duke of Suevia, that Eberbart was slain, and Giselbert drowned in the
Rhene, that the Bishop of Mintz was forsaken by his people and gone they knew
not whither. Henry Otho's brother finding all had failed him, comes in black
apparel to the Emperoar at Franckfurt, falls down at his feet, calls for mercy,
promising ever after to be faithful and obedient, and so he was pardoned.

Ludovic the French King, let fall the war he undertook for recovering of
Lorrain, and married with Otho's sister the widow of Gillebert. Bertholdus Duke
Conradus took to wife Luidgard Otho's daughter, with whom he had Lorrain.
Hermannus Duke of Suevia married his only daughter to Liuthulsus Otho's son.
In Italy Berengarius the younger put himself under Otho's protection, which
occasioned King Hugo to enter into a league with the Saracens whom he might
have destroyed, after he took Fraxinetum their strong garrison; but
Berengarius by Otho's help got in a short time the Italians love, who disliked
Hugo's government, whereupon Hugo retires to Provence, where he dyed, and left
his son Lotharius to the courtesy of Berengarius: who being settled in Italy,
received in a tax 10 bushels of money toward the removing of the Hungarians
thence: so much Hugo had paid heretofore. After this Otho with 32 Legions
enters France, and sets Ludovic their King at liberty, who was confined for
hanging up Herebert his fathers enemy, and for killing William of Normandy.
Shortly after this Otho made wars with the Danes, whom he caused with their
King Harald to embrace Christianity, which Harald afterward was deposed for
his^ll government by his own son Sueno: who destroyed Religion again, for which
he was highly beloved of his people, and 3 times by them redeemed from the
pirates, who had taken him.

Shortly after this Lotharius Hugo's son dyed of a Frenzy in Italy.
Berengarius his Governor besieged his widow Ade^heide daughter to King
Rodulphus and heir of Italy: the Queen with Pope Agapetus the second, implore
Otho's help, who sends his son Luithulphus, and comes after himself with a
greater Army. Berengarius and Albert or Albericus, are thrnst out of their
kingdom. Adelheide is set at liberty, and married to the Emperor. The
daughters of Berengarius are sent into Germany: then Conradus Otho's son in law
is made Governor of Italy, who having taken Berengarius with his son conveys
them into Germany: but Luithulphus or Ludolphus Otho's son disliked his fathers
marriage: and Conradus found the Emperor not well pleased with his service in
bringing Berengarius Otho; and Berengarius having sworn fealty to the Emperor
is sent back to Italy. But Aquileia and Verona are assigned for Henry Otho's
brother: this dissension cost much blood* but Conradus by surrendering Mintz to
Otho, was made friends with his father in law: Ludolphus having seized upon
Bavaria, seated himself in Ratisbone, where he was so st^ictly besieged, that
being pinched with famine, was forced in a poor habit to submit himself and to
beg for pardon, which was granted him by his father, but he was sharply
reproved by Henry his Uncle.

After this the Hungarians who were brought into Germany by the rebels,
committed 955.
many outrages, but near Augusta 100000 of them were overthrown by Othos;
Conradus who had heretofore called them in was slain in this conflict. The
Sclavi also at this time were destroyed in Germany. Hermannus Bilingus received
from Otho the Dukedom of Luneburg. So after that Otho had overcome his brother
Tanguardus, and subdued the Bohemians, Hungarians, and defeated the conspiracy
of his brother Henry with his accomplices; and had forced Hugo Capetus Earl of
Paris to restore France to Ludovic, in which expedition he lost his English
Lady Editha: and after he had broken the strength of Berengarius in Italy, and
delivered the captive Queen Adelheide whom he married: after he had broken the
plot of his son Ludolphus, and his son in law Conradus. After he had
vanquished the Danes, and by the help of Adaldagus Bishop of Hamberg, had
converted them to Christianity, and settled 3 Bishoprics amongst them: after he
had overcome the Heneti, and brought them also to Christianity: after all these
noble exploits and good success, he is visited with an affliction, as it were
with some water to temper his wine, in the death of his son Rudolphus, who
had done him good service in Italy against Berengarius, his body was honorably
buried by William his brother Bishop of Mintz in the Church of St. Alban.
Ludolphus and William were Otho's sons by Editha.

The death of Ludolphus occasioned Berengarius to fly out again, being urged
thereto by Pope John the twelfth: so that Otho is called again into Italy; but
before Otho being 7 years old Emperor, and committed his education to William
his brother; upon this he enters Italy, takes in Ticinum and the other Towns,
pursued Berengarius, and in the way enters Rome, where he is by Pope John
saluted Emperor, and all both Senate and people take the oath of allegiance:
after this 962.
he pursues Berengarius, whom he took prisoner, and brought him to Germany,
where he was condemned to perpetual imprisonment in Bamberg, where he dyed,
with his wife. In the mean while the Pope repenting of what he had done, calls
Albertus the son of Berengarius into the City; whereupon Otho makes another
journey to Rome; the report of whose march made the Pope and Albertus to fly:
the Citizens take the Oath of allegiance the second time to Otho, and swear
never to create any Pope without the Emperors consent. Withal he calls a Synod
here, in which Pope John the twelfth, for his perfidiousnesse and other 963.
crimes is deposed: and Leo the eight is set up in his room, who confirmed the
Emperors assent in the election of Popes, with Anathema to those that should
Otho also swore not to order any thing in the City without the Popes assent,
which oath some think to be supposititious, but when Otho was gone, the Romans
being corrupted by Albertus call home Pope John, and depose Leo: after the
death of John one Benedict is chosen.

Otho hearing of the Romans revolt, returns again with his Army, and besieges
the City so close, that they were forced by famine to yield. Pope Benedict 964.
is banished and committed to the custody of Adaldagus bishop of Hamburg, where
he dyed: so Italy after 60 years trouble under diverse Lords is settled by Otho.
Pope Leo being dead, the Romans desire the Emperor to name his successor, he
names John the thirteenth, whom they presently imprisoned. Upon this Otho in a
rage returns to Rome, sets up again the Pope, hangs thirteen of the prime
Authors of his imprisonment, whips the City Governor, sets him on an Otho,
and there causes him to be declared Emperor.

Nicephorus of Constantinople sent to Otho to renew the old league between his
Ancestors, and the French Emperors; to that purpose Otho demands Theophania the
daughter of Romanus, and daughter in law to Nicephorus for a wife to his son;
which the Greeks refused, and affronted his Ambassadors, wherefore he
pillageth Calabria and Apulia, and at last in spite of them carried away
Theophania, and married her to his son, then returns into Germany; where he
makes one Hermannus Duke of Saxony, a man of mean extraction, but had done Otho
good service; and had faithfully governed Saxony in his absence. He bestows on
him Steden there. The last Duke of this race was taken by Henry the fourth, and
imprisoned, where he dyed without issue-male. Then Otho among the Heneti erects
the Bishoprics of Aldeburg, Havelburg, and Brandeburg, and subjects them to
the Metropolitan of Hamburg. Amongst the Sorabi he makes bishoprics of
Magdeburg, Mersburg, Cicen, and Wisnen. At last he dyed suddenly of an Apoplexy
the 37 year of his reign being begun. 973.
He was buried at Magdeburg: a little before his death, Hatto Bishop of Mintz,
who succeeded William the Emperors son, was eat up by rats, for deluding the
poor people whom he burned in a barn, calling them the rats of a commonwealth.
Otho by Adelheide had 3 sons, Henry, Bruno, and Otho his successor, and one
daughter Adelheide, whom he married to Hugh Capet Earl of Paris, and King of
France. Otho founded a Church in Denmark called from his name Otensia or
Othonia. In his time Pope John the fourteenth called a great bell by his own
name, whence came the custom of naming and baptizing bells. About these times
the University of Lovan is founded by John Duke of Brabant. Parnassus a City in
Lombardy is overthrown by the Neighbors, and all the Inhabitants killed, for
maintaining the heresy of the Anthropomorphites, they who recanted their
heresy were spared, and permitted to build Crema, a town hard by. Stephen the
first King of Hungary, for his piety was canonised. William the second Rollo:
shortly after that Dukedom was turned into an Earldome, and seized upon by the
French Kings, which ministered occasion of long war between France and
England. Ethelstan King of England got from Otho Constantines sword, in the
hilts of which was one of the nails that fastened Christ to the Cross. He
obtained also the Lance with which his side was pierced, a piece of the Cross,
and of the Crown of Thorns.

Romanus the younger having poisoned his father Constantine, reigned in
Constantinople 13 years, 10 years whilst his father was alive, and 3 years
alone. He was much addicted to luxury and wantonness, therefore was surnamed
the Child. Nicephorus Phocas his General took Candace the chief town of
Crete, whence the whole Island is called Candy, and expelled all the Saracens.
961.
He beat also the Saracens in Syria. At last Romanus having spoiled his body
with lust and glottony, dyed, being 24 years old, a child both in years and
manners. His first wife was Berta Hugo's daughter King of Italy: his second
Theophania of whom he had Basil and Constantine, and one daughter Theodora who
married 963.
to Zimisca, who afterward was made Emperor.

To Pope Anastasius the third, succeeded Landus who sat 6 months. After him
came John the tenth 13 years, then Leo the ninth followed 7 months. After
Leo, Stephen sat 1 month. John the eleventh his successor 4 years. Leo the
seventh followed 3 years. Then came Stephen the ninth or eight 3 years.
Martinus the third succeeded 3 years whose successor was Agapetus the second
7 years. To him succeeded John the twelfth 9 years, then Leo the eight 1 year.
John the twelfth returning from his banishment sat 3 months. Benedict the
fifth set up by the Romans against Leo the eight, was Pope 2 months. Leo being
restored sat 8 months: to him succeeded John the thirteenth, who sat almost
8 years. In Scotland a great Army of Danes were defeated by means of one Hay
Hay with his two sons being at plough, met them in a narrow lane, and
upbraiding their cowardice, made them for shame return, who fell with that
violence on the Danes, that they utterly destroyed them. Hay was rewarded with
as much land as a Falcon could fly over at one flight, which was 6 miles in
length. Whence came the noble family of the Hays, whose chief is Earl of Arroll.

CHAP. VI.
The Eastern affairs under Nicephorus Phocas, Zimisces, Basilius, and
Constantinc. 2. Of the Western under Otho the second. 3. Of the Turks, and some
other passages of those times.

Romanus being dead and his two sons Constantine and Basil, as yet too young
to meddle with public affairs, Nicephorus Phocas is by the Eastern Army
declared Emperor. He married with Theophania the widow of Romanus, He defeated
the Saracens in Cilicia, recovered much of Asia and Syria, and took in
Antiochia the Metropolis: but by Sea his success was not Manuel his Admiral
lost his Fleet and Army, and was taken himself by the Saracens. Bringes the
Chamberlain thought to have been Emperor, and to that purpose was encouraged
by Zimisces General of the Land Forces, to look after it; but he was hated by
the people, therefore Nicephorus carried it. Polyeuctus the Patriarch would
have dissolved the Emperors marriage with Theophania, pretending a spiritual
affinity, because he had been Godfather to one of her children; but in the
Synod which was called for that purpose, it was concluded, that the Emperors
marriage could not be hindered by such affinity. This Nicephorus was a good
soldier, but a bad Emperor, for he oppressed the people with heavy taxes,
pinched them with hunger by engrossing the corn, and raising Manuel the
Patrician; he caused an high wall to be built round about his Palace; but that
could not save him; for soon after the wall was finished, although he kept the
keys of the gates himself, yet he was found out by Zimisca and the other
conspirators, who being pulled up in baskets, got over the wall, and in the
night time break into his chamber, where the murdered him* Not long before his
death, as he was in the Forum, the people railed and flung stones at him; some
think his wife Theophania had a hand in his death, being jealous that he would
969.
defeat her sons by her former husband, of the Empire, and confer it on his
brother Leo. He was no friend to the Church, but envyed her wealth complaining
that it was misspent by the Clergy, therefore would not suffer any lands or
money to be given by legacies, or other ways on Churches or Clergy men. He
dyed the 57 year of his age, and reigned 7 years. The Saracens being
Nicephorus in Syria, they burned down the goodly Temple of Christ's Sepulcher,
with the Patriarch in it.

Nicephorus being murdered, Zimisces invades the Empire, whom Polyenetus the
Patriarch would not crown, till he had cleared himself of the murder, and 969.
banished Theophania, (whom others call Theodora) and all the rest of the
conspirators, and till he had repealed Nicephorus his Act concerning the
election of Bishops, to wit, that none be chosen Bishops without the Emperors
consent: all this being performed by Zimisces, and having sworn that he did not
touch Nicephorus, He was crowned by the Patriarch, who about a month after
dyed, to whom succeeded Basilius the Monk. Zimisces obtained a great victory
over the Saracens as they were besieging Antiochia. He made peace with Otho by
sending Theophania, who was crowned at Rome by Pope John the fourteenth, He
made Basil and Constantine the sons of Romanus, consorts with him in the
Empire. He subdued the Rossians and Bulgarians, by Bardas Sclerus his wifes
brother, who took the Bulgarian King prisoner, and made them sue for peace.
After which victory he rode into Constantinople in a triumphant manner,
carrying in wagons the plunder of Bulgaria, and the Image of the Virgin Mary
with great solemnity* He caused stamp upon his gold and silver coin, this
inscription, Jesus Christ King of Kings: at last having reigned almost 7
years, he was poisoned 975.
by Basil his Chamberlain, for reproving his covetousness, and threatening to
take his place from him. Zimisces favored the Manichees, and called them out
of Asia into Europe.

About these times Mieslaus Prince of Poland received the Christian Faith, and
965.
was baptized: from which year the Polonians began their Calender. Harald King
of Denmark with his wife and son Sueno are baptized; who before worshipped
Christ and Idols together, now they flung away their Idols being induced
thereto 966.
by Poppo a Clergy man, who carried before the King a burning Iron in his hand,
without hurt. Edgar King of old Albion (as he was styled then) perceiving how
England was obnoxious to foreign invasions, as first by the Romans, and then
so often by the Danes and others; for want of shipping, causes a great Navy to
be built, which like walls should secure his Kingdom. Egbert had built some
ships before, and 30 years after him Alfred, but they were either disused

Otho the second being twice declared Emperor in his fathers time, once at Aix
and the second time at Rome, is by all received, after his fathers death,
except 967.
by Henry Duke of Bavaria his cousin german, who by the help of some Bishops,
caused himself at Ratisbone to be proclaimed Emperor. Otho summons him to
show cause why he assumed that title, he perceiving his own error, and how
few came to aid him, lays aside his claim, and submits himself to the
Emperor, who gave him his life, but banished him, and bestowed the government
of Bavaria upon Otho Duke of Suevia, his nephew by his brother Ludolphus.
Harold the Dane, Mesico the Polonian, and Boleslaus the Bohemian, who had
entered into league with Henry, to lay down their Arms. But whilst Otho is
thus employed, Lotharius the French King by force of arms labors to regain
Lorrain. Otho marches against him with an Army, at the report of whose
approach Lotharius flies; upon this Otho pursues him, wasting and burning all
before him, even to the walls of Paris, then having burned the suburbs,
retreats with his Army homewards, Lotharius pursues him in the rear; many of
Otho's soldiers were drowned in the river Axona, and many he lost at
Arduenna: and if he had not made the more have, he had fallen into the hands of
the French. Yet shortly after peace is made, and Lorrain is restored to Otho,
though the French Peers stormed at it. Some parts of the country the Emperor
assigns to the Bishops of Collen and Leege; the rest he bestows on Charles the
brother of Lotharius, conditionally that he should hold it in fee of the
Emperor, as a Province of Germany.

Things at home being thus composed, Otho intends an expedition against the
Greeks and Saracens. In his minority he had done his Father good service in
Apulia and Calabria, against the Greeks: whom he drove out thence: but whilst
Basil and Constantine recover these countries again, being lost by Nicephorus*
Otho to regain them raises a great Army of Germans and Italians, which under
Otho Duke of Suevia expelled the Greeks out of their Garrisons of Istria and
Dalmatia. At Beneventum a great battle is fought, in which Otho was defeated,
and he himself hardly escaped: for he flung away his arms and clothes, that he
might run the more nimbly toward the Bay of Tarentum, where his wife
Theophania was, but before he could get to the town, he was intercepted by the
Saracens, and so was fain to leap into the Sea, and there was taken by the
enemies ships, who not knowing him, let him go again for a piece of money, so
he came 982.
983*
Shortly after he dyed at Rome, having reigned 10 years, and was buried in St.
Peter's Church in a porphyrie tomb.

About this time Adelbert Bishop of Prague being weary of the Bohemians, went
down to Pannonia, and baptized Geisa King of Hungaria; thence he went to preach
in Borussia, where he was torn in pieces by the Barbarians. To Pope John the
fifteenth succeeded Benedict the fifth or sixth one year; he was starved to
death in the castle of St. Angelo. His successor was Donnus the second, one
year. Bouiface the seventh followed who sat 7 months. Benedict the sixth or
seventh his successor sat 8 years. Stephen King of Hungary sends to Pope
Benedict to have the title and Crown of a King conferred on him, which he
obtained; but this favor was denied to Miecisla^s Duke of Polonia, who sent to
Benedict the Bishop of Cracovia. St. Edward the son of Edgar King of England,
and a hopeful Prince was murdered by his stepmother to advance her own
son Ethelred; whose Kingdom laid in blood prospered not, but became
tributary to the Danes; who laid heavy and yearly taxes upon the land, before
which Dane-gelt were not known in England. Otho had by Theophania Otho the
third, yet a child; Hugo or Ulricus Marquisse of Saxony, and 5 daughters.
Otho's minority occasioned new troubles in the Empire.

Zimisces being poisoned by Basil the Eunuch, the Eastern Empire came to Basil
975*
and Constantine the sons of Romanus the vounger. Constantine was more
addicted to his pleasures, then to government. Basil being 20 years old; and
Constantine the 17. began to manage public affairs by the advice of Basil the
Eunuch. He recalled his mother Theophania to the Court, being banished thence.
Fearing the greatness of Bardas Sclerus, so called from his harsh or hard
disposition, who (...)
had done in the East great service, he took much of his power and command
Basil, defeats his Army, and takes in Nicaea the Metropolis of Bithyn^a: upon
this Phocas Bardas is sen^ for from his banishment, and is made General of all
the Forces of the two Caesar's. He in a Duel having wounded Sclerus, put to
flight all his disturbed Legions. Sclerus was ^ain to fly to Cosroes the
Sultan of Babylon; but being accused of treachery, he was imprisoned: So Basil
being freed from civil wars, resolves to recover Calabria, and Apulia,
Theophanias dowry. Otho in the sixth year of his reign, marches into Italy
with a great Army, to defend his wifes dowry. In the first conflict he defeated
the Greeks and Saracens, in the second he was defeated, as we have said. About
this time Olaus King of Noraway converted his country to Christianity, and sent
shortly after some to convert Island.

Basil understanding that George Lord of the inward Iberia, had invaded the
Basil's Army fell upon him, and utterly defeated his Forces. He subdued also
the Saracens in Syria and Phaenicia. Shortly after he and the Bulgarians fell
at variance for some wrongs offered by them to the Greeks. About which time the
regal family of Bulgaria ended in Peter who was now dead. Thereupon 4 brothers
of an ancient family strove for the principality: Three of these failed by
death, the fourth Samuel by name, taking advantage of the civil wars of Greece
invades diverse of their towns which he took. Basil upon this undertakes an
expedition against Bulgaria, where his Army miscarryed by the treachery of his
Commanders. And withal Phocas who before had defeated Sclerus, now rebels
against Basil. For he Basil, whom he had delivered from so great an enemy,
invades the Empire; but he was overthrown in diverse battles, and at last dyed
suddenly. Basil also had good success against the Bulgarians, by the industry
of his General Uranus. He took some towns beyond Mount Hemus, and the next
year he invaded Bulgaria himself, and rebuilt the Greek Garrisons in Thessalia
that had been demolished, about the time that Veremundus King of Spain had
overthrown Almansor Lord of the Corduban Saracens.

Samuel King of Bulgaria could not be quiet from molesting the Greeks,
wherefore Basil in the 38 year of his reign suddenly falling behind the
Garrisons that Samuel, who being affrigted of so many calamitous people, became
suddenly verriginous, and within two days dyed. His cousin German Bladislabus
to be revenged, raised an Army, but this also was defeated, and he himself
slain, so at last Bulgaria was totally subdued, and the chief Nobility was
transported to Constantinople. Hereupon shortly after the Crabits and Syrmium
the chief City of Pannonia submitted to Caesar.

At the same time the Turks, a race of Hunns inhabiting the North side of
Mahomet, Sultan of Persis and Media against the Persians, who were animated by
Inargus (who was of the blood royal of Persia) to rebel, and vindicate their
liberty, from the Saracen yoke. Cosroes then had Bardas Selerus with many
other Christian soldiers, he promised to set them at liberty, if they did
defeat the Persians, which they happily did. So Sclerus having obtained the
victoty, returns to the Christians, and joines himself to Bardas Phocas, who
was then contesting with Basil for the Empire. He cunningly sent his son
Romanus as a fugitive to assist Basil; whilst he himself stayed with Phocas,
to the end that if Basil prevailed, Romanus his son might procure his Fathers
pardon; if Phocas prevailed, that then he might obtain his Basil having got
the victory, Romanus who was now become his favorite, persuades him to remove
the Eunuch Basil, (by whose means Zemisces was murdered) from all government
being he was hated by the people; this was accordingly done, Zemisces shortly
after dyed of grief* Phocas also dyed suddenly. Sclerus by his sons means
is made the chief Steward of the Palace. But before came to Byzantum, he lost
his Eyesight with age.

The Prince of Iberia being now dead, Basil seiseth upon it. He recovered also
Media and Chazaria the 4 year of his Empire, and made the Princes of Tripoli,
Damascus, and others who were plundering the Territories of Antioch, to become
his tributaries, thus being puffed up with victories and wealth (for he had
heaped to gether 200000 talents of gold, besides jewels, pearls, and an
infinite mass of silver) he began to slight both citizens and soldiers, and
to account of learning as a thing useless, which made him more feared then
loved of his people. So intending to recover Sicily from the Saracens, sends
his Fl^t before with a purpose 1025*
to follow himself, but his journey was hindered by death. He had lived and
reigned 72 years, 50 alone, and the rest of the time he was Co-emperour with
his Father; then with Nicephorus, and after him with Zimisces.

After the death of Basilius his younger brother Constantine ruled the Empire 3
years, by others rather then by himself. For he could scarce spare so much time
from whoring, drinking, dicing, hunting, and Stage playing* Under him diverse
towns of Syria and Phenicia, reassumed their liberty, and killed their
garrisons. He sent twice to suppress the Saracens in Italy and Sicily, but did
no good. Yet by his General Constantinus Diogenes, Governor of Syrmium and
Bulgaria, he drove away the Scythians beyond Isther. The Governor of Samos
overthrew the Saracen Fleet which had wasted the Cyclades. He caused Romanus
Argyrus to marry his daughter Zoe, having taken his former wife 1028*
from him, whom he shaved, and put into a Monastery; but the third day after

Cosroes the Saracen being dead, Mahomet his successor inferior in strength
to Pisasirius Prince of the Babylonian Arabians, was fain to call in the Turks
(as we have said) for his assistance: by whose help he overcame the Babylonians
and Indians: but having other enemies to buckle with, he was loath to let the
Turks go home, till they had done the rest of his work; therefore he
detaines them in Persis, and besets the river Araxes (over which they were to
pass) with strong guards. The Turks were highly incensed, that they should be
forcibly Mahomet to drive them out of their strong holds sends 20000 men, who
were put to flight by Tangrolipex Mucaletus the Turish Prince. The Sultan
enraged at this disgrace, blindes many of the Captains who were sent against
the Turks, and so terrified his Army with threatenings, that most of them fell
off from him to the Turks. The Sultan to be revenged raises an Army of 500000
men, who were all defeated by the Turks. So Araxes being now made passable,
the Turks came swarming in upon the Territories of Babylon, and so they
obtain the Saracens

CHAP. VII.
The affairs of the Western Empire under Otho the third, Henry the second, and
Conradus the second. 2. Diverse passages of England, Scotland, Italy, France and
other parts of Europe. 3. Of some Popes.

OTho the third, as yet a child succeeded to his Father, for whose sake he
984*
Henry his cousin german, and Duke of Bajoaria took upon him to be young Otho's
Protector, and to rule the Empire: but the Saxons being mindful of their oath
and allegiance to Otho, by the help of the Princes got the young Emperor again
out of Henrys hands, and restored him to Theophania his mother, and Adelhida
his Grandmother, under whom he was bred in all kind of divine and humane
learning. His mother some few years after dyed, so that his Grandmother had the
sole education of him, till he by the evil counsel of some green heads, puts
her away. In his minority new troubles sprung up, Cr^scentius the Roman Consul
will have the City choose an Emperor of their own, and cast off the Germans in
France. Lotharius makes wars upon Germany for the Dukedom of Lorrain, which
O^ho the second took from him. In Germany Henry the Bavarian returning from
banishment, after the death of Otho Suevicus, not only recovered Bavaria, but
aimed also at the Empire.

When Otho was come to years of discretion, he falls upon settling the Empire:
in the interim Lotharius was forced by death, to give off his challenge of
Lorrain. His son survived his Father but one year: Charles also dyed, the
brother of Lotharius, as he was challenging the kingdom of France, which Hugh
Capet Earl of Paris invaded and obtained now the whole race of Charles being
extinct. This Hugh began the third race of the French Kings which has lasted
till this day: the first race began in Meropheus or Clodoveus, and ended in
Hildericus. The second which began in Pipin and ended in this Ludovic the last.
Hugo acknowledged Otho for Emperor, and permits Otho the son of Charles to
enjoy Lorrain as in fee from the Emperor. But debarres him from his right in
France.

Otho having settled Germany, bends his whole strength to appease the
distractions of Rome and Italy. Therefore understanding that Crescentius did
domineer in Rome, and had thrust out the Pope, he marches thither with his
Army, Brunno his kinsman, son to Otho, Duke of Suevia, and nephew to Ludolphus,
whose name was changed to Gregory the fifth. He is sent before to Rome, the
Emperor with his Army follows, who being let into the City, pardons
Crescentius upon his submission, and then is crowned Emperor by the Pope. All
things being there settled, he marches back toward Germany, but he was not gone
far, when Crescentius thrusts out Gregory, and sets up Johannes Placentinus a
wealthy man, and withal fortifieth the City with Bulwarks against a siege.
He shuts himself up within that strong and spacious Moles Hadriani, being his
burial place, then the tower of Crescentius, now the castle of St. Angelo.
Otho hearing of this, returns to Rome, the Citizens open the gates, presuming
on pardon, which was promised to Cresentius, if he did deliver up his strong
hold, which he did; but the promise was not kept; for Crescentius being carried
on a jade through the City, with his face backward, and torn by the people, was
at last hanged with 12 more of his associates, Johannes Placentinus had his
nose cut off, and his eyes put out, and then was flung down headlong from the
Capitol: the other Senators that were accessory to this plot Otho banished
into Saxony. Upon this sedition it was agreed between the Emperor and Pope,
that the Germans alone should have power to Otho or afterward, when the Empire
was in the Family of the Suevi, is uncertain.

Otho having settled the Empire, undertakes a pilgrimage to the bones of
Adelbert in Polonia, where being magnificently entertained by Boleslaus Duke of
Poland, by way of recompense, he named him King: and erected there an
Archbishopric at Gnesnau, under which were Crocovia, Colberge, and Viotislaen,
Suffragans. He was forced to make a new journey to Rome, to appease the
commotions there raised by the Pope, for being excluded from the Emperors
election. There he fell in love with the widow of Crescentius pretending to
marry her, but when she perceived, that he meant no such thing, upon his
returning to Germany, she presents him with a pair of poisoned Gloves, which
killed him the 30 year of his age, of his Empire the 19. He dyed childlesse,
his former wife 1001.
Mary, daughter to the king of Arragon, he caused to be burned, because she had
falsely accused and caused to be put to death a young Noble man, with whom she
was in love, for that he would not pollute the Emperors bed at her
instigation; Otho to do justice on his perfidious Empress. Otho's bowels were
interred at Augusta or Ausburg, by Henry of Bavaria his successor, who
bestowed on them a marble tomb: his body was buried at Aix. He was a prince
endowed with so much wisdom, learning and piety, that he was called the
wonder of the World.

In Otho's time are recorded strange prodigies, as uncouth earthquakes and 995.
Comets, showers of wheat and little fishes out of the clouds. In Sicily near
Aetna 997.
Fire brake out of the river Rhene which burned down the neighboring villages.
Great Frosts in the midst of summer, which destroyed grass and corn, whereupon
followed plagues and famine, and the eruption of the Sclavonians upon Saxony.
Vlodomirus Duke of Russia is made a Christian.

To Benedict succeeded Johan the fourteenth, who was Pope 3 months, and then
was imprisoned; whereupon Boniface the sixth was re-inthroned, and sat four
months, his successor John the fifteenth sat 8 months: to him succeeded John
the sixteenth, who was Pope 10 years. Gregory the fifth his successor 2
years. John the seventeenth a Greek and Magician, thrust out Gregory for 10
months, but was himself deprived both of his dignity, eyes, and life by Otho,
and Gregory restored, to whom succeeded Cerebertus or Sylvester the second, a
Mathematician and Philosopher, and therefore in that rude age, he was thought
to be a witch. He was first Archbishop of Rhemes; then of Ravenna, lastly of
Rome, where he sat 4 years.

Much about the same time the Empire of Germany, the kingdom of France, Poland,
Hungary, and Bohemia were established; and the kingdom of the Arabians in
^orduba which had continued 300 years, had its period: and then 1000.
began the Hebrew tongue to flourish there, under R. Joseph, who turned the

In England the Danes were generally massacred for their intolerable tyranny
and oppressions, whereupon Swain King of Denmark armed with rage and power,
came with a great Fleet, and conquered this land, drove King Ethelred to
Normandy, but upon the death of Swain he was called home; whose Forces Knute
or Canutus Swains son defeated. Ethelred being dead, his son Edmund
Ironside fought diverse battles with the Danes, not without good success, till
at last he was betrayed and utterly defeated, and so Canutus obtained the
Kingdom. But neither Swain nor his son Canutus had such good success in
Swain was utterly defeated, and hardly escaped with his life: in the second
Canut was so weakened, that he was forced to sue for peace, in which it was
agreed, that the Danes should depart Scotland, and that neither Scots nor Danes
should molest one another, during the lives of Micolumbus the Scots King, and
Swain the Dane. Yet this Millcolumbus or Malcolme, whom the Danes could not
hurt was afterward murdered by some of his own subjects in his bed, because of
some oppressions committed, or at least permitted by him upon his Nobility; but
vengeance pursued the murderers immediately after, even the same night; for
having mistaken their way in the snow, they fell into a lake, in which they
were all drowned, men and horse, as they were flying away, the ice breaking
under them.

Otho the third being dead without children, Henry the second succeeded: he
was Duke of Bavaria, a Saxon by blood, but a Bavarian by birth: He was the
nephew of Otho the first by his brother. In the beginning of his reign he was
opposed by Ethard, Marquisse of Saxony, whom Lotharius and Benno Dukes of
Saxony killed. Henry also Marquisse of Austria, with his brother Brunno Bishop
Otho the firsts time, and were now become heathen Idolaters, having first
destroyed their Churches, and murdered their Bishops. But Henry brought them
again under the obedience of Christ, and made them rebuild their Churches, then
he endowed the Bishoprics with new reveneus, chiefly that of Marburg, to which
he assigned a great part of the Earldome of Marburg. Having subdued the Heneti,
he made wars upon the two Boleslaii, the one king of Poland, the other Duke of
Bohemia: these having flowen out into open hostility against him, he caused to
submit to his obedience, Rinold being dead without children) into a Bishopric,
and so enriched and honored it, that he made the chief Princes of Germany the
Bishop of Bamburgs Vassals, and to do him fealty, so that the Electors as yet
hold of him in Fee, whatsoever they enjoy as Electors. He suppressed also the
insurrection of Henry, and Theodoricus brothers to Cunegunda his wife, who
stormed because they could not enjoy their sisters estate being now dead, and
which the Emperor had distributed among the Clergy men. These two brothers
raised an Army against him; invaded and took Ausburg, then thrust Brunno the
Emperors brother thence; but the Emperor overthrew them both in a battle, and
deposed Henry from his

Hermannus Duke of Suevia being dead, he made Ernesius husband to Gisel his
cousin german Duke thereof, and so having settled the troubles of Germany, he
addresses himself for Italy, to take possession thereof as Emperor, to
suppress 1005.
the Greeks and Saracens there, and to subdue Arduinus whom the Bishops and
Nobility had proclaimed Emperor at Millan, who in two great battles was
overthrown by the Emperor and slain. Henry was taken prisoner himself, but
having deceived his Keepers, leapt down from the wall, and so broke his thigh,
which made him halt ever after, whence he was called Henry the lame. After this
victory he was crowned Emperor by Pope Benedict. After this he marches 1014.
toward Apulia and Calabria, against the Greeks and Saracens, who were
struggling for that part of Italy, a share whereof William Duke of Normandy had
taken from them under Otho the third, and at last that whole country of Magna
Graecia became subject to the Normans. But at this time Henry subdued both the
Greeks and Saracens, and took from them their New Troy, which the Greeks had
lately built in Apulia; in that same place where anciently Hannibals camp lay.
This was the third journey that Henry made into Italy, and the last. In his
return 1022.
homeward, he had conference with Robert King of France, about settling the
State and Church: and to that purpose they appointed to give the Pope a meeting
at Ticinum, but death prevented this, for the next year after he dyed at
Groaning 1024.
Conradus for his successor. He was a pious and a munificent Prince who, (as
they say) lived perpetually chaste with Cunigunda, though married. Hence he was
called Saint.

In his life time he had many wars with the Polonians, Bohemians, Italians,
Russians, Greeks and Saracens, in all which he had good success. He had a
dange^s war with Baldwin Earl of Flanders about the Dukedom of Lorrain, which
he gave away after the death of Duke Otho, to Godefrid Prince of Arduenna: but
Henry by the help of Robert King of France, and Richard Duke of Normandy took
Gant and wasted Flanders, so that Baldwin was fain to submit, who received in
Fee from the Emperor, the Isle of Zeland, with the City Valentina. In the time
of this Henry, the Turks took Jerusalem from the Saracens, and overthrew the
Temple which Constantine had built there. The King of Denmark with a great
train went to Rome, to entreat the Pope that the Churches of his kingdom might
be exempted from the jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Hamburg: the Pope
promised to send a Cardinal thither, for that purpose, but nothing was Gregory
the seventh, who subjected all the Churches of Denmark, Swethland and Noraway
to the bishop of Breme. The Transilvanians by the means of Stephen King of
Hungary received the Christian Faith: for he took Giula with his wife and
children prisoners, who being released were all baptized. Canutus King of
Denmark and England, obtained also the kingdom of Norraway. Rainimir the son
of Sanctius Major was first King of Arragon. To Sylvester succeeded Pope John
the seventeenth or eighteenth, who sat 4 months: his successor John the
nineteenth sat 4 years, to whom succeeded Sergius the fourth, who was Pope
two years. Benedict the seventh or eight sat 11 years: and so many years
sat his successor John the nineteenth or twentyeth. Canutus King of England
married Emme widow to king Ethelred. He went about to extirpate those of the
royal blood of England; therefore sent away the two sons of the late king
Edmund, and his brother, to be murdered abroad; but they were by divine
providence preserved. He went to Rome, and freed the Saxon School which the
Kings of England had erected there, from all imposition.

From the Saxons the Empire of the West is translated to the Francs in the
person 1024.
of Conradus the second, who is called Salicus because the country of Franconia
was called Salia, from the river Sala, whence came the Salique law, with the
French, which by the Salii or Francs were driven out of Franconia. The Empire
Conradus was descended of the ancient Gibelins in Franconia. He married with
Gisil Henry the Emperors kinswoman by whom he had a son called also Henry.
In the beginning of his reign he was threatened with wars by his cousin german,
and competitor for the Empire, Cuno the younger. By Ernestus also the Emperors
son in law, by Frederic of Lorrain, by Boleslaus King of Poland, and Robert
King of France, but all these clouds he dispelled by his wisdom and dexterous
carriage.

The third year of his Empire he prepares an Army for Italy, to quiet the
commotions there: and withal holds a Parliament at Aix, where he declares his
Henry brother of S. Cunigunda being dead. He caused those of Papia who had
demolished his Palace to rebuild it, he quieted the people of Ravenna, who
would have driven him out of the City, and rewarded a soldier who for him had
lost a leg in that skirmish, with a boot full of silver. From thence he went
1026.
to Rome, where he was crowned Emperor by Pope John, and was conducted to his
chamber by two Kings, namely Canutus King of England, and Rodulphus king of
Burgundy. At Rome two soldiers falling out about an Ox hide, the one being an
Italian, the other a German, raised such a tumult that many were slain in it,
the Romans being worsted, were fain to beg pardon bare footed with ropes about
their necks; which they obtained. Conradus bestowed Apulia upon the Normans to
be

Whilst Conradus was in Italy, Frederic of Lorrain, Cuno of Wormatia, and
Ernestus of Alemannia Dukes conspired against him; but Frederic dies before
the plot came to maturity. Cuno was glad to demolish all his fortifications to
o^ain the Emperors favor. Ernestus having pillaged Alsatia and Burgundy was
at last forsaken by his soldiers, and so yielded himself a prisoner; but
afterward flying out again, was so hotly pursued by the Emperors guard that
they enclosed him within a wood, and slew him. About this time Conradus brought
Miseco the Polonian in subjection, who had expelled his brother Otho out of the
kingdom by the means of Gisell the Emprisse, he was reconciled to Conradus,
and was restored to the third part of Poland. He q^iered also the Francs,
French, 1032.
and Bohemians and Stephen King of Hungary, who made war upon Conradus for the
Dukedom of Bavaria, which he claimed as his sons right, being the child of
Henry the Saints sister: but the war ended by the death of Emericus Stephens
son.

Rodulphus King of Burgundy by his will bequeathed his kingdom to Conradus:
but Otho nephew to Rodulphus by his sister laid claim to it, and thought by
1035.
the sword to obtain it, but he lost both it and his life to boot, being killed
in the battle, and so Burgundy was made a Province of the Empire, having
continued a kingdom, from the death of Carolus Calvus 144 years. It was made a
kingdom under Arnulphus, it was afterward parted into the Duchy, which the
Emperor retained, and the county which fell to the King of France, this
Rodulphus who gave it away was the tenth and last king.

After Conradus by his son Henry had subdued the Bohemians, he married him to
C^nelinda daughter of Canutus king of England and Denmark; she being brought to
bed of a daughter to him, dyed in Italy, and was buried in Limburg, at that
Hermannus Duke of Suevia being dead of the plague in Italy, the Emperor
bestows that Dukedom on Otho nephew to Otho the third, Emperor by his sister,
1039.
at last he dyed suddenly at Utricht in Frisia the 15 year of his reign, the
year before dyed St. Cunigund, and St. Stephen, king of Hungary. Conradus was a
valiant and wise Prince; he showed princely magnanimity in his war against
Miseco Vdalricus the Bohemian took prisoner, when he fled to him for shelter.
The Emperor hating the treachery of him that did betray his trust, would not
countenance the Traitor, nor receive the King as a prisoner. He was buried at
Spire in the Church which he built himself.

About this time in Ferdinand the Great, were united the kingdoms of Castil,
Navar, and Legido, by the marriage of Sanctia the only sister and heir of
Veremund, and at last Aragon also by the death of Ramirus his base brother. In
England to Canutus succeeded his son Harald, who reigned but 4 years, in
which time he banished his stepmother Emme, and put out the eyes of Alfred her
son by Ethelred, and cast him into a loathsome prison, where he dyed. In
Scotland king Donald did homage to Canutus for Cumberland. He was murdered by
Macbeth Solanum somniferum, an herb we call Nightshade mingled with their
bread and wine.

CHAP. VIII.
The affairs of the Eastern Empire under Argyropolus, Michael, Calaphates,
Zoe, Theodora, and Monomachus. 2. Of the Turks and Popes of those times. 3. Of
the Polonian, Hungarian, English, Scottish, and other affairs.

COnstantine the Greek Emperor being dead, Romanus the third, called
Argyropolus, from his too great bounty, or rather prodigality, succeeded. He
to ingratiate himself with the people took off the tribute, which allelengium;
imposed on all rich men by Basil. This was to be paid by wealthy men to the
children of those soldiers which had dyed in the wars to confirm his title.
He put away his wife, and married with barren Zoe the daughter of Constantine,
she being 50 years old, and he 60. He enriched the bishops who had been
beggered before: and banished Theodora Zoes sister into an Island upon
suspicion: and sent Constantine Diogenes for affecting the Empire into a strong
tower, where he killed himself by leaping from a high window, lest he should
be forced to discover others that were of the plot with him. He beat the
Saracens at Sea, but was beat by them on the land: for as he was striving to
recover the towns of Syria, which his predecessor had carelessely lost, he
was overcome and forced to fly to Antioch; whereas he might have had these
towns Amiras of Tripolis, who had fallen off from the Egyptians, he took in
two castles in Syria: but could do no good against the Saracens in Sicily nor
against the Normans in Apulia being aided by Conradus Caesar. Under him George
Maniaces took Edessa by storm, where finding the Epistle which as they say
Christ wrote with his own hand to King Algarus, he sent it to Constantinople:
but shortly after this Romanus by exactions oppressed the people: and because
he could not make his old barren wife fruitful, he began to slight her, at
which the libidinous woman being impatient, began to dote upon Michael the
Paphlagonian. Michael by oaths denied there was any affection between Zoe and
him, for which perjury he was taken with the Fallingsicknesse, which abated
Romanus his suspicion; for he thought that Zoe could not affect one troubled
with that disease: but at last Romanus was poisoned by Zoe, and being one day
in the bath, the adulterer held down his head in the water, till he was
almost stifled, and then being laid in his bed, dyed immediately, having
reigned 5 years, and 6 months, to whom by Zoes help succeeded Michael.

Michael for his adultery and murder is rewarded with the Eastern Empire, at
first he showed himself a good Governor, but not so good a Scholar as his
predecessor, 1034.
who was skilled in the Greek tongue, in Philosophy, and in the laws. All the
while that Michael was Emperor, his Dominions were vexed with comets, plagues,
siccity, sterility, earthquakes and locusts, which so devoured the fruits of
the earth, that the Inhabitants were feign to change their habitations: these
locusts were by a strong wind carried into the Hellespont, and there drowned,
but after they were left dry upon the shore, they revived, and for 3 years
together wasted Thracia, till at last they were destroyed at Pergamus. At first
Michael made much of Zoe, till he was thoroughly settled, afterward he kept her
up so close, that all her servants were removed from her, and none suffered to
see her, or speak with her* but by leave of the Captain of the watch, who
examined Michael was visited with an evil spirit, which to palliate, he called
the Falling sickness. He made three years peace with the Amiras of Egypts
widow. Under him George Maniaces by the help of France recovered all Sicily
from the Saracens, after they had possessed it 230 years, who were at civil
wars among themselves. But Stephen foolishly let the Sultan escape, for which
being sharply reproved by Maniaces, he was accused by Stephen as if he had
aimed at the Empire. Upon this George is imprisoned, and Stephen made Governor
of Sicily, who in a short time lost it all again; Michael falling into an
Hydropsie, and so unfit for government, and being touched in conscience for his
murder and adultery, entered into a Monastery, where he 1041.
dyed, having first named for his successor Michael Calaphates, his nephew by
his sister, he reigned 7 years. In his time a Thracian woman killed a certain
stranger with his own sword, for offering to ravish her, which fact was so
approved by the Thracians, that they crowned her with garlands, and flung out
his body into the streets, who as a self-murtherer lay there unburyed.

Michael Calaphates the son of Stephen who lost Sicily, was adopted successor
by Paphlago, and confirmed by Zoe, who made him swear, he would be faithful
Zoe, and deposed his Uncle John from his Government, by whose help he obtained
the Empire, when he fell on his knees to Zoe, beseeching her to confirm
Michael's adoption. He emasculated most of his kindred: but for this his
insolency, the people of Constantinopl^ rose in arms against him, calls home
Zoe with her sister Theodora, makes them lay down their monastical habit, and
assume the imperial; in the tumult 3000 Citizens were slain by the Praetorian
Guard, yet the Citizens prevailed who thrust Michael* with his uncle
Constantine into a Monastery, and then put out their eyes, and drove them out
of the City. Not long after old Zoe married again to Constantine Monomachus
whose former wife was Romanus Argyropolus, him Michael had banished upon
suspicion of his too much familiarity with Zoe. But now he is called home,
with his wife Sclerena: so now the Empire is guided by one man and three women.

This Constantine Monomachus is confirmed in the Empire, which he much weakened
1042.
by his prodigal wasting of the treasure, which made him lay heavy taxes on
the borderers of the Empire, to keep off forraigners, but the borderers grew
careless, and let all break in that would, when they saw the treasure
exhausted, and the burden lie on them, they knew their condition could not be
worse under strangers. Michael Governor of Dyrrachium, (now Durazzo a City in
Macedonia on the Adriatic,) under Monomachus was killed with 40000 soldiers by
George Maniaces, was animated by his Army to invade the Empire, which he did;
but he was slain in Bulgaria; though his Army had the better of the
Imperialists, and so this war ended. Leo Torencius kinsman to Monomachus did
also enter in competition for the Empire, which Monomachus perceiving, caused
him to be shaved with intent to put him in a Monastery. But he being well
beloved by the Maccdonians, was received at Adrianopolis, where he quickly
raised an Army, with which he besieges Byzantium, and had taken it, but that
he was dull and neglected his opportunity, permitting the Emperors Forces to
increase, by which in diverse battles he was overthrown, and at last Vladomirus
Prince of Russia, for having had one of his men killed at Byzantium in a
quarrel, raised an Army of 100000, which in boats made of one piece of timber,
called Monoxyla he brought before Constantinople; conditions of peace were
offered him, which he refused, therefore his Army and Fleet in Gods just
judgments were utterly overthrown. The Bossini a people of the East, were
subdued by Monomachus.

At this time the Turks were grown so strong, having taken Babylon, and
subdued Media, that they send an Embassy to the Emperor Monomachus offering
to make a league with him, conditionally that he will become tributary to the
Monomachus had lately subdued the Pazinacae a people of Scythia; and having
converted them to Christianity, placed them in Bulgaria: he sends 15000 of
these to Iberia to fight against the Turks; who had taken Liparit^ the Iberian
King prisoner, and made him swear never to raise a^s against the Sultan any
more. But these Pazinacae would go no further then Chrysopolis, therefore they
swim their horses over the Hellespont, and join themselves to their country
men, wasting Thracia, Macedonia, and other parts near Constantinople: at last,
after diverse skirmishes, they make a league for 30 years: in the mean time
the Turks make havoc of all without control; for the borders lay open, being
the Garrisons were discharged for want of pay. But the Turkish conquests were a
little stopped by a victory obtained against them by the President of Media,
and by the civil war that fell out between the Sultan of Persia and his
brother Abraham.

Monomachus being long troubled with the Gowt, fell at last into a Pleurisy
and 1054.
Theodora Zoe's sister, who dyed not long before, being 70 years old, She
reigned alone almost 2 years: so finding her self aged and sickly, by the
entreaty of the Peers, she names Michael Stratioticus for her successor and
then dyed. To Pope John the 1055.
nineteenth or twentyeth succeeded Benedict the eight or ninth, who sat 13
years. But his chair was invaded by Sylvester the third, who sat one month,
and then was forced to surrender his pontificate to Benedict again, and in this
schism Gregory the sixth is chosen, who sat 2 years: so that now Rome is like
the three-headed Cerberus. After them came Clemens the second, who sat 9
months: and after him Damascus the second, who was Pope 23 days; then came
Leo the ninth, who sat Casimir of a Monk and Deacon became King of Poland,
being the next heir, with whose orders and vows the Pope dispensed Queen Raxa
the mother of this Casimir, for her mis-government was fain to fly from the
fury of the people, with this her young son; for not only had she incensed
her own subjects, but the Russians also who broke in upon the North, and the
Bohemians who pillaged the South part of Poland. In memory of this dispensation
given to Casimir, the Polonian Knights, at certain solemnities in the Church
use to wear long white surplusses, after the manner of Priests and Deacons;
the Plebeians were taxed by the Poll to pay yearly one penny toward the
maintenance of a perpetual light in Saint Peter's Church: they were

Berengarius the Archdeacon broached his doctrine against Transubstantiation,
which afterward he recanted, whether willingly or by force, is doubtful. The
dignity of Cardinals began about this time to be in request. At Rome was found
a Giants body uncorrupted, which being set up right, was higher then the City
walls: Its Epitaph was this, Here lies Pallas the son of Evander, killed by
Turnus his Lance. The Hungarians fell off again to Pelagianism, and killed the
Clergy: but Andrew the fourth King of Hungary, made it death for any man in his
Kingdom to profess Paganism.

In England Hardiknut son of Knut by Queen Emme succeeded to Harold, whose
body he caused to be untombed, the head struck off, and flung into the Thames.
He punishes such as were guilty of the death of Alfred his brother by the
mother. He offended the whole State by grievous taxes; he called home Edward
his other half brother out of Normandy; then dyed suddenly the second year of
his reign: and in him ended the Danish Kingdom in England, having lasted but
26 years under these 3 last Kings. Edward the Confessor is crowned. He was
son of Ethelred, and is commended for his gentleness, continency, 1042.
and piety, who with his touch cured certain diseases. Yet the Earl Godwin made
insurrections against him, because he favored the French too much 1065.
dyed, his corpse was interred in the Church of Westminster, which he had
founded a little before. In Scotland Macbethus having treacherously murdered
King Duncan, invaded the Kingdom, and for 17 years possessed it, until
Milcolumbus the slain Kings son being assisted by King Edward of England with
10000 men, recovered it from Macbethus.

CHAP. IX.
The troublesome affairs of the West, under Henry the third, and Henry the
fourth. 2. The affairs of Italy, Spain, Portugal, Sicily. 3. The Popes of
those times.

HEnry the third, surnamed the Black, from the color of his hair, succeeded to
his Father Conradus, against him Vratislaus king of Bohemia made 1039.
war by the assistance of Peter King of Hungary; in this war Henry Peter
grandchilde to Stephen for being too favorable to strangers, and for
maintaining of Christian Religion: but pretending his mis-government; Ovo was
the King they set up against him. Henry employes Leopold Marquisse of Austria,
who having recovered a great part of Hungary, forced this new King to beg for
peace and pardon, which was granted him: but afterward falsifying his oath and
promise, he renewed the war Peter, and was by the sentence of the Peers of
Hungary beheaded. But Peter would not be induced to forsake Christianity and
to profess Paganism, wherefore the Hungarians conspired against him, and 1050.
sent for his kinsman Andrew whom they had banished; him they made King, and
put out Peter's eyes, who shortly after dyed at Alba Regia.

After this Henry married with Agnes the daughter of William Prince of
Pictavia: he rejected the Musicians and Players that came to the wedding,
thinking these fooleries far below his imperial gravity: but he could not
enjoy peace long; for Godefrid Duke of Lorrain entered into league with the
French Baldwin of Flanders, to expel his brother Gottello out of his part of
the Dukedom, that so he might enjoy all alone: this so incensed Henry that
he caused him to be apprehended and imprisoned, yet upon his submission he
let him go, and sent him with aid to Pope Leo the ninth against the Normans.
In the mean while Benedict the ninth, Sylvester the third, and Gregory the
sixth. Anti-Popes made such stirs in Rome and Italy, that the Emperor was
forced to repair thither, and to call a Synod at Sutrinum not far from Rome.
In this Benedict, who had set up his residence in the Palace of Lateran,
Sylvester at S. Peter's, and Gregory at S. Marks, were all three deposed, and
Sindeger or Suideger Bishop of Bamburg was elected, who was named afterward
Clemens the second.

After this Henry being crowned Emperor by this Clement, marches with his
Army into the farther part of Italy, to compose the differences between the
Normans and Lombards, some whereof were yet remaining there: so all things
there being settled, He returns for Germany; but before he could get out of
Italy Pope Clement the second is poisoned, and immediately after him Pope
Damasus; therefore he was feign to choose Pope Leo the ninth, who was the
third he chose before his departure from Italy. This Leo being afterward to
stay in Rome, accompanies the Emperor into Germany, where in Henry; the Pope
was forced to submit and give way to the Bishop of the place, who claimed it as
his due.

After Henry returned from Italy, he made an expedition into Hungary, against
Andrew their King, to revenge the death of Peter; but he had no success in
this interprise: only Andrew the King was slain by a fall from his horse, and
trod under foot. He banished Conradus of Bavaria, for his mis-government, and
for entering into league with the Hungarians, who at last made their peace with
the Emperor by promising to pay a yearly tribute, and to furnish him with
Auxiliaries upon all occasions. Conradus dyed in his exile: whereupon Henry
made his young son Henry the fourth Duke of Bavaria, being but 2 years old,
and got him to be declared Emperor. Then he sent back Pope 1053.
Leo into Italy with an Army under the conduct of Godefrid Duke of Lorrain to
suppress the Normans, who at first were put to flight, but recollecting their
dispersed Forces overcame their overcommers. Shortly after Godefrid married
with Beatrix the widow of Boniface Marquise of Tuscia in Italy, Henry
suspecting 1055*
that Godefrid (whose Faith was wavering, and spirit ambitious) by this
marriage Godefrids intentions; in the interim he crowns his son at Aix,
being 4 years old. He stayed a year in Italy, where having settled all things
he invades 1056.
the Sclavi of Lusatia, by whom his army was totally routed, and he shortly
after dyed of grief, after he had lived 40 years, and reigned 17: he was buried
at Spira near his Father Conradus, he was a good and mild Prince: his first
wife was daughter to the King of England, who dyed childlesse. His second wife
Agnes bore him Henry the fourth.

This Henry the fourth was 7 years old, when his Father dyed, who committed to
his wife the care of this Prince: and his education to Conradus Ecert Marquisse
of Saxony, and Otto the Saxon who lately had obtained Bavaria of the Empress,
pretending that they would breed the youth in Military Discipline, and State
affairs which he could not learn under his mother, but rather effeminateness;
whereas indeed their aim was, either to procure to themselves the Empire, or
at least the administration thereof during the childs minority. In the interim
the soldiers grew licentious and outrageous for want of discipline, Otto the
brother, begot of William Marquisse of Thuringia by a Concubine, they began to
rob and plunder Saxony, this theevish Army of robbers was at last defeated by
Bruno and Ecbert brothers, Marquisses of Saxony, being assisted by the
Emperors Forces, the battle was fought above Mesburg, where the young
Emperor was placed a little way off from the Army, as a terror to the enemy,
and a spectatour of the victory. In this conflict Bruno was slain, and so was
Otto the ringleader of the robbers, whose inheritance in Thuringia was seized
on by Ecbert Marquisse of Saxony, who erected a College of Canons at Naumburg,
and translated thither from Cyzicum, the Episcopal Seat.

Henry being 13 years of age, undertook the managing of the State; and first
he assisted Solomon his kinsman King of Hungary, against Bela who thrust him
out of his kingdom: this Bela's Army Henry overthrew, and reestablished
Solomon in his kingdom: then he waged war against the Sclavi of Lusatia
with good success; but the Saxons storming that the Empire should be any
where, except among themselves conspired against the young Emperor, the
author of this conspiracy was Otho Duke of Bavaria, whom a little before Henry
had sent into Italy with the Bishops of Colen and Trent, to confirm the
Italians in their allegiance to the Emperor, and to demand the ordinary
tribute. Otho by insinuating himself with the Princes of Italy, brought a
suspicion Rodulphus of Suevia, and others. This Rodulphus being desirous to
take up the differences, and end the war, interposed himself as a Mediator
between the Emperor and them; but they rejecting all means of reconciliation,
were apprehended and imprisoned, afterward escaping out of prison, they grow
more eager and fierce against the Emperor then before. Otho the Bavarian was
not indeed in the battle, yet he was convicted of treason against the
Emperors life, wherefore he lost Bavaria: which caused him to raise new
Forces against Henry out of Saxony and other places.

Pope Gregory the seventh, called Hildebrand before, was chosen without the
1073.
Emperors consent against the ancient laws of election, Henry to be revenged
of this wrong; raises an Army, but he was pacified by Gregory for the
present, who not long after makes a decree, that henceforth the Emperor should
have no hand in the Popes election, and withal cites Henry to make his
appearance Henry. He therefore to clear himself repaires to Rome in the
midst of 1076.
Winter, that the sentence of excommunication against him might be taken off.
He was forced to stay from morning to evening barefoot, and without any ^ood
before the Popes Palace, ere he could be admitted into his presence, which
was not till the fourth day after, then being admitted, and sharply reproved by
the Pope, he is enjoined to dismiss his Army, to ^orbeare meddling Gregory
against him, because he had called a Synod at Worms: wherein Gregory was
condemned of Simonie. To clear himself of which he took the Sacrament,
imprecating against himself sudden death, if he were guilty of the crime of
Simonie, and wishing the Emperor to do the like, which he refused, affirming
that he would make it appear in the Parliament, how he had discharged his duty
in managing the Empire.

But the Pope fearing lest Henry should gather strength again, and revenge the
affronts put upon him, sends his Decree to be proclaimed in Germany, whereby
Henry is excommunicate, and by the instigation of the Saxons a crown Rodulphus
Duke of Suevia, with this inscription; The rock gave to Peter, and Peter to
Rodulphus the Diadem. Rodulphus upon the persuasions of 1080.
the Bishops of Mints and Colen, that he was bound to obey the Pope and not to
keep Faith to him who was excommunicate; accepts the Title of Caesar, and is
crowned at Mints; and so takes possession of the Empire; forgetting what
favors he had received heretofore from the Emperor. Then he prepares an Army
against him, relying on his own and the Saxons power, with whom joined diverse
Bishops and Dukes. But the Francs and others abhorring this perfidiousnesse;
under Duke Godefridus Bilioneus in the Emperors absence at Rome, raise an Army
to defend his right. Henry understanding by the Bishop Rodulphus his Garrisons
out of Mints, encounters with the Saxons in nine several battles, in the
fourth whereof Rodulphus is defeated, deadly wounded, and his arm cut off;
which when it was presented to him as he was dying, confessed that with this
hand he had confirmed his faith to Henry which he falsified, and so accusing
the Bishops for their wicked counsels, dyed. When it was told the Emperor that
Rodulphus was richly intombed. I envy not that honor to him (says he) but
wish that all my enemies were thus entombed.

Rodulphus being slain Henry converts all his force and fury against the Pope,
Gregory to be excomunicate and depose^, and imprisoned in the Castle of St.
Angelo, having named for his successor Clement Bishop of Ravenna: whom he
brought to Rome after two years 1084.
siege, and there placed him being consecrated in the Pontifical chair, and
was by the same Pope declared Emperor, and crowned with his wife Bertha. In
this expedition Henry corrected the Normans for assisting the Pope. But the
Saxons after Rodulphus his death renew their Forces, and make Hermanus Prince
of Lorrain Emperor by the Popes command. He fought with Henry, and overcame
him near the town of Wurc^burg: but he was quickly driven thence into Saxony,
where he thought to re^ew the war, but was forsaken by his soldiers. He at
last by the fall of a gate which he was besieging was 1088.
slain with many others. After him Ecbert Marquisse of Saxony invaded the
Empire: but he shortly after was slain by Henry's guard in a Mill, whither he
had fled. Thus the fury of the Saxons was by so many bad successes somewhat
abated; but the Popes indignation increased: for Urban the second, stirred
Henry, his son Conradus by his first wife; who by his father had been made
Governor of Italy, but he being taken away by untimely death, Paschalis the
second sets up his other son Henry against him whom his Father had named his
successor in the Empire. He by the help of the Saxons, wrung the Empire from
his Father, whom the Bishop of Mints in 1105.
the presence of his son disgracefully divested of all his imperial
ornaments. But whilst the old man went about to raise new Forces to revenge
this 1106.
wrong, he dyed at Leodium the 56 year of his age, and the 49 of his reign*
whose Body was not buried in 5 years space after his death, at last it was
removed from Leodium to Spira, where it was intombed near his Father. Henry
lasted 38 years from the time he went out of Rome till he dyed. He had two
wives, by the first he had Conradus, who having married Rogers daughter of
Normandy, called himself King of Italy, but shortly after dyed, and was buried
at Florence He had another son Henry the fifth, who succeeded him.

In Henry the fourths time diverse Bishops and Princes of Germany made an
expedition into the Holy land, but with ill success, for most of them were
destroyed by the Turks and Saracens, for of 7000 scarce 2000 returned home. In
Spain Anful king of Gallicia after some years siege took from the Saracens
there greatest City Toledo, and there established the Christian Religion. This
age produced the Carthusians Bruno of Colen: and the Cistertians by Robert
Abbat of Molismum: the old Benedictines were much degenerated from the rules of
their Ancestors. We showed before that the Normans had taken Apulia from the
Greeks; William the son of Tancredus was the first Prince there, then Drogo, to
whom succeeded Hunfrid. After him came Robert Wiscardus, who were all brothers:
this Robert helped the Pope 1074.
against the Emperor, and subdued Calabria with Sicily, whereupon Gregory the
seventh excommunicated him; but afterward he submitted to the Pope, and was
1080.
contented to hold these Provinces in fee of the Church, paying a yearly
revenew to the Pope. The next year Robert with 15000 overthrew Alexius the
Greek Emperors great Army of 100 and 70000. Hereupon Alexius for a great sum
of Henry the fourth to invade Roberts Territories, but he imployes the money
against Pope Gregory the seventh, whom he shuts up in prison; takes possion of
the Palace of Lateran where he places Guibert the Antipope. Robert returning
with his Army, drives home the Emperor to Germany, punishes the rebellious
City, sets Gregory free, and brings him to Salernum where he dyed: and 1085.
shortly after followed the death of Robert, who left the Dukedomes of Calabria
and Apulia to his son Rogerius.

About these times Henry by extraction a French man having married Theresia
1100.
the daughter of Alphonsus the sixth King of Castile, with her got the Earldome
of Lusitania or Portugal. He by his valor drove out and subdued the Saracens,
and Calipha, is rebuilt by the permission of Daber Caliph of Egypt, at the cost
of Monochus and Argyropilus. The Vandals and Sclavi having killed Gottschalus
their Governor with all religious persons they revolt again to Paganism, which
is now the third time. The Church service or Liturgy in Spain was compiled by
S. Leander and S. Isiodor called Mozarabum is changed by Gregory the seventh.
One Peter an Eremit, and afterward a Captain in the Holy War, was the first
that taught to pray upon beads. The Dukedom of Bohemia is now erected into a
1086.
Kingdom: for Vratislaus because he subdued Leopoldus Marquisse of Austria, is
by Henry the Emperor at Mintz declared King, and crowned by Gilbert Archbishop
of Trevers. The Italians by the persuasion of Pope Victor invaded Africa, where
they killed 100000 Saracens, and overthrew their chief Cities. Abstinence from
flesh on Saturdayes is enjoined by Gregory the seventh. The States of Venice
and Genua contend for the mastery of the Sea, both of them having done good
service for the Holy War. But at last the Venetians obtain the total command
Roger Duke of Normandy was the first King of Sicily, Apulia and Calabria: to
whom succeeded his son William surnamed the Wicked.

To Pope Leo the ninth succeeded Victor the second, 2 years after him came
Stephen the seventh, by some the 9, by others the 10, he was brother to Gotfrid
of Lorrain. He being sent to Byzantium calls a Synod, at which because the
Emperor and Patriarch would not be present the Cardinal departed, and with
Apostolical indignation, beat the dust from his Sandals, he was chosen Pope
after this without the Emperors suffrage: and subjected the Church of Millan to
the Sea of Rome, having been independent 200 years. He sat but 7 months, to
him succeeded Benedict the ninth or tenth, who having sat 9 months, was thrust
out by Gerard Bishop of Florence, Nicolaus the second, though some make these
two distinct men.. He caused Berengarius openly confess that the true body of
Christ was eaten in the Sacrament, which opinion was confirmed by Lanfrancus,
who wrote Books to this purpose. He was Pope 3 years, to whom succeeded
Alexander the second, who had been Bishop of Luca: against him was set up
Cadulus Bishop of Parma, who coming twice to Rome with a great Army, thought
to obtain the Pontificate by force, but could not. Alexander sat 11 years, his
successor was Gregory the seventh, who was Pope 12 years. He could shake fire
out of his sleeves when he was angry: he inhibited the marriage of Clergy men,
which Henry the fourth commanded; Gregory Henry advanced to the chair one
Guabert or Gilbert, assuming the name of Clemens the third, who was Pope (but
not without opposition) 17 years: after him came Victor the third, who sat one
year, and then was poisoned, to whom succeeded Urban the second, who sat 13
years. He animated the western Princes to undertake the Holy War.

CHAP. X.
The Eastern affairs under Stratioticus, Ducas, Diogenes, Michael, Botoniates,
Alexius. 2. The Holy War and Kings of Jerusalem, and new orders of Knighthood.
3. The affairs of Cyprus, Portugal, England, Scotland, and the Popes of this
time.

IN the Greek Empire to Theodora succeeded Michael Stratioticus, so called,
because a mere soldier, being unskilful in Government, and all things else;
1056.
for which cause he was chosen by the Eunuchs of the Palace; that he bearing
the title, they might in effect rule the Empire. But he slighting the
soldiers, and Nobility; he being very aged, besides his want of skill, the
Army chose Isaacus Comnenus to be Emperor, against whom Stratioticus sends
Theodorus, with an Army, but he was defeated by Comnenus, whereupon
Stratioticus willing to make his peace, sends to assure Comnenus that he will
make in his last Will him heir of the Empire, with which Comnenus seemed to be
contented, till he saw that Stratioticus under hand did bribe the people and
Nobility, to the end they would not give their consent to his election.
Therefore Comnenus sends the Patriarch to degrade him, who as he was persuading
Stratioticus to part willingly with the Empire, asked the Patriarch what reward
he should have for leaving an earthly kingdom; he answered, that he should
receive an heavenly for it: Upon this, he resigned the Empire, having reigned
one year, and then takes himself to a Monastical 1057.
life.

Comnenus succeeded, who first deposed the Patriarch that advanced him, then
falls upon the Church revenues, to fill up his exhausted t^asure. He made war
upon the Hungarians, and Bossini, and forced them to beg for peace. One time as
he was hunting, he was so affrighted with the sight of an horrible Boar (which
some think was an apparition) and with sudden lightning and thunder that he
Constantine Ducas, he betook himself to a private life.

Ducas was so covetous that to spare charges he disbanded a great part of his
Army, and garrisons, giving thereby boldness to the neighboring Nations to
invade 1059.
that little of the Empire which was left; whereupon the Uzzi a people of
Scythia, being 60000 in number past over the Isther, and invaded Macedonia and
Greece. Ducas being destitute of soldiers for want of pay, betakes himself to
prayers and tears, by which arms God was overcome, who sent a plague among the
Uzzi, which swept away most of them: the remnant were destroyed by the
Bulgarians: 1067.
these calamities were forewarned by an earthquake, which overthrew diverse
houses Ducas advanced Johannes Xiphilinus of Trapezuntium to the Patriarchate,
affirming that he had rather obtain honor by scholars then by soldiers. Having
reigned 7 years and 6 months, he dyed of a lingering disease in the 61 year of
his reign: he recommended the Empire to his wife Eudocia, whom he caused to
swear that she would never marry again, nor leave the Empire to any, except
to his three sons, Michael, Andronicus, and Constantine. She therefore
undertook the Government, but finding that the Empire was much weakened, and
the enemies thereof increasing daily, and that there were need of a stronger
defender then her self, resolves to break her oath, and so Romanus Diogenes, a
good soldier, who became Emperor shortly after.

Diogenes against his promise made to Eudocia, excludes her out of the
Government, and undertakes the Empire alone, that he might without opposition
recover the honor of the Eastern Empire, almost l^st, by reason the Turks had
invaded Asia, which they were like to carry clear away having no Garrisons to
resist them. Therefore he marches into Asia against the Forces of Aspasales
Caliph of Babylon, whose seat was now in Persis, he by his Sultans had sent two
Armies, one into Cappadocia which he wasted, the other into Syria: with these
Diogenes encounters, defeates them, takes Hierapolis and Alepus, and seiseth on
their plunder, which they had laid up in Neocaeseara. His next expedition was
Azan the Sultan, who offered him honorable conditions of peace, but he
rejected them. He fought stoutly with the Turks, then toward the Evening
returned into his Camp. Andronicus the brother of Constantine Ducas, supposing
Diogenes had fled; withdrawes his Forces suddenly, and leaves him for a prey to
his enemy: but he perceiving how he was betrayed, resolves to fight again
notwithstanding, which he did courageously, and killed many of the Turks, but
at last by the fall of his horse which was wounded, he was taken by the enemy
and brought to the Sultan, who first Eudocia and her children, in his absence,
the Empire was conferred on Michael the eldest son of Ducas, who besieged
Diogones in Adena, then caused him to deliver up the town, upon assurance that
he should receive no hurt, but Michael against his oath, thrust out his eyes,
his head for want of good looking to putrified, and so he dyed, having reigned
almost 4 years. 1071.


To him Michael succeeded, whose surname was Parapinacius from pinatium the
fourth part of medymnus, which was a measure equal almost to two of our
bushels, because in his time was a great famine, in which this measure of corn
was sold at a deer rate. A little before this famine was born a monster with
Goats feet, and one eye in his forehead, upon which followed a great plague.
This Michael gave himself more to study then to government, under Psellus the
Philosopher whose Arithmetic is yet extant; hence it came to pass that the
Eastern Empire was ruined Nicephorus Botoniates, who was descended of
Nicephorus Phocas, enters into a league with the Turks of Asia, and Nicephorus
Briennius Duke of Dyrrachium sets up a new Kingdom in Thracia, Botoniates at
the same time possesses Nicaea. Briennius is overthrown by Ruselius Latinus,
wherefore Botoniates growing potent by the Turks power, made Michael give up
his Empire which he did willingly, and entered into a Monastery, with his wife
Mary, hav^ng reigned almost 7 years. In the Patriarchat to learned Xiphilinus
succeeded Cosmus a dunce.

Botoniates succeeds in the Empire, who first of all suppresseth Briennius and
1078.
kills him, then he defeats Constantine Ducas, the son of Michael whom the
Army had proclaimed Emperor at Chrysopolis: but the brothers Alexii conspired
against Botoniates, and by the help of the French besiege Constantinople, which
having taken, they raged promiscuously upon all ages and sexes. Then they
thrust Botoniates into a Monastery, after he had reigned 3 years. So the
Empire is divided among the brothers. Alexius he had the imperial title and
1081.
power, his brother Isaacius by a new name is called Sebastocrator: the third
called Adrian, is named Protosebastos, and the youngest Sebastos. These four
divided also the revenues of the Empire amongst* them, so that there were not
means left for the Emperor to resist an enemy.

Alexius wanting money fell to exactions and rapine, in stead of gold and
silver coin, he made use of brass, yet would have all his taxes and tributes
to be paid in gold. Near Epidamnum he received a great overthrow by the
Normans under Duke Robert. He lost the Islands of Chius, Lesbus, Samus and
Rhodes to the Turks, under their Captain Zacchabus, who also took from the
Greeks Creet and Cyprus. Alexius also had wars with the Bosini who overthrew
1196.
him, and made him buy his peace, by assigning them some lands to dwell in. He
was also defeated by Godefrid of Bullion in his expedition into the Holy land:
he lived 70 years, and reigned 37. a little before his death all his friends
forsook him, so finding himself slighted, dyed with grief, having first named
his son John 1198.
Emperor. His body was buried without any solemnity: he was Co-Emperour with
Henry the fourth.

In these Emperors time the Holy war was undertaken by Godefrid Duke of
Lorrain with his brothers Eustachius and Baldwin, by Robert of Normandy, Hugh
brother to Philip the French King, with diverse others. Peter the Eremit had
undertaken an expedition before this, but with ill success, his Army, which
consisted Solomon the Turk, after they had suffered much by the Bulgarians, in
their march toward Asia; there were also before Godefrids two other Armies
sent, these were defeated by the Hungarians: but Godefrid had better success,
who having sold his patrimony, the Dukedom of Lorrain to the Bishop of
Leodium, spent it all upon this expedition, which he undertook about the
middle of August, and arrived with his whole Army before the end of that year
at Constantinople. He mustered his Army at Chalcedon now called Scutari, and
found that it consisted of 600000 Foot, and 100000 horse, their badge was a red
Cross on their shoulder. The Turks had subdued all from Pontus to the
Hellespont in the space of 40 years; the Greeks and Saracens being driven out
thence; and both the Caliphs of Babylon and Egypt much weakened, they had also
subdued Palestina, and taken in Jerusalem: but this they did not enjoy above 8
years, for it was retaken again by the Saracens.

The first conflict the Christians had was at Nicaea, with Solomon the Turkish
Sultan, and first of that name, whose great Army they overthrew, and after 26
Solymans wife. In ^4 years space they subdued Lycaonia, Cilicia, Syria,
Mesopotamia, and Comagena, all the Turks being either destroyed or fled: these
victories so affrighted the Saracens, that the Calypha of Egypt, by
Ambassadors was glad to sue for peace. They besieged Antioch and after 9
months took it. But the Sultan Belchiacor sent an other Army of Persians, who
besieged the Christians within the City, so that they were pinched with famine;
the Greek Army sent by Alexius to raise the siege, durst not venture upon so
numerous an Army of Saracens, wherefore the western Christians within
perceiving they were in a desperate condition made a furious sally upon the
enemy, whom they routed and put to the flight. The Saracens 1099.
were so famished, that they went praying for 8 days together bare footed
about the walls, and at length were animated to fall on again by a glittering
Target which they saw in the air over Mount Sion. The City being taken, and so
much blood shed, that it came up to the horses knees; Godefrid who first scaled
the walls, was by general consent made King; but he would neither take the
Title nor Crown in that place, where our Savior had been crowned with
Thorns, where he had suffered death, and so much dishonor; yet there

Baldwin the Kings brother was now in possession of Cilicia, Comagena, and
Mesopotamia, and was honored with the Title of Earl of Edessa which is a City
in Comagena called Rages in Tobias's History, at this day it is named Orpha.
Tancredus nephew to G^scardus by his sister, obtained the 1100.
Government of Tiberias. Boemundus Prince of Tarentum, who was one of the
undertakers of this expedition, got the government of Antioch: But this year
proved fatal to many Princes, for Godefrid King of Jerusalem dyed, having
reigned one year. Boemundus Duke of Antioch was taken by the Tancredus Earl of
Tiberias succeeded. William Rufus King of England was killed by chance. Henry
of Lovan was slain in running a tilt. Britistaus King of Bohemia was murdered
by a high way robber as he was returning from hunting.

To King Godefrid succeeded his brother Baldwin Earl of Edessa. He by the help
of the Fleet of Genua took Caesarea of Palestine, Ptolemais, Tripolis, and
Berythus, with other towns, the third part of which is assigned to the
Genuans. Apamea also and Laodicea towns of Syria, were taken about that time,
and so was Carrae of Mesopotamia by Boemund (who had been ransomed) and
Tancredus. But they lost it again, whilst they were striving for the
superiority of it. Hereupon Boemund returns to Italy: but having married with
Constantia Philip King of France, he returns to Antioch. Robert Earl of
Flanders with Eustachius the Kings brother, go back again to their own
countries. Baldwin having taken the Isle Pharos in Egypt, after he had ralgned
18 years dyed.

To him succeeded his cousin German Baldunus de Burgo: in his time was
instituted the order of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, afterward of
Rhodes: these were to wait upon the King in his expeditions against the common
enemy, to defend and enlarge the bounds of Christianity; to clear all the
ways of Pilgrims to Jerusalem from thieves and robbers. These did good service
whilst they were assisted by Christian Princes, but being forsaken by them,
they were forced to give up Rhodes to the Turk, and to contain themselves
within the small confines of Malta. After them sprung up two other Orders of
sacred Knighthood: to wit, the Templars and Teutonics, the Templars had one
Hugo De Paganis, and Gaufred for there Authors: these seated themselves in
Jerusalem, and were to guard the pilgrims from the Sea side to Jerusalem, and
back again. Henry the seventh Emperor. The chief Master of this Order had
his seat at Jerusalem. The Teutonics from their profession and 1190.
Symbol were called Marians, their beginning was at Ptolemais in the time of
Henry the sixth Emperor, where certain rich Citizens of Lubec and Breme built
a large Hospital for strangers who should be of that Order; from thence
plantations were derived into Germany; their first Master was one Henry
Walpodius Frederic the second, subdued Prussia and Livonia, and kept out the
barbarous Nations from these parts: but when these Knights grew loose,
effeminate, and careless, Prussia and Livonia were torn from the Empire. King
Baldwin having defeated the Turks at Damascus, 1131.
and the Saracens of Egypt, and taken in Tyrus, dyed in the 13 year of his
reign.

Baldwin being dead, the Princes fell at variance among themselves, which
increased the strength and courage of their enemies. Fulco son in law to
Baldwin is made king, in whose time there was nothing but civil jarres about
the principality of Antioch: he having reigned 11 years dyed at Ptolemais, by a
fall from his Baldwin and Almericus.

Baldwin was assisted by Conradus the Emperor by land, and Lewis the French
King by Sea. But Conradus having lost his Army in the siege of Damascus and
1162.
Ascalon returns home. Baldwin having at last taken Ascalon, dyed at Berythus
the 24 year of his reign: to whom succeeded his brother Almericus, he invaded
Egypt, and fought with Saracon the Sultan, who had driven the Caliph out of
Egypt. He had wars also with his successor Saladin, but with no success.
Almericus dyed the 12 year of his reign, leaving a young son Baldwin, who
being leprous, and despairing of ever having children, made Baldwin son of
William Marquisse of Montferrat, his sisters son, his successor, whom Guido
his Father in law poisoned, that he with his wife Sibylla might obtain the
Kingdom, whereupon Raimundus the young Kings tutor made war against Guido,
he to strengthen his cause draws Saladine out of Egypt, which was the
overthrow of that kingdom of Jerusalem, for he took upon surrender Ptolemais,
Asotus, Berythus, and Ascalon: and after one months siege Jerusalem, 88 years
1187.
after it was taken by Godefrid.

Sibylla with her four children were killed in the tumult, her sister Isabella
the wife of Humfredus Toronius was carried away by Conradus Marquisse of
Montferrat, hoping in her right to obtain the kingdom: he was murdered, and
Henry Earl of Campania and Lord of Tyrus, married with Isabella, Guido
Lusignanus a French man laid claim to it in the right of Sybillas children,
whose Father in law he was. He helped Richard King of England with money when
he was about to recover the Christians losses in Asia, and for this money Cyprus
was pawned or sold to Guido; after Richard had seized on the Island and had
taken Alexius Comnenus prisoner. His posterity held Cyprus till the death of
Jacobus Lusignanus, the last King, and then it came into the possession of the
Venetians. For his Widow being a Venetian borne, and too weak to buckle with
the power of the Turks, resigned it to the Venetians: who held it almost 100
years paying a yearly tribute of 40000 Crowns to the Egyptian, and after to
the Turkish Sultan. But they lost it to Mustapha General of the Turks under
Selymus the second: As for the Kingdom of Jerusalem, John De Breen was the
last Christian King thereof in Syria or Palestine, whose daughter Yeoland
married to Fredric Emperor and King of Naples, who in her right called himself
King of Jerusalem, which title the King of Spain retains as being King of
Naples.

In this Holy War the Venetians, Genuans, and Pisans did much good service

About this time began the Kingdom of Portugal in Alphonsus the son of Henry
Earl of Lorrain. This Henry married with Taresia the daughter of Alphonsus the
sixth king of Spain, who took Toletum from the Saracens. Henry Alphonsus was
content at first with the Title of Duke: but having subdued the Saracens, he
was saluted King by the soldiers. The Monastery of Clarevall was erected and
S. Barnard made the first Abbot thereof, S. Agnes instituted her Order of Nuns
at Jerusalem. Otho Bishop of Bamberg converted Pomerania to 1105.
the Faith.

In England King Harald was assaulted by his younger brother Toustain and
Harfager King of Norway, both by Sea and Land; but these both were slain, and
Harald obtained the victory. Shortly after William Duke of Normandy, 1065. 1066.
Edward his kinsman, landed in Sussex, where a bloody battle was fought, in
which Harold was slain, and with him almost 61 thousand English; and so ended
the Saxon line, about 500 years after the first coming in of Hengist. William
was received into London and crowned on Christmas day at Westminster by Aldred
Archbishop of York; the next spring William returns to Normandy to settle his
affairs there, and takes with him the chief of the English Nobility: fearing
lest they might revolt in his absence. Upon his return there were diverse
discontents and rebellions at Exeter, Oxford, and chiefly in the North, the
Nobility being discontented with Williams bounty toward the French: but he
subdued them 1074.
all, and defeated also afterward another rebellion in the Isle of Ely. Prince
Edgar Williams competitor, with many of the English Nobility were fled to
Scotland, who were protected by King Malcolin: whereupon William with a
puissant Army enters Scotland, where both Kings conclude a peace. Edgar
submits, and is restored to grace, and a fair maintenance. Roger Fits-Auber
with many others 1078.
conspire against William; but the fire was discovered before the flame broke
out, and so the plot vanished; after this the king in the 13 year of his reign
subdues Wales. In Normandy his son Robert rebels against him, which drew
William over thither with an Army, Robert lying in ambush with 2000 men, fell
upon the King, defeated his Forces, unhorsed the King himself, and wounded him
in the arm, but he was cured at Rouen, and reconciled to his son, who
rebels 1080*
William brings him into England, and employes him against the Scots: for now
the league was broken between the two kings. After this 1082*
his son Henry, and Louis the French kings eldest son fell out at Chesse,
and wounded each other; which occasioned a War between the two Fathers: the
French with Robert invade Normandy, William enters France, and at Rouen is
reconciled the third time to his son Robert: a short peace was made, which
was quickly broken: for William refuses to do homage for the kingdom of
England, though he was content for Normandy. The French king mocking him for
his great belly, made William enter France again, 1087.
where at Mantz he was hurt, and thence conveyed sick to Rouen, and so ended
his War. William changed the laws, and puts them in French, alters the
tenures: but the customs of Kent we represerved by the mediation of the
Archbishop Stigand. He seized on all the Forests and Chases of the kingdom.
He dis-peopled for 30 miles space the country of Hamshire on Lanfranc an
Itali^n born, and Archbishop of Canterbury, he dyed at Rohan the 74 year of
his age, and 21 of his reign: his Corpse lay three days neglected, till his
youngest son Henry had it conveyed to the Abbey of Cane, where it could not
be interred, until the ground wherein he lay was purchased. To Robert his
eldest son he left the Dukedom of Normandy, to William his third son
England; to Henry the youngest, his treasure with an yearly pension: his
second son Richard was slain by a stagge in the Forest; where William
Richard the son of Robert Duke of Normandy broke his neck. He erected seven
Abbyes of Monks, and 6 of Nuns, besides his munificence to 9 Abbeys and 1
Nunnery in Normandy. In England he founded one Abbey where he fought his first
battle, and two Nunneries, one at Hinching-brooke in Huntingdonshire, and the
other at Armthewt in Cumberland.

William the second succeeded, who was feign to make an agreement with his 1087.
elder brother Robert, who challenged the Crown in right of Primogeniture, by
paying to him 3000 Marks per annum. Odo Bishop of Bayeux, with diverse of the
Nobility, conspire against William, and invites Robert into England, but
Robert, though assisted by the French: at last a peace is made between them,
1088.
that the Surviver of either of them should succeed to the rule both of England
and Normandy. After this William assists Robert, against his brother Henry,
who had taken the Fort of Mount Michel, for not repayment of the money which
Henry had lent Robert against William: the King was like to have been 1091.
taken prisoner, as he was alone on the Sea shore near the Fort, had not
rescue come the sooner, for his horse being lost, he defends himself with the
saddle Henry is reconciled with his brothers, and was allowed to hold in
morgage the Country of Constantine, till the money was paid: but when the day
came, for want of payment Robert is imprisoned, and 1092.
forced to renounce the Country of Constantine. This was after Roberts return
from Scotland, who was employed there against Malcoline. After this Robert
raises Forces to recover the Castle of Dampfront in Normandy taken by Henry,
and inveighes against William for underhand dealing, but he passes over with
an Army into Normandy, and fees the French King to forbear aid to Duke Robert.
He thereupon made his peace with William: who upon his return made war upon
Scotland, and Wales; in Wales the Earl of Shrewsbury 1094.
Robert of Mouberry raised a sedition against William which was by his
diligence soon ended. Robert being dead in the Holy expedition, King William
obtaines Normandy, and so became more insolent, laying heavy taxes on his
people, keeping Bishoprics vacant, that he might receive their revenues,
taking money of the Jews, and selling all spiritual preferments, which he
profusely spent on buildings, and on the French to keep them quiet, he makes
another expedition into Normandy against Conte de la Fles^he, who had surprised
the City of Mains, him he takes prisoner, and after releases him: at last he
was shot by Walter Terell a Norman in the new Forest, being 43 years old, and
having reigned 1100.
12 years.

In Scotland Milcolin or Milcolumbus surnamed Canmore, reigned. He brought in
the titles of Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, Barons and Knights. The Nobility
before were called Thanes. He entertained Prince Edgar with his mother and
sisters, and diverse of the English Nobility, which fled to him from the tyranny
of William the Conqueror. He married Margaret eldest sister to Bdgar: then
Edgar to William, but upon honorable terms. He was threatened with a civil
war at home by the Moravians, Rossians, Cathanesians and Islanders; but the
quarrel was composed by the mediation of the Clergy. The insurrection in
Galloway was suppressed by one Walter, whom for his good service the King made
chief Steward of Scotland: whence the surname of Stewarts had its original. He
erected two Bishoprics, to wit, of Murry Eugenius, which authourised the new
married Brides to prostitute their Virginity to their Lords. As Malcolme was
besieging Anwik Castle which William Rufus had surprised, he was slain by
one Robert Mowbray, who delivering the Castle keys to the King on the point of
his lance, run him through the eye; hereupon Mowbray was called Percie, of
whom are the Earls of Northumberland. Prince Edward in revenging his Fathers
death was also slain; this double loss was the cause of queen Margarets death.
He reiged 36 years, his body with his sons were translated from the Abbey of
Tinmouth, to the Church of Dunfermling.

At Rome to Urban the second, succeeds Paschalis the second, who sat 18 years:
Henry the fourth; another Council he calls at Florence against Fluentinus
Bishop thereof, for holding that Antichrist was then borne. He caused Henry the
fifth, in his Fathers life time call a Synod at Northusen in Thuringia against
Simony and the married Clergy. The Synod called at Trecassina in France, was
called by Paschalis for the same end, he calls also another Synod at Lateran, in
which he excommunicates Henry the fifth, for meddling with investitures of
Bishops. In Paschalis his time were 3 schismatic Popes.

CHAP. XI.
The Western affairs under Henry the fifth, and Lotharius Duke of Saxony. 2.
The Eastern under Calojohannes. 3. The affairs of France, Spain, England,
Scotland, Denmark, etc. with the Popes of those times.

HEnry the fourth being dead, but not buried (for his body by the Popes
command, lay five years without sepulture) Henry the fifth, his son
succeeded. He first punishes Henry Duke of Lorrain, Robert Earl 1109.
to Henry the fourth: then he assists Almus King of Hungary against Coloman.
Shortly after he made war upon the Polonians, for denying to pay the
accustomed tribute to the Emperor; but the Bohemians his Auxiliaries falling
off from him, he lost the battle, and was forced to give off the siege of
Glogove, and to make his peace with the Polonian. In the fifth year of his
reign he enters Italy with an Army, to regaine his right of investiture of
Bishops and Abbots by the crosier staff and ring. A right which the German
Emperors have obtained for above 300 years, ever since Charles the Great; on
the other side Paschalis claimed that right as belonging to the Clergy and
people of Rome: and whereupon Henry besieges the City, takes it, and in it the
Pope and Cardinals: which he imprisoned, till his privileges were confirmed;
which being done, and crowned Emperor, he returns into Germany, where he
bestows an honorable funeral on his Father at Spire, but the Clergy storming
at the Popes concessions, and Henry's Henry for his Simony, and withal they
stir up the Saxons to rebel, by the Bishop of Mints, who traveled through
Saxony encouraging the people to join with Lotharius their Duke. Rodulphus
Marquisse of Brandeburg, and Sigefrid Palatin of Saxony, (w^ose l^fe the
Emperor had lately spared) with diverse others side with Lotharius. But Henry
in a great battle overthrew all these Forces, and slew Sigefrid: after this
victory he married with Mathilais the King of Englands daughter at Mints,
where Duke Lotharius in sackcloth submitted himsel^e to the Emperor, who
pardons him.

But Lotharius shortly after this, forgetful of his pardon, with the Bishop of
Halberstad, raise new tumults, and with a great Army of Saxons, encountered
with the Emperor in the County of Mansfield, and defeated him: in this
conflict Hugerus Earl of Mansfield Henry's chief General was slain, and he
himself was forced to fly, and to remove as far as he could from the fury
of his domestic enemies. He goes into Italy, being sent 1109.
for to take possession of the inheritantance of Mathildis widow, who was
sister to Ecbert Marquisse of Saxony. This year was terrible by reason of
strange thunderings, earthquakes, and apparitions in the air. Pascalis hearing
that Henry was marching toward Rome, went into Apulia, where he Johan
Cajetan, who took the name of Gelasius the second. He refused to absolve
Henry from his sentence of excommunication, wherefore he is deposed, and one
Berdinus or (as some call him) Mauritius a Spaniard is made Antipope, whom
afterward Calixtus who succeeded, Gelasius took prisoner, and banished, having
excommunicated the Emperor again; wherefore he is forced to return into
Germany, with a resolution to punish Mints for the perfidiousnesse of their
Bishop; but he durst not, because he understood that the Saxons were making
new preparations against him by the Popes instigation. Gelasius not being
suffered to live at Rome, retires himself Guido of Vienna called Calistus the
third, is made Pope by the Cardinals at Cluniacum; who refused the Pontifical
habit, till the Romans had confirmed his election. He continuing the Papal
hatred against Caesar, at Sutrium seiseth on Berdinus the Antipope, who having
set him on a Camel, leads him to Rome in triumph, where being disgracefully
used, he is thrust into a Monastery.

The Emperor finding himself too weak to resist the Popes power, being backed
by France, Italy, the Normans, Saxons and others, is persuaded by his Peers to
yield, and to resign again the investiture of Bishops, and election 1122.
this for perpetual serenity. In the mean while Rogerius Prince of Sicily,
slighting the Emperors threats and exhortations, invades Apulia and Calabria,
in the absence of Duke William, by the instigation of Calistus the Pope, the
Venetians drive the Babylonian Turks from the siege of Joppe, and after 4
months siege take in Tyrus the Metropolis of Phoenicia, having first covenanted
with William. Viceroy of Palestine, that they should enjoy the third part of
the Maritime towns they took in. Shortly after the Pope dies; Henry having
composed the troubles in Belgium raised by Lotharius of Saxony, having also
aided Henry the king of England, his Father in law against Levis the French
king, he makes a journey to Utrich, to settle the disorders of that 1125.
place, where he fell sick and dyed the 19 year of his reign. In his time Otho
Bishop of Bamberge converted Pomerania to the Christian Faith. Henry dying
childlesse, left Franconia to Conradus of Suevia, who after Lotharius was
Emperor, he repaired the City of Norica, and built a Monastery to S. Aegidius,
which he

Lotharius Duke of Saxony was made Emperor by the instigation of the 1125.
Pope, and Saxons, who were willing to assume their ancient dignity and power.
Conradus Henry the fifth sisters son, who had got Franconia by Henry the
fifth, as his Father had obtained Suevia by Henry the fourth, challenged the
Empire in right of his mother; yet Lotharius carried it. Conradus hoping to
prevent Lotharius, hastneth for Italy to obtain the Popes confirmation, having
secured Ulma, Norimberg, and Auspurg for him, but he spoiled his cause by
invading of Lombardy, and accepting there of a Crown from the Archbishop of
Millan, thnugh it was but of iron; for Pope Honorius Lotharius, whereupon
finding all help failed him, by the mediation of S. Bernhard who flourished at
that time, he was reconciled to Lotharius.

Lotharius being settled, upon the request of Pope Innocent the second, he came
1132.
with an Army into Italy, to suppress the faction at Rome, which had set up
Anacletus an Antipope: when he came, the faction fled, and he was crowned
Emperor by Innocent, whom he brought back to the City, being driven out by a
prevailing party. Lotharius demanded the Emperors rights back again from
Innocent; but being dissuaded by the Pope and S. Bernhard whom he brought with
him, to claim that which had caused so much trouble and bloodshed, lets fall
his ^emand. After this, he made a second expedition into Italy against Roger
King of Sicily, who had invaded the Churches lands. Wherefore having passed the
Apenius without resistance, he takes in Ancona, 1137*
Spoletum, and other towns, and by the help of the Pisan Fleet pursues Roger by
Sea and Land, so that he was forced to abandon Italy: which at last being
settled the government of Apulia was committed to Reginaldus, and of Thuscia to
Henry his son in law, but as he was returning into Germany, through the groves
of Trent, he fell sick in a poor cottage, and dyed the 13 year of his
Lotharia Caesaria.

Before this last expedition into Italy, Lotharius pacified the troubles of
Denmark, which were occasioned by Magnus King Nicolaus his son, who had
murdered Canutus his cousin German. Ericus brother to this Canutus implored
the Emperors aid against the murderer, who with his Army quieted the
Cimbrians a while; but after he was gone Ericus with his Forces which
consisted most in horse, fell suddenly on Magnus his quarters, kills him with
most of the Danish Nobility. Shortly after Nicholaus Father to Magnus was
murdered with his guard in his own Palace; by this means Ericus obtained the
kingdom of Denmark. Lotharius authorized Vernerius to gather together and to
teach the Roman Laws, which had been neglected above 600 years. Rome and
Bononia were the places appointed for this reading. About this time also
Gratian the Monk compiled together the Popes Decrees, to which many additions
have been made by the subsequent Popes. From hence sprung up the Canonists and
Schoolmen; the one maintained the Popes Hierarchy, the other his Doctrine,
which School doctrine was compiled afterward in Frederic the firsts time by
Lombard, called the Master of the Sentences, on whom Thomas, Scotus, and
innumerable Schoolmen have commented. Lotharius had by his wife Rixa one
son, who dyed young, and two daughters, the one he married to Henry the proud
Duke of Bavaria, to whom he gave Saxony, the other he bestowed on Lovis the
bearded Earl of Turingia.

In France to Hugh Capet succeeded his son Robert, who built many Churches
and Monasteries: he reigned after his Fathers death 36 years: to him 1060.
succeeded his son Henry the first, who placed William the bastard son
R^bert Duke of Normandy in his Fathers inheritance, having slain 30000 Normans,
he dyed the 28 year of his reign, whose son Philip a child succeeded,
Baldwin Earl of Flanders was his Governor. He was excommunicate by Pope
Urban, for repudiating his wife, and marrying another, but two years after, he
was absolved and reconciled, he reigned 49 years; to 1108.
him succeeded Lovis the sixth surnamed the Gross: for some difference between
him and the Archbishop of Rhemes, he would be anointed at Orleans, and crowned
by the Bishop of Senon. He saw 5 Popes in France, to wit, Urban, Paschalis,
Gelasius, Calixtus, and Innocent. He reigned 30 years, the Monastery 1137.
of Clarevall was erected in his time, the first Abbat whereof was S. Bernhard.

Alphonsus the seventh was called Emperor of Spain, by his death the
kingdoms of Legio and Castile were divided in his two sons Sanctius and
Ferdinandus, in his time the Arabians in Spain called Almohades, would suffer
no Christians to live amongst them under pain of death. The ninth general
Council, and first among the Latins called the Lateran of 900 Bishops and
Priests was held, about the recovering of the Holy Land from the Saracens and
Turks. The Synod of Rhemes was summoned by Gelasius and held by Calixtus
against Simony, in this the Emperor was excommunicate. And council also was
held at Neapoli in Samaria for reforming of Manners. Lovis is excommunicate by
Stephen bishop of Paris, for invading the Churches rights. After which he
lived not long, besides he lost his son Philip as he was Tamdemus author of
the Adamites, seduced many people at Antwerp; against whom was set up Norbertus
bishop of that place, who was author of that order which was called Premom
stratensis; from the place where he retired him self. In a Synod held in
France, it was ordained that the Knights Templars* should wear a white cloak,
of which order there were not at first above nine; but in the space of 50
years they grew to be 300; abounding in wealth, besides innumerable inferior
brethren, which they called servants; their office was to defend the highways
and pilgrims toward John were to provide lodgings and use hospitality.

In the East to Alexius Comnenus whilst he was yet alive succeeded his son
Calojohannes, a better and greater man then his Father; for he subdued the
Turks in Asia, the Scythians and Tartars in Europe, who had swarmed like
Locusts into Thracia and Macedonia in time the of Alexius Comnenus. These
Calojohannes drove out, he suppressed also the Huns near Belgradum: a place
famous for the slaughter of the French by the Hungarians, (...).
as they were marching toward the Holy Land. He sent Ambassadors to
congratulate Lotharius his victory against Rogerius, whom he drove Conradus
Suevus. He was a rich Prince in money; therefore bought Antioch for a great
sum from Raimund Prince thereof, finding some resistance as he went to take
possession, he wasted Syria: he took Sosopolis the strong City of Pamphilia
by a stratagem, causing his men to ride as near as they could to the Works,
and let fly their arrows at the Garrison, and then to run away toward the
Woods, purposely to toll the Garrison from their strong hold, which was done
accordingly, and so the Grecians wheeling about entered the Town. He took
Castamon from the Persarmenians, and returned with triumph to Byzantium; but
this happiness lasted not long, ^or shortly after Tanismanius the Turk, and
then Mahumet recovered what they had lost, and Gangra to boot with the strong
City Pontus: at last, as he was hunting of the wild Boar in Cilicia, he hurt
his left hand with one of the poisoned arrows which fell out of his quiver,
whereby it gangrened, and his whole body was infected, so he dyed the 25 year
of his reign. The Physicians would have had his hand cut off; but he refused,
saying, One handed Caesar was not fit to govern the World. He had four sons,
two dyed before him; of the other two* he chose Manuel the younger, to succeed
him, finding Isaacius the elder of too harsh and fierce a nature to govern.
About this time dyed John a Stampis, who had lived above 360 years, for he was
a soldier under Charles the Great, and dyed under Lovis the Gross.

In England Henry the first surnamed Beauclerke for his learning, the youngest
son of William the first, was crowned after his brothers death, 1100.
Robert being then in Apulia: he recalls Anselme Archbishop, furnishes the
vacant Bishoprics with fit men, relieves the Laity of their pressures, and
Ralph Bishop of Durrham is imprisoned for his evil counsels to the late King:
the Court is reformed, the lights in the night are restored, which were
forbidden by William after the coverfeu bell. He married Maude daughter to
Margaret late Queen of Scots, and Niece to Edward Atheling: but Robert having
returned into Normandy, arrives at Portsmouth with a strong Army to recover the
Crown: the Armies being ready to encounter* for avoiding blood a peace was
concluded, that Henry should be King during his life, paying to Rabert 3000
marks per annum. 2. That Robert surviving should succeed. 3. That all Robert's
friends should be pardoned. After Roberts departure Henry assumes the
investitures of Bishops, which Anselmus opposed; Henry sends to the Pope
Pascalis to let him know the collation of church dignities was derived to him
from his predecessors. Anselme opposes the Ambassadors at Rome, wherefore
he is banished: but by the Popes persuasions Anselme is restored, and the King
forbeares to meddle with the Church. In the interim Robert de Belesme Earl of
Salisbury fortifies his Castles, and combines with the Welsh against the King,
but in 30 days his castles were retaken, and his accomplices scattered, and the
Earl banished into Normandy, where combining with William Earl of Mortaigue,
he commits many outrages, Robert conniving at the same, and afterward joining
with these Henry, who being invited over by the Normans weary of Roberts
oppressions, and encouraged by Pope Pascall, fights against his brother and
defeats him, then brings Robert prisoner to England, commits him to the castle
of Cardiffe, where he lived 26 years; his eyes were put out for attempting an
escape: so Henry after his brothers death 1106.
became absolute Duke of Normandy: he kept good correspondency with Scotland,
and France; he sent into Wales a colony of Flemmings, which much infested this
country: he had some debate with the Earl of Flanders, about the payment of a
pension, which the Earl claimed, but the debate was more verbal then real.
But after this Lewis the Gross, had some quarrels Henry the fifth Emperor. The
King of England having married Maude his daughter to him, animates him against
the French, who supported the Pope against him; but by the mediation of the
French King Lovis, the Emperor submits to the Pope: all differences are taken
up between them and Lovis; so that the King of England was disappointed; yet
he continues his quarrel with Lovis, for procuring Fulke Earl of Angeou to
seize upon the country of Main, and animating Baldwin as is said against him
for with holding his Pension which was paid by the conqueror only to Baldwin
the fifth Earl of Flanders during his life, and was upon courtesy continued
by succeeding kings. But Henry beat the French, and at last they were
reconciled. After this the Welsh rebelled, and were subdued by him: but he was
much afflicted for the loss of William the young Prince, who was drowned
returning to England, with many persons of honor, and their attendants to the
number of 140, besides 50 Mariners. After this the Emperor being dead, Henry
marryes his daughter Maude to Geffery Plantagenet Foulke, Earl of Aniou, by
whom she had three sons, Henry who was King after Stephen, Geffery and
William. The first Parliament 1014.
Henry established in Salisbury consisting of the three Estates: about 5 years
after the death of Anselme. Ralph Bishop of Rochester, is made Archbishop by
the King, and gives him his investiture, but Thurston the Kings Chaplain, who
was designed for York, refuses to swear obedience to Canterbury, appeals to
the Pope, who absolves him, invests him, and gives him the Pall: the king is
forced to submit in this also to the Pope: at last having reigned 35 years, he
surfeted on a Lamprey, and dyed, he was buried in the Abbey of Reading, which he
had founded. He erected two Bishoprics

In Scotland Malcolme being dead, the Crown was usurped by Donald, who was
assisted for that end by the king of Norreway, which so exasperated the people,
that they sent for Duncan Malcolmes son out of England, upon whose approach
Donald fled, being forsaken by his people, the sixth month after he Duncan
continue long, for his government was so harsh that he was hated by his
people, upon which Donald got Makpender Earl of Mermes to murder him, and
then returning from banishment, invaded the Crown again, but in the third
year of this second invasion he was taken and imprisoned, where he first lost
his eyes, then his life. To this Donald Malcolmes brother succeeds Edgar
Malcolmes son, who lived peaceably 9 years, he built the Monastery of
Coldingam, who dying without issue, his brother Alexander succeeded. This king
in the very beginning of his reign, was assaulted by an Army of the
discontented youth of the kingdom, whom he defeated near the river of Spaea.
Afterward he was assaulted in* the night as he was asleep, Michael at Scone.
Having also escaped drowning in a storm; he erected a Church to St. Columbus,
and enriched the Church of St. Andrews. He dyed without issue; to whom
succeeded his brother David; who 1124.
gave himself to building and repairing of Churches and Monasteries, he built
Holy rood house, with 9 other Abbeys, and two Nunneries, one at Carlisle, the
other at Berwick, and two Abbeys near New Castle. To the 6 former Bishoprics,
he added four more, to wit, Ross, Breichin, Dunkeld, and Dunblane, allowing
them Stephen of England, which were shortly after composed. Maude the Empress
sent her son Henry (who succeeded Stephen afterward) to receive the order of
knighthood 1139.
from king David his great Uncle, whose eldest son Prince Henry of Scotland
dyed, to the great grief of the kingdom, his eldest son Malcolme David
caused to be declared Prince of Scotland, and made William his second son
Earl of Northumberland: at last David dyed the 29 year of his reign.

In Rome to Paschalis who sat 18 years; succeeded Gelasius the second one
year; Berdinus called Gregory the eight was Anti Pope. To Gelasius succeeded
Calixtus the second five years: his successor was Honorius the second five
years: his Antipope was Celestinus the second. To Honorius succeeded Innocent
the second 14 years. When he came into France, the Parisian Jews presented
to him the Volume of the Law wrapped up in a Almighty God, remove the veil
from your hearts: He annoints at Remes Lovis the yoanger King of France.

CHAP. XII.
1. A brief History of Egypt from Augustus, till the Turkish conquest. 2. The
western affairs under Frederick Barbarosse. 3. Diverse passages

AFter Egypt had been subdued by Augustus Caesar, it remained subject to the
Romans till the Empire was translated to Greece, and then it was under the
Greek Emperor till being weary of their oppressions, they called in the
Saracens, whose Calipha they chose for their Governor, and so shaked off the
Grecian yoke; this Calip^ was descended from Mahomet the Impostour, and
different both in Government and profession from that other Caliph of Babylon.
Almericus, who in the kingdom of Jerusalem succeeded Baldwin, craved aid from
the Sultan of Syria, who sent thither Sarraco with an Army which overthrew
Almericus, and drove the Christians quite out of Egypt, this being done he
suddenly seized upon the Caliph, whom he imprisoned, and dashed out his brains,
and then makes himself king of Egypt, to whom succeeded Saladin his nephew by
his brother. He overthrew the Christians in Syria and Palestine, and brought
their kingdom of Jerusalem to nothing. To him succeeded his brother, whose
posterity reigned till Melechsala; he finding his best and oldest soldiers
almost quite extinct by reason of his continual wars with the Christians, and
not daring to confide in the treacherous and effeminate Levois the French king
at Damitia, in Egypt, which was the old Heliopolis or Pelusium, takes him
prisoner, and destroys his brother Robert, with his Forces, who was got
farther into Egypt, for this good service Melechsala, chose out of them a
guard for his own body, but not long after he was murdered, by this new guard,
who seized on the kingdom after it had been possessed Sarracon about 100
years.

These slaves having now made themselves kings, chose Alcair of old called
Memphis or Babylon, for the seat of their kingdom: the country out of which
they came is now called Cercassia, the inhabitants are of the Greek Religion
with the Muscovites and Raxolans, their children were wont to be sold, and by
Merchants transported by Sea to Alexandria, and thence to Memphis, where
abjujuring Christian Religion, they were sent to school to be instructed in
the Mahumets Religion, and then were trained up in Military affairs, and so
were employed in the wars, which custom the Turks learned, in making of their
Janisaries: these were called Mamaluchs, which signifies circumcised. None
were admitted either to the regal or equestrall dignity in Egypt, but those
that were thus born, and educated, so that neither the Mamaluchs children did
inherit their fathers equestrall, nor the Sultans children, the regal honor.
The first slave that obtained the kingdom was Turquemenius, he was entitled
the Sultan, and so were all the succeeding Kings, as before they were called
Caliphs. This new Sultan released King Lewis from his imprisoment, and grew so
insolent and imperious Cothus, who for this fact was saluted king by the Army
of slaves, and was after he had overcome the Tartars, slain by Bendocader, who
succeed^d. He drove the Christians out of Syria, and recovered Antioch. After
he had much wasted Armenia, he was poisoned at Damascus. Melechsait succeeded,
whom Elpis thrust out of his throne and murdered. He took from the Christians
Tripolis, Sidon, Beritus, and Tire and razed them, so made them unusefull for
the Christians, he was murdered by one of his guard in the camp, his
successor Melechseraph, or Vstrephus took Ptolemais the last Christian town,
and razed it to the ground. He was murdered by his guard, as he was hunting,
to him succeeded Melechnasar, and Melechadel, with diverse others, till
Caithbeius, whose names are scarce known, much less their actions. This
Caithbeius was a great scourge to the Turks under Bajuzet the second, whom he
overthrew in two great battles, his son Mahomet succeeded contrary to their
custom, therefore he was deposed, and upon this arose diverse factions in the
Court: so that in three years were five Sultans, the two last were Campson,
Gaurus, who reigned 16 years, at last siding with the Persian against the
Turk, Selimus the first was overthrown and slain in the battle. The last was
Tonombeius, whom Selimus overthrew, took prisoner, and hanged him up in the
gate of Memphis, so ended the Mamaluchs kingdom, having continued 260 years.
Egypt since that time remains

Conradus the Emperor before his death named Frederic the first, called
Barbarossa and Aenobarbus from his read beard, for his successor, though he had
a son of his own now at years; at this time Henry of Austria, and Henry of
Saxony his son in 1155.
law did contend for the Dukedom of Bavary. This controversy was so taken up
by the Emperor, that Henry of Austria was honored with the title of Duke, who
before was but a Marquisse; and had withal a part of Bavaria assigned to him.
He held a Diet at Mersburg, where he composed the difference between Canutus
the son of Magnus, Sueno the son of Ericus, and Wooldemarus the son of Canutus
whom Magnus slew, which three contended for the kingdom of Denmark: there it
was Sueno should hold the kingdom of the Emperor, Canutus of Sueno, and
VVoldemar should be bound to appear such a day in the high Court: so Frederic
having in some sort quieted Germany, he makes an expedition into Italy, being
called upon by the banished Apulians, and some Cities of Lombardy, which were
oppressed by the Millanois, who aimed at a Sovereign Dominion. He used great
severity against Verona for excluding him the gates, because he was not as yet
confirmed by the Pope. Millan for a time submitted to him; then having crossed
the Appenin, he enters Rome, where he is crowned by Adrian the fourth, not
without great tumults and opposition of the people, so that he was forced to
fight within the City in his own defense; in this conflict many were taken and
slain, and many Arnold Bishop of Mints, and Herman the Palatin; the Bishop he
spared because of his age, and order, being a Churchman, but he caused Herman
for troubling Germany with a needless war, to carry a dog upon his shoulders,
holding him by the hindmost legs before all the people; which then was
accounted a great punishment. He caused also Bolislaus King of Poland to pay a
fine or mulct, for neglecting to bring into the Imperial Exchequer his yearly
tribute.

But whilst the Emperor was employed at home, the Millanois made new work for
him abroad, by oppressing their neighbor Cities, and drawing many into their
rebellion; with whom Pope Adrian conspired, who also exasperated Frederick by
sending him word, that the Empire was at his disposing, to give it, to whom he
pleased; wherefore he thought it time now, to look to himself, therefore with
an Army he passes over the Alps, falls upon Millan which he took by storm,
and was about to destroy it, but upon the submission of the citizens, with
naked sword about their necks, and crosses on their breasts, falling down at
his 1158.
harbors, and customs, and withal to repair the towns of Cumae and Lauda,
which they had spoiled. But scarce was Frederic gone thence into Burgundy, when
the Millanois enter into a new confederacy with other cities, with William of
Sicily, and a great number of Cardinals, animating the Pope to excommunicate
him, because he made the Bishops to do him homage, for their temporalties,
which he affirmed were given him by the bounty of his predecessors, hereupon
the Millanois stone Frederic's Ambassadors, and intend by some assassinates
which they had hired either to poison or stab him; wherefore he enters Italy
again, overthrows Crema, Adrian in the mean while as he was preparing the
thunder of excommunication against him, is choked with a fly in his drink,
and so dyed: but before his death he bound 14 Cardinals by an oath, not to
choose any man Pope but him who would oppose Caesar and maintain the cause of
Millan, and of William the Sicilian. Hence two Popes are chosen, one Roland
named Alexander 1160.
the third: by the Millan faction, the other Octavian named Victor by the
Emperors side, to whom were joined the kings of England, Denmark, Hungary and
Bohemia: a Synod is called at Papia, where Alexander is cited to appear; he
condemns that Council, and refuses to come, affirming himself to be above
Councels; Frederic for holding with Victor, and procures the greater part of
Italy and France to side with him: upon this Frederic falls again upon Millan
furiously, takes it by storm, overthrows it to the ground, and sows salt on
it; then the chief actours of this last rebellion were condemned and beheaded,
1162.
the rest wandering up and down in Italy, and destitute of all help and
comfort, set up a new order called Humiliati.

Pope Alexander in the mean time was not idle, but drew France, Spain, and
England to his party. Venetians also with Padua, Verona, and others places join
with him against Frederic. The Romans call home Alexander; the towns of
Lombardy cast out the Emperors garrisons, and all arm against him. In the
interim Victor the Antipope dyed at Luca; in whose place was substituted one
Guido of Crema, who takes the name of Pascalis. Frederic is forced to return
again into Italy, where having crossed the Pope, he takes Ancona; encounters
with the Roman army at Tusculum, where they lost 15000. He enters the city;
Alexander flies, and Pascalis is placed in the Palace of Lateran; the Romans
take the oath of allegiance to Frederic. But he lost diverse principal men in
this fight, besides there dyed of the plague the Bishops of Colen, Ratisbone,
and Spire, with Frederic the son of Conradus Caesar, and diverse other prime
Commanders; this loss with the news of the Greek Emperor, who had promised aid
to Alexander conditionally, that he would restore to him the Western Diadem,
and the jealousy

About this time; after VValdemar had killed Sueno, the murderer of Canutus he
obtained the Kingdom of Denmark; and made diverse expeditions against the
Sclavi, who with their Piracies infested the Danish Islands. He brought
Niclotus Duke of the Sclavi into great straights, that he was forced to destroy
many of his own towns; Henricus Leo. And Albertus Ursus wasted most of his
country and peopled it with Flemings, Hollanders, and Frislanders, who erected
diverse Churches there. Rostoch was built by Primislaus son of Niclotus.
Waldemer overcame the Rugi. Ericus King of the Sueci subdued the Finlanders.
The Merchants of Breme and Lubec, by their arms brought the Livonians to
Christianity. Dantsick is built by the Danes in the mouth of the river Vistula.
In Italy the rebels by the assistance of Alexander and the Greek Emperor,
rebuild Millan, they build also another City, which from the Popes name, they
called Alexandria, and peopled it with 150000 men. Frederic to hinder the Popes
proceedings, prepares a fifth expedition into Italy, after he had demolished the
walls and 1173.
fortifications of Mints, which had lately murdered their Bishop Arnoldus, and
had banished Christianus his successor: for Conradus the Popes Bishop of
Mints, was joined with Alexander, and mainly opposed the Emperor, who sent
Christianus the banished Bishop into Italy, He did good service there for
Frederic, in recovering Ancona a Sea town, from the Greeks. The third year
after he came thither, by the addition of Caesar's Forces he besieged
Alexandria, which held the Caesarians play a long time to their great loss.
Where^ore he was forced to make peace with them: and so disbands imprudently a
great part of his Army, whereupon the Lombards revolt again: Frederic is fain
to send back for his disbanded men; and because the power of Henricus Leo was
great in Germany, as Waldemar King of Denmark; having besides done good service
at Jerusalem: the Emperor earnestly implores his help, which he favoring the
Pontifician party, denied, pretending that he was aged and infirm of body.
Frederic was vexed at this denial, yet ventured upon the Ligurians, and was by
the treachery of the Brixians overthrown. His Eagle is taken, and he knocked
down from his horse, being missed 5 days, it was thought generally, that he
was dead, but the fifth day he showed himself at Ticinum, where the Bishops all
protested to forsake him, if he did not submit to the Pope.

In the mean time Alexander mistrusting the Romans, fled to Venice in a Sea
man's habit. Otto Frederic's son with a Fleet of 50 ships pursues him. The
Venetians in defense of the Pope, encounters with Otto, defeats him, takes 48
of his ships, the other two being sunk, and carries him prisoner to Venice. The
Pope to reward this good service, bestows on the City a ring of gold, with
which they should espouse the Sea to them, which custom is yearly observed
upon Ascension day by casting a ring into the Sea. Frederic having lost both
his sons, the one by death, the other by captivity, finding also that his
enemies increased both in number and power, and that he was not able to help
the afflicted Christians in Asia; in this turbulent condition of the West,
resolves by the advice of his 1177.
Frederic should come, and falling down at the Popes feet, should petition for
absolution: then that he should quiet Italy, and lead his Army into Asia.
Frederic having consented, repaires to Venice; and at the Gates of S. Marks
falls down at the Popes Feet, who sets his foot on his neck, saying: thou shall
walk upon the Basilisk and Aspe, and upon the Lion, and the Dragon thou shall
tread. Frederick replied: not to thee but to Peter. Yes says the Pope, both to
me and to Peter.

The Pope having honored Venice with many privileges, returns after 18 years
wars into Rome, where he calls a Synod, in which he assumes the power of Peter
Lombard is unjustly condemned of heresy, concerning the Trinity. It was also
decreed that none should be held for Pope, but he who was chosen by the major
part of the Cardinals, and that the Roman Magistrates should swear obedience
to 1181.
him and his successors, and then dyed.

Frederick returns to Germany, to fit himself for his Asiatick expedition; to
that end he calls a Diet at Bamberg, where he accuses Henricus Leo of Treason,
condemns, and proscribes him, commanding the neighboring Princes to invade his
Castles and Dominions; he gave away Saxony to Bernard of Anhalt, and Bavaria to
Otto of Wittelsbach, for their good service to him: yet Leo by the means of
Henry King of England, his father-in-law, obtained so much of his land again
from Frederick as now the Dukes of Brunswich and Luneburg do possess. The Duke
of Bohemia for his good service to Frederick at Millan, obtained the title of
King, or at least a confirmation of it. Some think the seven Electors had their
original at this time. It is certain, that before this, the Brandeburg and
Palatine of Rhene were of small account, and Bohemia but a Dukedom. After
this, Frederick declared his son Henry, Caesar, by 1183.
girding his sword to him. In the Diet at Mentz the next year, Pope Lucius the
3. and Frederick quarrelled about the Roman Consuls, whom the Pope would have
abolished, and therefore was thrust out of Rome by the Citizens; they
quarrelled also about the Principality of Maulds or Mathildis, which Caesar
challenged as given to the Empire, the Pope as due to the Church; besides
Caesar chose Rodolphus for Bishop of Trevers, but the Pope set up Volomarus
being nominated by the greater part of the Canons; therefore Lucius refuses to
confirm Henry in his Regalities, except his father would give over Millan the
marriage was celebrated between Heary Fredericks son, and Constantia the
daughter of William King of Sicily, by which means 1186.
Apulia and Sicily returned again to the Empire: This Henry escaped a great
danger at Erford: for as he was composing a difference between Conradus of
Mentz, and the Lantgrave of Thuringia, the floor of the chamber yielded, where
they with many others were; four Earls, and diverse Gentlemen fell down into a
sink or privy, where they had an uncleanly death. Pope Lucius died at Verona,
to whom succeeded Urbanus, called Turbanus, from disturbing the peace of Italy,
in raising his Countrymen the Lombards against Frederick, whom he was about to
excommunicate, but that death prevented it: Some Jerusalem. To Urban succeeded
Gregory the 8. who died at Pisa the 57. day of his Pontificat; his successor
was Clement the 3. who by his Edict urges the Holy-war against the Sarazens,
for Saladin the Sultan of Egypt had taken five and twenty Cities from the
Principality of Antioch, which City also had been lost by the corruption of the
Patriarch who was bribed, had not the unexpected arrival of the Sicilian fleet
under William hindered it.

The Christians having lost all in Syria and Phaenicia, except Tripoli, Tyrus
and Antioch, having lost their Army, and the Cross, the Templers and
Hospitalers being slain by Saladine, and Jerusalem surrendered: Frederick,
assisted by Richard England and Philip of France, prepares an expedition into
Syria; therefore advancing the Cross, he gathered an Army of 30000. Isaacius
the Eastern Emperor made some resistance, fearing lest Fredericks intent might
be to subdue the Grecians; but afterward understanding the truth, he furnishes
him with shipping and provision: he passed over the Propontis into Asia, but
the French and English supply could not come soon enough, being hindered by
storms. Frederick recovered Cilicia, and killed multitudes of Turks at Iconium
which he took, and upon the Sultans submission restored it; then he drove
Saladines forces out of Armenia; but unhappily as he went into the river Serra,
or as some call it Cyduus, to swim, he was carried away by the stream, and with
Gibeline race, and of the Guelphs by the mother; he was buried by his son
Frederick in Tyrus, who undertook the remainder 1139.
of the war, conducted his Army to Antioch, and there left a strong Garrison;
thence he went to Laodicea, ready to revolt to the Sarazen, which he pacified,
and fortified, he took also Berythus and other Towns, then went to relieve
Ptolemais, where he died of a pestilent Fever, and most of his Army. By his
second wife Beatrix, Frederick had five sons, Henry his successor, Frederick of
whom I spoke now, Otto Earl of Burgundy, Conradus Duke of Suevia, and Philip
Duke of Tuscia, who reigned after his brother Henry. Its written of Barbarossa,
he so much honored Pope Urban, that he lighted from his horse when he rid to
meet him, and held the Popes stirrup; but afterward he raised the cruel faction
in Italy between the Pontificians which they called Guelps, and the Caesarians
called Gibellins, from the two families in Germany, between which of old was
deadly feud: shortly after his death the third Holy-war Spain, the one of
Calatarava, the other of S. Iago or James; but I find that these Orders were
more ancient, for Santius King of Toledo instituted the Knighthood of
Calatrava, An. 1130. so called from the Province where they were settled; their
garment was black, and on it a red-crosse: The Order of S. James was much more
ancient, being by King Ramiro instituted when he defeated the Moors at
Compestella; at which time St. James of Compestella was honored with many
privileges, and great riches, their Ensign was a Red-crosse in form of a sword.

About these times Petrus Aboilardus or Alardus, broched many dangerous Lewis
the younger, a Council is held at Senon. From Petrus de Bruis sprang up the
Petrobrusiani called Sacramentarians. Gilbertus Porretanus Bishop of Poictou
was deposed for denying the Divine-Essence to be God, but upon his recantation
he was restored. The Archbishopric of Lisbon in Portugal is erected, and the
four Archbishopricks in Ireland, to wit, Armagh, Dublin, Cassils, and Touman.
By Pope Adrian, William is crowned King of both Sicilies, which he holds in
fee, then began Sicily to be called Peters-Patrimony. Livonia or Li^and is
converted to the Faith by S. Menardus, who by Pope Alexander the 3. is made
Bishop there, where now is Riga the Metropolis.

Much about this time also, the Tartarians, a mighty and warlike people, but
without settled habitation, wandering up and down the vast Northern Countries of
Europe and Asia, being subject at first to that great Lord called Uncam or
Presbyter-Iohn, to whom they paid the tenth of their Beasts for tribute; but he
fearing their multitudes which daily increased, resolves to disperse them into
diverse Countries, which so displeased them, that they forsook their former
places, and went further North, refusing to pay any more tribute to Uncam; then
they chose for their King one Cingis Can, who in a short time grew 1162.
so great, that they subdued nine Provinces next them, and at last came upon
Uncam with a great Army, and slew him, and so Cingis possessed his state, and
daughter too, which Uncam refused to bestow upon him in marriage, when he
Cingis waxed so potent, that they overrun the great Country of Cathaia,
wasting many times the Dominions of the Turks, Muscovites, Polonians,
Hungarians and others, of whose antiquities and actions I dare not speak,
because for the most part fabulous and uncertain: They are of different
Religions, some Christians, some Mahumetans, and some Pagans. About this time,
a certain mad Sardinian lived a long time in 1171.
woods and deserts among the Deer, feeding on grass, and walking upon all four
like beasts; one day as the King of that Island was hunting, he was taken and
brought to his parents, who would neither speak to them, nor taste either
Heremites, called Williamites from William Duke of Glascony their author,
sprung up at this time, they were to follow the rules of S. Austine* The
eleventh General Council, and second of the Latins, was held in the Latheran
by Pope Alexander; there the Waldenses so called from Waldo of Lions, are
condemned, and the Popes election by Cardinals alone established. Petra a town
beyond Jordan, is made a Bishopric. The Jews are persecuted in France and
Germany, for crucifying a Christian child. The Carmelites Order began in the
Deserts of Syria, which afterward 1177.
was brought into Europe, by Albert Patriaroh of Constantinople. There was long
debate between the Popes and the Romans, about the government of the City, and
form of Magistrates: this difference lasted fifty years, from Innocent 2. till
Clement 3. who at last prevailed. 1188.


In Rome to Pope Innocent 2. succeeded Celestine 2. five months: his successor
was Lucius 2. eleven months: to whom succeeded Eugenius 3. S. Bernards
disciple, who sat eight years, to him he wrote his Books of Consideration: his
successor was Anastasius 4. one year: to him succeeded Adrian 4. an Englishman,
Norwegians to the faith, he sat almost five years: Alexander 3. succeeded, who
sat one and twenty years, longer then any other Pope except S. Peter, who sat
five and twenty years; Silvester 1. and Adrian 1. who reigned three and twenty
years; his Antipopes were, Victor 4. Calixtus 3. and Paschalis 3. To Alexander
succeeded Lucius 3. four years; he was the first that was created Pope by the
Cardinals alone: his successor was Urban 3. one year, whom Gregery 8. succeeded
for one month and 27 days: Clemens 3. succeeded for three years.

CHAP. XIII.
The Eastern affairs under Manuel Comnenus, Alexius, Andronicus, Isaacius and
Alexius Angeli. 2. The affairs of France, Spain, Denmark, Constantinople, Rome,
England and Scotland, in these times, with diverse other passages. 3. Henry the
6. Emperor.

TO Calojohannes in the East, succeeded Manuel Comnenus, a perfidious,
turbulent, and unhappy Prince. Conradus the Emperor of the West, and Saracens,
the Armies of Frederick and Lewis the French king were overthrown; for Conradus
having crossed the Thracian Bosphorus, entered Asia, where he was 1147.
promised to be furnished with all necessaries by the Greeks, who both deceived
him, and betrayed all his counsels to the Sultan of Iconium, whereby the German
army was spoiled with famine and the sword, and unknown dangerous ways:
wherefore the Emperor was forced to bring away the remainders of his army, and
to send Frederick his brothers son post, to acquaint the French army who were
going to Iconium, of the Greeks treachery; for they had suborned some to tell
the French, that Iconium was delivered up to Conradus stayed a while at
Ephesus. The French at the river Meander were beaten by the Turks. Roger the
Sicilian, to revenge the Latins wrongs, with a Fleet of ships takes Corcyra,
and wastes all the Greek coast. At last Conradus and the French arrive at
Syria; Lewis hasteneth to Iudaea. Conradus being brought to Ptolomais, and
thence to Jerusalem, gave way to besiege Damascus, which cost the Latins much
blood; for having taken the suburbs, the City was upon surrender, till the
Princes began to quarrel who should be governor; the old soldiers perceiving
that Theodoricus of Flanders was like to Damascus, which so angered the Emperor,
that he left the siege, and returned home by Constantinople ingloriously: the
French followed the next Spring, and were like to be surp^ised by the Greeks,
had not Roger encountered with Michael Palaeologus, Manuels chief Commander.

At that time, Roger brought from Chalcis Silk-makers into Sicily and Apulia.
Another Fleet of Christians at that time took Lisbone, and the Country about
from the Saracens; that City was delivered to Alphonsus, made lately Duke of
Lusitania by the King of Castile. The Danes and Saxons brought the Sclavi to
Christianity. Lewis returning from Sicily into France, put away his wife
Elianor, pretending the unlawfulness of that marriage, by reason of
consanguinity: she presently married to Henry of Anjou, King of England and
Duke of Normandy by right of his mother, Earl of Angiers and Turon by the
father, but by the right of his wife Earl of Poictou and Duke of Gascoigny,
which occasioned great war between England and France. Legates are sent from
Armenia to Pope Eugenius, to be instructed in the mysteries of Christianity;
Presbyter-Iohn that great Eastern Prince had overrun Media and Persia,
purposely to invade Jerusalem; The Turks also upon the departure of Conradus
and Lewis, chiefly the Sultans of Damascus and Iconium, began again to make
excursions upon the Christian territories. Ioscelinus Earl of Edessa, as he was
at stool, was surprised and imprisoned. Noradinus made excursions upon Antioch.
Manuel the Greek Emperor obtains Edessa from Baldwin the 3. and within a year
lost it to Noradine. Raimundus Prince of Antioch is slain by Noradine, whose
widow Reinold of Castle married, and withher obtained Antioch: He suppressed
the highway robbers of Cilicia; and for Cyprus; and afterward to prevent a
greater war, submits to Manuel. The Templers and Hospitallers, though much
enriched with booties, deny to pay their Tenths any more to the Patriarch of
Jerusalem, having for money procured immunity at the Court of Rome. In Manuels
time lived Eustathius, Homers Interpreter, and Bishop of Thessalonica, who
manfully resisted Manuel, endeavoring to corrupt the Christian doctrine with
some points of Mahumetanisme. As this Emperor had many faults, yet some good
things he had in him; for he was very bountiful, in forcing all his treasures
upon the Sultan of Iconium, when he was in want of money, (but I should rather
call this prodigality:) He was also tenderhearted; for not Baldwin 3. king of
Jerusalem, who had broke his arm in hunting, but he himself also on his knee
did use to soment and bind up the Kings broken arm: He showed also his piety,
before his death, in repenting that he had entertained Astrologers, or hearkened
to their predictions, finding them by experience to be false and delusorie, for
they had promised that he should live fourteen years longer then he did,
therefore by his handwriting he condemned their impostures; he reigned 38
years, and died the 60. year of his age; a little before his death he 1180.
resigned his Empire, and embraced the Monastical life; he had two wives, one
was Conradus Caesar's wifes sister, the other was daughter to Raimund Prince of
Antioch, of whom he had Alexius his successor.

This Alexius was betrothed to Anna daughter of Lewis the French king, which
exasperated the Greeks, fearing the Latins would become too great in
Byzantium: therefore they send for Andronicus the cousin-german of Alexius,
living in exile among the Turks in Chaldaea; he raises an Army, which he
brings in view of Byzantium, having first overthrown the forces of
Protosebastus, who undertook the protection of the young Caesar; afterward
Andronicus puts out his eyes, and imprisoned him: So being admitted to the
government, he thrusts out all the Latins, and many of them he murders; then
undertakes the protection of Alexius, whom he carried on his shoulders to the
Xene, Alexius his mother, of treason, as if she had ploted with Bela king of
Hungary against the State, and so strangles her; shortly after he strangles the
young Emperor, being but fifteen years old, and having reigned but three, whose
body being wrapped up in lead was let down into the sea.

Andronicus having murdered Alexius, reigns alone, and marries with Anna or
Agnes who had been betrothed to Alexius, being as yet but eleven years old, and
he an aged man. He took Nicaea and Prusia, exercising all kind of cruelty 1183.
on his enemies who had fled thither. Alexius, Manuels Nephew, and the Latin
soldiers fly to William king of Sicily, who to revenge the wrongs received
from Andronicus, took Thessalonica and Dyrrachium, using all kind of cruelties
against the Citizens. In the mean time Andronicus rages like a savage beast at
Byzantium, upon the living and the dead also, causing them to be dragged out of
their graves: Understanding that one whose name began with these letters, I. S.
was to be his successor, and that it was Isaacius Angelus, he Angelus fearing
the cruelty of Andronicus, fled into the Temple; the people immediately in a
great tumult salute him Emperor. Andronicus perceiving that he was hated by the
people, forsaken by his soldiers, and pursued after by William of Sicily, he
thought to escape by sea, but could not by reason of the storms; therefore he
is laid hold on, brought back to the City, set with his face backwards on a
lean scabbed Camel, his right hand being cut off, and one of his eyes thrust
out, at last is brought upon a theater, where he is hanged by the feet upon two
posts, and there by the enraged multitude is torn in pieces by pincers and
fleshhooks, he crying out in the mean while, Lord be merciful! and, Why do you
bruise the broken reed! So he died after two years reign, and in him ended the
Comneni.

Isaacius Angelus by the popular faction is made Emperor: he at first complied
1185.
with the people, and eased them of many burdens; he overthrew the Sicilian
fleet sent against him, and took the two chief Commanders Richard and Baldwin;
but undeastanding that King William was preparing another Fleet for revenge, he
made his peace with him: He was much troubled with two false Alexii, who called
themselves the sons of Manuel; but having suppressed them, he gave himself to
luxury, wantonness, and oppression. He had ill success against the Mysians or
Wallachians, who rebelled against him: He Barbarossa's march through Thracia,
but so doing he procured his anger, to his great loss: He sent a Fleet to
regain Cyprus from Isaacius Comnenus the Tyrant, but with no success: He
committed sacrilege in robing the Churches. At last he was seized upon by his
own brother Alexius Angelus, (whom he had redeemed from the Turks with much
gold, and made him his Consort in the Empire) and was by him deprived both of
his eyes and government, the 10. year of his reign, being deluded by the
Astrologers, who made him believe that he should reign two and thirty years:
His son long after got him out of prison, who upon the change of air and diet
shortly after died.

Alexius Angelus, who changed his surname, and would be called Comnenus; 1195.
having blinded his brother, invades the Empire; but as he was riding in
triumph with the Crown on his head, the Imperial horse (having more wit then
the people that chose this Tyrant) flung him down, with which fall the Crown
broke, an ill presage. He gave himself to rioting and tyranny: he threatened to
kill Alexius the younger, son to Isaacius, who therefore fled to Venice, where
he procured the Venetian and French assistance. At that time Boniface Marquisse
of Montferrat, Baldwin Earl of Flanders, with diverse other Commanders, were met
at Venice, to have their assistance in their expedition to Asia, which was
promised with a great sum of money, conditionally that they would assist Iadera,
that had revolted from them to the Hungarians, which accordingly was performed.
In the mean time Alexius arrives, complaining of his Uncles tyranny, his
Fathers imprisonment, and his own banishment; promising them great matters, if
they would aid him to put down the Tyrant.

Upon this a Fleet is prepared of two hundred and fifty ships, in which were
thirty thousand Foot, and a thousand Curisers. Alexius the Tyrant, in the
interim, suffers his Towns to be taken in the East by the Sultan of Iconium,
and his Armies to be beat by the Schythians and Wallachians. The Venetian fleet
sets sail from Dalmatia, and arrives into the Bay of Byzantium, having broken
the Iron-chain which secured the Bay: Upon this, the Tyrant robbed the
Emperors Tombs, and fled with a great treasure of gold, having reigned eight
years. The Citygates are opened to the besiegers, and the Citizens adore their
old Emperor, whom the Latins had delivered out of prison and re-installed: but
the people desire that young Alexius might be joined with his father Isaacius;
this Saracens Synagogue, by which a great part of the City was burned; there is
no end of their exactions: The two Emperors sat still, permitting their
deliverers to pay themselves; whereupon the enraged multitude, by the
instigation of Alexius Ducas a stout man, met together in the great Church,
railing against both the Isaacius dies, and one Nicolas Canabus is named
Emperor: Alexius upon this sends back for Boniface the Marquis, and the
Latins, to put down this new Tyrant. Ducas (surnamed Murzuffus, from his
hanging-brows) comes privately to Alexius, counsels him to fly betimes from
the fury of the people, and therefore gets him to come out of the palace,
pretending that he would protect him; but he presently thrusts him into a dark
dungeon, and then strangles him the 7. month of his reign, and withal draws
Canabus out of the Temple: for some time he defended the City against the
besiegers; at length he goes out to treat with them, but was beat back with
loss; he sustained the siege a while, but finding the City unable to hold out,
he gets away, Euphrosine the Empress, and her daughter Eudocia, with whom he
was in love. Theodorus Lascaris sonin-law to Alexius Comnenus fled likewise. At
last the Grecians fall to petition for quarter, submitting themselves to the
Latins, who used them with all kind of rigor and tyranny. Thus the chief
Grecians departing out of the City, and the rest yielding themselves, Byzantium
and its Provinces fall now into the power of the Latins. After this, Murzuffus
or Murziphlus is apprehended in Peloponnesus, brought to Byzantium, where his
eyes were thrust out, and he flung down from a high tower by the Latins; the
people raged on the dead

The City being taken, fifteen men are selected who should name the Emperor:
the Venetians were to name a Patriarch of their own Nation, if so be the Empire
should not fall to them: So the Earls of Flanders and S. Paul named five men
apeece, Montferrat and the Allobroges as many more, the Venetians name the
rest; the suffrages fell to Baldwin Earl of Flanders, to whom was given the
half of the Cities, of the Provinces, Tributes, and other things which they had
conquested in the war. Thus the City being settled, they march into Thracia,
where all places between Byzantium and Adrianopolis are surrendered. Baldwin to
gratify his fellows, declares Boniface the Marquis King of Thessaly, Crete
(which Boniface had got as a gift from Alexius Angelus, and which he willingly
resigned) upon the Venetians; this occasioned the emulation betwixt the
Venetians and Genuois. So now the Eastern Empire 1204.
is transferred from the Greeks to the French.

In France, to Lewis the Gross succeeded Lewis the 7. called the Younger: he
married with Alienora the daughter of William Duke of Gascoign. He made his
expedition into Palestina, where he lost his Army by the Greeks perfidiousnesse
1137.
(as we have said) after a years stay he returns, and divorceth Alienora; 1147.
then marries with Mary, or as some call her Beatrix, daughter to Alphonsus 7
Emperor of Spain, and Alienora (as is already said) married with Henry Duke
1150.
of Normandy and King of England. This Lewis died at Paris the 44. year of his
reign. To him succeeded Philip, called Augustus, and Adeodatus: he was made
1180.
King in his fathers lifetime: He banished the Jews out of France; and with
Richard of England went to Palestina, where with the confederate Princes he
1191.
Acona, and returns the same year into France: He had five years war with
Richard of England; he obtained two victories, one over the English at Poictou,
another over Otho the Emperor in Flanders; he died the 43. year of his reign
after his fathers death. In his time was held a Synod at Paris, in which the
Clergy parted with their Tithes, for promoting the war against Saladine the
Turk: he much enlarged and beautified Paris. In his time a custom arose in
France, that when any Priest was dying, he laid on his breast a paper
containing the true faith of the Resurrection, because at that time some made
question of it. Then also did some Citizens of Breme and Lubec set up the Order
of the Marian soldiers at Ptolomais, after the form of Germany, to subdue the
Sclavi and other Northern infidels.

In England, after the death of King Henry, Steven Earl of Boloigne, son and
heire-apparent of Stephen Earl of Bloys, and of Adela the Conquerors daughter,
made himself King, albeit he had solemnly vowed to King Henry to further the
succession of Mauld the Empress, and Henry's daughter. He seized on the
treasure of his uncle King Henry, and dispersed it among such as he knew would
stand him in need. He created diverse Noblemen and Knights, and released the
Dane-gilt, causing some rigorous laws to be mitigated: He much advanced the
Clergy with privileges and immunities, Cumberland to David King of Scots and
uncle to Mauld the Empress, that he should not help her to recover her right;
he also made David's eldest son Earl of Huntington; yet not long after (in her
quarrel) he wasted the North with fire and sword, till he was forced with loss
to retreat by Thurston Archbishop of York. In the sixth year of his reign,
Mauld, with her base-brother Robert Earl of Gloucester, landed with an Army,
which was much increased by the access of English and Welsh: the King with his
Army encounters the Empress; a bloody battle was 1142.
Bristol, and after three months set at liberty, to free the Earl of
Gloucester who was taken prisoner. The Empress is received into London, where
she was like to be surprised, for refusing to restore King Edwards laws;
therefore she suddenly flies to Oxford, where she is unexpectedly besieged; but
clothing herself, with her chiefest accomplices, in white, she escaped by the
benefit of the snow, and got away in a ship to Normandy; After this was peace.
In the 17. year of this Kings reign died Geoffery Plantagenet husband to the
Empress; and Henry Short-mantle her eldest son married Elianor (as was said
already) heir to the Earl of Poictou. This Henry was encouraged to invade
England, which was his due 1151.
Steven encounters, whose only son Eustace was unfortunately drowned, which
caused a peace; for Steven being childlesse, adopted Henry, and proclaimed him
heir-apparent to the Crown: the Prince returns to Normandy, and the next year
after King Steven died, the nineteenth year of his Reign: he was buried in
the Abbey* of Feversham in Kent, which he had founded. And so in Henry, the
Saxon blood is again restored to the Crown.

As Henry was besieging one of his Castles in Normandy, which was surprised
1154.
by the French, news came to him of King Stevens death: He was advised to
raise the siege, and hasten for England; but he resolves not to stir till he
had taken the Castle, which upon this was surrendered: then he sails into
England, and is crowned. He reformed the Common-lawes, and divided the Kingdom
into six Circuits, appointing Judges twice every year to ride these Circuits.
He banished the strangers, who had Steven: He caused most of the Inland-castles
to be demolished: He seized on all Crown Lands which had been alienated, and
resumes into his own hands Cumberland, Northumberland, and Huntington: He
married Geoffery one of his youngest sons, to Constance daughter of Conaccus
Duke of Britany, by whom he had that Duchy; his youngest son married with
Adela King Lewis of France his daughter; and he bestowed his daughter Mauld on
Henry Duke of Saxony, about which time died the Empress his mother. He never
suffered his Soldiers Ireland, and made himself by his Victories Lord of that
Country. He caused his eldest Son Henry, and his wife Margaret 1174.
the French Kings daughter, to be Crowned twice; himself, the second time,
serving as a Sewer at his Sons table; who then bragged, That his Father was but
the Son of an Empress, but himself the Son both of a King and Queen.

His sons Henry, Geoffery, and John, with the Earls of Leicester and
Chester, and William King of Scots, took part with the French against him; yet
Henry prevailed, and pardoned his Sons and Lords for this rebellion. Prince
Henry died before his Father, and John was poisoned by a Monk. Normandy, the
five and twentieth year of his Reign, and was buried at Founteverard in
France. He was a fortunate, wise, and valiant Prince: but unhappy in his
Childrens rebellion; his vain dotage on Rosamond, whom he loved above his
chaste wife Elianor; and in his quarrel with Thomas Becket Lord Chancellor,
and Archbishop of Canterbury, who would not be invested by the King, but went
to Rome, and received his Pall from Innocent the second, and was made a Legate:
at his return, he surrenders his Chancellorship and Great-seale to the King,
not showing him any reason why he did so. Upon this discord between Henry and
Thomas, the Clergy grew insolent without control; Stevens Law for exempting
the Clergy from the Temporal power, is abolished, by the consent of the
Bishops, even of Becket himself at last, but with much ado; who after he had
sworn to allow this act, yet relapses, and obtaines the Popes pardon for this
sin of his: hereupon the King seiseth upon all Beckets Temporal lands, and
demands an account of 30000 marks, which he had in his Chancellorship turned to
his own use: This Becket refused to do, and went privately to Rome; after whom
the King sends letters to the Pope, complaining of Becket; but the Pope took
his part, and threatened the King with excommunication, Pontinyack in France, to
whom the King sent to have Becket turned out, and withal forbids access from
the Pope into England, Beckets friends also are banished: The Abbot fearing the
Kings displeasure, persuades Thomas to leave his house; then did Lewis the
French king procure him better enterment, and animated the Pope against King
Henry; who sails over into France, and in the French Kings presence proffered
to restore Thomas and his friends, if he would take the former oath and
subscribe; which he utterly refused to do, except he might add this
exception, Salvo ^onore Dei; which highly displeased the King, who returns into
England: two Legates with an Interdict against him came from Rome, which made
him pass over to Normandy to confer again with Becket, who was still the
same man; so the King was forced to restore him. The young King Henry was also
offended with him, for refusing to absolve the four Bishops whom he had
suspended for performing the solemnities to him without his leave, and so was
confined to his house in Canterbury; but within four days after, Becket was
murdered by four Palestina, but this he redeemed by erecting three Religious
houses; he visited Beckets shrine, walking barefooted from London to Canterbury
as he was enjoined, and there was whipped by all the Monks; the four murderers
died miserably in exile, within four years.

Richard surnamed Cour-de-Lion, king Henry the 2. his eldest son now living,
succeeded his father: he first of all enlarges Queen Eleanor his mother, who
1189.
had been restrained by Henry, for disliking his wantonness with Rosamond.
Normandy: she set at liberty prisoners for small offenses, and paid many of
their small debts: in this her son Richard did imitate her, pardoning ordinary
offenses, and freeing all his debtors. He made his brother John Earl of
Lancaster, and married him to the Earl of Glocesters heir; he gave him also
Nottingham, Devonshire, and Cornwall; but he proved unthankful, in affecting
the Crown. This Richard in a short time by his bounty exhausted all his fathers
treasures. He was persuaded by the Pope, to accompany in person Frederick the
Emperor and Philip Augustus of France, into the Holy Land; Sicily is the place
appointed for their meeting: And because he would not be burdensome to his
people in taxing Barwick and Roxburgh to the Scots King for 10000l. he sold
also the Earldom of Durham to the Bishop; he made sale also of diverse Honors
and Manors. Having fitted himself for this expedition, he commits the
government of the Kingdom to William Longchamp Bishop of Ely, who shortly
after was made the Popes Legate. Then he sailed to Cyprus, being driven thither
by tempest; which he won, and sold to the Templars for 30000 marks: Thence he
sailed into Sicily, where he discontented Philip the French king, because he
denied him a share in his conquest of Cyprus, being he was absent when it was
taken, and because their covenant of equal-sharing extended only to the
Holy Land; yet they agreed for the present, and proceeded together Turks; they
took many Towns and Forts, and among the rest Acon, where Richard pulled down
the Banner of Archduke Leopold set on the walls, saying, that his own Banner
should be first set up, seeing he first entered the City; at this Philip was
much displeased again with Richard, so that he returned in a rage home,
carrying with him the Forces that belonged to the Emperor and to Leopold: King
Richard notwithstanding, by the help of some Christian Princes with him,
persued his victories against the Turks; and then returned to Cyprus, which he
won from the Templars, and exchanged it for Jerusalem, with Guido or Guy of
Lesingham, the last Christian king, whence Richard was styled King of
Jerusalem. Ely (son of a Cow-herd) did so tyrannise over the kingdom in his
Protectorship, that he became odious: wherefore 1191.
perceiving how he was hated, went disguised in a woman's habit to Dover,
purposing to leave the kingdom; but he was discovered, and by the people
dragged up and down, and after sent to the Tower; but when the King returned,
he was restored to his offices: shortly after, as he was traveling to Rome, he
died. In the Kings absence, his brother John seized upon many Towns and Forts,
angry that Ely was preferred to him in the Protectorship: K. Philip also made
many incursions into Normandy; which caused king Richard to forsake his
Conquests in Asia: but in his return he suffered shipwreck, between Aquileia
and Venice, and by swimming saved his life; he was shortly after taken prisoner
by Leopold in Austria, and sold to the Emperor Henry the 6. for 60000 marks,
from whom he ransomed himself for 100000 pounds: then he rides post to
Normandy, raises an army, and revengeth himself upon the French king. In this
mean while his brother John repaires to him, with humble submission and
acknowledgment of his disloyalty, laying the fault thereof upon Ely's
misgovernment; hereupon John is received into the Kings favor. Richard, upon
Leopold, whom the Pope excommunicates for making Richard a prisoner, after his
good service in the Holy-war. He caused himself to be again crowned King; then
transports an 1193.
Army into France, where at the Castle of Chalous near to Lymois he was shot
with an arrow, of which he died within three days, the 9. year of his reign;
but before he died, he won the Castle, causing all to be put to the sword
except the malefactor, whom he pardoned. In the beginning of this Kings reign,
1199.
Robin-Hood and Little-Iohn robbed and spoiled many rich misers and userers;
but Robin being betrayed bled himself to death, so his theevish rout was
dispersed. King Richard was buried at Fonteverard in France, at his fathers
feet: he left three parts of his treasure to his brother John, and the fourth
to his servants.

In Scotland, to David succeeded his grandchild Malcolm, against whom Sumerled
Thane or Earl of Argile rebelled, whose Army was defeated, and he 1153.
driven into Ireland by Gilchristius Earl of Angus. King Henry of England,
forgetful of his oath which he made to king David when he knighted him, that
he would never trouble him nor his posterity for those lands he held in
England, Carlisle from the Archbishop of Glasco; then he caused this young King
to swear him fealty at Chester, and carried him against his will over with him
into France, thereby to keep the Scots from invading England, and to bring
Malcolm in dislike with the French king. At his return into Scotland, he
endeavored to pacify the offended Nobility, excusing himself, that what he
did in assenting to king Henry's demands, was by force; and so they were
pacified for the present. After this, Malcolm is invited by Henry to the
Parliament at York, where he is accused for assisting the French; therefore his
lands in England were forfeited to the Crown: upon his return homeward, the
people were so incensed, that they had almost seized on him in his house at
Berth: He complained to his Nobility, how he had been circumvented Henry,
wherefore a war is proclaimed; the two Armies met at Carlisle; but to avoid
bloodshedding, Henry was contented to leave Cumberland and Huntington to
Malcolm, and only take Northumberland from him; to which Malcolm against the
mind of his Peers assented, and therefore was despised by them: Upon this the
country of Galloway rebels, but in three battles they were defeated by
Gilchrist Earl of Angus. The Moravian rebellion was worse, in which the Kings
forces were beaten first; but a new Army being sent, the Moravians were
quelled, and most of them killed or fled. Sumerled took occasion by these
tumults, to invade the seacoast with an Army, having the assistance 1163.
proposes a marriage for the King, being now 22 years of age; but he refuses
to marry at all, preferring Celibate to the married life, and showing that he
had provided an heir for the Crown. So all being quiet at home and abroad, he
gave himself to repairing and building of Religious houses, and died shortly
after, the 25 year of his age, having reigned above 12 years. 1165.


To Malcolm succeeded his brother William. He is called upon by king Henry to
do homage for Cumberland and Huntington; for that cause he repairs to him, and
withal remands Northumberland as his due. Henry promised to satisfy him the
next Parliament, at which he was desired to be present: thither when he came,
Henry going over to France with his Army, takes William with him against his
will: having stayed there some time, with much ado he got leave to go for
Scotland, whither when he arrived, he falls to settle the kingdom, and to build
forts: then he sends Ambassadors to Henry, to demand Northumberland: Henry
being busy in the French war, was content to part with a share of
Northhumberland, but not with all; afterward this share caused a new war, for
William demanded the rest, and Henry was sorry for giving so much; Armies are
William unexpectedly was surprised by 400 horse in ambush, which he thought to
have been Scots, and carried into France. Having staid there some time, he
ransoms himself, by delivering unto the English four garrisons, viz. Edinburgh,
Sterlin, Rosburgh, and Barwick, with fifteen hostages, till the sum agreed upon
was paid; in the mean time he is dismissed, who being returned home, he with
his Nobility swear fealty to the King of England, till these garrisons were
redeemed; then he quiets the tumults at home. King Henry demands, that the
Bishops of Scotland should acknowledge the Archbishop of York for their
Metropolitan, which they refused to do, for this cause they complained to Pope
Alexander 3. who freed the Scottish Bishops from subjection to the English yoke.
Shortly after this, Gilchrist kills his wife the Kings sister, for being found
in adultery: he is summoned to appear to answer for this murder, who
refuses, therefore is proscribed, his houses pulled down, and his whole estate
forfeited: Some years after this, the King returning from Murry, where he
overthrew Donald Baan that had rebelled there, meets with Gilchrist in the
habit of a beggar, whom demanding what he was, fell flat at the Kings feet,
confessing his miserable condition; at which the King being moved with pity,
considering his former greatness and good services, restored him to his

King Richard having succeeded Henry, and preparing for his Eastern expedition,
1190.
sends home the Scots hostages, and restores to William his three garrisons,
(for Edinburgh-Castle was redeemed before, upon the payment of the fourth part
of the ransom) he frees him also and his successors from all bargains and
covenants made with king Henry; in requital of which favor, William sends him
toward his charges in the Holy-war 10000 marks, and sent his brother David
Earl of Huntington to wait on king Richard, who in his return from Syria was
shipwracked, sold by the Egiptians, bought by the Venetians, and sent home the
4. year after his departure from Scotland. King Richard also William and his
brother, with a present of 2000 marks: here William fell sick, and it was
rumoured through Scotland that he was dead; which gave occasion to Harald Earl
of Orkney and Cathnesse, to pick a quarrel with the Bishop of Cathnesse, and
then to thrust out his eyes, and cut out his tongue; but William being
returned, he caused Harald to be apprehended and hanged, having first put out
his eyes, and emasculated all his 1199.
male-children. This same year Alexander king Williams son was born.

King John of England quarreled with William, for refusing to aid him against
Philip the French king; therefore began to erect a garrison over against
Barwick, which the Scots threw down again: upon this Armies are raised on
Williams two daughters should marry John's two sons, and that no garrison
should be built near Barwick. After this, William lost his youngest son, with
his nurse and fourteen more, by the sudden inundation of Tay, which drowned a
great part of Berth in the nightime, so that the king hardly escaped himself;
therefore he caused the Town to be built in a more safe place upon the same
river, and called it Perth, now S. Iohns-town. After this it was agreed between
the two kings, John and William, that for the time to come, the children of the
Scots kings should do homage for their lands in England, but not the kings
themselves. Not long after this, William died, the 74 year of his age, and of
his reign 49. 1214.


In Rome, to Clemens 3. succeeded Celestine 3. who sat 4 years and 7 months:
he excommunicated all France for king Philips divorce, who had repudiated his
wife Gelberga; he confirmed the Teutonick Order, prescribing to them the rule
of S. Augustine, with a white-garment and black-crosse, injoyning them to say
in 24 hours, the Lords Prayer, Creed, and Ave Maria, 200 times. To Celestine
succeeded Innocent 3. who sat 18 years and 7 months: He sent Tartars, who by
the Sarazens persuasion preferred Mahumetanisme to Christianisme; some think
this was done afterward by Innocent 4. He also procured Livonia to embrace the
Christian faith: under him was held the 12. Ecumenical Council at Lateran, at
which were present two Patriarchs, of Constantinople and Jerusalem, seventy
Archbishops, four hundred Bishops, twelve Abbots, and eight hundred Priors; in
this Synod the word Transubstantiation was confirmed. About this time sprang up
the Order of Predicants by Dominicus the Spaniard, of which are recorded to
have been 4143 Monasteries: the Minorites Order by Francis the Italian,
Platina's time: the Carmelites, by Albert Patriarch of Jerusalem; the Eremites
Order also of S. Austin, and the Order of the Holy-Trinity.

In Germany, Henry 6. succeeded to his father Barbarossa, whose wife Constance
1191.
daughter to Roger king of Sicily, was married out of a Monastery; by her
Sicily was annexed to the Empire: when she was fifty years old, she was brought
to bed at Panormus of Frederick 2. in a public Chapel which Henry had built
to that purpose, that it might be seen the child was not supposititious. He was
resisted in the beginning of his reign, by the Bishops of Colen and Liege, with
whom the Burgundians sided, but they were quickly suppressed by Henry, after he
had put the Bishop of Liege to death, who was more active against him then the
other. After many conflicts, he quieted the Sicilians and Apulians who would
have revolted from him, and put diverse of their ringleaders to exquisite
torments, fleaing some of them alive, blinding others, and thrusting sharp
pikes through them; some that aimed to be Kings, he crowned with Iron-crowns
red-hot: for this cause he was named Henricus Asper, Henry the rough or sharp.
In Italy he placed new Governors, to keep them from rebellion: Being well used
at Cremona and Bononia, he gave them power to coin their own money. The death of
Saladine, (who caused his shirt to be carried in his funeral, with this
acclamation, Here is all that is left of the great Conqueror of the East!) gave
hopes to Henry of some good to be done in Syria; Mentz and diverse other
Commanders, who took Ioppe from the Saracens, and fortified diverse Towns: but
as Henry was coming after with his supplies, he fell sick of a fever at
Messana, where he died; some think he was poisoned by his wife, for his
adulteries; he was buried at Panormus in a Porphyrie tomb, having reigned
somewhat above seven years: his son Frederick was now five years old, whom he
committed to the care of his brother Philip; him he had made Governor of
Hetruria, and married him to Irene the sister of Alexius the Greek Emperor.
Henry's death hindered the Christians 1199.
progress in Syria.

In Spain, the Numidians, Moors, and Africans, being arrived in great fleets,
set upon Alphonsus king of Castile, whom they overthrew, and laid waste his
country, so that the French were afraid they would pass over the Pyrenean
hills thither: this expedition of the Moors into Spain, was occasioned by the
Danes, Frislanders, and Hollanders, who in several fleets set upon and wasted
the coast of Barbary: in revenge whereof, the Moors fell upon Spain.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE SECOND PART: Entreating of the times from Philip
Emperor in the West, and the French Empire in the East, till Wenceslaus the
German Emperor, containing the History of 200. years.
CHAP. I.
1. The Troubles of Europe under Philip, Otto the Fourth, and Frederick the
Second, Emperors of the West. 2. The Affairs of the Holy Land. 3. Of the
Danish and other Europeian Affairs.

THe report of Henry's death being come, Philip hastes from Hetruria into
Germany, sending the Peers of the Empire before, desiring them to fulfill the
will of the deceased 1200.
Emperor, in confirming his sons Succession, and his own Protectorship; but
Pope Innocent by his Legates sent to the Princes to rescind the will of Henry,
and to reject Philip from the Government of the Empire, for he hated Frederick
and his race, and so he did Philip, for curbing the Italy: therefore he is
excommunicated, and the Bishop of Sutrie that absolved him degraded upon the
Popes instigation. Many voted for Bertholdus D. of Loringia: but the King of
Bohemia, D. of Saxon, Marquess of Mysnia and Bavare, with others in Parliament
declared Philip Emperor; which Bertholdus perceiving, and that his power was
too weak to resist, yielded to Philip; upon this the Pope instigates the
Princes to confer the Empire upon Otto the son of Henricus Leo, and withal
excommunicates Philip, which made the Bohemian and other Princes to fall off;
hereupon Otto is crowned at Aix by the Bishop of Colen; but Philip being
nothing dejected, raises an Army, takes in Strausburg, and at Spire encounters
with Otto, whom Thuringia, after his Country was wasted by Philip, submitted:
then, because the Bohemians sided with Otto, Philip falls upon them with fire
and sword; he forced also the Cities upon the Rhine, even Colen it self to
yield, so that Adolphus the Bishop was fain to crown him at Aix,
notwithstanding K. Richard and K. John of England stood entirely for Otto,
being his Uncles: Otto thrusts Adolphus out of his Bishopric, Philip maintains
him; hereupon another Battle is fought by 1207.
Colen, in which Otto lost the Field, and was forced to fly into England.

Conradus Bishop of Mentz was lately returned from Palestina; he for siding
with Philip, is stripped of his Bishopric by the Pope, and so was his successor
Ludolphus, and Sigifrid, Philips enemy, is made Bishop: but an end was shortly
after put to these Civil wars by the Marriages of Philips Daughters; for the
two eldest he bestowed upon the King of Bohemia and Duk^ of Brabant, the third
he married to Richard the Popes Nephew by his brother, and the fourth to his
Competitor Otto, who upon this left off prosecuting his right in the Empire: By
this last Marriage Philip bought his peace, but lost his life; for one Otto
Wittelsbachius who had been a suitor to this daughter, and was by Philip
encouraged in the suit, but afterward rejected, in a rage gets into the room
where Philip was at Bamberg with a private friend, and thrusts his Dagger
(which he had under his cloak) into the Emperors throat, of which wound he
dyed, having reigned ten years almost; the Paricide escaped by means of Erbert
Bishop of Bamberg, but afterward he was apprehended and 1208.
slain. Philips body was buried at Bamberg, and from thence translated to Spire
by Frederick the Second; his wife Irene dyed shortly after with grief.

Otto succeeded to Philip, for so they had covenanted, that Otto should not
meddle with the Empire whilst Philip lived; but he did not enjoy it long
Innocent the second at Rome, (where his Gold prevailed more then his Sword)
there arose a quarrel about the Principality of Maud, sometime the wife of
Henry the Fourth; this she had bequeathed on the Church of Rome, but the
Emperors still claimed it as their due; therefore Otto resolves to recover by
Arms both that Marquisat and the other Territories withheld from Frederick
the Second's Tutors. At this resolution of Otto's, Pope Innocent was highly
offended, and because he would not leave off his claim, he is excommunicated;
therefore Otto sets Guards upon the Pope, suffering none to have access to him,
which caused such a tumult in the City, that Otto, not without great slaughter,
was fain to fly thence into Lombardy, where he collects his Forces and invades
Romandiola, Tuscia, and the Marquisat of Ancona; thence he marched into Apulia
to recover what the Pope had detained from the Empire: in the mean season the
Popes curse is published in Germany, and the Princes are desired to thrust the
Excommunicate Emperor out of his Government. Hence arises a new War, which
drew Otto home out of Italy, some do side with him, but more with the Pope;
hereupon the chief German Princes, with the Bohemian, send for Frederick the
Second out of Sicily, remembering the promise they had made to Henry his father,
about settling his son in the Empire. Frederick comes into Alsatia; Otto with
his Army prepares to encounter him, but Spain; Frederick in the interim takes
in all upon the Rhine, then being crowned at Aix, he makes a League with Philip
the French King; the King of England assists Otto with men and money; upon this
the War is renewed; but it lasted not long, for Otto being defeated by the
French, and forsaken by his men, resigned up his 1214.
Empire the fourth year after he had undertaken it, and five years after this
resignation died of the bloody Flux, and was buried at Bruswige.

In these Civil wars of Germany, the Marquess of Brandenburg drew the Sclavi to
rebel against Canutus King of Denmark. Peter Bishop of Rosehild arrived 1218.
in the Oder with an Army, which he landed in the Marquisat; a bloody Battle
Sclavia, and took diverse places in Holsatia from Adolphus the Earl who aided
the Marquess: At last Lubec being taken by Valdemarus D. of Slesvic who
assisted Peter, Hamburg is surprised by him, and in it Adolphus. Canutus being
dead, Valdemor the second is saluted at Lubec, King of Denmark and Sclavia, and
Lord of Nordalbingia. Adolphus for his ransom delivers up the strong Fort of
Lavenburg to the King.

About the same time Philip of France recovered all Normandy again, the 270.
year after it had been given to Rollo the Dane, from whom till this time were
reckoned twelve Dukes, six whereof were Kings of England. Odoacer Bohemia, for
siding with the Pope, is deposed by Otto the Emperor at the Diet of Norimberg,
and his son set up in his place.

The Waldenses, called commonly the poor men of Lions, Albigenses and Beggini,
were busy about these times in opposing the corruptions of Rome, against whom
the Dominicans and Franciscans were employed by Argument, and the Earl of
Montsfort with some other Princes by the Sword, many of them were slain, and
many burned for Heretics: the Saxons, Westfalians, Frislanders, and Austrians
were making an Expedition against them, but changing their mind, they assisted
Spain against the Moors or King of Morocco. Peter King of Arragon lost his
life in assisting the Albigenses.

Frederick having settled Germany, and annexed again Belgium and Lorain to the
Empire, was fain to be crowned the second time at Aix, and to take a solemn
Oath to the Pope, that he would raise all the strength he could to recover the
Holy Land; for which purpose also he assembled the Council of Lateran, and
promised to declare Frederick Emperor; but before this could be performed,
Innocent died at Perusium, as he was going to compose the War between the
Pisans and Genuois: At last Innocents promise was performed by his Successor
Honorius. After this, Frederick returns to Italy, to take order with the
Tuscians and Apulians, who by the assistance of the Bishops, had invaded and
spoiled the Emperors Territories; these he subdued, and removed the Bishops
out of their places, which fled to the Pope for remedy, who desired Frederick
to restore them; which he refusing, and withal inveighing against the Popes
pride, covetousness, and frauds, gave occasion of new troubles, by which all
Italy banded against the Emperor, and at last the French were called in to the
Kingdom of Naples, (these troubles were presaged by Earthquakes, and blood
mingled with dust, out of the clouds, at Rome.) The Emperor is Sicilians take
up Arms against Frederick, having shaken off his Government, therefore
Frederick is forced to leave Italy, and to pass over into Sicily, which he
quieted, and performed Funeral obsequies to his wife Constantia lately dead:
Thence he returned into Germany, where he held a Diet at Wurceburg, and made
his son Henry by Constantia his Colleague in the Empire, but afterward
condemned him to perpetual imprisonment in Calabria, with his two sons, by
consent of the German Princes (where he died the next year after) because he
aimed to dethrone his Father, against whom by the Popes instigation 1222.
he stirred up the Cities of Lombardy: This quarrel was somewhat mitigated
between the Pope and Emperor by John de Bregna K. of Jerusalem, who Asia, and
that if Damiata had not been surrendered again to the Sultan, the Christian Army
had been drowned by opening the sluices of Nilus. He also bestowed his daughter
Iole upon Frederick, with the Kingdom of Jerusalem for her dowry, to engage his
son-inlaw against the Sarazens in Asia; Frederick having undertaken the
Expedition, sends his son Henry into Germany, to have a Diet called for raising
of money horse and men toward this Expedition.

Ludovic Lantgrave of Thuringia is by the Princes made chief Commander of the
German Forces. Frederick invites the German Princes into Cremona, to 1225.
consult with them about the Empire, for he could not with safety leave Italy.
Lombardy he hinders the meeting; but Pope Honorius dies in the interim, to
whom succeeds Gregory the ninth, as fierce as the former against the Emperor,
accusing him for lingering in Italy, and neglecting the Asian Expedition,
whereas he knew that Frederick by his son Henry was promoting the business in
Germany; Brundusium was the Rendevouz for the Soldiers, where the Lantgrave of
Thuringia, with diverse others fell sick and died; Frederick also himself was
ill disposed, by reason of the unseasonable weather, and when he put to Sea,
was beat back again by contrary winds, so that he was forced to stay at
Brundusium; the Pope notwithstanding rages against him, accusing him of
perjury, adultery, and cruelty Damiata to be lost; therefore he curses him,
and denounces war against him, to that purpose calls Bregna or Brennus his
father-in-law into Romandiola, giving him the Title of Exarch; he arms also
the Tuscians and Lombards against him. Frederick to purge himself from the
Popes criminations, calls the Princes together at Ravenna, but the tumults of
Lombardy hindered that meeting, therefore he clears himself by writing. So
having repaired his Fleet, he sets sail for Asia, having sent before, with the
greatest part of the Army, Reinold D. of Bavaria, and Master of the Horse; the
charge of Italy was committed to Reinold D. of 1228.
Spoletum: but because Frederick took not his leave of the Pope, nor expiated
his crimes, contemning as it were the Popes curse, he commanded the Syrian
Armies not to follow, or to obey him, and withal lays hold on the Kingdom of
Naples, and fills all Italy with troubles: Frederick notwithstanding fortifieth
Ioppe, and forces the Sultan to restore Jerusalem, Bethleem, and Nazareth.

This Brennus or Bregna had married Mary the daughter of Almaricus King of
Cyprus and Jerusalem, and with her received the Title of King: he did good
Asia; but being forsaken of Andrew King of Hungary, who having washed himself
three times in Jordan, thought he had sufficiently paid his vow, returns home
with his Army: being (I say) thus forsaken, and hopeless to recover Palestina,
he intrencheth himself between Caesaria and the hill Caiapha, and grew so
strong with the continual aid of Pilgrims, that he much infested the
Barbarians; then having got a Fleet of Ships, he sails to Damiata (of old
Heliopolis) in Egypt, breaks down the Chain which kept off Ships from entering
Nilus, and at last, not without much labor and blood took the Barbarians
strongest Hold. Here Saphadinas was slain; his son wanting provision, retreats
from the place with his Army. Conradin the Sultan of Damascus Jerusalem, and
the son of Saphadin, offers conditions of peace, and promises restitution of
the Cross, and all that the Christians had lost in Cyria, or Phenicia; this was
liked by all the Latins, except by Pelagius the Cardinal, who would yield to
no terms till Egypt were first subdued: At this, Conradin in a rage
demolisheth the walls and chief buildings of Jerusalem, Caesaria, and other
places, that they might not be serviceable to the Christians, who lost many men
by the Plague and Famine; at last, Damiata after a years siege and a half, is
taken; Pelagius claims it as the Popes due; King Brennus retires to Ptolemais,
who with much entreaty of the Princes returns; Pelagius the Legate urges the
subduing of Egypt, and first of the regal City Cayre, whom Brennus resists,
alleging they came not for Egypt, but for recovering the Holy Land; but the
Legate would have his will; therefore commands Lodovick of Bavaria to go before,
and the rest to follow, threatening to curse those that obeyed him not; about
70000. went for fear of his curse; no sooner had they pitched their Tents about
ten miles from the City Cayre, when the Nile is let in upon them, many were
drowned, and the rest forced to forsake Damiata, and to leave Egypt; the Sultan
of Damascus made Truce with them for ten years; upon this Brennus repairs to
the Pope for new supplies.

About these times, Waldemar the second, King of Denmark, was surprised and
carried away with his Son by Henry Earl of Suerinum, whose Wife the Henry was
absent at the holy War, notwithstanding he had entrusted her with the King,
hoping she could not have been any where so safe. This King having recovered by
his Armies, and subdued the Sclavian coast of the Baltic Sea, and having
regained Hamburgh from Otto the fourth, was in his sleep seized upon by night,
carried away in a Ship, and imprisoned in the Castle of Daneberg; so that two
years after he was forced to ransom himself with 35. Talents of Silver; so he
recovered his Kingdom, but in the interim lost the Town of Vandalia, which
revolted from him.

Frederick having returned from Asia, showed that he was not dead, as was 1230.
given out, purposely to encourage Brennus to invade Apulia and Calabria, being
Frederick lands in Sicily, and overthrows in a Battle the forces of his Father
in law, and reconciles himself to Pope Cregory, who had been driven out of Rome
by the People for his exactions, and was indigent of money; therefore the
Emperor by Leopold of Austria sends him a great sum, and upon that he is
Absolved and entertained by the Pope: So they join their forces together
against the Rebels and Heretics, raging on them with Fire and Sword; Frederick
on the Messanians in Sicily, Gregory on the Teutons; who being again pursued by
the Romans, aiming at their ancient liberty, stoutly defended himself: At
Reatum a bloody battle is fought, in which 30000. were slain: After this, he
sends his Preachers about for raising of men and money again for the Holy Land.
A great Army is raised under Theobald King of Navarre and other Commanders;
They march by land, suffering much hardship and loss by the way; but shortly
after they were come to Ptolemais, the Turks Army overthrew them, so that few
escaped, who returned home with dishonor.

About this time Ferdinand King of Castile took Hispalis and Corduba from
Sarazens; and James King of Arragon, Valentia and Majorca, driving the 1235.
Barbarians into Africa: And about the same time did Henry rebel against his
Father Frederick, whom he also would have poisoned as some think, upon
suspicion that he loved his Son Conradus begot of Iole the Queen of Jerusalem,
better then him. The same year, Frederick married Isabel Sister to King Henry
the Third of England; then did Pope Gregory set forth his Decretals: Frederick
prepares an Army to chastise the Lombards, chiefly the rebellious Millanois;
but the insolences committed against the Hungarians by Frederick of Austria,
who despised the Emperors Summons, caused him to raise his Siege from before
Millain and return home, where he stripped the Austrian of all Millanois, whom he
subdued, and took in Sardinia subject of old to Sicily: The Pope challenges
Sardinia as a part of the Churches Patrimony; Frederick refuses, showing it
belonged to the Empire, the Privileges of which he was bound by Oath to
maintain; upon this Frederick is accursed for an Heretic, and an Enemy of the
Church: He on the other side, by Letters to the Christian Kings excuses
himself, and accuses Gregory of high crimes, whom the Romans upon hope of gain
by his presence, received again into the City: Then did Gregory strengthen
himself by the Venetians and Genuois, who had contended long for the Dominion
of the Sea; between them he made a League for Nine years, Frederick: He also
invites Lewis the French King to take upon him the Empire, which he refuses;
yet afterward both Lewis of France and Henry of England fell foul with
Frederick, for employing the Earl of Tolouse his forces against Raimund Earl
of Province, who was Father in Law to both Kings: however, Frederick was
prevalent against the Pope by Land, and against the Venetians at Sea; only
Ferraria was recovered by Gregory. Such confusion was then in Italy, that the
Emperor could scarce know who were for him, who were against him; therefore he
brought in for distinctions sake the Barbarous names of Guelphs and Gibellins,
which two Families had heretofore quarrelled in Germany; the Caesarians are
Gibellins, the Pontificians Guelphs; these two factions fill all places of
Italy with blood, most Towns fell off from the Pope, even Rome was ready to
forsake him; but that he in a solemn supplication caused the heads of the two
Apostles Peter and Paul to be carried through the City, to move the people to
commiseration.

Frederick in the mean space takes Beneventum by storm, and overthrows it; he
drives the Benedictines out of their Monastery at Cassinum, and gives Nuceria
in Apulia to the Sarazens (whom he drove out of Sicily:) He falls suddenly upon
Ravenna and subdues it. Upon this Gregory calls a Synod at Lateran for deposing
of Frederick, who by his Letters to the Princes showed, that both the time,
place, and persons, and other circumstances were for Gregory's Rome both by Sea
and Land, and intercepts some Cardinals going thither, whom he imprisoned, with
diverse Bishops; which so grieved Gregory, that he fell sick and died, the 15.
year of his Pontificat, and almost 100. of his life. Then did Faventia after a
long siege yield to Frederick: his two sons, Conradus and Henry drove the
Tartars from Danubius; these had plundered Poland, Hungaria, and Silesia; the
Church wants a Pope for twenty one months, in which vacancie Frederick removes
the University of Bononia into Padua; at last the Emperor by the entreaty of
Baldwin, who had left Asia, and of Raimund the Tolosan, being both now in
Italy, dismisseth the imprisoned Bishops and Cardinals, wishing them to choose
a new Pope, which they neglecting to do, were forced by Fredericks Arms, and
Lewis the French Kings threatenings; at length Innocent the Fourth is chosen at
Anagnia, now called Campagnia di Roma; he pretending that Frederick meant to
kill him, fled to Genua from Rome, and 1245.
then by Sea into Lions; in the interim, the Romans overthrew Fredericks
Frederick was killed, which caused many to fall off from his Faction.

The Pope in this mean while chooses new Cardinals, whom he honors with
Scarlet Garments and Hats; then he falls with his Curses upon Frederick, and
invites the Germans to choose Henry Lantgrave of Thuringia for their Emperor,
which was hindered by Fredericks Armies; this not succeeding, the Pope calls a
general Council at Lions, there Petrus de Vineis with others stoutly pleaded
for Frederick, yet notwithstanding he is anathematized: 1245.
But to show how much he slighted this Curse, he falls upon oppressing the
Millanois again; but finding diverse of the Princes to forsake him as an
Excommunicate Conradus in the Empire, which by him was refused; of this
Frederick complains to the Princes, but Innocent proceeds in soliciting Henry
to accept the Empire, which he did at last, whom Conradus Fredericks Son
opposes with an Army; but his Commanders being bribed forsook him, so that he
was fain to return with dishonor to his Father: after this, the Lantgrave by
the help of the Bishops, plays the Emperor, and as he was going to receive
his Inauguration at Ulma, was set upon by Conradus; the Landgrave had the
better, but a Reserve of 15000 Conradus had laid in

Innocent being much troubled at this, sends his Orators abroad to solicit
the Princes to rise unanimously against Frederick, and withal sends a great
1247.
Sum of money to William Earl of Holland, to raise an Army and to invade the
Empire, but the money was intercepted by Fredericks Friends; yet by the
diligence of Conradus Bishop of Cullen, and the other Prelates of Germany, as
also by the continual preaching of the Franciscans and Dominicians, infinite
sums were raised for William, with which he raised an Army that drove
Conradus King of the Romans quite out of Germany; wherefore Frederick resolves
to go into Burgundy, that from thence he might send forces against Lions where
the Pope was; but in his journey he was stayed by Parma, which thrust the gates
against him; he resolves not to stir till he had taken it, but the siege lasted
a whole year, in which time he builds a new town close by it, which he called
Victoria, and caused new Coin to be stamped in honor of Victor the Martyr, to
whom he vowed to build a Temple, if he subdued the City: He had there three
Sons with him, Henry the younger whom he created Viceroy of Italy, Frederick
the bastard Prince of Antioch and Governor of Tuscia, and Hensius King of
Sardinia; he had also received Elephants and some other wild beasts out of
Africa, with these he made public shows at an unseasonable time, and spent his
treasure vainly; so that he was feign Parma proffered to surrender upon
Articles, which were denied them by Frederick; wishing them in scorn to eat
sparingly, and make much of their provision, for that should be the last that
ever they should eat; this so exasperated them, that desperately they salley
out upon the Caesarians (Frederick being then retired for healths sake, with
some part of his Army) whom they defeat and put to flight, seize upon 15000.
Horse, and cut Thaddaeus the General in pieces, and the new City Victoria they
overthrow and level with the ground.

William of Holland in the mean space, desirous to be consecrated, laid siege
to ^ix, the Dukes of Saxony and Bavaria were against him; but he had the Bishop
of Colen, with the rest of the Clergy, for him, whose Arms and purses were at
his command; by their help, and by an inundation of water, the City yielded,
and received William. About this time Petrus de Vineis, who had pleaded so much
for Frederick, was ill rewarded by him, upon suspicion that Innocent had hired
him to poison the Emperor by his Physician, who having brought the potion, and
willed by Frederick first to take it, poured it on the ground; upon this,
Peter's eyes were thrust out, who to avoid further punishment, or else mad for
being falsely accused, beat out his own brains against a pillar. In the mean
while Frederick begins to prevail again; he drove William back into Holland; he
subjected Parma, being secure, with other Cities in Italy. People began to
murmr, that the Popes persecuting of Frederick kept him from Asia, where all
was now in danger to be lost, many revolted from Christ to Mahumet: Hereupon
Innocent is desired to receive Frederick into favor again, that he might heal
these sores of Christendom, or else that Lions, but he remained inexorable;
and therefore sends to the King of England to have Bordeaux for his residence,
being he was banished from his own Church. In this mean season Frederick died
in Apulia, 1250.
of poison, as some think, of a Fever, say others; and to hasten his death the
sooner, his Bastard-son Manfred stifled him with his pillow; he died the 38.
year of his Empire, and the 54. of his age; by his Will he left a great
treasure toward the holy War; he was buried at Panormus in a Tomb of
Porphyrie, on Manfreds charges, to avoid the suspicion of murder.

He was a Prince eminent both in virtue and vice: he was a good Scholar and
Linguist; he caused Aristotle, Galen, Ptolomy, and Avicenna to be translated
Naples, corrected many of the Laws, and was a lover of learned men: he had
three wives, the first was Constantia Queen of Arragon, of whom he had Henry
the elder Duke of Suevia and King of the Romans; the other was Iole, Bregna's
daughter King of Jerusalem, whence the Title of King of Jerusalem was annexed
to the Kings of Sicily and Naples, of her he had Conradus, on whom Frederick
conferred the titles of his brother Henry, and bequeathed him Sicily and
Naples: The third was King John's daughter of England, of whom he had Henry the
younger: he had also, besides diverse daughters, bastard-sons; Manfred prince of
Tarentum, who stifled him for giving away Naples from him; Hensius King of
Sardinia, whom the Bonanians killed, being shut up in an iron Cage; and
Frederick Prince of Antioch.

CHAP. II.
1. The true estate of the Eastern Empire. 2. The affairs of France, Tartary,
Denmark, Poland, England, Scotland, Spain, and other places. 3. The Popes of
these times.

THe Greeks having lost the Eastern Empire, Balduinus Earl of Flanders,
Constantinople; who to enlarge his Empire, passes into Asia, having sent his
brother Henry before, against whom Prusa of Bithinia shut her gates. Baldwin
was quickly called back out of Asia, upon the revolt of some Cities in
Macedonia and Thracia, among the rest Hadrianopolis, which held out so long,
till John Duke of Mysia came with his Army to raise the siege; the Latin Army
is overthrown, and Baldwin with diverse Commanders taken prisoners; he had
reigned but one year, when he was laid in irons, at last they cut off his hands
and feet, and so left him alive for a prey to the Birds, but he died the second
day after. The Latins to be revenged, rob and murder both by sea and land, so
that they 1205.
and the Scythians destroy one another. Henry, Baldwins brother, succeeds in
the Empire; and Boniface the Marquis having lost most of his Towns, shuts
himself up in Thessalonica. Miserable was the condition of Greece at this time,
men devouring one another, as Wolves do sheep. 1206.


In the East, Prusa, Nicha, Smyrna, Ephesus, and diverse other places, with the
Lydians, submitted themselves to Theodorus Lascaris, who having got together a
Fleet of Ships, subdued diverse Islands. David and Alexus, brothers, the Nephews
of Andronicus sometimes Tyrant, Aldobrandinus the Italian, and the Genuois who
took Crete, tore away diverse limbs from the Greek Empire. Henry made peace with
the Bulgarians, and married with the prince of Bulgaria's daughter; so
returning with his Army to Byzantium, he fortified the City, where having lest
a Garrison, went to Thessalonica, where the Marquis of Montsferrat was, whom he
made King there; and then returned to Constantinople; where he died the 11.
year of his Reign, having betrothed his daughter Iolanta to Petrus
Antisiodorensis, who in her right claimed the Empire, and Rome to be crowned by
the Pope. In the mean time Theodorus Lascaris, who had overthrown the Turks in
a great battle, and killed the 1216.
Sultan with his own hand, made himself Emperor at Nicha, and seized upon
Epirus and Dyrrachium, that he might shut up the Emperors passage in his
return to the City; he besieged the Tower, but to no purpose; so he promised to
raise the siege, if Theodorus would give him the public Faith for his safe
departure, which he did accordingly; but as the Emperor was passing through
the Woods of Thessaly, he was treacherously apprehended by some Forces in
ambush, which brought him to Theodorus, by whom he was condemned, imprisoned in
a loathsome Dungeon, and two years after beheaded; his Robert was returned from
France; because he could not come by Sea to the City, the Enemy having shut up
all passages, he makes a long journey through Panonia and Mysia. When he had
got the Empire, he admits Martinus Michael, the Venetian Praetor, out of his
love to the people, to be his Colleague in the Empire; but he lived not long,
sor he died in Achaia, as he was returning after his inauguration, from Rome;
his son Baldwin was as yet too young for Government, and the Lascarins with the
Comnins were busy in using all means possible to recover the City; which
danger the Venetians perceiving, entered into a League with the one to destroy
the other; therefore they advised the young Emperor Alexius Comnenus; but the
French Peers fearing a change of Government in a Grecian affinity, rejected
this wholesome advice, and by the suggestion of Pope Gregory, they made a match
between the young Emperor to Martha the daughter of Brennus King of Jerusalem,
whose sister, or (as others say) daughter Iole, Frederick married. So long as
Brennus lived, Baldwin was strong enough for his enemies; but after his death
the enemies increasing, and his treasures being spent, which should have
maintained the Venetian Fleet, he was forced to repair into Italy, hoping for
aid from Frederick (then before Parma) and the Pope, but both failed him; yet
when he heard of the death of Theodorus Lascaris, he took courage, and returned
Constantinople, hoping to quell his enemies; but Michael Palaeologus forced him
into the City, which he besieged, and at last by treachery took; Baldwin
escaped narrowly in the night, and got into Italy by Euripus and Eubola, then
in the Venetian possession. Thus was Constantinople lost by Baldwin the second,
the 60. year after it had been possessed by Baldwin the first.

Theodorus Lascaris Emperor of Nicha, having defeated the Turkish Sultan,
(whose head he carried upon a long pole about his Army, to the teriour of the
Turks, who fainted at the sight thereof, and submitted to him) reigned 18.
years, and then died, leaving for his successor Johannes Ducas his son-in-law,
1222.
who in 33. years of his Reign recovered almost all the Empire from the
Latins, and then dyed; whose son Theodorus Lascaris succeeded, who died the
1255.
fourth year of his Empire, being 36. years old, and left a son, John by name,
of 6. years old, to succeed him; but Michael Palaeologus usurping the Empire,
1259.
thrust out the eyes of this young Emperor, whose tuition he had undertaken;
and so being now ten years of age, lost both his eyes and Empire at once.

In France, Philip raised an Army against the Albigenses, who were defended
Arragon, and Raimond Earl of Toulouse. In this war, Simon Montfortius, General
of the Catholic Forces, gave diverse defeats to the Albigenses, and at last was
killed at the siege of Toulouse, which was given him by the Lateran 1218.
Council as a reward. This war was renewed by K. Lewis the 8. and determined by
his son St. Lewis, who caused Earl Raimond at Paris to abjure their 1226.
opinions; and then he bestowed his daughter, with the Earldome of Toulouse
upon Alphonso the brother of St. Lewis. The English were beat out of Rochel,
1229.
and a great part of Gascony, by Lewis the 8. who returning from his
Albigensian 1244.
Expedition, died the fourth year of his reign, whose son Lewis the 9. was
crowned at Rhemes the same year, the 12. year of his age; he for his good life
Boniface the 8. and called Lewis the Saint: he subdued in the beginning of his
reign Theobald Earl of Campaina, and Hugh Earl of Marchia; then having made
peace, and being recovered of a dangerous sickness; he raises an Army, and
under the sign of the Cross saileth into Egypt, obtains a Victory, and withal
Damiata; thence he marches to Cayre, and was in a fair possibility to have
taken it, the Calyph Forces being much weakened: but by reason of the unwholesome
vapors of those Marish places, the Pestilence grew so violent in the French
Army, that multitudes died; so that the King being defeated, and taken
prisoner, was forced to yield to such conditions as pleased the enemy, to wit,
that Domi^ta should be restored, with the captives on both Jerusalem from the
Parthians, who being beat out of their own Country by the Tartars, entered
Syria, took Jerusalem, and destroyed it, abusing and polluting the Temple of
the Holy Sepulcher. This King was very devout and religious, causing public
fasting and prayers through all his Dominions, when France was visited with the
Plague: he redeemed the Holy Relics of Christ's Passion, among which was the
Crown of Thorns, from the Venetians, to whom Baldwin had pawned them for a
great sum of money, to be employed against the Greeks, which incensed Lewis had
also a religious Mother Blanca, who in his minority and absence governed the
Kingdom with great prudence; by her means peace was made between France and
England. This same Lewis took many Towns in Brittany, and caused the D. do him
homage; he advanced the University of Paris, after many Scholars had left it
upon some jarrs between them and the Citizens: he would not be persuaded to
forsake the Army, when the Plague was hot among them in Egypt, but stayed all
the while, and was at last infected himself; the fame of his sanctity caused
Tartars, and many of the Scythians to become Christians; he stayed 5. years in
the East, converting the Barbarians by his good life; he sent home his two
brothers Charles and Alphonsus, to comfort their disconsolate Mother, after
they were set free, being taken prisoners with him: as he was returning
homeward, his Ship was cast upon a rock by a storm, during which time he prayed
kneeling, and so the Ships got off without hurt.

About these times the Tartars, under the conduct of their King Hoccottas, did
in great swarms enter Asia and Europe; they subdued Persis, and all the
Countries between that and Tanais; at length they overran Poland and Hungary,
even to Austria: upon this, Pope Innocent sends some choice Franciscans and
Dominicans, to try if they could bring these Barbarians to the knowledge of
Christ, which they did accordingly, so that their new King Mago, or Meto, was
baptized: Halon, King Meto's brother, having defeated the Turks, recovers
Syria, and was in possibility to have settled the Christians again in Jerusalem,
had not their own discords hindered, and his departure thence; for at that time
his brother Meto died, and he was called away to inherit the Kingdom.

In Denmark to Waldemar the 3. succeeded Ericus, whose brother Abel was made
Duke of Iutia; this Ericus, as he was preparing to chastise Lubeck and Hamburg,
who had entered into confederacy against him, was treacherously murdered by
his brother Abel, who having leigned two years, was in Gods just judgment
slain by the Frisones in a tumult, as he was raising an Army against them, for
refusing to submit to his unjust exactions. To him succeeded Christopher, the
third brother; against him his subjects rebelled, and threw

Poland at this time was afflicted with Civil Wars: for Conradus and Henry the
two Tutors of young Boleslaus the King, strove for the Principality; diverse
battles were fought, till at length Conradus the Kings Uncle prevailed; but the
Queen and her son were more inclined to Henry; wherefore Conradus seiseth on
the King, and shuts him up in a Monastery, where he made an escape, having
intoxicated his Keepers with wine, and so betakes himself to Henry, who with
much trouble settled him again in his Kingdom, both the Tutors submitting. In
the interim, the Tartars break in upon Poland, destroying Hungary 1240.
to his Father-in-law; but he also by the same storm was driven out of his
Country; which fell likewise upon Silesia and Moravia. Boleslaus was glad to
hide himself in a Castle; in the mean while, the son of Henry the Kings Tutor,
upon the death of his Father, who was slain in the war, takes possession of
Poland, whom Conradus, Boleslaus his Uncle, drove out; but he did not enjoy the
kingdom long, for he grew odious to the people, for laying heavy taxes on
them, that a way was made for Boleslaus to return, who upon the death of
Conradus, which fell out shortly after, possessed the Kingdom quietly.

In England, John Plantagenet, youngest son of King Henry the 2. succeeded to
Richard, albeit Arthur Plantagenet his Nephew, and son to Geosfrey his elder
1247.
brother was then living, whom Philip the second King of France animated and
assisted with men and money against King John, so that in a short time Arthur
levied a puisant Army, and invaded Normandy, where he took diverse strong
places; at length King John came over with a strong Army, and fought diverse
battles with his Nephew; after which they came to an agreement, and a place was
concluded, but shortly after interrupted by the French King, who with a more
numerous Army enters Normandy, and depopulates it: king John for want of money
and courage gave way to the French Victories, till the people cried out on him,
and furnished him with a large tax, every lusty man Normandy, where cruel
battles were fought, and the French defeated; Arthur the kings Nephew, and
rightful heir, was taken prisoner, and sent to the Castle of Roan; where upon
hope to escape, he leaped from the Walls, and was drowned in the Ditch. The
next year following the French king pretending title to that Duchy, invaded it
with such a power and fury, that the whole Country, to avoid desolation,
subjected it self to him. Shortly after this, Pope Innocent the third
quarrelled with king John, about the election of the Archbishop of Canterbury;
for upon the death of Hubert, St. Austins Monks there without the kings consent
elected Raynold a brother of their own, of whom they took an Oath to repair to
Rome for his investure and pall: the King being displeased at this, they elect
John Gray Bishop of Norwich, in whose behalf the King sent to the Pope,
entreating him to ratify this last choice; but the Pope slighted the Kings
Letters, and confirmed the first election; yet understanding Steven Langton the
Cardinal of Chrysogone, which was done accordingly, albeit the K. prohibited
the choice, who storming that he was thus slighted, writes to the Pope, that he
would not from thenceforth suffer him or his Kingdom to be thus enslaved to
Rome: The Pope answers, that the election should stand, requiring the King to
give him quiet possession, and to recall the banished Monks, and authorized 4.
Bishops to interdict the King and Kingdom, if he did not obey; the King upon
this seized on these Bishops lands and goods, promising to do the like to all
that should have any recourse to Rome; wherefore the Pope sends his two Legates,
Pandulphus and Durant, wishing the King to submit himself to the Pope, and to
be reconciled to the four Bishops, and the Monks of St. Austin, which he was
willing to do, conditionally that he might not allow the Cardinals election;
upon this the Legates pronounce the Popes Curse against the king, absolving his
Subjects from their allegiance, and withal gave his Crown to Philip the French
king: 1213.
this fulmination the King slighted; and to confront the Pope, he enters
Scotland with a great Army, because King Alexander the second had sided with
the Pope, and entertained diverse of his rebellious Clergy; the Scottish King to
avoid further trouble, reconciled himself to King John. King Philip of France
having now some pretense to war upon England, provides a great John, so his
hopes failed him: but the Pope pursued the King so eagerly with his
Thunderbolts, that he was fain at last on his knees, before Pandulphus, to
confess his disobedience to the Pope; and craving pardon, by a public
Instrument under his hand and seal resigned his Crown to the Pope, which
Pandulphus kept four days for the Popes use, and then gave the Crown to King
John and his heirs, reserving a tenure thereof to the Church of Rome, with an
annual Tribute of 1000. Marks, 7000. for England, and 3000. for Ireland. Many
of the Nobility upon this revolt from the King, and fly over to France, to
assist Philip against him, who was making preparations for his son Lewis to
England; which he did, and was like to have carried it, had not the Pope
required Philip and his son Lewis to desist from all hostility against that
Crown which was holden of the Sea of Rome: this injunction the French King
refused to obey; wherefore the Pope sends Guallo the Cardinal of Saint Martins
hither, who accursed Philip, Lewis, and the English that sided with them:
Hereupon the common Soldiers forsook their Leaders, and went home, and diverse
of the Country people fell to robbing and plundring the houses of the Nobility
and Gentry that were accursed; which caused them, being destitute of means, and
forsaken of their friends, to submit to King John, who pardoned them, and
restored them to their Honors and Lands; and so Lateran, published, that the
tenure of England was to be of the Church of Rome. At the same time Otho the
Emperor, Peter King of Arragon, and Raymund Earl of Toulouse, with some other
Princes, were excommunicated for heresy, as was pretended, but indeed to
subject their temporalties to the Pope; and therefore it was decreed, that no
man should be made Emperor, until he had sworn his homage to the Pope. But
the Clergy was never heartily reconciled to King John, against whom they still
bore a private grudge; therefore in the Abbey of Swinsted near Lincoln he was
poisoned by a Monk of Saint Bernards Order, who to make sure work, drank first
to the King, and poisoned himself for company; some think he died of a surfeit
of Peaches and new Ale. King John reigned 17. years, and was buried at
Winchester. In the 7. year of his reign he went into Ireland, and reduced that
revolted people to his obedience. In the 9. year he renews the Londoners
Charter for the annual electing of a Mayor and two Sheriffs. The next year
London Bridge was built. 1209.
He had two sons, Henry, who succeeded him, and Richard Earl of Cornwall and
Romans. His three daughters were, Joan the eldest, married to Alexander the
second, King of Scots; Elianor, wife to Simon Earl of Leicester; and Isabel the
youngest, who was married to the Emperor.

Henry, King John's son, was crowned at the age of 9. years, whose Protector
1216.
was the Earl of Gloucester. In this Kings minority, the French invade this
Kingdom, with whom the Welsh take part; but the Protector stoutly opposed
them: The Pope in the mean time thunders out his curses and Excommunications
against the French, and their adherents: At this, Prince Lewis desisted from
Arms, but his father Philip shipped new Forces to aid his Son. Hugh de Burgh
Master of the Cinque Ports rigs out a Fleet, and beats Lewis makes peace with
the English, and for a sum of money received, he surrenders all the Forts and
Towns he had taken, and returns to France. Upon his departure, a Parliament is
called, in which King Edwards Laws were established, and the grand Charter, or
Magna Charta, the Wardships and Marriages of Wards granted of old to King Edgar
and Edward the Confessor, were revived, and a voluntary Tax given to the King
for raising of Forces to be conducted by Richard Earl of Cornwall, the Kings
brother, for recovering of Poyteers and Gascoign again from the French; which
Provinces were shortly after recovered by the same Richard, but invaded again,
and taken by the French, and re-taken afterward by the said Richard the second
time; at last a peace is made between the two Kings. After this England were
discontent with King Henry, for applying himself merely to strangers, and
neglecting them; which error the King perceiving, he reconciled himself to his
Nobles, and resumed the Earldom of Chester into his own hands, John Scot the
Earl thereof being dead without issue male; the four daughters of this Earl
were, by way of exchange, enriched with other Territories and Honors. Prince
Edward, the Kings son, is married to Elianor the King of Spains sister, on whom
he bestowed Guian, Ireland, Chester and Wales; these two last dignities he
annexed to the eldest sons of the English Kings. Not long after a Scholar in
Oxford intended to murder the King, Henry's reign, Lewis the 9. invadeth
Guian, against whom King Henry carried over an Army; diverse skirmishes there
were, with diverse success: After King Henry's return into England, the French
King married his brother to the daughter of the Earl of Toulouse, to whom he
gave Poytiers and the English Territories in Alberne; he invades also the
Earldome of March; king Henry upon this transporteth an Army unto Bordeaux, and
near to that place fought the French, but lost the Field; whereupon the Earl of
March submitted himself to the French king. Henry upon his return, married his
sister to Alexander king of Scots. The Popes exactions were so great upon this
Land, and his demands so unreasonable, in sending his Mandate to have 300.
Romans preferred to the Benefices which should be first vacant in England, that
the Clergy generally murmured; the Archbishop of Canterbury, Edmund, in
discontent gives over all, and retires to the Abbey of Pontiniac in France; and
the king was fain to complain in the Lateran Council against the Pope, who had
no other satisfaction from him but this, Let us first kill the great Dragon,
(that is, Frederick the Emperor) and then we shall quickly trend down these
petty snakes, that is, the inferior Kings and Princes.

In Scotland, to king William succeeded his son Alexander 16. years old; he
being invited into England by the oppressed Clergy under king John, falls upon
the Royalists and their Lands with fire and sword. King John in requital enters
Scotland, wasting all before him in Lothian. Alexander was deterred by the
Popes curse, from assisting Prince Lewis of France against King John, who had
now resigned his Kingdom to the Sea of Rome; therefore he returns to Scotland,
but with great difficulty, king John having caused the Bridges Trent to be
broken down; but his death (by poison,) did facilitate Alexanders return, who
being absolved by the Popes Legate from his curse, makes peace with King Henry
of England, whom the Pope had now established in his Kingdom. The Scots
restore Carlisle which they had taken in the former war, and the English
surrender Berwick. The Legate by his excommunication raises a great sum of
money from the Scottish Clergy, who joining with the Clergy of England, send
Messengers to Rome with complaints against the Legates sordid and unjust
carriage, on whom the Pope set a great fine. A^gidius the Cardinal after him
was sent to raise more money in both Kingdoms, which when he had lavishly
spent, returns empty to Rome, pretending 1220.
Rosse under one Gillespie, who had taken Innerness, and done great hurt
thereabout: Cumin the Earl of Buchan is sent against him, whom he defeated and
took, with his two sons, their heads he cut off, and sent them to the king. The
people of Cathness burned the Bishop, with some others, in his house, having
before complained of his exactions: the chief actors were cruelly put to death;
and the Earl of Cathness being suspected to have had a hand in this murder,
though absent, was brought to the king, who upon his submission was pardoned.
After this, another Rebellion of 10000. discontented Thomas the Bastard-son of
Alan Earl of Galloway, was suppressed, with the loss of 5000. Rebels, and their
Captain. After this, he lost his Queen, who returning with the English Queen
from visiting the Relics of Canterbury, fell sick and died, being childless;
he married again, and had by this wife, Alexander the third, who succeeded him.
Two years after this, whilst the king was at Haddington, the Earl of Athol was
burned, with some others, in his house. Patrick, the chief of the Bisots, was
suspected; he to clear himself offered a Duel with any of his accusers, which
being denied him, he fled with diverse of his Family, into Ireland. Another
tumult was suppressed in Arguile; and not long after this the king died, the
51. year of his life, and of his reign

In Rome to Clemens the third succeeded Celestine the third, who sat four
years: his successor was Innocent the third, who was Pope 18. years; In his
time the Greek Church, by means of Baldwin Emperor of the East, was reconciled
to the Latin, and Thomas the first of the Latin Church, was made Patriarch of
Constantinople, against whom the Greeks chose Michael the fourth who sat
without the City. The Venetians take Crete or Candy from the Greeks, but permit
them to retain their Greek Ceremonies. This Island was the cause of 70. years
war between the Venetians and Genuois, which by Gregory the 10. was at last
composed, so that the Island remained in the power of the Venetians. Peter the
second, king of Arragon, was crowned by this Innocent Rome, who authorized the
Archbishop of Tarracon to crown his Successors at Caesarangusta. His
Successor James took from the Moors the kingdom of Valentia, and Murtia, with
the Baleares. Alexius Comnenus, father-in-law to Theodorus Lascaris, erected a
new Empire at Traperuntinum, containing Cappadocia and Colchis. St. Clara, a
Disciple of St. Francis, sets up a new Order of Nuns. To Celestine succeeded
Gregory the 9. who sat 14. years: He Canonized St. Dominick and St. Francis,
and forbad the Civil Law to be read at Paris: He digested the 5. Books of
Decretals into that method they now have; he forbad Laymen to preach. Power is
given to the Archbishop of Mentz to consecrate the kings of Bohemia, which
continued long, till one of them sold that privilege to the Church of Prague.
To Gregory succeeded Celestine the 4. who sat but 18. days; then followed the
vacancy of one year nine months, in which time S. Ferdinand drives the Moors
almost quite out of Spain; having obtained both the kingdom of Castile and
Legion, with Corduba and Hispalis, he erects the University of Salmatica.
Innocent the 4. is chosen Pope; he sat Robert Sorbona, a Divine, founded and
enriched the College of Sorbon at Paris. To Innocent succeeded Alexander the
4. who sat 6. years; he reconciled again the Greeks and Latins in the Council
of Lions.

CHAP. III.
1. Fredericks posterity. 2. The Affairs of the Western Empire under Rodulphus,
France, England, Scotland, and other places. 4. Of the Popes of these times,
and other memorable things.

FRederick the second, before his death, had made his Son Conradus king of of
the Romans and of Sicily; to his Son Henry, whom he had by his English Lady, he
bequeathed the kingdom of Jerusalem, and to Manfred the government of Italy.
Conradus fell furiously upon those Towns, which after his Fathers death
revolted to Pope Innocent: He overthrew Naples after eight months siege,
driving from thence all the Nobility; he plundered Capua and unwalled it, and
burned Aquinum. But Manfred aiming at the Empire of 1251.
Italy and Sicily, poisoned Conradus, four years after his Fathers death; a
just Henry, and his son Frederick to be murdered: Manfred also commanded
Conradinus, the son of Conradus, to be poisoned, having undertaken his tuition;
and then falls upon the Towns of Apulia, and of the kingdom of Naples, which he
took from the Pope, and so made himself King, giving out that Conradinus was
dead, but was not: After this he seiseth upon Sicily, and to make himself the
stronger against the Popes power, he makes a match between Peter the son of
James K. of Arragon, and his daughter Constantia. Upon this, Urban the 4.
Alexanders successor, curses Manfred, and armeth Charles of Anjou, brother to
Lewis the Manfred, defeats and kills him, and so obtains both kingdoms, paying
to the Pope forty thousand Crowns yearly.

Conradinus being now of years, and having raised an Army of Germans, with whom
diverse Italian Towns joined: Conradus also, his brother, Prince of Antioch,
helped him to recover Sicily; the Sarazens likewise assisted him; all Sicily
yielded, except Panormus, Messina, and Syracusa. Conradinus after this,
fighting with Charles, is defeated and taken, and so was Frederick Duke of
Austria, both whom upon the Popes persuasion he caused to be beheaded; 1268.
as for Conradus Prince of Antioch, he first pulls out his eyes, and then
caused him to be hanged. Thus the French obtained Sicily; whose tyranny, pride,
John Duke of Proclyta, whose wife the French had abused, and himself by them
was plundered, having advised with Pope Nicolas, (Charles his enemy) as also
with John Palaeologus Emperor of Constantinople, (who had lately taken
Byzantium from the French) and with Peter king of Arragon, Manfreds son-in-law,
they all agree to cut off the French, and to confer Sicily on the Arragonians;
a Fleet for this purpose is prepared by both kings, and the business kept close
for two years together, till the very hour that all the French throughout the
whole Island were destroyed, as it were, in a moment, except a few who were in
the strong Castle of Spirlinga; it is thought, that in the space of two hours,
above 8000. were slain by the Sicilians, who spared not women great with child,
but ripped up their bellies, and 1282.
dashed the infants against the stones, that none of the French blood might
there remain; (this was done on Easter day at evening Service, March 30. Hence
the proverb, Vesperae Siculae.) The slaughter being finished, Peter of Arragon,
who stayed at Hippo in Africa with his Fleet, waiting for the event of the
Sicilian Charles lost Sicily quite, who though he raised a war against the
Arragonians, yet they kept the Island till his Race was wholly extinguished,
and then they obtained also the kingdom of Naples, being invited thither by
Joan the widow: And thence also the French were quite excluded. Afterward
Ferdinand king of Arragon dying without issue Male, left these kingdoms to
Charles the 5. his Grandchild by his Daughter.

William the Emperor being slain, ash was preparing an Army against the 1257*
Frislanders, Germany was divided into Factions about a new Emperor; some were
for Richard Earl of Cornwall, k. John of Englands son, others for Alphonsus
Castile, both had made parties by giving large bribes, and both are nominated;
Richard, by the Bishops of Mentz, Colen, and the Palatine; but he being too
eager and violent against those that were for Alphonsus, and having run himself
out of all his moneys by his too much bounty,. is forsaken of his own party,
and so forced to return to England. Alphonsus being sent for into Germany by
his own party, to wit, by the Bishop of Trevers, the Duke of Saxony, Marquess
of Brandenburg, and king of Bohemia; but delighting more in Mathematics then
in Dominions, and being fearful to meddle with the distracted estate of
Germany, staid so long in France, that he lost both the Empire and his own
kingdom, which his son Sanciu seized on; therefore he returns Sivil, where
with grief he died, having advanced the knowledge of Physic and Astronomy, to
his great charges, and the benefit of posterity; for he spent above 40000.
Crowns in compiling of his Tables, and interpreting of Arabic, and other books
into Latin.

Germany being exposed to every great man's violence, for want of a Head, and
both Fredericks faction and the Popes were so strong there, that no man durst
venture to meddle with the Imperial Government: Pope Gregory is at last moved
with the afflictions and complaints of that Country, so that he gives order to
the Electors to choose them a king of the Romans, otherwise he would provide
one for them: When they met at Franckfort, they unanimously Rodulphus of
Habspurg, who was then besieging of Basil; upon the news of his Election, which
at first he did hardly believe, he makes peace with the Basilians, repairs to
Aix, where he is crowned with his wife Anna. As soon as he was settled, he
applies himself to compose the differences of Germany; complaint was made
against Ottocar king of Bohemia, for invading and seizing upon Austria. The
Hungarians had invaded the lower, and the Bavarians upper Austria; their
oppressions were such, that the people resolved to invite thither, either Henry
Marquess of Mysnia, the husband of Constarea, who was sister to Frederick the
last, or else one of his two sons. Wenceslaus king of Bohemia perceiving this,
married his son Ottocar to Margaret Henry, Frederick the Emperors son: Upon
this Match, Ottocar pretending a Title, invades Austria, which he did not long
enjoy, for Rodolphus the Emperor overthrew him, brought him on his knees, and
took Austria from him, which he bestowed on his son 1282.
Albertus, whose posterity has possessed it till this time. But not long
after, Ottocar scorning that he should be thus used by Rodolphus, who had
heretofore been his servant, being also instigated by his wife Cuniganda, (for
he had unjustly repudiated Margaret) secretly raises 10000 men, and with
moneys tries to corrupt the Peers to forsake Caesar; but the business could not
be so closely carried as he supposed; for Rodolphus with an Army of Germans and
Hungarians beat Ottocar, whom a common Soldier killed after he was taken,
because he had killed a brother of this Soldiers. In this Battle the Emperor
was beaten down from his horse, yet recovered, and 14000. were slain; presently
after this Moravia is subdued. A new League is made between Caesar and the
Queen of Bohemia, that Caesar's daughter should marry with Wenceslaus the son of
Ottocar, and so he should hold Bohemia in fee of the Emperor.

After this, Ralph forces the Bernens, Helvetians, and Burgundians to submit
Thuringia and the neighboring places he pulled down 66. Castles of the Rebels;
He reigned 18. years, in all that time he never saw Italy, affirming that the
former Emperors went thither rejoicing, but returned sorrowing: He bestowed
Romandiola upon the Pope; He sold to the Bononians, Florentines, Genuois, and
Lucans their liberty for gold; He destroyed all the Highway Robbers in
Germany, 29. he put to death at one time. There was one who resembled somewhat
Frederick Duke of Suevia, who was beheaded with Conradinus; this fellow began
to draw people into Rebellion, so that the Emperor being afraid, left
Columbaria, and made show as if he would submit to this new Caesar, whose
knavery when he found out, he caused him to be burnt alive. But the Pope
fearing his greatness, renewes the Decree for recovering the Holy Land, which
was almost gone, for in three years after it was all swallowed up by the
Egyptians. He also set out an Edict for the defense of Italy, the Seacoast of
which, for want of Garrisons, was exposed to Piracies. Another order he
publishes for expelling the French and Spaniards out of Sicily and Naples; and
if the Emperor made not haste to reform these disorders, he threatens to
invade Hetruria and the Exarchal or Romandiola in Picenum, Flaminia, and
Aemilia; he allowed also for the holy Knights, the fourth part of Ralph not
being willing to quarrel with the Pope, parted with the Exarchal, as we said.

Ralph the Emperor being aged and sickly, calls a Diet of the Princes, wherein
he moved that his son Albert might be his Successor; but not prevailing, and
finding himself ill-disposed, removes from Frankfort toward Spire, saying, Let
us go to the other Emperors, and so died by the way, the 19. year of his
Reign, and was buried at Spire, near Philip of Suevia. He had by 1291.
his wife Anna, Albert Duke of Austria, Ralph Duke of Suevia, with diverse other
sons and daughters: In his time Ptolemais was only left to the Christians,
about Jerusalem, the kings of Cyprus and Sicily, the Hospitallers, Templars,
and Teutonick Knights strived for superiority, Sultan Melech Sapherates (that
is to say, the illustrious King) besieged it two months, the Christians within
not being able to hold out longer, got away privately by Sea, and so the Town
was utterly destroyed, 196. years after the Conquest by Godfrey of Bulloign; so
that in Asia, only Cilicia, now called Armenia minor, retained the Christian
Profession. A main cause of our losses in Phaenicia, and the Levant, was the
quarrel between the Venetians and Genuois, upon suspicion that Philip of
Montferrat Governor of Acre or Ptolemais was more favorable to the Venetians
then the Genuois: There was also in the Town a Church of Saint Saba, for which
they strove; the Pope understanding Genuois got into it first, filled it with
Soldiers, and turned it into a Garrison: The Venetians hearing of this, in a
rage parted from Tire 1259.
with three Galleys, enter forcibly the Port of Acre, break down the Chain; and
burns 23. Ships with two Galleys of the Genuois; afterward they overthrow the
Church, affirming that the Genuois had profaned it: Of these small beginnings,
sprung that war, which held so long, in which many cruel Battles were fought;
the Venetians at first being superiors, by the assistance of the Pisans, and of
their own Forces.

In France S. Lewis reforms the Laws and the Judges; ordaines that all
blasphemers and profane swearers by Gods Name, should be burnt in the forehead
with a hot iron, wishing he might be so burnt himself, conditionally he might
purge his kingdom of that heinous sin: He built and finished diverse Religious
Houses, as that of the Iacobins at Paris, of the Cordaliers, of the
Carthusians, and others: he married his son Philip to the Infanta Elizabeth,
daughter James king of Arragon; he reconciled the difference that was between
the children of Margaret Countess of Flanders. Having settled his kingdom and
house, he goes on Shipboard at Marsiles, with his three sons, Philip, John
and 1270.
Peter, and sets sail for Carthage, where he takes diverse Ships in the Port,
and sinks the rest, and then laid siege to the City; a furious battle was
fought between the French and Moors, which continued doubtful a great while, at
last a party of the French Army getting between the City and the Moors, seized
on the Castle, and took it; the Moors having lost their Fort, and being
assaulted on both sides, submitted, and were received to mercy by Lewis, and so
the Town was surrendered. After this, the French Army marches toward Tunis,
Tunis encounters them with his Army in the way; a Battle is fought, in which
10000. Moors are killed, and the whole Army defeated, and so he marches to the
City, which he besieged 6. months so close, that no provision could come
thither; the Citizens begin to think of a surrender, and were beginning to
Article, when the Plague seiseth upon the French Camp, so that many died every
day, among the rest, Prince John, who from this sad unfortunate accident was
named Tristan, he was born whilst his Father was a prisoner in Egypt; and Saint
Lewis himself, to the great grief of his Army, and of all good men, died in the
Camp of a Flux, the 25. of August; after whose death the king of Sicily arrived
before. Tunis with a great Army, to the comfort of the French, much dejected
for the loss of their good king. Henry also Earl of Cornwall shortly after
arrived with a great Fleet, hoping to find Saint Lewis alive, that they two
might join their Forces with Prince Edward of England, for recovering of Syria.
Tunis being now besieged by Italians, French, and English both by Sea and Land,
the Moors within, who used to make daily sallies before, do now begin to faint
and yield; the Christians being weary and sickly, yielded to a peace, that the
Barbarous king should permit the Gospel to be freely taught through all his
Dominions, and that he should pay yearly to the king of Sicily 40000. Ducats,
which was the sum due from Sicily to the Sicily, there to refresh themselves
with the change of air, but they were surprised by the way with such a storm,
that all their Ships were scattered sundry ways, and many of them sunk and
torn; besides, the Plague was so hot amongst them, that they resolved every man
to his own home, and to give off their voyage intended for the Holy Land.

To Saint Lewis succeeded his son Philip the third, surnamed the Bold: the next
year after his return from Africa he was crowned at Rhemes; he made 1271.
Guy Earl of Flanders in place of his brother, who died in Sicily. The
Queen Mother following the steps of her Husband Saint Lewis, gave her self
wholly Paris a Covent of the Order of St. Francis. The King made himself Lord
of Toulouse, the Heirs thereof being dead. His eldest son Lewis was poisoned by
his Chamberlain Peter de la Broche, who accused the Queen, Philips second wife,
of the murder, as if she had done it, that her children might succeed to the
Crown: The King sends to an old Wizard in Brabant, famous for divination, who
excused the Queen, and laid the blame on La Broche, whom upon this he caused to
be hanged. He reduced the Gascoigns: He raised a great Army against Arragon,
whose King Peter had seized upon Sicily, and was excommunicate by the Pope, and
his 1284.
kingdom bestowed on Philip Valois, king Philips son. At the siege of Gerunda,
which Philip took, Peter was killed; but Roger Admiral of the Arragonian Fleet
falls unexpectedly on the French, as they were removing thence, because of the
Plague, and sets both the Town and Fleet on fire, and so they make their way
through the Pyrenaean Straits with their swords. Philip at this news fell sick
and died at Perpinianum, or Parpignan, and was buried at S. Denis. This year
was famous for the death of three Kings, namely, of Charles King of Sicily,
1285.
Peter King of Arragon, and Philip King of France. He reigned above 15. years;
he left two sons behind him by his first wife Isabel the daughter of Arragon,
to wit, Philip the Fair, his Successor, and Charles Valois; of his second wife
Mary the Brabantine, he left Lewis alive.

Philip the Fair had almost continual wars with England and Flanders, that were
Confederates: by his brother Charles Valois, he defeated the Forces of Edward
the Second, and recovered Gascoign. Guy Earl of Flanders, who took part with
Edward, was overthrown with him at Turnae by the same Valois, and 1293.
carried prisoner to Paris with his two sons. After this the Flemings rebel
against the K. and defeat his Army at Courtray; but two years after, they
fought again 1295.
at Andomaropolis, and were beaten by the King: Then there was a peace
concluded between them. This Philip for refusing to undertake the Holy War, was
accursed by Boniface the 8. but his Successor Pope Benedict absolved him. 1304.
Clemens the 5. who translated his seat to Avinion, where it continued 70.
years, conspired with this Philip against the Templars, whom they destroyed,
and bestowed their wealth on the Hospitallers, except what they put up in their
Exchequers. He fixed the Parliament, which before was ambulatory, at Paris,
1307.
and built the great Hall of his Palace, with other convenient rooms for that
1314.
purpose; and at the request of the Normans, he granted them a Parliament at
Rouen their capital City, which sits twice yearly, in the Spring and Autumn,
Jane founded the College of Navarre. King Philip, after he had been royally
entertained in Flanders, with all the cost and magnificence that could be
devised; left such Governors behind him, who did so tax and oppress the
people, that they resolve to shake off the French yoke; to that purpose a cruel
massacre was committed on them at Bruges in their beds at night; and all the
Gentry of Flanders, with the people, arm themselves against the king, who was
raising an Army of 24000. to ruin Flanders, and was on his march as far as
Doway; but being dissuaded by his sister, king Edwards wife, upon his
instigation, who was loath that Flanders should be swallowed up by the French,
Philip returns back with a part of his Flemings; therefore under the command of
the E. of Artois he sends a great Army against them who furiously and foolishly
set upon their Trenches, where the Flemings held them play so long, til a great
part of their Army wheeled about a private way, and fell upon the Rear of the
French, whom they so disordered, that 12000. Horse and Foot were slain, besides
many prisoners; Count Artois with many of the Nobility, were killed, over whose
dead bodies, chiefly of the Earls, the enemy barbarously insulted. Upon this
defeat, the king sends old Guy their Count, to see if he could persuade them to
submit upon hope Henault; but they were beat back from thence. The French king
sends for 6. Galleys from Genua, resolving to beat the Flemings both by Sea and
Land; but they being nothing daunted, make excursions as far as Arras, setting
fire on the Suburbs thereof; but the French recovered somo part of their honor
lost at Curtray, by defeatting the Flemings near Saint Omer, where they killed
15000 of them, and shortly after 800. of Bruges, and 500. before Tournay; but
these losses did not discourage them; therefore they resolve with fresh Forces
to assault the French again; which they did with such fury, that Valois took
his heels, but the king with his Army fought stoutly, and got the Victory, with
the loss of 6000. Flemings on the place; among which was found the body of
William, son to Guy Count of Flanders. This defeat made the Flemings submit to
peace, which was concluded upon this condition, that 200000. Crowns should be
paid to the French king, and Flanders restored to Robert, Guy's eldest son, for
the Father was dead in France.

About this time, Cassan the Tartarian Prince, who was become Christian, having
defeated the Persians, and chased the Sultan out of Syria, writes to the Pope
and French king for their aid, and alliance with the Latin Princes, for
recovering of Jerusalem: Upon this, Pope Boniface the 8. sends menacing Letters
to Philip, to promote with all speed this Expedition: which Letters the king
slighted, and withal imprisoned the Bishop of Palmiers (which place he had
lately erected into a Bishopric for the Province of Narbon) for holding
correspondency with the Pope against him; and forbids any of his Clergy to
repair to the Council which the Pope had called: Hereupon he is excommunicated,
and his Subjects absolved from their Allegiance; so that Boniface not yet
contented stirs up Albert Duke of Austria, elected Emperor, to invade France;
but he stirred not: He solliciteth also the king of England, but he could not,
being employed in his Scottish wars. Philip sends an Ambassador to the Pope to
be reconciled; the French Clergy send also three Deputies in their names to
excuse their not waiting on his Holiness at the Council; In the mean while the
Pope was seized on at Anagnis, a City of Abruzzo, by Sciarra Coloness, a
Bandito of Rome, by the French Kings aid, and carried to Rome, where he died
1303,
shortly after. This Philip afterward being present with the Kings of England
and Arragon at the Popes Coronation in Lions, was like to be smothered by the
John Duke of Britain was slain. The Templars were accused by this King and the
Pope, of heinous crimes, and of keeping correspondency with the Turks and
Sarazens; therefore were condemned to be burnt alive: The great Master, with
his brethren, protested before God at their death, that they were free from the
crimes objected against them. The Templars of Germany were more favorably
dealt with, for though their estates were taken away, yet none were condemned,
but such as were found guilty. The Hospitallers being enriched with the
Templars Estates, raised a great Army, with which they took the Isle of Rhodes
from the Turks. The war of Flanders was beginning again, because Philips death,
a great tumult arose at Lions between the Episcopal party and the Royal, about
their Rights, which with much ado was appeased by Lewis King of Navarre, and
the Count of Savoy. The King died at Fontain-bleau where he was born, and
buried at S. Dennis, having reigned 24. years.

In England, king Henry the third hearing of St. Lewis his captivity, and that
he was willing to resign Normandy, if Henry would come to his rescue; Upon
this, he presently undertakes the Cross, and demands the Tenth of his Clergy
Londoners backward; a Parliament is called, in which the demanded Tenth is
denied by the Bishops and Lords; but such were the kings wants, and Gascoign
was upon revolt, that another Parliament is called, and a Tenth is granted by
the Clergy for three years, and Scutage three Marks of every knights fee by the
Laity for that year. The king resumes Gascoign from his brother Richard, who
had possessed it now 27. years, and gave it to his eldest Son Edward. Richard
was unwilling to part with his possession, and so were the Gascoigns to part
with him: Whereupon Simon Monfort Earl of Chester, a stern man, is sent with a
Charter for 6. years, to curb them. Three years after the Gascoigns accuse him
of Tyranny; the king sends for him, but he being supported by the Nobility,
contests with the king, who is fain to send him back again to his charge, with
promise to the Gascoigns, that Prince Edward should come shortly after; but
Monfort tyrannizeth more then ever; wherefore Henry goes over into Gascoign
with 300. Ships, and deposes Monfort; and because the Gascoigns had put
themselves under the Spain, who claimed Title to Aquitane, Henry proposes a
Match between his son Edward, and Elinor the Spaniards sister; The Marriage is
agreed upon and solemnised at Burgos, where the king of Spain knights the
Prince, and quits his claim to Aquitane. Henry invests the Prince and his wife
therein, and gives besides to him Ireland, Wales, Bristol, Stamford, and
Grantham. After this, king Henry returns homeward by Paris, with one thousand
Horse, and is feasted by Saint Lewis lately returned from captivity. Upon king
Henry's arrival into England, he fines the Londoners, though they had presented
him with a hundred pound in money, and two hundred pound in plate. After this,
Elinor the Princes wife arrives with a great Train. There Alexander the Fourth,
the Bishop of Bononia, with a proffer of Sicily to Edmond the kings second son.
Then comes Rustandus with power to collect the tenth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, which is denied him; he comes also with power to absolve the king from
his Oath for the Holy War, if he would destroy Manfred son to Frederick the
Emperor, now king of Sicily and Apulia; but the Apulians angry that the Pope
should give away their Land to a stranger; help Manfred to defeat the Popes
forces. In the mean while, Richard Earl of Cornwall is elected King of the
Romans, and crowned at Aix. King Henry demands a Tax for attaining the kingdom
of Sicily for his son Edmund; two and fifty thousand Marks are granted; but
Edward is fain to mortgage Stamford, and other Towns, to William de Valence, to
supply the Kings wants. After this a Parliament is called at Oxford, called the
Mad Parliament, where many wrongs are complained of, and many things
established tending to the weakening of the Kings Prerogative: Twelve Peers are
chosen, whereof the Earls of Leicester and Gloucester were chief, to whom power
was given to maintain the Laws made lately, which were ratified by the King
unwillingly; but he being displeased that the twelve Peers should remove from
him most of his chief Servants, calls another Parliament, where he complains of
this wrong; but they so little regarded France and Scotland for aid. He
resigns Normandy, with the Lordships of Anjou, Poytiers, and Mayn, to Lewis; in
1261.
lieu of this, Henry is made Duke of Guyan, for which he was to do his homage:
He also procures two Bulls from Rome, by which he and all others that had sworn
to maintain the late Laws, were absolved; notwithstanding the twelve Peers went
on in reforming abuses, and removing from their charge such Officers as the
King had placed. The king publishes the Popes Bulls, countermandeth the
Authority of the twelve Peers, and makes the Londoners swear to assist him. The
Barons upon this raise an Army, and write to the king, beseeching Oxford Laws,
and withal they march toward London, spoiling by the way the houses of all
those who held for the Popes Bulls; they write to the Londoners, who sent the
Letter to the king, and their resolutions to hold with the Twelve Peers in
maintaining the late Laws, and so they receive the Barons into the City with
joy: from thence they march with the Army to Windsor Castle, where they plunder
and displace all the Aliens, who had Offices there. The Lords of the Kings
Council gave order for restitution of the Aliens goods; but the Barons refused
to obey: At last these differences were referred to the judgment of Saint
Lewis, whose sentence was, that the twelve Peers should lose their authority,
and none should rule but the King. This sentence, as partial, is rejected by
the Barons, who repair again to the Marches of Wales, and levy a new Army; in
their march toward London, they plunder and burn the houses of Sir Roger
Mortimer, who counseled the King to withstand them. The Prince levieth another
Army, which is beat by the Barons, who remain Masters of the Field. After this
Victory, they are joyfully received at London; and two Constables elected by
Richard King of the Romans, lately returned from Germany, whom the Barons
forced to swear to maintain their cause: But now he becomes their enemy, who
before was mediating a peace. The King in the interim surpriseth Northampton,
and in it Sir Peter Montfort, and Simon, Leicesters eldest son, who had raised
an Army thereabout for the Barons. Another Battle after this was fought near
Lewis in Sussex, where the King with his brother Richard, Prince Edward, with
many Knights and Gentlemen are taken prisoners, and more then 20000. slain.
After this, a peace is made, and agreed that the King should confirm the twelve
Peers authority; which being granted, the two Dover Castle. Then did the King
call a Parliament, in which he swore to maintain the Barons rights, until they
should be reformed, if any thing were amiss. Hereupon the Princes were
enlarged. Shortly after the two heads of the Faction, Leicester and Gloucester,
did jarre about these Ordinances. Prince Edward, upon this, with Gloucester,
Warrein, and Sir Roger Mortimer 1265.
raised a new Army; Leicester did the like; a cruel Battle is fought at
Eversham in Worcestershire, in which the Barons are discomfited: Here Simon
Earl of Leicester, with his eldest son, and Sir Hugh Spencer, with many other
prime men were slain; the Earls carcass was inhumanely mangled by the Richard,
resolved to consume London with fire; but the Citizens came humbly submitting
their lands, goods, and lives to his mercy; but he was so implacable, that he
would not hearken to them, nor to any for them, till at last the Prince
mediated in their behalf, and so the King was content with a fine of one
thousand Marks; he pardoned also the Cinque Ports, for their robbing at Sea,
during the troubles. But the Earl of Glouoester, who by his revolt from the
Barons, had furthered the kings good success, being slighted for all London,
and there the rascality flock to him, and having committed diverse outrages,
falls upon the Kings house at Westminster, which they ransack and plunder; but
the Prince again interceded both for the Earl, and the other offenders: The
Earl desirous to be employed, requests that he might be sent with an Army to
the Holy Land, which was granted, because the K. was willing to be rid of him;
but he using too long delays, lost this opportunity, which was laid hold upon
by Prince Edward, who conducted the Army into the Holy Land, where he did brave
service, and raised the siege of Acon; he was traitorously wounded with a
poisoned knife by a Sarazen, but recovered. His Cousin Henry, son to the king
Romans, was slain in the Church of Viterbo in time of divine Service, by his
own cousin-german Guy de Montfort son to Simon Earl of Leicester, in revenge of
his fathers death: king Richard died shortly after; and the next year following
k. Henry the 3. departed this life, the 65. year of his age, and the 57. 1274.
of his reign; he had by his wife Elinor 6. sons, whereof two survived him,
Edward and Edmund; and two daughters, Margaret, wife to the king of Scots, and
Beatrice, who married John the first D. of Britain.

To Henry succeeds his Son Edward, being now in Syria, who three years after
his departure from England, begins his voyage homewards; he lands in Sicily,
where he is royally feasted by Charles King thereof; he is also in Italy
honorably used by the Pope and Princes; and in France entertained by Philip
the third, to whom he did homage for his lands held of that Crown; at last
arrives in England after six years from his setting out: Alexander King of
Scots, and John Duke of Britain were present at his Coronation: He began
betimes to clip the Clergies wings, by causing the Statute of Mortmain to be
enacted, against which afterward the Clergy petitioned the King, when they had
raised him a great sum of money, but they were not heard: he abridged
Westminster the Return of Writs granted him by King Henry the 3. He resolves to
subdue Wales which had always been a receptacle for the English Rebels: he
summons Leolin their Prince to be present at the Parliament who refused,
therefore he enters Wales with fire and sword, and forces Leolin to sue for
peace, which he had, paying a Fine of 50000 lib. and 1000 lib. per ann. but
withal delivers him Elinor, Simon Monforts daughter Earl of Leicester, with
whom he was in love, she coming from France was taken at Sea; yet for all
this, within three years he rebels again with his brother David, on whom the
King had bestowed diverse graces; an Army is raised against him, Leolin is slain
Edward, who caused it to be crowned with Ivy, and set upon the Tower of
London: thus ends the last of the Welsh Princes; his brother David is
apprehended, drawn at a horses tail about the City of Shrewsbury, then
beheaded, his heart and bowels burnt, his head sent to the Tower, and his four
quarters to Bristol, Northampton, York, and Winchester. In this interim
Alphonsus the Kings eldest Son twelve years old dies, so Edward born at
Carnarvan is heir of the Crown, and first of the English who was styled Prince
of Wales. After this, King Edward at the death of Philip the Bold, passes over
into France, there to do homage to the new King Philip the fourth for Aquitain;
then he reconciles the King of Arragon 1286.
and Sicily in Spain, and redeems Cha^les Prince of Achaia (Son to King Charles
of Sicily) prisoner in Arragon for 30000 lib. After three years and six months
being abroad, he returns into England, calls a Parliament, reforms diverse
abuses, and enricheth himself with Fines laid upon corrupt Officers and Judges;
he banisheth the Jews, seiseth upon their estates, for which the Kingdom gave
him a fifteenth, and the Clergy a tenth; many other supplies of money he had in
his time, he new coined all the old money which had been defaced by the Jews,
for which two hundred ninety seven suffered at one time in London. He was
chosen Arbitrator by the Scots, who were divided about the true successor of
king Alexander; and as he was going Northward Elinor dyed, who had sucked (as
some write) the poison 1290.
out of his wound given him by the Sarazen. Whereupon he returns with the Corpse
to Westminster, he caused Crosses to be erected at Stamford, Waltham,
West-cheap, Charing, and elsewhere in memory of her, with her statue thereon.
After this, he returns to the North, and by his means Baliol is made king of
Scots, who afterward upon an affront offered him in the Court of England,
defies king Edward, so a long War begins; king Edward enters into a League with
Guy Earl of Flanders, with Adolph the Emperor, to whom he 1297.
sends 15000 lib. to recover his lands in France, and with other Princes; so he
sends an Army into France, where all his Territories are forfeited and seized
upon for refusing to come and do his homage. He then enters Scotland with
Dures^e; many places in Scotland are subdued, and Baliol sues for peace, and
does homage: after this he raises heavy Taxes on the Clergy and Laity; the
Clergy refuse to pay, whereupon they are put out of the kings protection: But
wen they saw how they were exposed to all wrongs for want of Justice, they
submitted, and redeemed themselves and Monasteries, which the king had seized
on. His brother Edmond in the mean while dyed at Byon, having besieged Bordeaux
a long time to no purpose: upon this news the king calls a Parliament, in which
he desires his Lords to go to Gascoign, which they refused, except he went in
person, which he could not do, because he was tied to assist Guy Earl of
Flanders, whose Daughter the French king kept as a prisoner in Paris, for that
Guy was to marry her to king Edwards Son: Besides the French king falls upon
Flanders with an Army of 60000 and wins many Towns: king Edward upon this
passes over into Flanders with 500 Sail, and and 18000 men, but was
disappointed of the Emperors assistance, and so Guy: He staid that Winter in
Gaunt, where he lost many of his men whom the Gantois killed in a mutiny, and
Edward himself hardly escaped; therefore he is forced to make peace with the
French king for two years, and to leave Guy to himself, who shortly after was
carried prisoner to Paris, where he dyed (as some think) and his Daughter of
grief. king Edward upon his return, understanding that the Scots by the courage
of William Wallas* had almost regained that Kingdom, makes a new invasion, and
defeats the Scots in a great battle at Tonkirk; during this time, the Exchequer
1300.
and Courts of Justice were kept at York about six years. At the Parliament
held in S. Andrews, the Scots (except Wallas and his party) swear fealty to the
England.

In Scotland, Robert Abbot of Dumferling. was removed by King Alexander the
third from his Chancellorship, for legitimating the bastard daughter of King
1253.
Alexander the second, intending she should succeed if the King died without
issue; the Seal was delivered to Gamelinus Archbishop of St. Andrews. Some of
the Lords being summoned to answer for their oppressions, refused to appear;
whereupon they are by the young King declared Rebels; they watching an
opportunity when the King was thinly accompanied, seized on him, and carried
him to Sterling, pretending they removed him from his English Counsel by which
he was much ruled, being lately returned from England, with his Henry's sister,
and a great English train: but the arrival of Acho King of Norway, with 120
ships caused the king to be set at liberty, and the Lords to be pardoned; for
then was no time to quarrel, when the common Enemy was so near. This Acho
pretending right to some of the Scottish Western Islands, came with 20000
Danes, and suddenly seized upon two of the greatest Isles; then he landed his
men on the shore of Cunigame, against whom Alexander Stewart grandfather to him
who was first of that name King of Scotland, was sent with an Army; he after a
long skirmish defeats the Danes, kills sixteen thousand on the place, and
drives the rest on shipboard, all the ships were cast away on the Isles of
Orkney by storms, except four which Norway; shortly after this king Acho died
of grief; his Son Magnus was glad to make peace with the Scots, and resign all
his right in the Western Islands, for which he was to receive 4000 marks
presently and a hundred marks yearly, besides a match is made between Margaret
king Alexanders daughter, and Hangonan king Magnus his Son: about this time
king Alexander took the Isle of Man, it was there agreed that it should be
under the protection of Scotland, and that the king of Man should furnish the
Scots with ten ships when he should be required: After this, Alexander sends
five thousand Scots to aid king Henry against his Barons in England, where most
were killed, the rest taken prisoners. At that time there was great emulation
in Scotland between the Nobility and Clergy, whose wealth and power was much
Alexander, which he slighted; but the Clergy threatening to complain to the
Pope, king Alexander was forced to comply with them, for avoiding further
trouble, and caused satisfaction to be made them; in the interim a Legate from
the Pope comes to collect money for the Holy War, but he was not suffered to
enter the kingdom, and answer was made him, that the king would himself raise
money, and send Soldiers to Syria; therefore an Army is sent under the Earls
of Carry and Athol to the French king Lewis, and to the Pope a thousand marks.
Not long after, the king lost his wife, and both his sons; first David, and
then Alexander, who had married the Earl of Flanders daughter: Margaret also
his daughter the Queen of Norway died, who left one daughter, called the Maid
of Norway, By his second wife the Earl of Drux his daughter in France, he had
no issue; for the same year of his second marriage, he fell from his Horse near
Kingorne, and dyed the five and 1285.
fortieth year of his Age, and the seven and thirtieth of his Reign; his death
was much lamented both for his good Laws, and his just government.

After Alexanders death, Six Governors are set over the kingdom, three for
the South Side, and three for the North-side of Forth. In the mean time, King
Edward finding an opportunity to unite the two kingdoms, sends Ambassadors
into Scotland, with Propositions of a match between his Son and the Maid of
Norway, Inheritrix of Scotland; the match is agreed on, and Ambassadors sent
to Norway to bring away the young Queen; but she was dead before they came, to
the great trouble of England, and almost the ruin of Scotland, which was torn
into many factions by diverse Competitor; the two chief of which were John
Balliol and Robert Bruce; John had the better right, Robert the most
affections, and both strong parties to side with them; Bruce had lands in
England, Balliol in France, and both had great possessions in Scotland: To
avoid civil wars, the controversy by general consent is referred to king
Edward of England, both, because of his fathers affection and alliance to
Scotland, and of his own desire to have renewed this affinity with a new match:
King Edward upon this comes to Barwick, calls the Nobility thither, not as
Subjects, but as Friends; they sent their Deputies; He first swears the
Competitors to stand to their award, then he swears the Peers to obey him that
should be named king; this oath he caused to be ratified by their Hands and
Seals; then he chooses out twelve prime men of Scotland, as many of England,
France are sent to, for their opinion in this difficulty, but their answer was
not satisfactory: the twenty four were enclosed in a Church alone, to determine
the controversy; in the mean while Edward deals with Bruce apart, whose title
was weakest, and proffers him the Kingdom, if he would become his Vassal,
which he refused; then he deals with Balliol, who accepts the proffer; so
Balliol six years and nine months after Alexanders death is declared king of
Scotland, and crowned at Score; but Bruce and diverse others refused to swear
Allegiance to him, who repairs to King Edward at New Castle, to whom as he
promised, swears Fealty, to the great grief of the Lords, who could not now
tell how to help it: But not long after, the Earl of Fifes brother Balliol,
and his brother murdered by the Abernethies without justice, appears to king
Edward sitting then in Parliament: Balliol was called upon to answer to his
accusation, and to come down to the Bar, (for he sat next the king) at which
indignity he so stormed, that he went home, calls a Parliament, at which were
present Ambassadors from France, desiring a renovation of the old League; and
also from England, demanding assistance against the French according to their
allegiance. The French League was preferred and renewed, being at that time of
five hundred years continuance; and the English allegiance rejected, as being
extorted from a king without consent of his Parliament. Upon this, a defiance
is sent Edward, who having a Fleet ready, intended for France, sends it to
Scotland, which the Scots overthrew in the mouth of the river toward Barwick:
this so exasperated king Edward, that he invites Bruce to accept of the
kingdom, and withal besieges Barwick, which after a long siege by a slight
was taken; for king Edward making show of a retreat, the Town-gates were
openopened, the soldiers went out to refresh themselves; in the interim, the
English Horse return suddenly, enter the town and put all to the sword: then he
besieges Dunbar and takes it, and defeats the Scots army that came to relieve
it: Upon this Edinburgh and Sterlin are surrendered; at last, Balliol submits
himself and kingdom to Edward: who sends him by sea into England, and causes
the Scots Lords to swear Fealty again to him: Balliol is imprisoned, the fourth
year after he was crowned, but upon the Popes entreaty is sent into France,
whither king Edward also went with a great army. In this mean space John Cumin
Earl of Buchan is sent by the Scots with forces into England, who with Fire
and Sword fall upon Cumberland and Northumberland; Wallas also, a Forth, which
he took in; then fights Crassingham (whom king Edward had left to be Treasurer
of Scotland) defeats his forces by Sterlin, and with his army enters England,
where he stayed without opposition three months, and returns home with much
booty. Upon the report of these proceedings, king Edward hasteneth out of
France, raises a great army, and marches to Stammor or Stainsmoore; the
English seeing the carriage of Wallas and his Captains, with the order of his
army, which consisted of 30000. retreated without fighting; Wallas fearing some
treachery did not pursue; Scots Lords who held for King Edward, envying Wallas
his valor and success, gave out that he aimed to be King himself, and that it
were better for the Scots to be subject to king Edward, then to a new upstart;
besides, the Scots army began to mutiny among themselves, which was the cause
of their overthrow six miles from Sterling; in which conflict ten thousand
Scots were slain: Wallas upon this dismisseth his forces, and king Edward
returns into England. The Scots that stood upon their liberty, send to king
Philip of France to mediate for a peace with King Edward, which was granted for
seven months; during which time, the Ambassadors that were sent to Pope
Boniface the eighth were intercepted by the English and imprisoned; Scots
again, who drove all the English, and Scots that were for King Edward, out of
their Garrisons: another army is sent into Scotland, which being divided into
three bodies, were all three defeated in one day by an army of eight thousand
Scots; which so enraged 1302.
King Edward, that he raised the greatest army that ever was raised by him; he
rigs out also a great Fleet, and so invades Scotland by Sea and Land: so great
was his army, that it went through the most part of Scotland without
opposition; only Wallas would sally out of his Ambushes now and then upon the
Rear: King Edward with fair promises would have drawn him to his side, but
could not prevail; all the Castles and Forts which had held out against
Sterling which held out three months, was feign to surrender for want of
provision. The Scots again (except Wallas and his party) swear Fealty to king
Edward, who returning into England carried with him the ancient Records,
Monuments, Libraries, Learned men, and the Fatal Chair of Scotland. Wallas
keeps himself in safe places, till he was betrayed by his friend Montieth to
king Edward, who caused him to be put to death in London, and his quarters to
be dispersed to diverse parts of both Kingdoms. King Edward now thought all
sure; but he found afterward that he had to to do with a slippery Kingdom,
which he could not long hold: For Robert Bruce the son of Balliols competitor,
and John Cumin Balliols Cousin-german, taking the oath of secrecy from each
other, combine to revolt; they agree Bruce should be King, and Cumin next in
dignity; and should also enjoy all Bruces possessions, which were very great;
yet Cumin repenting of his bargain reveals the Plot to king Edward, who
resolves when opportunity served, to have him questioned for high treason:
Earl Gomer or Gloucester, Bruces old friend, advertiseth him of his danger, not
by word or writing, for he durst not, but by sending him a pair of gilt Spurs
with some money by his servant, pretending he had borrowed these of him: Bruce
understanding the meaning, causes three Horses presently to be shod backward,
that in the Snow the tracks might not be known, and with his two servants rides
post into Scotland, where by the way he intercepts Cumins Letters going to King
Edward, in which he found, that Cumin did instigate the King to dispatch Bruce,
with what speed he could, for he was a dangerous and active man, popular and
potent in Scotland: Upon this Bruce goes to find out Cumin, who was then in
the Gray-Friers Church at Dumfrise, and shows him his own Letters, which 1305.
he disclaimed; with that Bruce in a rage runs him through with his sword,

In Rome, Alexander the Fourth was Pope six years; in whose time Daniel Duke of
Russia made the Popes Legate in Polonia believe, that he and his Country would
be of the Romish communion, and would maintain the Christian Religion against
the Tartars, whose power was grown formidable to the Christian Princes; but as
soon as he obtained what he sought for, to wit, the Crown and Title of King, he
continued in the Greek communion. To Alexander succeeded Urban the fourth, a
Cobblers son; he sat three years; he ordained Corpus Christi day: In his time
Byzantium was taken with eight hundred men, by Palaeologus, from the Latins,
in whose Family it continued almost Mahumet the Turk. To Urban succeeded
Clemens the fourth; he was Pope three years, and had two daughters by his wife,
who was now dead. After two years and nine months vacancy Gregory the tenth
was elected, who sat four years; he ordained the use of the Conclave in the
Election of the Pope, to prevent future vacancies; for the Cardinals must not
go out of the Conclave, till they have chosen a Pope: He ordained in the
Council of Lions, that none should undertake the 1274.
charge of a Parochial Church, till he was five and twenty years old. About
this time died Thomas Aquinas, being fifty years of age; and the Whipping
Heretics arose, who preferred their Whipping to Martyrdom. Pope Innocent
Praedicants Order. Adrian the fifth succeeded, who sat but one month and nine
days; he died before his Consecration, and revoked the Decree of the Conclave,
which revocation was confirmed by his Successor John the one and twentieth; and
so without the Conclave were elected Nicholaus the third, Martin the fourth,
Honorius the fourth, Nicholaus the fourth, Celestine the fifth, who renewed the
Conclave, and Boniface the eighth confirms it. John the twenty one, or as some
say, twenty two, sat eight months: To him succeeded Nicholaus the third, who
sat three years, eight months: In his time the Turks, after they had been
suppressed by the Tartars, gather new strength, and invade Martin the fourth
succeeded four years. Honorius the fourth followed two years; he confirmed the
Carmelites 1280.
Order, and turned their party-colored coats into white; and confirmed also
the Order of S. Austins Eremites. Honorius the fourth succeeded, and sat two
years: In his time Rodulphus the Emperor subdued the Helvetians, who before
were subjects to the Earl of Savoy. Nicholaus the fourth succeeded four years;
he was the first Pope of the Franciscans. To him Celestine the fifth succeeded
five months, who was deluded by a voice through a Cane, as if it had been from
Heaven, willing him to resign his Pontificat to Boniface: he decreed, that the
Popes and Cardinals should ride on Asses, as Christ did, and not Boniface the
eight, who came in as a Fox, reigned like a Lion, and died like a Dog in
prison; he Canonized S. Lewis; and ordained the Jubilee to be every hundredth
year: In his time the streets of Paris were overflowed with the Sein, so that
there was no passage through them without boats: He put on both the Pontifical
and Princely habit, causing two swords to be carried before him. The Tartars
embrace Mahumetanism, and so lost both Christianity, and Asia together. Hence
the Ottomans began to flourish. Selymus the Turk married with the daughter of
the Prince of the Precopit Tartars, who seated themselves in Taurica
Chersonesus. This Match produced Solomon. And much about the rising of the
Ottoman Family, arose the House of Austria.

CHAP. IV.
1. The Eastern Affairs under Michael Palaeologus, Andronicus the elder, and
younger. 2. The Turkish and Tartarian Affairs. 3. The Affairs of Hungary,
Poland, Denmark, the Low Countries, chiefly Holland, and the Switzers.

IN the East, Michael Palaeologus having blinded Johannes Lascarus, invaded the
Empire, and drove the French out of Byzantium; he gave Pera or Galata,
Byzantium, to the Genuois for their good service. Azatines Sultan of Iconium
being driven out of his Kingdom by the Tartars, fled to this Michael. Twenty
thousand Bulgarians invade Thracia, and plunder it. The Sultan of Iconium, whom
Michael had kept in strait custody, escaped by help of the Scythians. The
Sultan of Egypt and Arabia having the Hellespont open, carries away many of the
Scythian slaves, about Tanais and Meotis, into Egypt, by whose help he drove
the remaining Latins out of the East. Michael to strengthen himself by the
Pope and Italian Princes, against his enemies, repairs to the Council of Lions
(leaving his son Andronicus to rule the Empire) and there acknowledges the
Popes Supremacy, and reconciles the Greek and Andronicus his successor, and
Constantine, a good Soldier, who had fought successfully against the Turks;
but Andronicus, upon suspicion that he affected the Empire, put him in prison.

Andronicus hired the Alani that dwelt along the coast of the Euxine Sea,
against the Turks: These Alani being impatient of the slavery they were in
under the Scythian Tartars, repair in great multitudes to Andronicus, for some
new habitations within his Dominions; These he armed against the Turks in Asia,
by whom they were defeated; and so many as escaped the Turks fury, saved
themselves over against Lesbos on the coast of Greece. Rogerius Laurea, Admiral
of the Arragonian or Spanish Fleet, against the French in Sicily, was invited
by Andronicus with his Fleet against the Turks. He gets leave of the
Arragonian, having made peace with the French, to go with his Colleague
Piringerius Terza. Andronicus, to make them both the more cordial to him,
creates Rogerius, Caesar; and Piringerius, the great Duke: These did beat the
Turks in diverse battles, but for want of pay they became enemies, and fell to
plunder the Greek Territories. Rogerius is killed in the tumult, and his
Colleague was taken afterward by the Genuois, who stripped him both of his
Admiralty Catalani, descended of the ancient Catti and Alani, much infested
Andronicus, against whom he raises an Army of Thracians and Macedonians; but
he was put to the worse, and forced to fly. These Catalans, by the help of the
Turks, wasted Macedon, and without them overrun Thessaly; thence passing into
Boeotio and Attica, surprised Athens and Thebes, where they seat themselves,
having killed the Prince of Athens.

At this time John Prince of Thessaly dyed without issue, having lived three
years with his wife Irene, the bastard of Andronicus the Emperor; and so the
dominion of the Angeli ceased in Thessaly, Epirus, and Aetolia, a part of which
returned to the Emperor, and the rest the Princes and the Catalans tore away.
Some of the Turks who turned Christians, went to the Prince of Servia: the rest
made a league with Andronicus, for a safe convoy to the Hellespont, and from
thence to Chersonesus with their booties; but the Emperor kept not promise with
them, and so they were cut off by the Genuan and Bulgarian forces; for which
perfidiousnesse the Turks were enraged against the Christians in Asia. In the
mean while Maria Domicilla, who by right of blood claimed Jerusalem, resigns
her right to Charles King of Sicily, though Hugh King of Cyprus claimed it. The
Armenian Christians being deserted by the 1287.
Tartars, were miserably butchered and destroyed by the Turks: The falling off
of the Tartars from the Christians and Christianity, and their civil wars among
themselves, gave opportunity to the Egyptians under Melech-Messor to besiege
and take Tripoli, which they burned, and in it killed seven thousand 1288.
Christians. His son Seriphas, about three years after, took Ptolemais with
60000. horse, and 140000. foot: there were slain of the Christians 30000. the
rest that escaped were drowned with storms, except a few which recovered
Cyprus. Tyr^* Sidon, Beritus, and whatsoever the Christians had in Syria was
Seriphus afterward, as he was preparing a Fleet to invade Cyprus, was murdered
by his own Captains, who fell at variance among themselves. Cazanus the son of
Argon Prince of Tartary, was invited by the Sarazens to embrace Mahumetanisme;
which he did for a while to obtain his ends, therefore permitted the Christian
churches to be destroyed: but when he had increased his wealth and power, he
sell upon the Mahumetans and killed them: upon this Melech Nasor the Tyrant of
Egypt sights him; but he, though almost defeated, so carried himself, that he
left 20000 Sarazens dead on the place, and drove the Sultan into Baldac or
Babylon of Egypt. This victory gave a short breathing to the Christian affairs.

The Greek Church was now divided into three Factions; some holding with Becus
the Patriarch of the Latin profession, some with Joseph the other Patriarch
who was put out, and some with Arsenius who was dead. Whereupon to quiet all,
Andronious makes Gregory of Cyprus Patriarch; Becus and the Pontifician party
are banished; Gregory also shortly after is deposed, and Athanasius the Eremite
is substituted, who because he sent every Bishop home to look to his own flock,
four years after he also is deposed, and driven into the deserts. Andronicus
by evil counsel destroyed the Grecian fleet as useless, being now affianced by
marriage to Spain, which had the kingdom of Sicily; but the want of a fleet
gave occasion for all pirates to plunder the Greek coasts Venetians of Byzantium
pretending some losses they received by Andronicus, plundered both by land and
sea; which gave occasion to Othoman a petty Prince in Carmania, (but of an
active spirit, and strong body) to mise an army against the Christians; so that
he with other Turkish Commanders divided a great part of the Greek Empire
amongst them. In the battle that was fought in Chersonesus between the Greeks
and Turks, for the booties which the Turks carried from Greece under the safe
conduct of Andronicus, his son Michael lost the day, and withal the Imperial
ornaments, which the Turks disgracefully used. They brake into Thracia with
such multitudes, that they plundered it all, so that in two years the Byzantines
durst not go out of their gates: The most Bythinia are taken by Ottoman, who
makes Prusia the capital city of his new-erected Monarchy; so the Christian
Empire in the East is but a mere Sceliton. The calamities that fell on this
Empire by the Turks, were presaged by frequent earthquakes, comets and
ecclipses in the sun and moon. Andronious lived till he was seventy years of
age, and saw not only these public calamities, but also the private miseries
of his own family; for his sons and grandchildren proved both flagitious,
and factious against each other, and most ungracious to himself; for Andronicus
the younger, son to Michael, and grandchild to this Andronicus the elder,
thrust his grandfather, being almost blind with age and sorrow, into a
Monastery, where he dyed; Michael the father of this younger Andronicus, was
dead before; Manuel the other son of this Michael, was killed by the
City-guard, whilst in the night he went to find out this dissolute brother
Andronicus the younger.

Cazanus the Tartar (as we said) having beaten the Egyptian Sultan, was master
of Asia. He was by profession a Christian, and therefore married the King of
Armenia's daughter. Finding that his Kinsman Caydon was raising a Persia, sends
Ambassadors to the Pope and French king, for a union with the Latin Princes,
toward the regaining of the Holy Land. But he committed a great error, when he
entrusted Caycaphus a Saracen fugitive with the government of Damascus, having
been governor before in that place under the Egyptian: for this Saracen
revolted from him, and brought all Syria into the obedience of the Egyptian
Sultan. And so now the thousand years are ended, in which the Church did reign
with Christ; for Mahumets religion prevailed so fast, that it drove
Christianity out of the East. The Armenians and Cyprians endeavored to recover
Syria, but could do nothing, because Cazanus fell sick. The Egyptian Sultan
carried away all provisions from the Christian Cazanus, his brother Campanda
turned Mahumetan; and so the Turks overran all, even to the gates of Byzantium.

Michael Palaeologus father to Andronicus the younger, being in Thessaly, and
understanding how his younger son Manuel was killed, died for grief. Old 1321.
Andronicus, receiving continual complaints against the oppressions of his
grandchild the younger Andronicus, was resolved to imprison him: which he
understanding by the Patriarch, fled to Adrianopolis; and by the help of John
Cantacuzenus, and Syrgiannes the bastard son of Constantine, and grandchild of
old Andronicus, who was now hated for the continual taxes which he was Turks,
raised an Army against his Grandfather: therefore young Andronicus, promising
exemption from all taxes, drew almost all Thracia and Macedon to side with him;
so that the old man was glad to content himself with Byzantium, and a part of
Macedon, leaving the rest to his grandchild. Upon this rent, the Turks build
ships, with which they infest the coasts of Thrace and Macedon. Wherefore old
Andronicus, to furnish himself with money against them, was forced to sell the
ornaments of the ancient Emperors. But Syrgiannes, angry that he was not
Colleague with young Andronicus in the Empire, flies to the old man, and puts
him in hope to recover all again. Young Andronicus at this raises an Army, and
Byzantium, pretending his grandfather was dead; and to deliver his mother Xene,
whom Constantine the Despot or Lord had carried away by ship from Thessalonica
to Byzantium, and there imprisoned her: But her delivery caused a new peace;
and the rather, because Philadelphia was now besieged by the Turks. Young
Andronicus is now crowned and made Consort of the Empire with the old man; but
Syrgiannes is imprisoned and plundered. In the interim, Ottoman subdues almost
all Bythinia; who having reigned ^8 years, died, and was buried in a
Silver-tomb by his son Orcanes, after he 1326.
had taken Prusae by famine. After this, young Andronicus desirous to reign
alone, makes a league with Michael Despot or Lord of Bulgaria, with whom he
Constantinople is betrayed, the old Emperor seized upon, and by the advice of
Niphon the Patriarch is deposed, who with grief lost his eyesight. Young
Andronicus makes an expedition into Asia against Orcanes, where he was wounded
in the foot, and shamefully lost his army to the Turks: After this he fell
desperately sick, upon a cold he took after bathing. The report of his death
thrust the old Emperor into a Monastery in Byzantium; where Theodorus Synadenus
made him abjure his Empire, and change his name from Andronicus to Antonius.
But young Andronicus recovers, and was invited by the Bulgarian against the
Triballi, but refused to go, being content to sleep in a whole skin. This
Bulgarian Lord had married Andronicus his sister (as was said) and therefore
put away his other wife, sister to the King of Servia; whereupon this King made
war upon the Bulgarian, thrust him out of his principality, and put Alexander
his kinsman in his place.

About this time, Orcanes the Turk took Nicaea of Bythinia, after a long siege.
1332.
In the midst of these miseries, old Andronicus dyed in his Covent, the 50.
year Andronicus makes war upon Alexander the Bulgarian, who defeats him, and
having cooped him up with the remainder of his forces, takes pity on so many
Christians, and proffers peace upon promise of future moderation. After this,
Syrgiannes is accused of treason, but escapes, and with the Triballi invades
Macedonia. Andronicus not able to suppress him by force, murders him by an
assasinate: the Triballian Prince being bribed by the Emperor makes peace with
him, and so Macedon returns again to the obedience of Caesar. The Genuois in
Peru were grown so strong, that they slighted Andronicus. Catanes a Genuan
seiseth upon Mytilene, but not long after Andronicus recovers it, having
brought the Phocaeans into subjection. The Scythians beyond Isther Thracia, and
carried away for slaves 30000. Greeks and Turks. Orcanes did lie in wait to
surprise Byzantium; but Cantacuzenus with 70 Greek horsinen overthrew a great
number of the Turkish infantry. Andronicus calls in the Turks upon the
Illyrians, who had offended him: And whilst he is subdoing Aetolia and Epirus
(which shortly after he lost) Orcanes takes Nicomedia of Bythinia, and so the
next year, the Turks without resistance overrun Thracia; a while after they
pass over the Hellespont, and by the help of Soliman, Orcanes his eldest son,
took it. Shortly after, Andronicus died of the Spleen, being 45 1341.
years old, and having reigned 20. He left two sons by his wife Anne the
Almain, John and Manuel, over whom he appointed governor John Cantacuzenus,
whom John; but he shortly after forgot his oath, slighted the young Caesar, and
to make himself great, humoured the Greek Princes, and married his daughter to
Orcan the Turkish Sultan. Orcanes having reigned 30 years, died.

In Hungary, K. Ladislaus with Boleslaus had scarce driven out the Tartars, who
had overrun Hungary and Poland; when the people, who hated the tyrannical
deportment of Ladislaus, choose for their King Andrew, called Venetus, from his
mother and education, being Venetian: he was grandchild of K. Andrew by his son
Steven. After the death of this Andrew Venetus, Charles Nephew to Claudus of
Sicily, Robert Uncle to Charles, and Wenceslaus the Bohemian, became Competitors
Otto the Bavarian, who being taken by the Transilvanian, escaped by the help of
his wife, and returned home: Albert establishes Charles in the kingdom, who
banished many of the Nobility, and so he prevailed over his Competitors.

In Poland was the like contestation: For to K. Boleslaus succeeded Lescus
Niger, who had subdued the Iazyges and Russians, and his Competitor Conradus
Masovius, whom diverse of the Nobility had chosen for their King. This Lescus
died without issue; wherefore Boleslaus Masovius, Henry Vretislave, and
Ladislaus Locticus brother to Lescus, strove for the succession. ^n the mean
while, Wenceslaus the Bohemian invaded the Territories of Cracovia and
Sendomiria, Tartars fall upon some other places of that distracted kingdom: in
these tumults, Henry Vretislave dies, and Primislaus is chosen King by the
Polanders, who lived not above seven months after. Then was Ladislaus chosen:
but he who with so much toil and trouble got the kingdom, with too much ease
and luxury lost it; for the Peers deposed him, and conferred the kingdom upon
Wenceslaus the Bohemian.

In Denmark, Ericus the sixth, Grandchild to Waldemar by his son Christopher,
was treacherously murdered, to whom succeeded his son Ericus the seventh,
being a child; in his minority, the Kingdom was well governed by Agnes of
Brandenburg and the Nobility. The Kings murderers were all banished; Pirates
severely punished; the Holsatians and Vandals reconciled; the Territories of
Rostoch, and other places over-gainst Denmark, reduced into the Kings
obedience. This Ericus afterward became tyrannical and sacrilegious, who for
his wicked life, and the whoredoms he committed upon diverse Noble Matrons, was
murdered in a Barn, where he was found sleeping, by seven assasinats, who gave
him seventy wounds. He married his Daughter Sophia to Waldemar King of
Swethland, who for incest with his sister was driven out of his kingdom; to
whom succeeded his brother Ladislaus. To Ericus the seventh in Denmark
succeeded Ericus the eighth, who obtained some Victories 1319.
against the Teutones; He died without issue, having reigned three and and
thirty years. To him succeeded his brother Christopher, an unfortunate and
careless Prince, a hater of his Nobility, and an oppressor of the people; for
which he was driven twice out of his kingdom. He pawned to the Holsatians all
Scania, who upon this aimed at the whole kingdom, which the Danes perceiving,
called home again king Christopher, whom they had banished, and let loose his
son Ericus, whom for his bad government with his father Magnus the king of
Swethland redeemed Scania from the Holsatians for seventy thousand Marks of
silver. Waldemar, king Christophers other son, was declared king; but he was
not as yet returned from the Emperors Court; 1333.
during which time, the Holsatians seized upon Iutia, but their chief
Commanders were in one night surprised in their Garrison, and murdered by the
Danes: Upon this the new king Waldemar returned home.

In the Low Countries, John Duke of Brabant buyeth the Earldome of Nemours and
Duchy of Limburg. The Earl of Geldre next heir opposes. A war follows, in
which near Colen, the Earl is defeated, and taken prisoner, with Colen, Adolph
of Nassovia, and Henry of Lucelburg. The Earl of Geldre, upon renouncing of the
Dukedom, is released. Henry's son married the Duke of Brabants daughter, and
with her had the Earldome. Not long after, John was slain in Tornament.

Holland, called by the Romans, Batavia, in the time of Charles the Great, was
1294.
overrun by the Danes; but about this time Florentius the fifth was Earl of
that Province, who was treacherously murdered by some malcontents, as he was
Hawking, because he had made a league with France, to the prejudice of Guy Earl
of Flanders, and the King of England; the murderers cut off his hands, and
gave him two and twenty wounds. Before him were sixteen Earls, Didericus a good
man, who stoutly repressed the Norman invasion; to him succeeded Didericus the
second, of whom no memorable act is extant. Arnolphus followed, who had long
wars with the Frislanders, in which he, with the most of his Nobility were
slain. His son Didericus or Thedoricus the third succeeded, who had wars with
the Frislanders, whom the Bishop of Utricht assisted against the Earl, whom at
last he defeated. His son Thedoricus 1039.
the fourth succeeded; he unwittingly killed the Bishop of Colens brother; in
revenge of which, the Earl being fled, two of the chief Nobility of Holland
were murdered by those of Colen: To requite this murder, the Earl burned all
the Ships of Colen and Leege which were then in Dort, and imprisoned the Dort;
the Earl gets into the Town in the dark; a doubtful skirmish was fought, in
which the Earl at last had the better; but in the morning he was wounded by one
of the enemies in the thigh, and died within two days after. His brother
Florentius the first succeeded, against whom the Bishop of Colen and Leege,
with some neighboring Princes, raised a great Army, seven and twenty thousand
of which were drowned in the Ditches near Dort, and the rest slain by the Earls
Forces: After four years peace, his former enemies renew their Forces, and
invade Holland again, and were overthrown again: But whilst the Earl with some
Troops were securely refreshing themselves near the Mose, Alrad brother to the
Duke of Lorain with fresh Forces falls upon the Earl, whom they killed with two
thousand and six hundred of his men. This murder was afterward repaid by the
Citizens of Dort, who killed all the murderers. The Earls widow, Gertrudis,
during his sons minority, for two years ruled the State. She married Robert the
Frislander, so called, because he with his wife ruled Holland, which was then
called Frisia; this Robert was son to Baldwin Earl of Flanders, William Bishop
of Utricht raised a war, which ruined Holland. Henry the fourth Emperor
bestowed this Province upon William, who to obtain it the easier, procured
Godfrey (from his low stature and crookedness, called Gibber) Duke of Lorain,
to assist him, who with a great Army overthrew the Hollanders, and drove Robert
with his wife and children into Flanders; so by the Bishop of Utricht, Godfrey
was made Protector of Holland. After this, he falls upon the West-Frislanders
with fire and sword, and in a Battle kills eight thousand of them; but
afterward, as he was on the close-stoole at Antwerp, he was murdered; his
death was shortly after accompanied with the Bishops, who was a great Favorite
of Henry the 4. and an enemy to Heildebrand. Didericus Florentius, being now of
age, is assisted by Robert Frislander, and the Flandrians, to recover his
Fathers Province: Him the Bishop of Utricht opposed with an Army, assisted by
Conradus the Sueve, whom the Emperor had made Earl of Holland; but they were
both defeated by Didericus, and forced to 1092.
resign their claim to him the right owner. His son Florentius the second
succeeded, a peaceable and just Prince, who died in the prime of his years; to
whom succeeded Didericus the sixth, who was forced by Henry the fifth to hold
Holland in Fee of the Empire: He aimed to be Earl of Flanders, but missed of
it. He twice subdued the West-Frislanders; then his brother Florentius taking
part with Frisia, was the occasion of much bloodshed. At last Lotharius
Florentius afterward was murdered. Didericus had some controversy with the
Flandrians, about the Islands of Zeland, but he died before the controversy
was ended. To him succeeded 1151.
Florentius the third, who married the daughter of Henry Prince of Scotland; he
had some contestation with the Bishop of Utricht, but the Emperor Barbarossa
reconciled them: He had wars also with the Frisians, and did good service under
Barbarossa, who by the Holland ships brake in upon Damiata or Pelusium. Having
ruled Holland three and thirty years, he died in the Holy-War, and was buried
near Barbarossa in Antioch, whose son Theodoricus the 1190.
seventh succeeded; He had wars with his brother William about Frisland; the
East-Frisland to William: He had wars also with Flanders, and a controversy
with the Duke of Geldre about the election of the Bishop of Utricht; the matter
was referred to the Pope, who made the Earl Protector of the Bishopric, till a
new Bishop was chosen. He had also wars with the Duke of Lorain, whose woods he
cut down and burned, and carried the Dukes brothers away prisoners: but Lorain,
by the help of Colen, Limburg, and Flanders, set upon the Earl of Holland, and
took him prisoner. In the mean while, the Bishop of Utricht fell upon Geldre
and Holland with fire and sword; but shortly after, the Duke, the Earl, and the
Bishop were made friends. Then the Earl died, having ruled Holland thirteen
years; 1203.
to whom succeeded his brother William, who was opposed by the Earl of Lossen,
whom he defeated. Then understanding that Malcolm King of Scotland his Uncle
was dead, and that he thought himself next Heir, repairs into Scotland with a
great Fleet, where he found a party to join with him; but perceiving what great
opposition he was like to have, and that the Earl of Lossen had invaded Holland
in his absence, returns home, and drives out his enemy, having ruled nineteen
years, he died, to whom succeeded his son Florentius the fourth; he was father
to William King of the Romans, and to Margaret, who had at one birth 365.
children; he was employed with the 1223.
Dukes of Brabant and Cleve, by the Pope and Emperor, to suppress the Heathen
Idolatry that was begun to spread in those parts; He was killed in a
Torneament by Claremontanus. To whom succeeded William the second his son,
being six years old. His Protector was Otho his Uncle Bishop of Utricht. 1235.
The Earl on his wedding day was like to be burned with his wife, for the house
took fire suddenly, so that it was burnt down, with diverse in it, and much
Plate and Jewels. About twenty years of age, Frederick the second being Harlem
to the Hague, and built the Palace there: He had Wars with the Flandrians about
the Isle Walacria of Zeland, which they claimed as their Island; A battle is
fought, in which the Flemings were overthrown, drowned and slain. After this,
Charles of Anjou, brother to King Lewis of France, renews the quarrel in behalf
of the Flemings, having received Hanonia as a reward for his assistance; but
William drove him out thence; and then a peace is made with Flanders. After
this, being at Utricht, he is wounded in the head with a stone which was flung
at him, for the Frisians, and those of Utricht hated him; and as he was making
an Expedition against the Frislanders, who Frislanders: He had been King of the
Romans seven years. To him succeeded Florentius the fifth; in his 1256.
minority were great troubles between Holland and Utricht; as soon as he was of
age, he made an Expedition against the Frislanders in revenge of his fathers
death; those he subdued; about which time many Towns of Frisland were drowned
by an inundation: Then also was Zeland united to Holland by marriage 1287.
of Guy the Earl of Flanders daughter with Florentius: He was one of those
Competitors with Balliol for the Crown of Scotland, being descended from Ada
wife to Florentius the third, and daughter of Henry Prince of Scotland; Edward,
he sold his Title for a sum of money: he had wars with the Flemings, and for
making peace with France he was murdered (as was said.) To him succeeded John
the first his son, whose protection the Earl of Cleve undertook; but he was put
out of this Office; by John Earl of Hannonia. About this time great troubles
fell out between Holland and Utricht. Middleburg also in Zeland was besieged by
the Flandrians. The young Earl of Holland having married King Edwards daughter
of England, was much carried away by his Favorite Wolfardus, who caused him to
infringe the Liberties of Dort, upon which arose a Civil War: Dort will not
lose her privileges; therefore the Earl besieges it, but is beat off with
loss. Wolfardus is so hated by the people, that they hanged him by a long rope
out of a high window, where he was imprisoned, disgracefully abusing and
wounding his body. The West-frislanders being wearied with a continual 1298.
war, submitted to Holland, which overthrew their Castles, and seized upon half
their goods. After this, the Earl died, not without suspicion of poison, to
whom (because he wanted issue) succeeded John of Hannonia, son of King Williams
sister.

About this time the Switzers or Helvetians began to Cantonize themselves; they
for their good service in Italy against the Sarazens, were permitted by the
Pope and the Emperor Ludovic, son to Charles the Great, to live after their
own Laws; which liberty they enjoyed till Italy and the neighboring Guelphs
and Gibellines; then Barbarossa took them into the protection of the Empire;
but when the House of Austria began to oppress them, and infringe their Laws,
they revolted, and vindicated 1307.
their ancient Liberties, which they maintain to this day. The three Cantons
that first revolted, were Switz (whence all the rest are called Switzers) Ury,
and Underval, which with Lucerne, Zugh, and Soleerre retain the Catholic
Religion; but Friburg, Basil, Bernu, Zurich, and Schaffouz are Calvinists; the
other two, Glaris and Appentzel profess both Religions.

CHAP. V.
1. The affairs of Germany under Adolphus, Albertus, Henry the seventh, Ludovic
of Bavaria. 2. The affairs of Sicily; Naples, Florence, Rome, and Millain, and
other parts of Italy, with the adjacent Countries, from the year 1298. till
1347.

ADolphus of Nassovia, Kinsman to Gerhard Bishop of Mentz, is by his means
declared Emperor: Count Palatine stood for Albertus of Austria, but could not
prevail, and was hated for this ever after by the Bishops Faction, whose
creature Adolphus was; he to strengthen himself in the Empire, desires to marry
his son to Albertus the Austrian, which motion is rejected; whereupon a war is
raised between Adolphus and Albertus, both for this repulse, Thuringia with the
money which he received of King Edward of England, upon hope that he would
assist him and Guy of Flanders against the French; but he failed both;
wherefore both (having made peace with the French) became his enemies. The
German Princes scorned that their Emperor should become a mercenary Soldier to
the English Kingdom; and the Thuringians stormed that they should be bought
and sold. Albertus of Austria showed that he had reason to serve the French, if
the Emperor would abase himself to serve the English: Hereupon forces are
raised against Adolphus, whom the same Bishop of Mentz that made him Emperor,
deposes, and sets up against him Albert of Austria, with whom the Princes
join; only the Duke of Bavaria, and Rodolphus Count Palatine, who was
son-in-law to Adolphus, adhered to him. Near Spira the battle is fought;
Adolphus too hastily with his Horse, 1298.
before the Foot came up, fell upon the Austrians, who had the advantage of the
ground and Sun; The Adolphians are defeated, and Adolphus himself wounded in
the eye, and beat down from his horse; whom as he was rising again from the
ground, Albertus runs into the neck, and kills him, the eighth year of his
Empire; he was buried at Spire.

Pope Boniface the eighth, who speaking through a long Cane in the wall, had
made Celestine lay down his Pontificat, endeavored to make peace between James
to restore Sicily to Charles the Lame; but Frederick, brother to James, came in
the interim with a Fleet from Spain into Sicily, and is saluted King by the
people. When James was dead, Robert, son to Charles the Lame, came over into
Sicily, and took Catana; but the Sicilians, who favored the Spaniards more
then the French, in a Seafight defeat Philip, the brother of Robert, whom they
took and imprisoned. Frederick recovers in a short time both Sicily and
Calabria in Hetruria. The Genuois were so incensed against the Pisans, that
they sunk great ships in the mouth of the River, to hinder their Navigation:
About which time, there were such fearful Earthquakes, that the Pope being at
Mass, was forced to Gibellines and Guelphs now raged in Italy, but under new
names, of White and Black; the Gibellines were named White, whom the
Florentines drove out of their City, with Dantes the Poet. The Pope, to be out
of danger, removed his Seat to Avenion in France, which Clement the sixth
bought; the Italian affairs he committed to the care of three Cardinals; the
Popes abode in France was seventy years, in which time diverse Schisms were in
the Church, the Italians choosing a Pope of their Nation, and the French of
theirs. This time the Italians called the seventy years Captivity of Babel.

Albertus having slain Adolphus, is made Emperor; such was the concourse of
people to see him, that the Duke of Saxony was squeezed to death with the
press. He reconciled himself with Otto Duke of Bavaria, whose Uncle he had
killed: But this friendship lasted not long, for Otto being called to be King
of Hungary fell upon Syria; but shortly after, Otto is by the Hungarians
Albertus desires to be confirmed by the Pope in his Empire, which Boniface
refused to do, showing by the Crown on his head; and the sword by his side,
that he was both Pope and Emperor himself; yet shortly after in hatred of
Philip the Fair, he declared him Emperor, and withal conferred on him the
title of France: but Philip to elude the Popes fury, bestowed in marriage his
daughter Blanca upon Ralph Alberts Son; this Albert made his Son Ralph King of
Bohemia, Wenceslaus the seventh being in a tumult slain in Moravia; but Ralph
in the very beginning of his Reign, was murdered in his chamber; Henry Duke of
Carinthia, and Son in law to Wenceslaus the sixth, having seized on the
Kingdom, notwithstanding that Frederick Alberts other Son was elected King by
Albert had wars with Otto of Bavaria, whom Conradus Bishop of Saltsburg
assisted, and withal so endangered the Emperors life with a poisoned cup, that
had he not vomited presently, he had dyed; yet he never thoroughly recovered.
Afterward the same Emperor was slain, and cut in pieces by means of the Duke of
Carinthia, whilst Albert was making war against Frederick of Mysia, which
Country he aimed at, as being a convenient inlet to Bohemia. This Frederick was
Son to Albert Earl of Thuringia, a wicked man, who would have murdered his
wife, daughter to Frederick the second, Emperor, being animated thereto by a
harlot whom he doted on: Alberts Lady fled to save her life, and as she kissed
her Son Frederick in her flight; whom she Albert, in her passion she bit his
cheek, the mark whereof he still retained. Dietricas Marquess of Mysia, Alberts
brother, commiserating this disconsolate Lady, gave her entertainment, and made
her Son Frederick his heir to Mysia, at which Albert the Father stormed, and
caused this his Son to be imprisoned a whole year, till by the favor of his
Keepers who pitied his case, he was let go. After this his Father Albert dyed
miserably. Frederick subdued all his enemies at last, and among the rest Albert
the Emperor, and so obtained both the Earldome of Thuringia, and the Marquisat
of Mysia. The Emperor was set upon first by John his brothers Son, whom he had
removed for his loose life from the government of Suevia. This John gave the
first blow, 1308.


Albertus being dead, Philip the Fair of France was now in hope to be Emperor,
having the Pope within his Dominions; wherefore by his brother Charles Valoise,
he raises an Army: but the Pope considering how dangerous the translation of
the Empire might prove to the Italian Princes; sends secretly to the seven
Electors to hasten the election of a German Emperor; which was done
accordingly; and Henry Earl of Lucelburg was chosen upon the commendations of
his brother Baldwin Archbishop of Trevers; the Pope by his Italy, and there
compose the long differences with which it was almost ruined: he to that
purpose sets himself, but first resolves to settle Germany; therefore he
confirms Frederick the Son of Albert in his possession of Austria,
conditionally that he would resign his right in Bohemia, which when he had
assented to, the Emperor by consent of the Electors, deposed Henry the
Carinthian, and made his own son John King, by marrying him to Elizabeth the
daughter of Wenceslaus the eldest, and niece to Ralph the Emperor. Henry after
this, composed the wars of Mysia or Mysina, so that Frederick should content
himself with Thuringia and Mysia, and should leave the lower Lusatia to the
Bohemians: so Germany being quieted, he raises an Army for Italy; but first he
performs the Funeral ceremonies to Albert and Adolph, whose bodies he
translated to Spire, and declared all those to be Traitors who had a hand in
the murder of Albert, all which dyed miserably.

In Italy most of the Cisalpin Cities had changed their Governors; the
Scaligers Verrona, the Passerins on Mantua, the Carrarians on Padua, the
Venetians on Ferrara, and the Florentines on Pistoriue; in Millain the Turrians
chief of the Guelphs under Guido had suppressed the Gibellins, and driven out
thence Matthew the Viscount, who complains to the Emperor, being on his march
toward Millain, he restores them both to their ancient patrimony and sets the
City at liberty; but because Henry placed Matthew on his right hand, and Guido
on his left, as he was going to receive his iron Crown, Guido raises a tumult
in the City which had endangered the Emperor, but that Matthew suddenly raised
all his friends, and by the help of the German forces fell upon the Turrians,
and drove them out of the City; the charge of which Matthew. Cremona, Phacenza,
Parma, Papia, and Brixium, who favored the Guelphs, were reduced by Caesar, to
whom the Cremonians with ropes about their necks acknowledged their fault, and
paid their Fine. Brixium also was punished with a mulct, and demolition of
their walls; and one Theobald who had caused them to rebel, was torn in pieces
by horses.

Lombardy and other places being settled, Henry goes for Genua, and from thence
by Sea to Pisae, the Army he sent by land toward Rome, where the two families
of the Ursini and Columni for three months together skirmished daily, that the
streets ran with blood; Robert King of Apulia son to Charles the lame, Ursins
against the Gibellins who stood for Caesar, and strove to keep him out of the
City, but the Columni prevailed and brought him in, where he was crowned the
third time with much difficulty and reluctance of the Cardinal Legates. Caesar
after his Coronation made haste out of that turbulent 1312.
City, and fatal to the German Emperors: he made a League with Frederick of
Sicily, who then had war with Robert of Apulia: the Florentines with the
Bononians, Ferrarian^, and other Cities held out against the Emperor, who
burned their fields and provision, that they might for want be forced to yield
the sooner: He summoneth Robert to appear and answer to his accusations, but he
refused to come, and so is condemned of Treason and Rebellion, his Arms are
Clement shortly after repealed, as may be seen in his Constitutions called
Clementines, set forth by his successor John the 23. Henry having laid siege to
Florence, and preparing to go against Robert upon the invitation of the
Neapolitans, is poisoned by one Bernard a predicant Friar, being hired thereto
by the Florentines; the murderer, who poisoned the cup, or as some say the
Sacramental bread, was flia'd alive. Henry's body two years after his death was
translated to 1313.
Pisae: the Florentines in thee battles were defeated by the Pisans, who stood
for Caesar and the Gibellins; wherefore the Legates and King Robert, offended at
this success, give their assistance to the Cuelphs, whose Army Matthew Viscount
Millain defeated: Hereupon he is excommunicated by Vasco the Cardinal, and
Legate to the Pope; yet his sons had good success against the Guelphs,
notwithstanding the aid they had of the Neapolitans under Robert, of the French
under Philip Valoise, and of the Germans under Henry Duke of Austria.

John after his fathers death raised an Army, and confirmed the Caesarian
forces in Italy: He enlarged also Bohemia by the addition of Lusatia, and a
great part of Silesia; which Country lying between Poland and Bohemia, fell off
from both, and made themselves free; but having abused their freedom with
intestine broils, the Bohemians subdued them: This John was afterward killed in
the battle of Cressy, in which were slain also Charles Valoise, and thirty
thousand French.

After the death of Henry the seventh, the Empire wanted an head fourteen
months, because of the rent among the Electors; for the Bishop of Mentz and of
Trevers, with the Marquess of Brandenburg stood for Ludovic of Bavaria; but
1316.
the Bishop of Colen, the Palsgrave, and Duke of Saxony, were for Frederick of
Austria: both were crowned; Ludovic at Aix the ordinary place, by the Bishop of
Mentz and Trevers, whose office was not to consecrate; Frederick at Bonnoa
which was not the ordinary place of Coronation, by the Bishop of Colen, whose
charge it was to consecrate the elected Emperor: the King of Bohemia with his
casting voice, conferred the right title on Ludovic; yet to avoid jars, the
Electors, by the Popes advice, were content that both should be called
Emperors, and both equally rule together, as of old, M. Antonius and L. Verus,
Valentinian and Valens, Gratian and Theodosius, with many others, reigned
together as Colleagues. Ludovic thrust his brother Ralph the Palsgrave out of
his inheritance, because he preferred Frederick to him; This Ralph afterward
England. But these two Emperors could not agree; Germany is divided into two
factions, which last eight years; these troubles were presaged by a Comet, and
accompanied with famine and mortality: five several battles were fought; the
two greatest were, that at Esling in Suevia, which was besieged by Frederick
for adhering to Ludovic; in this conflict many of the Nobility were slain and
taken on both sides, for the victory inclined to neither, however the siege was
raised. The other great battle was fought near Muldorffe in Bavaria, which
Frederick had invaded with ten thousand Hungarians, and twenty 1323.
thousand Austrians: Ludovic meets him with the strength of Bohemia, and the
neighboring parts; great flaughter is committed on both sides; at last the
Hungarians are forced to give ground, and though the Austrian horse held out
Frederick with his brother Henry are taken prisoners; three years was this
Emperor detained a prisoner, then was set at liberty, conditionally that he
would be content with the bare title of Emperor whilst he lived, but should not
not meddle with the Government, nor enter into Italy: Seven years after he
dyed, his brother was released by restoring of some Towns and Forts in Moravia,
which in this War the Austrians had taken from the Bohemians.

After this victory of Ludovic, Pope John the 22. or 23. accuses him for
aiding Galeacius of Millain against the Guelphs, and for exercising his
Emperial Galeacius, who had a just cause; upon this Ludovic is condemned by the
Pope as an heretic, and the sentence declared against him at Avenion, for
maintaining that the Pope was not to meddle with secular affairs. Leopoldus
brother to Frederick, who came not in time to aid him, does much hurt in
Alsatia and Helvetia, afterward he became mad and dyed. John King of Bohemia,
and Charles King of Hungary, with Otto Fredericks other brother overrun
Austria; shortly after Otto dyed, and so did Frederick, being consumed by a
Love-potion. Four years after the 1330.
victory, Ludovic marches into Italy to establish the Gibellin faction, the
chief Galeacius and his four brothers, John, Mark, Luchin, and Steven,
Viscounts of Millain, the sons of Matthew. Galeacius had taken Placenza from
Albertus Sootus: upon this; King Robert, the Pope, and the Florentines, who had
been molested by Castrucius, a great friend of the Galeacii, entered into a
League, with whom the French King joined, in hatred to the Emperor, to
re-establish the Guelphs in Italy; the Gibelins understanding that Philip
Valois and his Confederates were raising Forces against them, they beseech the
Emperor to hasten into Italy, who did so; he was met at Verona by Mark, who
complained of his brother Galeacius, that he did assume the sole command over
Milain, infringing their liberties. This accusation Ludovic put off, till a
more convenient time: in the interim he goes to Milain, where he is pompously
received by Galeacius, and in the Church of S. Ambrose receives his Ironcrown
from the Bishop of Aretin a great Gibelline. Here was present at that time
Caius Scaliger, with a thousand Horse and some Foot-companies, to wait on the
Emperor; who having heard his accusation and Marks against Galeacius,
understanding also that the Millanois would pay his Army, if their Republike
Galeacius entertaining correspondency with the Pope, he puts him with Luchin
and John his brothers, his son Actius, and some others in close prison; Then
were chosen four and twenty men out of every Tribe or Ward to rule the Common
wealth. And so having left Montfortius with some German forces to guard the
City, Ludovic passes into Hetruria, and so to Rome, where he complains to the
Cardinals and Senate of the wrongs done him by Pope John 22. withal he makes
one Peter Corbarius a Franciscan, Antipope, by whom he and his wife Margaret
Lady of Holland and Frisland, are crowned in the Vatican. But no 1328.
sooner had Ludovic left the City, when this poor Antipope (called now Nicolaus
5.) is by Boniface Earl of Pisa apprehended, laid in irons, and sent to the
Avenion, where he ended his days in misery.

About this time the Emperor takes Castrutius Duke of Luca out of prison, and
bestows honors on him; at whose request the Vicounts are restored. But all
this could not secure the Emperor in Italy; for he found them, upon the Popes
displeasure, to fall from him; besides, Rome had received King Robert of
Naples, his forces in Germany were defeated, the Catti and Saxons had revolted;
And fearing an Italian fig or pill, makes haste away into Germany; where having
assembled the Peers, he makes confession of his faith, as he had done at Rome
before the Cardinals, and complains of the Popes injustice Benedict the ninth,
John's successor; who sent him word, that he could not absolve him, being
hindered by the Kings of France and Naples. Ludovic, to be revenged on the
French king, who solicited the Pope to make him Lieutenant of Italy, joins
himself in league to King Edward of England, to the great prejudice of France,
which was wasted by their forces. Wherefore the French King cunningly got the
Emperors wife to take him off from the English, assuring him by oath and
promise that he would reconcile him to the Pope, which he did not: He procured
also John King of Bohentia to forsake him, who with a great Italy, pretending
that he went to settle the troubles of Lombandy, where the Lieutenants or
Vicounts of those cities which Ludovic had left to their government, strove for
the dominion of them. King John suddenly seiseth upon Brixia, Cremona, Papia,
and diverse other cities; whereupon the Guelphs and Gibellines (being affrighted
at this success, and fearing lest Philip Valois and the Pope had conspired
with King John to subdue all the Italian cities, and to divide the dominion
amongst them) of long enemies became now friends, and enter into league against
John, whom they defeated at Ferrara and drove him out of Italy; yet he retained
Parma, Regium, and Mutina, which he committed to his Son Charles.

Ludovic having conferred the Dukedom of Corinthia upon the Austrian, which
King John hoped should have been given to his son in right of his wife, the
daughter of Henry of Carinthia; he declares himself an open enemy to Ludovic,
and joins with France, where he lost his life. Pope Clement the sixth who
succeeded Benedict, renews the sentence of Excommunication, delivered by Pope
John against Ludovic, and urges the Electors to choose another Emperor; and
because the Bishop of Mentz would not call the Princes together for a new
Election, he is first excommunicated, and then deposed, and another Bishop put
in his place; but the Elector of Trevers, who had been Ludovicks chief
Counselor and supporter, fell off from him, and encouraged Charles Prince of
Bohemiae to undertake the Empire: The like did the Duke of Saxon. The new
Bishop of Mentz assembleth the Princes. Charles Marquess of Moravia (whose
Font-name was Wenceslaus, but afterward called Charles by Charles the French
King, who had married this Bohemians Aunt) King John's son is elected, and is
conveyed to Aix to be crowned; but the City denied him entrance; wherefore he
is, by the Bishop of Colen, crowned at Bonna, a Rhine near Colen:
Notwithstanding that Ludovic, by confession of his faith, had refelled the
Heresies objected against him, and had straightly charged, upon pain of
proscription, that none should obey the Popes Orders, nor leave off performing
of Divine Service, because of his Excommunications. The French King did labor
to reconcile the Pope and Emperor, but in vain; for the Pope would not absolve
him, except he would openly confess his Heresies, resign his Imperial Crown,
and hold it of him; which Ludovic refused, affirming, that though he had his
Consecration from the Pope, yet the right of the Empire was not in him, but in
the Electors; but Ludovic died the next year after this new Election, by a fall
from his horse 1347.
horse. He reigned 30. some say 33. years; his wife Margaret, daughter to
William the third of Holland, went to take possession of that Province fallen
to her by the death of her brother William the fourth, killed by the
Frislanders.

About this time the Florentines being oppressed by Castrutius and their own
civil discords, yielded themselves to Charles Duke of Calabria, son to Robert
King of Naples. Ludovic Gonzaga invaded the Dominion of Mantua, having
Passerinus Lord thereof. Caius Scaliger, Lord of Verona, having taken in Padua,
and Tarvisium, from the Carrarii, died, whose son Mastinus succeeded. Galeacius
also died with grief, having lost his fathers Principality by Castrutius Duke
of Luca, and Lord of Pisae and Pistorium; whom the Pope excommunicated, as he
was riding in triumph into Luca for his Victory over Pistorium, upon which he
died with grief, and his children stripped of their inheritance by the Emperor,
who had for Castrutius sake incurred the Popes displeasure. Mastinus Scaliger
to his fathers inheritance added Vicetia, Brixia, Bergomus, Parma, and Luca,
and aimed also at Venice, which was his undoing; for the Venetians took from
him Padua and Tarvisium. Luchinus the Vicount Brixia and Bergomus. Benedict the
eleventh sends his Legate to pacify the tumults in Rome, where by his command
Francis Petrarch the Poet is carried in pomp to the Capitol, and there crowned
with Bays. He confirms Scaliger with the other Princes in their late
purchased Dominions: but a dangerous war arose between the Florentines and
Pisans, in which Florence was like to be surprised by Valter Duke of Athens,
who was sent by Robert King of Naples to assist them; for he undertaking to
settle things, was made Protector by the Republike, but he made himself
absolute Lord; whereupon the Bishop of Florence raises the people against him,
who both drove him out of the City, and the Nobility with him.

The Kingdom of Naples at this time was in great trouble; for King Robert 1344.
the son of Charles the Lame, dying without issue male, marries his Niece Joan
by his son Charles, who was dead, to Andrew King Charles of Hungaries youngest
son, and makes him his Successor; but he not being able to satisfy her
unsatiable lust, was by her means strangled, and then marries with Ludovic the
Prince of Tarentums son, and her Cousin-german, who had more right to the
Kingdom then the other. Hereupon Ludovic K. of Hungary, to revenge his brother
Andrews death, marches into Apulia with a great Army, at whose approach
Ludovic with his incestuous wife and parricide fled; and so he seized on the
Kingdom. Shortly after, the Hungarian having settled Naples, returns home. The
Tarentine with his wife, being in Marsiles, repair to the Pope at Avinion, who
buys this City of them, and re-establish them in the kingdom. Not long after
the Tarentine dies, and his wife marries with James the Arragonian, Duke of
Calabria, whom she within a while casts off, and marries with Otto of
Brunswic, and adopts Lewis of Anjou, brother to Charles the fifth of France,
son of king John. Pope Urban the sixth being offended at Ludovic of Hungary to
repossess Naples, which he refused, because of his age; but sends Charles the
son of Lewis of Dyrrachium, and husband to Margaret, Ioans sister, who suddenly
enters Italy before Anjou was ready, defeats Otto of Brunswick, and imprisons
him; and Joan, who had yielded her self, by his command is stifled with a
pillow held on her face. Three years after Otto escaped out of prison, and
recovers Naples; but shortly after died. Lewis of Anjou, by the help of Clement
the seventh, raised 30000. men, with which he makes war against Charles two
years together, takes in Tarentum, with some other places, and was like to
carry the whole kingdom; but being poisoned by a draught of infected water,
died; and so the Army, and withal the kingdom fell to Charles without
bloodshed, who shortly after Hungary against Sigismund, where he is
treacherously killed by the Queen widow. His son Ladislaus took Rome twice,
being divided into factions. Against him, Alexander the fifth, and the
Florentines call in Lewis of Anjou, son to the former, who defeats Ladislaus;
but afterward Anjou was worsted, and the Florentines forced to make peace on
disadvantagious terms. Ladislaus is poisoned at Rome; to him succeeded his
sister Joan in the kingdom, who adopted Alphonsus, king Ferdinands son of
Arragon, and afterward dis-inherited him, she promises the kingdom to Lewis
of Anjou, grandchild to the first Lewis: Hereupon a war is raised between
Alphonsus and Lewis, in which Alphonsus at last got the victory, and left the
possession of the Ferdinand. Lewis, by Ioans consent, makes his brother Renatus
Heir to the Crown; but she dying, he lost his right. His son John was defeated
at Troy. Renatus the father conferred his right upon his brother Charles his
son, who was only left alive of the stock of Anjou; he left his right by will
to Lewis the 11. of France. Charles the eighth, the son of Lewis, by claiming
his Right, occasioned great wars between Arragon and France.

Rome, in the Popes absence, is torn in sunder by the Columnii and Ursini. One
Nicholaus a Scrivener did so insinuate himself into the foolish multitude,
Augustus, Severus, and Clemens; then seiseth upon the Capitol; multitudes both
of the City, and abroad, adhere to him: he sends his Edicts to the Italian
Princes to submit themselves to him; he sends to the Pope to repair into the
City within the prefixed time of a year, or else to lose his Pontificat; he
commands the seven Electors, and other Princes of Germany to wait on him, or
else he would proceed against their contumacy; but the next year this
short-lived Emperor was by the Popes forces driven out of Rome and Italy, and
afterward being apprehended, was sent in chains to the Pope. About this time

CHAP. VI.
1. The Eastern Affairs under the Palaeologi. 2. A brief History of the Turks,
till the year 1412. 3. The brief History of Sweden, Denmark and Norway, till
the same year 1412.

AFter the death of Andronicus senior the son of Michael, the Palaeologi began
1332.
to reign at Byzantium, which race continued 121. years. Andronicus junior
having (as is already said) deposed his Grandfather, reigned eight years, and
left John Cantacuzenus Tutor to his two sons, John Palaeologus and Manuel.
Sixteen years after Cantacuzenus was driven out, and John Palaeologus reigned
seven and twenty years, whose successor was Manuel; he ruled four and thirty
years, to whom suceeded his son John seven and twenty years, whose Successor
was Constantine the eighth and last, for in the eight year of his reign
Constantinople was taken by the Turks.

Cantacuzenus, for his ambition in aiming at the Empire, is banished; whereupon
he raised an Army, with which he vexed John, and his Mother a widow, Byzantium
by treachery, and made himself Emperor, and John his Colleague, on whom he
bestowed his daughter in marriage; but he disliking his father-in-law's
greatness, fled to Tenedos to raise Forces against him, and procured Francis
Cataluscus the Genuan to assist him, for whose service he gave him the Isle
Lesbos with Mitylene, which his 1354.
posterity held till Mahumet the second. Cantacuzenus in the interim enters
into league with the Venetians, Catalanians, and King of Sicily against the
Genuois. A war is begun, the Genuois in a Sea Fight at Scutari, between
Byzantium and Chalcedon, get the Victory, under Auria Admiral of their Fleet;
but the next year the Genuois at Corsica are overthrown by Pisanus the Venetian
Auria renewes his Fleet, and fights Pisanus near Peloponnesus, defeats and
takes him prisoner with 5000. more, whom he carries in triumph into Genua.
Upon this Cantacuzenus remits the Empire to his eldest son Andronicus, and
shuts himself up in a Monastery. His youngest son Manuel he makes Despot, and
Governor of Sparta in Laconia: His daughter he had married before to Orchanes
the Turk; but Andronicus is driven out of his Empire by Palaeologus, and flies
to Rhodes, hoping to find assistance of the great Master; but failing of this
he repaires to his brother at Peloponnesus, where he spent the rest of his life
in private.

John having obtained the Empire, or shadow of it rather, went to Italy for
assistance, but being slighted there, returns to Byzantium and seeing he could
not maintain himself against the Bulgarian and Servian Forces in Arms against
him, he makes a league with Amurathes, to whose protection he both submits
himself and Kingdom, promising a yearly tribute, for the payment whereof he
delivers his youngest son Theodorus as hostage: By this means the Greek
Emperors became Vassals to the Turk. John, in his absence had made his eldest
son Andronicus Governor of the Empire; and his other son Emanuel, Ruler of
Thessalonica. Andronicus was accused of Treason, as if he had conspired with
Amurathes his son to kill Bajazet sent Theodorus into Peloponnesus, having
put the Cantacuzeni to death. Blind Andronicus, having recovered a little
sight, complains of his father and brother to Bajazet, who thrust both the
Father and the son into a dark Dungeon, and conferred the Empire on
Andronicus; but three years after Emanuel escaped out of prison, and by the
help of Bajazet thrust him from his government, and sent him bound with his son
John to the Turks Court.

Emanuel having profferred a yearly tribute of three millions of Crowns to
Bajazet, obtaines the Kingdom; he is enjoined to deliver up Philadelphia which
had been diverse times besieged in vain, to give hostages, and to bind himself
by oath to aid the Turks with Auxiliaries upon all occasions. But not long
after, John the son of Andronicus accuses his Uncle to Bajazet, and alienates
him so from Emanuel, that be besieged Byzantium, and seeing he could not take
it by force, resolves to gain it by famine; but the sudden breaking in of
Tamerlan the Scythian, diverted him from his enterprise. Emanuel intending for
Italy Turks* leaves John the son of Andronicus governor of the Kingdom in his
absence; for he was now out of the Turks favor, for complying secretly with
his brother: Theodorus, the other brother, fearing lest Bajazet would have
taken Byzantium, when he lay before it, sold Argos and Nauplium to the
Venetians, and Sparta to the Rhodians; But the Turks afterward destroyed Argos,
and Sparta returned to the Palaeologi. This Emanuel had seven sons, by his
Turkish wife, widow to the King of Trapezuntum; John his successor, Andronicus
governor of Thessalonia, which he after sold to the Venetians, and so in
Peloponesus obtained Mantinaea of his brothers; His third son was Michael; the
fourth Theodorus Prince of Peloponesus, he strove with his brother John for the
Empire, choosing Amurathes for Arbitrator; the fifth Demetrius, He took from
the Albans Peloponnesus by the Turks help, for which he paid a yearly tribute
of fifteen thousand Crowns, at last he yielded himself and Sparta to Mahumet;
The sixth Thomas, who after Byzantium was taken, and Pelopounesus lost, lived
obscurely in Rome; The seventh Constantine, succeeded John in the Empire.

About these times Greece was torn in pieces by the Venetians, Genuois,
Neapolitans, Spaniards, Bulgarians, and Servians, or Triballians, every one of
these snatching away a share of that wretched Country; not long after the
Venetians Athens to Antonius the son of Reinerius the Florentine: The widow of
this Anthony after her husbands death, bought the Principality from Mahumet,
and falling in love with a Venetian Merchant (who for her sake poisoned his
former wife) made him Prince, who being accused by the Gentry of Athens for
Tyranny, is by Mahumet commanded to be slain, and his wife also, and then
commands the President of Thessaly to take possession of Athens; which
afterward, because of the often seditions of the Citizens, he destroyed with
its Tower, and so ends this famous City for Arts and Arms, having flourished
from Solon to this Mahumet two thousand years: now it is Theodorus Emanuels
fourth son kept out the Turks by land from Peloponnesus by building a wall in
Isthmus reaching between the Ionian and Aegaean Seas, where stood the two
Cities Corinth and Megara.

To Emanuel succeeded his eldest son John, who being stripped of all power could
act nothing memorable; he went to the Council of Florence, and shortly after
his return dyed, to whom succeeded Constantine the seventh his youngest
brother. He had done good service against the Turks before he was Emperor; but
when Amurathes had taken Heraclea, he was forced to submit to the Conqueror,
and to beat down the wall again of Peloponnesus, which afterward the Venetians
set up, but Mahumet totally overthrew it. In him ended the Greek Byzantium
being taken by Mahumet.

The Turks, originally Schytians, or Sarmatians, who had broke into Asia
through the Caspian straits, and had served Heraclius against the Persians, who
afterward served the Persians, and subdued them, and withal received from
their conquered subjects Mahumetanisme: whom afterward the Tartars much
weakened; but after their departure; the Turks recovered all that they had lost
in Asia, and much more, dividing themselves into diverse Tetrarchies according
to their Families, of which the four chief were, the Assimbei, Candelori,
Caramanus, and Ottomanus. The first possessed Cappadocia with Armenia the
less; The second had the Country Sinope about Pontus; The Carmans had Cilicia,
and the Ottomans Bithinia, and the Country about Olympus: but in time Mahumet
the Ottoman swallowed up the Candelorians and Caramans Countries, who fled to
the Assimbeans for help; of these came Ussumcassanes who subdued the Kingdom
of Persia, and had long wars withthe Ottomans, as we shall see hereafter. The
occasion of the quarrel were Hali and Homar, Mahumets Alcoran; The Ottomans
followed Hali, the rest Homar. The first Ottoman began to flourish about the
year 1300. and reigned 1327.
twenty nine years; He was the son of Orthogulies, chief of the Ogucian family,
and was called Ottoman from a small Town of Galatia, named Ottomanzicum. He
took Natolia and Ancyra in Phrygia, Sinope in Galatia, where King Mithridates
was born and buried, and Sebastia in Cappadocia, it is at this day called Siva;
He subdued also Prusia the Metropolis of Bythina, and there made his residence,
though some adscribe this to his son Orchanes. A little before his death, eight
thousand Turks brake into Europe, having passed the Hellespont, and joined
themselves with the Catallani. Ottoman left three sons; the Orchanes, (the
other two brothers being slain,) succeeded.

Orchanes subdued Mysia, Lydia, Lycaonia, Phrygia, and Caria, extending his
conquest to the Hellespont and Euxin sea, whilst Cantacuzenus, and the
Palaeologi are striving for mastery; some think he was slain by an arrow at the
siege of Prusia, others that he was killed in a battle against the Tartars;
Some write he reigned two and thirty years, others but two and twenty. To him
succeeded Amurathes the first, whose elder brother Solomon, that first of the
Turks entered Europe with an Army, was dead of a fall from his horse, as he was
coursing an Hare. This Amurathes overcame the Triballians, enemies to the
Greeks, and took in diverse Towns of Thracia; multitudes of Christians fled into
Adrianopolis, whom he besieged and took. Then desirous to transport Asia, he
was advised by his Priests to pick out every fifth man that was most handsome
and sound; these were distributed among the Turks, to learn their discipline
and exercises, and after three years to be brought to the Port and made
Ianisars, in which consists the Turkish strength against Christendom. He
makes Adrianopolis the seat of his Kingdom. He plunders Macedonia, and gives
the booty to his Soldiers; but understanding that the Mysians and Triballians
had raised a great Army against him, was resolved to restore to the Greeks
their Cities again, and to return into Asia, had not the Earthquake which
overthrew the walls of many Towns, invited Turks to possess them. He falls
upon the Triballi as they were in drink, and subdues them. Susman King of
Mysia, to pacify Amurathes, bestows his daughter on him, the other he marries
to Andronicus the son of John, who became stipendary and tributary to the
Sultan. After this, Amurathes subdues the Governors of Asia who had revolted
from him. Whilst he with John the Emperor were absent in Asia, his son Sanzes,
with Andronicus John's son, combine against their Fathers, who were rewarded
both with the loss of their eyes. Amurathes at last subdued Lararus the Despot
of Servia or Triballia, and put him in prison: to revenge this wrong, a servant
of Lazarus faining himself a fugitive, got access to the Sultan, whom presently
he run through with his sword; and so dyed Amurathes, after he had fought seven
and thirty Battles, and reigned two and thirty years, some say but three and
twenty. His son Bajazet succeeded. 1389.


Bajazet the first, with strangling his brother Iagupe, begins his Reign: he
enters with a great Army the Bulgarian and Servian Countries, called anciently
Mysia and Triballia, along Isther to the Pontic sea, and defeats Marcus the
Despot with all the Nobility, and so rangeth through Illiricum, Macedonia and
Albania, even to Hungary without opposition, driving thence multitudes of
Christians, and infinite store of plunder. Shortly after, he overruns Thessaly
and Thrace, even to Bosphorus, then destroys the Suburbs of Byzantium, and so
affrighteth John Palaeologus, that he is forced to seek out aid of the French;
Charles the sixth then reigning, sends John Earl of Nivern his Cousin-german,
who afterward got the Duchy of Burgundy with an Army to assist Sigismund King
of Hungary against the common enemy; diverse Princes of France and Germany
accompanied John. After they had joined their Sigismund, they march through
Servia, and obtained some small victories by the way. Then they laid siege to
Nicopolis, which gave time to Bajazet to arm himself, who having gathered
together two hundred thousand, sent before eight thousand light horsemen, which
the French set upon, and after them the Hungarians and Germans; but on a sudden
they were encompassed 1396.
with the whole Turkish Army. The French first go to wrack; the Hungarians
seeing the French horse returning without their Riders, betake themselves to
their heels; Sigismund escapes to Byzantium in a Galley; John and diverse others
are taken, some whereof were cut in pieces by Bajazets command; John with five
others were ransomed for two hundred thousand James Prince of Mytilene. John
upon his return ordained the Order of the Golden-Fleece, in memory of his
banishment in that Country where the Golden-Fleece was found by ^ason, and
where Peter and Andrew the Apostles preached: Their garment is of crimson
Velvet, with a Mantle of the same lined with white, and richly embroidered
round about with a border of Flames and Fleeces; the Hood also is of crimson
Velvet, the Collar of gold, the Toison or Fleece hanging thereat, either in
memory of Iasons, or of Gideons Fleece. Some think this order was instituted
afterward by Philip Duke of Burgundy and Earl of Flanders in the year 1429.
having a resolution to conquer the Holy Land.

Bajazet after this victory returns to the siege of Constantinople, which he
was forced to give over, upon the entering of Tamerlan into Asia, having four
hundred thousand horse, and six hundred thousand foot. This Tamerlan, called by
the Greeks Timyres, was a Citizen of Samarcanda Metropolis of the Zagatains in
Tartary. He entering Asia takes in some Towns of Armenia, and sets on fire
Sultania called of old Tygranocerta sometime the seat of the Persian Kings. So
having crossed Euphrates, he enters Cappadocia where he took Sebastia now
called Suias, and in it put to death Orthobules Bajazets son. He caused his
horse to tread to death all the Captives, being innumerable. Bajazet with a
great Army met him at mount Stella, where Pompy overthrew Mithridates,
Antitaurus, a cruel battle is fought, in which a hundred and forty thousand
were slain; Bajazet is taken, his horse being shot under 1400.
him with many arrows, who being brought to Tamerlan was shut up in a iron
Cage, which was in derision carried through Asia, and made Tamerlans footstool
when he took horse: thus was the murderer of his brother used, and that cruel
Butcher of Christians two years ago, when he defeated the French and
Hungarians. At last perceiving how he was made the scorn of the world, and
forced to eat the scraps that were flung from Tamerlans table like a dog, and
seeing his Concubines abused in his presence, chiefly his beloved Wife, the
daughter of Lazarus the Despot, out of impatience dasheth out his brains
against the Samarcanda.

After this victory Tamerlan having passed over Taurus, enters Mesopotamia,
subduing all before him even to the Syrian sea. He defeated the Egyptian
Sultan, not far from Pelusium. All the Cities of Syria, even Damascus at last
yielded to him. His custom was to present a white Flag the first day that he
sat down before any place, the next day a red one, and the third a black; the
first did signify mercy, the second punishment, and the third death to those
that held out three days against him. So having glutted himself with spoils
and victories, and the plague raging in his Army upon the deserts of Egypt, he
returns in triumph to Samarcanda, where he died; he reigned forty years, and
Bajazet 24. others say 26. What Tamerlan suddenly got, was as suddenly 1402.
lost by his sons, in their mutual quarrels. Bajazet left five sons; the first
Joshua, who seized on the Dominion by the help of the Soldiers, and four years
after was killed by his brother Mulsuman, whom some call Solomon. This fought
with his other brother Moses, whom Tamerlan had taken prisoner, Moses was
overcome by Mulsuman; but afterward for his insolent government he is deposed,
and delivered by the army to Moses, who put him to death. Moses afterward for
his tyranny is delivered 1412.
to his other brother Mahumet, who strangles him, and imprisons the other
brother Mustapha for aiming at the Empire. But the Greeks give to Bajazet two
sons only, to wit Celebinus and Mustapha.

Scandia or Scandinavia, from whence of old issued out upon the Roman Empire,
Swedes, Normans, Vandals and Goths, contains now three Kingdoms, Swethland,
Denmark, and Norway: Swethland is the ancienter, giving original to the Kings
of Denmark and Norway; for Dan the first king of Denmark, which from him was
called Dania, was the son of Humel the sixteenth King of Sweden; Sweden, before
there was any King in Norway. Haland and others who succeeded him were but
petty Kings, Harald the first was the first Monarch there. Sweden was governed
by its own Kings, till Erichson (otherwise Smeck) King of Sweden and Norway was
deposed by his subjects, and Albert Duke of Megapolis his sisters son made
King, who oppressing the Nobility, and filling the kingdom with Germans, the
Peers fell off from him to Margaret Queen of Denmark and Norway, who was then
in arms against Albert, and so the three kingdoms were united; till the Kings
began to despise the Swedes, and commit all power to the Danes; whereupon the
Swedes and Norwegians chose Charles the son of Canutus, a Noble Swethland, for
their King: but the Norwegians being enticed by Christiern the first, King of
Denmark, submitted to the Danes.

In Swethland, Gustavus the first descended from the ancient Swedish kings,
freed his country from the Danish yoke; in thankful remembrance of which
benefit, his posterity are allowed by the Swedes to inherit the kingdom. The
first Christian King of Swethland was Biornus; before whom though they reckon
an hundred Kings, yet are their stories so defective, that most of their names
and actions are buried in oblivion. This Biornus lived about the year 816. in
the time of Lewis son to Charles the Great. The next we find after him is Ericus
Sanctus, whom they reckon their 124. King. After him the posterity Suercherus
and Ericus reigned by turns: for Suercherus king of the Goths and Swedes, being
murdered by his own servant, Ericus obtained the kingdom by his worth and
prowess; He made good laws, converted the Finlanders to Christ, and governed
his kingdom in peace and justice; yet he was murdered by his Nobility. To whom
succeeded Charles the son of Suercherus, after he had reigned two years over the
Ostrogoths, who fell off from the Swedes for choosing Ericus to be their King;
after whose death he governed both kingdoms eight years: but being hated for
his affection to the Daes, he was murdered by Canutus the son of Ericus
Sanctus, who believed that Charles had conspired with the Danes to murder his
father: He died in the Cauutus succeeded, the son of Ericus Sanctus, who died
with grief for murdering Charles, in the year 1192. Suercherus the son of
Charles succeeded; He intended to revenge his fathers death upon the posterity
of Canutus, but his Danish forces were overthrown, and he in another battle was
killed by his subjects, an. 1210. Ericus the son of Canutus, having escaped
the fury of Suercherus, reigned 6 years and died, an. 1216. His son John, a
youth of great hopes, died the third year of his reign. Ericus Balbus, great
grandchild to Ericus Sanctus, succeeded; His kinsman Canutus conspired against
him, and drove him out of his kingdom; but he raised an army, defeated and
killed Canutus, and returned in peace to his kingdom; He subdued and converted
the Tavestii, by the help of Birgerus Prince of the Ostrogoths, and then died,
an. 1250.

Valdemarus the son of Birgerus was chosen King in his fathers absence, who
returning from the Tavestii challenged the kingdom, as being rather due to him
then to his son; but was resisted by the Army, and contented to be Tutor
Valdemar after his fathers death, by the instigation of his Danish wife,
tyrannizeth over his brothers, for which he is deposed by the Swedes, and
stripped also of the kingdom of the Goths. His brother Magnus Ladolus succeeded,
an. 1276. who took his brother Valdemar prisoner, and so the quarrel about the
dominion ended; He murdered at a feast the chief men amongst the Folchungi:
then giving himself to devotion and works of piety, died. Brigerus his son
succeeded, an. 1282. the murderer of his brothers, whom he accused of treason;
they to defend themselves, raised an army against this Tyrant, and took him
prisoner; afterward reconciling himself to them, invites them to a feast, and
treacherously lays hold on them and puts them in a dungeon, where they
perished with stench and famine, Denmark, where he died miserably with his
wife. Magnus Smeech son of Ericus, killed by his brother Birgerus, succeeded
an. 1319. He was a wicked and libidinous Prince: In his wars against Norway he
was taken prisoner by Haquin the Norwegian king, from whom being delivered he
fled into Denmark; there he proscribes all the Swedish Peers; which they
slighting, call in Albert the Megapolitan, whom by public consent they
confirmed in the kingdom at Stockholm; He proffers reconciliation to Magnus,
Haquin. Albert afterward began to slight the Swedes, therefore is slighted by
them, and in his wars with Margaret Queen of Denmark is taken and detained
seven years a prisoner, at last is forced to absolve the Swedes from their
allegiance, an. 1394. Margaret the Dane, wife to Haquin king of Norway
succeeds, and is now Lady 1394.
of three kingdoms; A magnanimous Princess, but covetous, and one that made no
bones to break oaths and promises; she committed the chief places of trust to
the enemies of Swethland, and out of hatred to the Swedes left them and made
her residence in Denmark, having first procured the kingdom to Ericus her
Nephew by her sister, she died, and was buried at Flensburgh 1412.
an. 1412.

In Denmark, Waldemar the third, whom they reckon their 94. King, succeeds his
father Christopher; he was surnamed the Reprobate, for his wicked life. In the
beginning of his reign, an. 1340. he cuningly got the possession of Scania from
King Magnus, and his Castles which were kept by the Germans. The next year he
invaded Onland and Gotland, having slain in that 500. in this 2000. and lost
them both again the same year. He found his kingdom much impoverished and
wasted by foraign incursions, but he left it rich and flourishing: He was a
cruel Tyrant against his Nobility, which he endeavored to Margaret Queen of
the three kingdoms afterward severely punished those rebellious Lords. This
Waldemar being threatened with an Interdict by the Pope for his tyranny and
perfidiousnesse, returns this Answer:

Waldemar King of Denmark to the Pope of Rome, sends greeting. We have our
nature from God, our Kingdom from our Subjects, wealth from our Parents, and
our faith from thy Predecessors, which if thou will not let us enjoy quietly,
we 1375.
send it back again by these presents. Farewell.

He died, An. 1375. To him succeeded his daughter Margaret, who by her father
had Denmark; by her husband Haquin, the son of Magnus Smeec, or Smeg, Swetbland
and Norway: She reigned 32. years after her husbands death; she finished the
war begun by Haquin against Albert King of Sweden, whom sho 1389.
took prisoner with his son Ericus, and his father Duke of Megopolis, with the
Earl of Holsatia, and many Barons. Albert after six years captivity, is let
free Holme, or else to return a prisoner; Holme upon his Letters is delivered
up, and so the three kingdoms are united; and it is agreed, that in the
election of the King, the Swedes and Danes should have the first suffrage by
turns; but the Danes not content with the first suffrage in the election of
Ericus, they challenged it also in the election of Christopher, which so
offended the Swedes, that they chose them a King of their own, Charles the son
of Canutus. Margaret being childless, (for her son Olaus was dead) she sends
for Ericus her Nephew out of Pomerania, and makes him King at fifteen years of
age; so they 1396.
reigned together till she died. He married Philippa the King of Englands
Margaret died, and was richly entombed at Rosehilda, 1412.
An. 1412.

CHAP. VII.
1. The affairs of Italy, Germany, Bohemia, the Netherlands, under Charles the
Fourth, and Wenceslaus, Emperors. 2. The Wars between Venice and Genua for the
Isle of Tenedos, from the year 1349. till 1400.

ALthough Charles the Fourth, son to King John of Bohemia, had been crowned at
Bonna before the death of Ludovic the Emperor; yet he now being dead, diverse
of the Electors make void Charles his Election as fraudulent; wherefore in the
Diet of Frankfort, Mentz, Palsgrave, Saxon, and Brandeburg proffer the Empire
to King Edward the third of England, who had lately beat the French and Scots;
but he prudently considering the difficulties of that great place, and the
danger his own Kingdom might incur by the French and Scots in his absence,
waved that proffer: Then they invited Frederick Marquess of Mysnia, a rich and
potent Prince; but he refused the motion, knowing that he could not enjoy the
Empire (being Charles was already chosen) without much trouble; therefore
Charles presents Frederick with a gift of 10000. Marks. The Electors at last
set up Gunter Earl of Swarceburg in Thuringia, who came with an Army to
Frankfort, whither Charles also 1349.
came with his Forces, but refused to hazard all his fortunes upon one battle,
therefore labors to undermine his enemy without shedding of blood; whereupon
he makes his peace with the sons of Ludovic his Predecessor, whose lands he had
spoiled with fire and sword; then he marries the Palsgraves daughter, and so
got the House of Bavaria to stand for him: He also by a Physician poisons
Gunter, who died the sixth month after his Election; but Charles Thuringia; he
also brought back the public Mart to Frankfort, which he had thence translated
to Mentz: and so at last Charles obtaines the Empire alone, not without much
bribing.

Charles in his younger days was educated in France with King Charles;
therefore brought many French customs into Germany, and parted with the rights
of the kingdom of Arles to the French, to the great detriment of the Empire.
This Arles is the chief city of Narbon, which the Burgundians made the
metropolis of their kingdom; in this three famous Councels have been held.
Charles also to weaken the greatness of the German Princes, armed diverse
Cities against them with immunities and privileges; he enlarged Bohemia with
Silesia and Lusatia, and made diverse Countries thereabout feudatory to Bohemia.
He made John and Albert, Princes of the Henets on the Baltic sea, Dukes of the
Empire. He advanced the power of the Senate in Norimbergh, Petrarch and others,
to settle the tumults of Rome, he repairs thither; After he had been crowned at
Milain with iron, is there crowned with gold. There he stayed but a short
while, for so he had promised by the 1355.
Cardinals to Pope Innocent 6. lest his long abode there might weaken the Popes
power, and cause alterations. At Milain he made Galeacius and Barnabas the
Vicounts, Vicars or Lieutenants of the Empire in Liguria. This Galeacius was a
great Lover of Learning; therefore by the advice of Petrarch erected a Library,
having before instituted a famous College, in which his son John Galeacius
allowed large stipends to Baldus and the two Raphaels to read the Marsilius to
profess physic, and to Emanuel Chrysoloras to read the Greek tongue.

Charles having returned into Germany, calls a Diet of the Princes, where he
contracts and digests all the ancient rights, customs, privileges and
constitutions belonging to the Empire, into an Epitome and method: this was
called Lex Carolina, and Aurea bulla, the golden Patent. This contains all the
rites and laws concerning the Emperors election, and shows how far each
Princes authority extends; By this all contentions about the Emperors election
are cut off, and each Prince confined within his own bounds. This Patent or Bull
was made and proclaimed at Norimbergh. After this Diet, Charles repairs to Pope
Urban 5. at Avenion, whose stirrup he held, and followed him on foot. Then
dedicated the rest of his life to works of charity and piety; To settling of
1356.
Bohemia, where he instituted the University of Prague, and enriched diverse
Monasteries and Colleges of Canons. At last he labored with the Pope and 1361.
Cardinals, also with the Electors by great sums of money, for his son
Wenceslaus to be his successor, whom with much ado he got to be crowned, and
then within two years after dyed, having reigned since the death of Gunter 28
years, in all 31. 1376.


About this time, the Dukedom of Gelder fell from Reynold for want of issue
male, to William Earl of Iulia, who married his daughter Mary. Afterward,
William of Monts seized upon both Gelder and Iulia; and because Arnold of
Egmont laid claim to Gelder, Gerard the son of William gave up his right to
Charles Duke of Burgundy. Not long after this, Cleve fell to the Earls of
Marca, for want of issue male. Burgundy was then in the possession of Philip
the Bold, brother to Charles the fifth of France, who bestowed Burgundy on him,
that he might the more easily obtain the marriage of Margaret of Flanders. This
Duchy fell to John Father of Philip, by the death of Otto Duke of Burgundy.
Brabant was in controversy between Wenceslaus of Lucelburgh, and Lewis Earl
of Flanders, in right of their Wives; Lewis prevailed, and left to his daughter
Margaret, who Philip the Bold, Flanders, Artois, the County of Burgundy,
Nivern, Rethelin, Salina, and Mechlin. Philip left Flanders, Burgundy, and
Artois to his son John; Brabant and Lucelburgh to his son Antony; to his third
son Philip, Nivern and Rethelin. Antonies son John Duke of Brabant, founded the
University of Lovain.

The Emperor Charles having sold and given away so many Towns, lands and
privileges from the Empire, much weakened it; his chief care was to enrich and
honor Bohemia; he carried to Prague (which he had beautified and enlarged) the
Lance with which Christ's side was pierced, the Nails, the sponge, and part of
the Cross, with the sword of Charles the Great, and a Tooth of John Baptist,
which the Pope had honored with a solemn Holy Day. He gave to the eldest of
his Predecessors sons the Principality of Upper-Bavaria, to his other son
Brandeburg, to William the third son Holland and Hannonia, to Margaret the
widow their mother a yearly pension: but she discontented for the loss of
Holland, requires it again from her son William, which he refused; Hannonia is
given to the Empress for her life, after whose death William grew distracted,
and so continued many years. Charles before his death divided Bohemia into
twelve Counties, and abolished the new sect of Whippers; he bought the
Marquisat of Brandeburg from the posterity of Bavare, and bestowed it on his
son Sigismund: when he sent his son Wenceslaus to be christened at Aix, he
sent with him his weight in gold, to make him the more welcome to the
Virgin-Mary; at two years old he gave him the Crown of Bohemia; at fifteen he
made him Augustus; having promised to each Elector a hundred thousand Crowns,
for Sigismund to Mary the daughter of Hungary, therefore sent him thither to be
educated in the language and custom of the Country, in hope that he should be
King; he made Lunenburg a Duchy, and punished those that imprisoned any
Clergymen.

About this time, the Venetians and the Genuois quarrelled, because Petrinus
King of Cyprus at his Coronation, had preferred the Venetians to the Genuois;
whereupon Cyprus is wasted, and Tamagusta taken by the Genuois. Shortly after
the Florentines being offended with the Popes Legate, caused many Cities of
Italy to fall off from the Pope, who in their Banners carried the word Liberty;
with those the Bononians joined; Pope Gregory sent an Army Britons to reduce
them to obedience, but in vain; wherefore being persuaded by Catherine of Sena,
and perceiving what loss Italy sustained by his absence, returns to Rome, and
so much the rather, because one day reproving a Bishop for being so long absent
from his charge, who answered, 1376.
And why do you who should give example to others, stay so long away from your
Bishopric? Diverse Towns of Germany finding no favor or assistance from their
Princes, enter into a mutual confederacy; these are called Hans-towns, whereof
there be six in Vandalia, eight in Pomerania, six in Prutenia, four in Livonia,
thirteen in Saxony, ten in Westphalia, six in Clivia and Monts, seven in
Geldria, three in Transylvania, and three in Frisia, besides fourteen other
Towns that fell off afterward an. 1554.

To Charles succeeded his son Wenceslaus in the Empire: when he was baptized he
fouled the water with his dung, and so he did the Altar two years after when he
was crowned King; this presaged his foul and vicious life, for he was notorious
in drunkenness, tyranny, cowardice, and letchery: In his time most Cities were
infested with seditions, and the highway with robbers, whilst he lay wallowing
in lust and pleasures; nor durst any man admonish him, he was so cruel, that he
spared not to murder them at his table; he carried about a Hangman with him,
whom he called Gossip, because he christened his child; many times he would
make him light from his horse in the highway, and Albert of Holland, that
because she reproved him for his whoredoms, he drowned her Confessor for that
he refused to discover her sins she had confessed; and then he set his
Mastif-dog which he kept and fed in his chamber, upon her, and murdered her:
He permitted many thousand Jews to be murdered in a tumult at Prague; for
which cruelties that City was so visited with the plague, that in one Parish in
the space of four months, there dyed three thousand five hundred: about which
time was found out by Bertholdus Niger a Monk, the diabolical art of shooting
with Guns, worse then the plague: The Venetians were the first that made use of
them against the Genuois. The people being impatient of such a Tyrant,
notwithstanding his strong guards, which he was still changing out of jealousy
and fear, seized upon him, and imprisoned him four months at Prague: at last,
by much entreaty he was permitted by the Senate to bathe himself, and to wash
away 1393.
the filth of his body; in the mean while having retired a little toward the
Susan by name, with him, and so escapes to the new Tower on the River, where he
is defended by his brother John Marquess of Lusatia, and Procopius the
Moravian: but he was never a whit bettered by his imprisonment, for he made as
much use of his Gossip the Hangman as before, and was not ashamed to use Susan
for his concubine; so that the people being enraged against him, sent for his
brother Sigismund who was now King of Hungary, his father in law being dead,
and his Competitor Charles of Naples slain; but he was run so much in debt,
that he was forced to mortgage the Marquisat of Brandeburg to his
Cousin-germans, Iodocus and Procopius Moravia: this is that Sigismund whom
Bajazet overthrew with the French; he upon the invitation of the Bohemians,
enters the Country with an Army, seiseth on his brother, and carries him to
Vienna to Albert of Austria, notwithstanding the opposition made by John his
brother, and Procopius his Cousin-german: this Albert was son in law to
Sigismund. Ludovic of Austria was slain by the Switzers.

Wenceslaus willing to escape, promised great matters to a Fisherman, who used
to bring the prisoners sometimes small Fishes, out of pity: this Fisherman by
the help of a long string got him into his Boat, and brought him to Vicegrad,
whence he got away in a Beggars habit to Prague, where having Wenceslaus force
him to write Letters, and to seal them with his own Seal, inviting diverse
Magistrates into the Castle, who not dreaming of the Kings being there, were by
his command apprehended and put to death: the Fisherman was Knighted. Then to
strengthen himself, he marries with Sophia the daughter of John Duke of
Bavaria: but the Electors perceiving that he grew rather worse then better, did
unanimously depose him from the Empire, having reigned two and twenty 1400.
years after the death of his father Charles; he was fifty seven years old when
he

Among other wrongs done by him to the Empire, the selling away of the
Principality of Millan, was not the least; for whereas till now the Governors
of Millan were the Emperors Lieutenants and Deputies, John Galeacius the
Viscount, for a sum of money, is made Duke and absolute Lord for him and his
posterity, and the Cap with the Scepter are sent him from Wenceslaus. Under his
father Charles the Empire was weakened by great quarrels 1377.
and wars between the Earls of Wirtenberg, and the Cities of Suevia: Rhine,
and those of Suevia who had joined their forces, were defeated by the
Wirtenbergians and Bavarians, but not without great loss on this side, for
there 1286.
were slain four Earls, sixty Knights, and a multitude of common soldiers: the
Helvetians had better success against Leopold the third of Austria, whom in a
great battle they defeated and slew, so that the Princes were forced to yield
to the Switzers.

The great quarrel between the Venetians and Genuois fell out upon this
occasion. The two brothers Andronicus and Manuel strove for the Greek Empire;
Andronicus the elder claimed it by right of primogeniture, Manuel the younger
by his fathers last will, who bequeathed it to him: With Andronicus the Genuois
sided, with Manuel the Venetians. The one bestows the Isle Tenedos on the
Genuois, the other on the Venetians, who presently seized on it, lying in the
mouth of the Hellespont, convenient for Trade. Upon this, Legates are sent from
Genua to Venice, demanding restitution of Venetians refused, affirming they had
it of him who had most right to it: wherefore the Genuois sent a Fleet of ten
Galleys under Arnus Strupa to Tenedos, which took some of the Venetian Ships
and burned them, but could do no good upon the Fort, being strongly manned;
therefore they went to infest the Venetian Islands in the Aegaean Sea; hereupon
the Venetians rig out a Fleet, and the Genuois add ten Galleys more to their
Fleet under Lewis Fliscus, who meeting the Venetians, fell unadvisedly with
five of his Galleys upon them before the rest could come up; a cruel conflict
ensues, in which many were killed on both sides; at last the five Genuoy
Galleys were taken, the rest escaped save one which fell upon a Genuois hearing
of the overthrow, were solicitous for Famangusta in Cyprus, which they had
taken from the King of that Island, fearing lest the Venetians would seize on
it, or assist the King to recover it, therefore they send one of the Galleys
that escaped thither with Arms and Men; the other three were committed to the
charge of Peter Picconus, with command to repair to their other Fleet; with
this Peter sails into the Adriatic sea, where he did much annoy the Venetians,
who enter into a league with Bernabos Prince of Millan, knowing that he being a
near neighbor to Genua, could much annoy them, and hinder provisions from them
by land out of Gallia, and all commerce thence; they wisely also make a league
with Ianus King of Cyprus, angry with the Genuois Famangusta: the Genuois being
much troubled at this league of the Venetians with the Millanois, which would
hinder all Trade with Gallia, Cisalpina, and besides force them to employ their
men in Land-service, which they should send abroad to Sea; they resolve to make
a league with Henry the Emperor, being offended with Venice for Illiricum,
which they took from him: They also send Legates to the Patriarch of Aquilaea,
from whom the Venetians had taken Trioli; and to Francis Carraria Prince of
Padua, on whom Venice did still incroach.

The Legates of Genua complain to the Emperor of the wrongs done by the
Venetians to the Empire; of their insolences in maintaining the younger
brother against the elder, and in seizing upon Tenedos, and that their aim was
to invade the Empire: Henry answers them, That the Turkish wars kept him off
from punishing the Veuetians, yet as soon as the season of the year permitted,
he would either come or send an Army against hm. With this answer the Genuois
were pleased; therefore they cause two and twenty great Ships to be built; and
because the Auriae, chiefly Lambas and Pagnanus had done good service
heretofore against Venice; they pitch upon Lucianus Auria, whom they make
Admiral of their Fleet, and call home all that had been proscribed or banished
for robbing in the highways. In the mean while, Dominicus Fregosus Governor
of Genua, is removed by a contrary faction from his place, and Nicolaus Goarcus
made Governor: shortly after, all the Fregosan family are banished the City;
Dominic Fregosus and Peter imprisoned, but Peter escaped. The King of Cyprus
who had lately married his daughter by the the Venetians means to Bernabos of
Millan, attempted by the help of five Venetian Galleys to take Famangusta, but
the Garrison within had notice of the plot, and prevented it by their
vigilancie. Aruns Strupa having returned with his ten Galleys from the Aegaean
Sea, Lucianus Auria is sent into the Adriatic with two and twenty Sail, which
much annoyed the Venetians. In the interim, the Emperors Army enters into the
Teritory of Frioli; Francis Carraria besets Tarvisium with Horse and Foot, the
Town held out a while, but seeing no succor come from Venice, yielded
themselves to the Emperor, by the permission of Francis. The Venetians upon
this, began to despair of their Towns in Illiricum and Frioli; but they were
more solicitous after their Sea affairs; therefore Victor Pisanus: Lucianus
encounters with them near Polla; the fight continued long and doubtful, the
greatest slaughter was on the Venetian side, which so heartened Lucian, that he
pulled off his Helmet, hoping the victory had been got, and in the interim was
shot through the head, and so dyed instantly: They that were next to him, for
fear lest the Soldiers should be disheartened, or the Enemy encouraged, convey
him aside, and place another in his Arms where he stood. Victor held out as
long as he could, at length having lost fifteen Galleys, flies back to Venice
with the remainder of his

The news of this victory wrought great joy in Genna, which was quickly quailed
by the report of the Emperors death, to whom they appointed yearly
supplications at the Altar of John the Evangelist in St. Georges Church, with
yearly salaries out of the public Treasure to his son and posterity. Then they
make Peter Auria their Admiral, who repaires with one Galley only to the Fleet
in the Adriatic. The Venetians were much troubled for their losses, therefore
they send to Bernabos to invade the Genuois by land, they might be forced to
call home their Fleet out of the Adriatic. Barnabos raises an Army, invades
the Territories of Genua Nicolaus the governor fearing lest his adversaries
would take occasion to thrust him out of his Principality, commands that none
should take up Arms but those whom he trusted; and then having paid a great
sum of money, eases the State of the Enemy, and prevents sedition against
himself: In the mean while the Venetians send nine Galleys to molest the coasts
of Genua, which plundered some small Islands, and Sea-towns of the Enemy. The
Genuois upon this rig out nine Galleys, because they would not call Adriatic.
The Venetians perceiving this, set sail presently to their Islands in the
Agaean Sea; and the Genuois missing the Enemy, sail immediately to Petrus Auria
in the Adriatic, so that now they make up thirty Galleys besides other vessels
for carriage, by which Venice is shut up.

About a mile from Venice on the Adriatic shore, stands the Church of St.
Nicolas, which fenced them with a strong wall, and a deep ditch; along the
shore were diverse forts: hither Peter came with his Fleet to straiten the
Enemy; having landed his men, he falls on the wall before the Church, and with
much loss gains it, and with it the Church. Then he comes to the Town called
Clodia Fessa, at this day Chiogia, with his Fleet; Francis marched along
Venetians had filled the Town with hired Soldiers. Peter and Francis with all
their Forces fall to storming of the Town, which was strongly defended by the
Soldiers, with much expense of blood on both sides; at last the Townes-men
being wearied out, and overpowered with multitudes, delivered up the Town and
Garrison.

The Venetians hearing of this loss, and calling to mind the loss of Tarvistum,
and of their Fleets, the exhausting of their Treasure, the want of commerce and
decay of trade, with the small hopes they had in Bernabos, they send Letters to
Peter in Clodia, to entreat for peace, alleging to him the inconstancy of
Fortune, the good that Genua should get by this peace, and the glory that Peter
had purchased to the Genuois, it making Venice sue for peace, which had
hitherto been so often victorious, and had never been forced in seven hundred
years till now, to sue for peace. Peter replies, that he was not ignorant
either of the inconstancy of Fortune, or of their ancient greatness, but that
now they must consider not what they have been, but what they are, and that the
conquered Bernabos, complaining of the miseries they were driven to, and that
they had no other hope left but in him, who by his Landforces wasting the
confines of Genua, might occasion the calling home of their Fleet: So the
Romans by invading the Carthaginians drew Halciar out of Sicily, and Annibal
out of Italy: Upon this Bernabos assures them, that he will not fail them in
this their extremity, and therefore presently hireth three thousand horsemen,
Genuan Territories, which so affrighted the Countrey-people, that some fled
into the hills, some into the Cities; the Genuois presently put themselves in
Arms, with a resolution to assault these Robbers, which when they perceived,
they resolve to be gone, but ambushes are laid for them, and all by-ways and
Groves are intercepted, so that few of these Robbers escaped alive: In memory
of this defeat an annual supplication is appointed at S. Georges Church.

In the mean while Peter shut up the Adriatic, so that Venice was in danger to
be starved for want of provision. Manuel the son of Calciannes, the Venetians
Pera the Genuan Colony by Bizantium; whereupon the Genuois send Nicholaus
Marcus with three Galleys thither, but the siege was raised before they came;
in the way Nicholaus meets with some Greek Galleys, and beats them. The
Venetians understanding that the Genuois were careless and secure in Clodia,
and that most of their Fleet were sent abroad, they in the dead of the night go
to Clodia in small boats, and were scaling the walls, but were discovered by the
clashing of their armor, and so forced to return with some loss. Upon the
coming back of the Genuan Fleet to Clodia, one of their Galleys appproaching
too near Saint Georges Church, within half a mile of Venice, stuck fast as the
Sea ebbed, and was seized on by the Venetian Rhodes. The Venetians resolve to
try once more with Genua, for their lives and liberties; therefore privately
they prepare a Fleet of three and thirty Galleys, within their Arsenal, with
other Vessels of burden, intending if they could not master the enemy, to
transport themselves into Candy with their wealth and Families; for effecting
of this work, because the Treasure was exhausted, many private rich men
cheerfully brought in their Gold and Silver to the Senate, for which piety
they were made Senators. Andrew Contarenus then Duke of Venice, an expert
Seaman, with the greatest part of the Senate, Clodia in the night
unexpectedly; the Genuois then had in the Harbor nine and twenty Galleys, the
rest were dispersed in the Adriatic; the fight begins with exhortations, Peter
wishing the Genuois to remember their former successes. Andrew desiring the
Venetians to fight for their liberty, for their parents wives, children and
country: the skirmish was doubtful a great while; but the Venetians at last
were worsted and forced to fly back to Venice: the Genuois supposing the enemy
had been totally defeated and disheartened, grew secure, and neglected to guard
the Clodian Harbor; Upon this the Venetians finding that some Keels of their
great Ships which the Genuois had burned, were sunk in the mouth of the
Harbor, resolve to sink some more filled with stones, in the same place, so
that the Genuan Fleet could not get out: the Venetians having done this, they
gave a great shout, at which the Genuans were amazed, not dreaming Genua not
knowing of this stratagem in the Adriatic, had sent thirteen more Galleys
under Math. Marrufus to join with Peter, who finding his Fleet useless, that he
could not get out, exposes his Forces on the shore, and made excursions upon
the enemies Territories; but as he was besieging the Castle Brondulum, he was
shot in the head, and so died; yet the Castle was taken by the Genuois, who
understanding of their disasters in the Adriatic, were much grieved, knowing
that their treasury was exhausted, and that the vigilant Gasper Spinola, a
brave man, for their Governor, who prepares to encounter the Venetians by land.

Venice having lost almost three years the possession of the upper Sea, which
now they had recovered, resolve to besiege Clodia, being furthered by the
Plebcians, and women, who brought in their Plate and Jewels; their Army sits
down between Brondulum and Clodia, to hinder all provision from the Clodians.
Spinola who was now come to Clodia, fearing the loss of Brondulum, made a
bridge to relieve it, and perceiving the enemy advancing toward him, exhorts
his Soldiers to be courageous, a bloody battle ensues, in Clodia; in this
flight many were drowned, the Bridge which they had lately made breaking under
them with their weight. The Venetians having thus defeated the enemy, fall to
the siege of Brondulum, which presently yielded; then they besiege Clodia by
Sea and Land: The Genuois were much disheartened, having no Land-Army, nor any
by Sea, but their thirteen Galleys under Marrufus, who durst not come near to
Clodia, for fear of the Venetian Fleet; and suspecting that Bernabos with an
Army would invade their Country, they build a Tower five miles off from the
City Bernabos. Marrufus meets at Sipontum six Venetian Galleys, and twelve
Ships of burden, these he sets upon and bumes, and takes the Admiral
Thadaeus, whom he sends prisoner to Genua, and makes his way through forty
Venetian Galleys. Ianisius with five Galleys is sent from Genua to join with
Matthew, but they could not get to Clodia, by reason of the enemies Fleet; in
the interim Bernabos had sent some Troops of horse to plunder the Genuois
Country, but they were beat back with loss.

The Clodians having now sustained six months siege, and being forced for want
of food to eat dogs and cats, and finding all passages for their relief 1380.
shut up by Sea and land, deliver up the Town to the Venetians, who Venice; the
Genuois were known from others by pronouncing crapa instead of capra, and were
detained, the rest were set free. After this the Venetians take in (...),
(...), Pola, with other Towns and Castles they had lost. The Genuois perceiving
that they were all bent upon their Land-service, and neglected the Sea, rig out
thirteen new Galleys, appointing no Admiral, but that each Captain should be
Admiral by turns for some days. These are commanded into the Adriatic to join
with Matthew; they much annoyed the Venetians. But Nicolaus Goarcus Prince of
Genua, understanding that Peter Fregosus his enemy, who had escaped out of
prison, had raised Forces and joined himself with Bernabos against him and the
State, sends for Spinula and Marulus to come home with some part of their
Fleet: These having set their Forces on shore, Peter with his Companies run
away. After this, the Venetians by land, the Genuois by sea, do much annoy each
other. Upon this, Amatus the 7. Prince of Savoy endeavors to reconcile these
two States; to this purpose Ambassadors are sent to him from both, to whom the
Prince makes a speech in commendation of peace and concord, of the mischief of
war, and of the vanity in striving for a barren Island with the expense of so
much blood and treasure. At last it was agreed that both States should renounce
their claim to the Isle Tenedos, seeing there could be no peace so long as
either of them possessed it; The Bishop of Aquileia was to enjoy his right in
Friuli: so the peace is concluded, the fourth year of this war. The Genuan
Fleet is called home from the Adriatic: The Venetians send to the governor of
Tenedos, to come away with Genuois were permitted to storm the castle, and to
demolish it.

CHAP. VIII.
1. The lives of the Popes, from the year 1305. till 1389. 2. The history of
Holland and the next Provinces, from the year 1298. till 1404. The history of
Savoy, from the beginning till the year 1397.

WE will now speak a little of the Popes of these times. To Boniface the 8.
succeeded Benedict 10. some say 11. he sat eight months and seventeen days;
He excommunicated all those who had a hand in the death of his Predecessor; he
reconciled James and Peter de Colona (whom his Predecessor had degraded from
their Cardinalship) to the Church again; he absolved also the French king, whom
Boniface had excommunicated, and Ottoman laid the foundation of the Turkish
Empire; which Nation had been now five hundred years 1305.
in Asia, but without a Monarchy till now. About the same time also, Flavius
Melfensis in the Kingdom of Naples, found out the use of the Lodestone, and
Mariners Compass. To Benedict succceded Clemens the fifth, of Bordeaux; he
sat eight years and ten months; he had been Archbishop of Bordeaux: This was
he that translated his seat to Avenion, where his successors continued seventy
years, till Gregory the 11. It was at his Coronation, that the wall fell down,
which killed the Duke of Britain with many others; the Popes Crown fell from
his head, by which he lost a Carbuncle worth 6000 James and Peter de Colona,
whom Boniface had degraded. He confirmed the King of Arragon in the kingdom of
Sardinia. In the Council of Lions (which was the 15 genesis Council) he condemned
the Begards and Beguins, who denied the Popes power, and held 1312.
that man might be more perfect in this life then Christ was, and that one may
be without sin. He abolished the Templars, who had stood 184 years: in his time
Philip the Fair banished the Jews out of France; 7. years after Lewis Utinus
received them again. Rhodes is taken after 4. years siege from the Turk. The
painted Horse of Constantinople, to the great terror of the people, neighed
twice in one night. John King of Armenia left his Kingdom to his brother, and
became a Minorite. Clemens confirms the University of Orleans, which Philip
erected. To Clement succeed John the 22. who sat nineteen years and four
months; he erected the Archbishopric of Toledo, under whom he appointed six
Suffragans: He set up in Portugal a new Order of Knights, and also in Algarbia,
called the Knights of Jesus Christ, on whom the Templars estates there were
bestowed, to resist the Sarazens: He set out the Constitutions called
Extravagantes: 1319.
Ave-Mary Bell to be rung three times a day, toward the evening: He maintained
that the departed souls rested in certain receptacles, in which they had not
the vision of God, till the Resurrection; this opinion he retracted upon a
Decree of the Faculty of Paris: He canonized Thomas Aquinas: He confirmed
Burgundian College in Paris, erected by Joan wife to Philip, the fifth
daughter to the Earl of Burgundy: In his time Alphonsus the eleventh king of
Spain, by the assistance of Alphonsus the fourth king of Portugal, his
father-in-law, overthrew the king of Morocco, and five other barbarous Princes,
besides 450000 Sarazens, with the loss of 20 Christians only. The Plessean
College at Paris is erected by Godfrey Plessy. The Burbon is made a Duke.
Uladislaus receives the Crown at Cracovia from the Pope, whose predecessors,
for the murder of Stanilaus, had lost it. Against this Pope was set up
Nicholaus the fifth, by Ludovic the Emperor, who having sat three years and
three months, died in prison at Avenion.

To John succeeded in the Popedom Benedict the eleventh or twelfth; he sat
seven years three months: He founded the College and Temple of the 1335.
Bernardines at Paris; he set out a Decretal, thwarting his Predecessors
opinion concerning the departed souls; In his time two other Colleges were
built at Paris, to wit, the College of Eduen by Bertrandus Bishop of Edua, and
Turon by Burgolus Archbishop of Turon. The Sultan of Egypt committed the
custody of Christ's Sepulcher in Jerusalem to eight Franciscan 1342.
Friars. To Benedict succeeded Clemens the sixth, who sat ten years six
months: He sent into Germany to have war proclaimed against the Turks,
promising indulgences to all that should contribute toward that war, and
besides, liberty to eat eggs and milk upon all fasting days, except Lent; this
privilege was procured by the Bishops of Trevers and Colen, to their Diocese;
but because the Bishop of Mentz refused to give aid, his Diocese was denied
this privilege, so that to this time they eat no eggs on fasting days.
Clemens reduced the Jubilee to each fiftieth year, and abolished the Whippers:
In his time the Venna is sold to Phil. Valois for 40000 Crowns by Prince
Humbert who became a Dominican, upon this condition, that the French kings
eldest son should be called the Delphin, and that Humbert for his life should
be allowed yearly 10000. Florens. About this time in France was instituted the
knighthood of the Star, and in England the knighthood of the Garter. This
Clemens was a great enemy to Ludovic the Emperor. To him succeeded Innocent the
sixth, who sare nine years eight months; ^he reconciled the Kings 1352.
of France and England: he ratifies the University and Archbishopric of Prague
in B^ia, erected by Charles the fourth. About this time John Wickliff began to
broach his opinions in England.

To Innocent succeeded Urban the fifth, who sat eight years four months; this
Pope consecrated Marius the Nestorian Patriarch, who came purposely 1365.
from Mosal or Selencia, where the Patriarchs seat is, to be consecrated at
Rome. He confirmed the Order of Saint Briget. At this time John the French king
invaded Burgundy, and annexed it to France, which Charles of Navar ^imed as his
inheritance; this Charles the fifth afterward bestowed it on his brother Philip
the Bold. This Pope confirmed the Order of Mount-Olivet. To him succeeded
Gregory the eleventh, who sat seven years two months; he brought back his
Chair from Avenion to Rome, upon the revolting of his Towns in Italy. Charles
the wise about this time ordained, that the sons and heirs of the 1371.
French Kings, should be crowned and consecrated at fourteen years of age. John
Galleacius having bought the Dukedom of Millan from Wenceslaus, took away
Verona and Vincentia from the Scaligers; Padua, Tarvisium, and other Towns from
the Cararians, and subdued Trent, Perusium, and other places; he defeated also
the Florentines, with their Auxiliaries the French. The Polanders for 900.
years, even till the death of Casimir the Great, had enjoyed their own Kings
and Princes, that is till the year 1370. except Wenceslaus the Bohemian;
Casimir dying without issue male, Ludovic the Hungarian, and his son-in-law
Uladislaus Iagello the Lituanian obtained that Crown, which his posterity enjoy
till this day. After this Gregory had returned into Italy, there arose a great
Schism in the Church, for the Italians chose an Italian Pope, to wit, Urban;
the French chose a Frenchman, Clement the seventh, who betook himself to
Avenion; this schism lasted 36. years, even till the Council of Constance. To
Clement succeeded Benedict the 13. of Arragon, who sat in Avenion. About
thirty years after Urban the Italian Cardinal chose Boniface the ninth,
Innocent the seventh, Gregory the twelfth; France, Spain, England and Scotland
followed the French Pope, Italy and other places the Italian. 1378.


To Gregory succeeded Urban the sixth a Neapolitane, who sat eleven years, he
appointed the Feast of the Visitation of our Lady; In his time Iagello Prince
of Lituania, after the death of Ludovic King of Hungary and Polonia, whose
daughter he married; he imbraceth Christianity, and is crowned King of Poland
in Cracovia, and is named Uladislaus; his Country Lituania was the last in
Europe that received Christianity. Great contestation arose between John the
first King of Castile and Legian who had married the daughter of Ferdinand King
of Portugal, and John the bastard of this Ferdinand, about the Crown of
Portugal; but John the Bastard in the end carried it, and of a Monk became John
Columbanus and Francis Vincentius of Seva were the first Authors of this Order,
they wore a white coat, girt with a leather girdle, and a cloak of fine wool
over their coat; they went barefooted, only they used wooden soles. Charles
the sixth of France reduced the many Lillies in his Arms to three: In his
minority the Clergy lost their Tithes, which were employed upon the wars. The
University of Cracovia is instituted by King Iagello, and confirmed by the
Pope. Professors 1389.
were brought from Prague, they were maintained out of the Customs and Tole of
Salt. Two Colleges were erected, one for Divines and Philosophers, Urban
succeeded Boniface the 9. fourteen years eleven months; this Pope enjoined the
Anuates, or one years fruits of Benefices, to be paid into the Apostolical
Treasure toward the wars against the Infidels. About this time Emanuel
Chrysoloras, by the Popes allowance, brought back into Italy the Greek Tongue,
which had been banished thence 700. years. The University of Erfurd is erected,
and four Colleges more at Paris. At Avenion to Clement the 7. succeeded
Benedict the 13. Antipope, who was deposed by the Synod of Paris.

We said before, that to John the fourth of Holland succeeded John the
Hanonian, who descended from King William by his sister; this Hanonian John
Renessius heretofore condemned for Treason; he drew to his side most of the
Nobility, and seized upon Walachria; the controversy is referred to Charles
the French King, by the Earl of Renessius; but he perceiving Charles inclined
to the Earl, appeals to Albert the Emperor, pretending that Holland did now
fall to the Empire, the Earls Family having failed; Upon this Albert raises
an Army, whom the Earl meets with his Forces; when they were ready to fight,
the Bishop of Colen interceded, and a peace concluded, conditionally that the
Earl should hold Holland in see of the Empire; so Renessius his hopes were
frustrated, and commanded to forbear meddling with Zeland; yet he raised some
troubles afterward in Holland, but he was defeated and driven into Brabant.
After this the Earl had wars with the Bishop of Utricht, in which the Bishop
was killed, and another substituted in his place. At last the Earl desirous to
live quiet, bestowed Holland upon his eldest son, and Zeland upon William, and
so went back to Hanonia or Nervia, but his tranquillity was interrupted by the
wars of Flanders with Philip of France; for the Earl of Artois, son-in-law to
this Hanonian, had involved Hanonia, because it sided with the French;
whereupon Holland, to help the Hanonian, and to call back the Flandrian Forces
thence, falls upon Flanders: under the conduct of William, the Flandrians in
the interim invaded Walachria, William is forced to encounter them; but his
success failed, for he was defeated, and hardly escaped to Middleburgh, which
he was also forced to quit to the Fleming, who had now got all Walachria, only
Zirizea remained, which was a shelter for William; this Town held out a siege,
and at last with a few resolute Soldiers slew and drowned 1500. of the
enemies. Guy of Flanders upon this resolved to invade Holland, and first he
defeats the Battavian Army; then takes in all the Towns of North-Holland,
except Harlem. The Duke of Brabant claims title to South-Holland, which
submits to his Forces, except Dort; this Town not only held out against him,
but at length, with incredible success, drove him quite out of Holland. Guy
returns into Zeland, besieges again Zirizea, which stoutly resisted, though
much oppressed by the enemy without, and famine within. A French Fleet is sent
to join with the Zelanders against the Flemings; Four of the French Ships stuck
upon the shelves, which the enemy intended to burn with some fireships; but
the wind turning about, drove the fire upon the enemy; a great fight ensued, in
which the Flandrians were Guy carried prisoner into France: so Zirizea and all
Zeland are now at liberty. Renessius the prime incendiary, who had fled to
Utricht, not daring to trust the Town, was making an escape by boat, which in
the River by the weight of the passengers was sunk, and so they were all
drowned. Hannonius hearing of the great success of his son, fell sick with
sudden joy, and died.

After this Robert Earl of Flanders intended to renew the war with Holland,
but is reconciled by the mediation of friends. About this time it rained for
ten months together, upon which followed a general Plague

William after this had some controversy with Utricht upon the death of Guy
the Bishop, who held some Lands belonging to Holland; he joined himself
afterward to Ludovic the Emperor, against Frederick the Austrian, and then
forces the rebellious Frislanders to pay tribute to Holland. At last this Earl
died, and was buried in Valenciens. He was so just, that he put to death 1337.
the Governor of South-Holland, for taking a Cow from a Countryman; this was
William the third.

To him succeeded William the 4. he married the D. of Brabants daughter, by
whom he had no children; he assisted Edw. of England against the French, the
Borussians against Casimir of Poland, and the Spaniard against the Sarazens;
Ludovic was cast out by the Pope, which he refused to accept; in his wars
against Utricht he received a wound in the foot; and as he was fighting against
the Frislanders, he was slain, and his head cut off in disgrace, and his whole
Army defeated; he being dead without issue, his sister Margaret, wife to
Ludevic the Emperor succeeded, who having ruled that Province one year returns
to her husband Ludovic, and commits the care of the State to her son William of
Bavaria, conditionally that he should pay yearly to her 10000 Scutati; about
which time Utricht and Holland fell out, and the Hollanders were beat; but by
means of the Duke of Brabant and Earl of Cleve, the Bishop was forced to make
peace with Holland. About this time Margaret pretending that her son did not
keep his Articles, demands her Earldome again, which he upon this forsook, to
the great discontent of Holland, for they loved him better then the Mother:
hereupon a Civil war arises between those who favored the son, and them who
adhered to the mother: Leiden, Amsterdam, and most of William, King Edward of
England assisted Margaret; there ensued a cruel Sea Fight between the Brill and
Gravesend in the mouth of the Mosa. At last it was agreed upon, that Margaret
should have Hanonia, 1351.
and William the rest, who married with the Duke of Lancasters daughter, of
whom he had no children: The Bishop of Utricht and he had wars, after which he
fell mad, and killed one Gerard a Nobleman in his fury, wherefore he is
imprisoned, and strife arose about the Government of the State; some standing
for Williams wife, others for Albert his brother, who upon this is sent for;
the old civil quarrel bursts out again, which not without much blood and
trouble, was appeased by Albert, who was Protector of Holland 19 1377.
William being dead, Albert succeeded.

Earl Albert having buried his former wife, marries with Margaret the
daughter of Adolphus of Clive, of whom he had no children; he doted upon Alitha
a Strumpet, who was killed by the consent of the Nobility; these the Earl
threatened with death; the Earls son interceding for them, was forced to fly
into France from his fathers wrath; but John of Bavaria obtained pardon for
them all. At length Albert died, and was buried at the 1404.
Hague.

Savoy or Sabandia, of old Allobroges, from a King of that name, was in the
Romans time a Kingdom, whose king Bitulto was taken by Fab. Max. After the
Romans, the Burgundians obtained this kingdom, and was a part Gallia
Narbonensis, and of the Kings of Arles; it was a member of the Empire till the
year 999. when Berald of Saxony, brother to Otho the third, for killing Mary
his Uncles wanton wife, fled from Germany, and seated himself here in the City
Morienna, to whom succeeded his son Humbert first Earl of this City, which
title he obtained from Conradus, some say Henry the second Emperor, because
his father Berald had recovered it with the kingdom of Arles to the Dukedom
of Burgundy from his enemies, and had made the way through the Alps, clear
from Thieves and Robbers; he married the daughter of the Marquess of Segusia,
by which he with his wife Amadeus. Humbert was buried in S. John's Church of
Morienna, which he had beautified and enriched.

To Humbert succeeded his Son Amadeus Earl of Maurienna, and Marquess of
Susa; he was called Candatus by Henry the Third, Emperor, because of his long
Train or Tail of young Gentlemen that always followed him. He assisted
William Earl of Burgundy against the Prince of Loraine. After he had given
good proof of his valor in that war, he died, and is buried with his Father.
To him succeeded Humbert 1080.
the second, who having subdued the petty King of Brianconium, that tyrannized
over his Subjects and Neighbors: he went against the Sarazens, Godfrey of
Bulloign; he contracted in his long journey, a disease, which at length killed
him. In his time Bruno having drawn many scholars with him out of Paris,
retired into a desert near Gratianopolis in Narbon, and there instituted the
Carthusian Order.

To Humbert succeeded his son Amadaeus the second: for his valor and good
service to the Empire, he is made by Henry the fifth Emperor, Earl of Savoy,
which was held in fee of the Empire, of old it depended upon Burgundy; but when
this was a part of the Empire, Savoy was governed by the Emperors officers,
who abusing their power in oppressing the people, were put out, and this
Amadaeus made Earl. He subdued the Earl of Geneva, who out of spleen, because
Amadaeus would not marry his daughter, invaded his Territories with a great
Army, which was defeated, and the Genevan himself killed. He had quarrels with
Lewis the Gross of France, which were taken up by St. Bernard: Afterward he
went against the Sarazens in Asia, with the same Lewis, and Conradus the third,
Emperor; but in his return home he died in Cyprus. He erected two Abbeys. 1148.


To him succeeded his son Humbert the third, who so grieved for the death of
his wife the Earl of Flanders daughter, that he could receive no comfort, till
by the advice of the Bishop of Geneva, he went to two holy men who had retired
themselves from the world, and professed a strict kind of life, near the lake
Lemannus; from these he received so much comfort, that in memory thereof, he
erected a Monastery in the same place, called Altacomba, which he richly
endowed, and furnished it with twenty Monks taken out of the Cistercien Abbey;
there did the Earl himself live a monastical life with these Virgin-Mary, and
having placed certain Monks there, resolves to live and die with them; but that
he was again overcome 1193.
with the importunate requests of his people, beseeching him to return to his
government, and to marry again for procreations sake: of this third wife he had
a son called Thomas; whereat he was so glad, that to testify his gratitude to
the blessed Virgin, he founds a Priory at the entry of the same lake to her,
Mauritius the Martyr, and filled it with Monks out of the Society of St. Peter
of Clunie. At last this devout Earl, after his return from Ptolemais with
Philip Augustus, fell into a lingering disease, and then died: He was interred
in the Monastery of Altacomba which he built to the Virgin. To him his son
Thomas succeeded, being yet a child. 1201.


The Earl of Burgundy, Uncle to this Thomas, undertook his tuition, which he
performed faithfully, keeping off all the storms which use to fall upon States
in the Princes minority. Thomas being now of years, suppresseth the forces of
Guy Earl of Geneva, him he takes prisoner with his daughter, whom he was
conveying to Philip Augustus the French King to be married; but the Thomas,
that she married him against her fathers consent, therefore Thomas would not
set Guy at liberty, because he refused to give his consent, till he had made
the Earldome of Geneva a Fee-farm to Savoy. After Thomas had returned from his
expedition against the Albigenses, whose doctrine was much spread through
Narbon, he joined the Principality of Piemont (which was fallen into diverse
factions for want of a successor, the Princes issue being extinct) to his
Earldom of Savoy. In Piemont he built many Castles to keep the Country in
obedience, and eased them of their heavy Taxes, and so prevented all occasions
of rebellion. He subdued also the Marquess of Montsferrat, and the Astenses,
who were confederate with Piemont. Frederic 2. Emperor against the Pope, fell
sick, and died. 1233.


To Thomas succeeded his son Amadaeus the third: he took diverse places in
Lombardy upon the civil quarrels of that people, and killed the governor for
imprisoning his Ambassadors as they were going from Amadaeus to Rome. He
restored the Country of Valesia to the Church of Sedun: At last, returning from
Lions, after he had saluted the Pope, and had conveyed his sisters daughter to
be married to Charles Saint Lewis his brother, he died, and was buried with his
Ancestors in the Monastery of Altacomba: whose son Boniface succeeded; 1246.
his fortune was not answerable to that of his Predecessors, for as he was
fighting against the Marquess of Montsferrat, the Taurini and Astenses, he is
taken prisoner and carried to Taurinum, with his chief companion and counselor
the Marquess of Salusia, where he was unworthily used, notwithstanding Pope
Alexander 4. had labored for his liberty, which would not be granted, and
therefore the Taurinians are excommunicated; in the interim Earl Boniface with
grief, some think with poison died, never having married; his body being
ransomed with a great sum of money, was buried in S. John's Manrienna. At this
time fell out the captivity, of Saint Lewis and his brothers. 1256.


Though Boniface had a sister, yet she was not permitted to succeed, because of
her sex; therefore his uncle Peter is made Earl of Savoy. Henry the third of
England, who had married Elianor his sisters daughter, made him Earl of
Richmond. For his fortitude and success, this Peter was called Junior Charles
the Great. He purposed to be revenged of Taurinum for the death of Boniface,
therefore lays a strait siege to it; which was relieved with victuals
strangely; two hundred Boat-men, for a great sum of money, chained certain
barrels full of provision, which they sank into the river Po, so artificially,
Peter did, was the punishing of those who had a hand in the death of Boniface;
afterward this City of Turin was bestowed by the Emperor upon Peter.

After this, Peter subdued many of the neighboring places, took in diverse
Geneva, and dismissed all his prisoners without ransom, having sworn fealty to
him. So Peter quieted all about him, and takes a journey for England to see
Queen Elianor his sisters daughter. The Earl of Geneva takes occasion by Peter's
absence to stir a rebellion against him, and therefore seiseth upon some of his
castles, giving out he was dead. Upon the report of these doings, Peter
procures 4000. English foot, which he transported by sea to Savoy; his coming
was so sudden, that none knew of it till he was there: He first takes in the
Castles that were revolted, and puts the Governors to death; then falls upon
the Territories of Geneva; but by the mediation of the Earl of Burgundy a peace
is concluded between the Savoyan Genevan, so that the Genevan should pay a
great sum of money to the Savoyan for the charges he had been at in this war,
and withal Amadeus should keep the Castles which he had regained. Then he
builds a Town called Margesus, upon the bank of the Lake and four Castles in
the Territories of Vienna; afterward he makes a journey into Germany to visit
Richard Earl of Cornwall, who had married Elianors sister Queen of England, and
was in competition with Alphonsus for the Empire. Peter having sworn fealty to
Richard, obtains of him full power and right over the Taurini, Ueragri,
Salassii, and Uaulxii, for him and his posterity; but at length Peter being
returned from Germany into Savoy, fell into a lingering malady, of which he
dyed, having made his 1268.
Philip (being then at Rome) his heir and successor, in confirmation of which
he caused his Ring to be delivered to him, as Alexander did to Perdices, this
custom continued ever after in Savoy.

Philip having received the ring of S. Maurice, (which had been given to Peter
by a certain Abbot) succeeds in the Earldorne; he was a Churchman, and held
the Bishoprics of Lions and Valentium in Commendam; but this Churchlife he
forsook, and married. Those of Berne and Friburgh, having made their peace with
the Emperor Ralph of Habspurgh, who had made war upon the Switzers, he takes
some towns and forts from this Philip, who complained thereof to the Pope,
hoping he would have dealt with the Emperor for satisfaction; but finding none,
he fell sick with discontent, and so for ten years together pined away, and
died. He divided his estate before he died, among 1285.
his Brothers sons: to Thomas the eldest he bequeathed Piedmont; to Lewis the
youngest, the Barony of Uaulxium; but to Amadeus the middlemost, whom he had
bred and loved best, he gave Savoy; for confirmation of which, lest his Maurice
his Ring, and caused money to be stamped with his name on it; he also by his
last will ordered, that if either of the other two brothers should repine at
this division as being unjust, he should forfeit his legacy. Before his death,
he caused proclamation to be made through Savoy and Burgundy, that if he had
done wrong to any man, or was indebted to him, he would make satisfaction to
the full. He bestowed the richest furniture of his house upon the Abbey of
Altacomba, where he would be buried with his Ancestors, and increased the
revenues thereof.

To Philip succeeded Amadeus 4. his brothers second son. He had long war with
the Earl of Geneva, and Humbert the Delphin of Uienna: the Genevan Thomas,
under pretext of wrong done him by Amadeus his younger brother, for accepting
Savoy; but Thomas was so faithful, that he would not stir against his brother;
wherefore the Delphin got him with some of his forces which he had raised in
defense of his brother, into an ambush, and slew him: but fearing lest Amadeus
would be revenged upon his Country for this slaughter, he invites the Genevan
to fall with fire and sword upon the lands of Lewis the youngest brother,
hoping by this to keep off the Savoyan forces from his own land. Amadeus seeing
that one of his brothers was killed, and the lands of the other wasted, falls
suddenly with an army upon the Genevan Savoy with his brothers country, and
guards it; the Genevan being amazed at this sudden coming of Amadeus, presently
flies; the Savoyan takes in some forts and castles, which he furnishes with
men and provision to keep off any more incursions into his brothers country;
the territories on both sides are miserably wasted with fire and sword, and the
inhabitants with plague and famine, till peace was concluded by the Popes
Legates, and the English and Burgundian Ambassadors: 1298.
but this peace lasted not long; for when the Delphin understood that the
Friburgers whom the Savoyan assisted, were overthrown by the Bernens, he took
occasion upon this to invade the Savoyan territories, against his oath Amacleus
was now forced to take arms, therefore invades the enemies country, takes the
town Bellocomba, and puts all that made resistance to the sword; then he
marches to Goncelli^ whither the Delphin had fled; to him Amadeus sends an
Herald, accusing him of his perjury, and challenging him either singly into the
field, of to meet him with his army; the Delphin returned him this answer, That
he would not contend with him in strength of body, in which man's glory
consisted not, for Bulls were stronger then men, but he would encounter his Army
with another, when time served. Amadeus perceiving the siege would be long, and
his provisions failed, marched back, and in the way took in a Castle, and
seized upon great store of cattle* but the Delp^s soldiers who lay in ambush,
and much of the cattle were regaitted. The Savoyan upon this resolves to raise
more forces, but by the means of Charles King of Sioily a peace is made between
the Savoyan, the Genevan, and the Delphin. The city Iurea upon the confines of
Piedmont, being long oppressed by the factions of Cuelphs and G^bellines, at
last chose Au^adeus for their Protector, who reconoiled the faction, and
abolished their names. But in the absence of Amadeus, the Earl of Geneva
builds a Castle near the Town, much offensive to the Savoyen. He again on the
other side builds a Castle to offend the Genevan, and so the peace is broken
again. The Delphin also, who still sided with the Genevan against Savoy, draws
away some of the Savoyen Tenants from their allegiance, chiefly Mombelius Lord
of Entrementium. Hereupon Amadeus besieges Entremontium, and takes it and in
it the Lord, who falling on his knees begged pardon, and had it.

Whilst Amadeus was employed in besieging Entremontium, the Earl of Geneva by
the help of a faction in the City, got possession of it, which did properly
belong to the Bishop of Geneva, not to the Earl; but in a short time the City
declaring for the Savoyen, drove out the faction, and the Earl was Amadeus put
to death as soon as he came, and took the Castle which held out against him,
putting all within it to the sword, except the women: shortly after the Bishop
was banished for plotting to bring in the Earl of Geneva again, and his Castle
pulled down: Not long after the Earl of Geneva dies, and so does the Delphin,
whose sons conspired to continue their fathers quarrel against the Savoyen, who
hereupon sends his son Edward with a puissant Army against them; Edward obtains
a glorious victory, and returns to his father with great joy: At length the
Countries being wasted with long Savoyens daughter is married to William Earl
of Geneva; but this peace lasted not above two years; for the Delphin
perceiving that he could not persuade the Genevan to break with his father in
law, labors by treachery to get the Town and Abbey of Ambrunaya, for that
purpose deals secretly with three wicked Monks of that Abbey, born in Delphiny,
to betray the place, which they did, by letting in through a backgate the
Delphins forces; this being done, the three Monks seize on the Abbot in the
Church Porch betimes in the morning as he was going to Mass, and hanged him
from a high window, because he was always averse from their wicked courses;
the Savoyen hearing of this wicked act, sends a considerable Army thither, who
suddenly seized on Ambrunaya, puts all to the sword that Delphin, and sends the
three Monks to the Ecclesiastic Magistrate to be punished. The Delphin upon
this, takes by treachery from the Savoyen the Castle Mirebellum, which he
strongly garrisons, and returns to Delphiny, when he heard that the Savoyen was
upon his march with a great Army, who sits down before the strong Town of St.
German in the Delphinat; but perceiving the place was well provided of all
things to endure a long siege, he uses this stratagem: He rises with his Army
pretending to besiege Languienum; when those of St. German seeing the danger
Langienum was in, sent out their chief provisions and forces to relieve it:
Upon this, the Savoyen German, which he takes with ease, being destitute of
their aid, which could not get in to them, yet the Townsmen fought till they
were almost all slain; the Castle also at last yielded: then Amadeus besieges
and takes the Town Amberievum. The loss of these two places so grieved the
Delphin, that shortly after he fell sick and died. About which 1304.
time was the war between Philip of France and the Flemings; Philip to make
himself so much the stronger, got the Savoyen and Delphin to resign both their
Armies to him, which they did; and after a long war peace is concluded. Amadeus
made his son Edward General of the Savoy forces.

This Amadeus for his good service at Rhodes was honored with the title of
Great, and a silver Cross (the Arms of the Knights of S. John of Jerusalem)
Cluny, who were to pray for the Earls of Savoy; because the Earl and his wife
both dreamed at one time, that they saw six little children pray to God to send
the Earl and his Countess issue which hitherto they wanted: This College was
called the Holy Covent. At last, Amadeus, as he was going to Avenion to procure
aid for his son in law, the Emperor of Byzantium, against the Turks, died, and
was buried in Altacomba.

Edward the ninth, Earl of Savoy, received the Ring, and succeeded to his 1323.
father; he was a good Prince and Soldier, but so wasteful in his expenses,
that he was forced to raise heavy Taxes from his people; he picked a quarrel
with Foucignius who married his sister Mary, and without any cause at all, made
war upon him, in which his Army was defeated, and had almost been taken
prisoner himself, but that he was rescued by the Lord of Entremontium, whose
life he had saved heretofore, when he was taken by his father Amadeus. This
same Edward interceded for his life the second time, where being Ambassador
Delphin at Paris, he killed in the Kings own presence the governor of his
Palace, for which he had suffered, if Edward, being then present, had not
begged his pardon. This Edward died with grief at Paris, for 1329.
the ill success he had in his former war, and is buried in Altacomba.

Amadeus the fifth, brother to Edward being at Avenion with Pope John 22. is
called home against his will, and invested in the Earldome by the Ring; Edwards
daughter, by the Salique law, is put by; but her husband the Duke of Britan
would not suffer her to give up her right till she received a great sum of
money for it. The Delphin growing insolent for the victory he got a while ago
over Edward, began now with fire and sword to waste the borders of Savoy.
Hereupon Amadeus, though otherwise a peaceable Prince, is forced to take Arms
in his subjects right, having first made a league with the Earl of Geneva; he
therefore first sets upon the Castle Monthousiun^, which he took with great
resolution and courage, for he was the first that scaled the walls, and leapt
down thence upon a Plain, keeping off the Enemy till his forces came to his
assistance: after this he built and took in other Castles. The Delphin to
requite Amadeus, besieges the Castle Perrieria in Savoy; but as he was coming
too near to view the works, is killed with an arrow; whereupon the Castle was
the more fiercely assaulted, and at last surrendered, upon condition that they
should have their lives; but the Articles were presently broken Humbert the
Delphins brother succeeded, Philip Valoise makes a firm peace between Savoy and
the Delphinat: So Amadeus gives himself totally to building, repairing, and
enriching of Religious houses; he gathered together all his Ancesters bones
which had been buried abroad, and laid them up in the Chapel of Altacomba. At
last he died, having lost a young son Amadeus nine years old.

Amadeus 6. succeeded, surnamed the Green, because he and his Court did wear
1342.
usually green clothes. Upon the death of Robert King of Sicily, the
Principality Piedmont fell to this Amadeus, and to James Prince of Mor^a.
Roberts Niece being rejected by the Salique law. The first act Amadeus did, was
the restoring of the Bishop of Sednuum to his place, being wrongfully thrust
out by the giddy multitude. After this, new quarrels arise between him and the
Delphin, because Hugh of Geneva had got the Baronry of Geisium, which was given
by Hugard Lord thereof to Amadeus the fifth of Savoy. Amadeus the sixth sends
to Hugh that he should come and do his homage for that Baronry; this he
refused, saying, that he was bound to do his homage to the Delphin, not to him.
Whereupon the Savoyen takes the Castle of Florimontum by storm, and shortly
after the strong Town Geisium. Hugh of Geneva to requite this, takes some
Savoy, and puts all to the Sword. Great slaughter and spoil is done on both
sides, till the Delphin resigned his interest in the Delphinat to Philip
Valoise the French King. Upon this, the limits of Savoy, and the Delphinat are
so settled, that all occasion of future quarrels are taken away. The river of
Guyerus is made the bounder of their Territories: But no sooner had Amadeus
disbanded his forces, when the Archbishop of Millan took occasion to lay claim
to Piemont, therefore entertains the disbanded Soldiers, with a multitude of
highway men, whom he employed to invade Piemont; yet in this action he would
not be seen himself. But the Savoyen quickly suppressed these Robbers, and
hanged up David and Robert their Captains, with many others whom they took
alive. After this he bought the Baronry of Vaulxium, and made war upon the
Prince of Morea, for killing the Earls messenger sent to summon the Prince: He
took diverse Forts and Castles from this Prince, which afterward he restored,
being reconciled to him, having lost Baumeus and Chalantius, his two chief
friends in this war.

This Earl instituted the order of the Anunciada, in memory of the
Annunciation of our Lady: He ordained fourteen of the prime Nobibity to be F.
E. R. T. which was the Motto of Amadeus the Great, who took Rhodes; for the
meaning is, Fortitudo ejus Rhodum tenuit. The annual solemnity is held on our
Lady Day in the Castle of S. Peter in Turin: this example was followed by Lewis
the eleventh of France, who instituted the order of S. Michael; Philip the
governor of Burgundy, author of the order of the Golden-Fleece; and Edward the
third of England, who ordained the order of the Garter. This Earl erected a
Monastery of Carthusians to pray for the safety of this order of the
Annunciation. After this, the Earl goes against the Saluzzes, who had
conspired with the Archbishop of Millan against him, whom having besieged, he
forced him to come into his Pavilion in an humble way, with a napkin bound
about his neck, and publicly to beg pardon, and to take again the oath of
Allegiance. Afterward peace being concluded in France, the English soldiers
going to help the Marquess of Montsferrat against the Vicount of Millan, were
forced to march through Piemont; at which the Earl being offended takes up Arms
against them: the English upon this take many of his Forts, and besiege the
Earl in Lansa; but upon the payment of two thousand and four hundred pounds,
the English are content to leave off the siege, to restore the Forts and
prisoners, and to march Lewis Duke of Burbon against Peter K. of Castile, who
to please his whore Mary, had stifled his own wife Blanca sister to the Duke of
Burbon, and to the wife of Amadeus: but hearing that Peter was killed by Henry
his bastard brother, they alter their resolution from invading Castile, and
intend to set upon the Despot of Bulgaria, who under pretense of friendship had
imprisoned John Paleologus Emperor of Constantinople; he transports his men to
Callipolis, which Amurathes had invaded: the Barbarians resisted his landing a
while, but at last were forced to give way. As soon as the Christian Army was
landed, they had diverse skirmishes with the Turks and Bulgarians, whom Amadeus
defeated, Varna, which caused the Bulgarian to set the Emperor at liberty, who
with Amadeus were received into Bizantium with great joy: But the Savoyen
disliking diverse of the Greek Ceremonies in their Divine-service, urges the
Emperor to unite the Greek Church with the Latin, to which he condescended;
and to let the Earl see he was real, he sends to Pera, where Amadeus was, the
sons of his chief Nobility as hostages, and withal the Imperial Diadem, and
shortly after he goes himself to Rome for that purpose; but being denied by
the Pope a few Galleys against Amurathes the Turk, he returns home without any
thing done in the union, which might then have been easily

Whilst Amadeus was absent in Constantinople, Barnabas Viscount of Millan, with
his brother Galeacius invade Piemont, to whom joined the Marquess of Salussia,
and Philip son of James, Prince of Morea; Earl Amadeus hearing of this, was
forced to leave off prosecuting the union of the Greeks and Latin Churches,
and repair with all speed to Savoy, at whose coming the Enemy retreats back to
Lombardy; but the Salussian, and Philip of Morea staying too long behind, were
cut off by the Savoyen. After this, the Marquess of Montsferrat with the
Savoyen help, overthrew the Viscounts Army, which had taken some Towns from the
Marquess, and besieged Asta; upon this defeat, the siege is raised. After this,
Amadeus is employed by Charles the fourth, Emperor, Pope Gregory the eleventh,
and Joan Queen of Naples, all whose lands were invaded by Barnabo of Millan,
and his brother Galeacius: against these the Earl marches, takes Coma, and
restores it to the Queen; then takes diverse Towns from the Enemy, and forces
Galeacius to make his Barnabo, who upon this hasteneth to Millan, fearing the
Enemy would besiege it, which indeed the Savoyen intended, had the Popes forces
come in time, which were now upon their march, but could not join with Amadeus,
because Barnabo had opened the sluices, and drowned all the passages; yet
afterward Amadeus made a shift, and got with great difficulty to the Popes
Army* at Bononia. These together plundered the Countries of Placentia and
Parma, and were preparing to sit down before Placentia; but Amadeus fell
suddenly sick, so that he was forced to be carried in a Litter to Murina; and
upon this the Army dissolved. Afterward Amadeus being recovered, and now in the
Kingdom of Naples with Urban the sixth, in defense of Lewis of Andes, fell
suddenly sick again, with the Duke of Andes, and a multitude of soldiers and
horses that had drunk of a water which the Enemy had poisoned, all 1383
these died: Amadeus his body is carried to Altacomba. It is reported that
Barnabo had poisoned, before this expedition, all the bread and wine in the
Town of Vicomercat, whither he knew Amadeus was to come with his forces; but
the treachery being found out by some that fell sick upon the eating and
drinking of that poisoned stuff, they were all cured by St. Maurice his ring
dipped in vinegar; though this is not likely, yet not impossible.

Amadeus the seventh, son to the former, having received the ring, succeeds: he
was now three and twenty years of age, and had already given good testimony of
his valor in his fathers time, by taking in some Towns and Forts upon the
River Araris; his dominions were enlarged by the Isle of Tene^os, which was
given to his father by the Venetians and Genuois, between whom he made peace,
after they had quarrelled long for this Island, as we have said; the City Coma
also was bestowed upon the same Amadeus the father, by legacy from the Queen of
Naples. This young Earl made war, with good success, upon the Marquess of
Montsferrat, for causing some of the Savoyen Sedun with their Forts, and made
them receive again their Bishop, Edward the Prince of Morea's son, whom they
had thrust out: he defeated the Marquess of Saluzes forces which had invaded
his Country; the Seigniority of Nicea chose him for their Prince, and so did
some other Princes thereabout. But after Amadeus was returned home, one day as
he was hunting the Bore, he fell from his horse, and sorely wounded his thigh,
which a Montebank out of Africa, who then waited on the Duke of Burbon,
undertook to cure, but it is thought he poisoned him, for so the Earl 1397
as he was dying confessed: the Physician is apprehended and imprisoned, who
having cleared himself, is banished out of Savoy, France, Burgundy and Germany,
into England. The Earl is buried in Altacomba.

CHAP. IX.
The French Story from the year 1313. till 1380. interwoven with diverse
passages of England, Flanders, Spain, Germany, Italy, etc.

IN France, to Philip the Fair succeeded his son Lewis Hutin, who had before
1313.
this time succeeded to the Crown of Navarre, by the death of his mother; he
caused Enguerrand great General of the Finances, for imposing diverse Tributes
on the people, to be hanged, and his image to be flung down from the Palace
stairs where it stood. This King resolves to make an expedition Philip, who had
for that purpose sequestered the Clergies tithes; but before he could accomplish
his design, he died in the second year of his reign, having left his Queen
great with child, his name was John, and lived not above eight days: so Lewis
had now only one daughter Joan, by Margaret daughter to Robert Duke of
Burgundy, but she could not succeed, because of the Salique Law, which says,
Let not women succeed in the Salique Land, which was meant of France, because
Ammian Marcellin writes, that in his time there were a people in France called
Salies; therefore though the Duke of Burguny uncle to this Princess stood for
her right a while, yet at last yielded France, and acknowledged Philip le Long,
the deceased Kings brother, lawful heir, who was crowned without contradiction;
he bestowed his eldest daughter on this Odon Duke of Burgundy, and with her the
Country of Burgundy: his second he gave to Lewis Count Roberts son of Flanders,
who in right of his mother was Count of Nivern: the third was espoused to the
Delphin of Vienna: Jane the defunct Kings daughter, was married to Lewis Count
of Evreux, who by her obtained the Kingdom of Navarre.

In the mean while, the Pope confirms the peace between France and Flanders, by
which it is agreed that the Earl of Flanders should pay to the French a
million of Crowns in twenty years by equal portions. The design for the
Holy-war is hindered, by the debate that was between Lewis of Bavaria, and
Frederic of Austria; the Gibellins that were banished out of Genua procure Mark
son to Matthew chief of the Gibellin faction, and Vicar of the Empire to
besiege Genua, which sent to the Pope for his protection: the Pope commands
Mark to cease from molesting those who sought his protection; Mark refused to
obey, whereupon he is declared an heretic, and an enemy to the Church, and so
denounces war against him; for effecting of which he reconciles King Robert
with the King of Arragon, whom he makes to resign Rhege to Robert, who
thereupon presents himself before Genua with fifteen Galleys of his own, and
ten of the Popes, but these could not make Mark raise the siege, till an Army
was sent against Millan, which caused the Millanois return home to save their
City: Philip also, son to Charles of Valois, and to King Roberts sister,
marches with an Army into Italy, upon whose approach Galeas Viscount, and son
to Matthew, proffers to submit himself to the French Kings Arbitrator, which
this young Prince believing, returned with his forces into France, where he
found the King dangerously sick, and a great mortality every where caused by
the Jews, who poisoned the waters, partly hired by the Turks and Saracens, and
partly to be revenged for their banishment under Philip the Fair; the Jews are
apprehended and 1321.
next day was hanged. The King about this time died without issue male.

Charles the Fair, Philips brother succeeded: He falls presently to execution
of justice, being omitted by reason of the great mortality, and the short
livesof the late Kings. He caused one Iordain, a kinsman of Pope John, to be
hanged for murder. Lewis Count of Nevers is imprisoned for his presumptuous
behavior toward the King. One Hugh occasioneth great troubles in France, for
building a Fort in Guien without the Kings leave, pretending it was English
ground; At last, it was after much debate demolished by Charles Valoise, who
with an Army defeated Hugh, and his English forces. This Charles was he who
caused Enguerranum his special friend to be hanged for which fact afterward he
grew so discontented, that he fell sick, and died; but before his death, he
procured Charles the Fair having reigned seven years, died, and left his wife
great with child: King Edward of England, son to Philip the Fairs daughter,
sister to the last King, claimed title to the Regency, as being next of kin;
but the French told him that he was too young to govern such a Kingdom, and
that he had need to have a governor himself. Philip son to Charles of Valoise
told him plainly, that France was not to be governed by women, and that it was
unreasonable for a daughter of France married in England to claim that right,
which was denied to her that was married to the ^rgundian, which was always
accounted French; much was debated to and fro about this business: In the
interim, the Queen Dowager brought Philip of Valoise is declared King, and
consecrated at Rhemes, and crowned at S. Dennis, thence he rides in great state
to Paris, where he is received by the Nobility, City, Clergy and University, in
great pomp; and a match is made between this new Kings youngest son 1328.
Philip, Duke of Orleans, with Blanch the former Kings daughter lately born.

Philip being settled, resolves to make wars upon Flanders, for not paying the
million of Crowns agreed upon; Earl Lewis sent his collectors to raise the
money, but they were slighted, and he forced to fly, because of a fire that
Turney whilst he was there, the people supposing that he had set the Town on
fire. The French King raises an Army and besieges Cassel, upon the borders
where he Flemings had put a Garrison; but he could not either take the Town, or
draw the besieged to fight, wherefore he falls with fire and sword upon the
Country all about, hoping to draw the besieged out of their strong hold, but
could not: At length the Soldiers returning with great booties to their Tents,
began to make merry, and be careless; the Flemings seeing this, issue so
suddenly out of the Town upon the Camp, that they had almost surprised the
King; but the alarm being made, and the King on horseback, the French fall
furiously on the Flemings, routs them, and kills Cassel is taken, sacked and
burned, and Count Lewis is resetled in his Country, where the authors of the
rebellion are put to death; William Canute one of the chiefest, was fled to the
Duke of Brabant, but he was forced to deliver him up to the King, who caused
his head to be cut off at Paris. In the Kings absence the Clergy incroached
much upon the secular Courts, of which complaint was made to the King; but he
favoring the Clergy was content to let them go on in their judicatures.
Shortly after there met at Amiens four Kings, to wit, of France, of England, of
Bohemia, and of Majorea: King Edward came to do homage for the Duchy of
Guien. The French King prepares for his expedition into the Holy Land,
therefore goes Avenion to consult with the Pope about it, and withal makes
his son John, now fourteen years old, Duke of Normandy and Regent of France.
Then he sends to the King of England to join with him in this holy expedition,
but he found that he was otherways bent, and intended to invade France,
wherefore the expedition into Palestine is laid aside.

Robert Earl of Artois, who had been so hot for the Salique law, in the right
of King Philip against the English Ambassadors, is now quite changed, and
altogether for the English Title; whereupon to secure himself from Philips
indignation, conveys his chief wealth to Bordeaux, then in the English
possession, and repairs himself to King Edward in England, who had already made
war upon David King of Scotland, whereby the French King is engaged in honor
to assist his friend and allie; and now open acts of hostility are committed by
the French and English on each other both by Sea and Land; in the interim king
Philip to strengthen himself the more, bestows his daughter upon the young
Duke of Brabant, who was aimed at by William of Henault, for one of his
daughters, and draws in all his ancient Confederates to join France and
Bohemia; and for fear lest the Flemings should side with the English, the Pope
confirms a solemn league between the French and Flemings, these swearing
fidelity to France, which they promise to keep, or to forfeit a million of
Crowns; peace also is made between Arragon and Navar, both kings engaging
themselves to stand for France; but Lewis of Bavare the Emperor takes part
with king Edward against the French, because he thought the French king kept
off the Pope from absolving him; William of Henault also was against the
French, because he intercepted the Duke of Brabant, with whom he meant
Guelders, the Marquess of Iuliers, and Bishop of Colen were also enemies to
France; but the Earl of Flanders stood firm to the French, he beheaded Le
Courtisien a French Lord at Gaunt, for keeping correspondency with the English,
upon which the Commons fell to mutiny, and killed some of the Earls Officers,
and the Earl himself, pretending he was going to hunt, fled to France; the
English in the mean time take some Towns from the French; these invade
England, and plunder and burn Southampton: Cambray is summoned to surrender to
king Edward, as Vicar or Lieutenant of the Empire, alleging that the City
belonged to the Empire, not to France, but the French Garrison within refused
to obey.

The French Army consisted of four Kings, to wit, of France, Scotland, Bohemia,
and Navar; of six Dukes, among which were the Duke of Britany and Lorain, six
and twenty Earls, four thousand Knights or Cavaliers, in all 100000 Soldiers;
the English and German Camp consisted of 60000. which by the advice of Robert
of Artois was raised from the siege of Cambray, because he thought such a
gallant Army would do better service in the Field, then to lie idle a whole
Summer before so strong a place. The Count of Henault, upon the borders of
France, took his leave of King Edward, showing that he waited on him so long as
he was within the limits of the Empire, being the Emperors Lieutenant, but he
would not enter into France to make war against his Uncle: Philip is advised by
Robert king of Sicily, and his wife Council, not to fight with the English, and
hazard France upon the fortune of a Battle; the Dutch being weary of the French
delays, began to think of returning home; King Edward gave them leave, and
retires to Flanders with his Army, purposely to draw the Flemings from the
French to his side, which they were unwilling to do, because of their
engagement and promise; Upon this King Edward takes the title of France upon
him, and wears the Lillies in his Colors, by this telling the Flemings, that
they did not violate their oath in submitting to him, being both King of France
and England, and so got the Flemings to side with him, for which they are
excommunicated by the Pope. After this, King Edward went over to England to
raise money, having left his Queen at Gaunt ready to lie in; in his absence,
King Philip by his Niece the Empress, got the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria to
renounce the English, and to take away from Edward the Lieutenantship of the
Empire, because he had not paid the sum he promised to the Emperor; in the
mean while the French and Flemings made daily excursions upon each others
borders; the Earl of Salisbury before Lisle is taken prisoner, and carried to
Paris, two hundred of his men being cut off by the French, who took the Towns
of Escandure and Thin.

The French sent a Fleet of 380 sail to lie before the Sluice in Flanders,
which now sided with the English: King Edward encounters this Fleet with
another 1340.
of fewer Ships, but taller and better manned; a terrible skirmish ensues of
six hours, in which were killed 30000 on both sides; at last the English got
the victory, King Edward received a hurt in the anckle, which was shortly after
England and Germany, with the help of upper Flanders, he besieges Tournay, and
Robert of Artois with 30000 men sits down before Saint Omer, in which the Duke
of Burgundy was with a strong Garrison, who sallied out upon the besiegers;
Count Artois drew the Duke as far as he could from the Town, hoping to have
surprised him, but the Duke fell with such fury on the Flemings, that he made
them retreat disorderly, having killed 3000 on the place; the Count retreats to
the Camp before Tournay; many sallies were made out of the Town, but at last
they were put to that straight, that the French Army under King Philip was
forced to encamp within three leagues of the English; in the night time Philip
relieves Edward out of hope to gain that place; therefore upon the entreaty of
the Countess of Henault, his wives mother, and sister to king Philip, he makes
a Truce with the French for three years; the Flemings are absolved by the Pope;
the prisoners set free on both sides; the Scotch King is carried home in French
ships; the King of Bohemia stays in France; the Duke of Britain dies by the
way homeward: the King of Navar raises an Army against the Sarazens.

It fell out well for Spain, that this peace was made; otherwise the three
African Kings who had joined their Forces with the Sarazen King of Grenada, and
had defeated the Spaniards diverse times both by Sea and Land, Alphonsus Kings
of Castile and Portugal, with the French and Navar Forces in a great battle
totally defeated the Barbarians, seized upon all their rich plunder, and
carried the African Banners in triumph to the Pope at Avenion, where they were
hung up in the chief Church. About this time Count Evreux king of Navar died;
and immediately began the war of Britany, upon the death of Duke John, who
died, as is said, going home from Tournay; he had married his only daughter
before to Charles son of the Count De Blois, and of Margaret sister to Philip
the French king; but Duke John's third brother Count de Montfort laid Title to
the Duchy of Brittany, and for that cause seized upon Nantes, Breast, Rhemes,
Venuez, and the treasure of Limoges. Charles de Blois in right of his crooked
wife, claimed the Duchy, both appeal to the Peers of France and Parliament of
Paris, who declare the Right to be in Charles: At which, John de Montfort in a
discontent goes into England, and entertaines a league with king Edward; but
when he was returned into Brittany, he is accused for doing homage to king
Edward for that Duchy, this he denied; yet when the king had commanded him to
stay in Paris, he stole away thence by night, which so exasperated the king,
that presently he sent his son, Prince John Duke of Normandy with an Army to
settle Charles de Blois in his possession of Brittany, who laid siege to
Nantes, and took it upon composition, John de Montfort, who is sent to Paris,
and imprisoned in the Louvere.

Clanda, the masculine wife of Montfort, took up Arms in her husbands quarrel,
sends to England for aid, seiseth upon Hembont whilst Charles is besieging
Rhemes, which being surrendered he brings his Army to Hembont, where as he was
assaulting the wall, Clauda slips out with a party at a gate, and enters the
enemies camp, which she plunders and sets on fire; but upon the coming of the
English supplies, Charles raises the siege. Pope Clement the sixth being newly
elected, procures a truce of two years between Charles and Montfort. Clauda
upon this goes over to England, where a Match is proposed between her young
son and the kings daughter: then she procures a fleet from England, under the
conduct of Robert of Artois: the English being landed, seize upon Vennes; the
French with an army besiege it; but as Robert was striving to raise the siege,
he re^ived a hurt, of which he shortly afterward died, at which king Edward was
much grieved, and with an army passes himself into Britany, where having taken
some towns, upon the Popes desire a France and England; wherefore Montfort is
set free, and shortly after died.

King Philip in the interim caused a strict search to be made for such as
favored the English in the former war; diverse of the Nobility of Normandy and
Britany are sent to Paris and beheaded, Ieoffry de Harcourt escapes into
England. About this time, one James de Arteuel a Fleming, at Gaunt, made a
speech against the French in favor of the English, and advises the people to
drive out their Earl for favoring the French, and to choose a new one, or to
admit of him whom king Edward should send. Upon this the Flemings were so
enraged, that they tore him in pieces and flung his carcass to the Edward in
the mean time with a thousand sail arrives in Normandy, 1346.
takes diverse towns, burieth honorably the heads of Persi and Bacchon, which
were set up at Carentan, for their fidelity to him. Then he went to Caen, where
he fought with Raoul the Constable of France, and the Citizens, whom he beat
into the town, and the English entered pel-mel with them, about five hundred
English were killed out of windows and from the house-tops; the Constable
having saved himself a while in the tower, yields to king Edward, who
commands Ieoffry to set the town on fire, because of their obstinacy; but he
desired the town might be spared, because he had diverse friends and kindred in
it, which was assented to by the king. In the mean while a Herald is sent from
king Philip to king Edward, to appoint a day and place for a battle; Edward
sent word, that he would fight near Paris, in the view of that great city,
which the French believing fitted themselves there for the battle; but the
English having deluded the French, encamp themselves near Crescy in Ponteu, by
a great wood; in this battle the English were victorious, in which were killed
thirty thousand men; Count de Blois, and de Sancerre, with the Earl of
Flanders, and king of Bohemia with all his forces were slain, besides twelve
hundred Chevaliers, all of ancient families; the King himself had his horse
shot under him, and being mounted again by Count de Beaumont, fled to Broy, and
from thence to Amiens. Ieoffry de Harcourt hearing that his Philip with a rope
about his neck, and cast himself at his feet craving mercy for his rebellion,
for which the king pardoned him.

King Edward finding Calice a fit port for his passage into England, sat down
before it with his Army, and having besieged it eleven months, at last took it
upon composition; six of the chief Burghers were demanded by the king to be
put to death, who willingly offered themselves, whose courage when the king
perceived, he pardoned them all. The French king during the siege came with an
Army hoping to raise it, and therefore presented battle, but the English would
not leave their trenches, whereupon the French retreated. Charles de Blois and
his two sons were prisoners in England; but he was set Philip of France, who
left two sons, John his successor, 1350.
and Philip Duke of Orleans. Then a Truce was made with England for two years;
in which time Rioul Constable of France, who was taken at Caen, initiated this
young Kings reign with his blood, for he lost his head, being accused of
Treason, the Delphin having lost his son in this war, and being about to sell
his Signiory to the Pope, the French so prevailed, that it should be annexed to
France, conditionally the kings eldest son might be styled the Delphin. Charles
d'Espagne is made Constable, whom Charles king of Navar so hated, that he
caused him to be murdered in the night time; and withal, gave out that he was
forced to do it in his own defense, and that the Constable intended to murder
him: Upon this King Charles is summoned to answer in person to his accusers,
which he refused ^o do; but at last upon better advice he came to Paris, his
fact was pleaded before the French King, and being found guilty he is seized
upon by James brother to the Duke of Burbon, who was made Constable of France
after the death of d'Espagne, and delivered to the Officers, Jane widow to
Charles the Fair, this King of Navars Aunt, Blanch the Kings mother-in-law, and
Jane the King of Navars wife, and the French kings daughter, he was pardoned;
but yet he took this accusation for an affront, and therefore carried a grudge
ever after to his father-in-law, who when he was raising some Taxes on his
Subjects, to suppress the English, who out of Bourdeaux and Calice did plunder
the Countries, this King Charles did what he could to hinder the Taxes, which
notwithstanding were raised, though with some difficulty and opposition,
chiefly of Arras, which was

King Edward understanding that an Army of 30000 French was raising, returns
to England; in the interim King John makes his eldest son the Delphin Duke of
Normandy, whom he sends thither to take possession, where he is met at Rouen by
the chief Nobility of that Country, and by the king of Navar, as being Count
D' Evreux; King John hearing of Navars being there, makes haste to Rouen,
seiseth upon him and John de Harcourt, who was of Charles his counsel, for
which his head was there presently cut off, and King Charles sent prisoner to
Paris: Upon this the Towns of Evreux and Harcourt stood out against king John,
and all Normandy ready to mutiny. King Edward being advertised Gloucester
thither with a great Army, with whom joined Philip, brother to Navarre, and
Geoffrey Harcourt Uncle to John who was beheaded, these fall to taking and
plundering 1356.
of Towns, but the coming of the French king made them retreat; in the mean
while Edward Prince of Wales went out of Bordeaux with 2000 horse, and 8000
English Archers, besides the chief men and Garrisons of Gascoigny, these
overrun the Countries of Poictou and Berry, killing all the French that made
opposition; which K. John understanding, left a flying Army in Normandy, and
marches toward Prince Edward, who having done his work, which was to draw K.
John out of Normandy, retreats to Gascoigny; where having met Poictiers, a
place by reason of large Ditches and Vineyards very disadvantageous for the
French Horse, in which their strength consisted; these might have starved the
English, had they been patient, but they would needs fall upon them in their
trenches, 300 of their prime men were chosen to begin the battle, which were
defeated by the English Archers; the French Army was divided into three
battalions, the first under the Constable, the second was conducted by the
Delphin, and the third by the king himself, all these three were defeated one
after another, the king and his son Philip taken prisoners, and with them 1500
Gentlemen, Poictiers received some of the French that fled, but fearing that
the English would enter pellmell with them, shut their Gates; the king is
honorably received into the Princes Tent, and feasted; thence he was carried
to Bordeaux, but the Gascoigns would not suffer the King to be carried into
England, till they were appeased by rich gifts and promises.

K. John is received in England with great magnificence; in the mean while the
D. of Normandy assembles the chief men of France at Paris, out of which fifty
Deputies are chosen to advise how the King should be set free: there it was
proposed, that the King of Navar should be set at liberty; that six of the
Clergy, six of the Nobility, and six of the third estate should govern the
young Delphin; but he disliking this way, dissolved the Assembly. The Parisians
murmr for raising the value of money. The king of Navar being let out of
prison by some of his own faction, strives to raise new troubles in France,
showing that he had more right to the Crown then the k. of England, which made
Edward backward in aiding the Navarrois. David k. of Scotland, who had been
taken prisoner, was ransomed for 10000 Crowns. The French king was content to
pay his ransom, but not to part with the right of his Crown. The Delphin went
about from Town to Town, raising all the money he could for his fathers
ransom. Languidoc and the Champerois were very forward, even the women to part
with their rings and jewels* but the Parisians were hindered by the k. of Navar,
who in all things opposed himself to the Delphin, who was in danger of his life
whilst he was there, having some of his servants killed in his presence. The k.
of Navar raised great Forces in Normandy, and sent for 10000 Navarrois, which
took diverse small Towns; the Pesants also began to mutiny Paris, and having
raised an Army of Gentlemen, defeated the Pesants; then he brings 30000 men
near to Paris to curb their Factions; the Provost-Marshal who stood for Navar,
being demanded the keys of the City-Gates by some of the Delphins friends, is
presently slain for refusing, and the Gates are opened for the Delphin, who
caused two chiefmen of the Faction to be hanged, and then prepares to suppress
the k. of Navar. 1358,


The Truce between France and England being ended, king Edward passes over to
Calice, and from thence to Rhemes, a hundred thousand Crowns are sent him to
forbear spoiling and plundring the Country; thence he marches Paris, and
offers battle to the Delphin, who will not hazard his strength, therefore king
Edward burns and spoils all about Paris, intending to ruin all, or to bring
France in subjection; but when he understood the difficulty of this work by the
Duke of Gloucester, and being also affrighted with Thunder and Lightning, which
killed some of his men, he desisted from his enterprise, desiring pardon from
God for what he had already done; so now a final peace is thought upon, which
was concluded on these Articles, That k. Edward and his son should quit the
right they claimed over Anjou, Tourain, Main, and Normandy, and that the
French should render Guien to them, and that they English, and so the Armies to
be disbanded on both sides; which being performed, king John returns to France
after four years captivity, where having saluted the Pope, he binds himselfby a
vow to make an Expedition against the Infidels, but first he means to settle
his kingdom, and having occasion to go into England about some weighty
Affairs, he died at London, and was buried at S. Dennis.

Charles the fifth son to king John succeeded: he made his chief abode at
Paris, committing the managing of the war to his brothers, and other
Lieutenants; he defeated the king of Navar, by Bertrand du Guescon a valiant
Commander. King Peter of Lusignan came from the East into France, soliciting
the King to further the Holy-war intended by king John; but he could not
Brittany: at last peace being made between Jane the widow of Charles de Blois,
who was slain, and Mountfort, he is declared Duke of Brittany. Peter of Castile
having allied himself with France, by marrying the French Queens sister,
daughter to the Duke of Burbon, fell off from the French, and sided with the
English; his wife he slighted and abused, accusing her that she had procured of
a Jew that was a sorcerer, an enchanted Girdle, to bewitch him, whereby he
might be made incapable to govern, and so she might rule; shortly after she
died; he in the mean time having stripped Henry his Bastard-brother of all his
Lands left him by his father, drove him out of his kingdom, and then makes war
upon the king of Arragon, a friend to France. The Bastard is brought back by
Bertrand du Guesquin, and crowned, having chased away king Peter. The Prince of
Wales restores Peter to his kingdom. In the interim the king of Navar is
surprised, as he was showing the way to the English Army through the Spanish
country, and brought prisoner to the king of Arragon. The English defeated
Guesquin, and took him prisoner, then drove out Henry, and replaced Peter in
Navar having given his son for Hostage, is set free, and so is Guesquin for a
ransom. Henry being furnished with another Army from France, returns into
Castile, where finding Peter forsaken by the English for want of their pay, he
defeats and kills him, and then made himself king by consent of the whole
kingdom.

The Prince of Wales being necessitated, imposes heavier Taxes on Guien then
the French used to do, whereupon they complain to the French king and
Parliament at Paris, who would not seem to countenance their complaint till
their Hostages were returned from England; then did king Charles upon
reiterated complaints send a summons to the Prince at Bordeaux, and open war
Edward; hereupon diverse Towns revolt from the English; king Edward to defend
Guien, sends over an Army to Bordeaux, who took the Duchess of Burbon, the
French Queens Mother, with diverse other Dames, prisoners, and let them not go
without great ransomes; another English Army lands at Calice, burning and
wasting all before them; they took and burnt Limoges for revolting to the
French; but at this time the English Army had no great success at Land, and
less at Sea, for their Fleet of five and thirty sail was overthrown by the
French and Castilian Navy near Rochel. S. Severe is taken by Guesquin. Poictou
and Sainctonge are given to the Duke de Berry* Rochel is surrendered to the
French, and a part of the English Army under Capral de Bus is defeated. The D.
of Britany, k. Edwards son-in-law, strives to draw the Britains to the English
side, but is resisted by some great Lords, which made 1356.
the D. retire to England, having left Robert Canol an Englishman Governor of
Britany, whom the French besiege in the Castle of Breast, and his cousin Hugh in
Derval; these both accorded to surrender their Forts, if they had not succors
from England within two months, and so Hostages are given; in this mean time
supplies come from England, which would not land, though invited by the French,
but stayed on shipboard till the two months were expired, and then Canol
received the English Army into Breast; the Fench threaten to kill their Canol
replies, that then he would kill all the French prisoners in Britany.

The English Ambassadors complain to the Pope, of the wrongs done them by the
French, in breaking the peace, and falsifying their Oaths; the French defend
themselves, clearing both King Charles and his father from perjury; the Pope
would not take notice of their differences, but was content to hearken to the
French touching the affairs of Flanders; for king Edward desirous to marry one
of his sons to the Earl of Flanders only daughter, sent to the Pope for a
dispensation, which was denied, because it would cause perpetual war between
France and England; for Flanders had thitherto been a dependant of France; so
this Match being broken, Philip le Hardy Burgundy married the Lady, whom if the
French King had married, the addition of Flanders would have been a great
strength to France. After this the King of Navar made his peace with France,
who shortly after by some assasinates (who were put to death for this villainy)
intended to have poisoned the French King. Navars wife dies about this time,
and he is declared enemy to France, from whom they take the City Evreux.
Shortly after died Prince Edward of Wales, and the year following King Edward
his father. k. Charles remembering the insolences that were acted in Paris
during his minority and his fathers imprisonment, ordained that after the kings
death his eldest son should immediately succeed, and that he should be crowned
at the age of 1377.
14. and then should be out of his nonage, that the Princes Governors should
not have too much time to make themselves great. Guesquin. takes many towns
from the English on one side, and D. Philip le Hardy on the other took all from
them round about Calice, so that he hemmed them in from making excursions. For
maintenance of the war, subsidies are laid upon salt and wine; all Eritany
except Breast is now under the French: hereupon Ambassadors are sent from
England German Princes, complaining of the wrongs done by France; the French
Ambassadors on the other side defend themselves, and complain of the wrongs
they sustained from the English, chiefly that they exacted more for the ransom
ofk. John then the Egyptians did for S. Lewis, and withal they desire the
German Princes to renew their alliance with France, which was urged also by
Charles the Emperor, Uncle to the French king, and by Wenceslaus his son; who
to make an agreement between the two kingdoms went themselves into France,
where they were magnificently received in all places where they came, chiefly
at Paris, where great joy and pomp was showed, and all prison doors let open;
but these joys and the Treaty of peace were crossed by the Queens death and

After this, the Emperors, French and English Ambassadors, with the Archbish.
of Ravenna the Popes Legate met at Gaunt, to advise about the same peace; but
this meeting was also dissolved by the schism of the Church, which lasted 30
years; for Pope Gregory who removed his seat from Avenien to Rome, being dead,
great debate arose between the Italian and French Cardinals about the election
of his successor, as we have already showed, Urban the 6. being chosen by the
one, and Clement by the other, who held his residence at Avenion. About this
time D. Thomas, uncle to k. Richard of England, went over to Calice with 8000
English, who from thence passed into Brittany to assist the Duke in Flanders.
The Gantois complain against their Earl for raising new Taxes upon their Bruges
who cut a channel for the river Lis to flow through their Lands: this
occasioned a war; for the Gantois taking Arms and white Caps, were met with by
the Earl and his Army, who upon their Petition promised to take off their
Taxes, and to maintain their ancient privileges; and so they laid down their,
Arms and white Caps; but John Leon their Captain dissuaded them from laying
down their Caps, the badges of their liberty, whereupon they took up their
Arms and Caps again, and killed the Earls Governor of Gaunt; this was done by
the meaner sort, but the richer and wiser chose 12. men whom Bruges, who faling
at his feet beseech him to take pity on their Town, like to be ruined by
factious people: John Leon hearing of this, and that his case was desperate, if
he should be seized on by the Earl, assembleth his white-Caps together, and
falls upon the Earls Palace full of wealth in the Suburbs of Gaunt, which they
pillage and set on fire; the Earl highly displeased at this, resolves to raise
an Army, and for that cause goes to Terremond: Leon in his absence marches
with his white-caps to Bruges, to whom the faint-hearted Townsmen surrender
themselves, and opened their Gates; thence he marches to Dam, where he is
received, and shortly after, as its thought, was poisoned: notwithstanding the
death of their Captain, the White-caps laboring to draw all the Flemings to
their side, went and besieged Hypre, where Audenard held out against them. D.
Philip of Burgundy fearing his own loss in these troubles of Flanders, if his
father-in-law should be worsted by his people, goes to his brother the French
K. of whom he obtains leave to mediate a peace between the Earl and his
people, for this cause he goes to Tournay, whence he sends to the White-Caps
to lay down Arms, and then he would procure them a general pardon and act of
oblivion, conditionally they would rebuild the Earls Palace at Gaunt; so Arms
were laid down on both sides, and the Earl received with great joy into Gaunt.

In the mean while, Oliver, Cousin-german to Roger governor of Gaunt, who was
killed, in revenge of his brothers death, took forty vessels of provisions
going for Gaunt, which caused a war between the Gentry and commons of Flanders;
the like commotion was beginning in France, for those of Montpellier killed the
Kings receivers and collectors of Subsidies, and were taking up Arms, but the
Duke of Anjou quickly suppressed them, and hanged de Berry, the Kings brother
removed from the government of Languedoc, and Count de Foix (to please the
people) put in his place. This year died King Charles, having left three
children, Charles, Lewis, and Catherine; Duke d' Anjou is made Protector, the
young King being as yet but thirteen years old; 1380.
the Dukes of Burgundy and Burbon are made Tutors to the children.

CHAP. X.
A prosecution of the French History from the year 1380. till 1407. In which
are interlaced diverse passages of Italy, Flanders, Navarre, Afric, Britany,
England, Scotland, Spain and Hungary.

CHarles the sixth is confirmed in his Kindome by the Peers assembled at Paris;
so are the Dukes of Burgundy, the Kings uncle by the father, and of Burbon by
the mother, established governors to the children. That day the King was
crowned at Rhemes, being to dine (as the custom was) at the Archbishops house,
a contestation arose between Duke Anjou and Burgundy Anjou claiming it as
governor of the Kingdom, but Burgundy in respect of his Duchy, and being
Dean of the Peers of France. The King, to avoid further disturbance of that
solemnity, ordered that Burgundy for that time should sit next the King;
wherefore Anjou being set down first, Burgundy thrusts himself between him and
the King. At this time the English had laid siege to Nantes in Britany, but
having lost before it some prime Commanders upon the sallying out of the
Garrison, they raised the siege: the Britons being wearied with war, desire
their Duke to make his peace with the French King, or else they would forsake
him; whereupon he was forced to Clement; so the English return home. Anjou the
Regent of France did much favor Pope Clement, because he promised to give him
the Kingdom of Sicily, which depended on the Church; for his adversary Pope
Urban had sent for the Hungarian to self on that Kingdom, and to revenge the
death of his brother Andrew, murdered by his wife Queen Jane: but Pope Clement
who had received Avenion from her, was willing to support her cause, therefore
advises her to make Duke d' Anjou her son and heir, which she did: he to raise
an Army, got the King to grant him Subsidies, which did much vex the people, so
that at Paris they Jews, whom they plunder; and then upon the Kings collectors
and receivers of his rents, whom they rob of all their moneys, and burn their
books of accounts: by this example, other Towns deny to pay more Taxes.
Languedoc refuses to receive the Duke of Kerry for their governor, and caused
Count de Foix to raise an Army against him, which defeated some of the Dukes
companies, after which he advises them to submit to him for avoiding further
troubles, which they did the more willingly, because he was the Kings uncle.

Pope Clement to strengthen Anjou's cause in Sicily, imposes a tenth upon the
French Clergy, at which they storm, protesting both against him and his
Cardinals, chiefly the Sorbon: John Gerson declaimed in the University of Paris
against this Popes proceedings, which so angered Anjou, that he sent to
apprehend Gerson, but the Scholars rescued him, upon this he retires to Rome,
where he is entertained by Pope Urban; a trap was also laid to apprehend the
Rector of the University, but he escaped; the Scholars grew so discontent,
that multitudes of them forsook that University. Diverse Ambassadors Paris
complaining against Clement for upholding a schism to the great hurt of
Christianity, seeing Urbans election was generally approved a more lawful then
that of Clement: Anjou stood up, and maintained that Urbans election was*
forced by the Romans, whereas that of Clement was peaceable. In the mean time,
Charles whom the King of Hungary had sent with an Army into Italy against the
Venetians, having made peace with them, goes to Rome, where he is by Urban
crowned King of Sicily; this Charles was descended from Charles the Lame, and
Mary his wife Queen of Hungary: he without great opposition, obtained Sicily
and Naples, took Queen Jane and Duke of Brunswick her husband prisoners. Anjou
in the interim tries all Paris; some of the collectours are killed, the City
Magazine broke open, and the people having armed themselves, they chain all the
streets, open the prison doors; and let loose all the prisoners: The Bishop
being fled, they broke open his prisons* and let out one Aubri^t whom they make
their Commander; he had been Provost of Paris, and done much good in repairing
and building some public places; but being accused of heresy, he was
imprisoned by the Bishop: being now delivered unexpectly, he promised the
people that Paris: the like mutiny there was at Rouen, where the people made
one Gras their King, commanding him to abolish all taxes and impositions
whatsoever.

The Parisians seeing that Aubriot was gone, were advised by John des Marais,
to send him with some others that were not criminals to the King to beg for
pardon, which was assented to, and pardon granted conditionally that they paid
sixty thousand Crowns, and that the authors of this sedition be put to death;
Marais returns with this answer to Paris, only he concealed the d' Anjou is
crowned at Avenion by Pope Clement, King of Sicily and Jerusalem; then he goes
about the Towns of Province, desiring them to acknowledge him for their Lord,
showing that he was the adopted heir of Queen Jane, their lawful Countess; but
when he saw them unwilling; he forced them, then marches into Italy with
thirty thousand horse, not against Pope Urban, left the Country should rise,
but against King Charles at Naples, who forbore fighting with Anjou, purposely
to weary Anjou dies, some say by poison, so his Army without fighting returns
with his corpse to France. King Charles reigned four years at Naples; in the
interim King Lewis of Hungary dies: the Peers of that kingdom call home King
Charles, notwithstanding Sigismond the Emperors son had married King Lewis his
eldest daughter: King Charles having left at Naples his wife and two sons,
hastes to Hungary, where he is crowned, and shortly after murdered in the
house of the Queen, widow of Hungary, who stormed that her daughter should be
deprived of her inheritance: upon this Sigismund is crowned in Hungary, and
Ladislaus the son of King Charles at Naples.

About this time a new war began in Flanders, upon the taking of the forty
ships of Gaunt by Oliver Cousin to Roger who was killed: One John Pruneau gave
out, that Oliver durst not seize on these ships without the Earls command,
therefore assembleth the White-Caps, and marches to Audenard, and suddenly
surpriseth it; the Earl hearing of this at Lisle, complains to the Gantois,
that they had broken the peace made by the Duke of Burgundy; they answer, that
he broke it first, by suffering Oliver to take their ships without reproof or
punishment: the Earl willing to recover Audenarde, and to live quietly, agrees
with the Gantois, that he would banish Oliver, conditionally that they banished
Pruneau, which was done, and Audenarde restored again to the Earl, who
presently sent to rebuild the demolished walls, and placed a strong Garrison in
it: after this Pruneau is apprehended by the Earls Cousin the Duke of Brabant,
whom he sends to Lisle in chains, where he is beheaded and his body broken on
the wheel; the like end had diverse others of Bruges, and elsewhere, who had
animated the White-Caps: the Gantois fearing their turn would be next in these
punishments, conspire unanimously against their

The Gantois understanding that the Earl was about to besiege Hypre which held
with them, sent three thousand men thither, and withal nine thousand were armed
to fall upon the rear of the Earls Army, who was on his march with twenty
thousand against Hypre, whilst they within should sally Hypreans, of whom two
thousand and four hundred were slain, the rest fled, and so both Hypre and
Courtray, are surrendered to him, who put to death seven hundred of the chief
criminals in Hypre, and took two hundred hostages of Courtray: then he went to
besiege Gaunt, which he could not so enclose, but two gates were free to
receive supplies from Liege and Bruxels: the Gantois being no whit dismayed at
the Earls strength, send out a party by one of their gates which was not
besieged, and went immediately to Terremunde which they took, this made the
Earl raise his siege: but the Gantois shortly after received some loss, for
two Captains with their forces Gantois were partly slain, and partly burned in
a Church, whither they fled; the other Captain not being able to help these by
reason of the marish ground between them. Hereupon the Gantois chose one
General who should have absolute power, his name was Philip Artenel, because
many Generals did oftentimes cross one another; this Philip by the mediation
of the Bishop of Liege, the Duke of Brabant, and Albert Count of Henault,
endeavored to make peace between the Earl and his subjects: Philip proffered
to the Earl at Tournay, where the Assembly was kept, full power over the
bodies and estates of his subjects to banish and fine whom Gaunt only with one
garment apeece, and ropes about their necks, to be disposed as he pleased:
Artenel acquaints the Citizens, that either they must suffer their throats to
be cut, or else take up Arms to defend their liberties; for his part he was
resolved to die in maintenance of their cause; whereupon they all agreed to
take Arms: with this he chooses out of the white Caps five thousand of the
stoutest and strongest, with these he marches toward Bruges; they that
remained were resolved, that if these five thousand were cut off, they would
burn themselves and City, rather then yield to slavery: the Earl at Bruges
understanding of Artenels marching thither, slighting his small number, met him
in a place disadvantagious to him, with his Army, which was defeated and driven
back into the Town, whither the Gantois entered pel mel with their enemies:
Artenel makes diligent search for the Earl, whom he meant to have used with all
respect, and to have brought him to Gaunt with all possible honor, to induce
him to show mercy to his subjects; but the Earl hid himself in a poor house,
and thence Lisle: Artenel gave charge that no hurt should be done to any
strangers within Bruges, because he would not provoke foreign Princes against
him. After this he pillaged Hypre, and seized on the Earls treasure, and diverse
Towns yielded to him; its thought that now he had above a hundred thousand men
in Arms, so that the Earl was forced to implore help from the French King, and
acknowledges himself to be his vassal; the French were not unwilling to assist
him (though he had hitherto befriended the English) because the Flemings made
excursions upon the French borders; order therefore is given for taking out the
sacred Standard, called the Auriflamme: this was of red silk interwoven with
flames, it was of old sent from Heaven to King Clouis, to be carried in the
wars against Infidels: this Standard was not to be used but in great necessity,
and to be carried by some holy Knight, but afterward it was brought out upon
all occasions, and therefore at last in a battle against the Flemings, it was
lost, none knowing what became of it. This Standard being received by the King
with great devotion from the Abbot, he gave it to one Peter Villiers to be
carried; then having placed the relics of the Martyrs on the Altar, he begins
his march with a gallant Army through Artois.

The Flemings hearing of the French march, brake down presently all their
bridges upon the River Lis, except one which they strongly fortified: the
Clisson with the Vantguard to gain the bridge, the Flemings being hardly
pressed, were forced to break down this also; in the interim whilst they were
skirmishing, a party of French in boats get over the River who charged the
enemy in the Rear, whom they utterly defeated, and killed three thousand on the
place; so the bridge was gained and repaired, and the whole Army got over.
Artenel upon this, leaving a party to continue the siege of Audenarde, marches
with sixty thousand against the French, and fights them; the fog was so thick
that morning that scarce could any perfectly discern their next neighbors,
till the Auriflamme was displayed, and then (if you will believe) the mist
vanished: The French Army is divided into Flemings, hoping to take him
prisoner, as the English did King John; but the other two battalions falling on
the Flanks of the Flemings, did so press them that their ranks were
disordered, who both hindered and hurt one another, and so at last they are
totally routed by the French; thirty thousand were killed on the place, and ten
thousand in the pursuit; the body of Artenel was found yet breathing, who
refused to have his wounds dressed, not desiring to live after the loss of his
Fellow-citizens, so presently died, and his body was hanged on a Gibbet.

The report of this defeat caused the siege before Audenarde to rise in haste;
Dam, Bruges, and other Towns yielded to their Earl; but the French burned
Countray, because they found in their great Church the golden Spurs of the
French Gentry that were killed in that place eighty years before: There were
also found some Letters written from the mutiners of Paris to the White-Caps,
which hastened the Kings return thither; by the way he stopped at St. Dennis,
to give thanks to God and the Martyrs for his victory, and then restored the
Auriflamme to the Abbot; thence he marched through Paris with his Army, without
taking notice of the Provost and Sheriffs that met him; having at last sung Te
Deum, in Nostre Dame, he caused the Townsmen to assemble in one place, whom he
environeth with his Army; then did the Chancellor upbraid them with their
rebellions, and the King threatened to cut them all off, but his Uncles being
there begged their pardons; the Townsmen on their knees cried for mercy, which
they obtained, only a fine was put upon them, and three hundred of the chief
incendiaries were beheaded; the chains of the streets were carried into the
Loure, and the King ordered

Shortly after this, the Gantois and English, who held for Pope Urban, enter
into a league against France, and Pope Clement: Urban had granted to the King
of England the tithes of the benefices within his kingdom, toward this war;
eight hundred English horse, and ten thousand foot are transported into
Flanders, who made war with diverse parts of Flanders, and yet pretended they
came to assist the Gantois; complaint is made against them, but no redresses:
having taken Bourburg and Gravelin, they sit down before Hypre; but hearing the
French Army was coming, set the Suburbs on fire, and went Cassel, but could
not stay to besiege it, because the Constable of France was drawing toward
them with his Army, who pursues them to Gravelin, and thence to Bourbourg,
where they are besieged, and forced to surrender, having leave to depart wi^h
their baggage. At which time Lewis Earl of Flanders died at St. Omer, and is
buried in Lisle; his daughter Margaret, wife to Philip le Hardy Duke of
Burgundy, is his sole heir, by which means Philip is now Lord of all Flanders,
except Gaunt, which would not yet submit. Shortly after Dam is surprised by one
Arteman a Captain of the Gantois, whilst the governor was gone to the Court.
About Limosin also and Poictou there was a great insurrection of malcontents
under one Peter Bruiers de Berry suppressed them in a battle, and hanged the
chief incendiaries.

The French King having an intention a long time to invade England, prepared a
great Fleet at the Sluice, which Arteman the Gantois Captain resolved to burn,
but the plot was discovered, diverse of the plotters were imprisoned and
escaped, some were hanged. Then the French besieged Dam a whole month; at last
Arteman within not able to hold out longer, got away with his forces in the
night, the next morning the French enter, and having plundered the Town,
utterly destroy it; then they fall upon Zealand with a Fleet, which they
pillage for aiding Gaunt, so that they were forced to beg pardon Burgundy,
which was granted them. From the Sluice, where the French had built a Castle to
guard the harbor, the King sends John de Vienne his Admiral with sixty great
ships, to help the king of Scots against the English; this Fleet, with the
Scots forces, burnt and spoiled many places in England; but upon a falling out
between the French and Scots, the Admiral returned home, and told the King that
he durst not stay long in Scotland, because the people banded against him, and
that England was in a good condition to be conquered, because the D. of
Lancaster, son in law to Peter k. of Castile (who was killed by his bastard
brother Henry) was gone into Spain with the best soldiers, to settle his wife
in Castile: for, says he, The English can easily French king, with the Duke of
Burgundy, prepare twelve hundred sail to invade England; but Duke de Berry the
kings other uncle was against this expedition, and dissuaded the king from
venturing his person, wealth, and Nobility, upon uncertain success, besides
that the English were all in Arms to resist his landing; upon this the voyage
is put off, and the great Fleet dispersed without action.

The next year Lewis Duke Tourain the Kings brother, married with Valentine
daughter to John Galeacius Duke of Millan; and shortly after the King went to
(...) Clement at Avenion, where Lewis of Anjou (son to that Lewis who died 1387.
in Italy) is crowned K. of Sicily and Jerusalem, pruposely to cross Pope
Urban, and King Ladislaus son to king Charles of Naples. Languedoc complains to
the King against Duke de Berry's exactions, therefore Count de Foix is made
their governor, who married the King of Navars sister, whom he slighted,
because her brother owed him a great sum of money, which either he would not,
or could not pay, therefore sent her with her son to him back again, because
she took it ill that her husband should prefer his bastard son to his
legitimate son by her; Navar, and had acquainted her brother of her husbands
bad conditions, he gives her son a bag of powder, which he wished him to bestow
on his father, and that he would mix it with wine, for it would procure his
love to his wife again: the young man simply carried the powder to his father,
who finding it to be poison, caused him to be put to death in a prison. This
King of Navar was also extremely hated of his people whom he impoverished with
continual exactions; hereupon he is one night burned in his bed, some say by
accident, some say purposely; for being feeble with age and letchery, his body
was anointed with certain unguents, and wrapped in a linen cloth d^t in Aqua
vitae, which presently took fire by a candle that was in the Armignac also died
about this time as he was on his journey from Italy, with an Army of French
sent to help the Florentines, who were like to be suppressed by the Millanois.

After the two Kings of France and England had made peace, and disbanded their
Armies; many French soldiers who could not live but by the sword, assembled
together, and made to themselves Commanders, then in companies dispersed
themselves into diverse Countries, forcing the Inhabitants by paying
contributions to buy their peace of them. Count Armignac having raised a great
sum of money, procures fifteen thousand horse and ten Bandito's to accompany
him into Piemont against the Millanois: James Verme the Duke of Millans
General, shut himself up in Alexandria, not finding it time yet to fight this
fresh enemy; who perceiving he would not fight, falls to plundering, and so
being laden with store of wealth were marching away securely: Verme being
advertised of this, charge them in the Rear unexpectedly, kills six thousand,
and puts the rest to flight, Armignac is taken prisoner, and died presently
after of his wounds; so France was quieted by the defeat of these unruly
soldiers, yet some of them returning made new troubles, till they were all
surprised and hanged, and the Castle of Vantadour in Limosin (which they had
taken) surrendered. About this time the Genuois being much molested by the
African Pirates, which they could Liguria to France, the greatness and wealth,
and ancient glory of the French in subduing the enemies of Christ, and the
danger that Christendom is in by the greatness of the Barbarians, and that
the Ports, ships and wealth of Genua was at the French service; besides, that
the passage from France to Afric was short.

The motion was hearkened to by the French Gentry, the Duke of Burbon is chosen
General; England is invited to join with the French in this honorable 1390.
English Gentry; great companies pass over to France, who being joined
together march over the Alps; at Genua they find a gallant Fleet of Ships and
Galleys ready and well appointed, among which were diverse Venetian vessels
which they had sent thither for this expedition, joining their forces against
the common enemy, though otherwise these two Cities were mortal enemies. All
things being ready, they set sail for Afric: when they came within sight of
Tunis, the royal City of Barbary, they see the Barbarians in battle array, who
strove to keep the Christians from landing; but the English Archers made the
Barbarians give way, so that our Army landed: the Barbarous king sent some of
his forces into the City, the rest entrenched themselves, who refused to fight,
though often invited, some light skirmishes there were between us and the
Numidian horse; but when we could not draw the King to fight, though we burned
and ruined all the houses thereabout, at last we resolve to lay a strait siege
to the Town, which stoutly held out, notwithstanding the King durst not
adventure Genuois who spoke the African tongue, are sent to parley with the
Town-governour, who wondered that the French and English should come to vex
Afric which had never done them hurt; it was answered, that the hurt Afric had
done to Genua, and the Isles of Italy, was done to them, being all Christians
and of the same faith. At last they come to an accommodation, the King sends to
the Christian Army his Ambassadors, where it is agreed that the Africans shall
not henceforth offer to molest any of Genua, and each man thence to his own
home.

France is now quiet, but in Britany begin new troubles: for the two sons of
John Montfort being ransomed by the Constable of France a Britain, and the
eldest of the two married to his daughter, gave occasion to the Duke to suspect
that the Constable aimed at the Duchy for his son in law; therefore one day
invited the Constable to a feast, and after dinner pretending to show him a new
house that he had built, detained him there as a prisoner, at which the king
was highly displeased; the Duke excused himself, that he did this to Britain
born: this answer did not content the king; but the Duke of Burgundy mediated
for this Duke of Britany, who let the Constable go, after he had parted with a
great sum for his ransom, and diverse of his lands. After this, Peter Craon
the kings favorite, is banished the Court, upon some discontent taken against
him by the kings brother the Duke of Orleans. Craon suspecting the Constable,
that this affront he received by his procuring, watched him one night as he
came late from the kings lodgings, fell upon him, and so wounded him that he
left him for dead, yet afterward recovered. The king was so enraged at this
Craon, that he caused his goodly house at Paris to be pulled Britany had
animated Craon, he raises an Army against him; the Duke sent to excuse and
clear himself, but could not be heard: therefore the 25. of July, in the
extreme heat of the year, he takes horse and marches before his Army with a
thin cap on his head; his Physicians and Peers dissuade him from going in such
dangerous weather, but in vain: he was scarce gone a mile from the City Man's,
the Metropolis of Maine, when he was taken with such a frenzy, that he killed
two of those that were next him, and hurt diverse others, laying about him, till
he fainted and fell from his horse, and is carried back to Man's, where he at
last was cured, but not totally: the Duke of Britany with his wife and
children, and chiefest goods, had taken Mallo for England, but understanding of
this accident, returns home again.

About this time the people began to murmr against the Constable, that he
could not have gathered together so much wealth as he had, without robbing
them: wherefore he to stop their mouths, reconciles himself to the D. and so
all former wrongs are forgot and forgiven. The King being returned to Paris,
the government of France by general assent of the Peers is conferred upon the
kings uncles, though the D. of Orleans the Kings brother labored much for it;
but he was too young for that employment. Many Plays and Masks were performed
at Court to drive away the kings melancholy; in one of the Masks, the king with
five others disguised themselves in the shape of Lions, their linen covers
were pitched, that the threads which resembled the hairs of wild beasts might
stick the faster; as these were dancing the round, and singing nuptial songs in
honor of a great favorite lately married, the Duke of Orl^ans stood so near
with his torch, that a spark fell on the king which set all on fire; every one
running to save the king, left the others to shift for themselves, two of which
Berry instantly stayed the fire on the king by the long train of her gown which
she flapt upon it; the Duke of Orleans excused himself, that what he did, was
against his will: but this accident increased the kings disease, for whose
recovery many vows and prayers are made to God.

Clement the Antipope being dead, Ambassadors are sent from the kings uncles
to the Cardinals of Avenion, to desire that no Pope should be chosen till the
schism were first remedied; they all swore, that if he at Rome would lay down
his Pontificat, he should do the like at Avenion, that was to Pierre de la Lune
a Castilian is chosen, to whom the kings uncles repair, beseeching him to make
a peace in the Church, and that he would submit himself to a general Council;
he answered, that he would not leave the helm of Christ's ship, so long as he
lived, and so the Princes returned without effecting any thing, which much
discontented the king; but the Pope, to please him, authorizeth him to raise a
tenth from the Clergy, this made him more odious; whereupon command is given
that no Bulls shall be received from him, and that no Clergy man should
acknowledge him, and withal an Army is sent to besiege him; whereupon he
removes from Avenion, and returns home to Spain, having the Eucharist carried
all the way before him, that none

Great debate arose about the kingdom of Arragon, between diverse Princes
descended from king Peter by differentbran ches: Duke de Anjou laid claim to it
in right of his wife Iobant, the daughter of John eldest son to king Peter; all
parties were contented to submit themselves to the arbitration of some holy and
learned men, these adjudged the kingdom to Ferdinand youngest son to the king
of Castile, and Leonar daughter to Peter king of Arragon, whose eldest son was
dead, having left one son named John of Castile. The kings of England and
France meet near Calis, where a match is concluded between the daughter of
France, and the king of Englands son.

After the Christians were defeated at Nicapolis by the Turk, young Sigismund
king of Hungary, who had escaped, returned into his Country: he it was for
whose cause king Charles of Naples was murdered by one Nicon at the command of
the old Queen, both which were shortly after put to death by Charles his
friends. This Sigismund returning, found that in his absence the people had
been much wronged by the Nobility, wherefore he cut off the heads of two and
thirty of his chief Lords; some think this execution was done before the battle
of Nicopolis; but he was so hated for this, and slighted for his overthrow at
Nicopolis, that two of the chief Lords of Hungary conspired against him, and
took him prisoner, committing him to the custody of Nicons two sons, hoping
they Ladislaus king of Naples to accept of the Crown, but he remembering the
disaster of his father Charles made no haste thither; in the interim the widow
of Nicon entreats her two sons to set free the king, lest Ladislaus obtaining
the Crown might revenge his fathers death on them; so Sigismund is set free,
who instantly cuts off the heads of those two Lords who apprehended him. About
this time Wenceslaus the Emperor being deposed, Robert his successor made war
with the Duke of Millan, by whom he was defeated and driven back to Germany:
two years after the Duke of Millan died. 1405.


During the French kings indisposition, there arose a great debate between the
Dukes of Orleans and Burgundy about the government of France: shortly after,
Philip le Hardy Duke of Burgundy died; but the feud between these two houses
grew hotter, so that Paris was much disturbed with the two factions, which came
to that height, that one night the Duke of Orleans as he went late from the
Queens lodgings, was murdered in the streets, by some that fled immediately
into the Duke of Burgundies house; the Duke himself Arras, and from thence into
his own Country, where he found an 1407.
Army ready, which he conducted against the Ligeois, who would not receive
their Bishop.

CHAP. XI.
The History of England, interwoven with some passages of France and Scotland,
from the year 1301. till 1350.

A Peace being made between France and England, King Edward the first makes a
third expedition into Scotland, where he did nothing but besiege 1301.
Sterling three months, which in the end was surrendered upon composition; but
the King kept not his promise: The Scots complain to the Pope of King Edwards
usurpation over them, being hitherto a free Kingdom; the Pope writes to the
King to forbear meddling any way with Scotland, as belonging to the Church: The
King desires his Holiness not to trouble himself in this matter, alleging
that Scotland appertained to the Crown of England. Then being furnished with
men and money, he makes a fourth journey Scotland, where he had fealty again
sworn to him; then returns home, and removes the Exchequer from York. Sr.
Nicholas Segrave being accused by Sr. John Cromwell for treason, offers to
justify himself in a duel, which the King denied him; whereupon he leaves the
Kings camp, and goes beyond sea to fight his enemy, for this he is adjudged
guilty of death, but by the intercession of the Peers is pardoned: then the
King makes inquisition for intruders on other men's lands (this writ was called
Trailbaston) for batteries, ravishers, murderers, etc. He terrifies diverse of
the Nobility for their former insolences, and got great sums of them: He got
the Pope to unty the Covenants made between him and his subjects, after he had
sent him some golden Bruce was king of Scotland, he was startled, and begins to
comply again with his people: Pembrook, Clifford and Percy are sent with an
Army to relieve his Wardens of Scotland; he follows after with another Army:
three hundred sons of Earls, Barons and Knights, assemble to wait upon the
Prince in this expedition, all whom he girds with a Military belt, as the King
did likewise the Prince, whom then he Knighted: then the King made a solemn
vow to be revenged on Bruce for the death of Cumin. 1307.


The thirtieth penny of the Clergy and Laity, and the twentieth of all
Merchants being granted, the King makes his last expedition into Scotland;
Bruce was defeated by the frauds and family of Cumin, assisted by the English
forces that were sent before: Bruce escapes, his brother and some Lords are
found out and executed; the wife of Robert Bruce is sent prisoner to London:
the Countess of Buchan is put into a wodden Cage, and hung out upon the walls
of Barwick. The King calls a Parliament at Carlisle, in which he yields to the
Pope the first fruits of all Churches within his Dominions, and the Pope
granted the King all the Tenths of those Churches for two years. In the mean
while King Bruce recovers new Forces, assailes the Earl of Pembroke, and
defeats him; then three days after chases the Earl of Gloucester into the
Castle of Air, where he besieges him; but the siege is raised by King Edwards
forces, who at last, having shed so much blood, dies of a Bloody Flux, upon
the sands of Scotland by Borough, by which we may see, that the Kingdoms of
this world are built upon sandy foundations; he reigned four and thirty years
seven months, his age was sixty eight: his successor was Edward the second, on
whom was conferred the Earldome of Cornwall, Edmund King Richards son of the
Romans being dead without issue; but this Earldome young King Edward bestowed
on Pierce Gavestone, whom he recalled Edward had been a while imprisoned by his
Father.

King Edward the second presently upon his entering into his Government,
displeased his people by recalling Gavestone, and bestowing on him not only
Cornwall, but also the Bishop of Chesters goods, who had been his Fathers
Treasurer; him he arrests, imprisons, and bestows all his estate upon this
Gavestone, because the Bishop had complained against the Princes riots to his
Father; then makes a new Treasurer, and removes all his Fathers Officers
without Northampton, in which a fifteenth of the Clergy, and a twentieth of the
Laity are granted him. After his fathers Funerals, he is married to Isabel,
Philip the Fair's Daughter; the Nuptials are performed at Bulloign with great
solemnity; in the second year of his reign he is crowned, which was like to
have been hindered by the Lords, because he suffered himself to be totally ruled
by Gavestone, who corrupted both him and his Court with all manner of excess
and debauchery; but he promised the Lords, that he would perform their desires
the next Parliament. Shortly after his Coronation, all the Knights-Templars in
England are arrested and imprisoned. Gavestone is prosecuted by the Lords, whom
he slights and Magna Charta confirmed, ill Counselors and strangers are
removed, the Kings power restrained, and Gavestone banished 1310,
into Ireland. These Articles are ratified, and Excommunication denounced
against such as should contradict them, by the Archbishop of Canterbury, lately
recalled from his banishment; but the King shortly after calls home his minion
Gavestone, whom he marries to his Niece, sister to Gilbert de Clare Earl of
Gloucester, and daughter to John de Aeres, and bestows on him the Jewels of
the Crown, which he sold to strangers, and conveyed away much treasure.

The Barons threaten the King with a war, unless he put away his minion, who
therefore is banished again, and threatened with death, if ever hereafter he be
found within the Kingdom; he shelters himself a while in Flanders, but finding
no security there, nor elsewhere, returns to the King, who joyfully receives
him; the Lords upon this combine against him, an Army is raised, the King is
besought to deliver up Gavestone; but he conveyes him to New Castle, where
understanding of the Barons Army, they both remove by Sea to Scarborough
Castle, where the King leaves him guarded, and goes himself to Warwickshire;
Scarborough is besieged, Gavestone is taken, whom the Lords (notwithstanding
the King solicited for his life) condemned him to the block, and beheaded.
After this the Lords threaten the King, that unless Gloucester, and two
Cardinals sent from the Pope, labor to reconcile the King and Lords; the
Cardinals are checked for intermedling with business concerned them not; yet
the Lords yield to deliver up to the king the Treasures and Jewels which they
took from Gavestone, so that he would grant their Petitions. About this time
Queen Isabel at Windsor is delivered of a son named Edward; a Parliament
shortly after is called, in which the King complains against the Lords, and
they against him; at last they are persuaded to crave pardon of the king, which
they obtained, and their Articles are confirmed.

In this mean while king Bruce grows strong in Scotland, which he had almost
totally regained, and with an Army invades England; king Edward raises an Army
of one hundred thousand against him: Near Sterling upon the River Bannock,
Bruce with thirty thousand horse and foot encountered king Edward; the Scots had
dug trenches which they pitched full of sharp stakes, and covered them over
with hurdles and turfe, by which the English England, seven hundred knights,
Esquires and Gentlemen, of common Soldiers ten thousand, many prime men taken
prisoners, but the king escaped back to York, who desired to be revenged on the
Scots, but could not; the English borderers run all away, leaving their 1315.
country to the mercy of the enemy. This war was accompanied with Famine,
Dearth, and Pestilence, so that a Parliament is called at London to abate the
price of Victuals; the Dearth notwithstanding lasted three years, by reason of
excessive raines, and a murrain among the Cattle, both the King and Lords were
pinched in their diet. About this time the Earl of Lancasters wife is Canford
in Dorsetshire, by a deformed Dwarff, claiming her for his wife, and by her the
Earldomes of Lincoln and Salisbury; it is thought the King was an actor herein,
for which the King was taxed, even by a woman disguised on hors-back, who rode
into Westminster Hall, when the king was at dinner there on Whitsunday, and
delivered him a Letter, wherein his evil courses were reproved; she confessed
she was hired so to do by a knight, who likewise justified his fact.

Not only did Robert Bruce overthrow the king twice, and obtain the Crown of
Scotland, but he sends over his brother also with an Army into Ireland, a
Edward it seems intended to have had the Earl of Lancaster murdered by the
Scots, as appeared by a Letter sent from him to the Scots k. which was
intercepted, and the messenger executed. The Scots plunder as far as York:
Hereupon a Parliament is called at London, money and men are raised, but the
English Army mutined and came to nothing; Barwick is surrendered to the Scots;
k. Edward beleaguers it; but the Scots to raise the siege, enter with new
Forces upon England, and had almost surprised the Queen near York; the Earl of
Lancaster withdrawes himself from the siege of Barwick, because the king
promised the Town to Hugh Spencer his minion; this Spencer with his father so
exasperated the Lords, that they took up Arms against the king, and English
are defeated again by the Scots, who killed 3000 of them; wherefore K. Edward
concludes a Truce with them for two years, and returns with dishonor home. The
Queen is denied lodging in the Castle of Leeds, belonging to the Lord
Badlesmore, as she was going toward Canterbury, whereupon the King besieges
and takes it, hangs up the Keeper, Badlesmores wife and children are sent to
the Tower, and all his estate seized on; then the king raises an Army against
the Barons, whereof diverse submitted themselves to him, chiefly the two Roger
Mortimers; The Lords that held out are discomfited by the kings Forces; the
Lancaster with many other Lords are taken and executed. Presently upon this the
King marches with a mighty Army into Scotland, whence he was forced for want
to return without blows; the Scots pursue him, and had almost taken him, as
they did his treasure with the Earl of Richmond; so having wasted all as far as
the walls of York, return richly laden into Scotland. Sir Andrew Harkley, who
for taking Lancaster prisoner at Borough-Brigs, was made Earl of Carlisle; upon
suspicion for combining with the Scots, is drawn, hanged, and quartered for
treason, at London.

And now the king and his Clergy fall asunder about the Bishop of Hereford,
1358.
whom he arrested and accused of high treason for aiding the rebellious Lords;
he refused to answer without leave of the Archbishop of Canterbury; his
fellow-Bishops then took him from the Bar, and delivered him to Canterbury;
afterward being taken and convented, the Bishops with their Crosses erected
took him away again from the place of judgment, and excommunication denounced
against those that should lay hands on him; but the king finding him guilty,
seiseth on his estate. In this mean while the French king seiseth on all the
king of Englands Territories there, for omitting to come over when Spencers
held it unsafe for him to go over in person, his kingdom being so distempered;
therefore the Queen, sister to the French k. is sent, who negotiates so with
her brother, that all quarrels should end, if king Edward would give to his son
Edward the Duchy of Aquitane and Earldome of Pontheu, and send him over to do
homage, which was assented to; so the Prince is sent over with the Bishop of
Exeter, who perceiving shortly after his arrival some plots between the Queen,
the Prince, and Roger Mortimer lately escaped out of the Tower of London,
acquaints the king therewith; he upon this sends presently for them; but they
neglecting to come, are proclaimed enemies to the king, and order taken at all
the Ports, Spencers, who had bribed his Counselors thereto, withdraws to the
Earl of Henault and Holland, whose daughter Philip she contracts with her son
the Prince; by the Earls means she is transported over into England, lands at
Harwich, with the Prince, the Earl of Kent the kings brother, Pembroke,
Mortimer, John the the Earl of Henaults brother, and 2500 Flemings; she is
received by diverse of the discontented Lords, and by the Bishops of Hereford
and Lincoln.

The king upon this craved aid of London, but found none; Death is proclaimed
to those that assisted the Queen; all her adherents are commanded to Kent; a
thousand pounds proffered for Mortimers head. So leaving the City, he departs
toward the west, where he is slighted, without hope of any aid; the Queen
marches with her increasing Army to Oxford; the Bishop of Hereford preached,
and concluded from his Text, 2 King. 24. My head aketh, that the aching and sick
head of a kingdom was to be taken off. The Queen proffers 2000 pound for young
Spencers head, and proclaims, that the Soldiers should not take from the
subject any thing without ready money, otherwise to be punished with the loss
of a finger, hand, or head, if the value of the thing taken came to three
pence, Hugh Spencer in the Castle of Bristol, and commits himself to the Sea,
lands in Wales, and is hid in the Abbey of Neth: the Queen is met at Gloucester
with aid from the North, then wins the Castle of Bristol; Hugh Spencer Earl
of Winchester, is taken, drawn, hanged in his Coat Armor, headed and
quartered; at Hereford she proclaims, that if the king would return and rule
the State as he should, he should be restored to all again; but he came not,
wherefore the Prince is made Guardian of the kingdom, has fealty sworn to
him; a new Chancellor and Treasurer are chosen.

The king is at last found, and by Henry Earl of Lancaster, brother to the late
Thomas, is conveyed to the Castle of Kenelworth; the younger Spencer now Earl
of Gloucester, is drawn and hanged on a Gallows fifty foot high, and had the
like execution which his father had; the Earl of Arundel, with two Barons, and
others that adhered to the king, were executed at Hereford; Baldock the
Chancellor, being a Priest, was pined to death in Newgate. The Londoners force
the Mayor, who held for the king, to take their part; all prisoners are let
out; the Tower is taken, and John Weston the Constable put to death; the Bishop
of Exeter, the kings Treasurer, is murdered: the Queen returning with the
Prince to London, call a Parliament, in which the King is deposed, as 1327.
unfit to govern, Prince Edward is elected; Canterbury preaches on this Text,
Vox populi vox Dei; the Queen seems discontented at this election; the Prince
to comfort her, swore he would not accept of the Crown without his fathers
consent; wherefore three Bishops, two Earls, two Abbots, and four Barons, three
Knights of each Shire, and Burgesses of every City and Borough are sent to the
imprisoned King to require the renunciation of his Crown, which he Corff, where
he was murdered by his Keepers, who through a horn, which they put in his
fundament, pierced his guts with a burning spit, having reigned nineteen years
and about eight months: After his deposing he was the Founder of Orial
College and S. Mary Hall in Oxford; he had two sons, P. Edward, and John of
Eliham Earl of Cornwall, who died young in Scotland; his daughter Joan married
to David Prince of Scotland, and Elianor to the Duke of Gelders: Some write
that he was carried up and down from one Castle to another, that his friends
might not find him, and all plots disappointed* and that he was murdered in
Barkley

King Edward the third being but fourteen years old when he began his reign was
thought unfit as yet to manage the kingdom; therefore five Bishops and seven
Lords are chosen to govern the kingdom; but the Queen and Roger Lord Mortimer
ruled all. The strangers that came over with the Queen under the Earl of
Henaults brother, are sent to join with the English Army at York against
Scotland, but a quarrel arose between the English and the strangers, so that
nothing was effected, and the Scots Army returned. The next year the 1328.
Marriage with Philippa of Henault is solemnized, and a Parliament held at
Northampton, in which a dishonorable peace is concluded with Scotland, and
their Jane the Kings sister is marred to David son to Robert Bruce; Sr Roger
Mortimer is made Earl of March, the Instrument or Charter of the Scots fealty
is restored: In the Parliament held shortly after at Winchester, Edmund Earl of
Kent this young Kings Uncle, for intending to restore the King his brother, is
condemned; he stood four hours on the Scaffold for want of an Executioner, at
last one was found.

The next year a Parliament is held at Nottingham, in which the Queen loses
her great Jointure, being three parts of the kings Revenues, and is put to a
pension of a thousand pounds per annum. Mortimer is accused for procuring the
late kings death, for receiving a bribe of 20000 pounds from the Scots
Stanhop-Park; for making a dishonorable peace with Scotland, for being too
familiar with the Queen, and for the death of the kings Uncle; for these he is
condemned, drawn, and hanged at Tyburne, where his body hung two days as a
spectacle. After this, king Edward being summoned by Philip Valois now k. of
France, goes over to do his homage for the Duchy of Guien; by this he
acknowledged the right of his Competitor for that kingdom, because king
Charles being dead without issue male, the Crown by the Salique Law fell to
Philip Valois the Cousin-german, and not to king Edward, though nearer, and the
Nephew of the said king Charles, as we have already showed in the History of
France. King Edward then did his homage, Amiens, in a crimson Velvet Gown
embroidered with Leopards, having his Crown on his head, a sword by his side,
and golden spurs on his heels; king Philip sat in his Chair of estate in a
violet-coloured Velvet Gown embroidered with golden Lillies, his Crown on his
head, and Scepter in his hand, in the midst of his Peers; king Edward by
command of the Chamberlain of France puts off his crown, sword and spurs, then
kneeling on a crimson velvet cushion before king Philip, promises to be loyal
as Duke of Guyen and Peer of France, to King Philip; the Chamberlain
pronouncing the words of homage before, and putting his hands together between
the French kings hands; then king Edward rises, and kisseth the French king
(as the Lord of the Fee) in the mouth.

After this, k. Edward returns to England, and aids Edward Baliol son to John,
who 32 years before had usurped the crown, and was deposed. This Edward Baliol,
whilst the young k. David Bruce was in France, got himself to be crowned king
at Scone, having first defeated the Bruceans, by the help of those Scots that
were for Baliol; yet this new King is driven out of Scotland by the Bruceans.
Edward comes with a great Army, and after three months siege takes Berwick,
and defeats the Scots army at Halidown-hill, who came to raise the siege; here
were slain 7 Earls, 900 Knights and Baronets, 400 Esquires, and 32000 common
soldiers, (the Scottish writers mention but 14000.) The Lord Seaton, who was
governor of Berwick, conditions with king Edward, that if rescue came not by
such a day, he would render him up the Town, in assurance of which he delivers
him two of his sons; but when king Edward saw the Scots forces come before the
day, he summons Seaton to render the Town presently, or else he should see his
two sons executed: The Lord being doubtful what to do, is encouraged by his
wife rather to lose their two sons,

K. Baliol being settled in Scotland, at Newcastle does homage to the king of
1333.
England, for which the Nobility of Scotland are discontented, and threaten to
drive him out: So that k. Edward was forced to raise vast sums of money upon the
English to maintain the Scottish war, and three years together goes thither in
person with new Armies, being desirous to subdue Scotland before he attempted
France. A Parliament is held at London, wherein the Flemings are invited hither
to make their Cloth, because no Wool was to be transported beyond seas; this
was to draw the Flemings to side with him against the French: It was also
enacted, that none should wear other then English cloth, except the King,
Queen, and their children: Tenths, Fifteenths, the Churches treasure for the
Holy war, Subsidies of wools, and the goods of Lombards, Cluneaques, and
Cistercians, are given to the king toward this expedition into France; the
Emperor and diverse German Princes side with him. Then the King with his Queen
and Children go over to Flanders, thence enter France; the two Armies look upon
each other, nothing was acted, only a Hare started before the head of the
French army, which occasioned a new knighthood, called knights of the Hare:
other particulars we have mentioned in the French story.

K. Edward after a years absence returns into England, leaving the Queen in
Brabant: He lands about midnight at the Tower, which he found unguarded. He
calls a Parliament, and receives great subsidies of Clergy and Laity, and has
loans of many wealthy men: For his mighty subsidies, diverse pardons are
granted, and the great Charter confirmed. The English are worsted at Lisle, but
the French fleet is beat at sea. Tournay is besieged by the English; A
challenge is sent by k. Edward to k. Philip, but rejected. After Tournay is
besieged 3 months, by the mediation of Philippa's mother (a Nun) truce is
concluded for one year. So Q. Philippa after 3 years absence returns to England
with the king: she had two sons in Flanders; Lionel D. of Clarence, and John
(born at Gaunt) D. of Lancaster. The king complains that he was forced to raise
the siege from Tournay, for want of money, for which he accuses John Stratford
Archbishop of Canterbury; John of Montfort being in competition with Charles de
Blois about the Duchy of Britany, craves aid of king Edward, as we have showed
before. Many bickerings there were between the French and English in Britany,
till a Truce of three years was conluded.

K. Edward after this drives k. David out of Scotland into the Islands. William
Montacute Earl of Salisbury conquers the Isle of Man, whom k. Edward styled
king thereof. A Society of the knights of the Round-table, in imitation of k.
Arthur is designed, and a chamber of 200 foot round erected at Windsor for the
same: then began the Order of the Garter at Windsor, occasioned by the garter
of the Countess of Salisbury, taken up by the king in dancing with her, the
number 1343.
of the knights are 26 besides the king; these held a yearly feast at Windsor,
Edward founded a Church, and gave to certain Priests and Prebends large
stipends to serve there; he ordained also 13 aged decayed Gentlemen to be there
maintained, to pray for the prosperity of the Knights.

In a Parliament at Westminster complaint is made against the collation of
Benefices on strangers, therefore a Letter is sent to Pope Clement the 6. from
the Lords and Commons, seconded by the Kings Letters, by Sir John Shordich a
civil Lawyer, desiring the Pope to recall all such collations and reservations;
all Patrons also are prohibited to grant such collations under pain of
imprisonment or death; in this Parliament Archbishop Stratford upon submission
is reconciled to the King, and P. Edward about the age of 13. is created P. of
Wales, a tenth is granted by the Clergy, and a fifteenth by the Laity, then
general musters Edward goes over to Flanders, James Artevile is employed by
him to induce the Flemings to revolt from their Earl, but he had his brains
beaten out at Gaunt for his labor, and so the kings design failed him. And now
the wars break out again between France and England; K. Edward left the Lords
Piercy and Nevil Wardens of England, and takes with him the young Prince being
aged 18 years, and an Army of 4000 men at Arms, 10000 Archers, besides Welsh
and Irish; he lands in Normandy, and divides his men into three battails, one
to march on his left hand along the seacoast, the other on the right conducted
by the two Marshals, and Huntington is Admiral of the Fleet, he first sacks
Caranton and burns it, having found the heads of Bacon, Piercy, and others
there massacred by K. Philip, then he takes Lo, Cain, and other Towns, then he
goes over the river Some and defeats the French which were sent to hinder his
passage, being 1000 French horse and 6000 foot; the English Army consists of
30000. the Prince has the Vantguard, wherein were 800 men at Arms, 2000
Archers and 1000 other; the second battle was committed to the Earls of Arundel
and Northampton, the Lords Rosse, Willoughby, S. Alban, Multon, and others,
wherein were 800 men at Arms, and 2000 Archers, the third battle was led by
the K. having 700 men at Arms and 2000 Archers; Savoys, the Vantguard he
commits to his brother Count de Alanson, the Rear to the Earl of Savoy, the
main battle he leads himself; Alanson contrary to the k. of Bohemia's advice
would not suffer the Genoves Infantry (which consisted of 1500 Cross-Bows)
should make the first front, therefore by changing the seat of the Army he
caused disorder and discontent, besides a sudden rain fell which dissolved
their strings, and made their Bows useless.

King Edward from a Windmill-hill perceiving the enemy disordered, sends to
charge the Genoves, who presently recoil; Alanson with Savoy, Lorain, and
Delphin de Vienois, through the Genoves rush furiously upon the English battle
where the Prince was; the French king seeing his brother like to be wors^ed by
the English, makes up to dis-ingage him; the fight grew hot and doubtful; King
Edward is sent for to come up with his aid, but refused, when he knew the
Prince was alive, for he desired that the honor of the day should be his; the
French Kings horse being slain, and he conveyed out of the field, the rest were
disheartened, and so the English got the day, 30000 were slain, of which were
15000 Earls, Barons, and Gentlemen; other particulars we have touched in the
French story: the next morning King Edward sent out three hundred Lances, and
two thousand Archers, to discover what was become of the enemy, who found some
Troops coming to the Army, being ignorant of what had happened; these are also
defeated. The English Forces sent to aid Montfort against Charles de Blois,
prevailed, and took Charles prisoner with some Lords and Knights. That year
also King David of Scotland is overthrown by the Queen of England and her
forces; fifteen thousand Scots were slain, the Earls of Fife, Menteth, Murrey,
Sutherland, with the Lord Douglass, the Archbishop of Saint Andrews, and
others are taken prisoners. Henry of Lancaster with an Army of six thousand
pillageth the country of Poictou. King Edward besieges Calice. The French
King having punished his Treasurers and Collectors, raises a great sum of
money, and with it an Army, but could not raise the siege from Calice, and so
breaks up his Army and returns to Paris; two Cardinals are sent to make peace,
but could not: Calice is surrendered, which continued with the English two
hundred and ten years after; so a Truce being made for some months, King
Edward returns triumphing home.

These wars were accompanied with great plagues and famine, so that in a short
time half of the people died. King Edward goes over again to Calice, de
Charney sent the money before, and he comes after with some Forces, the money
is received, and the King goes out with his Forces to meet him; a sharp
encounter there was, the King was disguised, and twice beaten down by one
Riboumont, whom afterward he took prisoner, and for his valor rewarded, and
set him free without ransom. After this the King got the Castle of Guisnes
near Calice for a sum of money, and shortly after the French King died. 1350.


CHAP. XII.
A prosecution of the English story from the year 1350. till 1399.

THe Spaniards had taken some English Ships laden with wines in the River
Garoune, wherefore King Edward seized on some Spanish Ships laden with cloth,
as they were passing from Flanders. The Moneys here are abated in weight, and
yet pass according to the former value, which caused much murmuring among the
people. The Staple of Woolls is withdrawn from Flanders, and set up in England,
because the young Earl Lewis on whom King Edward would have bestowed his
daughter, was got away and married to the Duke of Brabants daughter. A
Parliament is held at Westminster, in which Wears, Mills, and other stoppages
of Rivers hindering boats, are commanded to be removed, all common Whores are
enjoined to wear hoods striped with diverse colors, and the wrong sides of
their garments outward. Henry Lord Derby is made Duke of Lancaster. Charles de
Blois is set free to procure his ransom of 40000 Florens. The Pope labors to
make peace between the two Kings, but could not, because the French king would
not part with the Homage due for the Duchy of Aquitain. The Prince of Wales
sets forth with 300 sail for Gascoign, with 1000 men at Arms, 2000 Archers,
besides the Welsh Edward passes over to Calice with another Army, where he was
met with 1000 German and Flemish Mercinaries, his Army consisted of 3000 men at
Arms; 2000 horse-Archers besides the foot; London sent 300 men at Arms and 500
Archers: but this Army returned without effecting any thing, for the French
king would not fight.

After this, King Edward is invited over into France by the King of Navar, whom
the French king had imprisoned, as we have showed; for this expedition fifty
shillings is granted to the king upon every sack of Wool for six years: but
before he goes to France, he marches with an Army to recover Berwick which
had been taken by the Scots whilst he was last at Calis; he regains the Town,
and Baliol resigns his share of Scotland to him: In the interim Prince Edward
wastes much of the French Territories, so that the French king is forced to
raise another Army, which encounters with the English near Poytiers, and is
overthrown by them; the particulars we have set down in the French story: the
French king is brought over to England, and lodged in the Savoy: King David of
Scotland is ransomed: Paris rebels against the Dolphin, Navar; the Provost
assaults the Dolphins house with three thousand Artificers; he rusheth into his
chamber, and slew two Marshals of France, and withal takes and puts on the
Dolphins hat edged with gold on his own head, and sets his own party-colored
hat on the Dolphins head, and so he goes out, causing the two dead bodies to
be trailed along the streets for the people to gaze on: then he writes to the
other Cities of France to join with him, and to take his livery as the Dolphin
had done; but they refused: the Dolphin in the mean while escapes from Paris,
raises an Army, and quels the Parisians. These troubles hindered the Kings
ransom.

King Edward having kept the French king four years prisoner, and finding that
there was no haste to ransom him, and that he would not yield to do homage for
the kingdom of France, resolves to take possession by the sword; therefore he
passes over to Calis with a Fleet of eleven hundred sail; he divides his Army
into three battalies, one he commits to the Prince, another to the Duke of
Lancaster, the third he leads himself; he marches to Paris, and took diverse
Towns by the way; the Duchy of Burgoyne redeems it self from spoil for two
hundred thousand florins of gold: the Dolphin was now at Paris which he had
mastered, king Edward could not get him to fight, wherefore Britany, where
having refreshed and increased his Army returns to Paris, which he found so
well fortified by the Dolphin that he could do no good on it: at last, being
terrified with thunder, vows to make his peace with France, which was done, and
king John ransomed: king Edward calls 1361.
a Parliament, in which the accord is ratified by the Estates. The Priors
aliens have their land restored, which were held from them during these wars.
Another great plague followed, in which with many other Noblemen, died the D.
of Lancaster a good Patriot, whose daughter and heir was married to John of
Gaunt, who thereby is made D. of Lancaster: the Prince marries the Countess of
Kent, daughter to Edmund brother to Ed. 2. Aquitain is bestowed on the Prince,
Lionel Earl of Ulster is sent into Ireland with fifteen hundred men, and is
made Duke of Clarence; king Edward keeps the day of his birth, and fiftieth
year of his age, as a Jubilee, and pardons diverse offenses; he causes the
Common Pleas which before were in French to be turned into English; he makes
many good Laws against gluttony, drunkenness, excess of apparel; he makes
Clergymen his chief officers, because he relied upon their sanctity.

He was visited shortly after by John the French king, who died here, as
likewise by the king of Scots and the king of Cyprus. Prince Edward after his
going over to Bordeaux, assisted Peter of Castile against his brother Henry,
whom French aided; he beat the French, established Peter in his Throne, and
returned victorious to Bordeaux; but not long after Peter is overthrown and
killed by his brother, so the Prince is deceived of the great rewards promised
by Peter; hence the soldiers murmr for want of their pay, to pacify whom
the Prince is forced to raise taxes on the Country of Aquitain; complaint is
made to Charles the fifth the French king, who summons the Prince to appear
before him at Paris, contrary to the Articles of agreement between the two
Kings, the Prince refuses to come, hereupon most of his Country revolt to the
French, so that what king Edward with much blood and treasure had been getting
in two years, is lost in one. After this, the French king sends a Navy to
trouble the coast of England: king Edward sends John of Gaunt with an Army unto
Calis, which marched without any great opposition to Bordeaux to the Prince his
brother, wasting the Country as he went: another English Army is sent unto St.
Omers under Sir Robert Knowles, depopulating all in his way till he came to
Paris; he took some Towns in the Earldome of Anjou, which again revolted to the
French upon a defeat given to the English by king Charles.

King Edward upon this disorder, calls a Parliament, in which the Temporality
grants him a Subsidy of fifteen thousand pounds, but refused by the Clergy,
wherefore the king in anger removes them from their places of trust and profit:
the Prince being sickly returns home to England, with his wife and son Richard,
born at Bordeaux, and resigns the Duchy of Aquitain to his father; the Duke of
Lancaster being left behind, and having buried his wife two years before in
the great sickness, in which also Queen Philippa died, he marries Constance,
eldest daughter to Peter king of Castile, by whom he had the empty Title of
King of Castile and Leon, but their daughter Katherine afterward became Queen
of Castile and Leon, being married to Henry 3. who was in possession: her
posterity were kings of Spain. Edmund Earl of Cambridge married Isabel king
Peter's youngest daughter; Lionel Duke of Clarence marries the Duke of Millans
daughter, and shortly after died: the other two returned to England with their
wives. Rochel is besieged by sea and land; the Earl of Pembrook is sent with
forty ships well manned and monied, but he is defeated there by the Spanish
Armado, and taken prisoner; King Edward sent forth an Army to recover these
losses, but was beat back by contrary winds; nine hundred thousand marks spent
in this expedition. Shortly after this the Duke of Lancaster lost his Army
among the mountains of France, before he came to Bordeaux: the next year he
returns, Gascoigne, except Burdeau^ and Bayon.

King Edward being supplied with a new Subsidy, desires to end the quarrel
with France by Treaty; two years are spent about this at ^ruges, but nothing
done; for the French demand Calis, and great sums of money, which could not be
granted: In the mean time the Staple is removed from Calis, because of the
danger of Merchants goods. Another Parliament is called at Westminster; the
King calls for money, the people for redress of abuses in his officers, and
that the Duke of Lancaster, Lord Latimer the Chamberlain, Alice Pierce the
Kings Concubine, and some others might be removed from Court; William Wicham
Bishop of Winchester is excepted by procurement of the Duke of Lancaster; but
this Jubilee is turned to sorrow by the death of the Prince, upon which the
excluded parties return to Court, the Speaker of the House of Commons la Mare
is committed to perpetual imprisonment at Nottingham at the suit of Alice
Pierce, who now took upon her to sit and intermedle in the Courts of Justice;
the Duke of Lancaster now manageth all: but to prevent mischief, Richard of
Bordeaux in Parliament is created Earl of Chester and Cornwall, and then
Prince of Wales, lest John of Lancaster March is commanded by Lan caster over
to guard Calis, which he refuses, therefore his Office of Marshal is given to
Sir Henry Piercy. Prince Richard is set in the Kings seat in Parliament by
Lancaster, who demands of the people more Subsidies, which is denied till la
Mare the Speaker be enlarged: then the Duke demands aid from the Bishops, that
is also refused till the Bishop of Winchester be restored.

At this time John Wickliffe, being deprived justly of his Benefice in Oxford
by the Archbishop of Canterbury, did begin to inveigh against the pride and
wealth of the Clergy and Monks, which has at most times been a pleasant
doctrine to covetous minds; he got presently store of disciples, afterward
called Lollards, professing poverty, going barefooted, and meanly apparelled;
he taught, that in times of necessity Laymen might seize on the Churches and
Monks revenues. These opinions he preached boldly, being supported by Lancaster
and Piercy; wherefore he is cited to answer in Paul's before the Bishops: at the
day appointed he is accompanied by Lancaster and the London and Piercy, because
he commanded Wickliffe to sit down before his Ordinary; Lancaster took the
Marshals part, who threatened to pull down the pride of the Bishops, and to pull
London out of the Church by the hair of his head; this so exasperated the
Londoners, that they vowed rather to lose their lives, then suffer their Bishop
to be thus used; the more incensed they were against the Duke, because he
threatened to take away the Mayor of Londons power. The next morning the
Citizens assemble, and being animated by the Lord Fitzwater (whom at first they
suspected to be their enemy) take Arms, assail the Marshals Inn, broke open
the gates, and set a Savoy, which by the multitude is assailed; the Duke and
Piercy escape by a boat, and complain to the Princess, who then was at
Hennington near Lambeth, with the young Prince: a Priest for speaking against
Peter la Mare was wounded to death; the people thinking he had been the Marshal
disguised; the Bishop of London was fain to go himself and appease the people,
who upon his exhortation, and being the time of Lent, forbear to assault the
Dukes house, whose arms with the Marshals they hung up reversed in sign of
treason: they also were persuaded by the Princess to make their peace with the
Duke, which they assented to, if he would have permitted the Winchester, and la
Mare to come to their answer. They sent also to the sick King, excusing this
tumult, and that it was raised upon information that the Londoners should lose
their liberties, which the King assures them was never in his thoughts, but
rather to enlarge them.

The Parliament considering the Kings wants, grants him a Subsidy, which was
to be committed to certain Earls and Barons to see it issued; every one above
the age of 14. years was to pay four pence, only Almesmen excepted; every
beneficed Parson was to pay 12. pence, and other religious persons four pence
the head. The Mayor and Aldermen are brought to the King at Shene, and
commanded to crave pardon of the Duke for their offenses; they again Shene near
Richmond the sixty fourth year of his age, having reigned fifty years and four
months. He founded East-minster an Abbey near the Tower, a Nunnery at Detford,
Kings-hall in Cambridge, an Hospital at Calice, St. Stevens Chapel at
Westminster, with the endowment of three hundred pound per annum to that
Church, besides his Windsor Chapel, with provision for the Churchmen and poor
Knights; He enlarged also Windsor Castle, and that of Queenborough, with the
Fortifications of Calice: his wife built Queens College in Oxford, who bare
him seven sons, five of them had issue; Edward Prince of Wales, Lionel Duke of
Clarence, John Duke of Lancaster, Edmund Earl of Cambridge, Duke of York
afterward, and Thomas of Woodstock; she had five daughters, four lived to be
married; Isabel the eldest to Ingelra^ Earl of Soissons and Bedford, Joan to
Alphonso 11. King of Castile, Mary to Montfort Duke of Britany, and Margaret to
Hastings Earl of Pembrook.

Richard 2. son to the black Prince succeeded, being eleven years old. In the
first year of his reign, King Charles of France assisted by the Spaniard,
ransackt 1377.
and burned Plymouth, Dartmouth, Portsmouth, Rye, and other Maritine Towns; but
they were driven to their ships by the Earls of Cambridge, Buckingham and
Salisbury. Alexander Ramsey in the night with forty other Scots, scaled the
walls of Berwick Castle, and took it, intending also to surprise the Town, but
English besiege the Castle with ten thousand men, at last it was with much
difficulty yielded, Ramsey only was pardoned for his valor. Shortly after the
French land again, who spoil Dover, Winchelsay, Hastings, and Gravesend, and
return home with great booty: To be revenged of these wrongs, a Parliament is
called, a Subsidy granted of four pence by every man and woman above fourteen
years of age, (but the levying of this caused much trouble) eight thousand men
are sent over into France who spoil all in their way till they come to Britany,
where they were kindly received by the Duke John Montfort. Upon John Wall a
factious Priest, who told the meaner sort of people that they were the sons of
Adam, and had as great right to the wealth of the land as the chief Lords
thereof; whereupon multitudes of the baser sort both in the City and Country
flock together, who make Wat Tyler a Tailor their Captain; Wall the Priest,
Jack Straw, Jack Shepherd, and others are made their directors; they march
toward London, rifling and pulling down the Lawyers houses, and force the
Gentry either to fly or join with them; they beheaded Sr John Cavendish chief
Justice of the King's Bench, and John of Cambridge the Prior; causing the Covent
to surrender up their Charters granted to them by Canutus their Founder. They
require of the king being then in the Tower, to Gravesend with his chief Lords;
but fearing the unruliness of that mad rout, ventured no further, but returned
to the Tower: the next day they came to London, and if the gates had not been
opened to them, they threatened to burn Southwark, so they are let in, feasted,
and rich gifts presented to them to pacify their fury; they rifled and burned
the Savoy, John of Gaunts house, killed all his officers, robbed the Innes of
Court, burned their Law Books, and sacrilegiously rifled the Churches; they
robbed all strangers about London, and open all the prisons. Wat Tyler caused
the head of his old Master, a grave Citizen, to be struck Wat upon a Lance:
they grew to be sixty thousand in number, and affrighted the king, as they lay
at S. Katherines near the Tower.

The next morning the king goes to Mile-end Green to speak with the Rebels; in
the interim Wat Tylar enters the Tower with forty more, robs the kings mother
and broke her head, and beheaded Simon Archbishop of Canterbury, because upon
the beginning of this commotion he had imprisoned John Wall. At Mile-end Green
they desire the King, that they and their posterity might be made Freemen,
which the king granted, and gave them his Banners for their safe conduct, and
withal pardons them; this promise the king performs by instruments Wat Tyler,
with twenty thousand, resolves first to ransack and burn London, and so they
come to Smithfield, the king repairs thither promising them pardon and liberty;
Tyler demands the kings sword from the Esquire that bare it; the Esquire told
him, that the kings sword should not be given to a knave; whereupon Tyler swore
to have his head off before he did eat and drink: John Hadley Mayor of London
then with the King, drew his sword and cut Tyler in the head, and felled him to
the ground; upon this, the rest resolve to be revenged for their Captains
death: the Londoners to save themselves and the King, sent him an Army of eight
thousand men; before they gave the charge, the King desires the Rebels to
submit, or else to redeliver his Banners, pardons and manumissions, which being
in scorn redelivered, the king in their view caused them to be cancelled and
torn, which so discouraged the rout, that they ran all away, the chief of which
were by their companions delivered to justice afterward, who with fifteen
hundred more were put to cruel deaths.

After this, the king married Anne sister to Wenceslaus the Emperor; then
calls a Parliament, in which his two uncles, Edmund of Langley is made Duke
1385.
of York, and Thomas of Woodstock Duke of Gloucester; Henry of Bullingbrook son
to John of Gaunt, is made Earl of Derby; Edward Plantagenet son to Edmund of
Langley, is created Earl of Rutland. At this time the king was mi^ed by his
favorites, De la Pool the Chancellor, whom he made Duke of Suffolk, and De
Vere Earl of Oxford, and Marquess of Dublin, whom he would have made Duke of
Ireland, if his Lords had consented thereunto: he caused his cousin Sir Roger
Mortimer, Earl of March, son to the daughter of Lionel Duke of Clarence, to be
proclaimed heir apparent to the Crown, but he was afterward Ireland by the
Rebels. The king now slights his Nobility and their counsel, and intended to
surprise the Duke of Gloucester, with the Earls of Warwick and Arundel at a
banquet, but was prevented by the Mayor of London; and afterward in Parliament,
they were so strongly guarded, that he could not seize on them: De la Pool
demands four fifteens for the king, which is denied by the Parliament, who
declare, that as the king once a year may call a Parliament, so the Members
thereof may break up and depart, if the king absent himself for forty days
together; they demand also la Pool to prison for his wicked counsels, and
require an account of the kings revenues how they were wasted; the king
requires fifty of their choicest men to be sent him to France then to his own
subjects; the two Lords which were sent to him, namely, the Duke of Gloucester,
and Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, so qualified the king, that he
returns to his Parliament, and then was De la Pool condemned, fined and
imprisoned for cousening the King, to whom all his lands are given, and twenty
thousand marks besides, his Chancellorship taken from him, and bestowed upon
Canterbury; thirteen Commissioners are appointed to examine the Kings officers
concerning their behavior, this the King swears to allow; all that should
persuade

The Parliament being ended, La Pool, and De Vere Duke of Ireland, with diverse
others are released by the King; and at Notingham the Kings uncle Thomas of
Woodstock, and Thomas Arundel Archbishop, are pronounced by the kings Judges
guilty of High Treason: the Nobility petition the king that he would ratify
his former oath, and thrust his evil Counselors from him, which he refused to
do: hereupon the Lords raise a strong Army, which these evil Counselors
perceiving, persuade the king to surrender Calice to the French, whereby he
shall reconcile himself to France, and shall master his Lords, who otherways
will master him; but the king would not hearken unto this counsel, London to
raise him a speedy Army of fifty thousand men; but the wiser Londoners would
not yield that they should take Arms against the kings faithful Lords, who
advised him to nothing but what tended to his and his kingdoms happiness:
hereupon the king relents, and sends to his Lords, acquainting them that he
would call a Parliament, in which his favorites should be brought to answer to
their accusers, and to be punished, if guilty: upon this the Lords disband
their Army, which the King perceiving, caused Robert de 1388.
Vere to raise five thousand men for his own defense; this made the Barons
jealous, therefore they renew their strength, and so encompassed the Duke, that
he was forced to swim his horse over the Thames, and so escaped into France,
where five years after he was slain by a wild Boar in hunting, whose dead body
was by the kings command embalmed and brought over, his Funerals were
solemnized with all magnificence fit for a Prince. The Lords executed some of
his chief servants, and dispersed the rest of his guard, when he was gone over
the Thames; then they conducted their Army to London, where John Earl of
Salisbury and Sir Nicholas Brembre lost their heads, Tresilian the chief
Justice was hanged at Tiburn; the other Judges were spared upon the Queens
importunity, but banished.

The truce between England and France being near an end, the French Admiral is
sent into Scotland with a thousand of the French Gentry and Nobility, and two
thousand Arms; these were slighted by the Country people who England wasting
all before them; but hearing that the King was marching toward them with sixty
thousand Archers, and eight thousand men at Arms, they went over the mountains
into Wales using there all kind of hostility, as king Richard used the like in
Scotland, having sacked and burned some of their chief Towns. When the Scots
Army returned home, the Country people were mad at the French for coming
thither, knowing that France had engaged Scotland in these wars to serve their
own turns, and not for the good of Scotland; whereupon they strip the French of
their horses, arms and money, and so sent them home; the Admiral and some other
honorable Personages they kept as pawns, till satisfaction

The French king pretending to conquer England, rigs out twelve hundred ships
with a formidable Army; king Richard prepares to welcome him with a hundred
thousand fighting men. The French Army is accursed by their own Countrymen for
their plunderings as they marched; and when they came to the Low Countries, for
want of food they sold their arms, horses and clothes, for their numbers were
so great, and the Duke of Berry the kings

After this the Scots invade England, king Richard prepares to go against them;
but by the mediation of foreign Princes, a truce for three years is concluded
between England, Scotland and France, and afterward enlarged to four years
more: and now king Richard having made peace with his neigbours, sends John of
Gaunt his uncle with an Army into Spain, to demand the kingdom of Castile in
right of his wife Constance eldest daughter to king Peter; in this expedition
the Duke of Lancaster carried himself so bravely, that the king of Spain
married the Dukes eldest daughter by his said wife, and gave Portugal, who had
aided him in these wars, and then returned home with wealth and honor. In this
interim the king and Pope quarrelled, and then it was in Parliament enacted,
that the Popes authority should here cease, and no more appeals be made to Rome
upon the penalty of a Praemunire extending to perpetual imprisonment, and
forfeiture of lands and goods. Shortly after Queen Anne died, and two years
after this the king married to Isabel daughter of Charles 6. of France, which
caused a peace of thirty years; the two kings met between Calice and Arde, and
then did the king surrender Breast to the Duke of Britain, a place which had
cost much English blood. Thomas of Woodstock reproves the King for this, and so
procures his anger, which set the King upon plotting his death, who also
intends to destroy his Barons; for he was made believe, that if he did so, he
should be made Emperor: upon this, Gloucester, Arundel and Warwick are
apprehended, and then he calls a Parliament, in John Bush Speaker in the lower
House, in a flattering speech impeacheth the Lords, and chiefly Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury of Treason, who was counseled by the King to absent
himself, with an oath and promise that he should receive no prejudice, yet for
want of his presence to answer for himself, is condemned and banished; Arundel
is beheaded; Warwick upon his submission and repentance is confined to the Isle
of Wight, where he died in great want and misery; the Duke of Gloucester is sent
to Calice, though unsentenced, 1396.
where by the Kings direction, Mowbray Earl of Nottingham caused him to be
smothered between two Feather-beds, for which service he was made a Duke.
Authority is granted by the Parliament to eight persons finally to determine
all causes as were not ended there, who being named by the King, decreed such
Cheshire men, to please them, he would be called Prince of Cheshire: he made
Henry of Bullinbrook, John of Gaunts son and heir, Duke of Hartford, his cousin
Ed. Plantagenet Duke of Aubemarle, and Thomas Mowbray Marshal of England, with
diverse others, on whom he bestowed the lands belonging to his uncle Thomas of
Woodstock, and to the two deceased Earls of Arundel and of Warwick; he granted
also pardon to all except fifteen whom he would not nominate, to keep his
Nobility in fear, lest any of them might be one of the fifteen.

Bullinbrook Duke of Hartford being grieved at the Kings mis-government,
acquainted Mowbray Duke of Norfolk therewith, purposely that he might inform
the King; with this he treacherously mis-informs the King, as if Bullinbrook
aimed to dishonor the King, which was not his intention; wherefore Hartford is
sent for, and confesses to the king what he said, but denied the untrue
suggestions which were added, and to clear himself challenges the Duke of
Norfolk to a duel, which was accepted, the king did not suffer them to fight,
but exiled the Duke of Hartford for six years, and banished Norfolk for ever;
Hartford is honorably received in France by king Charles 6. on whom for his
excellent parts, he would have bestowed his uncles daughter Berry in marriage,
had not king Richard hindered it. Not long after this, Duke Hartfords father
John of Gaunt died, whose lands and movables the king seized on, and bestowed
them on his sycophants; for which unjust dealing, his uncle the Duke of York,
and the Duke of Aubemar le his cousin forsook the Court. Shortly after the king
farmeth out his kingdom to his favorites, raises an Army and saileth into
Ireland, which he subdued. In his absence, Hartford, with Thomas Archbishop of
Canterbury, returns into England to make claim to his Duchy of Lancaster; at
his landing, both Lords and Commons flock to him in such numbers, that he had
quickly a great Army, which he leads to London, where he is feasted, thence he
marches Westward.

K. Richard being returned, and perceiving the Dukes strength, and that Scrope
Earl of Wiltshire, with Bush and Green his three evil Counselors had lost
their 1399.
heads, despairing to do any good by force, comes to his cousin, and proffers
to surrender his kingdom to him, which the Duke seemingly refuses, desiring
only his own patrimony, and reformation of public abuses; so he caused the
king to be honorably guarded to the Tower, and then assembleth a Parliament,
in which these Articles are proposed concerning the kings ill government: 1.
That he hindered his duel with Mowbray his false accuser, and yet banished him
unjustly for six years. 2. That he would not suffer any man to plead for him in
his absence, though he had licensed it under the great Seal. 3. That he would
suffer no man to be a Suitor for the said Dukes return. 4. That he had seized
upon his father John of Gaunts lands and movables, and given them to his
graceless Counselors. 5. That he had counseled the Archbishop Arundel to
absent himself from Parliament, that he might not answer to his accusers, and
then unjustly banished him. 6. That he granted an unjust prohibition under his
privy Seal, when the Chancellor refused Mowbray to smother the Duke of
Gloucester, whom he unjustly banished, and then advanced this Mowbray to wealth
and honors. 8. That the King unjustly robbed the Clergy and Monasteries to
further his Irish expedition. 9. That he carried with him the plate and jewels
of the Crown to Ireland. 10. In laying heavy Fines upon wrong information. 11.
That he devised crafty oaths to undo his subjects. 12. That he caused desperate
Ruffians to accuse rich men for their wealth. 13. That he enriched his wicked
Counselors with heavy taxes laid on the people. 14. That he cancelled all
Records which testified his oppressions. 15. That he said, the Laws were in his
own breast, and hereupon put Cheshire guard to rob and murder without
punishment. 18. That he had dishonourably styled himself the Prince of
Cheshire. 19. That he threatened the Lords in Parliament* that offered to speak
any thing of Reformation. 20. That he exacted great Fines of those whom he had
pardoned. 21. That he placed and displaced Burgesses in Parliament as he
pleased. 22. That he had exiled and executed diverse Lords for procuring a
commission in Parliament to enquire of abuses, which commission he had ratified
by his oath and instrument in writing. 23. That he procured the Popes bulls to
curse such as opposed his unjust laws, contrary to

The authentic copy of these Articles is sent to the King, who confessed them,
and his own insufficiency in government, and withal under his hand and seal
resigns his Crown to his cousin Henry of Bullingbrook Duke of Lancaster: which
being read and approved by the Parliament, King Richard is deposed, and the
said Duke made King, who was installed by Arundel Archbishop, his companion in
banishment: then was king Richard sent to Pomfret Castle; but shortly after by
the new kings command, who thought himself unsafe whilst Richard lived, he was
treacherously murdered; Sir Pierce Exton, and eight Henry caused to be
proclaimed, that he was lawful king by conquest, by resignation, and by
inheritance as next heir to king Richard: But indeed Edmund Mortimer Earl of
March, son to that Roger who was slain in Ireland, and declared heir to the
Crown by king Richard, had more right, as being descended from Lionel Duke of
Clarence, eldest brother to John Duke of Lancaster king Henry's father, and
third son to Edward the third; but he perceiving that there was no contesting
against the sword and

CHAP. XIII.
The history of Scotland from the year 1306. till the year 1377.

RObert Bruce having made his peace with the Pope for killing Cumin in the
Church, got himself to be crowned at Scone, but he had hard beginnings; 1306.
for he was twice defeated by the Cumins, assistest by the English, so that he
was forced to hide himself diverse months together in the mountains and Islands,
having only one friend to accompany him; in the mean while his brothers and
friends were searched after and betrayed, most of Rosse, and sent into England:
but when all his enemies thought he had been dead, he suddenly appears with a
considerable strength, and takes in Carick his own Castle, now possessed by the
English, whom he puts all to death; from thence he goes to Ennernesse, and
takes that Castle also: The report of this made great commotions in Scotland,
so that multitudes being discontented with the English government, flocked to
him, and now he has a considerable Army, with which he marches Northward, and
demolisheth all the Castles there, that they might not be any more shelters for
his enemies, and that he might not John Cumin Earl of Buchan hearing of Bruce
his success, raises an Army of Scots and English, and marches toward Bruce;
but finding how resolute the Bruceans were, and that he could not confide in
his own Army, because many favored Bruce, he makes a truce with him, in the
interim sends for more forces out of England.

Shortly after king Edward dies, and king Bruce falls desperately sick,
whereupon Cumin raises an Army, hoping that either Bruce was dead, or unable
to fight, and therefore a fit time to set upon his forces; but he knowing how
needful the presence of a Commander was in an Army, causes himself to be
Cumins Army near Ennernry. Shortly after Bruce recovered his health, and led
his Army into Argile, which he plundered, and drove Alexander Lord thereof into
England, where he died in great want. Galloway also is subdued by King Roberts
brother Edward Bruce. The report of Bruce his victories drew King Edward 2. of
England with his Army into Scotland, which was increased by the Scots that
adhered to England, but this great preparation came to nothing; for the English
for want of provision were forced to retreat, King Robert having removed all
the corn and cattle thereabouts to places of Bruce having regained the Forts
which the English held 1310.
in Scotland, he invades England with an Army, and returned without opposition
laden with spoil; after this Perth is taken, and the walls demolished by King
Robert; Roseburgh, Edinburgh-Castle, and other strong holds, with the Isle of
Man are surrendered. The English that were in Sterling Castle, being besieged by
Edward Bruce, capitulated to surrender within a year, if no supply came from
England in that time, which was assented to by Edward, for which King Robert
was angry, yet yielded to the conditions that he might not dishearten his
brother. In the mean time King Edward of England provides an Army of one
hundred thousand men, consisting of English, Scots, French, Flemings,
Hollanders: The Scots Army under Bruce was thirty thousand, these pitch their
camp near the English by Bannocbarn, two miles from Sterling; before the battle
the English send eight hundred horse toward Sterling, which were encountered
and defeated by five hundred Scots horse under James Douglasse: the next
morning isappointed for the main encounter, the Scots are divided into three
battles, the right wing was led by the Kings brother, the left by Randolph, and
the main battle by the King himself; the particulars of this fight we have
showed in the English story, only here is one passage not touched there, to
wit, that the English perceiving afar off upon the mountains the Scotch
Carriages with great store of cattle, and servants that attended on the Army,
supposed fresh forces had been coming to assist the Scots; this conceit, after
the overthrow they had in the ditches, so disheartened them, that they betook
themselves to a disorderly flight, in which multitudes were killed and taken;
so great was the loss, that for three years after the English were quiet,
though provoked diverse times by the Scots incursions upon England, 200 of the
English Nobility and Gentry were slain, about as many more taken prisoners;
March into Dunbar, and from thence to Barwick, whom Douglas pursued with four
hundred horse, but could not overtake him; in this battle four thousand Scots
were slain, of the English fifty thousand; Sterling-Castle, according to
promise, is surrendered.

About this time John Monteth, who for betraying Wallis was made Governor of
Dunbritton Castle by the English, intended by surrendering that Castle to King
Robert, to have surprised him, for he hid had a great many English in a low
wine-cellar, who should have suddenly seized on the King at dinner, and
transported him to England in a ship which they had ready for that purpose; the
plot was discovered to the King by a Lock-smith; at the day appointed Monteth
the King is invited to dinner, who desired first to see what store of wine was
in the Cellar; after some tergiversations used by Monteth, the cellar-door is
broken open, and the English Soldiers brought out, who having confessed the
plot, were put to death, and Monteth imprisoned, but his life spared, because
he was allied to some great men, whom the King at that time would not offend.
The next Spring Barwick is taken by the Scots, having been twenty years in the
English possession: then a Parliament is called at Air, in which the Kingdom
is confirmed upon Robert; and because he had but one daughter, to avoid more
controversies about the title to the Kingdom, it was decreed that Edward the
Kings brother, after his Mary the kings daughter and her posterity should
inherit, therefore they think of providing a fit husband for her.

After this, Edward Bruce is sent over to Ireland with an Army, where he is
made king, and presently subdueth Ulster, then marches with his Army through
the West of Ireland; an Army is sent thither from England; king Bruce goes
himself into Ireland with another Army to aid his brother, who was already
defeated and killed by the English before he could come to help him. King
Edward of England understanding that king Bruce and much of the Scottish
strength was in Ireland, sends an Army into Scotland, which was defeated
Douglas, Governor of the Marches; this Land-Army miscarrying, the English
Fleet land their Sea forces, and infest the coast; the Earl of Fife with five
hundred horse went to encounter them, but seeing the English stronger then he
thought; was retreating, but being met by the Bishop of Dunkel with sixty
horse, was encouraged by him to return against the English; and with that the
Martial Bishop takes his Lance, puts spurs to his horse, and with his company
falls furiously on the English, whom he routed, many of whom by pressing into
the boats, were drowned about five hundred; this Bishop Sinclar ever after was
called the Kings Bishop. That Summer the English besiege Barwick, and the Scots
march as far as York wasting all before them; Scots; the Archbishop with a few
more escaped; this was called the white battle, because in it so many Priests
were slain. King Edward hearing of this defeat, raised his siege from Barwick,
and returned with his Army into England, and then a short truce was made
between the two Kings.

King Robert after this calls a Parliament, in which he wills the Nobility and
Gentry to show by what evidences they held their Lands; at this they were much
troubled, most of them having lost their evidences in the late wars; therefore
suddenly they all stood up in Parliament, and drew their swords, crying out
that they had their evidences in their hands; the King at this was very angry,
yet smothered it, till he found a time to revenge himself, which shortly after
fell out, for many of the Lords being guilty, and fearing the Kings wrath,
conspire to betray the kingdom to the English; the King hears of the plots,
diverse Letters are found to that purpose, whereupon the plotters are
apprehended, a Parliament called, and the Letters produced, so all of them are
condemned of High Treason, among whom was David Brechen the Kings sisters

About this time came the Popes Legates, upon king Edwards procurement, to
mediate a peace between the two kingdoms, which when the Scots would not yield
to, they are excommunicated, who to show how little they regarded this
excommunication, follow the Legates as they were returning into England with an
Army, spoiling all in their way with fire and sword; King Edward in requital of
this wrong, marches into Scotland with an Army, Robert had conveyed all
provision into Garrisons and the mountains; the English in their return spoil
and burn some Monasteries; the Scots follow and destroy all as far as York, so
that K. Edward hardly escapes, his Army being defeated, so the Scots return
with rich spoils, and king Edwards Treasure. After this, the Scots send away
two Ambassadors, one to the Pope to appease his anger, which was quickly
effected, when he understood that without ground King Edward the 1. had begun
this war in claiming superiority over Scotland, which was a free kingdom: the
other Ambassador was sent to France, to renew the old League, which was also
done, and withal it was agreed, that if any controversy

About this time, one Hanton an English Gentleman, for commending king Robert
Bruce, was hurt by one Spencer, whom the next day he killed, and with that fled
into Scotland, where he was rewarded by king Robert with large Territories, and
made a Peer of the land, from him came the family of the Hamiltons. King Edward
of England being murdered, and king Robert growing old, a Parliament is
called, in which King Roberts young son is confirmed his successor, to whom
Robert Stuart the kings Nephew by his sister was to succeed, James Douglas is
sent to John Baliol in France with some presents, to the end he might resign
his title to the Crown, which he did willingly, acknowledging the wrong he had
done in accepting that Crown; and 1327.
withal highly commends king Robert Bruce.

King Edward the third of England sends Ambassadors into Scotland to conclude a
peace; but the Scots perceiving some fraudulent dealing, instead of making
peace, proclaimed war with England: Thomas Randulph and James Douglas are sent
into England with twenty thousand horse without foot, that they might run
through the Country without impediment; King Edward Carlisle and Newcastle are
guarded to keep in the Scots from passing the river, but in vain, for they
passed the river where it was fordable; the two Armies were within three miles
of each other eight days together, before either knew of it, by reason of
storms, rain, and overflowing of the Rivers, only the English were alarmed
diverse times in the night by the Stags running in herds to and fro, which they
thought had been the enemy; at last the English found that the Scotch Army was
pitched on the side of a hill, from which they could not persuade them to come
down into even ground; but one night the Scots perceiving the English Army
careless, Douglas is sent with two hundred choice horse, which got through the
Army even to the Kings Tent, and had cut two cords thereof; but the Alarm being
suddenly given, the Scots returned safe to their own Camp, having killed three
hundred of the enemy: the English expecting hourly when the Scots would give
onset, at last they understood that Douglas with all his forces were marched
back into Scotland, the English resolve to return home likewise; and not long
after Ambassadors are sent 1328.
England to treat with the Scots for a perpetual peace; in the interim a truce
is concluded for three years.

The next year, in a Parliament at Northampton peace is made with the Scots,
the Articles we have mentioned in the English story. King Robert having
celebrated the marriage of his son with the king of Englands sister, and being
now aged and sickly, he commits the Government of the kingdom to Tho. Randulph
his sisters son, and James Douglas, and betakes himself to a private life, then
he makes his will, in which he names David his son his successor, being now
eight years old, and next to him Robert Stuart; he exhorted his Lords to mutual
love, and wished them rather to send yearly Governors unto the Islands called
Aebudae, then to appoint one Lord over them, because there would be less
corruption, and more quietness; likewise that they should not in their wars
with England hazard all upon one battle, but rather tire them with alarms and
skirmishes; and lastly he forbids them to make long peace with England, lest
for want of Military exercise they grow either careless and effeminate, or else
fall out into intestine quarrels; he recommends also to James Douglas his Vow
which he had made for an Expedition into the Holy Land, which by reason of his
age and troubles he could not perform, therefore wishes him to carry his Heart
to Jerusalem, there to be interred, which James undertook the next year with a
company of resolute young Gallants, who join themselves with Arragon being then
ready for the same Expedition; in this war against the Sarazens he did good
service, but at last rushing too desperately upon the enemy near an Ambush, he
lost his life; king Robert was 1330.
dead a year before this Expedition, Anno 1329. the four and twentieth year of
his Reign.

Randulph Earl of Murrey is made Protector, as the king had ordained; he so
cleared the kingdom of thieves, High-way-robbers, and idle wanderers, that the
country people could securely keep open their doors, and leave their rural
utensils all night in the open fields; if any goods were lost, the Country
Justices were to make reparation, and the king to satisfy them out of the
Edward of England perceiving he could do no good upon Scotland so long as this
wise and vigilant Viceroy was alive, sent a Monk who professed Physic thither,
who understanding that Randulph was troubled with the Stone, got access to
speak with him, and undertook the cure; Physic is given mixed with poison,
which wrought gently; the Monk pretending he wanted some drugs, got money to
buy them, and to defray his charges, he returns to king Edward, assures him
that by such a day Randulph would be dead; upon Scotland; king Edward sends
spies to view the Scots posture, who finding they had an Army, and that the
Viceroy was there yet alive, return and acquaint king Edward therewith, who
causes the lying Monk to be punished, and the Army to retreat, leaving some
Garrisons on the borders to keep off excursions; Randulph not being able,
because of his sickness to pursue the enemy, disbands his Forces, and presently
after died at Musselburg, having been Viceroy two years.

The King now being but ten years old, Duncan Earl of Mar is elected
Protector: that very day news is brought, that Edward Baliol was entered the
Forth with a great Fleet of Ships; he had been encouraged by one Laurence Twine
an Englishman, who lived in Scotland, but for his misdemeanors was forced to
fly over to France; he acquaints Baliol of the distractions in Scotland, of
the weakness of the King, and the sickness of his Protector Randulph, of the
aid which he should have from King Edward, and of many friends he should find
in Scotland; upon these persuasions, Baliol obtains a Fleet of ships Edward: As
Baliol was landing his men at Kinghorn, Alexander Seaton a Nobleman of those
parts, with some Forces opposes him, but Seaton was killed with a great part
of his Forces; Baliol having refreshed his Soldiers, which now were increased
to ten thousand, marches toward Perth, and sits down near the river, the
Scots Army was divided into two bodies on each side of the river; Baliol
fearing to be enclosed, resolves to fight with one of those bodies a part, and
first on the Viceroy which was farthest off, and seemed most secure; one Andrew
Murrey in the night guided Baliol over the river where it was fordable, who
falling unexpectedly on the Viceroy's Army, routed them, though at first some
resistance was made, yet Scots Camp was so great, that instead of opposing the
Enemy, they fell foul among themselves, three thousand Scots were slain, the
rest fled to Perth, but shortly after yield the Town to the English, which
Dumbar with the other Army resolved to besiege, but upon better advice they
retreat; Baliol upon this good success, and finding multitudes of Scots to
flock to him, resolves to declare himself King, to whom diverse Lords whom he
had taken prisoners, were forced to swear fealty.

Baliol finding himself sufficiently strong, goes to Scone, where he is
crowned. 1332.
Young King David with his wife, to be out of danger, are conveyed over to the
French king; his party make Andrew Murrey, King Robert Bruce his sisters Perth,
which after three months siege they took; the Earl of Fife, who held the town
for Baliol, is sent to prison with his wife and children; Murrey of Tilibardin,
for guiding Baliol over the river, is executed; the walls of Perth are
demolished; a thousand horse are sent into Anandel (where Baliol was secure) by
the Viceroy, these fell suddenly on his forces in the night, so that he was
forced to fly away half clothed upon a horse without bridle or saddle, diverse
of whose friends were killed; Alexander Bruce, King David's kinsman, who had
taken part with Baliol, was taken, but pardoned: the Brucians knowing that
Baliol acted all for and by the King of England, fortify Barwick, where they
put Alexander Seaton Governor; an Ambassador is sent into France, to see the
young king, and to require aid; but the the Brucians are twice defeated by the
Baliolans; king Edward sends Forces to aid Baliol, who otherwise could not
subsist against the other faction, not regarding his affinity with Bruce, nor
the peace that was made, nor the oath which he took; and to make show of a just
war, he demands Barwick, which Bruce had by right of Arms gained from the
English; king Edward besieges the Town by Sea and Land, Douglas brings an Army
to raise the siege, he was advised to go with his Army into England; but he to
be revenged on king Edward for hanging up Seatons two sons, would needs fight
upon unequal ground and terms, and so lost the day; in that conflict ten
thousand Scots were slain, the English also lost many, besides their Fleet,
which Scots.

After this, Baliol had diverse bickerings with the Brucians, sometimes
prevailing, sometimes yielding; in the interim a new Army from England enters
Scotland, both by Sea and Land; in the Forth, the English Admiral, with most of
the other ships, were battered against the Rocks with storms; the Landarmy
marches as far as Glasco, where an English Parliament is called, there David
Cumin Earl of Athol is made Governor of Scotland, and King Edward carried with
him Baliol into England, for he durst not confide in him. Cumin seiseth upon
all the Lands of the Stuarts, and having the Southern parts at his devotion, he
marches Northward, where the Counties of Buchan and Murrey submit to him. All
Patents went under the style of Edward and Baliol; but whilst Cumin was so far
North, Robert Stuart who had hid himself in Dumbritton began to appear, and
having raised four hundred of the Cambels in Arguile went to take in some of
the next Forts, which they did with good success; upon this some of the
neighbor Counties began to side with him, so that his John Randulph Earl of
Murrey was returned from France with assurance of aid from thence; so now
having taken courage, they make two Viceroy's, to wit, this Robert Stuart, and
John Randulph; he with a considerable Army marched Northward, at whose approach
David Cumin being forsaken by diverse of his Soldiers fled to Lochaber, where
he was besieged, and forced to yield, and withal to swear fealty to king
Bruce, and trusting to his promises left him there as his Lieutenant, then
being returned to Lothien, he with the other Viceroy calls a Parliament, in
which was great emulation between Cumin and Douglas lately returned from
England.

Shortly after King Edward with Baliol invades Scotland by Sea and Land; a
Fleet of a hundred and sixty sail enters the Forth; King Edward by land
marches toward Perth; in the mean time Robert, one of the Viceroyes falls
sick, so the whole burden lay upon Randulph, who with a part of his Forces
encounters the Gelderlanders near Edinburgh, and defeated them, for they came
to assist the English, but he used them kindly for Philip Valois his sake; but
as he was conveying of them, he was intercepted by the English Faction, and
brought to King Edward then besieging Perth, which being surrendered, King
Edward returns to England, having had some loss by storms in his Fleet. David
Cumin is by him left Viceroy, for he carried Baliol with him. Cumin who March,
Murrey and Douglas, who never would yield to Baliol; these with considerable
Forces defeat the Cuminians; upon this Victory Andrew Murrey is made Viceroy,
for Stuart was sick, and Randulph a prisoner. New supplies are sent of English,
to relieve Cumins wife, who was besieged by the Brucians; they march as far as
Elgin in Murrey, burn Aberden, take diverse Forts, and relieve Cumins Lady; they
enjoin the six next Monasteries to rebuild the walls of Perth. No sooner were
the English gone home, but Andrew Murrey with new supplies regaines all the
Forts and Castles beyond Forth, except Perth and the Cupre, then enters
England, and returns with great booties: the Garrison of Cupre, for want of
provision, was forced to be gone, who returning homeward through Lothian over
the sands, were all drowned upon the coming in of the tide.

The next year, Dumbar-Castle is besieged by the Earls of Arundel 1337.
and Salisbury six months together, and at last were feign to leave it, having
lost many men before it by sallies; after it was relieved by Alexander Ramsey
in the dark of the night.

Murrey having beaten out the English from most parts of Scotland in two years
and a half, died, whom Stuart succeeded as Viceroy, who by Douglas got diverse
Victories over the English and their parties in Scotland.

Perth is besieged above four months by the Scots, at last the Earl of Rosse
takes it; the English are dismissed with bag and baggage; Sterling also is
surrendered by the English, and Edenburgh-Castle is taken by Douglas. Fraser and
twelve more, being disguised in sea-mens apparel, as if they had come lately
from an English Ship then in the Forth with wine and other provision were let
in, who presently killed the Porter, took away the keys, opened the Gates, and
let in some companies who lay in ambush; after a great skirmish, the English
were forced to yield: In the mean while Alexander Ramsey enters Northumberland
with an Army, which plunders the Country, and returns with great booty; he is
pursued by English Forces, which he defeats by drawing them into an ambush,
where he had hid great store of foot, and so brings home his plunder; then he
takes in Roxburg; after this, he with Randulph and Douglas 1342.
drive the English out of all their Holds in Scotland, leaving them nothing
Barwick. This year returns King David Bruce with his Queen, after nine years
absence. King Edward having made peace with France for three years, prepares
all the strength he can to invade Scotland; he had then in his Army 6000 horse,
and 40000 foot, besides a great Fleet, which was so shattered with storms,
that it did him little service.

Upon King David's return, Scotland is divided into factions, caused by the
murder of Alexander Ramsey, whom Douglas treacherously killed, because he had
got from him the government of Teviot: This much troubled King David, who made
search for Douglas, and found him, but by the mediation of Robert Stuart,
Roxburg and Teviot, for such then was the power of Douglas, that the King durst
do no otherwise. Differences being thus composed, David contrary to the advice
of his Lords raises an Army against England, into which he made three several
excursions, and returned with great spoils; At last a peace for two years is
concluded with England, conditionally that King Philip of France would ratify
it, without whom King David could make no peace, nor King Philip with England,
without the Scots; but the French being defeated by the English, stir up King
David against England, who invades and spoils all as far as Durham, in an
unseasonable time, his own Country being distracted by civil broils between
Rosse and the Lord of the Islands; the English Army come unexpectedly upon King
David, a battle is fought, in which many of the Scots Lords were taken or
killed; King David was taken prisoner by Copland, two of whose teeth he struck
out with his fist after he had lost his weapons; upon this Victory diverse of
the South Countries of Scotland yielded to the English, the rest being employed
in civil broiles against each other; but the English shortly after lost these
Countries again. King John of France sends money into Scotland to raise
Soldiers, desiring also that the Scots would make no peace with England, they
receive the money, a few Soldiers are raised which make excursions upon
England; they take also Barwick and burn it; the English enter Louthien with
fire and sword; Baliol again swears fealty to king Edward.

The English being again driven out of Scotland, king David is ransomed, who
upon his return dis-inherits Robert Stuart, his elder sisters son, and makes
Alexander the Earl of Sutherlands son, and his Nephew by the younger sister,
his heir; but he dying shortly after, king David is reconciled to Stuart; after
this Scotland is much afflicted with great inundations of water, and the
Plague; king David wanting issue, in a Parliament proposed, that for the good
of both kingdoms, the king of England or his son should succeed to the Crown
of Scotland; this motion was so disliked, that it was presently hushed: In the
mean while the High-landers continue in arms amongst themselves, whom
Edenburgh-Castle, the nine and forty year of his life, and the 1377.
seven and forty of his reign.

CHAP. XIV.
A prosecution of the Scottish History, from the year 1377. till the year 1400.

KIng Robert Stuart succeeds to his uncle David Bruce: his Coronation was
opposed by William Earl Douglasse, who claimed the Crown in right of Baliol,
and the Cumins, of whom he was descended; but his claim was so distasted by the
Lords, that he was glad to give off and submit to King Robert, and to confirm
his allegiance; the King marries his daughter to Earl Williams son. This year,
the fourteen years peace between the two kingdoms is broken by the English,
who at a Fair killed a friend of George Dumbar; he being denied satisfaction,
the next day with some forces he plunders the Fair, burns the Town and kills
many in it: the English to be revenged, fall with fire and sword upon the lands
of Sir John Gordon, who in requital invades England, fights with John Liburn,
whom he takes prisoner with many other, and carries them with great booties to
Scotland. Henry Pierce Earl of Northumberland raises seven thousand men, and
with them marches to Dunce in Scotland, where Johannes Scotus subtilis was
born, this Village is six miles England: the Country people thereabout in the
nightime upon the hills made such a noise with their rattles, which they use
in driving away the Deer from their Corn, that the English horse being
affrighted, broke their halters, and ran away; the English also fearing more
danger then there was, took their flight, and left their baggage behind them;
the same day Gordon by ambush took Thomas Musgrave governor of Berwick, with
some of his Troops which were going to join with Piercy.

Shortly after this Ambassadors arrive from France, to renew the old League
with King Robert, and to persuade him to invade England: In the mean while
Alexander Ramsey takes Berwick Castle, and afterward surrendered it. James Earl
Douglasse invades England with twenty thousand horse and foot, and returns with
great booties: the English in requital enter Scotland with fifteen thousand
under Talbot, who as they were returning through a narrow valley with their
spoil, in the night time were set upon by five hundred Scots; the English
thinking the number of Scots had been far greater, fled disorderly, many in the
flight were slain, many more drowned in the River, two hundred and forty taken.
John Duke of Lancaster is sent into Scotland to mediate a peace, which was
concluded for three years; Lancaster hearing of the civil broils in England,
upon the public Faith stayed in Scotland till the English storm was over.

The three years Truce being ended, Douglasse Lord of Galloway, with the 1384.
Earl of March, besiege some English Forts and takes them: Lancaster is sent
against Scotland with great forces both by sea and land, who for the kind
usage he had received a few years before at Edinburgh, would not suffer the
soldiers to use any violence; the Sea-forces in the Isle Armona burned down a
Monastery; the like cruelty they used in some other places, till the Scots
forces fell upon them, and having killed some, and taken others, drove the rest
on shipboard, forty of which were drowned as they held by a cable which was
cut. Scarce was Lancaster returned home, when Douglasse falls upon the English
forts, and regains them: A peace in the mean while is made between France and
England, in which Scotland was also included; but before the Scotland, and
spoil the lands of the Douglasses and Lindsey's, which being done, they show
the Scots, that a peace was concluded, and withal the French Ambassadors come
to assure them thereof; the Scots enraged at this perfidiousness and mokery
resolve to be revenged; king Robert labors to pacify them; in the interim
Douglasse, Lindsey and Dumbar stole away privately from the Court, and unknown
to the king, raise an Army of fifteen thousand, with which they enter England,
wasting all with fire and sword to Newcastle; then having returned with great
booties, and many prisoners, they cause a peace to be proclaimed.

About the end of the peace, the French Admiral with two thousand soldiers,
and pay for six months, comes into Scotland; he brought also four hundred
complete Arms for so many Gentlemen; these with the Scots aid invade
Northumberland, overthrow three Castles, but by reason of the great rains and
floods, were fain to return with their booty: King Richard of England, Scotland
with sixty thousand foot, and eight thousand horse, besides with a great Fleet
by sea, these with fire and sword waste the Country of Lothian. The Scots
unwilling to encounter so great an Army, resolve to draw King Richard out of
Scotland by invading England, therefore they enter Cumberland, spoiling all the
Country thereabout: King Richard would have pursued the Scots Army, but could
not by reason of the rocky and mountainous ways between them, and the
difficulty to find the Scots Army, therefore he returns home the same way he
came; and the Scots also retire out of England, who with the French resolve to
take the Town and Castle of Rosburgh; but because the French would have
Scotland. William Douglasse son to Archibald Lord of Galloway, sails over to
Ireland with an Army to requite the wrongs he had suffered by the Irish, who
had made excursions into Galloway.

Douglasse having landed his forces near Kerlinford, so affrighted the Town,
that they sent to article with him: Douglasse accepts of a Treaty; in the
interim the Town sends to Dundalk for aid, five hundred horse are procured,
Douglasse, hoping to subdue his Army, and to seize on his ships; but they were
subdued themselves, their Town sacked and burned, fifteen ships then in the
harbor are taken and laden with booty, so Douglasse returns victorious to
Galloway, having plundered the Isle of Man by the way. At his return, when he
understood that his father was marched upon an expedition into England, he
follows him: the Scots being willing to be revenged on the English for the
spoil done on Lothian the former year by King Richard, desire King Robert that
an Army might be sent: he being now aged and willing to be quiet, would not
yield to any invasion of England, therefore the Lords repair to the Earl of
Fife he Kings second son, John was lamed by a horse, and unfit for action)
these resolve to raise an Army without the knowledge of either King; but they
could not carry the matter so close from King Richard, who by Spies was
advertised of the Scots proceedings, and therefore wills the Northern Countries
to be in readiness: the Scots Army consisted of thirty thousand; the English
sent a Spy disguised in a Scots habit, to discover the Armies intention; he
having found out all, and returning to his horse which he had tied to a tree,
missed him being stolen, so that he was fain to foot it, which caused suspicion,
therefore he is pursued and brought back and forced to reveal the whole English
plot, which made the Scots alter their resolutions.

Two Armies being raised, the bigger marches by the way of Carlisle Fife,
Iernia, Mar and Sutherland, and Douglasse Lord of Galloway; the other enters
Northumberland under the Earls of Murrey and March, this lesser Army wastes the
Bishopric of Durham; Henry and Ralph Piercies, the old Earl of Northumberlands
two sons, are sent with some forces to secure Newcastle; thither the Scots
march, some light skirmishes for two days together they had with the English:
At last James Douglasse and Henry P^cy fought a duel in sight of both the
Armies; Piercy is beat off from his horse, and his spear taken by Douglasse,
which he carried away with him: the Scots were marching away with their
booties, with an intent to join with the bigger Army; but because Piercy
bragged, that Douglasse should not carry his Lance to Scotland, therefore he
resolves to stay two or three days to see what Piercy would do, who was very
eager to pursue the Scots to recover his Lance, but was advised not to do so
for fear of Ambushes, for they could not think that so small an Army would have
ventured upon Newcastle, but that they had greater forces at hand; Piercy with
ten thousand horse and foot pursues the Scots, which were scarce half so many;
a cruel fight ensues, which continued till it was dark, the days being then
at longest; so having rested a while, and the morning appearing, the conflict
is renewed, in which Douglasse is slain, but his death concealed; at last both
the Piercies being wounded and taken prisoners, the English are disheartened and
fly, of whom one thousand and eight hundred are slain, and a thousand
wounded, and one thousand and forty taken prisoners; of the Scots one hundred
are slain, and two hundred taken. And now the Bishop of Durham with his forces
were come, they should have joined with Piercy, Piercies Army was defeated, was
in a doubt what to do: At last being encouraged by the Country, which made up
his Army ten thousand, he pursues the Scots, hoping to find them careless
upon their former success, or else wearied with fighting.

The Earl Murrey, who now had the charge of the Army, Douglasse being dead,
understanding that the Bishops Army was coming upon his forces, calls a
Council of war concerning the prisoners; some would have had them put to death,
being dangerous to keep so many, but this was held cruelty, English supposed
the Scots to be more numerous then they were; this noise, and the sight of so
many dead bodies before them killed in the former conflict, the unskilfulness
of the Commanders, and rawness of the soldiers, so disheartened the English,
that they retreated: Upon this the Scots return homeward, Ralph Piercy not
being able to travel by reason of his wounds, got leave with six hundred of the
other prisoners to return home upon their parol, the poorer prisoners were let
go without ransom; Henry Piercy with four hundred more are carried into
Scotland, and shortly after ransomed. The other Army which was in Cumberland,
was not so glad for this victory, as sad for the death of Douglasse, a man
highly honored and beloved for his valor, and so much the more because he was
killed in the prime of years. And so much of this battle fought at Otterburn,
not far from Newcastle.

Upon the return of the Scots, King Robert by reason of his age finding himself
slighted by his Lords, and unfit for action, calls a Parliament, in which
Robert his younger son is declared Lieutenant and Governor of Scotland. Not
long after this King Robert died, the seventie fourth year of his 1390.
Alexander Earl of Buchan, to revenge himself of the Bishop of Murrey, who had
angered him, sets the Cathedral Church of Elgin on fire. To King Robert
succeeded his son John, who by an Act of Parliament had his name changed to
Robert, either because the two John's of England and France were unfortunate
Princes, or else because the two first Roberts of Scotland were brave men;
there were two Families of the Highlanders, whose feud was so great, that they
could never be reconciled, till it was agreed that thirty of either family
should fight hand to hand in the Kings presence, which was done accordingly in
open field by Perth, whither multitudes came to see that horrid butchering
spectacle; they 1396.
were all killed except one of the one party, and eleven of the other, who were
all grievously wounded; and so the fiercest of these families being slain, the
rest remained quiet for many years after. Two years after this, the title of
Duke came into Scotland, the first that was so called was David king Roberts
son, being eighteen years old, whom the king in Parliament styled Duke of
Rothesai, and his brother Robert Duke of Albaine: This title of Duke was
Douglasse, but he refused it. Not long after, George Dumbar Earl of March had
betrothed his daughter to David king Roberts son, and had already paid a great
part of the portion; At this Arohibald Earl Douglasse being offended,
complained to the Parliament that the king had bestowed his son without their
consent, and withal proffers his daughter with a greater portion, which is
accepted: Upon this Dumbar with his family removes in great discontent into
England, joins himself with Piercy, raises forces, and invades Douglasse his
lands: hereupon Dumbar is proclaimed Traitor, and his estate confiscate; a
Herald is sent to king Henry of England to demand Dumbar, and to complain that
the peace was broken; king Henry having given no satisfaction to the Herald,
besides, because Piercy and Dumbar with two thousand horse Scotland, (but were
driven out again with the loss of their booty by Douglasse) open wars are
proclaimed against England. 1400.


THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE SECOND PART: Entreating of the Histories of the World,
from the Year, 1400.
CHAP. I.
1. The Affairs of Italy, Germany, Hungary and Bohemia under Wenceslaus,
Rupert, Sigismund, Emperors. 2. The Councels of Constance and Basil, with some
other passages from the year, 1400. till the year, 1439.

IN the time of Wenceslaus fell out the year of Jubilee, which 1400.
should have been a year of rest and gladness, but proved the beginning of that
miserable rent in Christendom, which is not yet made up; John Husse, or Goose
(for so the Wickliffs books sent him from England, began to preach openly in
the University of Prague against Jubilees and Indulgences, against Purgatory,
Image Worship, Transsubstantiation, and other points held by the Church; this
new Doctrine of his made such a distraction in the University, that most of the
Scholars went away thence to Erford and Lipsia, where out of the ruins of
Prague sprung up these two Universities. About a hundred years after out of
this Goose's egg was hatched that Gosling, which did more hurt to new Rome,
then the Goose of the Capitol did good to old Rome.

Husse being driven by the Bishop from Prague, retires to the Village where he
was born, and preaches there openly the same doctrine; complaint is made
against him to Wenceslaus, but he neither could nor did any thing against him,
for he was shortly after deposed by the Electors of Mentz, Colen, Trevers, and
the Palsgrave. Iodocus Barbatus Marquess of Brandeburg, is named Emperor by
Colen and Mentz, which election was approved by Wenceslaus his Cousin-german;
but he was never crowned, for within six months of his election he died; then
was Frederick of Brunswick named by the Electors, but as he was coming to be
crowned, the Bishop of Mentz set upon him in the way and murdered him; at
length Rupert of Bavaria Elector Palatine is made Caesar, and Colen by the
Bishop, for Aix which favored Wenceslaus, would not open their Gates; but them
and other Towns which held with Wenceslaus, shortly after Rupert brought under;
this Rupert was descended from Ludovic the Fourth.

The Pope upon the Florentines request, who were molested by John Galeas of
Millan, gave way to Rupert to require from the Priests of Germany their Tenths
for raising of an Army against Galeacius, whose wealth and power was become
formidable both to the Pope and the other Italian Princes; but Rupert was
resisted by the Bishop of Millan, who also made Leopold of Austria and the
Bishop of Colen his enemies: Trevers likewise made resistance, yet he raised an
Army, being promised by the Florentines two hundred thousand Florens; as soon
as his forces had touched the Territories of Galeacius, he marches thence into
the Country of Brixia, but was beaten back into Trent by the Dukes Army; thence
he came to Padua upon the desire of the Venetians, where he was met by the
Florentine Ambassadors with some forces and money to renew the war; but not
finding the forces and money answerable to Venetians would openly assist him,
he returns into Germany: Whereupon Galeacius sends his forces against Bononia,
assisted by the Florentines, he obtains the victory and the City withal, which
had been the occasion of fifty years war; Bentivolus the tyrant of that City
was slain. He besieges Francis Gonzaga at Mantua, and forces him to yield the
Town, being almost drowned by letting in the Rivers Po and Athesis; he took
from Scaliger, Verona and Vincentha, and shortly after Padua from Cararius whom
at first he assisted against Scaliger. After he had taken in Bononia, he
crossed the Apinines with his victorious Army, and struck a great terror at
Florence, but a violent fever stopped the career of his victories, Johannes
Maria, and Philip, who were the last Dukes of Millan of that race of Vicounts,
and one daughter Valentina married to Lewis Prince of Orleans, son to Charles
5. of France.

After the death of Galeacius, the Guelphs and Gibellins at Millan fell again
to destroy each other with fire and sword; the Cities lately taken by
Galeacius, fell off from his sons, and the jurisdiction of Millan, to their
several governors; Brixia to Pandulphus, Papia to Facinius Canis, Cremona to
Benzones, etc. Among the rest Bononia fell off to the Pope, so did Assisinum
and Perusia Cities of Umbria. The Florentines with their money purchased Pisae
from Gabriel John Galeacius. Sena having killed Corregius their Governor,
reassumed their liberty, which was accompanied with many bloody seditions. The
Venetians upon these changes, promoted their Territories as far as Forum, July
and Istria, so they grew great by the ruins of the Scaligers and Carrarii; for
Novellus Carrarius the son of Francis, having recovered Padua by the Venetian
assistance, forgetting his benefactors, stirs up William Scaliger to recover
Verona, which when William had obtained, Carrarius poysoneth him, and then
murdereth his two sons, that without opposition he might enjoy the Empire of
Verona; and not content with this, he assaied to take in Vincentia, which
hating his tyranny, cast her self upon the Venetians patrocine; Carrarius,
whose forces they subdue, and drive him within the walls of Padua, where being
straightly besieged, he with his two sons were forced to yield to the Venetians,
who caused them all there to be strangled, his other two sons escaped, but died
shortly after in Hetruria: Upon this the Venetians obtain Verona, Vincentia,
Colonia, Feltrium, Bellunum and Padua. And thus was the greatness of Millan
which had swallowed up almost all Italy on this side of Latium, torn in pieces.
Johannes Maria became a most bloody Tyrant, taking delight to fling to hungry
Mastiffs condemned persons, or such as he hated; these dogs he used to feed
with men's flesh, and then to keep them hungry that they might prove Philip
revenged his death, and recovered Brixia, Placentia, Comus, Cremona, and some
other places, but lost quite Hetruria, Umbrio, Aemylia and Picenum; he beheaded
Fundulius the governor of Cremona, who being upon the Scaffold; was exhorted
to repent, answered, That he was so far from repenting, that he was sorry he
had not broke the necks both of Sigismund the Emperor, and Pope John 23. when
he entertained them with a banquet upon the battlements of his high Tower.

Rupert the Emperor seeing but little good to be done in Italy; returns, as we
said, to Germany, permitting the Italians to decide their own quarrels; who
were then distracted into Italian and French factions by means of the
Antipopes. Ladislaus King of Naples, seeming to favor the faction of Gregory
12. came suddenly upon Rome, being then in great distractions, and took it,
with some other Towns belonging to the Church; he threatened also the
Florentines; Lewis of Anjou being invited by the Popes letters, comes and joins
his Forces with those of Florence and Seva, upon hope to obtain the Kingdom of
Naples; so he recovers the City for Alexander 5. and drives out Ladislaus, who
not long after, with greater forces returns and takes Rome, having suppressed
the Pontificans and French Auxiliaries; he killed many of the Citizens,
overthrew the walls, took the Castle of S. Angelo, with diverse Towns belonging
to the Church, and kept them till his dying day, notwithstanding that he was
anathematized by Pope Alexander; he left by will the Kingdom to his sister
Joan, who as is said, repudiated her husband James Burbon Earl of Marchia, and
adopted Alphonsus King of Arragon, thinking thereby to make Anjou; Alphonsus
having slighted her, was rejected by her, who sent for Lewis of Anjou's eldest
son, after whose death she surrogated his brother Renatus, whence arose bloody
1412.
wars between the houses of Arragon and Anjou, the Popes siding sometimes with
the one, sometimes with the other. In the interim Rupert having reigned ten
years died, and was buried at Heidelberg; he was married twice, and left diverse
children behind him. In his time shined a terrible Comet which presaged the
wars of Bohemia raised by Husse, the troubles of Italy by means of the
Antipopes, and the defeat of the Christian Armies by the Turks. He built a
Church and College at Heidelberg.

To Rupert succeeded Sigismund the son of Charles 4. whom Ludovic King of
Hungary had adopted for his son, intending to make him heir to the Crown, and
husband to his daughter; but Ludovic being dead, and Sigismund as yet a child,
the Queen Mother governed the Kingdom; the Nobility disliking her government,
send for Charles King of Naples, son to Andrew King Ludovicks brother, who
being received with general applause, was by the Queen-widow poisoned, and the
Italians driven out of Hungary; but his death was revenged by John governor of
Croatia, who put to death the murderers, and having dragged the young Queen
with her mother by the hair upon the ground, caused the old Queen to be
drowned, and her daughter Sigismund upon this comes out of Bohemia with a great
Army, invades Hungary without opposition, and being now 20. years of age, is
crowned and married to the young Queen. After this he repairs to Croatia,
besieges the governor whom he took and beheaded, with 32. more that sided
with him in his rebellion against the young Queen: the Hungarians repining at
this severity imprisoned him, committing the charge of him to one of the widows
of those whom he had beheaded; but upon great promises made to her, she
dismissed him, who having again obtained the Kingdom, which he secured with
garrisons in all places, he put to death Steven Veivodas the chief author of
his imprisonment,

Concerning Sigismunds bad success against Bajazet the Turk, we have already
spoken, whose fortune was no better in a second Battle against Celebin Bajazets
son, who had got over the Hellespont, and had fallen upon Bulgaria and
Macedonia. Sigismund encountered with the Turks near Samandria, not far from
the Banks of Danubius, but lost the battle by coming too late. Notwithstanding
this bad success, he is called to the Empire by the Electors; his chief care
was to settle peace in Christendom now distracted by three Antipopes, to wit,
Benedict 13. Gregory 12. and John 23. whose residence was at Bononia, Gregory's
at Areminum, and Benedicts at Avenion. Sigismund finding that a Synod was
fitter then Arms to compose these distractions, procured by the consent of the
Christian Princes, a Synod to be called at Constance, where were present all
the Princes or their Legates, even from Byzantium and Trapezund. Here Adolphus
2. Earl of Cleve, and Amadeus Earl of Savoy, were created Dukes of the
Empire; the Marquisiat of Brandeburg, Friderick Burgrave of Noriberg, who had
done good service for Sigismund against the Hungarians and Bohemians. Albert
the Septemvir of Saxony died about this time, whose Dominion and Electorship
Sigismund transferred upon Frederic, surnamed the Stout; Marquess of Mysnia
for his charges and good service in the Bohemian wars: he erected out of the
ruins of the University of Prague, that of Lipsia.

The Synod being dissolved, Sigismund intended to make war against the Turk,
and to repair his honor lost in the two former battles, but he was taken off
from this design by the commotions of Bohemia, therefore Moravia sure to him,
and Silesia, he put to death the seditious Citizens of Uratislavia the
Metropolis of that Country for invading the Government, and flinging down the
Senators from an high Tower. The Bohemian war was hastened on by the violence
of the Hussits, who were enraged for Husse's death; therefore they persecuted
with all hostility the Priests and Monks, some of which they banished, others
they murdered, having pulled down and burned the Religious houses, and broken
to pieces the Images and Statues in their Churches. Diverse battles were fought,
but the Hussits under the command of Zisca obtained the victory; the Emperor
enters Bohemia with his forces to suppress these tumults; 1420.
and having taken Prague, was crowned and anointed King of Bohemia; then he
falls upon the Bohemian forces, but was repulsed and beaten by them, and
compelled to retreat into Moravia for a new leavy; In the mean time Pope Martin
5. by the Cardinal of Winchester, had stirred up all Germany against Bohemia;
three Armies were raised, one of Saxons by their Duke, the other of Francons by
the Marquess of Brandeburg, and the third of Bavarians, Suevians, and others,
by the Archbishop of Trevers: All these Forces by a sudden panick fear were
dissipated; the like success had that Army which was raised by Iulianus
Caesarinus the Cardinal; diverse other attempts were made upon the Bohemian
Hussits, but with ill

Upon this the Council of Basil is called; the Emperor with great promises is
invited into Italy by Philip Maria Viscount of Millan, against whom the
Venetians and Florentines made war both by Sea and Land; being 1431.
received at Millan, he is crowned with the iron Crown; thence he went to Parma
where he wintered. In the Spring he comes to Rome, and upon the day of
Penticost is crowned by Fugenius the 4. Thence returning through Perraria and
Mantua, creates John Francis Gonzaga Lord of Mantua, Marquess. Thence he
returns through Basil into Hungary, and from thence into Bohemia which now
was quieted by the Council of Basil. Here having obtained of the Peers that
Albertus Austriacus his son in law Moravia, 1437.
where he sickned and died the twentieth year of his Empire, the seventeenth of
his Reign over Bohemia, and one and fifty over Hungary, the seventy seventh
year of his age: He was buried at Varadinum or Varasin: He was a good Prince, a
lover of Learning; He caused the History of Arrianus to be translated for him
out of the Greek into the Latin. He hated flatterers, therefore one day he
beat one of his Courtiers for flattering him to his face; at which the man
repining cried out, Why do thou beat me, said the flatterer? Why do thou
bite me, said the Emperor? He was very munificent; but one day riding through
a water, his horse stopped and pissed in it, to which one of his Courtiers said,
This horse is like his master; the Emperor dered to know his meaning, the
Courtier tells him, That as his horse pissed there where there was too much
already, so he bestowed his bounty on those that needed it not, and neglected
those that were in want: The Emperor shortly after fills two boxes of the same
bigness, the one Sigismund is commended for diverse Apothegmes, and for his
clemency, saying, That others killed their enemies with swords, but he used to
kill his enemies with favors. His first wife Mary King Ludovic's daughter of
Hungary, died a year after their marriage: His other wife Barbara a lascivious
woman, bare him one daughter Elizabeth heir of the Kingdom whom he betroathed
to Albert of Austria, he imprisoned his Barbara for treason against him, for
she plotted with the Peers of Bohemia to seize on the Kingdom; but after his
death she was let free; her life after this she led infamously, and died
miserably of the Venereal plague.

There was nothing more commendable in this Emperor, then the pains he took
with the Christian Princes in calling the Synod of Constance, to settle the
distracted estate of the Christians caused by the three Antipopes: The
Cardinals at Pisa had conferred their Papacy on John 23. Gregory and Benedict
being excluded, who slighted this act of the Cardinals; therefore to take all
quarrels off, the Pontificat is conferred on Otto Columnius, Martin 5. the
other three being forced to yield; in this Synod Petrus de Aliaco Cardinal, and
Gerson Chancellor of Paris labored for a reformation of the Clergy and Court
of Rome, but to no purpose: here Wickliffs doctrine is condemned; so are John
Husse and Hierome of Prague; Husse was first degraded, and then delivered up to
the Secular power; upon his head was put a paper-Miter, with the picture of
three Divils, and this Inscription, [This is the Arch-heretick:] Some write,
that he should say before his death, That out of his ashes should arise a Swan
which they should not burn as they did the Goose, and that a hundred years
after they should answer 1415.
to God and him. Which words the Pohemians stamped upon some July, and Hierome
of Prague the next September after. In this Synod was renewed the decree of
Communicating under one kind: It was also ordered, that the fifth year after
the end of this Synod should be the beginning of another, and afterward every
tenth year a Council should be held; by virtue of this constitution a Synod was
held at Papia, which from thence, because of the plague, was translated to
Sena. This was dissolved by Pope Martin 5. because Alphonsus King of Arragon,
who hated Martin, endeavored to restore Petrus Lunensus to the Pontificat,
which at Constance he had lost: therefore Basil is designed for the next
Synod. Iulianus the Cardinal Germany to promote the Bohemian war, and to call
the Synod.

In this Council of Basil, at which diverse learned Bohemians were 1431.
present, it is decreed that the Synods authority was above the Popes: but
Eugenius 4. successor to Martin, fearing lest the Synods power should crush
the Papacy, commanded it to be translated to Bononia: This was so distasteful
to Sigismund the Emperor, and the rest there, that they cite Eugenius to
appear at Basil, or else to lose his Pontificat; hereupon Eugenius was forced
to ratify the acts of the Synod, but taking advantage of the arrival of John
Palaeologus Emperor of Constantinople, who came for aid against the Turks, he
enjoined the Synod to be translated to Ferraria, and from thence to Florence;
this displeased the Fathers of Basil, who desired the Greeks to repair thither,
if they meant to do any good toward their union with the Latin Church; but
Eugenius hindered their coming, and now Sigismund being dead, he stirs up the
Dolphin of France, who afterward was called Lewis the 11. to raise the Synod
with a great Army; these committed great insolences in Alsatia, but in their
journey to Basil Switzers, who also lost their lives there. This tumult drove
away from Basil the Princes Legates; the Greeks were persuaded in this assembly
at Florence to assent to the Procession of the Holy Ghost, 1439.
to celebrate the Eucharist in unleavened bread, to acknowledge Purgatory, and
the Popes power, which was so displeasing to the Greek Churches; upon the
return of the Emperor and Patriarch, that they denied Christian burial to all
such as should assent to these Articles: In the mean while the Synod of Basil
deposes Pope Eugenius, and substitutes in his place Amadeus Duke of Savoy who
styled himself Felix 5. whence sprung up a new schism, which was ended by the
death of Eugenius, and the voluntary Felix, who surrendered again the Pontificat.

CHAP. II.
The History of Swethland and Denmark, from the year 1412. till the year 1587.
Of Denmark and of Swethland, till 1590.

IN Swethland (as we have said) to Margaret succeeded her nephew Ericus 1412.
Duke of Pomerania, he was a great hater of the Nobility, whom he much weakened
in foreign wars both by sea and land; his government was opposed by Engilbert
Prince of Darcarlia whom the Danes slew, and by Charles son of Canutus
governor of the Kingdom, who drove Ericus into Denmark, where finding no help
or security, strives to make his peace with his own subjects, and to return
home, they upon his submission were contented to receive him again; but as he
was returning home, he seiseth upon Gothland, intending to exercise Pyracie
there upon all the Northern ships; but being Charles Canutus, and fearing the
Danish forces, surrenders himself to his people, amongst whom afterward he
reigned peaceably fourteen years from his Coronation: To him succeeded
Christopher Palatin, Duke of Bavaria nephew to Ericus by his sister; he had
wars with England, but returning victoriously home fell upon Sabec without any
success; he lost his Fleet by shipwreck upon the coast of Suecia, as he was
striving to surprise the Vandalic Cities: In his time the Kingdom was ruined
with plague and famine. At last having lost in the sea all his wealth dies in
Denmark childless.

Swethland being governed some years without a King, at length by 1458.
Foreigners elected Charles Canutus for their King: He subdueth Norway, and
lays heavy Fines upon the Danes for making war against him; the people being
irritated by the tyranny of their Governors, and animated by the Archbishop of
Upsalen, a rebellion is raised, which to suppress, Charles removes to Gedanum,
where he expected aid from Poland; in the interim the people obtrudes the
Kingdom upon Christiern King of Denmark and crowns him. Catillus Bishop of
Lincopen, and the Archbishops Nephew having raised an Army, drives out of the
kingdom all that sided with Christiern; and in a memorable battle defeats
Christiern; upon this Charles is called home out of Prussia, and by the popular
breath re-established; he placed milder Governors over them; at last, being
full of years and peace, died, to whom succeeded 1470:
Steno Sture, Nephew to Charles by the sister; he defeated the Fleet which
Christiern had sent against Stockholm, and overthrew his Army which had set
down before the walls, so that after this he never made any attempt against
Sweden; but his son John, by the assistance of the Russians, and taking
occasion by the Steno and Suanto, a great man, invaded Swethland, where by a
Faction he was crowned; but shortly after suppressed by Steno, who brought back
to Smalanda the Queen of Denmark, whom John had carried away and married; but
shortly after at a feast he sickned and died the 30 year of his government; he
was well beloved for his excellent parts, but chiefly for refusing 1503.
the Crown when it was proffered him.

Suanto Prince of the Ostrogoths, and Chancellor of the Kingdom, is elected
Prince of Swethland. Gaddus Bishop of Lincopen conveyed privately the body of
Steno to Stockholm. Suanto having entered into a confederacy with the Lubikers,
1512:
made war upon Christiern the 2. against whom whilst he was making Steno Sture
the younger Suantons son succeeded, who whilst he was fighting stoutly against
Christiern which had invaded Swethland with a new Army, was killed by a cannon
bullet; he being dead, and the Swedish Army defeated, Christiern was invited by
the Danish faction, and is crowned, but the Peers whom he suspected on that
very day of his Coronation are treacherously by him murdered at a feast,
having caused first the Town gates of Stockholm to be shut, that none might
escape, about 94 were massacred, whose bodies were left unburied three days on
the ground, to the horror of the spectators; the body of Steno but lately
buried, by the command of this new Tyrant is dug up, and burned with the
rest; at 1520:
that thirty thousand of the people were up in arms against him, he stole out
of Stocholm, and through woods and by-ways escaped to Denmark, the same month
that he was crowned; neither was he quiet at home, for having embrewed his
hands in the blood of his own people, was extremely hated, so that Frederick
his Uncle, Prince of Holstatia, with the Lubikers, raised an Army against him;
whereupon being terrified in conscience he flies into Zeland with Isabel his
wife, Caesar's sister, and his children, the third year after the massacre 1523:
of Stockholm.

In the mean time Gustavus the son of Ericus who had escaped out of the Dane,
under pretense of negotiating for Christina the widow of Steno, marries with
Steno's daughter, and by the consent of the Peers, and wealth of the Lubikers,
enters upon the possession of the vacant kingdom; after this he abolisheth the
old religion; and embraces the doctrine of the Augustine confession; at last
having governed the kingdom prudently eight and thirty years, he departs this
life, leaving for his successor Ericus whom he begot of his wife Katharine the
Duke of Saxons daughter; after he was crowned at Stockholm, he made wars upon
the Danes and Lubikers; by which 1560:
he encurred the hatred of his friends and neighbors; his brother John Duke of
Finland, was much displeased with his conditions; he having married Katharine
Sigismund King of Poland, lent him a great sum of money, for which he received
in mortgage from the King diverse Castles and Garrison towns in Livonia; Ericus
being suspicious, thought his brother had entered into league with the Polonian
and Dane against him, therefore makes war upon him, and having apprehended him
with his wife and whole family at Abo a Town in Finland, causes him to be
brought to Holmia, where being publicly condemned, was imprisoned, and most of
his chief friends put to death; after four years imprisonment he was set free;
about a year after he seiseth on his brother Ericus, devests him of his
kingdom, and commits him to perpetual imprisonment: hereupon John is made king
of Swethland by general 1568.
consent; he had war with the Dane and Muscovite which lasted many years; he
died and left one son, Sigismund, who was elected king of Poland; John was of
his fathers religion, consonant to the Augustine confession, but he suffered
his son Sigismund to be instructed privately by his mother Katherine in the
Catholic faith, yet would not suffer any other profession but Lutheranisme
publicly in his own kingdom; therefore he left his brother Charles Duke
Finland, a rigid Lutheran, as an hostage with his people, that no innovation
should be in their Religion, and withal in his sons absence appointed him
executor 1590.
of his will, and titular King of Swethland.

In Denmark, Margaret, as is already said, being dead, Ericus reigned alone,
1412.
he was the Duke of Pomerania's son, and great grandchild of. Waldemar; he
learned his cruelty and perfidiousness of Margaret, by whom he was educated. In
his time the Alemans made irruptions into Denmark, but to their loss, for they
were defeated and repulsed by the Queen and Nobility, whose overthrow in these
wars, Ericus that hated the Peers, did chiefly aim at; he being slighted for
his perfidiousness and injustice, is expelled out of both his Kingdoms into
Gothland, an Island fit for his safety, and for exercising of pyracie; during
Swedish ships, but was favorable to the Danes, to whom he left all Gothland to
be possessed and kept for him in his absence; for not finding himself secure
enough in that Island, he returns to Pomerania. This Ericus is infamous in the
Histories of Swethland and Denmark, for his adulteries, perjuries, plundrings,
treacheries, injustice, and seven and twenty several treasons; when he fled to
Gothland, he carried with him the whole treasures of his kingdom, and Caecil
his Concubine, who was the chief cause both of his wickedness and miseries. To
him succeeded Christopher Duke of Bavaria, 1438.
the great Grandchild also of Waldemar, he was chosen by the consent of King
Ericus; he was much offended with the insolences of the Hans-towns, Lubec
which the Danes had built, and was hitherto subject to the Danish Kings, but
now by treachery and cunning had shaken off their yoke, and aimed at the
government of their Governors; therefore to reduce them to their former
obedience, he raises out of all parts of his kingdom great sums of money,
which so displeased the Northern Juitlanders that they rebelled, but were
quickly suppressed by the King, and grievously fined: his wife was Dorothy
daughter to John Marquess of Brandeburg; he died childless, the seventh year of
his reign in the Castle of Helsingor; he was a Prince well beloved of the
Danes, but hated of the Swedes, over whom notwithstanding

To him succeeded Christianus the first, son of Theodoricus Earl of Adenburg,
1447.
he was elected by the advice of Adolphus Duke of Holsatia his kinsman; he
married Dorothy the widow of Christopher his predecessor, of whom he begot a
daughter, Margaret by name, (who was afterward married to the King of Scotland)
and two sons, John and Frederick; in his time the Swedes fell off totally from
the Covenant of the three Kingdoms; having chosen and crowned a King of their
own, to wit, Charles son of Canutus, and Lord Marshal of that Kingdom, but he
at last was expulsed for his tyranny and perfidiousness, and Christianus was by
them accepted as their king, to whom they were not long Swedes rebelled against
him, and called home again Charles from Gaunt, where he had lived in exile
seven years; this Christianus was a clement and bountiful Prince, whose
government had been without blood, if his simplicity had not been abused by
some sycophants, to the great prejudice of Swethland, for John Archbishop of
Upsalia, by the malice of some false informers (by whom oftentimes Princes are
abused) was apprehended by Christianus, and highly wronged, being sent into
Denmark, where he lived in great misery, and yet it was by his means that the
King obtained this Kingdom, for this Archbishop was the main man that opposed
the tyranny, perfidiousness and cruelty of King Charles, that stood most for
the peoples liberty, but King Christianus having found out the knavery of these
mis-informers, sends the Archbishop home again to Sweden with much honor, and
restores him to his former power and dignity; in requital of which favors, he
remained faithful ever after to Christianus, forgetting the injury of his
captivity: this King having redeemed Holsatia with a great sum of money, raised
Swethland also being subdued by his Arms, and Gothland regained, having married
his son John, and visited Rome for Religions 1481.
sake; at last after three and thirty years reign he died, and was buried at
Roschild in a Chapel which he had built and richly endowed, on the South side
of the Cathedral Church of Saint Lucius the Martyr; this place he had enriched
with diverse ornaments and Relics from Rome.

To him succeeded his son John the first; he married Christina daughter of
Ernestus Duke of Mysnia, who bare him two sons Christiernus and Frederick, and
one daughter, Elizabeth, who was married to Ioachim Marquess of Brandeburg;
this John almost reigned two and thirty years over Denmark; in the Christiern
and Frederick the first. John intended war against Steno Stura Governor of
Swede, which his mother Dorothy kept off whilst she lived, but after her death
he fought and subdued the Swedes, yet scarce enjoyed he that kingdom three
years, for Steno and Suanto rebelled, to the hurt of both kingdoms. 1501.
Christina was besieged and taken in the Castle of Holme; he was unfortunate in
the battle of Ditmarse which he lost, but had better success by Sea against the
Lubekers, who were always enemies to the kingdom of Denmark; he died of the
Plague in the town of Olburg, and was buried at Ottonia; he was a Prince both
prudent and religious, much lamented after his death even by 1513.
those that hated him in his life, foreseeing the tyrannical government of his
son Christiern the second, whom the Histories call worse then any Phalaris,
Nero, or Scylla, for having found a peaceable and plentiful kingdom, he left it
most calamitous, by his sacrilege, impieties, cruelties and perfidiousness,
sparing neither ecclesiastic nor secular persons, but raging on the dead as
well as Lubekers, they drove him out of his kingdom, the 9. year of his 1522.
reign; ten years he lived an exiled man in Germany; afterward returning with
an Army into his country, hoping to recover his kingdom, was taken prisoner,
and detained in captivity till his death, which befell him at Callenburg having
lived 77 years and some months, he was buried at Ottonia near his father; 1559.
his Concubine was the cause of all the miseries that fell on him and his
kingdom; he married with Isabel daughter to Philip King of Spain and Archduke
of Austria, who lived ten years, and was buried at Gaunt, a most chaste and
religious Lady, who bare him three sons, two of which died in their infancy,
the third departed in the Hungarian war under his Uncle Charles the fifth,
Emperor, the same day that his father was taken prisoner; she Dorothy married
to Frederick Count Palatine, and Christina the wife of Francis Sfortia Duke of
Millan, and after him of Francis Duke of Loraine.

Frederick the first succeeds King of Denmark and Norway; by his fathers last
will he was made Duke of Slesvic, Holsatia, Stormaria, Wagria, and Ditmarschia;
but being a child of nine years, his brother the king divides these Countries
with him; when he came to man's estate, he demanded of his brother the Legacies
his father left him, and complained for detaining his Dominions from him, but
receiving an unpleasing answer, he was contented to sit quiet so long as his
brother lived, whom he aided also in his wars against the Ditmarshians; at last
entering into a confederacy with the Danish Nobility, drives him out of his
kingdom for his tyranny, and undertakes the Government of Denmark and Norway;
Hafnia surrendered to him, whither calling the Nobility Christiern for his
tyranny and treachery is deposed, and Frederick elected, who presently
confirmed the privileges 1524.
of the Nobility as soon as he was crowned; he commanded that the Lutheran
doctrine should be publicly taught in the Churches; he died at Gottorp, and
was buried at Sleswig in the Quier of the Cathedral Church, where he was
honored with a Monument of Alabaster; he lived six and fifty years and reigned
ten; he had two wives, the first was Anna daughter to John Elector and Marquess
of Brandeburg, who lived fourteen years with him, he had by her Christian the
third, king of Denmark, and Dorothy 1. the wife of Albert Duke of Borussia, his
other daughter was Sophia wife to Bugislaus the Tenth, Duke of Stetin in
Pomerania; she had three sons, John, Adolphus, and Frederick, Elizabeth mother
to Sophia, who was wife to Frederick the second, King of Denmark, Anna that
died of the Plague, and Dorothy the second.

Christianus the third succeeded; he first of all took care to settle the
Churches of his kingdom, committing the charge of a general visitation of
Ecclesiastic persons to Widenscius Doctor in Divinity, whom he sent for out of
Magdeburg, and to Hermannus Tastius Pastor of Flensburg, with whom were joined
some of the Nobility; he was crowned by John Bugenhagius of Pomerania, 1537.
and reigned four and twenty years in great moderation and prudence; at last
the six and fiftieth year of his age he died; his Son honored him with a
magnificent Roschild, whither his body was transported with great solemnity;
his wife Dorothy the Duke of Lower Saxony's Daughter lies buried by him, she
died twelve years after her husband, 1559.
she bare to him Frederick the second King of Denmark, Anna wife to Augustus
Elector of Saxony and Marquess of Mysnia, Magnus Duke of Holsatia, Dorothy wife
to William Duke of Brunswick, and John the younger Duke of 1571.
Holsatia.

Frederick the second succeeded; he had wars 7 years together with Ericus the
14. King of Swethland, till the year 1570. at length by the mediation of some
Princes, peace is concluded between him and John brother to Ericus 14. October.
3. and died the 4. of April following, having first received the Sacrament,
1587.
and prepared himself with confession of his faith and prayer; he reigned 29
years, and lived 54. he died in Sitland in his Princely house of Anderschow; he
was much bewailed by the whole kingdom, chiefly by the Church and Schools, for
he was a great friend to Scholars; by his wife Sophia he had Elizabeth, Anna,
Christianus, Ulricus, Augusta, Hedewiges, and John; his Successor was
Christianus the Fourth, of whom we will speak hereafter.

CHAP. III.
The History of Holland; and the neighboring places, from the year 1404. till
1514. with some passages of Utricht till 1580.

IN Holland, Earl Albert being dead, his son William succeeded, commended for a
good soldier, a just Prince, and a munificent benefactor to the poor; 1504.
Mary daughter to Charles the seventh of France, by whom he had no children;
but of his second wife Margaret, the Prince of Burgundies daughter, he begot
Iacoba his only daughter and heir: He had some difference with Arkelius a Lord
of that Country, who had seized upon the City Worchom, or Gorcum. The Bishop of
Utricht assisted the Earl against this Arkelius, from whom he took some towns;
Gaspera was burned to ashes, and the same fortune was like to fall upon Gorcum,
if the Duke of Gelder, and John of Bavaria elected Prince of Liege had not
mediated a Peace between them: There were also great troubles between this John
the Bavarian and the Citizens of Liege, who despising the government of this
Prince, elected another; William by the aid of John of Burgundy his kinsman,
Antony of Brabant, and Theodoricus of Namurs, overthrew these rebellious
Citizens in a bloody battle, and withal abolished all the privileges of that
City, imposing a heavy Tribute on it: This William also had some quarrels with
Renald Duke of Gelder, but they were at last composed by the addition of
Arkelius his dominions to Williams. After he had settled all at home, he made a
journey 1417.
to Hannonia, and shortly after dyed.

To him succeeded his only daughter Iacoba, whose whole life was nothing else
but a wrestling with bad fortune: for her first husband the Dolphin of France,
John by name, son to Charles the sixth, shortly after her hasty marriage John
of Brabant, though she was retarded from that by Religion and propinquity of
blood; yet Pope Martin the sifth gave her a dispensation, which was revoked
again by the authority of Sigismund the Emperor. This being unknown to Iacoba,
she consummates the matrimony at the Hague: In the interim, John of Bavaria
aiming at higher matters, resignes his Episcopal seat to the Pope, and marries
with the widow of Anthony Duke of Brabant; besides, Sigismund the Emperor
confers upon John of Bavaria the Arms of Holland, to whom that Earldome seemed
to appertain, he being the next heir male, to whom the female Holland with an
Army, notwithstanding the Grandees resisted his claim, affirming that the woman
was capable by their ancient laws of the government of that Earldom: But John
of Burgundy made peace between them upon these terms; that what the Bavarian
did possess, he should enjoy by the right of Fee: yet the next year, the war
was renewed by the City of Leyden, which sided with Iacoba; but the inhabitants
being pinched with a strait siege, were forced to yield, and submit their necks
to a new Lord. John of Brabant was forced, though without his wives knowledge,
to deliver up the whole government of the Country to the Bavarian; hereupon
arose diverse jealousies and quarrels between the married Gloucester, without the
Popes dispensation; this exasperated her former husband, so that he having
undertaken the government of Holland upon the death of John of Bavaria, goes
into Hannonia, and being assisted by the Forces of Philip Duke of Burgundy,
overthrew in several skirmishes the Army of Iacoba, whom he took prisoner and
delivered her to the Burgundian, till the Popes opinion or judgment was known
concerning this match; but she escaped to Holland in a man's habit, where she
was joyfully received by those Cities of the Hoecks that sided with her, but
many other Towns adhered to Philip the Burgundian: Hence followed a cruel war,
the Duke of Gloucester assisted Iacoba, but Philip at last got the better;
After this the Popes sentence followed, making her divorce from her former
husband unlawful, with a command that she should commit her self to the custody
of Amadeus the Duke of Savoy, till Hunfred of Gloucester having repudiated his
wife, marries with another: After this Iacoba laid siege to Harlem, which she
was forced to raise again, and fight with Philip of Burgundy, whom at last in a
long battle she overcame, and drove him into Leyden. In the mean while as she
was making greater preparations, John of Brabant, from whom she had divorced
her self, died, which now put her in great hopes of obtaining Holland again;
but these hopes were quickly blasted by her overthrow she received near Wiringa
in a battle against Philip, with whom she Articles, that he should be Protector
of Holland, but the dominion should remain in her, besides, she should never
marry without the consent of Philip; and withal, if she died Iacoba being of a
libidinous nature, fell in love with Francon Borsalius, which when Philip
understood, suddenly he seiseth on him, and sends him prisoner to Rupelmond,
with command that he should have his head cut off; but the Governor of the
Castle being loath to meddle with the blood of so great a man, gave out that
Borsalius was beheaded; Philip repenting of his rash sentence, when he heard of
this, was much grieved, and wept, for he delighted not in blood; but when he
heard that Borsalius was alive, he rejoiced exceedingly, and withal, ratified
the marriage between him and Iacoba, on these conditions, that she should
Borsalius should lay claim to the Earldome of Osterband; if they had children,
they should enjoy their ancient Dominions, if they had none, that then all
these Countries should devolve to the Heirs of Philip the Burgundian; and so
she dying childless, the House of Burgundy became Lords of Hannonia, Holland,
Zeland, and West-Friesland; and thus Philip became a most potent Prince, his
first Marriage with Michaelia the daughter of Charles the sixth of France was
sterile, and so was his second Matrimony; but by the third match with Elizabeth
of Portugal he had three sons, one of whom, Martin by name (the rest being
dead) succeeded him. Philip after this had long wars with the French, at last a
peace is concluded upon this condition, Philip should endeavor to recover
amongst other territories the Earldom of Gisen, but from this he was hindered
by the English out of Calice, which was then under them. At this time, the
tumults of Gaunt and Bruges filled the whole Country with disorders: One day as
Philip was passing through Bruges, the Citizens fell upon his Company, killed
the chiefest of his Nobility, and if he had not broken open the gates, he had
been murdered there himself, so that he narrowly escaped. This high indignity
he could not digest, till he had besieged the town so closely, that it was
pinched both with poverty and hunger, for want of trading and provision:
whereupon the town is surrendered, eighteen of the chief plotters were put to
death, and the rest forced to redeem Gantois, and other factions thereabout; he
made his natural son David Bishop of Utricht, though the Citizens withstood
him; he also assisted by his power Lewis to the Crown of France, at which time
the solemnity and ceremonies of the golden Fleece were performed at the Hague;
this Order was first instituted at the Nuptials of Philip and Isabel.

In the mean time those of Liege offered diverse wrongs to the Earls hereditary
countries, and drove Lewis Burbon out of his Bishopric. The Earls son Charles,
surnamed Bellicous, or Hardy, was sent with an Army to suppress them, which he
did, but they presently rebelled again, whereupon the City Dinan^um, a famous
place then, is made the object of the Soldiers fury, who killed many of them
with the sword, and drowned multitudes in the Mose; they overthrow the Towers
and Walls of the City, and burned down the houses with fire; so at last the
Citizens of Liege were forced by this exemplary Brugis the 73 year of his age,
to whom succeeded Charles Mortin, called the Bellicous; he was three times 1468.
married, first with Katherine daughter to Charles the seventh, King of France;
secondly, with Elizabeth of Burbon, by whom he had Mary the Heir of his
Dominions; thirdly, with Margaret daughter to the Duke of York, and sister to
Edward the 4. King of England; he fought diverse battles with good success; he
suppressed Liege, as we said; he began a war with Lewis the eleventh, King of
France, which was upon agreement suppressed; he had some Seafights with the
Duke of Warwick, against whom he aided King Edward, when Holland, he had wars
also with Arnold Duke of Geldre, who had sold Geldre and Zutphania to Charles;
all this Country he added to his Dominion, and received it in fee from the
Emperor; but Caesar afterward gave aid to the Earls enemies at Colen and
Novesium, a Town belonging to Colen, and there was like to be great trouble, if
the Popes Legate had not taken up the quarrel: he had long wars also with the
French, and was twice defeated by Reinold of Lorain the French General. After
Nancy was taken by the French, Charles lays siege to it; a long and bloody
battle was fought; at last the Earl being betrayed by Campobassus an Italian,
was drowned with his horse in a Lake the 43 year of his age; he was a wise 1476.
Mechlin, and in the great Hall at the Hague he used to administer Justice
himself, sometimes every week; he beheaded the President of Zeland who had put
to death an innocent man, that he might abuse his wife; this President having
had his desire of the woman, sent her the dead body of her husband, which the
Earl understanding, sent to the woman the dead body of this President or
Governor, and made her heir to all his goods: This Earl was too greedy of
glory and dominion.

To him succeeded his only daughter Mary, the last of the house of Burgundy,
from which the right of those Countries were translated to the House Austria,
and so to Spain; her tuition John of Clive undertook, till she was married to
Maximilian son to Frederick the third, Emperor, which was the original of the
House of Austria's greatness. Lewis the French King sought her for his son, but
was rejected, for which he was highly incensed. The troubles arose again
between the Hoecks who took Leyden, and the Cabillans who seized upon Dort. The
Princess in hunting was flung from her horse, with which fall she broke a rib,
and died of an Imposthume, she was buried at Bruges, to the great grief of her
husband, to whom she bare Philip of Austria, Francis who died an infant, and
Margaret. Philip the second, Heir of these Dominions, being scarce as yet four
years old, had Maximilian his father for his Hoecks and Cabillans were quieted,
the rebellion of the Geldrians suppressed, the Towns of Ruremund and V^nloa
having submitted; he extinguished also the differences with France, by
betrothing his daughter Margaret to the Dolphin, who was deluded by him,
affecting rather the D. of Britanies only daughter, whom he married.
Maximilian had also wars with Gaunt and Brugis, whose stout stomach he at last
suppressed; but after he was called to the Empire, he left the care of Belgium
to his son Philip, now almost sixteen years of age; he by Iohanna daughter to
Ferdinand King of Spain begot Charles the fifth, Ferdinand King of 1506.
Hungary and Bohemia, and some daughters afterward married to the chief Princes
of Europe, and by the death of John of Castile he became Heir of diverse
Kingdoms; he was a virtuous and peaceable Prince; at length being full of
wealth and happiness, died at Burgis a City of Granado, not without suspicion
of poison; his heart, as he desired, was buried at Jerusalem: To him succeeded
Charles the 5. scarce six years old, whose Aunt Margaret in the mean while
governed the Netherlands; but after Charles attained the years of puberty,
Belgium solemnly acknowledged him for their Lord. After this, at Valedolid the
chief City of old Castile, sometime the residence of the kings of Spain, with
great magnificence, Charles takes possession of his fathers kingdoms.

Charles, by the death of Maximilian Emperor, his Grandfather, is chosen by
the general suffrage of the Electors, Emperor of the Romans; who was no
sooner gone into Germany, but the Spaniards rebelled, by means of the insolent
Government of William Croijus Chierius, whom Charles had left as Viceroy of
Spain; the Nobility envied the government of a stranger. Peter Gironius, being
aided by the Peers, under color of vindicating the liberty of Spain, goes to
Valledolid, where he seiseth upon Joan Mother of Charles, and carried her away
as his prisoner; but suddenly an Army of Imperialists being levied, they
regained the Queen, set her at liberty, and put to death the chief rebels,
Charles finding how requisite his presence was, to extinguish the fire of
intestine seditions, makes a journey to Spain, where he stayed eight years; but
whilst his presence quieted Spain, his absence occasioned troubles in the
Netherlands, raised by the Geldrians, and Zutphanians, who being at last
subdued, were forced to submit to the pleasure of the Conqueror, which was,
that Gelderland and Zutphania being escheated to the Emperor, they should be
held in fee from him; this Zutphan is a town in Gelderland, and has 1514.
been an ancient Earldome, and is seated on the River Ysle. Groyning also a
Town of West-Friesland, which had been wrested from the Duke of Saxony by the
Earl of East-Friesland, and sold to Charles Duke of Gelders, was to be
surrendered to Charles the Empe^; to whom also Henry of Bavaria, the last Bishop
of Utricht, being expelled by the Citizens thereof and Duke of Gelders,
resigned his jurisdiction; the first temporal Lord of it was Charles, who built
a fair strong Castle here; yet I find in Bell-Forest upon Guicciardin, that
William Enckewort Cardinal, and Bishop of Tortona in Spain, 1529.
took possession of this Bishopric by a Deputy, he himself remaining then at
Rome, whose Successor was George of Egmont son to John the first Count of
Egmont; he ruled this Bishopric five and twenty years, whose Successor
Frederick of Tautenburg was Bishop of the place twenty years, after whom
succeeded none but Titular Bishops; Episcopacy with the Roman Religion being
both driven out at the same time, not without great tumults, and almost 1580.
the overthrow of that City.

CHAP. IV.
The History of Savoy, and the neighboring parts, from the year 1397. till the
year 1452.

IN Savoy, Amadeus the 8. succeeded to his father Amadeus the 7. There was 1397.
great strife who should have the tuition of the child; for Bona Biturica his
mother, Bona Borbonia his grandmother, Lewis of Savoy Prince of Morea (who had
married his sister) the Earl of Geneva, and Philip Duke of Burgundy, Amadeus
himself being now of age, and having married Mary of Burgundy (according to the
desire of both parents whilst they lived) undertook the government: He was a
Prince of great hopes, and on whose prudence and power his neighbors did much
rely. Italy at this time was grievously afflicted with plagues, sudden deaths,
Civil wars, and schisms in the Church, all which were portended by a direful
Comet, and other fearful meteors. For mitigating of Gods wrath, and removing of
these judgments, supplication and processions were made through all Towns and
Villages, multitudes of people going

This Amadeus bestowed upon the Celestine Order all that building called the
Savoy at Lions, which heretofore had belonged to the Knights Templers, but
after their abolition to the Knights of S. John of Jerusalem, which buildings
Amadeus 4. for his good service in recovering the Isle of Rhodes to the
Christians: The same Amadeus 8. gave order to his son Lewis to build a Chapel
in that place, and to increase the revenew of those few Monks which he had
invited thither, having as yet no more but seventy five crowns per annum
allowed them, which was performed by Lewis accordingly, who also enlarged the
bounds of the Monastery; this was in honor of Peter Celestin not long before
canonized. About this time John Bishop of Liege was expelled his Bishopprick by
the Inhabitants, and pursued also in a hostile manner: this wrong William Earl
of Henault did highly resent (for this John was his brother) and presently
implores aid from the Duke of Burgundy Liegers; the Burgundian assents, and
withal invites to the confederacy Amadeus, who had married his sister: these
raised a great Army, a cruel battle is fought, in which Pierweisius the chief
author of the Bishops expulsion, and his son, who assumed the title of Bishop
of Liege, with eight and twenty thousand Liegers were slain, and John the
Bavarian restored again to his Bishopprick: Virius General of the Savoyan
forces, with the Gentry of Savoy that were with him, behaved themselves so
gallantly in this conflict, that the Burgundian invited three hundred of them
allowing large stipends to be of his Lifeguard, setting Virius over them as
Captain; but not long after, some differences falling out between Amadeus and
Lewis Duke of Burbon about the Principality of Dumbar, which the Virius boldly
by a Herald denounces war against Lewis of Burbon, at which the Duke wondered
that a private man durst be so bold, therefore he suspected that Amadeus had
authorized him to do so, and the rather, because Virius had seized upon some
Castles in the Country of Dumbar: Some think that he was encouraged by John
Duke of Burbon; however it was, the Burbonian with an Army before Virius was
aware, regained all the Castles which he had taken, and withal threatens to
proclaim war against the Savoyan, if Virius be not delivered up to him: the
Savoyan who disclaimed altogether this rashness and boldness of Virius,
delivers him up to the Burbonian, conditionally that he should be used as a
prisoner of war, and dismissed again after he had received satisfaction from
him for the losses sustained; this was agreed upon, and the difference about
the right of homage which the Savoyan demanded of the Burbonian, was composed
by the Duke of Berry; but this accord was not long-lived, for Charles 6. King
of France being offended with the Dukes of Orleans and Burbon upon John Duke of
Burgundy, and Amadeus to fall upon the lands of Orleans and Burbon with fire
and sword, which was done accordingly: Amadeus employes Virius, giving him the
charge of five hundred Curisers, Fierbourgius is sent by the Burgundian, these
make havoc of all whither they went: Berry, Burbon and Orleans being highly
incensed at these wrongs, enter into a league both against the Burgundian,
whose greatness they hated, and the rather because his power was greater with
the French King then all the other Princes; and likewise against the Savoyan,
who had married the Burgundians sister. What miseries and desolation fell upon
France by this confederacy, may be seen at large in the French Histories.

This Amadeus waited upon Sigismund the Emperor, as the second Earl France
about a Synod for removing of the Papal schism; the Emperors Ambassadors
could do no good, therefore he was fain to go himself, being attended upon
(according to the ancient custom when the Emperor travels out of the Imperial
bounds) by the Princes Electors, four Dukes, four Lantgraves, four Marquesses,
and four Earls of the Empire: Amadeus in his journey fell sick; some think
truly, some think fainedly, as being unwilling to meet or converse with
Orleans, the Burgundians 1415.
great enemy, and so returns home, where understanding that Genua was much
distracted with intestine broils, he sends one thither under color of some
other business to try some of the Citizens underhand, if the Emperor Italy
upon all occasions: this messenger not carrying his business close enough was
discovered, and by Barnabas Guanon the new elected governor of Genua (George
Adurinus the ancient governor having freely laid down his office in these
tumults) is apprehended and condemned of treason; but before the expiration of
one year, this Barnabas was by Thomas Fregosius thrust out of his office, and
banished from Genua. Though 1417.
this plot of Amadeus succeeded not, yet his good will was seen to the Emperor
Sigismund, which he rewarded by making him of an Earl a Duke; and because he
doubted lest Geneva and Lausanna. would unite Valtelin had done, two years
after he obtains of the Emperor full and sole dominion over these Cities,
which grant was approved by Pope Martin. After this Amadeus made peace between
Charles the 7. of France, and Philip the Good Duke of Burgundy, whose father
John was killed by the faction of Orleans, and procured that all who had a hand
in that murder should be expelled France. After this Philip D. of Millan made
war upon Savoy, and seized upon Novaria and Verselli, because Amadeus had made
a league with the Venetians the D. of Millans enemies, so that the Army which
the Millanois had raised against the Venetians and Florentines, was employed
against the Savoyans; but Amadeus to Lombardy with fire and sword, spoiling all
the Territories of Millan: but Sigismund the Emperor, who was now preparing to
go for Italy to receive the Imperial Crown, obtains free passage through the
Duke of Millans Country, and withal procures a peace between Philip and
Amadeus, in which Novaria and Vercelli are restored by the Duke of Millan, who
took to wife Mary daughter of Amadeus. In the mean while the French King had
lost a great part of his Country, in his wars with England and Burgundy. The
Prince of Orange intending to invade the Delphinat, sends to Savoy for help,
which was promised on this condition, that the Savoyan if he obtained the
victory should have that part of the Delphinat in which Gratianopolis was
seated, and Vienna: but the event of this war proved otherways then they
expected; for scarce had Orange entered the Delphinat, when Gaucourtius the
Governor of that Country under the French King set upon him, and overthrew his
Army, so that he was forced to save himself by flight, a great many Gentlemen
were taken prisoners, and above three hundred slain. After this a great battle
was 1431.
Renatus of Anjou, and Anthony the Loranger Earl of Vaudementium; this was of
the French faction, the other of the Burgundian; the Savoyan assisted Anthony,
who got the victory, and took Renatus prisoner.

Now Amadeus being sixty five years old, and growing weary of the world,
reputing with himself the hazard, vanity, and uncertainty of humane affairs,
resolves to change his course of life, and to persuade some of those Knights on
whom he had always most relied, to do the like; but first he picks out two of
them, whom he took aside into a private place, and acquainted them if you will
look upon the actions of Princes, whatsoever good success they have in wars
and government, is ascribed to fortune, or to their Counselors, or the
courage of their soldiers; but if any thing falls out amiss, if a battle or
City be lost, the fault is presently imputed to the Prince, as being either
careless, or treacherous, or timorous: I will say nothing of the continual
jealousies and suspicions of Princes; in time of war they are still fearful
lest their counsels may be betrayed, or their persons delivered up to the
enemy, in time of peace they are afraid of insurrections; they are also still
molested with the unbridled desire of domination, preferring that to all rights
of affinity and consanguinity: it is also madness to count them happy because
they possess much, for the greater their possessions are, the greater are
Lewis, yet reserving to my self the chiefest power and command.]

The two Knights hoping that the Duke would not continue long in this
Ripallium, where about a mile from the Town stood a large and pleasant building
upon the bank of the lake Lausanna, which Amadeus in his younger years had
built there for pleasure; there stood also a Monastery dedicated to S. Maurice,
whom Amadeus his ancestors highly honored as Aeneas Sylvius, afterward Pope
Pius the 2. saw this Duke in this habit, attended upon by ten Knights in the
same habit, and of the same order. But this sudden departure and resolution of
the Duke did much amaze his Nobility, being no ways acquainted with his
counsels in this; all his subjects also were much troubled Savoy should receive
no damage thereby, therefore wished them to persevere in their wonted
allegiance; In the interim he sends for all the chief men of his dominions,
desiring his two sons might be brought to him; then he declares Lewis his
eldest son Prince of Piemont, and his younger Earl of Geneva, and so delivers
over to Lewis the government of all his Provinces on both sides of the Alps,
but reserving to himself the supreme power, neither did he lay aside the title
of Duke, nor would he have any thing of concernment acted without his knowledge
and approbation. At last he dismisses the Assembly or Parliament, wishing them
to retire to their homes, and to be obedient to his Sons; twenty of his
domestic servants he retained with him, the rest departed with great sorrow.

The Duke took great pleasure in conferring with the Prior of that Covent, as
to grieve or to be troubled when we are separated from them; let us part
without repining with our wealth, lands and possessions, by which oftentimes
the mind is clogged, Gods anger provoked, and much mischief procured; so shall
we find a new light shine in our souls; and we shall become new creatures,
having put off the skin of our old natures, so shall our souls be fitted like
wax to receive new impressions of grace, when the old characters of our froward
and perverse dispositions are obliterated, which is effected by the benefit of
a retired life, by which our exorbitant and boiling affections are cooled, and
the unruly motions of our minds, like so many wild beasts are tamed; by this
means the venomous weeds of pride, lust, hatred, covetousness,

The Council of Basil (a Town in Helvetia upon the Rhine) being called first by
Pope Martin, then by Pope Eugenius, for settling the controversies of Husse, as
we have already said; after the controverted points were determined Julian the
Cardinal, Pope Eugenius his Apostolical Legate, a reformation of the Hierarchy
was urged: Philip Duke of Millan a great enemy to Eugenius, stirred up the
Princes and Cardinals against him, accusing him of diverse crimes; being cited,
he refuses to come, but sends his Legates, whereupon the Cardinals, with the
rest of the Synod, depose Eugenius, and substitute in his place this Amadeus,
who for his sanctity and piety was now grown famous; Eugenius in vain goes
about to dissolve the Synod, and calls another at Ferraria, which because of
the plague was translated to Florence. Amadens, now called Felix the 5. is sent
unto by his son in law the Duke of Millan, and the Fathers of the Synod to
acquaint him with his Peter Moravius, an. 1294. who though a professed
Anachorite of the Celestine Order, yet accepted of the Pontificat, being
altogether ignorant what belonged to that high employment, and so having sat
six months, was deposed, and ended his life in prison; prosperity is more
dangerous then adversity; this is oftentimes mastered, that is harder to be
overcome: Thus he excused himself; but at last by the importunity Philip of
Millan, and the earnest entreaty of his other friends, and chiefly his sons,
who thought this dignity conferred on the father for his worth, redounded to
the childrens honor, he submitted himself to the pleasure of the Synod: so,
the election being ratified, he is honored by the Pontificial habits which the
Legates clothed him with. Shortly after he takes his journey for Basil, being
accompanied with all his Nobility; when he came, all the Cardinals,
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, with the rest of the Clergy, Lawyers, and all
that were there in the City flock in great multitudes to meet him, so that many
were killed in the press; he receives his sacred Orders by degrees and
intervals of time; then being by the accustomed ceremonies made Bishop, he is
brought between two Cardinal Deacons to a Theater erected over against the
Town Hall; after he was set down, the Cardinal on his left hand takes off his
Episcopal Mitre, and the other Cardinal on his right hand sets upon his head
the Pontificial; the rest of the Cardinals and Clergy in their Ecclesiastic
habits stood round about him, the multitude in the interim with joyful shouts
and acclamations wishing all happiness to the new Pope; then the two Teutonic
Knights carrying a banner with a black cross in a silver field upon it, which
are the Arms of that Order: after him went a Nobleman of Savoy carrying a
Jerusalem: the horses of these Standard-bearers were in rich trapings, and
themselves in complete Armor (except their heads) covered with copes or rich
robes of silk, on which were imbroidered their Arms: after these twelve
milk-white horses richly traped with silk and gold were led, then four
Gentlemen with Targets, every one carrying a red hat on a spear, these were
followed by the Popes Chamberlains, after whom went the Princes Ambassadors,
and Roman Nobility, whom the Apostolical Subdeacon carrying the cross
followed, he was ushered by two Apparitors with their Maces; then Aenaeas
Sylvius, afterward Pope: after these followed the Advocates of the Consistory,
the singing men, etc. and after them two Subdeacons, a Greek and a Latin;
then rode the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, etc. next to them the Cardinals,
and last of all, the Pope on a white horse richly adorned with gold and
scarlet, eight Noblemen Basil; then having named who should be the Officers and
Ministers of his Court, he creates some eminent and learned men Cardinals,
among the rest was Panormitan the great Doctor of the Decrees, who was employed
by Pope Eugenius to plead for his right in the Council of Basil, but when he
came thither he pleaded against him; he afterward

Amadeus by accepting of the Pontificate, gave occasion to a new schism, which
is reckoned the 27. The French, Switzers, Millanois, Neapolitans, and those of
Piemont sided with Felix and the Savoyans; but the Venetians favored Eugenius,
being born there, so did the Florentines and Thuscians. Hence ensued a long war
between Eugenius, the King of Spain, and the Duke of Millan. Philip Duke of
Burgundy adhered to Eugenius, though he was the son of Felix his wife.
Frederick the Emperor first held with Felix, but afterward he sided with
Eugenius, who was now become a new man, and by his elemency and bounty had got
most men's affections from Felix. Upon this the Italian Princes enter into a
confederacy, with whom joined also the Duke of Millan, that he might not seem
to be singular. About this time, Balthazar Offida Governor of Bononia, for his
cruclties and injustice is apprehended by Francis Sfortia, (author of the
confederacy between the Venetians and Florentines) and sewed within a Bears
skin raw as yet and bloody, so that he had no use of hands or Philip Duke of
Burgundy not only got most of the Princes to fall off from Felix, but likewise
persuaded Charles the French king to do the same: hereupon Charles sends
Ambassadors to Rome, Basil and Savoy, to mediate for an accord between the two
Popes; in the mean 1446.
time Eugenius falls sick and dies, the 15. year of his Pontificate, and the
60. of his age, to whom succeeded Nicolaus the fifth. Lewis the son of Felix
the Pope, labors much with the French king to stand for Pope Nicholas, that so
peace may be established in Christendom; for he was sorry that the blame of
this schism should be laid on his father, who deserved it not, being as all
his Charles upon this sends his Ambassadors to Lions, wishing Lewis of Savoy to
do the like, and to procure some Legates from Basil, that meeting together they
may consult how peace might be settled in Christendom.

The next July after, there arrived at Lions, besides the Kings Ambassadors,
the Archbishop of Trevers, and Legates from Colen and Saxony; Pope Felix sent
Lewis Alleman the Cardinal: these consulted till November; at last it was
agreed, they should give Felix a meeting at Geneva; thither when they came,
they met with other Legates sent from France, England, Sicily, and other parts.
Felix, who against his will accepted of the pontificate by the persuasion of
Panormitan the Abbot, and some Cardinals who were unwilling to be deposed, does
resolve willingly to divest himself of it; therefore openly in the Synod of
Lausanna (for that of Basil was dissolved by the Dolphin) Felix aiming more at
the general good, then his own honor and emolument, renounceth the papacy,
transferring all his right he had to it upon Pope Nicholas; which fact was
highly commended and admired by the Synod, as may be seen by the testimony they
gave him, and which they left upon record to all posterity, the sum of which
was this: Having blessed him, and wished him all happiness, they commend him
for his piety, modesty, love of peace, and liberality toward the Church, who
in such a time of distraction would rather suffer himself then Sabinia,
Cardinal of the Church of Rome, perpetual Vicar and Apostolical Legate over
Savoy, Piemont, Montsferrat, Salusses, Asten, the province of Lions, Auspurgh,
Lausanna, Basil, Strasburgh, Constance, and some other neighboring cities and
diocesses, and withal to appoint him in the Church of God the second place
after the Pope, who was to rise whenever Felix came into his presence, and to
present his mouth (not his foot) to be kissed: And because he preferred peace
to the greatest honor on earth, they decree therefore that he shall wear the
Pontifical habits and arms, except the Fishers ring, the Cross Corpus Christi
must be left for the Pope; besides, whenever he passes beyond the borders of
his own Legatship, he may use the Arms and power of a Legate; they exempt him
also from his personal appearance in the Court of Rome, or at a General
Council. These honors and privileges the Synod thought him worthy of, 1449.
for his excellent parts, and chiefly for removing the schism and causing
peace by his vnluntary resignation of the highest place on earth. After this he
returns to his Cloister, where he spent the rest of his life in devotion, and
then resigned his soul to God, anno 1452. some write 1459.

CHAP. V.
A Prosecution of the Savoyan History, from the year 1452. till the

TO Amadeus succeeded his son Lewis, a great follower of his fathers virtues.
He performed exemplary justice upon Bolomerius the Chancellor of Savoy, a
wicked and covetous man, who had made himself extreme rich by oppression, who
for his own ends and gain kept Felix longer in the Pontificate then he was
willing, for had it not been for this wretch he had resigned it long before.
Lewis commands him to be apprehended, who being convicted of high crimes, is
condemned to be drowned in the lake with a great stone at his neck, to the
great content of the Nobility, to whom he had Philip Maria Duke of Millan died:
He had beheaded his former wife, to marry with Mary the sister of this Lewis.
But the people being weary of tyranny, which they had suffered under him and
his predecessors, resolve now to assert their liberty; therefore they choose a
Government of twelve men in their city, overthrow the castle, and tear Philips
last will in pieces; and withal they send to Frederick 3. Emperor a Cup of gold
of great price, with promise to send him every year such another, that he would
not suffer any to bear rule over them hereafter. The Venetians upon this took
occasion with a great Army to seize upon Placentia, Cremona, and other cities
belonging to the Duchy of Millan. Francis Sfortia, Philips son in law, after
Lewis of Savoy perceiving, he seiseth upon Valentia a city near to him, and
some other places. About this time also a war was raised by Charles 7. of
France, against this Lewis of Savoy and Philip Duke of Burgundy, because Lewis
had betrothed his daughter Carola without his knowledge to the Dolphin his
son, and because Philip had received and entertained the Dolphin when he fled
out of France; and withal the King sends him this message, That in
entertaining his son, he cherished a Fox in his bosom, which would
hereafter devour his Chickens, which proved a true prophecy. The Dolphin
being impatient of delays, deals with the Burgundian to send to Savoy, that he
might at last Savoy, Duke Lewis thought his message very just and reasonable,
therefore sends his Daughter with a great train to the Dolphin at Namurs, where
she was presently married to him.

The French king was much troubled at this match; therefore the Army which he
had provided for taking in some Towns of Picardy, and some places from the
Burgundian, he turns against the Savoyan; the rather, because he could do no
good against the Burgundian, who had foreseen and prevented the French plots:
besides, the King pretended that the Duchy of Millan belonged to the French
crown, therefore by a Herald demands from the Savoyan Valentia and other towns
which he had taken there; he also accused the Savoyan for making incursions
upon France, and some write that the Savoyan Nobility underhand stirred up the
French against Lewis, because he used them roughly for advising his father to
retain his right to the Papacy: but at last the controversy was taken up by
the Popes Legate at Lions, who was sent to make peace between France and
England. Lewis the second son of this Duke Lewis, married with Carola the only
daughter of John King of Cyprus, by whom he obtained that Kingdom: but James
the bastard brother of Carola, being assisted by the Sultan of Egypt, thrust
Lewis out of his kingdom, and overthrew his army, which Duke Lewis and the
Knights of Rhodes had sent thither; and so this wicked bastard obtained the
kingdom. Queen Carola fled to Rome, where she was entertained by Pope Pius the
second, who said, that justly her husband had lost that kingdom, whose father
Duke Lewis had been so averse, and slow in sending aid against the Turks and
Sarazens. Amadeus the eldest son of this Duke Lewis, resembling much his father
and grandfathers qualities, delighting more in peace then Philip, a youth of a
comely presence and stature, and of an active heroic spirit: Duke Lewis the
father understanding how his peoples affections were set upon Philip, began to
be jealous of him, the rather because he himself was grown infirm and unweildy,
his son young active and lusty; therefore he undertakes 1464.
a journey to Lewis the eleventh of France his son in law, with his eldest son
Amadeus, and being highly incensed complains grievously of his youngest son:
King Lewis wished his father in law not to trouble himself, he would take a
course to secure his son Philip, to whom presently the King sends a young
Philip suspecting no hurt, goes presently to the King, by whom (against his
promise) he is detained, and sentto the Castle of Lothesia, where he was kept
as a prisoner two years together, to the great grief of the Savoyan Nobility,
who loved him and hated the father: About the end of these two years Duke Lewis
died at Lions, whether he came to speak with the French King, the twenty sixth
year of his government; for he took not the style of Duke till his father was
created Pope: His heart was buried in the Church of the Caelestines, which
there he built by the command of his father; his body was transported Geneva,
where he lies entombed with his wise Anna.

His son Amadeus the ninth, and third Duke of Savoy succeeded, a prince 1466.
in goodness and integrity nothing inferior to his Father and Grandfather,
but of an infirm body, and oftentimes subject to the falling sickness: He
delighted no way in war, but having settled all at home, he went to the French
king with his Sister Bona, who was fled to him, being driven out of Millan by
the tyranny of the Sfortii. The king entertained him courteously, and with so
much respect, that his subjects of Savoy observing so great a king did thus
honor him, were content to live quietly and obediently under him; he was so
open-handed to the poor, and fed so many every day, that his Nobility

To him succeeded Philbert his Son, the first of that name, and fourth Duke of
1471.
Savoy; he was but four years old when his father dyed: His mother Iolanda a
wise Matron, and Sister to Lewis the eleventh the French King, undertook his
tuition; at which Lewis of France and Charles of Burgundy aimed, being potent
Princes both, and both having an interest in Savoy by diverse affinities; but
they were of different minds and dispositions: Iolanda prudently kept them
both off, by making fair weather with both, till Charles was overthrown in the
battle at Granson, where he lost above thirty hundred thousand crowns; then
she changed her mind, which had been till now more inclined to Charles; and
sides altogether with her brother of France: This being observed by Charles, who
lost another battle about three weeks after the former, and considering with
himself how much he was now weakened, and what prejudice Iolanda should make the
French King Protector of Savoy; by the advice of the Bishop of Geneva, and of
his brother the Earl of Rhomontium, he seizes upon Iolanda, and commands her
to be brought with all her family into Burgundy, where she was kept as a
prisoner. But when Charles thought he had been sure of Philbert and his mother,
he found that their keepers had deluded him by conveying the Child to
Camerinum, a place out of all danger, whither the Bishop of Geneva came, a
wavering and covetous man, and who upon the incitements of a Knight of Rhodes,
employed by the French King to work upon the Bishop, forsakes the Burgundian,
and withal delivers up to the King both the Child Philbert, and his little
brother Charles, Camerinum and Montmelian, then seiseth on the place where
Iolanda's Treasure and Wardrobe were, which he reserves for himself: This
highly discontented the Burgundian, considering what loss he had sustained in
the war which he undertook for the Earl of Rhomontium brother to this Bishop,
which war at last cost him his life at Nancy, by the treachery of one
Campob^chius; and so he found that the French King had truly prophesied of his
son, that he would prove a Fox.

In the mean while, Iolanda desirous of liberty, and to see her children,
employes a Nobleman of Piemont in a message to her brother of France, for that
purpose; who though he had no good correspondency with his Sister, yet France,
who accordingly sends Charles Amboise governor of Campagnie with some forces,
who passing without resistance through the Burgundians country, enters the
Castle of Roveretia which was carelessly kept, and brings away Iolanda with her
family into Savoy, near to the French Territories. King Lewis goes from Lions
to Turou, there to receive his Sister, where having provided fair lodgings for
her, sends diverse of his Nobility to meet her, and he himself with all his
train at the town gates receives and salutes her merrily by the title of Lady
of Burgundy. After some complements, he brings her to her lodging, giving order
that she should be used with all respect and accommodations: yet for all this,
they Philbert to be instructed in the Delphinat by Luisius a Nobleman there,
in the French tongue and manners, that so he might have the greater affection
to France: To this the mother assented; but when the King perceived that the
Savoyan Nobility intended to exclud Luisius, and to undertake the care of the
Child themselves, he causes him to be removed from Turin (called of old
Taurinum, a City in Piemont, and which anciently was the seat of the
Longobards) to Grenoble or Gratianopolis, so called from the Gratian that
enlarged and beautified it; now it is the chief City of the Delphinat, and
honored by Lewis II with a Parliament. There Philbert was married to Blanca
Maria daughter to Galeacius Duke of Millan, being both young and of the same
age: therefore Galeacius undertook the tuition of his young son in law, which
he performed carefully, and with great commendations, in spite of Johannes
Ludovicus Bishop of Geneva the Child's Uncle, who by sinistrous ends endeavored
to get him into his custody; but Galeacius by a plot seized upon this turbulent
Bishop at Vercellis, and sent him prisoner to Turin; so the Child escaped this
danger, which the year after he could not avoid: for having made a journey to
see Charles the eighth of France, his Uncles son at Lions, he fell suddenly
sick, not without suspicion of Poison given him by some of the Bishops friends,
and so died the fourteenth year of his age, and the tenth of his Principality,
to the great grief of his 1481.
people; for he was a young Prince of great hopes, and of a sweet disposition.
A blasing Star about that time presaged this fatality.

To Philbert succeeded his brother Charles the first, the fifth Duke of Savoy,
a young Prince no less eminent in virtues and natural endowments then any of
his predecessors; but in the flower of his age and fortunes, having scarce been
Duke seven years, he was taken away by untimely death: It was suspected that
Lewis Marquess of Salusses had secretly 1488.
caused him to be poisoned, because he had got a great victory over him; for
the Marquess refused to do the homage due from him according to the custom
of his predecessors to the Dukes of Savoy, therefore Duke Charles made war upon
him, overthrew his Army, and confiscated his whole estate as a Rebel; but three
years after (Charles being now dead) he recovers by the Duke of Millans means
his estate again. This young Prince Gabiens, a people inhabiting the Alps of
Liguria: he left behind him one son called Charles the second, or Johannes
Carolus, being yet scarce one year old; his mother Blanca, because of the Dukes
infancy, retained the government of Savoy, to the great content of the people;
for she was a vigilant, mild, and just Princess, whose chief care was to
breed her son in virtue and piety, therefore suffered none to converse with
him in his minority, but such as were eminently pious and prudent, knowing how
dangerous it is for young Princes, being yet but tender plants, apt to receive
any impression, to be ill seasoned; and how prone they are by nature to drink
in the poison of evil counsel. About this time Charles the Apulia, against
the kingdom 1494.
of Naples; as he was passing through Savoy, Blanca in her best equipage met
him, and presented him with a goodly Horse, which did him great service in that
war, and carried him out of many dangers; she bestowed also upon him toward
his charges great sums of gold and silver. The year after Duke Charles died,
the seventh year of his Dukedom.

To him succeeded Philip Earl of Bressa, and governor of the Delphinat under
King Charles; this was a wise man, whose counsel Blanca always followed. 1495.
He was the son of Lewis, and grandchilde to Amadeus the eighth Duke of Savoy;
being now aged, he accepts the government of the Duchy; he Michael, and great
Steward of France: having governed this Duchy one year and six months, he died
at Camerinum, and left for his successor his son Philbert the second, surnamed
the Fair; he was bred in the Court of King Lewis of France, 1497.
with his son Charles the eighth, for Lewis had married his Aunt Carola: he
waited on King Charles in the Neapolitan war; he ruled his people with great
moderation and wisdom; he assisted King Lewis the twelfth in the wars of
Millan with two hundred Courissers, whilst as yet he was but young. When
Philip Archduke of Austria returned out of Spain, and was come to Lions, where
peace is concluded between the French and Spainards, between Caesar and the
Archduke, and their confederates, He went to visit Margaret his Sister, wife
to this Philbert, by them both he was entertained sumptuously 1503.
as he was returning to the Netherlands. At last this Philbert died, the twenty
fifth year of his age, about the sixth year of his government: this year
wherein he died was fatal to multitudes of people, by reason of the great
infection of the air: this was a rich prince, for besides the dominions and
revenues of his Predecessors, he added a yearly revenue of twelve thousand
Ducats, paid him by the Millanois: His virtuous wife Margaret erected a Chapel
after his death, in which she entombed him. His successor was Charles the
third, brother to Philbert by the father, but not by the mother, which was the
occasion of great wars afterward.

CHAP. VI.
The Helvetian History, from the beginning till the year 1481.

THe Switzers in the Romans time were a warlike people, which they Cassius the
Consul; they intended to have forsaken their country; and to seat themselves
elsewhere; but Caesar then being Proconsul of France, puts a stop to their
proceedings, by hewing down the Bridge of Geneva, and raising a Fort between
the Lake and Mount Iura; first, by entreaties, then by their strength, they
strove to move Caesar for a passage; but when they saw they were still defeated
by the Romans, they cast themselves at Caesar's feet, who upon delivery of
Pledges, commanded them to return home, and rebuild their demolished Cities,
which they did, and lived afterward in obedience, and within their own borders,
till the coming of the Sarazens into Italy; then their aid was desired by the
Pope (as we have already Sarazens. After this they lived quietly at home,
employing themselves in Husbandry, until such time as their Nobility began to
tyrannize over them; then being conscious of their ancient valor and continued
liberty, made resistance. About the year 1300. the Counts of Auspurge
(afterward Dukes) had placed a debauched Gentleman in one of their Castles of
1300.
Urania in Valstreet, who having done diverse insolences, and ravished a young
Lady, was by her two brothers slain. The Count offering to do justice on the
Valderwaldians by this example were animated to the like outrage, complaining
also of their Nobility: Hereupon the Suavi with those of Uro, Zurich and
Underwald, entered into confederacy: the Nobility, to suppress in time this
increasing power, raise all the forces they can, but with ill success; Leopold
Duke of Austria was defeated by them, and so not long after was Charles Duke of
Burgundy: Thus for their valor they were courted by diverse Princes, chiefly by
the French, for whom they did good service against the Spaniard, both in Italy
and France; since Lewis 11. Cantons are now so divided, that eight of them are
of the Catholic Faith, and in pension with the King of Spain, the other five
are of the Protestant Religion, and serve the French King; who when he
demands any forces, they call a Diet at the kings charges, who also defraieth
the soldiers wages. Albertus of Austria had many bickerings with the Switzers,
after they had Cantonized themselves, and was preparing a great army against
them, but being murdered by some assassinates, and his children busy in
revenging his death, there was nothing acted against the Switzers, Henry the
seventh Lutrelburg who succeeded, confirmedthe privileges of the three
Cantons, who were so vigilant to prevent the plots of Albertus his sons, that
they could do them no hurt. These three had first made a league for ten years,
but upon a 1315.
great victory over their enemies, they made a perpetual league, with which
they acquainted Lewis the Emperor by their Agents, and with their late
victory: Upon this, in a Diet at Norinberg, the Princes of Austria are
condemned of treason, and their whole estate had they in these Helvetian
Cantons are confiscated to the Emperor, and the Cantons liberties confirmed,
and then they swear homage to him; who sent John Albergius to be their
governor: he promised to defend them from the power and claim of Austria, and
that they should have their own Courts of Judicature in their own Country, both
in civil and criminal causes. The Austrians having received so great an
overthrow by the Switzers, and finding the Emperor raising war against them,
they were forced to make a Truce with these Cantons, whom shortly after the
Pope and Bishop of Constance excommunicated; and Frederick of Austria, who
named himself Emperor, proscribed them: but by command from Ludovick the
Emperor, they were absolved by the Archbishop of Mentz. The Pope having
excommunicated 1327.
Ludovick, the Switzers make a league with those Cities of the Empire which
stood for Ludovick against Frederick of Austria; and upon this, Lucerna an
ancient City upon the river Rusa, entered into league with the three Cantons,
which highly displeased the Austrians, under whose jurisdiction hitherto this
City had been: In it were diverse Citizens that favored the Austrians, these
had plotted to let in the Austrian horse by night, but the vigilance of the
other party discovered and prevented the plot: diverse skirmishes the Lucernans
had after this with the Austrians, in which these were still worsted; who
seeing they could do no good with open hostility, fall to persuade the
Townsmen to break off their league with the three Cantons, showing there was
more help Canton League; a solemn Oath is taken by the plotters, and they wore
a badge of red upon their sleeves to be known by; the massacre was to be acted
the 29 of June, but was discovered by a Boy that very night it should have been
put in execution; for being assembled in the dark, the Boy passing by,
overheard their discourse, and that they were to kill the Watch, and open the
Gates to an Army of Horse, that came to assist them: the Boy acquaints some
Butchers with this, who were making merry together; they inform the
Magistrates, who sudenly with a strong guard seize upon the plotters: Cantons
for aid, who dispatch 300 soldiers for Lucerna, to guard the City; the
plotters are brought to their trial, but because diverse men of quality were
among them, the three towns interceded for them, who solemnly swear, never to
stir against the Helvetian League: It was also ordered, no clandestin
conventicles or private oaths should be hereafter in that City. About this
time, the Austrians were reconciled to Frederick the Emperor, to whom they
complain against the confederate Cantons; these excuse their revolt, as being
thereto necessitated: at last, Caesar orders that the Cities of Tigurum, Berne,
and Basil, should make peace between them; who by their Legates made a Truce of
thirty months, which after this was renewed: some 1334.
hostilities were acted during this time, but no open war, till Tigurum
confederated with these Cantons, and shortly after Bern, with some other towns.

Tigurum at first adhered to Frederick of Austria, against Ludovick of Bavaria,
but after fell off to Ludovick, when the other had resigned the Empire for a
great sum of money, for payment of which Tigurum with three other towns were
pawned by Ludovick. The Tigurans to free themselves, promise to be no less
faithful to the Bavarian, then they were to the Austrian: this so offended the
Austrians and the Pope, that the town was excommunicated, and continued so 18
years together, the Priests having forsaken it, with the Monks, only the
Franciscans went out at one gate, and entered at the other: In the mean while,
Rapersvila who had a harbor for all Tigurin fugitives; who there being but
twenty miles distant, did much annoy the Magistrates of Tigurum, therefore they
raise an Army and lay siege to Rapersvila, which they were forced to raise
again, because their provision failed, and hearing that the Earl of Habespurg a
great Patron of the fugitives was gone to Grinovium a Castle at the head of the
Tigurin lake, they hastened thither under the conduct of Earl Toggius; in the
first encounter the Tigurins were worsted, and Toggius taken prisoner; but
after they had better manned and fitted their ships, they fell again upon the
enemy, and gave them a great defeat, in which Earl Habespurg was slain, with
diverse Gentlemen; in revenge of whose death, Toggius at Rapersvil is cut in
pieces: the next year a peace was concludeded between 1337.
the Tigurins and the enemy, that the banished Citizens should pay six hundred
marks of silver, and should continue in exile five years; but this peace held
not long, for the banished performed not the Articles, therefore by the
Emperors leave, their houses and estates are confiscate; the year after, by
the mediation of Agnes Queen of Hungary, daughter of Albert 1. of Austria, the
peace is renewed, but soon after broken, because diverse of the Nobility of
Germany disliking the Tigurin popular government, assisted and encouraged the
banished Citizens, therefore the Tigurins to make themselves the stronger made
a league with the Citizens of Constantia and S. Gall, as likewise with Basil,
they made also diverse Knights of the Rhodes free of their City, to indeer the
Nobility more to them, because most of that Order were Gentlemen; this much
disheartened the exiles who despairing now to recover the City by strength, plot
with Earl Habespurg (his son whom the Tigurins slew not long before) and some
other of the Nobility, and with those of their own faction within the Town, and
such as were discontented, and delighted in innovation, to surprise suddenly
the Consul and his adherents in the night, and so to seize on the City, but the
plot was discovered the same night it should have been acted, by a servant
which acquainted the Consul; whereupon presently the great Bell of the City is
rung out, a

The Inhabitants of the lesser Town upon the left side of the River, fought
stoutly against the enemy upon the bridge, which they had prepossessed by means
of a Fisherman who discovered the plot to them; this Fisherman carried some
of the plotters in his boat, and having overheard a whispering that they meant
to kill him lest he should betray them, overturned the boat Habespurg, the rest
by means of the darkness escaped, the dead bodies were kicked and trod upon
three days together; the day after, seventeen of the prime plotters were
broken on the wheel, some beheaded, the Earl was imprisoned, and his Army
without the Town in fear and confusion ran home. Shortly after the Consul
Brunius with an Army besieges Rapersvil, the nest and harbor of the plotters,
the Town on the third day yielded, some of the plotters in it were killed, some
escaped; the Townsmen swear the same fealty to Tigurum, which they used to give
to their Earl: Marchia the Earls Country with fire and sword, so that the
Inhabitants were forced to swear fealty to the Tigurins; but when they heard
that Albert of Austria was raising forces to aid the Habespurgians, and to keep
their Rendevouz at Rapersvil, they burn the Town to the ground. Some Towns of
Alsatia made league with Frederick of Austria against the Tigurins, who had
taken an hundred and seventy Townsmen of that Country prisoners, the Alsatians
to recover their prisoners raised an Army by the help of their neighbors, the
Tigurins wisely declined this war, being already exhausted, and therefore
restored the prisoners: After this the Tigurins send a petition to Charles the
4. Emperor, complaining of the wrongs done them by Earl Habespurg and his
confederates, excusing their own actions, showing their innocence, and desiring
his assistance for the maintenance of their liberty, being willing to submit to
his Imperial commands, if so be the Austrian would be quiet; the Emperor
answers that he would endeavor to pacify the Austrian, and their other
enemies, but could not force them, being their power was greater then his,
therefore wishes them to use some moderate transaction with their enemies; upon
this the Tigurins send Legates with presents Albert of Austria, who at first
gave them good words, but at the second meeting was rough with them, being
incensed by the Nobility, accusing them for destroying both the old and new
Rapersvil, for wasting Marchia which belonged to him as supreme Lord, therefore
wishes them to restore what they had taken, to rebuild what they had
demolished, and to make pecuniary satisfaction for what they had wasted, and so
he would pardon them; the Legates replied, that their City had suffered much
wrong by these places in harboring and aiding the fugitives and rebels,
therefore they humbly beseech him, that he would not urge them to such
inconveniences; the Prince in Tigurins did not make reparation for these wrongs
willingly, they should be forced to do it.

The Tigurins understanding by their Legates the Princes resolution; of his
forces now raising, of their great danger and weakness, and that there was no
hope of help from Caesar; they resolve to enter into a confederacy with the
Helvetian Towns, seeing they all had the same common enemy the Austrian; and
Tigurum, by reason of the Lake lay so fit for commerce with those 1351.
Towns; upon this Legates are sent who are kindly entertained, and the league
ratified, in which the first place in all public actions is given to Tigurum,
(though it was the fifth that entered into the Helvetian league) because of the
Austrian to besiege the Town, fearing lest by their example more Towns would
combine against him, therefore with an Army of 2000. horse, and 20000. foot, he
sits down before the City, which the four confederate Towns had sufficiently
manned and filled with provision; after some light velitations, they came to a
parley by the mediation of some friends, in which it was agreed they both should
refer their cause to the Queen of Hungary, this was not liked by the four
confederate Towns, because the Queen was the Austrians sister; yet the Tigurins
confiding in her integrity, persuaded the four Towns to assent, which was done,
and pledges given by the City; with the Queen are joined Austrian, wishing the
Tigurins to give him satisfaction for his losses, they also laid fines upon the
other confederate Towns for revolting from Austria: this sentence was ratified
by Queen Agnes, the Switzers promise to stand to the verdict, though it was
unjust; but the Duke not content with this, demands John of Habespurg of the
Tigurins without ransom, which was denied by them, wherefore against his
promise he imprisons the Tigurin hostages, and renews the war.

The Switzers finding no hope of peace, resolve with joint forces to seize upon
Glarona a Town and valley of twelve miles in length, encompassed with the Alps
except in one place, which after this expedition was fortified with Austrian
government, submit themselves without resistance to the confederate Towns, and
swear to be firm in their league with them; mean while the Tigurins send an
Army against Bada a garrison of the Austrians, which had done them much hurt,
they fire the Suburbs, and plunder the Country thereabout; but as they were
returning with the booty, they were encountered by 4000. Austrians, whom they
overthrew, being themselves not above 1300. strong, they slew 700. of the
enemy. The next year the Austrian in hope to recover Glarona, is defeated by
the Inhabitants, the like success he had in Suitia; diverse places on both sides
are spoiled: about this time also the City of Tugium made league with the
Switzers: this Town stands between the Tigurins and Suitians, and used to do
them much hurt; at last being weary of the Austrian government, after fifteen
days siege surrendered, conditionally swearing that if the Austrian within so
many days should send relief, they might return again to his obedience,
therefore they send to the Duke for help, but the Legates found him more careful
in providing food for his hawks, then aid for his people; therefore Switzers,
they made league with them: presently upon this Tigurum is besieged again by
the Austrian; but a month after by the Marquess of Brandeburgs means a peace is
made on these Articles, That John of Habespurg now three years a prisoner
should be released without ransom, and that the Austrian should freely
dismiss the imprisoned hostages; that Glarona and Tugium should be released
from their oath, and return to the obedience of Austria, in other things the
Switzers league should stand: Habespurgius is released without ransom, but so
were not the hostages, who were forced to pay 1600. crowns; Rapersvil is
fortified with a garrison which invaded the Tigurin Teritories, and killed
Tugium is again taken by the Switzers, and Bern sides with them.

Bern built by Berchtold Duke of Zermgia, who meeting with a Bear in that
place, called it Bern in Dutch; this City he bestowed upon the Empire, which
Frederick the 2. Emperor endowed with diverse privileges; afterward it being
oppressed by Earl Kyburgius, it took the Earl of Savoy for its protector; he
restored to this City her former liberty for the good service the Bernats had
done the Savoyan against the Burgundian: After this they had diverse wars with
Godofrid and Rodolph of Habespurg, with the Turks, Austrians, and others of
their neighbors, they beat the Underwalds in a battle: afterward they both
Switzerland, upon which Tigurum is the third time besieged by Charles the 4.
Emperor, and Albert of Austria: the Tigurins petition Charles that he would
not persecute them being an Imperial City, desiring nothing but the
conservation of their liberties, and willing to yield to any reasonable
demands; Charles upon this deals with the Austrian for an accord, which being
by him refused, the siege was raised without doing any thing, and five years
after peace was concluded between the Austrian and Tigurins, on these Articles:
1. That restitution be made on both sides. 2. That none of the Austrian
subjects be made free of Tigurum. 3. That none meddle with the Fee-lands of
others. 4. That the Tigurins hereafter make no leagues with the Austrian
subjects. 5. That the Switzers enjoy their own confederacies. Some
controversies after this arose about Tugium whether that was the Austrians, or
included within the Switzers confederacy: Charles his opinion was, that Tugium
was not in the confederacy, the Suiti were of the contrary mind; the matter
was long debated, at last a Truce of a 11. years was made, during which time,
Tugium and Glarona ^ained in the Helvetian league, yet they yielded subjection
and fealty to the Austrian, who placed governors over them yearly; this Truce
was continued for more years after: Albert being dead, his son Leopold who
hated the Switzers, and durst not himself make war, set the English of Angles
upon them; Austrian and Helvetian Territories, but were at length beaten and
driven home: After this Earl Kyburgius made war upon Berus, but being worsted,
was glad to make his peace with him. Some years after 1376.
the Austrian ^ell out with the Lucernat's, and hanged their Legates which they
sent for reparation of wrongs done by the Governors; upon this they desire the
help of the confederate Towns, who joining their forces, seize upon Rottenburg
belonging to the Austrian, and demolish the walls and forts thereof.

The Austrian Governors willing to fish in troubled waters, forced the 1385.
confederate Switzers to rise again in A^ms, for great massacres and outrages
committed upon some neighboring Towns and Castles of the Confederates; a great
battle is fought, in which Duke Leopold son to Albert is slain, and with him
676. of his Gentry; the Helvetians elated with this victory, fall upon the
enemies Forts and Castles, diverse of which they demolish, and take some of
their Towns; upon this a Truce is made for one year, which being ended, the
Austrian with 8000. men falls upon the Helvetian Territories with fire and
Austrian: at last a Truce of seven years was concluded, which was afterward
continued for twenty years; and at last a peace of fifty years was agreed upon.
The Abbot of S. Gall made wars upon Abbatiscella, a Town under his
jurisdiction, now one of the confederate Towns of Switzerland: the
controversies between the Abbot and 1401.
the Town, were often debated, but at last tried by the sword; the Abbot was
overthrown; upon this the Austrian takes his part, but still the Town
prevailed, Suitii, who took in diverse Towns and Forts; at length the Abbot was
fain to sue for peace, and leave the Townsmen to enjoy their liberty. Seven
years after this war, the Austrians and Helvetians renew their old quarrels,
and withal the wars; for Frederick of Austria having conveyed Pope John 22.
from the Council of Constance, he was prosoribed by the Emperor, and
excommunicated by the Council: hereupon the Confederates are by the Emperor
and Council absolved from their cath, and willed to break off the fifty years
peace. Verbigenum, Bada, and some other places of Austria were taken by the
Switzers.

In the year 1422. the Switzers sent an Army over the Alps to recover the 1425.
Town Lepontium taken from them by the Duke of Millan; sothey did in the year
1425. and the year after, but could not recover the Town, yet they wasted the
valleys belonging to the Duke. In the year 1436. a grievous 1436.
Civil war by the Austrians procurement arose among the Switzers, first between
Tigurum and Suitium; this was assisted by the Confederates: but in the year
1444. that memorable battle was fought near Basil between the French under the
Dolphin, afterward Lewis the 11. and the Switzers, who 1444.
beat the French that came to raise the Council of Basil, as we have said:
after this a peace is made. Not long after, the Austrian war followed against
1450.
Duke Sigismund, whom Pope Pius excommunicated, and stirred up the Switzers
against him; but after many skirmishes, by the means of Ludovic of Bavaria, a
peace is concluded, and six years after the Duke of Millan makes 1460. 1466.
1474. 1477.
peace with the Switzers; two years after this, the Austrian war is renewed,
and eight years after began the Burgundian war, which continued three years,
and ended with the death of the Duke: this war was caused by the Austrian; for
Sigismund Duke of Austria, being forced by bad success to make dishonorable
peace with the Helvetians, morgageth the lands which he had near them, to
Charles Duke of Burgundy, a proud and potent Prince in those days, purposely
that occasion of quarrels might be given between him and the Switzers, who sent
for a renovation of friendship, and the old league between Burgundian and
Switzers; but Hagenbachus governor under the Burgundian of those morgaged
Provinces, hindered the Helvetian Legates from having access to the Duke,
besides many affronts were put by him and others of the Nobility upon the
Helvetians; the people under his government, being wearied with oppression,
petition Sigismund of Austria their ancient Lord, to redeem his lands again,
which was obtained easily from the Duke, being of a gentle and easy nature:
but the Burgundian would not part with the hold he had of these lands, besides
that Hagenbachius did still more and more oppress his people, diverse wrongs
were done by the Burgundians to the Switzers.

In the mean time Lewis 11. of France, who hated the Burgundian, underhand
stirs them up against him, and furnishes them with money; to this end he makes
a league with them, and by his means also Sigismund is reconciled to the
Switzers; Renatus Duke of Lorain, the Cities of Strasburgh and Basil, with
their Bishops, enter into a league with them, and so do many other Towns. Mean
while Hagenbachius is taken prisoner, and beheaded; The Austrian Charles makes
war upon the Bishop of Colen, claiming a title to that Bishopric; against him
Frederick the Emperor raises an army, and commands the Switzers to hold the
Burgundian play at home; but no sooner had they entered Burgundy and defeated
the Burgundians, but the Austrian makes peace with the Burgundian, out of which
the Helvetians were excepted. Upon this, Charles turns all his forces against
the Confederates; in the first battle the Duke was beaten, who a little before
had against his promise hanged the soldiers in the garrison of Gramson, who
upon quarter had surrendered to him: In a second battle the Duke was again
defeated, having lost 26000 men: In the third conflict at Nancy in Lorain,
which was then besieged by the Burgundian, (against whom Renatus D. of Lorain
was assisted by the Helvetians) Charles was killed in the flight, and so by his
death the war ended. The next year after this Burgundian war, the Duke of
Millan and the Helvetians fell at odds, about some wrongs done by his subjects
to the inhabitants of the Valley of Lepontium; in this battle the Millanois
were defeated, but the next year by means of the French king were reconciled to
the Switzers, with whom the same year Pope Sixtus made a league, and granted
them large indulgences and privileges. About three years after this, Tigurum,
Bern, Lucerna, Friburgh, and Salodorum made a private league among themselves,
because in the last Burgundian war they thought Lucernates and their fellows
had not power to make a league without the general consent of all the
confederates: The matter after much debate is referred to Nicholas Underwald an
Eremite of great esteem among them, who disannulled the new league, and
persuaded them in a free Assembly or Parliament to end the controversy, and
withal that Friburgh and Salodor should be 1481.
received among the Canton towns; and so by this means there are now ten
confederate towns of Switzerland, and so this Commonwealth of ten Cantons Basil
and Scaphusium, and after these Abbatiscella were added; The former eight,
called the old Cantons, had continued before this addition of Friburgh and
Salodor, 125 years, so that all that time the Switzers commonwealth consisted
of eight Canton-towns only.

CHAP. VII.
A prosecution of the Helvetian History, till the year 1521.

FRiburg was built by Berchtold 4. Duke of Zeringium, some few years before
Bern: after his death, Bern fell to the Empire, and Friburg to the Earls of
Kyburg, by whom afterward this Town was sold to Ralph the Emperor, and since it
has continued under the house of Austria almost two hundred years: yet in the
year 1403. being oppressed by the Austrian Nobility, they made a perpetual
league with Bern, but yet continued under the Austrian dominion: for though the
Helvetian Cantons made a league among Friburg with Bern lasted 45 years; but
afterward in the wars between Savoy and Friburg, the Bernats adhered to the
Savoyans, with whom they had been a long time in league; but a year after the
war began, the Friburgers being worsted, were reconciled to Savoy, by the
mediation of the French, Burgundian, and Helvetians. The next year after this
peace was made, the Austrian comes to Friburg, to see if he could persuade them
to make war upon Bern; which when he could not do, but perceived that they
began to Friburgers made a league with Bern, and the Switzers; therefore these
in the Burgundian war sent a garrison of a thousand men to guard Friburg. After
which, Salodor entered into a confederacy with the Cantons.

Salodor, an ancient City, as appears by the Roman monuments in it, was upon
the incursions of the Huns and Francons into France demolished; but when the
French grew great, this Town was rebuilt, and placed under the Bishop of
Geneva; Under the German Emperors, this has always been one of the Ludovick
the Bavarian, and Frederick the Austrian were in competition for the Empire,
Salodor adhered to the Barbarian, whereupon they were excommunicate by the
Pope, and besieged by the Austrian; in that war the Bernats sent them a
garrison of four hundred soldiers: they had war also with Earl Kyburgius, and
were by him defeated: at last in the year 1351. they made a perpetual league
with Bern; there the Austrian war being ended, in which Leopold was slain, they
were reconciled to the Austrians. Lastly, after the Burgunian war, they were
with the Friburgers admitted into the Helvetian league; after which the
Helvetian Army was overthrown by the Millanois upon the Alps: the next year
after they aided Sigismund Duke of 1487.
Austria against the Venetians; after this they served the French King in his
wars against the Duke of Britany, and in Italy against the Neapolitans and the
confederate Italian Princes.

About three years after this, a Civil war arose among the Switzers by means
1490.
of the Abbot of S. Gall, who had begun to erect a new Covent; at which the
subjects of the Abbot were offended, as fearing that the relics of S. Gallus
would be removed from the place where they had continued so long, besides they
doubted the trade of Linnen-cloath which was made there, would be tra^ted to
Rosacum where the new Covent was begun; therefore suddenly having conspired
together, they fall upon the new building, and overthrow it; at this the Abbot
being incensed, desires the aid of the four Towns which were in league with
him, with whom some other Towns also joined; but this war ended without blood,
for the Abbatiscellans made peace with the Switzers; after this the City of S.
Gall being besieged, they also made their peace with the Helvetians, a fine was
laid upon the Abbots subjects, and so they were received into favor. The last
Austrian or Suevic war followed, begun by Frederick the Emperor, but pursued
by his son Maximilian after his fathers death: Frederick had caused a great
league to be made among the Princes, Cities, and many of the chief Nobility,
purposely to overthrow the Helvetian liberty, he was the head of this league
himself: Lewis 12. of France, claiming title to the Duchy of Millan, did
earnestly desire to be in league with the Switzers, which they willingly
embraced. All means of accord being tried, but to no purpose, a battle is
fought near Constantia, in which the Switzers were worsted, but the fight being
renewed the same day they beat their enemies, and so they did afterward in
eight several battles; the Austrians being broken with so many defeats, at
length by the mediation of Lewis Sfortia Duke of Millan, a peace is made, in
which the Helvetian James Medices Lord of Mussium.

As soon as the peace was made, Galcacius Viscount of Millan raised five
thousand Switzers against the Magistrates will, who told them they were bound
by league to aid the French, but by the help of these Switzers Duke Lewis
recovered Millan; yet afterward the Switzers not being able to resist the great
forces of the French before Novaria a Town of no strength, they made their
peace and went home; Duke Lewis thought to escape in the habit of an Helvetian
common soldier, but he was discovered, taken, and carried away prisoner into
France: the same year Ulricus, Duke of Wirtenberg, makes a league of twelve
years with the Switzers: Maximilian also the Emperor makes an hereditary
peace, or renews rather that which was made before by his father Duke
Sigismund, with the four Cantons of Tigurum, Bern, Urania, and Underwald. The
next year after, Basil and Scaphusa were taken into the 1501.
Helvetian confederacy, both these Cities are upon the Rhene; Basil is the
biggest of all the confederate Towns, and very ancient, for we read of it in
Ammianus Marcellinus; it was honored with diverse privileges by the German
Emperors, also with a Bishopric and University; it first was in league with
Tigur, Bern, and the three first Cantons, in the German troubles when Ludovic
the Bavarian was excommunicated by the Pope 1327. then afterward with the
Tigurins particularly, 1347. When the English plundered Alsatia under Leopold
of Austria, and were preparing to besiege Basil, the Cantons sent a strong
garrison to defend it, so that the English were fain to leave off their
enterprise, and the rather because Charles 4. was marching with his Army
against them. In the Austrian war, which Katherine of Burgundy the wife of
Leopold made against them, they received aid from Bern and Salodor, an. 1409.
(in the Council of Basil) with sixteen hundred men they defeated the Switzers
against Charles of Burgundy; but in the war between Maximilian and the
Switzers, Basil stood neuter, in which City at last peace was concluded between
the Emperor and Switzers by the mediation of Lewis Maria Duke of Mantua; in
fine, being hated and wronged by the Austrian, and the Nobility, they made a
perpetual league with the Switzers, anno 1501. Scaphusa so called from Scapha a
boat, because the boats that come from the lake of Constance along the Rhene,
do unload here, by reason of the great precipice of the River f^m high rocks;
the Town receives by this means great customs: at first the Abbot (...) that
place was the chief governor, afterward obtaining diverse privileges from the
Emperors, they shook off the Abbots power, but it was sold afterward by Lewis
of Bavaria to the Austrian, under whom it remained eighty five years, till the
Council of Constance, where Frederick of Austria for conveying away pope John
22. was proscribed by Sigismund the Emperor, and his estate confiscated, and
so this Town was added to the Empire: afterward Frederick 3. of the Austrian
family, being Emperor, bestowed it upon Duke Sigismund Austria, who sent his
Legates to take the oath of Allegiance to the Austrian, which they refused,
except they might retain their privileges; this would not be granted;
whereupon they made a league with the Switzers, an. 1454. which they constantly
observed after, wherefore they were diverse times assaulted and molested by the
Austrian, and at last proscribed for assisting the Helvetians against Sigismund
of Austria, by the command of Pope Pius, but they were afterward released from
this proscription at the Austrians charges: About the year 1479. the league
between the Switzers and Scaphusia was renewed for 25. years, in which the Urii
and Underwaldins were comprehended: At last having assisted the Helvetians both
in the Burgundian and Suevian Cantons is concluded for ever, an. 1501.

After the Switzers had made a league with France, they assisted Charles 8. and
Lewis in the Neapolitan wars, which proved unfortunate to Helvetia; for in the
first war they lost their health, being infected with the Neapolitan disease or
French pox, and in the second they lost their lives by the sword of the enemy,
who in two great battles overthrew them. An. 1507. they assisted the French
against the Ligurians, and refused to aid the Emperor Maximilian against the
French. An. 1509. they aided the French in the confederacy they made with
Spain, Pope Julius and the Emperor, against the Venetians. The next year after,
Pope Julius 2. made a league with the Switzers, who sent him 6000. Italy
against the Duke of Ferraria, who had seized on some Churchlands, but indeed
his aim was to drive the French out of Millan, which the Switzers perceiving
forsook the Pope, and returned home without their pay: next year 1511. a
perpetual league is made between the Switzers, and the houses of Austria and
Burgundy; the French upon the expiration of their league desired to renew it
again with the Switzers, who were unwilling because they feared the Popes
anger, for the French then were his enemies; besides, the French had refused to
continue the Switzers pay, after the league was expired; they drowned also the
Suitens Post with his letters, and sold in open Market the Cantons Badge, which
the Posts use to wear.

The French having beaten Pope Julius at Ravenna, the Switzers send into Italy
for his aid twenty thousand men, who joining with the Venetians (then
reconciled to the Pope) took Cremona and Ticinum, and drove the French quite
out of Millan, so that they had nothing left them but the Castle; upon this,
Pope Julius honors the Switzers with the title of [Defenders of the Church:]
Then sent to them Banners adorned with certain Images, with a sword and Cap of
maintenance, the Ensigns of liberty: Maximilian Sfortia by them being restored
to his fathers dominion, makes a league with them, and withal bestows on them
Lugano, Locarne, Mendrise, and the valley of Madie; he gave also to the
Confederate Rheti or Grisons the Val-Telin, or Vol^urene. Charles also Duke of
Savoy, whose Ancestors had made a private league with some of the Cantons,
makes now a new league for five and twenty years, with the twelve Cantons: The
French also desired their amity, which was refused, because they kept still the
Castle of Millan, and were found to corrupt some of them with bribes; wherefore
the French Legates are commanded to depart out of their Territories: Hence the
war is renewed, the French besiege Sfortia in Novaria with a great Army, in
which Town were four thousand Switzers, and eight thousand more were sent to
them; these obtained a great victory over the French, whom they drove out of
Italy; in this battle fourteen hundred Switzers were lost: after this victory
Maximilian Emperor falling off from the French Covenant, raised an Army of
sixteen thousand Switzers, with whom as many more voluntaries joined, these
were conducted into Burgundy against the French, to them Caesar added some
Regiments of horse under the Prince of Wirtenberge; these besieged Divio or
Diion, the capital City of Burgundy; Trimonil the Governor not being able to
hold out, made his peace with the Switzers on these conditions, that the King
should quit his claim to Millan, and should at certain times pay them six
hundred thousand crowns; for performance of this four Noblemen are given for
Hostages, yet the King would not ratify this agreement, because he would not
part with his claim to Millan; whereupon the Switzers resolve to put the
Hostages to death, if the King did not the sooner confirm the agreement, and
withal intended the next winter to invade France; the King upon this sends
Legates to conclude a perpetual peace with the Switzers, but the Kings
conditions were so unreasonable that nothing was done, save only that he
gained time, and hindered the invasion of France: in these meetings Abbatiscella
or Appenzel was added as the thirteenth Canton.

Abbatiscella is the name of the Country, and chief Town thereof; the Country
is seated above the Town of S. Gall, among high mountains upon the frontiers of
the Grisons, it has eight principal Towns or Parishes, the chief is
Abbatiscella, that is the Abbots Cel or Chamber; for the Abbots of S. Gall,
Lords of this Country, made their chief residence in this Town: these of
Appenzel made themselves free first by the sword, then by their money to the
Abbot; they had seven years war with Cuno Abbot of S. Gall, who was aided by
the Inhabitants about the lake Acronium or of Constance, as also by Frederick
Duke of Austria, the Bishop of Constance, the Earl of Wirtenberg, with diverse
others of the Nobility: these were defeated by Appenzel, which Gall assisted
against the Abbot; they took five Towns, and above sixty Castles, some of which
they demolished; in this war the Abbatiscellans joined league with the
Helvetians: at last Rupert the Emperor made peace between the Abbatiscillans
and their enemies, at Constance, an. 1408. after which they became a
Commonwealth, the form whereof they retain till this day; before this every
Town had their peculiar Ensign, and Assembly or Parliament, now they have but
one Ensign, and one Assembly for all. Three years after this peace, the Abbot
of S. Gall began to trouble the Appenzellians with new process, whereupon they
make a league with six of the Cantons; therefore upon complaint made by the
Abbot, they are proscribed German Princes, and Helvetian Cantons, to force the
Appenzellians to their duty: the Switzers utterly refused to make war upon
their confederates, but they mediated for a peace, which was concluded the
fourth year of their excommunication, after the Earl of Toggenburg had defeated
them in two several battles: this peace held not long, for the Gentry that were
their neighbors about the Acronium, or of Constance, intended to invade the
Abbatiscellians with their Cavalry, but they could do no good this way, for the
Abbatiscellians seized upon Rineck, and the valley of Regusce, an. 1445. the
Lords of these 1445.
places got them again to be proscribed, but gaining nothing by this, they sold
them their rights for six thousand Crowns: after this an. 1452. they made a
1452.
league with the seven Helvetian Cantons against the Austrians, Burgundians,
and the Suevians or Suaubeans: At last an. 1513. they were received in the
number of the Cantons. Now the five last Cantons, except Basil, were long
before their admission into this rank, confederate with the old Cantons; and
this privilege the Cantons have above their confederates, that they can give
their advice and suffrages in all public assemblies, they govern with equal
authority those that are under them, and are equal sharers in all booties got
in the wars.

Francis of Valois son-in-law to Lewis 12. of France, having succeeded to that
crown, resolves to prosecute the war against Millan, begun by Lewis. Against
him Maximilian the Emperor, Ferdinand King of Spain, Sfortia Duke of Millan,
Switzers, enter into a league, to whom was joined Pope Leo 10. The Switzers
Army consisted of 30000 foot; the French unwilling to encounter 1515.
with them, labor to draw them to a peace, which was easily obtained, because
they doubted the confederate Princes were not sincere to them, seeing they
received not their promised pay, besides the Emperor sent not the horse to
guard the foot, as he was bound to do, he suffered also diverse of the German
foot to serve the French king; the Popes and Spanish armies would not pass
over Po, nor join themselves with the Switzers: therefore being destitute of
help and pay, they made peace with the French, upon which twelve thousand went
home, the rest prepared to follow the next day: but Sfortia disliked the
conditions of peace, therefore with the Switzers that were of his guard and
some others he falls upon the French about the evening, and withal the Switzers
send to call back their fellows that were marching homeward, showing them in
what danger they were; upon this they return, a cruel encounter ensues, in
which diverse of the French Nobility lost their lives; at the first the Switzers
had the better, but in the next encounter were defeated, and so retreated to
Millan, where they left for the Duke a garrison of 1500 in the castle, and then
return home. Upon this defeat of the Switzers, the French seize upon the Duchy
of Millan, which the Emperor sought by force to recover the year following, but
could not. In the interim, the French make an. 1521. All the Cantons joined in
this league, except the Tigurins, who could never be induced 1521.
to assent to it: for Matthew Cardinal of Sedun or Sion had diverted their
minds from the French: Zuinglius also their Preacher told them, how base it was
for them to be mercenary soldiers, and for pay to shed innocent blood; how far
this was against the mind of Christ, and the practice of their ancestors, and
that this mercenary way was an exposing of their liberty to sale; besides, that
this new league abridged them of their power, for not they, but the King was to
choose his officers, and these to raise the soldiers at their pleasure; again,
this league was in diverse things destructive of former leagues; Maximilian the
Emperor; and for any benefit which by this league would accrue the State, they
could find none, only some private persons might be enriched by the French
pensions, the love of which, and the wickedness which attends upon a military
life, might occasion much mischief in their country, as effeminateness,
covetousness, dissoluteness, neglect of husbandry and good arts, idleness,
luxury, drunkenness, whoredoms, blasphemies, which are the fruits of wars, and
weeds that grow in military camps; it was urged also, that the French
assistance could do them little good, that the relying upon pay and pensions
was a distrusting of Gods providence, and that Tigurins could not be drawn into
this league: But the other confederates were of a contrary mind, affirming,
that all war is not condemned in Scripture, for diverse holy men have been
soldiers, and have assisted their friends; that the Helvetian soldiery is not
mercenary, seeing they are to serve but one King, and that by covenant; if the
King enjoin an unlawful war, it was in the Magistrates power to deny him aid;
if the cause was doubtful, the common soldier was not to enquire into it;
besides, the Switzers Country is populous and barren, and obnoxious to many
enemies haters of their liberty, therefore they stand in need of foreign
employments and assistants; neither was it a rejection of divine providence to
make use of secundary means; their youth also by this employment should be
trained up in military discipline, so needful for defense of the Country; and
though some foreign leagues have not proved successeful, yet their leagues
with Lewis 11. Charles 8. and Lewis 12. of France, have been advantageous to
them. Upon these reasons the Cantons France.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Helvetian Confederates, till the year 1602.

HAving spoken of the Helvetian Cantons, we will now briefly relate the
Confederates and Allies of Switzerland: And 1. of the Abbot of S. Gall. Gallus
was a Gentleman of Scotland, disciple to Columbanus the Abbot, with whom he
traveled into France, and thence into Germany; he Tuggen near the head of the
Lake of Zurich, and then at Bregents at the head of the Lake of Constance, and
in other places of Switzerland sixteen years: being invited to the Bishopric
of Constance, he refused it, recommending one of his disciples to it, and so he
retired himself to an Hermitical life, an. 630. on the mountains above the Lake
of Constance, where now is the Town and Covent of S. Gall; there with some of
his disciples, he built a Cell, and in holy meditations spent his days; there
did his disciples remain, whose piety was rewarded with rich gifts from the
French Kings, and Dukes of Aleman or Suaube: at last the fraternity increasing
in number and wealth, S. Galls Cell Pipinus the son of Charles Martel made
Othomar a Priest, the first Abbot of S. Gall, who with his brethren began to
profess the rule of S. Benedict. The wealth and power of this Monastery did so
increase, that the Abbot thereof was reckoned among the Princes, and was of old
under the protection of the Emperors, who out of the Gentry of Suanbe or Aleman
used to send governors of that Abbey; but afterward being neglected in the
troubles between the Popes and Emperors, and quarrels arising between the Abbot
and Appenzel, to which the Town of S. Gall was joined, and some of the Abbots
own vassals, and therefore stood in need of some powerful protector, Caspar
Landenberg the 52. Abbot desired to Helvetian Cantons of Tigurum or Zurich,
Lucern Suits, and Glaris or Glarona, whom they chose for their protectors and
defenders their liberties, rights, customs, and possessions: This power also
is given to these Cantons, that all places in that seigniory belonging to the
Abbot, shall give free access to the Cantons when they please, and that in all
controversies the Abbot shall stand to their verdict: Abbot Ubricus,
Landenbergs successor, ordered that each of the four Cantons in their order,
should send one of their Council to stay with the Abbot two years, and to be
Captain of all his Country, and to be present at all pleadings, and that the
half of all mulcts and fines should belong to the Switzers, likewise that all
the Abbots subjects should Cantons in their wars; this league was renewed by
Ulricus, when the Townsmen of S. Gall and Appenzel had pulled down the begun
Monastery of Rosac, who by the Cantons were suppressed, and reduced to the
Abbots obedience, this league continues yet; and though the Abbot and Cantons
be of different Religions, yet they send according to their league a Captain to
govern his subjects in civil affairs, and to maintain the Abbeys rights.

The town of S. Gall owes her original to the Abbey, and her privileges to the
Emperors her protectors, though the Abbots subjects, with whom sometimes the
Townsmen use to quarrel about their privileges and liberties, which they were
forced for sums of money to redeem of the Abbot. Afterward the town of S. Gall,
in imitation of Abbot Landenberg, united themselves in league to six Cantons,
namely Zurich, Bern, Lucerne, Suitz, Tugium or Zug, and Glaris. This league was
made perpetual and confirmed by oath, an. 1454. They had made leagues before
this time with some of these Cantons, which was only for some years.

The Rheti or Grisons are ancient: for before Christ, the Tuscans being driven
Gauls under the conduct of their Captain Rhetus, they possessed the Alps, and
from his name they called themselves Rhetians; in the Romans time there were
two Countries called Rhetia, the first and second; and not only the Alps, but
a great part of Suevia or Suaube and Bavaria were called Rhetia; the first and
old Rhetia containing the springs of Rhene, a great part of the Alps, with the
neighboring valleys on both sides, is called now Grisons, and of old Cani:
there are three leagues of the Grisons, the first is called the High-league,
and it contains nineteen Commonalties, ten of which are lost; the second is
called the League or Covenant of Gods house, because of the Bishop of Curia or
Coire who is comprehended within it, this Dutch, the rest broken Italian; the
third is called the League of the ten Jurisdictions, because of the ten
Commonalties in it; these people have diverse times made leagues with their
neighbor Switzers; the two former have made a perpetual league with seven of
the Cantons; the third entertains constant friendship, though not a solemn
league with them: the upper League or Grison, entered into a confederacy with
the seven old Cantons for ever; the next year after, the league of Gods house
joined themselves to the same Cantons; these had long 1497.
controversies with those of the County of Tyrol, by whom they were much
wronged, and finding no redress, though the Emperor Maximilian had appointed
Constance, then the Bishop of Auspurg to arbitrate the business, yet nothing
was done, but were still put off with delays till the Austrians had put
themselves in Arms with intent to invade the Grisons unexpectedly; whereupon
they send Legates to Tigurum where the Switzers were then assembled, to have a
perpetual league confirmed between them, which was gladly entertained by the
Cantons and ratified: the next year after this followed the Suevian war, in
which the Grisons stoutly defended their borders 1498.
against the Austrians, whom they oftentimes defeated by the Switzers help; at
last having got the better, both the Switzers and Grisons made their peace with
Maxintilian; ever after the Grisons helped the Switzers in their wars in Italy,
when John James of Medices, afterward Marquess of Marignan, had taken the
Castle of Musse upon the lake Larius or Come, and Clavenne from the Grisons;
the Switzers sent them aid, by which the enemy was driven out of their
Territories: at this day the Grisons as well as the Cantons are in league with
the French, and serve him in his wars, but they have their Commanders and
Regiments apart from those of the Switzers.

The Valesians are three distinct people, enclosed with high mountains, and
inhabiting the valley between the springs of Rhene and lake Leman; these were
called anciently Viberi or Iuberi, Seduni, and Veragri; the two former are now
called the high Valesians, and are divided into seven Dioceses; the Veragri or
lower Valesians are subject to the other; but the Bishop of Sedun or Syon is
their chief both in Church and State Affairs, he is called Count and Governor
of Valais; they made their first league with the three Cantons of Uri, Lucerne
and Underwald, an. 1417. when they had wars with William Raromus the Bishop,
and his father Guiscard whom they had banished, Bern helped the Bishop; the
other Cantons who were neuters, fearing lest this siding of Bern with the
Valesians might cause a quarrel between Bern and the three abovenamed Cantons,
they with much ado made up a peace, in which the Raronii were restored: after
this war the Valesians made a temporary league with Bern, which in the year
1475 was made perpetual; two years before this, they joined themselves to the
three abovenamed Cantons, ann. 1533. At Friburg a league is concluded between
Adrian Bishop of Sion, and seven Diocesses of the Valetians, with seven
Cantons, to wit Lucerne, Uri, Suits, Underwald, Zug, Friburg, and Salodor or
Saleurre, to defend the Roman Religion against all opposers.

Rotvil is seated beyond Danube in Germany, on the left side of the river
Nicre: It is an Imperial Chamber or place of judicature, whither the
neighbourring Rotvil made with the Switzers, was for fifteen years, under
Frederick the third Emperor, ann. 1463. which afterward they renewed upon
occasions: at last, the league is made perpetual with all the Cantons, ann.
1519. Now because Rotvil is seated far from the borders of Helvetia, so that an
Army cannot be conducted 1519.
to them; they are tied not to make any war, but upon urgent necessity, and
that not without the Switzers consent, without whom they are to make no league.

Mulhouse a City in the County of Ferrat or Sequana, is thought to be the same
Ariabinum of old; it was anciently an Imperial City, yet governed by the Bishop
of Strasburg; but in the wars between Ralph of Habspurg and the Bishop of
Strasburg, Mulhouse was taken from the Bishop, and his Castle in the City
demolished; since which time it has been one of the Cities of the Empire:
Their first league they made with the Switzers, was in the year 1464. for this
City being infested by the Nobility, to be freed of their tyranny, they make a
league of fifteen years with Friburg, Bern, and Salodor; and by the mediation
of Bern, the other seven Helvetian Cantons receive them into protection. This
so incensed the Gentry thereabouts, that they took up arms against this City;
but the Cantons so aided them with garrisons within, and forces abroad,
Waldshout a town of Austria, that the Gentry were glad to make their peace.
Then in year 1506. the Mulhousians were united to Basil; nine years after they
made a league with the whole thirteen Cantons.

Bienna stands pleasantly, upon a Lake full of Fish, and beset with Vines, and
is under the Bishop of Basils jurisdiction, but enjoys her own privileges. In
the year 1303. this City made league with Bern, Strasburg, Basil, Friburg, and
Soluerre, to suppress the highway-robbers which infested all that country;
three years after, they made a particular confederacy with Bern; their third
league was made ann. 1532. and fifteen years after they renewed it, when John
Viana Bishop of Basil, a man of an unquiet spirit, made war upon his
neighbors, and being offended at this Union of Bienna with Bern, falls
suddenly upon the Town, and imprisoneth the Bernois that were authors of this
society; but the Bernois in revenge, fall upon the Bishps Castle in the Town,
and freed their Citizens: then they made war upon the Bishop and his
confederates the Salodorians, wasting many places of his bishopric.

Geneva the last City of the Allobroges, of which Caesar speaks, lies near the
Switzers upon Lake Leman, at the head of Rhon; it has been subject often times
to Fire; in the time of Heliogabalus it was burnt down: Aurelian repaired it,
and endowed it with diverse privileges, and called it by his name Aurelian; it
was wasted by the barbarous Nations that made irruption into France: About two
hundred and seventy years ago, it was twice burned. The Bishopric had great
immunities, and so had the City; yet they kept good correspondency with the
Bishop: The Earls of Geneva were great enemies to her liberty, who
notwithstanding were the Bishops Vassals, and held their Earldome from him in
Fee: She was also often troubled by the Earls of Savoy, so that ann. 1420.
Amadeus Duke of Savoy strove to obtain of Pope Martin the right of superiority
over Geneva by way of exchange; but John who was then Bishop, agreed with the
Citizens for himself and successors, that the liberties of Geneva should never
be exchanged or alienated; if any should endeavor an exchange, that he be
accounted a traitor. Afterward, when the Emperor Maximilian had made Philbert
Duke of Savoy and his son in law, Lieutenant of the Empire in those parts, he
and his brother Charles endeavored upon this title, to subject Geneva to them,
pretending that the privileges of Lieutenantship were granted to the Princes
of Savoy by Charles the fourth; who notwithstanding had taken away from Amadeus
their Earl, all power over Geneva: Bern, and Friburg, which was renewed and
made more firm ann. 1536. at which time, the Duke of Savoy and Bishop of Geneva
raised war against the Town, for changing their Religion. There has been
oftentimes intentions to confederate Geneva with the Cantons, which has not
yet been effected.

Neocomum or Neufchastel is in the Country of Avanches, on the Lake bearing the
towns name. In the war between Lewis the twelfth of France and the Switzers,
Bern in behalf of all the Cantons seized upon the town and the whole County,
placing a governor there, which the other Cantons did in order, except those
of Zurich; at last Joan Hoochbergia Duke Longovils widow, upon Hoochberg) which
was done in the year 1529. before this time it was annexed to the Cantons of
Bern, Lucerne, Friburg, and Solieurre, on certain articles, which upon this
rendition were confirmed. At this day the Lords of this County are by a
peculiar league allied to Bern.

Besides these confederate Towns, there be others belonging to the Helvetian
commonwealth, which may be called stipendiary, because they serve the Switzers
in their wars upon their own charges; these have their own laws and
Magistrates, but the sovereignty remains in the Cantons, whose public Edicts
they are bound to obey; these towns anciently belonged to the Austrian,
Switzers in their wars with Austria obtained them, upon certain conditions,
that they should enjoy under the Cantons the same privileges they had under
the Austrian; these are five in number, namely Bada, Bremgartan, Frauvenfeld,
Mellingen, and Rapersvil.

Bada on the river Limag is so called from the hot baths there, it is therefore
named Thermopolis; this town is mentioned in Cor. Tacitus, it had anciently two
castles, the one upon a high rock, demolished by the Switzers, the other is
garrisoned by them; it had also Earls of old, who are now extinct, to whom
succeeded the Lords of Habspurg, who joined this and other things to the House
of Austria; at last, it fell from them to the Switzers, in the council of
Constance, Frederick of Austria maintained Pope John 22. against the Emperor
and Council; therefore he is excommunicate, and proscribed. Sigismund the
Emperor with the Prince of Bavaria made war against him: the Switzers are
commanded to war against him also, notwithstanding the fifty years peace they
had lately made with him, because he was excommunicate and an enemy to the
Church and state; if they refuse to break the peace, they should be
excommunicated also with the Austrian: the breach of this peace was also
warranted by the Princes Legates at the council, and the Jurisconsults, because
the Emperors subjects, in all their actions, must except either expressly or
tacitly the Emperors Majesty and Rights. The copy of this Decree was Austrian
heretofore, does now belong to the Empire, and that the Emperor will make no
peace with the Austrian, except he confirm the Helvetian peace: to this war at
last they assented; but withal they desired pay, because they were poor; the
Emperor told them his money was short, but he would bestow on them whatever
goods of the Austrians they possessed, or should obtain in this war till they
had their pay; he exhorts also Zurich to take arms, promising them that
Austrian Country beyond Mount Albius in perpetual Fee: Upon this the Tigurins
in the year 1415. besiege Mellinga, and the third day take it: thence they went
to Brengarten, where the Cantons of Suits and Zug joined with them, to whom
this Town also surrendered it self, under the protection of the Empire; diverse
other Towns the Switzers took from the Austrian. Then the Tigurins by the help
of the other Cantons, except Bern, besiege Bada the strongest place belonging
to the Austrian, and which had often done them much hurt by excursions: after
three weeks siege, the Town surrenders; the Castle held out some time after,
till all necessaries Austrian do not relieve them at such a time; mean while,
the Austrian makes his peace with the Emperor, and command is sent to the
Switzers to disband their Army, but they would not give off the siege of this
Castle till they took and burned it, because of the much mischief they had
heretofore suffered by it; the Gentry stormed at this, but could not now tell
how to help it. Now the Emperor intending for Spain, to bring from thence
Peter de Luna, otherwise Benedict the ninth, to be Pope; and his treasure
being exhausted both on the Council and on his wars, he engaged Beda with some
other Towns and Lands to them belonging, for a sum of money to Zurich;
likewise Bern he pawned the Country of Ergow, which they at this day do solely
possess. The next year after, Zurich made the Cantons of Lucerne, Suits,
Underwald, Zug, and Glaris, sharers of this Pawn or Mortgage: but those of Uri
at first refused to share, thinking it a breach of the peace; but being better
informed of the lawfulness thereof, grounded on the Emperors and Councils
authority, were content to pay their money and share with the rest, and so did
Bern also.

Bremgarten one of the mortgaged towns, is seated on the river Russe, two
German miles below Lucern; it was first under the Empire, then it came to the
Habspurgs, from them to the Austrian Princes, who derive their beginning from
Mellingen another of these pawned Towns on the same river, one German mile
below Bremgarten, it belonged to the Earls of Habspurg; these two Towns with
Bada were taken by the Switzers for the Emperor: Now they are under the eight
Cantons, who suffer them to retain their ancient privileges. Rapersvil stands
on the Lake of Zurich or Tigurum; it first belonged to the Earls of Rapersvil,
then to the Habspurgs; it fell to the Switzers ann. 1458. Here were two
factions, the one Austrian, the other Helvetian; of these Duke Sigismund
carried away some prisoners to Oenipont or Inspruc, which made the other join
with the Switzers; but the prisoners were restored by the Switzers threatenings
and intercession: After, the Switzers war against Constance; those Uri, Suits,
Underwald, and Glaris, obtained leave to march with their Army through
Rapersvil; who when they came, seized on the Town; which by reason of the
Helvetian prevailing faction there, swore Allegiance to those four Cantons,
under whom they are yet, and enjoy their ancient privileges which they had
under the Austrian. Two years after the taking of Rapersvil, the seven Cantons
seized on Frawenfield, the chief City of Turgea or Turgow, in their war against
Sigismund of Austria; to this war the Cantons were incited by Pope Pius or
Aeneas Silvius, who excommunicated Sigismund for imprisoning Cardinal Cusan,
Bishop of Brixia or Bresse. Vitodurum or Winterdur, is a town in Kyburg
belonging to the Canton of Zurich, it was then under the Austrian; Tigurins
would surprise them, shut their Gates on the Fare-day of S. Gall against the
Country people, and would not open them upon any entreaties of the Governor of
Zurich: Hereupon Zurich forbids all commerce with this Town, and the Austrian
strengthens it with a garrison: The Tigurins with the other Cantons besiege
Vitodurum; so at last the Switzers obtain, ann. 1460. the Country of Turgow
with the Towns of Diessenhow on the Rhine, and Frawenfield: this war also of
the Cantons with the Austrian was hastened on by two brothers, Vigil and Bernard
Gradlers, who being oppressed by Sigismund, appealed for justice to the Cantons.

There are also under the Switzers nine Bailiages or governments, to wit, the
County of Bade, the free Provinces, Turgow, Sarunetes or Sargaris, Rhegus^i or
the Valley of Rhin, Lugano, Locarne, Mendrise, and the Valley of Madie; the
last four are beyond the Alps in Italy, and speak Italian, the rest speak
Dutch. Bada is subject to the Cantons of Zurich, Lucern, Uri, Suits, Underwald,
Zug, Glaris, and Bern; these are also Lords of Turgow, except Bern: the
judicature of criminal causes was taken from Frederick of Austria in the
Constance, and pawned by Sigismund the Emperor to the City of Constance; but
ann. 1490. Maximilian Emperor bestowed it on the Switzers; the free Provinces
are these Castles and Villages upon the left side of the river Russ, above and
beneath Bregmarten; these are called free Provinces, because the three Villages
of Megenberg, Richenfer, and Ergow or Villa Verbigena had their several
jurisdictions and officers, as distinct provinces, but now are made one. This
part anciently was called the County of Rore, it is now under the Cantons,
namely Zurich, Lucerne, Uri, Suits, Underwald, Zug, and Glaris; it was taken by
Lucern in the war between the Helvetian and Frederick of Austria; but the other
Cantons claimed an equal share in the government with Lucerna, Bern, whose
verdict was for the equal sharing of the jurisdiction by the other Cantons: The
Country is small, therefore the governor who comes hither some times in the
year has his residence in the Abbey of Muren. Sarnuetes or Sargans, so called
from the river Sara hard by them; this Town and Country belonged anciently to
the Earls of Werdenberg, then to the Austrian; who sold it to the Earls of Tog,
from whom the Earls of Sargans or Werdenberg redeemed it: At last, ann. 1483.
George of Werdenberg sold it to the seven ancient Cantons, who send thither
governors by turn, under whom the Town enjoys its old privileges. Rhegusci on
Rhene, are a part of the Grisons, they that dwell on the right side of the
Rhene, are under the Austrian; but the inhabitants on the left side belong to
the Switzers. Frederick Togg took all this Country from the Austrian by the
Emperors command, at the Council of Constance. Afterward this country was
diverse times pawned and sold, till at last the Cantons of Zurich, Lucerne,
Suits, Glaris, Uri, Underwald, Zug, having aided the Abbot of S. Gall against
Apenzel, obtained for their pay this country: afterward they admit the
Abbatiscellans the ancient Lords thereof to a share in the government, so that
now it is under eight Cantons.

Beyond the Alps, the Cantons have four Bailiages or Governments in Italy;
Lugano, upon the Lake; the second is Locarne, where was a strong Castle, not
inferior to that of Millain; the third is Mendrisi; and the four is the Valley
of Madia; Maximilian Sfortia Duke of Millain bestowed these upon 1513.
the Cantons, for their service in beating the French out of Italy, by the
command of Pope Julius: he bestowed also on the Grisons the Val-Telin: but
three years after, when Francis the French King had defeated the Switzers at
Marignan, and driven the Duke out of Millain, he confirmed this gift, and so
have the succeeding Dukes of Millain done: All the Cantons send Governors
thither, except Appenzel, because this was not then one of the Cantons, when
the Switzers obtained this gift. Bilitonium is under the three Cantons of Uri,
Suits, and Underwald: this town belonged to the Earls of Misairk, till the Duke
of Millain took it by force; but being retaken by the Earl, he sold it to Uri
and Underwald; from whom the Duke recovered it by treachery: Since which time
the Switzers have had many battles for regaining this place, the possession of
which at last they obtained, almost eighty years after they had lost it: For
whilst the French and Millainois were in continual wars, the 1500.
Townsmen for quietness sake surrender themselves to the Cantons of Uri, from
whom the French have often attempted to recover it, but in vain, it is now
divided into three governments under the three Cantons.

The Switzers have made diverse leagues with their neighbors: with Millain ann.
1466. between Galeacius and Blanca Maria his wife, and the eight Cantons; then
between Galeacius Maria Sfortia, and those of Uri about the Valley of Lepontia
or Liviner: the Duke grants to Uri the civil jurisdiction of that Valley, who
were for this to pay the Duke a yearly tribute, four Hawks and a cross-Bow.
Ferdinand Gonzaga ann. 1552. governor of Millain, in the name of Charles the
fifth Emperor, renews the league with the Switzers, which was to continue four
years: after the death of Charles the fifth, this league has not Spain, now
Lords of Millain, with the Helvetian, though amity is carefully entertained
between them; yet Philip the second of Spain made a confederacy with the six
Catholic Cantons, to wit, Lucern, Urania, Suits, Silvania, Zug, and Friburg,
for maintenance of the old Faith; this was confirmed at Millain, ann. 1588. the
Catholics of Appenzel were admitted into the same society, ann. 1597.

Sigismund of Austria made a perpetual league with the Switzers, which was
confirmed by the Emperors Maximilian, Charles the fifth, and Ferdinand. This
Sigismund was the son of Frederick, who carried away Pope John from the council
of Constance: he had many battles with the Switzers, by whom Lewis of France;
but he who had felt the Switzers valor at the council of Basil, would not
meddle in the business: then he implores the Burgundian, to whom he mortgageth
some countries near Helvetia, that he might purposely quarrel with the
Switzers; but the Burgundian governor was so tyrannical, that Sigismund was
glad upon the earnest entreaty of his oppressed subjects to redeem again the
mortgage, and to make a league, that was to be renewed every ten years with the
Switzer against the Burgundian, whose power was too great for either of them
apart. Ann. 1474. not only Sigismund of Austria, but also Renatus of Lorrain,
with the Bishops of Strasburg, Basil, and diverse cities, entered into
confederacy Helvetia against the Burgundian: but after he was slain, Sigismund
being childlesse, resignes his principality to Maximilian the Emperor,
reserving only to himself an annual pension; this Emperor renews the Austrian
league with Helvetia, ann. 1511. in which was comprehended the house of
Burgundy, and his Nephew Charles now under his tuition, with the twelve
Cantons, Appenzel, the Abbot and Town of S. Gall. Maximilian also promises for
his Nephew Charles, that he will yearly pay to each Canton two hundred crowns
as a present in Zurich; to the Abbot and Town of S. Gall, and to Appenzel, to
each of them 100. crowns, till Charles be of years that he can manage his
Dominions himself, who was also to confirm this League, which he did, ann:
Burgundy, for Austria was then under the government of his brother Ferdinand.

The Dukes of Savoy did anciently entertain amity with Bern, Friburg, and
Soluerre; and Charles father to Philbert made a league of twenty five years with
all the Cantons, ann. 1512. during which, the Duke was to pay yearly to each
Canton at Bern two hundred crowns: about the end of this league, Duke Charles
lost the greatest part of his Duchy to King Francis of France; in this war
Bern in defense of their confederats of Geneva, seized upon some part of the
Duchy: the renewing of this league was interrupted by the wars of Charles 5.
now protector Savoy, against the French in Piemont; but afterward Philbert son
to Duke Charles being restored to his Dominions by the French, made a perpetual
league with six Cantons of Lucern, Suits, Uri, Underwald, Zug, and Soluerre,
and after this, the other Cantons joined in this confederacy.

Of the French kings, Lewis 11. was the first that made a league with, and paid
to the Switzers an annual pension: this was after he had tried their valor at
Basil, where he lost 6000 men by 1600 Switzers; In hatred also of the
Burgundian, by whom he had been lately beaten, he makes this league for ten
years, promising to each Canton a stipend of 7000 Franks. Charles 8. son to
this Lewis, renewed the league an. 1483. and employed the Switzers in his war
against the Duke of Britany, whom he overcame, and also in the Neapolitan war.
Lewis 12. his successor made a league of twelve years with them, that by their
help he might again recover Millan. This war being ended, Lewis refuses to pay
any more the Switzers pension, wherefore they in anger make a league with Pope
Julius 2. an. 1510. by this means Sfortia is repossessed of Millan, and the
French beat out. Francis Valois son-in-law to Lewis succeeded, Switzers, and
carried the Duke of Millan prisoner into France; but shortly after he made a
stable league with the Cantons, considering how conducible their amity was to
France, and promises to pay yearly to each Canton 2000 franks, and as much to
the Valesians; to the Grisons as much as Lewis 12. paid them, and 2000 franks
over and above; to the Abbot of S. Gall and to his subjects, and to those of
Toggenburg, 600 franks; to the City of S. Gall, 400. to Mulhouse, 400. to those
of the County of Gruer, 600. and it is agreed, that the places heretofore under
the protection of Millan shall enjoy now under France their ancient privileges:
many other articles were concluded between them, and ratified at Friburg, in
the year 1516. Switzers at least, and not above sixteen thousand without the
Magistrates permission; these levies the Cantons must not hinder or call back,
except they be in danger themselves of invasion; but the French king is not to
employ the Switzers in any sea-service, but on the land only; if the Switzers
be invaded, the French king is to furnish them on his own charges with two
hundred men completely armed, or else two thousand crowns every three months,
besides twelve pieces of ordance, and a thousand franks yearly to each Canton
during this league, which was to continue three years after Francis: his son
Henry who succeeded made a new league with the Switzers, on the same articles
which were agreed upon by his father; this continued five years after his
death; in this the Switzers were not to aid the French in recovering their lost
dominions in Italy, but were to help him in regaining the town and province of
Bolon in Picardy: this league was made at Salodor, an. 1549. in which all the
Cantons were included except the Tigurins and Bernois. Lastly, Charles 9. son
to King Henry, renewed the former league; so did Henry 4. who promised to pay
the Switzers for their arrears due to them, a million of gold. The six
Catholic Cantons are allowed 1622.
to continue their league with Millan and Savoy.

CHAP. IX.
The Swedish History, from the year 1590. till the year 1631.

SIgismund son to John is declared King of Swethland, an. 1590. He returns from
his kingdom of Poland, and is crowned at Upsalia king of Swethland. Francis
Malaspina Bishop of Urbin and the Popes Legate, was earnest to inaugurate the
King after the Pontifician manner, hoping thereby to reduce the Roman religion
into that kingdom; but he was opposed by the Parliament, chiefly by Adam
Andracan Archbishop of Upsalia, who told the Legate, that it was against the
custom and laws of that kingdom, for any except the Upsalia to set the Crown
on the Kings head, besides (says he) the King must swear to maintain the
Augustine Confession exhibited to Charles 5. sixty four years ago, and no other
Religion in that kingdom but that which was established by Gustavus and John 3.
the Kings late predecessors; in the Parliament of Upsalia. The King perceiving
that all the Assembly sided with Adam, he was content to receive his
inauguration from him; his Coronationoath was given him by the Chancellor of
Swethland, by which he promises to maintain justice and truth, to suppress
vice, to govern the kingdom with P. Charles and the Swedish parliament, to
admit no strangers into his counsels or chief offices of his kingdom; that he
will lay no taxes on his people except June after returned to Poland. But
within few years after, in the Parliament held at Stockholm he was deposed by
the States of Swethland; and 1599:
the next year 1600. in the Parliament at Lincophen, he with his children and
posterity are totally excluded from the kingdom of Sweden, because contrary to
the will and admonition of his Grandfather he fell off from the Protestant to
the Roman religion, and invaded Sweden his native soil with an army of
Charles, the Nobility, Clergy, and whole Kingdom, which is grieved for that
his Majesty has in this violated his promises and Coronation Oath, for which
cause they were forced to renounce all fealty and allegiance to him: yet in
regard of their love to him, they are content that his son shall sit upon his
throne, if so be his Majesty will resolve within six months to send him hither
to be instructed in the Protestant faith, under D. Charles his Majesty's uncle,
and the other Peers of Swethland; but if the King refuse to perform this within
the prefixed time, they must disinherit him and his posterity; therefore they
beseech his Majesty not to slight the humble petition of his Kingdom, nor
welfare of his

The six months prefixed for the Kings resolution being past, and no answer
from him, a Parliament is called, in which Duke Charles is desired to undertake
the kingdom, which he refused, till the other six months were expired, in
which the young Prince was to be sent to be instructed in the new religion and
laws of the kingdom, that when he should attain the full age of 24 years, he
might be crowned, and not before. In the mean time they desire Duke Charles to
manage the State Affairs during the Princes minority, whether he come or not;
and withal they are resolved, if D. Charles die before this time, Sigismunds
son succeeds to the crown, he shall provide an honorable maintenance for his
Uncle Duke John, in his Duchy of Ostrogoth, and that he shall permit D.
Gustavus Adolphus son to D. Charles to inherit without molestation his fathers
Dukedom in as ample manner as his father possessed it; it is likewise ordered,
that if the King suffers himself to be dethroned, that Duke Charles shall
succeed; and if he die before any of the young Princes be fit for government,
he shall be governor whom Duke Charles shall name in his last will and
testament; but if he neglect to name any, then the State will choose two or
three faithful governors, till the young Princes descended of Prince John, or
of Duke Gustavus Adolphus shall be of years, it being in the power of the State
to choose which of them they shall think fittest for government. In the mean
while, because King Sigismund had falsified his oath, departed twice out of the
Kingdom without leave, sent Armies of aliens against his native Country, and
has refused to give any answer to their petition, therefore they disinherit
John shall have for his maintenance the Duchy in Othrogoth, which once was
possessed by Duke Magnus, except such Territories as belong to Duke Charles by
patent, instead of which Duke John shall have other lands of the same value, so
that Duke John shall content himself with these, expecting nothing else in this
Kingdom, except what he can claim by right of inheritance: It is also ordered
that the Duke shall entertain none that goes about to sow discord between the
Regal and Ducal families, but such only as study the peace and welfare of both
families so nearly linked in blood; withal they humbly beseech Duke Charles
for the present to accept of the Crown, as being most worthy thereof Charles
used not any sinistrous means to attain this Crown, but was again and again
urged and pressed by the joint importunity of Peers and people to accept the
same, and therefore they resolve to admit of none other for their King, but
Duke Charles, to whom they swear allegiance, and resolve to give him all the
rights and honors belonging to the Crown of Sweden, though he should refuse
the ceremony of Coronation: They also enact, that after the death of Duke
Charles, his son Gustavus Adolphus shall Charles his heirs male should fail,
then Duke John and his heirs shall succeed so long as that line shall remain;
which John and his successors shall swear never to make any league or union
with King Sigismund, or his heirs, tending to their obtaining any foot again in
the government of this Kingdom: John also must take heed that he never go
about to promote Papacy, except he with his whole progeny will lose their
interest for ever in this Kingdom: They also advise Duke Charles, that during
his sons minority, he would nominate a faithful and prudent Governor and
Tutor, who after his death might wisely administer the Kingdom, till Swede,
and no alien.

After the States had sworn fealty and allegiance to Duke Charles the son of
Gustavus Duke of Suderman, Nericia, and Wermeland; he undertook the government
of the Kingdom, but without the name or title of King, and so continued till
the year 1607. when by the joint consent of the States, he was crowned King of
Sweden, to whom, and to his son Gustavus after him, and to his successors the
inheritance of the Crown is confirmed by a solemn oath of Parliament. He had
before this taken from the Polonian a great part of Livonia. Upon his second
son Duke Charles Philip they confer his fathers Duchy Suderman, Nericia and
Wermeland, with other spiritual and secular jurisdictions possessed by Duke
Charles his father, before he attained the Crown; Duke John shall inherit the
Duchy of Duke Magnus: If Duke Gustavus Adolphus dye without issue male, then
his brother Duke Charles Philip, and the males of his body lawfully begotten,
shall succeed to the Crown; if these fail, then Duke John and his heirs male
shall inherit the Kingdom; in default of these, he shall succeed that is next
to them in blood: but if the whole Gustavian masculine race fail, then the
females shall possess the Crown in as ample manner as the males, and it shall
be lawful for them to choose their own husbands, so that they are not Papists,
nor enemies to the State, nor strangers, but of some Noble family of Sweden, or
some German Prince descended from Gustavus, of the Augustan faith; if the Queen
shall do otherwise, she must look to be dethroned: they promise also to provide
honorable maintenance for the other Royal or Ducal daughters, who must not
marry without consent of Parliament; neither must any of the Kings or Dukes
sons take to themselves wives of another Religion, or marry of their own head,
without acquainting the States, and if any shall persuade or counsel them to do
otherwise, or Augustan confession, shall forfeit his estate to the next of
blood, and shall be banished the Kingdom: It is also enacted, that none of the
Blood Royal of Sweden shall inherit this Crown, if he accepts of any foreign
Kingdom, except he make his perpetual residence in the Kingdom of Sweden;
seeing Sigismunds accepting of the Kingdom of Poland, and residing out of this
his native Kingdom, has occasioned so much mischief, as has almost ruined it.

The Kingdom being established in King Charles and his heirs, he reigned four
years, in which time he had war with the Danes; in this he fell into a 1611.
Gustavus Adolphus, and Carolus Philippus, with one daughter; he had wars with
the Polonian in Livonia, where he was defeated: He had better success before he
was King, when he killed two thousand of Sigismunds Army, seized on his camp
and money, and caused him to deliver up the Chancellor, and other incendiaries
to punishment: nor was he successeful in his wars against the Danes, for
Christianus 9. of Denmark, having sent a Herald to Charles for restoring of
the Danish ships he took, was slighted, and no answer at all returned;
whereupon the Dane besieges Calmaria a strong Town in Swethland; and at last
takes it by storm, in which men women and children were put to Swedes took
Christianopolis from the Danes by a stratagem: for this Town had sent letters
to the King for some Auxiliaries; these letters being intercepted by the Swede,
a garrison is sent with Danish colors lately taken; so the Town is surprised,
burnt, and most of the Inhabitants slain; the Dane takes diverse ships from the
Swede, and beats him again out of Calmaria, after he had retaken it: upon this
the governor of the Castle surrenders that also to the Dane, where were a
hundred and eight brass Guns, and six war-ships, with all their furniture;
diverse other Castles also surrendered to the Dane, which so incensed Charles,
that he sends a challenge Christianus for a duel, which was rejected and
laughed at by the Dane, wherefore King Charles with grief and age fell sick and
died the next month; about the end of that year most of the Swedish ships were
taken by the Danes at Elsburg, the other Key as it were of Sweden, and five
months after the Castle is surrendered.

To Charles succeeded his son Gustavus Adolphus, he was crowned at four and
twenty years of age; three years after he married with Mary Eleonor sister 1617.
to George William Elector of Brandenburg, she bare him a daughter Christiana
by name, who died the same year she was born in; then she bare him another
daughter called also Christiana, who now reigns, she was declared heir to the
Stockholm; for Duke Charles Philip hereditary Prince of 1627.
Swethland, and Duke of Suderman, died childlesse in Livonia. The Danes having
taken Calmaria and Elsburg, the two chief Forts of Sweden upon the Baltic, and
Hesperian sea, diverse cruel battles being also fought, and the plague raging
among them, a peace is concluded, in which the Swede was to leave off the title
and claim he had to Lapponia; he was also by Articles to pay to the Dane
toward the charges of this war 12 Tuns of gold, till which be paid Elsburg
shall be left in pawn. Gustavus after diverse hot disputes with his uncle 1628.
of Poland, whom many times he foiled, at last made an honorable Truce for six
years; he took in Newburg and Strasburg, being aided by Leather-guns, invented
then by one Elias Tripus; the Polander recovered again Newburg, who laid siege
also to Strasburg, but was beaten off by Oxenstern the Chancellor; from Meva he
was driven back by the King of Swede, notwithstanding the Polander was assisted
by the Imperial forces, therefore he was forced to make peace with Gustavus,
who restored to him Strausburg, Dirsavia, and Fraeberg, but retained what he
took in Livonia and Borussia, some Towns were sequestered Brandenburg; the two
Kings promise mutual assistance to each other against any third party that
shall make war upon either of them.

Gustavus being angry that the Emperor Ferdinand 2. had sent aid to the
Polander against him in Borussia, and had rejected his Ambassadors at the
Treaty of Lubec; he complains by his Legate to General Walstein, of the Army
sent against him under Aruheim: Walstein answers the King scornfully, that
because Caesar had so many Armies, he was forced for want of other employment
to send this to his friend the King of Poland against the Swede; besides
Gustavus was earnestly invited by the banished Princes of Germany, and chiefly
by the Albert of Fridland, in the Emperors right, arrogated to himself the
title of High-admiral of the Ocean and Baltic seas, which title never any
Emperor had before usurped; the pyracies also exercised upon the Swedish ships
did much afflict and grieve him, therefore he complains to the Imperial
Electors (who in right of the Empire were to take notice of the differences
between Princes) but when he saw no redress, nor hopes of peace, he sends
abroad his Declarations, that all might take notice how he was necessitated to
take Arms; therefore having prepared a Navy, he enters the Rugia on
Midsummer-day, where as soon as he came on shore, he fell on 1630.
his knees, giving thanks to God for so happy a beginning of his expedition,
praying for a happy success in his counsels and actions; and then presently he
falls upon Wolgast, which he took, having driven thence the Imperialists; they
who were in Caminum and Iulinum, set fire on their Towns, and went their way;
then he makes Stetinum the other Metropolis of Pomerania to side with him,
showing that he meant not to withdraw Pomerania from the Empire, or to bring it
under the Scepter of Sweden, but rather to defend it against unjust violence
and tyranny; upon this Duke Bogislaus enters into a league with him: this
Country at that time was in a woeful condition, being worse Stargand was seized
upon by the Swedes in the night, who drove thence the Caesarians. Pasevalcum
being exhausted with contributions, and robbed of all her prime men, receives
gladly two troops of Swedish horse or Dragoons; upon this Gotzius sends thither
such a multitude of Imperial soldiers, that the unarmed and fearful Town was
not able to resist, and so the Swedes saved themselves by flight, the Townsmen
were massacred, the women abused, their wealth plundered, and the Town with the
Churches, notwithstanding the entreaties of the Clergy, were consumed to ashes;
this was in September: the July before, Pecunum received the same measure from
the Imperialists, though it was not tainted with rebellion.

About this time a Diet is called at Ratisbone; the Protestant Electors of
Saxony and Brandenburg refuse to be there in person, but send their
Ambassadors; the Popes Legates were there, by whom the league is renewed; and
it is ordered that a great Army shall be raised to force the Princes to make
restitution of the Church-goods; the Emperor by his Edict complaining of the
wrongs done him by the Swede, whom he never offended, in making an hostile
invasion upon Germany, threatens proscription of all those who shall any ways
assist him; he commands also that all shall be ready with men, money and
provision against the Swedes: The King on the other side protests, that he
desires nothing more then the peace of the Church, and that the Emperor would
admit a Treaty to that purpose; but in the mean while he prosecutes the war,
for he takes in the Castle of Wolgasten, and by that means got a great part of
Pomerania to side with him; then he falls upon diverse other places which made
resistance, as Tratsund, Barth, and the Castle of Damgart, which he Ribbenitza
a Town in the Duchy of Megapolis on the confines of Pomerania, opened her
gates to him: then the King by his Edict wishes the Megapolitans to forsake
the Fridlanders, and to receive again their lawful Dukes Adolphus Frederick,
and John Albert, unjustly driven out, otherwise he will proceed against them
as Rebels with fire and sword, this his demand being grounded on Justice,
Consanguinity and Religion: The same Edict he sends to Rostoch three miles off,
but there he was prevented by a thousand Imperial horse, who desiring leave to
pass through the City staid there, and seized on it for the Duke of Fridland,
and furnished it with all kind of provision; but Francis Charles Lavenberg,
having raised some forces about Albis, took in Bousenburg, Winshem and other
places for the Swede; but the sudden coming of Remacrus Colonel of a thousand
Imperialists, made him retreat to Raceburg, where being denied entrance into
the Castle, is taken prisoner by Count Pappenheim, who pursued him with some
troops. Colberg mean while, a Seaport in Pomerania, is besieged by the Swedes;
Torquatus General of the Caesarian forces in those parts did what he could to
raise the siege, which continued all that bitter Winter till the end of
February, during which time there was great execution on both sides, but at
last the King took it by Gustavus Horn, and put to flight the Imperialists: in
the interim the Diocese of Magdeburg which Christian William governor thereof
had recovered, is again invaded by the Imperialists, who with their multitudes
overran many places thereabouts, and at length laid siege to Magdeburg
Metropolis of Saxony; thither the King sent Theodoricus Falkenberg to assist
the governor; all the provision and Arms that were in Alensleb lately taken,
were transported to Magdeburg; but being besieged by Pappenhem, he is forced to
give up the Town, who with his soldiers swear never to bear Arms thenceforth
against the Emperor.

The ruin of this City was presaged by the fall of one of the Towers of S.
Katharines Church, and shortly after, Novem. 26. by the overthrow of the John's
Church fell, and with its weight beat down the roof of the Church; the same
ruin befell the Churches of S. Ann, Gertrudis, and Sudenburg; the arched
Gallery or Cloister from the Bishops Palace to the Cathedral Church fell down
at the same time; five Wind-mils, and six Water-mils were overthrown by the
winds, besides great hurt done to diverse houses: Thus God does use to show his
sword before he strikes, that he may excite us to repentance, prepare us with
patience, or make us inexcusable if we slight his warnings. Germany at this
time was in a sad condition, being torn in pieces by so many Armies. About the
end of this year, the King of Swede had twelve 1630.
Germans, Swedes, Finlanders, besides three Troops of Laplanders who in the
midst of Winter came to him in skins, these were all Archers; the Emperors
Armies were far more numerous, but lesser disciplined, and more rapacious.
George Elector of Brandeburg, being pressed on the one side by the Emperor, on
the other by the King who married his sister, within his Provinces molested by
thieves and robbers, without affrighted with the Northern guests who sought to
quarter with him; to save his Country from ruin, he commands his subjects to
be in Arms, and to seize upon all highway men, though in soldiers apparel.
On Christmasse-day the same year, the King takes by storm Griffenhage of
Pomerania, so that this Country is now cleared from the Imperialists, who were
all killed or fled, and forced to leave their plunderings behind them: the
King upon this gives solemn thanks to God at Stetin, and causes his Army in
their camp to do the like, to whom he prescribed certain forms of prayer, all
praising God for this former years

About the beginning of the next year, Lewis 13. of France sends Hercules 1631.
de Charnace Ambassador, to take up the difference between the Kings of Poland
and Swede, and to make a league of five years between France and Swethland, for
defense of the Ocean and Baltick-seas, for restitution of the afflicted and
banished Princes of Germany, and for demolishing the Forts which have been
built among the Grisons since the beginning of this German War; for this end
the Swede shall maintain thirty thousand foot, and six thousand horse, toward
the charges of which the French will pay him yearly forty thousand Imperials;
that levies of men shall be permitted in Germany shall be exercised as hitherto
it was by the Imperial Edicts; King Charles also of Britain sends some Forces
under the conduct of Marquess Hamilton into Pomerania. About this time the
charge of the Imperial Army is taken from Albert Duke of Fridland, because the
Catholic Princes did suspect him, and is conferred upon Count Tilly, who is
made Generalissimo of all, both Caesarian and confederate Armies; he presently
views the Armies, reforms the Military discipline now grown loose, buys up all
kind of provision, and furnishes such places as he found weak with Men and
Arms: the King sends some Regiments to Gustavus Horn for taking in of
Landsberg, Demmin, and in his way takes upon surrender New-Brandenburg, with
some Castles: Treptovia is forsaken by the Imperialists: Malchin is surrendered
to the Swedes. About the midst of February, Demmin is besieged, seated in the
confines of Merchlenberg; so is Colberg in Pomerania, and Landsberg in Merchia,
all three at the same time by the Kings Forces: Demmin not being able to hold
out, is surrendered by the Governor with the Castle, where was good store of
ordnance and victuals; the Governor with the Garrison is permitted to march
whither they will. About the end of February, Colberg yields, the Governor
with nine companies of foot, and six of horse, have leave to Landsberg; in
Colberg was great store of Ammunition, but no victuals, so that the Garrison
was forced by famine to yield; five days after the surrender, some Forces were
coming with provision to relieve the Town, these narrowly escaped from being
taken by the Swedes: Landsberg held out the siege till the end of April. A
strange thing fell out at Rostoch; for one Varmeier a Townsman killed Hatzfield
the Governor with a blow of an axe in the neck, affirming he was induced
thereto by an Angel; neither would he acknowledge any fault he had done in
this, though he was tortured with diverse torments to death.

Count Tilly, to retaliate these losses, takes New-Brandeburg by storm, Kniphus
the Governor with his wife and daughters prisoners; in the very Church was the
Consul with the Townsmen murdered, nine Colors were taken, the Town exposed
to plunder, and then forsaken; he lost in this siege and storm about two
thousand of his men: thence Tilly returns to Magdeburg, because he could not
set upon the King being entrenched; in his march he lost some of his men by the
Swedish horse, which took Liebenwald and New-Brandeburg disarmed by the
Tillians; the Magdeburgers in Tillys absence had made some excursions, and
furnished their City with Arms and Victuals; but when he returned about the end
of March, they were quickly driven out of their works which they had made
without the Town, therefore finding they were not strong enough to oppose
Tilly's forces, they set fire on Sudenburg, and the new City, which were their
Suburbs; mean while the Swedish King besieges Francofurt upon the river
Viadrus whose Suburbs also the Garrison burned down, but the King unexpectedly
takes the City by force upon Scaumburg, Tieffenbach, and Monticaculas the
chief Commanders, with the common soldiers fled; the City was so miserably
plundered, that the enemy was sorry to see it, who with much ado made the
soldiers give off; seventeen days after, Landsberg is surrendered to the King,
five and twenty companies of foot, and twelve of horse, went out with their
colors flying: Silesia is now laid open to the Swedish soldiery;
Old-Brandeburg about the end of April is forsaken by the Tillians, the Elector
of Brandeburg is summoned by the King to deliver up the two chief holds of his
Electorate Gustrinum and Spandavia to the Swede, who promises to restore them
as soon as he shall raise the siege from Magdeburg; to this the Elector would
not assent till he saw Berlinum besieged, and then he was content to give up
Spandavia, where the Garrison took the oath of Allegiance to both Princes; the
Elector of Saxony John George is desired by the King to let him have free
passage through his Country, and to join his forces with him in raising the
siege from Magdeburg; the Elector would yield to neith demand, fearing to make
his Country the seat of war, which hitherto had been quiet, nor did he think
it either safe or warrantable to maintain the Magdeburgers against the Emperor,
though they complained of the wrongs offered them by Caesar, notwithstanding
Magdeburgers or not, Count Pappenhem comes with more forces to the siege; if
the Town had foreseen this, they would have strengthened their Garrison with
more men, for now they had not above two thousand foot that were sound, and two
hundred and fifty horse, yet they made diverse sallies out of the Town, even
three in one day, to the loss of the besiegers: Tilly summons them to
surrender, or else they should look for no mercy; their answer was that they
would submit if so be they May, the fatal day of that City, perceiving the
works toward the new Town, low, and the watch asleep, who did not think the
enemy would have stormed so great a Town, that day being already past seven of
the clock, resolve to fall first on there; then was the Bishop with Falkenberg
and the Senate in the Councel-house, conferring about sending of a Trumpeter to
Tilly, who proffered to save Pappenhem with his forces falls upon that part of
the works which was weakest; his word was Jesus Maria, their mark or badge, a
white-ribban about the arm; in the very first encounter, Falkenberg who came to
make good that place which Pappenhem had assaulted, was slain, and so that part
of the City is lost; the Garrison and Townsmen fought stoutly so long as they
were able, till the Caesarians to quiet them set the City on fire, which proved
as prejudicial to the besiegers, who thereby lost their plunder, as to the
Townsmen who lost their habitations; for the fire was so violent by reason of
the wind, that this great and stately City was in the space of four and twenty
hours burnt down to the ground, in which six Parish Churches were consumed in
the same fire, all the Churches, streets and highways were covered with dead
bodies, in the Cathedral of S. Catherine were found three and fifty murdered,
the Governor being wounded in his head and thigh is carried away Mary were
saved from the fire, and so were 139. houses, but all the inhabitants were
either slain or taken, the number of the slain is not certain, but it is
reported that two and twenty thousand were flung into the river Albis which
flows by the City; six hundred Townsmen were chained, though they were able to
ransom themselves; some made an escape by a sudden fire in the enemies camp, a
great many being stripped of all were forced to beg, most of the Ministers were
preserved and provided for by their Fellow-protestants; the destruction of this
City (which had now stood, and been a Metropolitan about seven hundred years
since Otho the Cassiopaea, by sounds in the air like the discharging of
Ordnance, by strange obscurity in the air, by the fall of diverse Towers, and by
a monstrous birth which was taken out of the dead mother, the child's head was
covered with a piece of flesh like a helmet which could be easily taken off, he
was clothed with a skin like a soldiers jacquet, with round kernels like
bullets in it, he had also boots on his legs: God by this would let us see,
that as the birth of this Monster was the death of the mother, so that Town or
Country which breeds armed soldiers within them, are at last destroyed by
them.

CHAP. X.
The prosecution of the Swedish History under Gustavus, from 1631. till the
midst of 1633.

THe same day that Magdeburg was buried in her own ashes, the Caesarians burnt
down the bridge of Dessavia, with the Fort joining to it, to hinder the Swedes
passage that way, who were much perplexed for the Saxony and Brandenburg, whose
confederacy he desired; a great part of his Army took up their quarters about
Crosna and Glogove in Silesia: Gustavus Horn was raising new forces in Marchia,
therefore Spandavia is again demanded by the King, Custrinum is delivered up to
him; upon Marchia is laid a monthly tax of thirty Dollers toward the charges
of the war. In June news was brought to the King that Ghryphiswald which he
meant to take in, was already subdued by the Swedish horse who were riding up
and down the Country, about the Town, for fodder: Perusius Swedes, who send a
summons to the Townsmen and Garrison to surrender; the Soldiers within, though
they had lost their Captain, yet venture to sally out upon the enemy, but are
beat back again into the Town, who despairing of any succor, resolve to
preserve themselves; therefore June 16. they deliver up the Town to the Swedes,
who found in it great store of military provision. So now the Imperialists are
quite driven out of Pomerania.

This Country being now secured, the Swedes march into Marchia, where they
seize upon Werbena, a place fit for their encamping, and for all sorts of
provision. The Imperialists under Gotzius invade the Town Cotbus in the dark
which they take and plunder. Tilly's Army quarters at Mansfield, and plunders
the neighbor country of Thuringia. The Elector of Saxony calls a Diet at
Lipsick, of both the Saxonies, Marchia, Hassia, Franconia, and Suevia, wherein
Germany: There were present the Legates of the two Dukes of Megapolis, Adolphus
Frederick, and John Albertus, whom Caesar had driven out of their ancient
possessions; these raised an Army, and being assisted by the Swedes, resolve to
retake their possessions again. Albert took in Severin, Adolphus Frederick
Butzovium a Bishops seat being forsaken by the VVallenstenians who as they were
going to Rostoch with their booty, were stripped of all. The King himself did
accompany the two Dukes his kinsmen, in great state to Gustrovia, where he gave
them possession of their ancient inheritance: thence he marches to Magdenberg,
and by the way seiseth on Tangermund; then he pitches his Camp Werben, and
gives charge to some Commanders to take in Haverberg, and resolves to be
revenged for the loss of Magdenberg, with all the strength he has; in the
mean time, Queen Maria Elenor arrives at Wolgast with some young soldiers out
of Swethland; Marquess Hambleton, and Alexander Lesly bring eight hundred
Scots and English into Pomerania. At Lipsick it is ordered that the Imperial
Army, which made but a prey of Germany, should not be admitted within any of
their Towns, Castles, or Towers; and withal, they resolve not to part with any
of the Church Lands now in possession of the Evangelical Princes, because the
Pope claimed them not by way of justce and law, but by violence and the sword;
besides, it was a business to be decided in a William Lantgrave of Hassia
raises an forces for the defense of his borders: to hinder this levy, Tilly
hastneth to Erford, which he so affrighted, that the town presently opens the
gates to him; then he draws nearer to the borders of Cattie to hinder the
raising of the Hassians; but Pappenhem, who did yet remain about Magdeburg, got
him to divert his army elsewhere, for the King had marched over old Marchia,
where he took diverse Towns, and was come to VVolmarstad to seize upon the
strengths of Magdenburg, but that he was kept off by a greater power.

Tilly perceiving there was no other way but with his whole Army to fall upon
Gustavus having intelligence of his march, and not being able to encounter with
so vast an Army, intends to weaken some part of it; therefore he sends
Rheingravius, with some other Cornets of Horse, who fell upon and discomfited
three Imperial regiments, and return with rich booty; but Charles Ludovick the
Palatine, who in this war served under the King, was shot, to the said Kings
great grief. Tilly, to recover his loss, began to draw near the Swedish Camp,
but could not draw the King to fight; yet for three days together there was
discharging of Ordinance, and diverse sharp velitations: at last, Tilly recedes
with some loss. In Mansfield, Eggo Furstenbergius with his Italian Tilly: he
compels Suevia, and Franconia, to renounce the League of Lipsic, and to pay
tribute to the Emperor. The Swedish Kings army is increased by the addition of
these forces under Horn and Tottus: He gives two regiments to William the
Lantgrave for Hassia, which was courted by the Imperialists to side with them.
But to my purpose: at Franckfort on the Main an assembly was held of both
parties for an accommodation, which proved fruitless. Tilly to encourage his
drooping soldiers, falls upon the Duke of Saxony, whose assistance he demands,
and requires also an abolition of the decrees of Lipsick; this being denied by
the Duke, Tilly falls upon Meresburg, sets Frebrug on fire, and plunders Mistnia
far and near, to the undoing of the inhabitants. The Elector accuses Tilly for
these wrongs; showing how he had violated the Imperial Laws: he commemorates
also his good services to the Emperor, and manifest that he has been
faithful to him hitherto in every thing that belonged to him as Emperor, who
therefore ought not to do any thing contrary to justice and his oath, which if
he do, he shall not escape the hand of a revenging God; but when the Duke saw
that this way he could not Sweden, and lets him enter his provinces; he opens
the gates Witteberg for him about the beginning of September: The Elector of
Brandeberg having his Country exhausted with ^ributions and plunders, promises
to aid him with all the provision and money he can raise; in this interim Tilly
loses no time, but encompasses Lipsick wasting all the Country about it, and
summons the City to open the gates to him; which returned answer, they could
not without the consent of their Prince; whereupon Tilly prepares to storm, the
Townsmen burn down their Suburbs, and make all things ready for defense: but
the fresh example of Magdeburgs destruction, which was threatened to Lipsick, so
terrified them, that Tilly, begins now to frown, for the Saxon perceiving that
he had lost a great part of his jurisdiction, held it needful for him to
fight; for he thought with himself that if Saxony, Thuringia, and Misnia should
maintain three Armies all the Winter, they should be undone; he knew his cause
was just, and resolves to rely on Gods Providence.

But the King thought it not safe to hazard upon one battle two electorats, nor
to venture the new and raw soldiers of Saxony against the old and beaten
Imperial Troops; therefore held it better to procrastinate: yet at last, being
Podelvitza a Village, four miles from Lipsick, is the place designed for the
Battle; the Imperialists took the advantage of the ground, sun and wind, which
the Sweds by degrees gained of them by wheeling about; the King mingled his
Horse and Musketeers so, that they galled the Cesarians and beat them off. The
Swedish left Saxony, began to give ground, and to put Tilly in hope of victory;
but they were opportunely aided by Horns foot, which lay in ambush in a little
wood, that upon the encouragement of A^ruheim the fight is reneued, and the
Cesarian horse put to flight, so that in a short time, the whole Army was
rooted: the night coming on, and the air being obscured with dust, and the
smoke of powder, made the king forbear pursuing of the enemy, fearing least
there might be some treachery or ambush, therefore resolves the next day to
fight again; but when the morning came, they found the enemy was totally
defeated, by his Ordinance, bag, and baggage left behind, there were found
about fifteen thousand slain body's; Tilly himself was wounded, both Armies
were almost equal in number, in all sixty thousand; the most of Tilly's force
were old soldiers. This victory was presaged by a white-Dove that lighted upon
one of the Saxon colors: some report that before the fight, water was turned
into blood at Hall and Merseburg; above one hundred Imperial Colors were
taken; Tilly shot with a Bullet, which only bruised his skin, but could not
pierce it, being made impenitrable, as the Chyrurgion thought, by diabolical
art; he escaped, not without great pain of his bruise, to Hamelia. The King
seized presently after this upon diverse towns, and the Duke upon Lipsick, who
gave public thanks to God for recovering so soon again his lost territories:
then it was agreed, that the King should march into upper Germany, the Duke
into Silesia and Bohemia.

The King in his march takes in diverse Towns and Castles, as Sueinfurt,
Herbipolis, forsaken by the Bishop, with the Tower well furnished with all
things; the garrison were all killed for resisting so long, but the women by
the Kings Proclamation were preserved both from death and abuse: the Bishop of
Bamberg out off fear, shakes of his catholic confederacy, and binds himself
by Francony swear allegiance to the King, who permitted to the subjects liberty
of Conscience. In November also Hanovia is taken in for the King by Christopher
Haubaldus. The Cesarian forces of lowerSaxony are much dejected upon the report
of the Lipsick victory; Rostoch is delivered up to the Megapolitans; here were
five hundred horse, and fourteen foot companies, which made their peace, and
marched away: VVismaria held out a while, and made some sallies upon the
Swedes; but at last, on St. Thomas day, Gramminus the governor was forced to
surrender, who marched out with three thousand soldiers toward Gryphiswald,
diverse of which swear allegiance to the Swede. The Imperialists every where
take their flight, supposing Tilly had been dead of his wounds, of whom there
was no news a long time; at length it is reported, that he was recovered, and
had raised a new Army. At Rottenberg another battle is fought, in which the
Imperialists are again worsted; hereupon diverse other towns submit to the
Swedes; even Frankfort, famous for its Mart, and the Emperors Inauguration,
opened her gates for the Swedish Army to pass. Upon the uniting of the Hassian
forces, diverse other places surrender, the Bishops of Mentz and Worms, with
Anshelm, Casimire, retire to Colen. About the 7 of December the King sends his
army over the Rhene; five hundred of the first that got over, Rhene, he takes
in Oppenhem; Stenie is forsook by the Spaniards, and Worms by the Lorrenois.
Mentz after a fierce storm for diverse days is surrendered to the King, with the
Tower and Fortifications; December 23. where he kept his Christmasse with great
solemnity, and heard a Sermon in the Castle-Church: many other towns also
shortly after the surrender of Mentz, submitted to the King, whose victorious
Army overrun almost all Germany from the Baltic Sea to Mentz in one year; in
which also fell out a great Earthquake in the Naples, the eruption of Vesuvius,
flinging great stones twenty miles off, and the ruin of the towers on the
Jesuits Church in Vienna by the wind, even in the Emperors presence.

The next year, Ambassadors are sent to the Swedish king; from France,
England, and Ragotzius the new Prince of Transylvania; the French Embassy was
for a truce between the Swede and Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, with the
Catholic confederats; which was granted; for these made show, as if they meant
to stand neuters; but Pope Urban was against this neutrality, therefore he
raises great sums of money upon the Clergy of Italy, which he sent to the
Emperor, and makes a league between the Elector of Bavaria and the German
Frederick the fifth, Palsgrave, was furnished with Gold out of England, and
Soldiers out of Holland for the recovering of his Patrimony; for which end, he
joins himself with Gustavus. Ragotzius had discovered a plot intended against
him by the Cesarians, which made him fall off and to seek occasion of excursion
upon Hungary and Silesia, if he could have found any aid from the confederate
Protestants. In Bohemia, the Saxon Army under Aruhem takes Prague and diverse
other Towns thereabout; the Elector himself repaires thither and sets up again
the Protestant religion; the heads of those which were set upon the bridge at
Prague, he caused to be taken down, and decently buried; the banished Bohemians
return to their homes again, and great joy every where there was, but of short
continuance; for Albert VVallensten Duke of Fridland, whom the Emperor had
laid aside upon the Petition of the confederate Catholics, is now made
Generalissimo, and suddenly furnished with a great Army; Iacobus Gallas and
Count Sultzen join their forces with him, waste and plunder all the Country
about Prague, which caused great dearth and scarcity of Victuals: so sudden a
fear seized on Bohemia and Silesia, that both Countries Misnia: the cold winter
could not refrigerate the soldiers courage; the Swedish forces brak in upon
Alsatia; the Caesarians plunder the country about Strasburg, whom a party of
Horse from the City defeated and plundered; the fear of the conqueror overran
the Dukedom of VVirtenberg, and the Marquisat of Bada: the Imperialists are
killed and chased every where; Frankindal in the Lower Palatinate is besieged,
and sundry other places are taken by the Swedes.

In lower Saxony, the people rise against the Romanists. John Frederick
storming Breme, and all the revenews of his Diocese to be taken from him by
the Caesarians, raises some forces, falls upon Verda and Burg which he took,
and shortly after he lost, and again recovered them; so miserably were those
places tossed to and fro, like tennisbals. Pappenhem also raises new forces,
and takes in diverse places. The ruins of Magdeburg are left to the Swedes, who
place a garrison there: many parts of Germany are laid waste by the rapacious
soldiers on both sides, many towns taken and retaken; A peace in the mean
while is in agitation at Torgave, but to no purpose: the Duke of Saxonies
daughter is betrothed to Christianus 5. Prince of Denmark; her eldest sister
was married to the Lantgrave of Hessen; and Mary the second, to the Duke of
Holsatia: Ulricus brother to this Christianus Tilly is now again recruited, and
marches toward Bavaria. Noriberg had received within their gates five troops
of Protestants, Ulm also joins with the Swede: at Ausburg Tilly is furnished
with Ammunition, Victuals and Money, by which he is made able to rage with fire
and sword upon Northgavia, and the higher Palatinate. Horn takes Bamburg, the
Bishop escapes to Bavaria, thither Tilly marches: whereupon Horn withdraws his
forces in the night, but not without some loss to the Tillians, and marches
to Sueinfuri; whither also the King comes with his whole Army, and is royally
entertainted Noriberg: His coming hither made Tilly remove back to the upper
Palatinate, wasting all the Countries and Towns through which he marched. The
King goes to the Danow, and takes by storm Donaverd; Tilly follows him at the
heels, and takes the strong Tower Raina on the river Lycus, over which the King
makes a bridge: the Tillians took possession of a wood hard by, whence they
discharged their great Ordnance on the Swedes, to hinder their making of the
bridge; but they were so entrenched, that they did more hurt then received, for
in letting play their Cannon against the wood, so tore the Trees, that the
boughs and splinters of them spoiled many of the enemy; so that Tilly received
a hurt in the thigh, and Altringer in the head; therefore Newburg and
Ingoldstad, having lost one thousand men.

The King having finished the bridge, and transported his Army, sent a party to
take possession of Newburg, forsaken by Maximilian of Bavaria and Tilly. Then
summons Auspurg to open their gates, where were eighteen Companies of foot, and
two of horse, placed there by Caesar and the Bavarian, to keep under the
Protestants, whom they had disarmed, and forced to leave off their public
exercises; the Citizens desire the King to propose honorable terms to the
Garrison, otherwise it was not in their power to force them, nor to open their
gates to him; four days after, Articles being concluded between the King and
the Garrison, they march away with bag and baggage, with their Arms and Colors
flying: As soon as the King had entered, he removes all the Pontifician
Magistrates, and commits the government of the City to the Protestants, having
taken of them the oath of allegiance: from thence he marches toward
Ingolstad, where Tilly lay sick, and by the way takes in some Towns: mean while
the Danes and Swedes were like to break Holsatia, as well upon the Kings as the
Dukes subjects; but the Swedish Commanders making it appear, that these wrongs
were offered by some private soldiers without the knowledge of their Captains,
or of the King, the former league between these two Crowns was renewed by their
Ambassadors. In lower Saxony, Tottus the Kings Lieutenant there took in
Buxtehud, and intended to fall upon Stada, but that he was hindered by
Pappenhem, who with his flying Army over-runs all Saxony and Westphalia, with
the Diocese of Breme, wasting all with fire and sword, who having received
some opposition and loss by Tottus, returns into higher Germany: Tottus is
sent for Arnheim General of the Electoral Armies in higher Germany, was almost
intrapped by Wallensten, under pretense of making peace; for he had recovered
Prague about the beginning of May, whence he dismissed the garrison with their
swords by their sides, being two and twenty companies of foot, and two troops
of horse, they marched to Leutmeritz where the strength of the Saxon Army lay;
but if Arnheim had not departed the sooner thence, he had been encompassed by
Duke Fridlands Army, therefore he escapes over the bridge of Leutmeritz in the
night, and comes to Pirna.

Whilst these doings were at Albis, there was much action upon the Danow
between the Swedish King, and the Elector of Bavaria, who having left Tilly
Ingolstad, cunningly encompasseth Ratisbone: he makes show of mustering one of
the Garrison troops without the gate; but whilst the Citizens were going to
Church, that Garrison seized on the gate, and suddenly nine troops of horse
enter the Town, who plundered the Townsmen of their best goods and money: the
Bavarian afterward made this his chief seat; in the interim Count Tilly dies
at Ingolstad of the wound he received at Lycus: the King begins to lay siege to
Ingolstad, but as he was viewing of the works, his white horse was shot under
him; Christopher Durlacenus, a Marquess, was killed with a bullet, and one of
the Kings chief Commanders was mortally Swedes held it best to give off their
enterprise, so they march from thence to Monachium, the Bavarians chief seat,
which with some other Towns submitted to the Swede; in Monachium were found a
hundred and forty brass Ordnance, and other great Guns, in one of which were
hid thirty thousand Crowns; the Country people were so enraged against the
Swedes, that they cut off the noses and ears of diverse straglers, and killed
many of them; the Boors rise in great numbers and kill diverse garrisons, but
they were quickly suppressed by the soldiers, and their chief incendiaries put
to death: but when the King understood that the Ratisbonians made diverse
excursions, and had taken Weissenburg, he leaves Bavaria, and returns to
Donaverd, Ausburg and Raina. And now the Imperialists being strong, all Germany
is in a flame; Ossa the Emperors Lieutenant rages with fire and sword through
Alsatia, some Towns he burns down to the ground; Spire is taken, and plundered:
Oxenstern at Newstad falls upon a party of the Caesarians, from whom he took
three colors and some part of their plunder; Duke Fridland having taken in
Egra and Ellenbog, prepares to unite his forces with the Bavarians; Pappenhem
having wasted the borders of Hassia, threatens Thuringia; Strasburg which now
sided with the Swede, sends to King Gustavus three troops of horse, and six
hundred Musketeers: the Bavarian having left a garrison in Ratisbone, marches
with an hundred thirty four Cornets of horse, and eight and fifty companies of
foot, which he joined to the Walestine forces; this made the King, being now
near Noriberg, to entrench, and to send for all his dispersed forces; in the
mean time Tupatelius one of the Swedish Colonels was intercepted by the
Wallasten forces, who took him prisoner, and cut in pieces his whole Regiment,
at which the King grieved exceedingly; at length in July, upon the drawing near
of both Armies, diverse skirmishes and light encounters Fridland endeavored to
keep off provision from the Swedes, but the Swedish Auxiliaries who were
coming to join with their main body intercepted the Caesarian provisions.

About the end of July, the Caesarians had laid up great store of corn and
other provision in Freistad, which when the King knew by a Captain whom he took
prisoner, he sends Tupatelius lately dismissed by Wallestine with some Dragoons
thither, he breaking open the gates with petards, enters the town in the night,
burnt all the corn, and drove away the cattle; the King coming to aid
Tupatelius with more forces, makes an ambush for the Caesarians who August, the
King of Sweden was fifty thousand strong, so that they dared the Caesarians who
were entrenched; after the Armies had thundered three days together with their
ordnance against each other, the Wallestenians began to march away; the King
therefore August 24. falls upon the Imperialists, all that day they fought till
the night parted them; of the Imperialists were slain a thousand, of the Swedes
seven hundred: Fridlands own horse was shot under him: at last about the eight
of September, Gustavus for want of victuals was forced to rise first and march
away to Newstad; at Noriberg were left three hundred horse and Fridland being
out of hope to recover Noriberg, sets fire on the neighboring villages, and
marches to Forcheim, whose rear was set upon by the garrison of Noriberg.

Out of the Diocese of Trevers issues a new Army, which Ossa and Monticuculus
join to their own forces, with these they waste and spoil all the Country
about, but they were resisted by Horn, who pursues them into upper Alsatia,
where he took Benfeld and other places; the Duke of Saxonies forces had been
sent away, some to Silesia, others to the Swedish camp: hereupon Holkius one of
the Caesarian commanders, with 8000. resolute men, falls with fire and sword
upon Saxony, Misnia and Naristi, burning and plundring as far as Dresda the
Dukes seat; he exacteth great sums of money from the Town of Anneberg, and puts
a garrison in Zuiccavia; Walstein divides his Army, and sends the Bavarian
forces into Bavaria, Gallas with a party is sent into Bohemia, and Franconia
Walstein retains to himself; Gallas subdues all the places he went through to
the Emperor, and wastes Noricum; Walstein takes in Columbac and Coburg, but the
Castle held out for the Duke of Saxony: the King also divides his Army, a part
whereof he sends to attend the motions of Fridland: Reina was delivered up to
the Bavarians by Mutsefall the Swedish governor, wherefore by the Kings
command he loses his head, and the Town is retaken Swedes in October; Bernhard
of Vinaria falls suddenly on the Caesarian Croats, defeats them, and takes ten
colors from them, which made Fridland change his resolution, who thought to
break in upon Thuringia; the King cuts off the Bavarian Auxiliaries that were
going to relieve Lausena, which at length Kniphusius took for the Swede: in
Saxony, Gallas and Holk waste all, who take in Freiberg for the Emperor, the
Citizens were forced to pay 100000. Dollers to keep off the soldiers from
plundering; and the Elector redeemed his Chapel and Tombs of his Ancestors
from spoiling for eighty thousand Dollers. Arnhem subdues the lower Alsatia for
the Swedes; Fridland does the like in Saxony for the Emperor. Lipsic, October.
22. is surrendered to Holk, the Inhabitants are disarmed and pay to the Emperor
50000. Dollers. Voppelius delivers up Pleissenburg to the Caesarians, for which
afterward he lost his head. Many other Towns, to avoid present ruin, submitted
to the Imperial yoke in Saxony; which Pappenhem also threatens with fire and
sword, being now returned from his fruitless expedition to Utricht; the King
perceiving that his confederate Duke of Saxony was in danger to lose all his
Walstein and Pappenhem were conjoined.

The fatal battle was fought at Lutzen the 6. of November; after some light
skirmishes, the next day as soon as the Sun had dispersed the clouds, the
King having called upon God, and refusing to eat any thing, leads out his Army,
which the enemy encounters with great fury; the heat of the battle was about
ten of the clock; the left wing of the Caesarian Army began to give ground,
which the King observing, presses on them the more eagerly, and pursues them
so far in their flight, that he received diverse wounds, of which he died
immediately the eight and thirtieth year of his life, to Bernehard who had the
charge of the left wing, behaved himself so bravely, that he put the enemy to
flight: and now the battle seemed to be at an end; but Pappenhem, to his own
ruin, makes haste from Hall, rallies again the disordered and running
Caesarian Troops, with whom he joins his own forces, and begins a more furious
conflict in the dark, then that which was fought by daylight, in which he
lost his life honorably; the fight continued till eight of the clock, and then
the Caesarians gave ground, retreating Lipsic, they left behind them some part
of their Ordnance and baggage; about nine thousand of both sides were killed,
and two of the best soldiers of their time, King Gustavus and Pappenhem; the
King presaged his own death, and wished his friends not to trust in him, whose
breath was in his nostrils, but rather in Christ Jesus, who promised he would
be with his Church to the end of the world.

Duke Fridland the next day after the battle left Lipsic, and being highly
displeased that some of his officers had forsaken their colors, and plundered
their fellow soldiers, he afterward at Prague condemned them to death by a
Council of war. Holk delivers up the City-keyes to the Senate Lipsic, of which
the Saxons, Novem. 10. took possession, being surrendered to them. The Kings
Army, though their head was gone, yet resolve to prosecute the work, they take
Chemnitz, Pleissenburg and Zuiccavia, under the command of Bernhard, Kniphus
and Horn; the same Horn took also the Imperial City Colmaria, which had been
taken five years before by the Imperialists, the Protestant Religion is there
set up again, and their liberties confirmed by Articles. Haggenove admits a
Swedish garrison. Frankendale is restored Novem. 26. to the Palsgrave, the
Spanish garrison is thence transported to Lucemberg. Frederick the Palsgrave,
having by the Swedish aid recovered a great part of his Patrimony, departs
Mentz, November 19. he left ten Children behind him, begot of the Lady
Elizabeth daughter to King James; his brother Ludovic Philip, who had also lost
his estate undertakes the administration of the Electorate lands: Oxenstern
Chancellor of Swethland, is made Protector of that Kingdom, and of Christiana
the Kings only daughter and heir, being now seven years old. About this time
the Diocese of Colen which had been the sanctuary of the exiled Prelates, is
now much molested by William of Nassaw, and Henry Baudis, who took diverse Towns
there; a certain soldier being a prisoner in St. Urbans Church, sets fire to
some barrels of Gunpowder there, which was the death of 300. persons; the Duke
of Luneburg having an Army of 16000. falls suddenly upon the Imperialists, of
which he takes 400. prisoners, the rest being above a 1000. he puts to flight,
1633.
whom the Swede and Saxons pursue, killing and plundering many of them; Anderac
is besieged by Count Isenburg, and his Caesarian forces, who were stoutly
repulsed by Rantzovius the Holstatian governor, who sallied out three times
upon them; at last Baudis coming with new supplies forced the Imperialists to
raise their siege after they had made breaches in the walls by their Hamelia is
besieged by Luneburg, but the Town had within it six foot companies, and two
troops of horse, with all sort of provisions which made the siege longer then
was expected; William Landgrave of Hassia defeats the Caesarians that were
coming to the relief of the Town, of these 7000. were killed, the rest fled,
and Hamelia at length is taken. Horn this year did great service for the Crown
of Swede by taking in diverse Towns in Germany, but in Alsatia the Boors made
another insurrection, in which diverse soldiers were killed and tortured by
them, but Rheingravius suppressed 4000. of them, and hanged up 130. At Bibrac
were seen two swords in the Air, the one was bloody, and the other Germany,
the Lakes were seen all bloody; in their bread, and on their trees blood was
seen; a two-headed calfe, and a two-headed child were ingendered in March.
Raina is by the treachery of the Townsmen delivered up to the Bavarians again.
Horns and the Vinarian forces being joined make up 28. thousand foot, and
12000. horse, with these they fall upon Bavaria, they defeat John de Werds
horses, and take in diverse Towns; mean while the Caesarian and Bavarian forces
do join near Ratisbone: Fridland with a great Army enters Silesia; the Polonian
forces are overthrown by the Swedes: Ulricus the Danish Prince defeats 2000.
Caesarian horse, and takes Braura From them; the King of Denmark, and the new
elected King of Poland Uladislaus 4. son to Sigismund labor much for a general
peace in Christendom; fearing lest the Turk having defeated the Persian,
should fall upon them; but the French and Protestant party in Germany would not
hearken to any till the liberty of Germany should be restored; Oxenstern is
made President of the Council of war: the French renew their league with the
Swedish party. Heidelberg with the Castle is retaken by the Protestants. In
Swethland the act is renewed for dis-inheriting Sigismunds heirs from that
Crown, and the Augustan confession is again confirmed; the care of the young
Queen is committed to the chief officers of that Kingdom, and the war against
the Caesarians is continued till a firm peace be concluded, for this purpose
the taxes on

CHAP. XI.
The Savoyan History from the year 1504. till the year 1580.

CHarles the third, the ninth Duke of Savoy, succeeded to his brother Philbert,
Philip the second: the first year of his government 1504.
was accompained with such a plague through all Savoy, that there wanted men to
bury the dead, and Till the ground: the first ten years of this Duke, Savoy
enjoyed much peace; till he made use of the French army against the Switzers,
which had made excursions upon Savoy, and plundered some parts of the Delphinat:
this army Francis the French king and Nephew to this Charles by his sister, had
raised for recovering of the Dukedom of Millan; the Switzers were angry with
Charles for permitting the French Army to pass through his Territories, and
assisting them with necessaries, which favor the Switzers had denied them by
the Duke, though they were beaten, and Millan 1516.
surrendered; yet they still hated the Duke, storming that their Cities in
Savoy and Piemont were open to the French, and shut against them; and that the
Duke had furnished the French with Victuals and great Ordnance. Francis
returning from Millan, walks on foot with all his train to Camerinum in
performance of his Vow, and is magnificently entertained by the Duke in his
house diverse days together, after many complements and thanks given by Lions;
but these courtesies were afterward forgotten by king Francis, when he sent
against Savoy a great army, under Philip Chabot Admiral of France, who stripped
the Duke of a great part of his Duchy, notwithstanding he had the help of the
Emperor Charles 5. the cause of this quarrel proceeded from the claim which
Francis laid to the Duchy of Savoy by his mother, the daughter of Margaret of
Burbon, first wife to Philip, father of this Duke Charles; to his said mother
Francis alleged the Duchy belonged, and not to Charles, because she was the
eldest; and upon the Articles of marriage between Philip their father, and the
friends of Margaret, it was agreed, that without difference of sex, the
children of their bodies should succeed. Francis said belonged to him in right
of his mother, notwithstanding the woman was excluded by the Salique law among
the Savoyens: at last, he desired so much of it as lay in France, on this side
of the river of Rohan, being given to his grandmother Margaret of Burbon, in
right of her marriage: He demands also Bressa, and forty years arrears,
amounting to 180000 crowns with all the interest; besides, some part of Piemont
as belonging to Province: he complains likewise that Taurinum and other towns
beyond the Po, were annexed to the Duchy of Savoy, during the heat of this
war, and after the death of Robert king of Sicily, Count of Province, and
Prince of Piemont; Nice, and Haven of Ville Franc, did always appertain to the
county of Province, but now by the treachery of the inhabitants, under the
power of Savoy; that diverse places also of the Marquisat of Salusses were
violently taken away from the Dolphin by the Savoyen: moreover, that the Duke
had scornfully rejected the badge of St. Michael, sent to him by the French
king, with the Captainship of 100 Courizers, and a pension of twelve thousand
crowns; and lastly, that in hatred of the French D. Charles had assisted the
Spainard and Burgundian, and had always been (...) league with the Emperor
Charles 5. and at that time too when he was unfortunately taken prisoner by him,
at the battle of Papia: For these reasons, Savoy is made a prey French, who
seize upon the high countries thereof; to the Bernois who invade the low and
fruitfullest parts; and to Charles the Emperor, who takes possession of the
chief Cities.

Others do give these reasons, why Francis was so offended with D. Charles. 1.
Because he pawned his Plate to assist Charles of Burbon, then a Rebel and enemy
to the crown of France. 2. Because he preferred the counsels of his wife, a
Lusitanian, and sister to Charles the fifths wife, before Francis his uncle. 3.
For sending gratulatory letters to Caesar, after his victory at Papia. 4. For
endeavoring to break off the league between France and Helvetia. 5. Because he
received the city of Asta, the French patrimony above a hundred years, in
Italy: this Caesar gave to the Duke, to keep out the French from ever entering
again into Italy. 6. Because he would not part with the city Nicaea, a Colony
of the Massilians in Province, which the French had pawned to him for a sum of
money, though the money was tendered by the King, who was not willing to part with
that ^wn, both because of its strength, harbor, and situation, as parting
Italy from France. 7. Because upon entreaty he would not give way that the Pope
should give the French king a meeting there. 8. For denying passage through his
country to the King, when he was hastening to Millan to be revenged on the Duke
of that place, for causing his Ambassador to be put to death.

For these causes the Duke so incensed the French king, that he ruined his
country. His policy had been better (say some) to have held in with France,
both by reason of its vicinity, of its power, and also of the neernesse of
blood between the King and Duke, then to hearken so much to the Emperor, and to
be led away by him, who was too far off to do him either hurt or good. The
Switzers also, upon the request of Geneva, threaten war against Savoy, if the
Duke offer to trouble that city, which was in league with Charles having sent a
crabbed answer to the Switzers, and perceiving what danger he was in, sends
privately to Charles the Emperor, being then at Panormum after his victory at
Tunis, for aid: but the matter was not carried so closely, as to conceal it
from the French king, who was the more enraged against D. Charles, because he
demanded of the Emperor some places in Italy, promising him in lieu thereof all
that he possessed in France behind the Alps, with the city of Geneva, so that
he might have easy access to the confederate countries. If this had
succeeded, France had been undone, the Emperor having an entrance made for him:
but the King a while took no notice of this, till he had answer from the
Savoyan to his demands, which were* That he might Millan. This being denied, he
claimed the Duchy of Savoy as his due; and the rather, because he could not
trust the Duke with such places, as might let in his enemies upon him when he
pleased. Mean while, because the King suspected he should receive no good
answer from the Duke, he makes ready a strong army under Philip Chabotius his
Admiral; he first seized on the trans-alpin towns, then having passed the Alps
he takes in some of the sub-alpin places. But the French victories had a check
given them by the Millanois, who staid his progress, otherwise Vercelliz and a
great part of the subalpin territories had been brought under the French yoke;
besides, Philip was stopped by John Cardinal of Lorain, whom the Emperor had sent
Philip to go no further then the river Duria, and that he should not offer any
act of hostility to hinder the peace, left he incur the Emperors displeasure.
Philip did as he was counseled, thinking the Emperor thereby would be the more
tractable, and that he would not act any thing dishonorable to him: but a
little while after, the war broke out again, and in a short time, by the valor
of Count Fanus Paulinus, Francis obtained almost all Savoy.

The French writers strive to excuse king Francis his invasion of Savoy, and to
blame the Duke; but indeed, the kings reasons were but specious pretenses,
Philip would have acted any thing against the Salique law, or that his people
would have assented thereto, being carefully from the beginning observed by
them; so that with much ado would they suffer at any time the mother, during
the nonage of the Duke, to rule that Duchy: neither can Duke Charles be blamed
for entertaining a league with the Emperor, considering his power and greatness,
as also the many and long leagues between the Houses of Burgundy and Savoy, and
that faithful correspondency between the Empire and Savoy; besides, Charles
thought there needed no other league with king Francis then that which nature
had already made, to wit, consanguinity. The loss therefore of Savoy cannot be
imputed to the Dukes want of policy, or any negligence, but rather to that
all-ruling Providence which has prescribed certain periods of time to all
powers and principalities, which ar^o less subject to change and mortality
then the men themselves of which they are composed. And although King Francis
was a good Prince, yet in this he was no good man, to invadeand challenge
another right; and much less could he be a good Christian, who would make a
league with that great Antichrist, and call in the Turk upon Christendom,
because he could not otherwise be revenged on the Emperor; this was an act
ill-beseeming the most Christian King.

Duke Charles made no resistance to the French forces, for indeed he could not,
having exhausted all his treasury on the Genevan war; for that City took
occasion to rebel upon this discord between France and Savoy, therefore the
Duke did what he could to reduce them to obedience, which he could Berne which
took the Genevans part; besides the Duke relied on the Emperors power and
authority, thinking the French would have submitted to what agreement he should
make: the Emperor indeed was much incensed against the French, of whom he
complained to the Pope in the assembly of the Cardinals, that Francis had
invaded the Territories of a Prince joined so nearly to the Empire by affinity,
and under the protection of the Empire, yea the Empires Lieutenant; the
heinousness of which act he aggravates, in that it was against the Kings own
Uncle: having complained, he marches toward France with his Army, whence
ensued a long war between 1536.
the two great Monarchs of Christendom, to the great destruction of Piemont;
the success of this war was various; at last the French King having recruited
his Army, and raised the siege from Taurinum and Pignerol, a truce for three
months is concluded, and after them for three months longer, which being
expired, and all hopes of peace blasted, the war is renewed.

Charles the Emperor had called a Diet at Ratisbone (anciently Augusta Tiberia)
1541.
for composing the differences of Religion; in this the Duke of Savoy
complained of the wrongs done him by the French King without any ground: the
French Ambassador there, answers by a writing, which caused great debate and
different opinions among the Princes, so that nothing was concluded, whereupon
the war (as is said) was renewed; mean while the Turkish fleet of Marsiles,
under the conduct of Hariaden Aenobarb a notorious Pyrat; these having spent
most part of the Summer in that harbor, upon the French kings desire, for whom
Solomon had sent them, besiege Nicaea a haven Town in Province both by sea and
land; hither the Bishop of Geneva being driven out, translated his seat: this
Town, after the great ordnance had battered down the walls and forts, fought
stoutly against the Turks, whose standard they took, the standardbearer being
killed; but at last the Town is taken, plundered and burned, yet the Castle
standing on a high cliffe, held out by the valor of Paul Simeon the governor
thereof, and one of the Knights of Rhodes. Alphonsus Gustavus Italy, and
Viceroy of Millan) makes haste to relieve it, with him were joined D. Charles
his forces, these seeing the Town destroyed, relieve the Castle with all
necessaries for a long siege, commending the valor of Simeon and the soldiers
that held out, and preserved the Townsmen; Aenobarb now out of all hope to gain
the Castle, returns to Marsiles: Guastius mean while lays siege to Montevic
one of the chief sub-alpin Cities, whose defection from the Empire had drawn
many others after it; at last after a long siege the Town yields, and shortly
after 85. Castles submitted to the Imperial yoke.

Aenobarb sends out of the Port of Tholon (of old Tarenta, which is toward
Marsiles) two passage-Barks to Solomon at Constantinople laden with captives,
among which were diverse boys and handsome maids, these had been perpetual
slaves to the Turk and Devil, had not Garcias Toletanus the Viceroy of Naples
his son with some Galleys fallen upon the Turkish convoy, which he overcame,
and so rescued the two Barks; these he sent home with a strong convoy, and so
Solomon came short of this booty, as also of the rich presents which Aenobarb
had appointed for him, all which were taken by Garcias: About this time
Luxenburg which Charles D. of Orleans, and son to King Francis had taken two
years before, was retaken by the Caesarians, with diverse other Towns. The
French lay siege to Carigna which Guastus endeavored to raise; a hot skirmish
lasted an hour, in which the Marquess was worsted, and hardly escaped with his
life; in this fight 9000. were slain, and almost 2000. were taken; the Town
being tired out with continual duty and famine, at last surrenders. The same
year 1544.
Caesar calls a Diet at Spire, thither King Francis sends his Ambassadors with
some instructions in Print, but they were not permitted to enter; and withal
Francis is declared an enemy to the Empire, for invading the Duke of Savoy's
Nicaea or Nissa, therefore they order that war be denounced against him, and
that the Duke be restored to all his goods and estate; An act also passed for
six months pay toward the maintenance of of Caesar's Army, consisting of 24000.
foot and 4000. horse; All French soldiers are banished out of Germany, and
punishment threatened against those that shall harbor or relieve any: Thus a
great Army being raised, the Emperor invades France on the one side, and the
English on the other; many Towns are taken, much blood shed, and a great fear
at Paris, but an unexpected peace is concluded; yet some years after the war
was renewed, some Towns are taken Piemont, but they are forced to forsake
Vercellae after they had 1551.
taken it, upon the report of Caesar's Army that was marching thither: At last
Duke Charles ended his troubles, which he bore with singular patience, by
departing out of this turbulent life into a more peaceable and calm, and was
buried at Vercellae. 1554.


To Duke Charles succeeded his son Emanuel Philbert: he was bred from his
childhood in the Court of Charles 5. Emperor, who loved him exceedingly for his
eminent parts, and made him Captain of his Lifeguard, consisting of 4000.
horse: afterward when the Emperor Charles transferred all his Kingdoms and
power upon his son Philip, the same Emanuel was by Philip made 1555.
time he was in it, which was four years, till he returned to his own dominion,
that he left behind him a good name; he bare his fathers losses so patiently,
that God at last restored him to his inheritance: King Philip made him
Generalissimo of his whole forces, by whose valor he obtained that memorable
victory over the French at S. Quintin, and withal took the City it self. Two
years after, peace being made between king Philip and king Henry of France,
Emanuel was restored to his full estate, and withal married with Margaret
Henry's sister; but the French retained a while in their hands Turin,
Villanova, Aslen, Guierse and Chivali, which at last he demands by his Legates
from King Charles 9. of France, who succeeded his brother Francis; but the
French loath to part with them, put off the Duke with long delays and excuses,
alleging that Nicea and Villafranca, with their dependances, were anciently
annexed to the County of Province, and subject always to the Counts of
Province, and that Queen Joan Niece to Robert king of Naples and Earl of
Province, and after her Lewis the first Duke of Amdes whom she had made her
heir, did possess these now when the houses of Amdes and Arragon fell at
variance for the kingdom of Naples, the Savoyan upon this took occasion to
seize on Nicea and Villafranca, having no title to them, and would never since
that time be induced to part with them; but the French kings have right to them
by the last will of Charles Amdes, Earl of Province, and king of Naples, the
last of that family: This Charles bequeaths his whole estate to Lewis 11. of
France, and to his son Charles, whom with all the succeeding kings of France he
makes his heirs; therefore the Savoyan must part with these places to the
French, before he can have possession of the Towns which the king holds from
him; so likewise the Principality of Piemont did of old belong to Province, and
was possessed by the above named Q. Joan. The French also prove the County of
Asten belongs to them, because John Galeacius Viscount of Millan gave it in
Dowry with his daughter Valentine, when she married with Lewis D. of Orleans,
great grandfather to K. Charles; this County Charles 5. Emperor injuriously
seized upon, and the Savoyen against all right has hitherto enjoyed it; they
show also that there have been many debates between the French and Savoyen,
about the Marquisat of Salusses, that the Counties of Geneva and Foucignium
depend upon the Delphinat, and are held in fee of the French, therefore the
Savoyen ought to do homage to K. Charles for them, as his ancestors had done
heretofore. Lastly, the French Ambassadors show, that whereas Philip of Savoy
having married with Margaret of Burbon, and that Ludovica mother to K. Francis
was the daughter of this Margaret, and that it was agreed upon articles of
marriage, that the children of Philip and Margaret should have shares in their
estate; that therefore the French king had reason to lay claim to some parts of
Savoy.

These and other reasons were alleged why the French king might retain these
controverted towns; yet for quietness sake, because France then had many
enmies, both intestine and foreign, King Francis the second brother to King
Charles sends to Burdiloun Governor of Piemont to deliver these towns to the
Savoyen, conditionally that he will part with Savillianum, and Pignerol with
the adjacent Abbey Burdillonius; upon this he calls together the chief Captains
Nicea with the tower and subjacent places should be restored to the King, and
that Fossanum with the adjacent places, as likewise the County of Austen, and
whatsoever by right of inheritance belonged to Francis the first's mother,
likewise the Marquisat of Salusses, and all places appertaining thereto, which
the Savoyen heretofore took away injuriously Turin, when the inhabitants saw
themselves forsaken by D. Charles, they of their own accord submited to the
French king Francis, petitioning earnestly they might hereafter be under the
protection of France, which was assented to by king Francis: Upon these
considerations, Burdillonus thought it fit to acquaint king Charles his mother,
the king of Navar then Lieutenant over all France, the Princes of the Blood,
the Constables, the Marshals, and Chancellor, and the kings Counselors with
these passages, And humbly beseeches them that the kings Patent might be
mended, and all their names added to it, that the France, chiefly that of
Paris: This was the sum of his Petition, which to most of the kings Council
seemed 1562
unreasonable, seeing the restitution of those controverted Places to the
Savoyen was agreed upon at the last meeting of the Spanish and French
Ambassadors at Lions: therefore the French king had sent an express Mandate
for their restitution; and to this purpose, Margaret king Charles his Aunt was
married to Emanuel Philbert Duke of Savoy, by which marriage they have children
to inherit these lands. Therefore the opinion of the Council was, that France,
seeing by the custom of that kingdom, the kings Council is of greater dignity
and authority then any French parliament.

The king to satisfy Burdillon, caused the king of Navar and the rest of the
Senators to put their Hands and Seals to the kings order, though without
president or custom; he is commanded therefore presently to restore the
controverted places, conditionally that the king be put in possession by the
Duke of the places, agreed on in the last conference at Lions, to wit,
Savillan, Petrousie, Pyneroll, and Ginoll; but the two former were restored by
Henry 3. at Turin, where he was magnificently entertained by the D. Emanuel in
his journey from Poland, when he was coming to receive the Crown of France, his
brother Charles being dead; this he gave as a gift to his Aunt, the Dukes wife,
and her son Charles. About six years after, Emanuel Philbert departed this life
at Turin, whose body Vercelles, in his fathers tomb. 1574.


To him succeeded his son Charles 4. surnamed Emanuel, he was born the 61. year
of this Century, and in the 80. year succeeded. In the 8 year of his
government, he invades and takes the towns of Carmaniola and Salusium, which
were 1580.
injuriously detained by the French from him; for in the conference at Lions
the French King promised the Spainard, that the Savoyen should have restitution
of all places taken from him by the French in the last war between them, which
lasted 23 years, except some towns, among which were these two now named; these
the king would retain till Margaret should bring forth children to her husband,
and then would restore them: But he did not, though often solicited Charles;
Wherefore he takes them by force, being thereto animated by Philip 2. of Spain
his father in law; and finding a fit opportunity thereto by reason of the
distraction of France, by their civil wars.

CHAP. XII.
The History of Hungary from the beginning till the year 1532.

THe Huns a people of Scythia, transported themselves into this part of
Panonia, which from them is called Hungary; it was inhabited by the Goths, who
by the Huns were driven out thence: Many of the Ostrogoths joined with the
Huns, and so made up one Nation: the Vestrogoths went into Mysia and Thracia,
by the consent of Valence the Emperor, conditionally that they should defend
the borders of the Empire from the Huns; but the covetousness and negligence
of the Roman Governors gave occasion both to Goths and Huns to invade the
Empire, so that after diverse battles, the Romans were forced to let the Huns
enjoy all Panonia quietly, where as soon as they were settled, they chose
themselves a King, Attila by name, who much molested the Romans: in his absence
he left his brother Buda to govern his kingdom, Mysia, Thrace, Macedon, and
Illyricum, he caused to be strangled, upon suspicion that he affected the
kingdom. After this, he invadeth Germany and France, with a numerous Army,
spoiling all before him with fire and sword, but was met and overthrown by
Aetius, in this battle 180000 Huns were slain, Attila fled by night into his
Camp, commanding those that were about him to burn him, if the enemy should
obtain the Camp, because he would not fall into their hands alive: But when he
saw the enemy was retreated, he falls furiously upon all the neighboring
countries, sparing neither sex nor age; then he goes to Sicambria, now called
Buda, where he gave himself to his delights; but he could not be long without
Italy with a hugh Army, which struck such a terror there, that after he had
taken Aquileia after three years siege, many out of all parts of Italy fled to
the Islands of the Adriatic sea, where they built them a City, now the Queen
of the Sea: many other Cities of Italy submitted to him; he abstained from Rome
upon the entreaty of Pope Leo. Being returned to Panonia, he died of an
Apoplexy, and sudden erruption of blood. After his death, his children
striving for his Dominions, lost all: so that the Goths seized upon Panonia,
whose power after this grew so great, that they had got almost the whole Empire
of Italy. Odoacer the Gothish king made Augustulus resign the Empire; so that
he, and eight Gothish kings that succeeded to him, enjoyed the Western Empire
with Panonia, whom the Lombards drove out of Panonia first, then out of Italy:
These being wholly addicted to Italy, left Panonia to the remainder of the
Huns, conditionally, that if their affairs should not succeed in Italy, they
might be received again into Panonia; they under their King Albonius erected a
kingdom in Italy. The Huns make eruptions upon diverse parts of Germany, with
great

In this mean time, two hundred and sixteen thousand Scythians break in upon
Panonia through Muscovia and Sarmatia. In Dacia, Almus descended of Attila, did
reign: to him being slain succeeded Arpadius, who sends to Suates then Prince
of Sarmatia, a horse richly trapped, and a request, that he would spare some of
his waste lands to his people, who wanted ground; Suates at first assented, but
hearing of the rapacity and multitude of that people, refused; whereupon he
raises an Army: but the strangers challenging that land as due to them, and
bought by the horse that was sent, march out against Suates, Danow, where he
was drowned. Arpadius seiseth on the Country, and divides it among his
Captains: these being settled, and the Stythian yoke cast off, they call
themselves Hungarians, and had diverse wars with the Polonians, Bohemians, and
Moravians. Charles the great being molested by the Hungarians invades their
Country, and by his son Pipin drives them out of all the higher Hungary. Gaba
their King, at Buda, in the midst of his jollity and pleasures is taken and
imprisoned, where he killed himself. Charles causes the idols of Mars and
Hercules there to be destroyed, and Christ to be preached; he disarmed the
people, dismantled the towns, and laid heavy taxes on them. When Charles was
dead Lindentus a potent and factious Hungary to its ancient liberty; therefore
Lewis the Pious, to whom Hungary and the adjacent Countries were bequeathed by
his fathers Will, raises an Army against him; Lindentus marches with his
forces, having wasted Carinthia, Dalmatia, and Bavaria: but he was defeated and
driven to the mountains by Lewis, to whom at last he submitted, and was
pardoned. After this, the Hungarians were quiet for some years; but they break
out again, invade Italy, and made Berengarius who came against them, to buy his
peace. After them the Sarazens fall upon Italy, whom Albert Duke of Etruria
defeated; but being slighted for his good service, he calls the Hungarians again
into Italy, which they miserably afflicted, Berengarius tributary the second
time; thence they fell upon Germany, and having defeated the German forces,
they plunder Bavaria and Franconia; the havoc and waste they made in Germany,
broke the heart of Lewis the Emperor: Conradus his successor became tributary
to Hungary; Henry his successor denied to pay this tribute, wherefore they lay
waste many parts of Germany; but at last they are overthrown, and their Captain
taken, whose life they would have redeemed, but could not. Then a peace of nine
years is agreed on; but before these were expired, they demand their tribute of
the Emperor, who instead thereof sent them a lame and mangie Dog: they to be
revenged, send three hundred thousand men, whose Germany was unspeakable; at
length Henry defeats the, moan hundred and fifty thousand are slain, and fifty
thousand of them taken prisoners: thus Germany rested a while; then they return
into Italy, and are quieted by a silver sop from Berengarius 3. Toxis their K.
not forgetful of their overthrow in Germany, and hearing that Henry was dead,
resolves to fall upon Saxony, but Otho the Emperor kept them out thence: some
years after, when Otho was distracted with civil wars, Toxis invades Germany in
diverse places; but when the Princes were reconciled, Otho raises a great army,
and overtakes the Hungarians laden with spoil near Auspurg, where a cruel
battle is fought, and the Hungarian army quite routed, multitudes of them were
drowned in the river, some that had escaped were burned in the houses where
they hid themselves; king Toxis is taken with four other Princes, who all
afterward lost their heads.

The kings of Hungary, after they received the Christian faith, were these: 969.
Gaysca, who was baptized by Adolbert Bishop of Prague; Steven his son was
baptized by the same Bishop, and afterward canonized; the Emperor Henry married
his sister to this Steven, and so all Hungary became Christian. This king
Strigon, and endowed it he erected also the Monastery of S. Martin, and another
goodly Church, the' burying place of the Polonian kings, with diverse other
monuments of his piety; he was buried in his temple at Strigon. To him
succeeded his sisters son 1039.
Peter, who for his tyranny is deposed. His successor was Abba, who having
reigned three years, was deposed for his tyranny, and Peter restored again; in
his time Hungary began to fall off from Christianity; he reigned five years and
six months. Andrew K. Stevens kinsman set up again the Christian faith; he
1047.
had two sons, Solomon and David; he caused Solomon to be crowned at five years
old, which occasioned a war between Andrew and his brother Bela, in Andrew is
killed, and buried in the monastery of S. Amian, which he built himself. Bela
his brother succeeded, who had 3 sons, Geicza, Ladislaus, 1062.
and Lampertus: He was the first there that used silver-coyn, weights and
measures, and set prices upon wares; he built a Monastery in Zewkzare, in which
he was buried; he defeated Henry the Emperors forces, which were sent to aid
his brother; he died in the year 1065. Solomon K. Andrews son succeeded, 1065.
but is driven out of the kingdom by Geicza and Ladislaus the sons of Bela,
therefore he lived an Eremitical life in Istria, where he died. Geicza Bela's
eldest son succeeded; in his time Hungary was visited with a great famine. His
1077.
successor was his brother Ladislaus, called the Saint, for his innocence; he
added Dalmatia and Croatia to Hungary; he had many wars with the Scythians;
Colomannus Geicza's son succeeded; he was first a Bishop, 1095.
and while he was king a cruel tyrant, he put out the eyes both of his brother
and his brothers son, his brother Almus afterward was by him murdered in the
church; he had two sons, Ladislaus and Steven who succeeded to his father,
being as yet young; he was called the Lightning by his subjects, because 1114.
his actions were sudden and rash; having no children, and weary of government,
he betook himself to a Monastery, where he died. 1131.


Bela 2. called the blind, because Colmannus had blinded both him and his
father Almus, succeeded; he was a good, though a blind King: he had four
Colmannus his bastard, who had raised forces against him: He died an. 1141. and
was buried at Alba regalis or Stuluneissenburg, 1141.
the place where the Hungarian kings are usually crowned and buried. His son
Geicza 2. succeeded: he suppressed the Saxons, Austrians, and Bavarians, who
had invaded Hungary; he was a pious Prince, and built diverse Churches, leaving
four sons behind him; he died an. 1161. his eldest son Steven 3 1161.
succeeded; he had wars with the Venetians in Dalmatia, with Emanuel the Greek
Emperor, and with Ladislaus and Steven his kinsmen, by whom at last he was
expelled the kingdom; he died childlesse, and is buried at Strigon. His throne
was usurped by Ladislaus 2. son to blind Bela; he reigned 6 months, 1173.
and after him his brother Ladislaus 5 months; him K. Steven 3. overthrew,
they died both the same year. Bela 3. brother to Steven 3. succeeded, who
cleared Hungary of Highway-men; his successor was Emericus the eldest of his
two sons, who died shortly after his father; he left one son, Ladislaus 3. 1196.
who reigned but 6 months. Andrew 2d son to Bela 3. succeeded: he made an
expedition into the Holy Land, where for his good service against the Sultan of
Babylon, he was honored with the surname of Jerusalem: his wife Gertruda, of
whom he had four sons, was wounded mortally by the Palatine or Viceroy of
Hungary, for soliciting the Palatines wise to uncleanness with her brother.
After K. Andrews return from Jerusalem, he married again; he bestowed on the
Nobility of Hungary diverse privileges. His son Bela 4. succeeded; in his time
500000 Scythians waste all Russia and Podolia, thence they fall upon Hungary,
where a battle was fought, and the King with much ado escaped in 1235.
a servile habit, many prime men of Hungary were then slain; Great cruelties on
all sexes and ages were exercised for three years together by these Barbarians,
who returning to Maeotis the Lake, embrace Mahumetanisme. King Bela Rhodes was
restored to his kingdom; he was buried in the Gray-Friars at Strigon. To him
succeeded Steven 5. his son; he 1275.
overcame Othocar king of Bohemia, and the king of Bulgaria also, and made all
Mysia tributary to him; he left a son behind him Ladislaus, and Mary who
married with Charles king of Sicily, by whom he had Charles Martel father of
that Charles who afterward was king of Hungary. Steven was buried in the Isle
Buda; his son Ladislaus 4. succeeded; in his time the Scythians again invade
Hungary, wasting all with fire and sword, and two years after returned home
with great booty. This king was murdered by the Cumani. Andrew 4. succeeded;
he was the son of Steven Venetus, and grandchild of Andrew 2. father 1291.
Steven; he subdued Austria, and died at Buda, where in the Church of S. John
the Evangelist he was buried. He being dead, the Pope declares the son 1301.
of Charles Martel king of Hungary; but the Hungarians chose Wenceslaus or
Ladislaus the king of Bohemia's son for their King, whom afterward his father
called home into Bohemia. Hungary at this time was divided into three factions;
some were for Charles, some for Wenceslaus, and a third party for Otho D. of
Bavaria, who was crowned at Alba regalis, and reigned almost three years; but
Ladislaus Vayroda carried him away prisoner to Iazygum or Transylvania, and
spoiled him of his kingdom. Charles Robert son of Charles Martel and Mary
daughter of K. Steven 5. is crowned: He was a great soldier, and amplified
1310.
Hungary by addition of Bulgaria and diverse other places; he married the sister
of Casimir king of Poland, of whom he had Ludovic: He was in danger to be
murdered by a Gentleman of his Court, on Easter Day, who ran at him with his
sword; but he was saved, and the Courtier executed.

Casimir king of Poland made a journey to visit this king Charles his kinsman,
and because he was childlesse, he names Ludovic (son to K. Charles who married
his sister) to the kingdom of Poland, so that this Ludovic became king of both
kingdoms; He had two daughters only, to wit Mary who married with Sigismund
1342.
king of Bohemia, who by her obtained the kingdom of Hungary, and Hedwiga Queen
of Poland. This Ludovic was a great warrior, he drove all the Jews out of
Hungary; he was buried at Alba Regalis, in the Chapel which he built. To
Ludovic succeeded his daughter Mary, who married with Sigismund 1382.
king of Bohemia, and afterward Emperor; she with her mother Elizabeth governed
the kingdom, because Sigismund was as yet too young, and suffered herself to be
totally ruled by some Peers of the Empire; which being ill resented by the
Nobility of Hungary, they invite Charles king of Naples to the crown of
Hungary: Not long after, this Charles was murdered by the two Queens, as he
was at a conference with them; so the Italians were driven out of Hungary, and
the Queen recovers her kingdom. John governor of Croatia, to revenge k.
Charles his death, seiseth on the Queen when she was in progress Sigismund with
a great army out of Bohemia, he without opposition is crowned king of Hungary,
the 20. year of his age; then he makes an expedition into Croatia, where he
besets the governor, takes him, and cuts off his head. Charles 2. surnamed the
Less, King of Naples, son to Andrew brother of King Ludovic, is chosen King of
Hungary, in opposition to Sigismund 1385.
and Mary; but he was murdered at Buda in the Castle, at the instigation of
Queen Elisabeth by one Blasius. Queen Mary dying childless, leaves the Kingdom
wholly to Sigismund, which he enjoys, and marries with the Countess of
Cilia, by whom he had one daughter Elisabeth. Not long after this, the Turks
invade Bulgaria, a Province of Hungary, a part whereof Sigismund recovered,
1396.
but not without much blood; in that cruel war there fell 20000. Christians,
and 60000. Turks, the Christians were beaten, and the King escaped Sigismund,
who afterward was restored to his liberty and kingdom; this king in a second
battle is beaten by the Turks, and the next year after is chosen Emperor; twice
in his time the Boors of Hungary rose up in Arms against him, and twice he 1409.
suppressed them. He reigned with his wife in Hungary 51. years, and died the
71. year of his age. 1437.


Albert Archduke of Austria, by marrying King Sigismunds only daughter,
obtained both the Crown of Hungaria and Bohemia, and besides is chosen Emperor;
he had two daughters, Elisabeth wife to Casimir King of Poland, and Anna who
married with William Duke of Saxony: The year after Sigismunds Amurath the Turk
invaded Hungary; Albert intending to give him battle, pitched his camp beyond
Danubius, where being taken with a looseness, hasteneth for Vienna, but he died
by the way thither; he left his wife with child, who intended to marry with
Uladislaus the King of Polands brother 1439.
and Duke of Lituania; mean while she is delivered of a boy called Ladislaus
heir of Hungary, whereupon she alters her mind concerning her intended
marriage, and resolves (now having an heir) not to marry the Duke, which bred
great quarrels and troubles in Hungary; the child is crowned the fourth month
after his birth; notwithstanding Uladislaus enters Hungary with an Army, and by
some is saluted King, he besieges and takes Strigon; the Queen Austria to his
Protector Frederick the Emperor, and carried with her the Crown of Hungary,
which 23. years after king Matthias was fain to redeem with a sum of money;
mean while Uladislaus is crowned with some of the relics taken from the head
of S. Stephen. The Turk took occasion by these jars to seize upon Rascia: four
years after, Uladislaus is defeated in a great battle by Amurath, in which
besides the king, there were slain many Princes and Prelates, and 30000.
Christians. At this time king Ladislaus Alberts son was five years old, then at
Vienna. John Hunniades or Corvinus is made Viceroy, and by Ladislaus for his
valor deputed Vayvod of Transylvania, for he had beaten Amurath; when the
young king, being twelve years old, came to Hungary, he made the same John, for
his good service, Earl of Bistria. After this John put again Mahumet to flight,
took from him a hundred great fieldpieces; 1455.
but he died the next year after, to the great loss of Hungary, which by the
factions of the Nobility was much afflicted. Ulricus Earl of Cilia is killed by
Ladislaus and Matthias, the two sons of Hunniades; whereupon Ladislaus is
beheaded, and Matthias who was King afterward, is imprisoned at Prague; King
Ladislaus after this beat the Sultan, and kills many thousand Turks: In the
nineteenth year of his age, at the very nuptial solemnities with Magdalen the
daughter of King Charles of France, he died.

Matthias Corvinus son to John Hunniades is ransomed out of prison by the
Waraden for 60000 Scrutati, and withal is elected King of Hungary. Frederick
3. Emperor lays claim to the Kingdom, as being next heir to the defunct
King: Matthias now was 17. years old, and capitulated with Frederick, that the
house of Austria should by his last will inherit the Crown of Hungary if he
died childless; his first marriage was with the King of Bohemia's daughter.
1462.
This Matthias was fortunate in his wars against the Turk, which lasted two
after he had redeemed the Crown, it was put upon his head with great solemnity
an. 1464. whilst he again is employed in his wars against the Turk, the
Bohemians besiege Tyrnavia on the borders of Moravia, but were fain to raise
the siege again. The next year after Matthias calls a Diet for aid against the
Turk 1467.
and Bohemian; then he marches to Posonia, and subdues almost all Moravia and
Silesia. Not long after Casimir son of Casimir K. of Poland, is invited into
Hungary by some of the Priests; but when he was come to Nitria, there Mathias
besieges him; Casimir perceiving his danger escapes by night and returns to
Poland, against him and the Bohemian Matthias makes war, which at last was
composed in the year 1476. Beatrix the k. of Sicilies daughter is crowned at
Alba regalis, Buda; in the interim the Turk subdues Dalmatia, makes 1476.
inrodes upon Hungary, and carries away above 30000. captives, he wastes also
with fire and sword Dacia, by which name Malachia, Moldavia, Bulgaria, or the
lower Mysia, Servia or the higher Misia, and Transylvania were meant of old:
when the nuptial solemnities were expired, Matthias invades Austria, because he
was slighted by Frederick the Emperor when he was a Suitor to his daughter
Kunegund; here he takes in some Towns and Forts: the Caesarians are overthrown
at Haymburg by Matthias, which presently after he besieges; the Emperor
Frederick sends 3000. horse to raise the siege, a battle is fought, in which
the Caesarians had the better; Stephen Bathor one of Matthias his Captains
being Haymburg on the confines of Hungary and Austria is surrendered to
Matthias, and so is the Castle for a sum of money: after this he takes Pruck a
strong Town on the river of Leythe; having taken in many Towns and Forts about
Vienna, he forces it at last by famine to surrender; after 7. months siege he
takes Neustad. At last betaking himself to his rest a while, and to be merry,
upon Palmsunday at table after his mirth, he fell into 1490.
such a passion of anger, because the figs which he called for were not so
choice as he expected, that he fell suddenly into an Apoplexy, tumbling and
roaring Alba regalis; he was both a good scholar, and a lover of scholars,
with which he furnished his kingdom; he erected a great Library, and took much
delight in the company of Regi-Montanus.

Ladislaus 2. who was K. of Bohemia, marries with Matthias his widow, and so
1516.
becomes K. of Hungary. About these times Maximilian 1. recovers Vienna,
Neustad and Pruck, with almost all Austria; then he takes Alba, with some other
Towns and Castles, which afterward he restored to Ladislaus, whose former wife
being dead, he marries a French Lady, of whom he had Ludovic and Anna; it was
agreed between Maximilian and him, that if the K. should die childless,
Maximilian Hungary and Bohemia. After this a great sedition was raised in
Hungary; for whilst the Cardinal of Strigon was preaching the Cross for raising
of Forces against the Turk, the Ambassador of Ladislaus at that time was making
peace with Solomon: many had taken Arms against the Turk, which they would not
lay down again, but elected for their King, Captain George Zeck, who had
heretofore given some defeats to the Turk; these like mad men run through
Hungary, demolishing diverse Forts and Monasteries, murdering the Gentry with
their wives and children, plundring their goods, and deflouring of virgins;
they hale the Bishop of Chona, with which death they threaten the Archbish. of
Strigon and others; but shortly George, with his Captains, were apprehended by
Count John the Vayvod, who used them with deserved rigor, he causes a burning
iron Crown to be set on his head, then two of his veins to be opened, the blood
whereof he presents to his brother Luke to drink; besides he caused 30. Boors
who had been kept from food three days, to fall upon their yet living king
with their teeth, whose flesh they tore and eat; but the king seemed to be no
ways dejected or afraid, he only desired his brother might be excused, being
by him compelled to this war; at length when all his limbs were torn, they
bowelled him, and having cut his body in pieces, they roast some parts, and boil
the rest, which they present to his soldiers to eat, who having filled
themselves were tortured to death with Luke Zeck. King Ladislaus died at Buda,
and was buried in Alba regalis. 1516.


To hm succeeded his son Ludovic 2. in the Kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia; in
his time Solomon the Turk invadeth Hungary with a great Army, wasting all
before him; the place that lay first open to his fury was the Archbishopric of
Colonza, therefore the King by the Popes aid makes Paul Tomori (now a
Franciscan, but heretofore a public and stout Champion Ludovic married with
Mary, Maximilian the Emperors kinswoman, who afterward was governess in
Belgium: King Ludovicks sister Anna was bestowed on Ferdinand, who afterward
was King of Hungary. King 1526.
Ludovic understanding that the Turk was again coming upon Hungary with
another Army, he meets him in person with strong forces, being urged thereto by
the Nobility, whose privilege was, as they said, not to go to war without the
Kings own prefence; in this unhappy encounter there fell on the Christian side
nineteen thousand, besides diverse Princes and Prelates, among which were the
Archbishop of Strigon, Paul Tomori the Monk; the king having escaped, Alba
regalis: the Turk pursues his victory, raging with fire and sword till he came
to Buda the Metropolis, which was quickly surrendered to him, the Queen with the
chief of the City being fled to Vienna: the Castle held out, in which was a
garrison of ^rmans, who perceiving that the Turks went about to spring mines,
articuled (...) they might depart with their baggage; this was assented to, but
promise (...) ^ept, for all of them were cut in pieces by the Turks cimiters,
only the Captain escaped, because the soldiers against his will, had
delivered up the Castle to the enemy; into the woods were fled above 25
thousand Christians, besides women and children, against whom the Turks
discharged Panonia, he returns unto Constantinople. After the death of Ludovic,
John the Vayvod of Transylvania is by some elected king, against the will of
the Palatine of Hungary, and the chief Prelates, who had called in Ferdinand
brother to Charles 5. Emperor, so that now there were two kings elected: the
Vayvod sent to the French king for aid against king Ferdinand, of whose
injustice he complained by his letters to the Emperor Charles and the Electors,
protesting that if he should be forced to seek for aid elsewhere, that he was
not to be blamed; wherefore when he saw no help, he swore allegiance Solomon,
desiring his protection, which he had long since proposed, if Ferdinands power
should be too great for him.

Ferdinand Archduke of Austria and king of Bohemia is elected king of Hungary,
he with a strong Army marches to Buda, which he takes, with the greatest part
of the kingdom; after this he is crowned at Alba. Casimir Marquess of
Brandeburg his General, in this expedition dies at Buda, where he is
honorably interred. The Vayvod invites Solomon the Turk into Hungary, 1529.
who takes by storm the Town and Castle of Buda after eleven attempts: John the
Vayvod, whom the Turks call Erdelban, meets the Turk with rich presents, and
kisseth his hand, by whom he is confirmed in the kingdom of Hungary, and
receives from him Buda the royal seat, which he held till his death, an. 1540.
After this Solomon takes in diverse Towns upon the Danow: the 26. of September. he
sat down before Vienna in Austria with 200000. Turks, for twenty days
together he plays upon the City with his ordnance, and oftentimes assaulted
it, but in vain; he lost in that siege above 80000. at last being forced with
cold, he raises his siege, and returns by Buda to Byzantium.

CHAP. XIII.
1. A prosecution of the Hungarian History, from the year, 1532. till 1629.

Solomon being enraged for his great loss at Vienna, and that he was forced to
raise his siege, returns with a great power, to wit, 300000 men, and 120 great
Canon. He first besieges 1532.
the little Fort and Castle of Gunta; which he assaulted thirteen times, and
thirteen times was beat off with Nicholas Iurith, an Hungarian, and Governor,
who would not yield, though the Town was almost battered to the ground with
great Guns, invites him to a surrender upon fair terms; That he should remain
Governor as he was; and that all the Inhahitants shall stay and enjoy all that
they ow without any hurt. The Hungarian accepts of the conditions: Then the
Turk removes to the borders of Stiria: He permits his chief Bashai, with
fifteen thousand, to wast and plunder the Country before him; but as he was
returning to the Army with his spoils, he was so circumvented Caesarian Horse
going for Vienna, that scarce two hundred of fifteen thousand Turks escaped.
The Emperor in a short time raises an Army of thirty thousand Horse, and two
hundred thousand foot, which when the Turk understood, he retreats with all
speed to his own confines. About five years after, Ferdinand raises an other
Army of eight thousand Horse, and sixteen thousand foot, under the conduct of
Catrian, who perfidiously betrayed the Army to the Turk. Not long after, this
Traitor labors to persuade Count Nicholas of Serinum, with whom he was
intimate, to side with the Turks; But Nicholas caused his head to be cut off,
which he sent to King Ferdinand Catrians Estate.

John, the Vayvod of Transylvania, dies at Buda: he left behind him a young
son, in whose Non age, his Mother undertook the Government. 1540.
Ferdinand lies Siedge to Buda, which the Turks understanding, they make have
thither with a great Army, under one of the Basha's. Ferdinand's Forces beat
day and night against the City with their Ordnance, but to no end; for they
were forced to raise the Seige, with great loss. The Turk enters Buda, and
Pestha; the Government of both places he commits to the Bellerbeg, and sends
away the Widow and her son to Transylvania About two years after, a numerous
Army is sent by Ferdinand into Hungaria, under Ioachim Elector of Braudeburg;
with whom the Pope joins three thousand Horse; these besiege Pestha, playing
continually with their Ordnance on it; but to no purpose, for the Plague so
raged in the Army, that it swept away many thousands in a short time. That same
year there died at Vienna eighteen thousand of the sickness. 1543.
The next year Soliman takes in Hungaria, the City and Castle of Strigon, after
many assaults. Then three months after, he takes Alba Regalis upon surrender:
It was Articled, That the Inhabitants should be dismissed without hurt: but
Soliman causes them all to repair to the Castle, where he disarms them; then
picks out the strongest bodied of them, the rest Mahomet Zaoglis Governor of
all Hungaria. Four years after, Anna, Queen of Hungaria, King Ferdinand's wife*
died in Childbed. The next year after King Ferdinand took Agria, and diverse
Forts: Shortly after, in upper Panonia, by the Earl of Salm, Anno, 1550.
Teufel, Ferdinands General is defeated by the Turk, who takes diverse places
this year from the King, and besieges Agria, an Episcopal Seat, with all the
strength he 1550
could make: But the Inhabitants united themselves by a solemn Covenant,
subscribed with their own blood: so that the Turks Army was forced with shame
to raise the siege, having discharged against it twelve thousand bullets out of
their Ordnance: Not long after a peace is made at Constantinople, between
Ferdinand and the Turk. About six years after, the Transylvanians revolt from
Ferdinand their King, to John Sigismund, son of the above named Vayvod: and two
years after, Ferdinand is chosen

After the Turk had taken Felica, a strong Town in the higher Panonia: a ^eace
is concluded between Ferdinand and Soliman. Four years 1560
after Ferdinand died at Vienna, and was buried at Prague. His son Maximilian
the second, succeeded in Bohemia, and Hungaria, and likewise in the Empire. He
was crowned King of Hungaria, with Mary his wife, before his Fathers death. The
next year after, Sigismund the Vayvod, and Vassal of Solomon, violates the
peace, and takes Zatwar, which shortly after was recovered by Maximilian, with
diverse other adjacent places. After this, the Vayvod sollicits Solomon to make
an expedition Hungaria* upon this, a command is sent to the Bashai of Buda, to
1565
be in Arms, and to begin the War. Mean while the Vayvod, who called himself
King of Hungaria, summons a Diet of his people, telling them that his most
Clement Patron, Solomon, had enjoined all the people of Hungaria to subject
themselves to the Scepter of his Vassal, the Vayvod: and not long after,
Solymon enters Hungaria, whom the Vayvod met with rich presents, in hope to
obtain from him that Kingdom: but he was deceiyed. The Bashai of Buda besieges
Palota, which is stoutly defended by George Thurin, and relieved by George of
Helfenstein. The Turks seeing new Forces coming, run all away, leaving behind
them their Vesprin, and put all the Turks, except five, to the sword: they take
also some Castles. The same year the Scythians upon Solymans invitation and the
Vayvods, fall with fire and sword on the higher Panonia, carrying thence many
Christians; but Lazarus of Schwend with some small Forces defeated ten thousand
of them, and then takes diverse places from George Bebec* an Hungarian Peer, who
had revolted to the Turk. Mean while the Emperor makes an expedition into
Hungaria, to relieve the lower Panonia which the Turk was now wasting: he
fortifieth Taurinum, where the Emperor was: there happened such a fire, that
the whole city was almost burned down; the soldiers instead of quenching the
fire, carried away the Merchants goods: but the Emperor raised a great sum to
rebuild the town again.

Anno 1567. At Constantinople, a peace for eight years is concluded between
Maximilian the second, and Solymus Sultan. One of the Articles was, That each
one should keep quietly what he had gotten: this pacification was afterward
prolonged. John Sigismund the Vayvod dyed 1571
without issue, but not without suspicion of poison. To him succeeded Stephen
Bathori, who was to continue the annual tribute to the Turk. This is he who
afterward by the Sultans recommendation, was elected K. of Poland.

The Turk before the peace was expired, fell upon Hungaria, where he killed
above one thousand Christians, and returned with great booty 1574
About the end of this year died Selymus at Byzantium: and two years after
Maximilian at Ratisbon. To him succeeded Ralph the second, his son: he was
King of Hungaria and Bohemia before, and afterward was elected Emperor.

Anno 1579. The Turks fall upon a great many unarmed Christians, being at a
fair in Sixo: Some they hacked and hewed with their Cimiters, 1579
others they led away captive, with their goods: they tied two thousand of them
together like Horses, whom as they were carrying away, the Hungarian Rusticks
in great companies pursued, delivered the Captives, and killed many of the
Turks, carrying away the rest prisoners. Panonia was exercised by the Turk, and
the like measure they received from the Christians near Agria. The Emperor had
a conference with the Hungarian Peers at Posonium, about securing 1580
the Kingdom from the Turks.

Anno 1582. During the peace, an Army of sixty thousand Turks, under Sanzacus,
broke in upon the higher Panonia, wasting with fire and sword all that lay in
their way: but as they were returning home with their spoils and plunder, the
Caesarian Forces set upon them near Agria, killed most of them, and recovered
the Plunder. The news of this overthrow did highly move and incense the great
Turk at Byzantium: but when he understood how the Turks without any ground or
provocation Rodolph the second, Emperor, and Amurath the third, for eight
years, beginning the first of January, Anno 1584. Yet three years after the
Turks 1587
robbed fifteen Villages, and carried away many Christians; but George Serin
recovered the booty, with the loss of two thousand Turks.

Some few years after, Matthias, the Emperors brother, with a great Army out of
Germany, fell upon the truce-breaking Turks of Hungaria: Novigrad 1594
is surrendered to Mathias. Serin, takes diverse castles. Tiefenbach, having
slaughterd diverse Turks, took Iasprin by assault. Mathias fell upon Strigon,
and Sinan the Turk was coming, he rises with his Army against the Germans will.

This Sinan, with one hundred thousand Turks, and sixty thousand Tartars,
besieges Iavernum. A terrible battle is fought, in which Sinan lost one
hundred thousand men. But Hardeckins, notwithstanding he was promised by
Mathias to be relieved within two days, delivers up Iaurin to the Turk: For
which fact, afterward he lost his head. In this strong town were one hundred
fifty great guns, six thousand of the Garrison were killed, Comora, over
against the town was stoutly defended by the Germans. Sinan being dead with
grief for his many losses, Mahumet the Sultan prepares to invade Panonia with
a great army. Mean while the Christians take Hatuana, using there all manner of
1596
cruelty, which upon the coming of the Turk, they plunder and burn. But the
Sultan revenged himself upon the Agrians, whom he put all to the sword. Pappa
is delivered up to the Turk by the Christian Garrison, for want of pay: which
town, whilst Swartzemburg afterward besieged, he is killed with a musket
bullet. Rederus pursues the Traitors, some of which he tortured and put to
death. Philip Emanuel of Lorrain imployeth his army Alba Regalis, but the
soldiers defaced and ransacked the town, not sparing the ancient Regal bones
and Monuments of Hungary. The Turks striving to regain the City, were beat back
with great loss, but the next year the Conqueror being dead, they retake the
place.

George Basta, growing bold upon the Turks weakness, (for the Sultan was yet a
child, and the Persians had overrun his Dominions as far as Babylon) raises
an intestine War between Hungaria, and Dacia. He forces 1602
the Protestants to hear Mass, Plundering those that refused: but the Turks
took courage, and withal, Pesta, being forsaken by the Christians, out of
fear: afterward they take Strigonium, after it had been ten years under
Rodolphus. Bethleem Gabor, having married the Widow of Moses, the Ciculian,
was in hope to become master of Transylvania, but his hopes were blasted by the
victory which Tampirius had over him. Sthephen Botscatus, a kinseman of
Battors, stood up for liberty of Conscience, in defense of the Protestants:
acknowledgeing Caesar's right no otherways, then upon Kepler observes. Mathias
being established in 1610
Hungaria, makes peace with the Turk, and enters Bohemia with a great Army,
where he is Proclaimed King, and by the consent of his brother the Emperor, is
Crowned. Forgatzias the Palatin of Hungaria, marches into Dacia; where he
brings Claudiopolis, and other towns into the obedience of King Mathias: but
shortly after he is beaten by Battorius, and hardly escaped with his life
through the woods. Battorius in Transylvania, attempting 1611
Cronstad by storm, sends Andrew Gietzius to the great Turk for aid; but Andrew
promises to the Sultan some Castles, if he would confer the Principality on
him: order presently upon this motion, is given to Mahumet Bassai, that he
should turn out Battorius, and settle Gietzius in his place: Which Battorius
perceiving desires assistance from the Palatine of Hungaria, and Protection
from King Mathias; at which the Turk was offended, 1612
and expostulated with Mathias, yet was not in capacity to make War against
him, because of the Arabian Rebellion. Gabriel Battor, willing to retain Dacia,
halted so long between the Emperor, and Turk, that Bethleem Gabor rebels
against him, and at last by the Turks aid, utterly defeats him, 1613
who the year following was murdered by his own servants. Gabor also to
Caesar, and the Sultan. The Turks break the peace, and burn some towns in
Hungaria. Gabor in Hungaria and Dacia, subjected Lippa, and some other places
to the Turk; and would also have delivered up Waradin to the Sultan for a
reward of his protection; about which, he and Humanoius fell at variance. Near
Agria, 1616
the Turks making excursions, are defeated by the Heiducci; but in Polonia they
have better success being assisted by the Tartars, whom the Cossacks had
provoked by their daily plunderings.

Mathias, King of Hungaria, and Bohemia, who was also Emperor, caused 1617
his Cousin Jerman, Ferdinand, to be declared King of Hungaria. Bethleem Gabor,
the Turks Vassal, having by letters imparted his resolutions to the Bohemians,
and gaping after the Crown of Hungaria, enters that Kingdom with a great Army,
and takes Cassovia, Poson, and other places, some by storm, some by surrender:
he assumes the title of Prince of Hungaria, and seizes on the Crown, which was
usually kept at Poson, and uses the Papists 1619
with all extremity. Not long after, he calls a Diet of his Faction (the
Clergy, and chief Peers of the Kingdom, being absent; and diverse Cities whose
Legates were there protesting against it) by which he is proclaimed King of
Hungaria: then he makes an incursion upon Austria, and sends Dampier,
attempting to take Poson, is killed. The 1620
Emperor sends out his Declarations against Gabor, for invading the Kingdom of
Bohemia, for delivering to the Turk some Forts of that Kingdom, and for
assuming the title of King. Notwithstanding Gabor had possession of the Crown,
which he removed from Poson, to a more secure place, yet refuses to be
Crowned. And the rather because Bucquoi was entered Hungaria with an Imperial
Army, with which many of the Princes and Cities joined and fell off from Gabor.
Besides that, Bucquoi had taken Poson, with 1621
diverse other towns. So that now Gabor was in danger of losing Hungaria
totally: but the untimely death of Bucquoi put him in fresh hopes again,
therefore he recovers some lost places, besieges Poson, but is repulsed with
great loss: at last, he is reconciled to Caesar, and is enjoined to restore the
Regal Crown, and to govern those places now in his possession, in Caesar's
name. The next year after this, the Crown is restored to Caesar, and Gabor
sends an extraordinary Ambassador to the Port, to acquaint the 1622
Turk with the reasons why he made peace with Caesar, showing he was
necessitated thereto by the des^lation, famine, and sickness of Hungaria, his
soldiers not being longer able to subsist there: besides, he feared a revolt
of his own people in Dacia, by the instigation of Caesar, and the Polander.
Lastly, seeing the Sultan had concluded a sudden Peace with the Poles, he was
afraid the burden of the War would be lest upon him alone, but withal he
says, that his Master meant not to keep the peace long, therefore desires full
power from the Sultan that he, with the Bashai of Buda, might when they saw
cause invade the Empire or Poland. This motion was slighted by the Sultan, who
now was unfit for a War abroad, and perceived Gabor aimed holy at his own ends.
Yet the next year an Army was granted by the Turk to Gabor, for subduing of
Hungaria, to the wonder 1623
of those who knew the Turks weakness at this time. Gabor being then at
Cassovia, receives the Turkish Forces, which he joins with his own, but he
wanted Artillery and other necessaries: his chief hope was in a general revolt
of Hungaria, and assistance from the United Princes of Germany: but the States
of Dacia, assembling at Alba Iulia showed how unwilling they wear to break with
the Emperor; therefore they send to him, who at Vienna receives the
Commissioners kindly, and sends the Bishop of Nitria to Dacia, where a new
peace is concluded between Caesar, and Transylvania.

But not long after, Gabor with an Army of 60000. over-runns Hungaria, at last
he makes a truce of ten months with the Imperialists. The next year, Caesar
raises an Army of 50000. to invade Hungaria, which made the Turk jealous, but
Caesar's Ambassador assured him, that the Emperor intended no hurt to the Port,
but only to recover what Gabor had taken from 1624
him. Yet some supplies were sent to Gabor by the Turk: mean while, the Prince
fearing Caesar's greatness, makes an absolute peace with him, disclaiming all
title to Hungaria, and consenting that Caesar's Son should be presently chosen
King thereof; that the Prince of Transylvania, should Gabor should remain
quietly, Prince of Dacia, Earl of the Ciculi, and Lord of Cassovia, which after
his life should return to the Crown of Hungaria. This Article much troubled the
Sultan, who desired not that Dacia should depend on the Empire. After this
Gabor sends to the Port for a confirmation of his Lady in the succession to the
1626
Principality of Dacia, which the Turk put off, because of his troubles with
the Persian. Yet fearing least the Prince should take a confirmation of the
Emperor, the grant is dispatched.

The Prince joins his Forces with the Bashai of Buda. Walstein endeavored to
keep them from joining with Count Mansfielt, but could not: so after Gabor
sends to Caesar, to excuse his taking up Arms, because some Articles were not
observed.

Then he sends to the Port, to excuse his making of peace with Caesar, because
the Bashai of Buda was called away from him by the Sultan. So Ianus like, he
looks both ways. Yet underhand he aids the confederate Princes, and stirs up
the Turk against Caesar, fearing too much his greatness.

For this cause, the Basha of Buda is continued in his place, and order given,
that when occasion served he should aid Gabor, Caesar sends a private Agent to
the Port, complaining against Gabor, and that he was the chief 1627
disturber of the peace: these Letters were intercepted by the Vizier, and not
suffered to come to the Sultan, but sent to the Bashai of Buda, to manage
things as he thought good. The Turk at last, upon Caesar's second complaint,
checks Gabor for his double dealing. At last, after all his juggling 1629


CHAP. XIV.
The affairs of Germany, Hungaria, Poland, Turkey, Bohemia, Austria, Millan,
Naples, Cyprus, and Borussia, under Albert and Frederick, Emperors, from the
year one thousand four hundred thirty eight, till the year one thousand four
hundred eighty.

ALbert, son in Law to Sigismund, in the space of a few months, Austria, became
Duke of Lucemburge, Marquess of Moravia, King of Hungaria, and Bohemia, and 1438
withal, Emperor of the Romans. He scarce sat two full years in this dignity:
for the second year of his Empire, he was taken with a dysenterie, by a surfeit
of Musk-millions, and dyed in Hungaria, near Strigon.

He was fain to fight for the Kingdom of Bohemia; For some of the Nobility had
called in the Polander, against whom, the Emperor employed Albert, Marquess of
Brandenburge, who defeated the Polander, and made him Bohemia: to which
Kingdom, Albert had a twofold Title; one by his Wife Elizabeth, of the Royal
blood; the other, by virtue of a Covenant between the Austrians, and Bohemians;
That when in either House the issue Male did fail, the other should enjoy the
Crown. The Hungarians were not content that their King should meddle with the
Empire, because that whilst Sigismund was busy about the Imperial affairs,
Hungaria was exposed to the fury of the Turks. The reason why Ptarsco, Chief of
the Hussites, called into Bohemia, Casimir, Brother to Ladislaus of Poland,
was, for that Albert was much addicted to the Roman faith, and a bitter enemy
to Husse: therefore he fortified all the Cities of the Hussits, and joined the
Thaborits with the Polanders, but they were (as we have said) defeated, and
diverse Hussits carried away prisoners by Frederick, Elector of Saxony.

Caesar having left a Viceroy in Bohemia, falls upon Poland with Fire and
Sword; but his sickness caused a peace. He left two daughters behind him;
Anna, who married William, Duke of Saxony; and Elizabeth, wife of Casimir,
King of Poland: he had also a Post-humus son, Ladislaus, whom his Mother
Crowned the 4. month of his age, which Crown she had secretly conveyed, and
hid for that purpose.

But the Coronation of this young King, could not keep Hungaria from troubles;
For Amurath, who lately had deprived George Despot of Servia, Sanderovia,
which town the Turk took, and the two sons he caused to be both emasculated,
and exoculated, pretending they were about to raise new Forces for their
Father: I say, this Amurath invades Hungaria, with Fire and sword: the
Hungarians to increase their strength, propose a Treaty between their Queen and
Ladislaus of Poland. The Q. willing to preserve the Crown entire for her son,
refuses to marry, which occasioned a great War; For diverse of the Hungarian
Peers sided with Ladislaus, others with the Post-humus King.

The Polander by the help of the Hungarian Peers, take many places in Hungaria:
the Queen on the other side was busy in retaking the same places. Mean while
Amurath was not idle, but brings his Army through Mysia, and Triballiae, and
sits down before Belgrade of old Taururum, the chief Fort of that Kingdom

Ladislaus gave the charge of Transylvania, to John Huniades, to keep off the
Turks on that side. George, he sends to the borders, to keep the Turks at
Belgrade from excursions. The Christian Princes understanding their danger,
strove to take up the difference between Ladislaus and the Queen Mother; and
withal, to bestow her two daughters on the two brothers, Castmer and
Ladislaus: in the interim, Huniades defeats the Turks, recovers all Moldavia,
and a part of Servia, with Bulgaria, by the help of Ladislaus. Huniades in one
day, defeated the Turks in five several Battles, and toward night, he utterly
routed the Bashai of A^a, Amuraths his kinsman. 30000 Turks were here lost.

Amurath, to repair this loss, sends Carambeius the Basha of Phrygi^, with a
great Army, which Ladislaus by the prudence of Huniades, totally discomfited in
the Valley of Hemus. This so allrighted Amurath, that he was about to have
killed himself had not Halibaeus Basha, who succeeded Carambeius encouraged him
to raise a new army, and to elude, Fabius like, with long delays, the courage
of Huniades, by shutting up the Streights of Mount Rodope, which Ladislaus
pereeiving, returns in a tryumphing way, but against the will of Huniades, to
Belgrade, showing his booties to the people, and with them, captive Carambeius.

Upon the report of these Victories, Caramannus, Prince of Cilicia is
encouraged to invade Pontus, and Bithynia, the Turks Provinces in Asia,
Amuraths Ladislaus for peace, upon what conditions he pleases. It was agreed,
that Amuraths should depart out of Servia; deliver up all the Towns and
Garrisons he had taken there, and restore to George, the Despot, his sons,
and whole Estate, and for the time to come, should offer him no wrong: and that
he should not meddle with Moldavia, and that part of Bulgaria which was lost.

Amuraths desired, that he might only retain Bulgaria, to which Ladislaus
Ladislaus, a fiery spirited young Prince, more Ambitious of Warlike glory,
then of peaceable security, soon after Amuraths was gone into Asia, breaks the
League by the instigation of Pope Eugenius, and Julian the Cardinal, who
persuaded him he might lawfully violate the Oath he took to an enemy of Christ,
and that he should have Absolution, and withal the assistance of the Pope,
Philip Duke of Burgundy, and the Venetian Fleet, which should stop Amuraths
from conveying aid by the Hellespont, out of Asia into Europe. Upon these
persuasions and hopes, that Ladislaus should recover again the Greek Empire,
and presuming Walachia, and Bulgaria, till he stayed at Varna, of old
Dionysiopolis, a town in Bulgaria, where he fell sick,

Amuraths upon these news, leaves Caramannus, and returns to the Hellespont
with all speed, and at Calliopolis, transmits his Army into Europe, in the
sight of the Italian Fleet, which perfiduously sufferd them to pass. The ships
that transported them, were these of Genua. The Turks with an incredible
celerity, march toward Adrianopolis, and before Ladislaus knew of any thing,
lying yet at Varna; They pitch their Camp close by him: the Christian Army was
so ordered by Huniades, that one side of it was defended by a Lake, the other
by Wagons and Chariots, chained together like a Wall: the hills behind them
guarded the Rear: the fight continued three days and nights together with such
violence, that the fields run with blood. The Victory was inclining to the
Christians, for the Turks began to give ground, and to fly away disorderedly:
the Prelates too rashly Turk perceiving that now the Christians lay open, who
before were in a manner enclosed with Fences, he causes all his Archers to let
fly at them, by which means they were presently disordered, and enclosed by
the Turks Legions.

The young King having got into the Turks Lifeguard, had his Horse shot under
him, and he himself was slain, with many wounds. The Prelates in their flight
fell into Bogges, and were drowned. Huniades, with much difficulty escaped, and
that part of the Army that fled, dyed miserably: some with cold and hunger in
the Woods: some with toil and Julian, the Author of breaking the Oath, was
found dead in the way, of many wounds: some think he was murdered of his own
party. Huniades, the scourge of Turkey, the defendor of Hungaria, and Bulwark of
Christendom, was preserved by God for more work: He after this defeated
Mahumet, Amuraths successor at the siedge of Belgrade, where forty thousand
Turks were slain; but having overwearied himself, with two days fight, he
fell sick, who commenin gthe care of his Country to Christ, and exhorting his
sons to virtue, departed this life.

Ladislaus, Albertus his Post-hume, was educated by Frederick the Emperor,
Hungarians to enjoy him, though they had often Petitioned, till he was of years
and understanding, fit for Government; in which he was altogether ruled by
Ulricus his kinsman, Earl of Cilia, which increased the peoples ill opinion of
the King, and their old hatred against Ulricus, who always envied Huniades for
his valor and happiness, and used all opportunities he could, to disgrace and
murder him: and being neither satisfied with his virtues, nor content with his
death, he persecutes his Children, Ladislaus and Matthias, whom by false
calumnies he thought to oppress.

Therefore one day Ladislaus coming to expostulate with the Earl, from Ulricus,
that began the quarrel, and drew first, was killed by Ladislaus, who cleared
himself to the King, and upon that received the public faith, and a pardon,
with a purple garment: yet afterward upon new calumniations, the King causes
both the Brothers to be apprehended: He put Ladislaus to death, causing his
head to be cut off in that purple Garment he gave him. He was three times
struck by the Executioner, and three times he lifts himself up, though his
hands were bound, calling upon God, and pleading his innocence, but the fourth
stroke out off his head.

The King perceiving how he was hated of the people for this murder, Hungaria,
goes to Bohemia, whither he carried with him Matthias, the other son of
Huniades, fearing least the people might have in the Kings absence tumultuously
set him free; besides he could put him to death more safely in Bohemia, then in
Hungaria, where he was so well known. But before the King had pronounced
sentence of death against Matthias, as he was celebrating his Nuptials with
Margaret, King Ch^rles the seveuths daughter of Thrace, at Prague, he was
poisoned, of which he died within few hours. Boiebracius, one of the greatest
men in that Kingdom, seized on the Crown: who restored upon the desire of the
Hungarians, Matthias to his Liberty, and bestowed his daughter on him, with
many rich gifts, by which he was fitted to receive the Crown of Hungaria, which
was set on his head by the general consent of the people, who had not forgot
what his Father had done for them.

But though Matthias was thus Honorably dealt with, by the Bohemian,

To Albert in the Empire succeeded Frederick the third, of Austria, whose
inauguration was accompanied with some Austrian troubles: for he had after the
death of Albert, undertaken the tuition of Ladislaus King of Hungaria, and
Bohemia, and Archduke of Austria. But Ulricus, Earl of Cilia, great Uncle to
the Child, challenges the right of Tuition: with him Albert sides: He was
Fredericks Brother who demanded a share of his Fathers inheritance; but the two
bsothers were reconciled by the German Princes, and Vlricus is commanded to lay
down his Arms. After this Frederick endeavors to compose the schism raised by
Pope Eugenius, in calling a Synod at Florence, against that of Basil; but when
the Dolphin brought his Armeniac Forces, (so called from the Earl of Armenia in
Gascoin, who was their Leader) against Basil, he did not stir, because he hated
the Switzers, whom he suffers to be all cut off, being 1600. in number, by the
French. Nor did stir in that War which was between Albert the Marquess, and the
Noribergers. In 8. battles, Albert had the better, in the 9. he was beaten, and
then he made peace with the confederat Cities.

Frederick having persuaded Foelix, to resign the Pontificat to Nicholas, and
him to confirm the decrees of Basil, he repairs to Rome for his Coronation,
Albert his brother, and Ladislaus the young King. In his journey he bestowed
many Dignities, and titles of Honor upon the Italians, by which he procured
much love among them. He entertained his Spouse, Lonora, King Edwards daughter
of Portugal, at Cenae; thither she came by sea, and from thence he conveys her
to Rome, where he was Crowned first King of the Lombards. (For Millan was
fallen to Francis Sfortia upon the death of Philip Maria Visecount, which
succession Frederick would not allow.) Two days after, with his new Bride, He
was Crowned Emperor of the Romans. Upon his return homeward, the Venetians, and
Ferrarians did Royally entertain him: for which he made the Marquess of
Ferraria, Duke; and with the Venetians he made a league. Mean while, there were
no small troubles at home by the plottings of Cilian, and the Austrians, who
demand the young King Ladislaus to govern them: so that he was foreced, being
suddenly beset with an Army, to dismiss Ladislaus.

Frederick also had much trouble with Albert his brother, and Sigismund Exerch
of Austria, about the Principality of that Country: for these were Cousin
Jermans, or sons of two brothers, and claimed an equal right: but after a long
War, the Emperor at last obtained all Austria. After this he had troubles with
Matthhias Huniades, about the Kingdom of Hungaria: this German Princes. For
though some of the Hungarian Peers desired Frederick to be their King,
Ladislaus being dead, yet the major part were for their Countreyman Huniades,
who yet could not obtain the Crown, which was delivered to Frederick with the
tuition of the child, by Elizabeth the Mother, till he had redeemed it for
80000 Crowns. Mean while, Pius the second, the Pope, who had been Secretary to
Frederick the Emperor, had deposed Isebergius, Bishop of Mints, for resisting
the Levies of Money in Germany, enjoined by the Pope for the Turkish War: and
because he refused to take the Oath imposed on him, which was, That he, nor his
successors should not without the Popes leave assemble the Princes for election
of a new Emperor, or for any thing that concerned the state of the Empire: this
occasioned matter for a new War. Frederick Count Palatin of the Rhene, and
Ludovic of Bavaria, both hated by the Emperor, side with the Bishop against the
Pope: but Albert, Marquess of Brandeburg Adolphus, the new elected Bishop: who
in a battle were defeated by the old Bishops faction, which was less numerous
then the other.

This War was scarce ended, when a more dangerous arisieth between 1461
the Emperor, and Matthias Corvinus, King of Hungaria, about the Kingdom of
Bohemia, which the Pope had bestowed on Matthias against Boiebracius, the
Hussits Patron.

But the Emperor would not assent to this grant; whereupon Matthias is highly
displeased, and the rather because the Bohemians and Emperor, had chosen
Ladislaus, son to Casimer, King of Poland, by Elizabeth, Albert of Austria. In
this War Matthias had got almost all Austria from Frederick. But Albert, Duke
of Saxony, recovered it all again to the Empire, except Vienna, which Albert
was loath to meddle with, because of the strength and power of that City.

In these troubles of Germany, Frederick, makes a journey to Rome, that he
might perform his vow: but Pope Pius was dead, and had for his successor, Paul
the second, a man of an evil report. After this, Frederick had troubles with
Charles Duke of Burgundy, that high spirited and turbulent Prince, who was much
incensed because the Emperor would not confer on him, the Title, Crown, and
dignity of a King: nor would he consent Charles should be Lieutenant, or Vicar
of the Empire. Upon this, Charles raises an Army, with which he besieges
Novesium, or Neuiss, a confederate City four miles below Colen. Frederick on
the other side Levieth 80000 men, among which were most of the Imperial
Princes. The Duke of Saxony was Standerd bearer. But whilst both armies were
preparing to fight, Frederick and Charles having had private conference by the
mediation of the Belgic Princes, peace is proclaimed in both Armies; and it is
agreed, That Charles his only daughter, should marry with Maximilian, the
Emperors son, who was to enjoy all the Provinces belonging 1475
to Charles, if he should dye without issue male. But out of this peace were
Lewis, King of France, Sigismund Exarch of Austria, the Emperors Cousin Jerman,
Renatus, Duke of Lorrain, and the Switzers, who had broke in upon Burgundy by
the instigation of King Lewis, and had taken two Towns.

Charles then removing his Camp from Nuiss, fell upon the Lorrainer, whom he
drove out of most part of his country. Then he falls upon the Switzers,
Lorrains Confederates, and takes from them the town and Castle of Granson; but
at last his Army is totally routed by them, so that he hardly escaped himself.

The next year he was overthrown again by the Switzers: and the year
Helvetians, he both lost his Army and life by them. The perfidiousness of
Campobassus, the Neapolitan, who forsook him, was the cause of his overthrow,
thus revenging himself 1477
for the cuff the Duke gave him on the ear heretofore. These troubles were
accompanied by two Commets, the one apeared five years before the death of
Charles, and the other, in the same year he dyed.

The death of Charles bred a new War between Maximilian, and the French. He
claimed the marriage of Mary, Charles his Daughter, according to the Articles
of pacification: and withal, the Provinces belonging to her.

The French on the contrary, assisted by some Belgic Princes, whose Chief was
Philip Ravesten, wasted Burgunay and Flanders, and changed the Dukes Provinces:
but at last Maximilian prevailed, though often times in danger by his seditious
Subjects, chiefly at Brugis, where they had beset Albert, Duke of Saxony.
Ravesten is driven into France, where he was made Admiral of a Fleet, which he
lost in a Seafight with the Turks near the Isle of Lesb^s.

Frederick, after the death of Mathias, returns to Austria, where he suppressed
the High-way-men. He was much troubled with a running Canker in the Foot,
called by Physicians, Phagedena, and having overthrown his stomach with
Musk-Millions, he fell into a looseness that killed him the 78. year of his
life, and of his Empire, the 54. He left only two Children behind him,
Maximilian, who succeeded, and Cunigunda, that 1493
Albert of Bavaria.

In Bohemia, Boiebracius, against whom the Pope had incensed Mathias of
Hungaria, being dead, Ladislaus is made King, who makes War with the Hungarian
for Moravia, and Silesia, which in hatred of the Bohemian Religion, submitted
themselves to the Hungarian. But the controversy was taken up by the Princes,
without effusion of blood: and it was agreed that a part of Silesia, lying next
to Bohemia, with both Lusatia's, should belong to Ladislaus, but Matthias
should possess the rest of Silesia, with Moravia, conditionally, That if he
died without an Heir Male, it should return to Ladislaus; if he had an Heir,
That then it should be free both to him, and to Ladislaus, either to leave, or
buy these Provinces for 200000

In Italy, the differences about the Principalities of Millan, made way for
Francis Sfortia, a Mercenary Soldier, to invade it. For Philip being dead, in
whom the ancient Race of Viscounts, from Matthew the great, failed; so that
none of that race was remaining, except Valentina, Philips sister, whom John
Galeatius the Father, had married to Lewis of Orleans, son to Charles the fifth
of France; with whom he gave the City Asta for her portion, with this
condition, That if her Brothers should die childeless, her children should be
lawful Heirs to the Principality of Insubria. This Philip had another
Daughter, Blance, named by his Concubin, whom he bestows upon Francis Sfortia,
and withal, Cremona for her portion: many laid claim to this Dukedom.

Frederick the Emperor by the Law of Feuds, which gives Title of Lands to the
Lords, when there is no Heir; Charles of Orleans, by the righ t of his mother
Valentina, to whose Heirs that Duchy belonged by the will of Galeatius,
Confirmed by the Pope; Alphonsus of Arragon, who seized on Naples, laveth claim
by the last will of Duke Philip, who named him Heir for assisting him against
the Venetians, when they threatened Millan. Francis Sfortia in the right of
his Wife, the Bastard of Philip, and by his last Will challenges the Duchy.
Mean while, the Millanois aimed at liberty. Frederick, being troubled with
Domestic broiles, sleights his Title. Charles of Orleans sends an Army into
Italy, under the command of Reinaldus, but he was taken, and his Army
overthrovvn by the Millanois and so he lost that Principalily. Alphonsus,
finding it too far from him, and beset with so many Competitors, lets fall his
claim. Mean while, the Venetians finding diverse Cities of that Duchy,
unwilling to be under Millan, begin to fish in these troubled Waters.

Placentia and Lauden, freely submit to Venice. Papia and Derthona, receive F.
Sfortia. Navarr, lying next to Vercelle, come under the Savoyen: but Sfortia
being hired by the Millanois, took Placentia and Lauden from the Venetians,
whom he overthrows in a great Battle: then they make peace with him, and assist
him against the Millanois, and afterward they help the Millanois against him,
aiming at that Principality themselves: but Sfortia Bajazet the Turk, against
the Venetians: but at last, the French King apprehended him at Novaria, as he
was raising of Forces out of Germany, Switserland, and the Grisons Country. He
carried him into France, where he imprisoned him: he died miserably, and was
justly punished for his parricid and ambition, the 5. year of his imprisonment.

Frances, also, Grandchild of John Galeacies, was brought into France, and
there shut up within a Monastery. So Lewis the 12. obtained the Principality of
Insubria; and to corroborat his Title, he bribed some about Maximilian with
gold, to get his approbation, That Lewis with his posterity, and Successors,
should hold the Duchy of Millan in Fee of the Emperor.

Lewis obtained to this purpose, the Emperors Patent, but with this clause,
That he should hold this Duchy in Fee, so it might not prejudice another
Title: upon this, Pope Julius (that he might drive the French quite out of
Italy, who had already overthrown the Ligurian, and Venetian power by land)
joins his Forces with the Venetians and Switzers, and restores Maximilian to
his Fathers Principality, which he held til the coming of King Francis, who
having taken Prosperus Columnus, at the foot of the Alps, and beaten the
Switzers near Millan, he takes the City, and by a strict Maximilian to
surrender, who by poison lost the use of his understanding. He was carried to
France, where he dyed of Melancholy and a Fever.

There now remains his Brother Francis, whom Charles the 5. Emperor, brought
back; having in two several battles defeated the French, and taken King Francis
prisoner* But after Charles had put Francis of Millan in possession of his
principality, he dispossesseth him again upon suspicion of Treason: Pope
Clement, the Venetians, and the French also, upon this are made friends; for
they thought it not safe, that Charles the Emperor Sfortias cause, but finding
that Charles was too potent to be forced by Arms to this, they work upon him by
entreaties to restore Sfortia to his principality, to which Charles assented.
Sfortia is invited to Bonona, upon the public faith, where he receives his
Duchy, and withal the Emperor betroths to him his Niece by his Sister, to
wit, the Daughter of Christiern, King of Denmark. By this double knot, Sfortia
was tied to the Emperor against the French: but the Duke dyed shortly after his
marriage; then, when Caesar having taken Tunis, was returning to Naples, and
from thence, in a triumphant manner to Rome: the Sfortian race being extinct in
Francis of Millan, King Francis demands from Caesar, the principality of Millan
for him and his Heirs, being his right by inheritance, and Maximilians grant.
This was denied by Charles, except Francis would restore the D. of Savoy to his
Lands which were violently taken from him by the French, most of which Lands
were restored; but Caesar in the mean time parts not with his Hold of Millan,
which he enjoyed whilst he lived, and then transfers it upon his son Philip.

About these times Apulia is in great trouble, by reason of the Wars between
Arragon and Anjou, which lasted twenty years, occasioned at first by the
impudent lechery of Queen Joan, whom Pope Martin, and Lewis of Aniou, did
pursue with all Hostility. Hereupon Joan implores the aid of Alphonsus, King of
Arragon, now in Corsica: he upon her entreaties arives at Naples, with a Fleet
of twenty sail, and beats the Forces of France, and those of Sfortia; for which
service, she adopts Alphonsus: he was the Son of Ferdinand, and Grandchild of
John, King of Castile, Arragon, and Sicily. This Alphonsus being the wisest,
and learned Prince of his time could not Joan, therefore he forceably drives
her out of Naples, who presently repairs to the Pope, accusing Alphonsus of his
ingratitude, and impiety; therefore she cuts of her former Adoption, and makes
Lewis of Anjou her Heir, whence arose great Wars; in which sometimes the
Ar^agonian, sometimes the Andegeven, was master of Naples.

Upon the death of Lewis, his brother Renatus undertook the War; but he was so
employed in the Wars of Britany, that he left the Neapolitan War to his son
John, who for diverse years, but with ill success, had Wars with Ferdinand, the
Bastard son of Alphonsus, whom he made Heir of Naples by his last will. At
length near Troy John was quite defeated, having lost both the Kingdom, and the
Island Aenaria, now Iscla. Not long after, being conveyed to France in a ship,
he dyed of a Fever; his Father Renatus dyed shortly after, childeless; his Heir
was Charles Main, his brothers son, who being also childeless, made Lewis the
11. of France, Charles the 8. Father, his Heir, who could never be persuaded to
recover his right of Naples by Arms, affirming, that he would first quiet all
at home, pull down the greatness of the Princes of the blood, and leave the
Kingdom to his son, free from trouble and fear.

Alphonsus dyed at Naples the 65. year of his age: he left the Kingdom of 1458
Sicily and Arragon to his Brother John, then King of Navar, for his Wife
Blanca, against his Bastard son Ferdinand, King of Naples. Charles the 8. made
War, but before any action, Ferdinand dyed, having left two sons, Alphonsus his
successor, and Frederick, and a Grandchild, Ferdinand of Alphonsus. 1492


John of Arragon, Brother to Alphonsus, the elder, left Sicily to his son
Ferdinand, of a second venture, and married him to the sister of Henry, King of
Castile, by whom he had afterward, upon the death of Henry, and his son
Alphonsus, the Kingdom of Castile, Henrys daughter being excluded, Ferdinand is
now King of Sicily, and of both Spains. Shortly after by his conquering Arms,
he added the Kingdom of Granado and Naples, all which he transferred upon
Charles the 5. his Grand child by his daughter.

This is that Ferdinand who subdued and drove out the Moors, by the advice of
Cousalvus the great, after they had inhabited Spain almost 700. years, from the
time that Miramolinus, King of the Moors, was called in against Roderick, King
of the Goths. For this Service, and for causing the Moors that remained in
Spain, to embrace the Christian faith, he obtained the title of Catholic. The
dissension of two Kings in Granado, on of which Ferdinand, the other fled into
Mauritania, made this Conquest easy to Ferdinand, who had both the assistance
and council of Cousalvus in obtaining this, and recovering the Kingdom of
Naples from the French. These great changes and troubles of Europe were
accompanied with 3. great Comets, which appeard in the space of 16. years.

About the year 1454. the Borussians fell off from the Marian Knights, to
Casimir, King of Poland, who some years before had much weakened the power of
these knights by diverse victories he had over them: the cause of their
defection, was the Tyrannical Government of the Marians, occasioned by their
often Wars, [of which when people grow weary, they kick off their Governors.]

The Borussians join themselves to the Polander, on these conditions, That they
shall be equally capable of all Honors, Offices, and places in the Kingdom:
they shall have the suffrages in Parliaments, and in election of the King; That
their Merchants shall traffic in Poland safely; That all Marians, shall be
abolished; That no strangers be admitted to be Governors in their Towns or
Castles: they shall enjoy their own goods, as heretofore, and shall be ruled by
their own laws. But the Borussians cunningly to cut of all occasion, either in
the Polonian to set up, or in the Marian, to renew their Tyranny, discharge all
their Garrisons, and destroy all their Forts, Castles, and Cittadels, before
they made this union with Poland. This defection of the Borussians, was the
occasion of 12. years War, between the Marians, and Polonians; at last a peace
is concluded between Casimir of Poland and Lewis Erlings huss Master of the
Marian Family, on these Articles, That the Castles and Marieburg, Stuma, and
Christeburg; with some other places and Towns lying upon Pomerania, should be
delivered up to the Polander, the Marians should retain the rest so long as
they would be faithful and subject to Poland.

This was the 250. year since first the Marians under Hermanuus Salcensis, were
called in by Conradus Masovius, against the rebelious Borussians, on this
condition, That what they did subdue by force of Arms, should be their own.
Since that time then that they began to destroy the inhabitants, and their
Idolatry, and to replenish the Country with Germans, it became a part of the
Empire under Frederick, till now the Polander has obtained

About this time, John, King of Cyprus, married his daughter Carolota, to Lewis
of Savoy, to whom he promised that Kingdom for her portion: after King John's
death, James, his Bastard son seizes on the Kingdom: shortly after, upon the
invitation of the Cypri^ns, Lewis arrives, and James avoyds the Island. But
shortly after he returns with an Army out of Egypt, and drives Lewis, with his
wife, and Rhodian forces, out of the Island: to make his Title the surer, he
marries with A^catarina, daughter to Mark Cornelius the Venetian, to which the
Senate assented, and withal, adopted her for their daughter, that by her they
might have the easier access to that James dies, and leaves his wife great
with child to the Senate; this child dyed also shorly after his birth,
whereupon the mother returns home, and delivers the possession of Cyprus to the
Senate.

In the year 1440. when Frederick began his Empire, the Art of Printing was
found out at Mintz in Germany. In the year 1477. Eberhard, Earl of Wirteberg,
whom afterward Maximilian made Duke, erected the University of Tubinga.

CHAP. XV.
The prosecution of the affairs of Germany, Italy, France, Spain, and the
other neighboring places, under Maximilian the Emperor, with the Coronation of
Charles the fifth, from the year one thousand four hundred eighty six, till one
thousand five hundred twenty.

MAximilian was made Coleagu with his Father Frederick in the Empire by the
Electoral suffrages. He was a wise Prince, a great Witteberg 1486
was erected by Frederick of Saxony: and that of Franckfort on Viadrus, by
Ioachim of Brandeburg. He had 8. years War with the Belgians, who had rebelled.
These at last he forced to submit to the Imperial yoke, by the Valor and
council of that brave Commander, Albert, Duke of Saxony, who having subdued
Gelderland, falls upon Frisia, which Maximilian by the consent of the Imperial
Princes, bestowed on him, for a recompense of his valor and charges. Some part
of this Country he subjugated, but being prevented by death, he leaves an
imperfect Victory to his Sons, who though they mastered them a while, yet could
not long retain Friesland in Saxon yoke.

In the beginning of these Belgic Wars, Maximilian found much difficulty for
two years after his election: he was taken and kept a close prisoner in Brugis,
where he was discracefully used, and forced to look upon the tortures, and
cruel deaths of his servants, till he was set at liberty by his Father, and the
whole strength of the Empire: after the death of Matthias, Maxymilian makes War
upon Hungaria, but at last is contented to give way to the Election of
Ladislaus, King of Bohemia, reserving the right of succession to himself, and
successors, if Ladislaus should die without issue,

After this, he makes War in Italy, but with ill success, so that he lost all
he possessed there. First, he Warred in Hetruria in defense of Pisa, against
the French and Florentins; being invited thither by the Pope, Lewis Sfortia,
and the Venetians. He was carried to that expedition in a Fleet of Genua, but
finding that he could not take the Town and Port of Liburnum, though he
attempted it to the loss of many of his men, he sent away his Army to Lombardy,
and he followed after, and so returned into Germany: But greater wars were
kindled by Charles the 8. of France, a high spirited and hot young prince. He
hoped to gain all Italy by his right he had to Naples. Lewis Sfortia had
oportunely implored his aid against the Arragonians. Charles, to make all sure
at home, makes a League with two of his enemies, to wit, with Maximilian, whom
he had incensed by repudiating his daughter Margaret, and by carrying away Ann
of Britany (his Spouse) by Lewis Sfortia, who betrothed Blance Mary (sister of
John Galacius) to him, after he was defeated of his British marriage: then he
ingratiated Ferdinand of Spain, by restoring the rich City of Perpennian, in
the very entry of Spain; and those lands which his Father John in the
Celtiberian War had mortgaged for money to Lewis the 11.

Charles then enters Italy with a formidable army, and sets at liberty Pisa,
from the power of the Florentins; and these from the Medices, and Sena
Bandulphus Petrutius. He also brought his Army into Rome, and caused the Pope
enter into League with him, and to deliver up Gemes, the brother of Ba^azet:
thence he marched with unexpected celerity to Naples, upon whose approach,
Alphonsus, with his son Ferdinand, and his Uncle Frederick, retreated; so that
he without great difficulty obtained the kingdom, and entered Naples in Triumph
the first of January.

The neighboring Princes, astonished at this unexpected success, enter into a
league against the French: chiefly the Pope, Maximilian Caesar, the Senate of
Venice, Lewis Sfortia, with Ferdinand of Spain; which made Charles retreat; and
perceiving that the way by which he was to return, was shut up by the Venetians
and Sfortia, (whom Lewis of Orleans in the interim had invaded, and seized on
Novaria) he makes his passage by the sword, and so having overthrown them in a
bloody battle, near the River Tarus, he returns safe into France.

But Charles continued not long master of Naples, for Ferdinand, son of
Alphonsus, renews the War, being assisted by Consalvus, whom Ferdinand of Spain
had sent with a strong Fleet to defend Sicily: but in the midst of his
victories, about two years after the Victory of Charles, he dyed of a Fever,
the right to that Kingdom being transferred upon his Uncle Frederick. Against
him a league is made between Lewis Sfortia, Pope Alexander, Lewis the 12. of
France, son to Charles of Orleans, successor to Charles lately dead, Ferdinand
of Spain, the Venetians, and Florentines, on this condition, That Millan should
be restored to King Lewis, who claimed it by right of inheritance; and Cremona
to the Venetians: That Caesar Bergia, Pope Alexanders Cisalpin Gallia, and that
Ferdinand and Lewis should divide the Kingdom of Naples between them. Ferdinand
preferred a Kingdom to Consanguinity, in respect of which, he should have
assisted Frederick. The hatred of the Venetians against Sfortia, caused this
League: for the Pope a little before, with Sfortia, and Venice, were in league
against France and Florence, in defense of Pisa: for which cause they drew in
Maximilian the Emperor; but when success failed them, and the Venetians aimed
at the superiority of Pisa, Sfortia fell off, and opposed himself to the
Venetians; which incensed them, and made them enter into league with the
Princes against him. Sfortia being now in a great strait, and finding no help
from Maximilian, whom the Switzers and Grisons had made War upon, he most
wickedly incited Bajazet against Venice, which was his ruin: For when he
returned into Lombardy, having the assistance of the Switzers Foot, and
Burgundian Horse, he was betrayed to Tramulius the French General, and by him
conveyed into France to perpetual imprisonment. His brother also, Ascanius, the
Cardinal, as he was flying to Placentia, was intercepted by the Venetians, and
delivered up to the French; and so Millan within one year changed her Lords
thrice.

Frederick of Arragon, who was now in the Kingdom of Naples, being ignorant of
the league between the two Kings of Spain, and France, and that they had parted
this Kingdom between them, sent to Consalvus for aid; but in vain, for he was
suddenly surprised by the French, who were come down into Campania, so that he
was forced with his wife and children to get over into the Castle of Aenaria
for safety: Naples being surrendered, he obtains leave of Mamurcius and
Obegnius, the French Generals, to repair by sea unto King Lewis of France,
hoping to find some favor from him. This request was quickly granted, for they
knew that he should be there imprisoned. He left his young sone Ferdinand at
Tarentum, to keep it with a strong Garrison, who surrendered both the town and
himself to Consalvus, who sent him into Spain to partake of his Fathers fortune.

According to the agreement, the kingdom of Naples was divided between the two
Kings: the two Provences of Campania, or Terra laboria, Aprutia, or Praecutina,
fell to the French, with the City of Naples, the Regal seat of Campania. The
other two, namely Brutij, and Apulia, to the Spaniard. But afterward, because
one kingdom could not satisfy two Kings, the French and Spaniard fell out
about the division, and so the Spaniard having quite expelled the French,
obtained the who le kingdom. Caesar Borgia, having nefariously murtherd the
Italian Nobility, and poisoned his Father Alexander by a Cup, which he had
prepared for the Cardinals, but by the mistake of the Cup Bearer, was presented
to the Pope, by command from Ferdinand of Spain was apprehended, and there
imprisoned 3. years in the Castle of Medina, whence he escaped by ropes, out of
a window, John, King of Cantabria, in whose Wars, with Alarinus, he was shot
with a musket bullet, and so dyed. Upon the irruption of the French into Italy,
Maximilian calls a Diet of the Princes at Worms, for making War against the
Turks; but he could not effect any thing: shorly after he makes War against the
Helvetians, in which 20000 men were consumed. Eight battles were fought, in
which Maximilian had the worst, whose aim was to suppress the growing greatness
of the Switzers, to recover the Territories taken from Austria by the Switzers,
and to reduce them to the obedience of the Empire. At last a pacification is
made at Basil. Then began the Bavarian War, occasioned by Rupert the Palatin,
son to Philip the Elector, who married Rupert to George, Duke of Bavaria's
Daughter, with whom he obtained from George, a part of the Duchy of Bavaria
1504
for her portion. Caesar would not ratify this grant of Bavaria, because it
was against the Custom of the Empire, and Laws of Fees, and prejudical to
Albert, Duke of Bavaria; yet the Pope approved it. After the death of George,
Maximilian would have a 3. part of the lands granted to be assigned over to
Albert of Bavaria, another 3. to Rupert for his Wifes portion, and the rest to
the Palatines Family for the losses they had received from Lewis of Bavaria.
Philip refused these conditions, therefore he takes up Arms: Maximilian
proscribes him, and raises an Army which Rupert was assisted by the Bohemians,
2000 of whom were slain. At last, the Palsgrave being worsted, Frederick,
Elector of Saxony, reconciles him to Caesar, causing him at the Diet of Colen
to make his submission to Maximilian, for which he incurred a while the
Emperors displeasure; in that he would mediate for such an enemy of the Empire:
yet Caesar pardoned the Palatin, and gave to Ruperts sons, a part of that
controverted country.

The Venetian War was undertaken by almost all the Kings of Christendum, at the
instigation of Pope Julius, who had lately driven out of 1508
Bonomia, John Bentivolus, being now 70. years old. Their power began to
Venetians sufficiently, the same Julius raises another War in defense of them.
Two years before this, Phylip the son of Maximilian, Prince of Belgium, is
invited to Spain by the Nobility, to undertake the Kingdom of Isabella his
Mother in law: Ferdinand perceiving his peoples affections more inclined to
Phylip then to himself, in anger he sails to Naples: but Phylip being
unacquainted with that hot climat, fed too plentifully, and so fell into a
fever and dyed the 28. year of his age. He left by his wife two sons, Charles
and Ferdinand, and four daughters. Before his death, a Commet was seen.

When Ferdinand understood his son in law was dead, having settled Naples,
French King, with whom he consults about the Venetian War, which the Princes
were willing to undertake, that they might curb the growing estate of that
City, which used to raise her self by the fall of others, and aimed at the
Dominion of all Italy. Therefore Maximilian Caesar, Pope Julius, Lewis of
France, Ferdinand of Spain, and Alphonsus of Ferraria, enter into a Confederacy
against them. Caesar was willing to be revenged on Venice, for stopping his
passage into Italy, when he was traveling to Rome for his Inauguration. He
took from the Venetians by Ralph Prince of Anhalt, his General, Vincentia,
Verona, and Padua, and defeated the Venetian Army, whereof 9000. were slain.
But shortly after they poisoned him at Verona, and so the Cities revolted to
the Venetians again. Lewis of France 1513
took from them, Cremona, with some other Cities: Alphonsus of Ferraria seized
upon diverse of their Territories: Pope Julius took Ariminum, Ravenna,
Ferdinand. Thus being exhausted of their money by this War, and robbed of their
Cities, and Territories, they humbly beg peace from Julius, which he granted
them, but could not persuade the French and Germans, nor the Ferrarian to lay
down Arms, which occasioned a new War, in which the French take Bononia, from
the Pope; whereupon he excommunicates Lewis, the French King, and pretends to
bring back Maximilian Sfortia unto his Fathers principality, whence he was
unjustly expelled. The French King on the other side, sleighting the Popes
curses, calls a Synod at Pisae, in which, after the example of the Synods of
Constance and Basil, he desires Florentines at first assented, but shortly
after they recanted; whereby the Cardinals and French Garrison by a popular
tumult are expelled the City, so that they repair to Millan.

The Pope was assisted by the Venetians, Switzers, and Ferdinand of Spain, who
expelled out of Cantabria, John, King of Navar, being of the French Faction.
Behind, France was invaded by King Henry of England. The French and German
Army defeat the Venetians near Athesis, then they march to Ravenna, where they
totally rout the Popes army, of whose men there were slain sixteen thousand the
rest flung down their Arms and submitted.

After this, the Emperor calls home his forces, and makes a league with Spain
and England, which furnished the French with work at home: wherefore the French
Army is called out of Italy, but as they were marching, they are set upon by
the Switzers and Venetians upon the Popes instigation, and driven quite out of
Lombardy. So the Pope recovers again Bononia, and casts out the Beutivoli.
Genua asserts her own liberty: Maximilian Sfortia is restored to the
principality of Millan, and so are the Medic^s brought back into Florence, whom
the French had driven out: and so ends the Confederacy against the
Venetians. After this, Leo 10. takes from Sfortia, Placencia, and Parma,
extending the Churches Territories as far as Po.

Lewis of France, and Ferdinand of Spain, secretly make a league, confirming
Cantabria upon the Spaniard, and Millan upon the French: but the French King
dies not long after, and the year ensuing, the Spanish followed: in whom ended
the race of the Arragonian Kings, which had reigned from the Berengary Earls of
Barcebona, 370 years, and 230 in Sicily. His death was portended by a Commet.
To Ferdinand succeeded Charles the fifth, his Grandchild by his daughter. To
Lewis succeeded, Francis, Duke of Angoulesme, his son in law: he began his
reign with the Italian 1515
Switzers, 1516
fighting for Maximilian Sfortia at Millan: the battle lasted two days; of
25000 men, scarce one half escaped. He takes from the Pope Parma and
Placentia, restoring them to the ancient jurisdiction of the Insubrians: the
Castle of Millan is surrendered to him, and Maximilian conveyed into France.
Upon this success, Francis intends to invade the kingdom of Naples, had not
Maximilian Caesar called him out of Italy, by stirring up the Switzers and
English against him. The Venetian War begun by Maximilian, was ended by
Charles, in the league between him and Francis, on these Articles; That Charles
should restore the kingdom of Navar to his son John, if the Arbitrators should
think fit, and withal 100000 crowns yearly to the French King out of the
Kingdom of Naples, for confirming of his right to that Crown: also that Verona
should be restored to Venice upon the payment of 200000 crowns to Caesar at two
times. Maximilian being now old, confirmed these Articles, and the rather,
because he had no hope of Switzerland. But when Charles was elected Emperor,
which Francis aimed at, this league was broke, and great Wars fell out between
Charles and Francis, in which the possession of Naples, and Millan was recovered
by Charles. About this time, Charles Duke of Gelderland, upon the instigation
and charges of the French, made Wars against the Brabantins, in hatred of the
house of Burgundy.

About these times in the Diocese of Spire, the people began to mutiny for
their liberties, after the example of the Switzers: but this sparkle hid 25
years under the Cinders, brake out into a flame through all Germany. At Vienna
there was a meeting between Maximilian Caesar, Ladislaus, Sigismund, King of
Poland, who renew the old league, which they confirm by mutual marriages, That
Mary, Niece to Maximilian, should marry with Lewis, the son of Ladislaus: Anna
the daughter of Ladislaus should choose either of his Nephews for her Husband,
with hope of succession to the Kingdom of Hungaria, if Lewis should dye without
issue male: That after the death of Ladislaus, Maximilian and Sigismund should
have the protection of the children and kingdom, but the Hungarian Nobility,
after the death of Ladislaus, which followed shortly, neglected both these
Guardians, and fell into Factions about the Tuition of the young King, scarce
yet ten years old; dividing his Revenews (Maximilian being dead, and the
Polonian involved in a threefold War, to wit, the Tartarian, the Russian, and
Borusnacetu) to invade Hungaria, and take Belgrade, the chief strength of that
kingdom. Maximilian held his last Diet at Auspurg, in which a consultation is
had about the Turkish War; for Selymus having overthrown the Sultans kingdom,
did threaten Christendom. He recommended his Nephew Charles to the Princes to
take care of him after his death, which followed shortly after, having fallen
into a Fever, and looseness the 59. year of his age, and the 32. of his Empire.
1519
He had two wives, the first was Mary of Burgundy, by whom he had Philip,
Margaret was betrothed to Charles the 8. of France, but by him repudiated,
having taken by force Ann of Britany, the only Heir of that Duchy, after she
was promised to Maximilian. Then Margaret was betrothed to the Prince of
Arragon, who dyed before the marriage; at last she married with that
unfortunate Prince, Philbert of Savoy. Caesar's other wife was Blanca Maria,
Daughter to Galleacius of Millan, and sister of John Galeas, by whom he had no
issue.

Some few years before Caesar's death, Sigismund, King of Poland, and
Constantine, Duke of Ross, or Rossia, defeated the great Army of the Muscovits,
Franciscans, holding the Virgin Mary to be conceived without sin, and the
Dominicans, who held the contrary: which troubled the world, till some Monks
were burned for speaking through hollow Images of the Virgin, and deluding the
people. An. 1517. Martin Luther began to oppose the Popes indulgences: 100
years after, the burning of John Husse at the Council of Constance, being
encouraged thereto by Frederick, Duke of Saxony, and seconded by Erasmus,
Melancthon, Bugenhagius, and others. His intention at first, was only to
oppose the abuse of Pardons, but being exasperated by Tecelius the Dominican,
who burned his papers, and stirred up other Monks to write invectives against
him: he writes to Pope Leo, and Albert, Archbishop of Magdeburg, Primat of
Germany, that he would submit his Theses to the Judgment and Censure of the
Roman Church; and at the last Diet of Maximilian, held at Ausburg, he promises
to Cardinal Cajetan that he

After the death of Maximilian, the Turk having settled Syria and Egypt,
prepares to invade Panonia: the French King having beat the Switzers, and
possessed himself of Millan, aims at Naples, and strives to translate the
Empire from Germany to France: Therefore he raises an Army, makes way with
Pope Leo the tenth: desires the Title of Emperor of Constantinople,
Bartholemew, where the Pattent called the Golden bull, was read, the Decrees of
which, the Electors standing at the Altar, swear to observe. After this, they
go from the Altar to the Chapel, where the Election uses to be; there the
Archbishop of Mints having prayed for direction from God, and a blessing on
their proceedings, he makes a speech to them, showing the weight and necessity
Otho the 3. by the Popes approbation established this Electoral College, by
which these 500 years, the Imperial possession has remained in this Nation: He
alleges many examples of misery and destruction in Germany, by disagreeing
Elections; and how needful at this time concord is, when Germany has so many
enemies, and the Turk is threatening Christendom: when the eyes of all Nations
Charles, King of Spain, Archduke of Austria and Burgundy, with some German
Princes, come to Mints, recommending to the Electors, the wisdom, courage,
moderation, and other virtues of this Prince; likewise his power and ability
above oath Christian Kings, which Maximilian perceiving, recommended him to the
Electors: this so wise a Prince, so loving to Germany would not have done had
he known the contrary. But the French Legates at Confluence, with great
promises, strive to procure the Electors suffrages, Francis for their Emperor,
if they consider the great union heretofore of the German and French Nation,
under the Family of Pipin and Charles, almost 100 years: how by their united
strength they suppressed the Lombards, Sarazens in Italy and France: how
needful their union is now to suppress the Turks greatness; how much Francis
was affected to the welfare of Italy, whereof he had now a good part, which
being united with France, and Germany, would master the Turk both by Land and
Sea. Besides that, no Prince in Christendom was so fit to be Emperor as
Francis, both in respect of his power, as of his Military skill, valor, and
happiness, whereof he has given good experience in recovering of Insubria; and
that the Germans should lose nothing of their Liberties by this Election, but
rather increase them by obtained offices and places of Command in France,
promising that no French Garrisons should be kept in Germany, but the natives
of Germany only.

The Electors thanked the King for his good will to Germany, promising to
proceed in the Election according to their Laws, and Oath which they had taken.
Not long before this, the French King had sent Legates to the Switzers, showing
them how needful it would be to the peace of Christendom, and destruction of
the Turk, if Francis were chosen Emperor, that therefore they would be no
hinderance to this Election, which was so much desired by the Christian
Princes, and the Pope himself for suppressing of the Turk who was aiming at the
total subversion of Christian laws, and religion: He promises also that the
Switzers shall be great gainers by this Union. To this the Switzers answer,
That they would not hinder French were busy to procure suffrages, and withal
dissuade them from Electing Francis, for that would cause much trouble in
Germany, and that there was no need to choose strangers, having so many able men
of their own Nation fit for that high employment. They write also to Pope Leo
the 10. That he would not persuade the Electors to choose Francis, for that
would cause great Wars between France and Germany, to the great prejudice of
Italy. The Pope by his answer seems to be inclined rather to Charles, then
Francis, though he names neither.

Mean while the Electors proceed to the Election, the Bishop of Mints speaks
first, showing that it was against their Oath, the liberty, Honor, and safety
of Germany to choose Francis being a stranger, and wohse aim was to transfer
the Empire into France, which could not be possessed in Germany heretofore by
Charles the Gross, and the Otho's, without great Wars. If then Frances be
chosen, the French will domineer in Germany, and will set it all on fire of
Civil Wars: for he has already denounced War against Charles, and has broken
the old league between France and Burgundy; and threatened War against Naples;
besides, the Austrians and Belgians have already refused to be under the French
yoke: and there is no more reason France to demand the German Empire, because
they derive the Original of their Kings from the Germans, then they have to
demand Troy from the Turk, because they derive themselves from Hectors son. If
Francis (says he) be chosen, then must the Electors make war against Austria,
so well deserving of Germany, and violate the Will of Maximilian. They will arm
Francis, who is too ambitious of domination, with power to raise War in the
bowels of the Empire. As for his suppressing of the Turks, in that he can do
nothing, except first he suppress the Belgians at home, and the Neopolitans in
Italy. He concludes then Negatively, against the Election of Francis: as for
Charles he is doubtful, because Spain is so remote Germany, which by reason of
the Turks, or of civil dissentions, requires the Emperors presence. Besides,
it is to be feared that Spain having once got the Empire, will not part with it
again, nor will they ever suffer Germany to enjoy Millan, which they have
conpuered by their blood. Therefore he thinks it might be safer to choose one of
their own German Princes, if any one had power enough to buckle with Spain or
France; but if these two Kingdoms fall out, Germany will be wronged for want of
a potent Emperor: which was the cause that in Frederick the 3. time, the
Burgundians marched without control through a great part of Germany: Philip
Maria domineered in Italy; and the Emperor himself was beset even in Austria,
who was beholding to Bohemia for his liberty: and lastly he was driven out of
Austria by the Hungarians; besides the late controversies in Religion are like
to make great broiles in Germany, which cannot be suppressed without a general
Council, and a prince more potent then any of the German Peers, who must both
assemble and defend the Council: Charles is the fittest for the Empire; and the
rather because he is a German prince, as Archduke of Austria, and not a
stranger: and besides, a prince of excellent parts and temper for government,
whereof he has given ample testimony in settling Spain, and composing the
differences thereof: descended also of brave princes, if you look upon the
virtues either of Philip his Father, or of Maximilian his Grandfather: He is
also of an age fit for Action and Government; not a child, nor an old decrepit
man. As for his remoteness from Germany, he may be so dealt with, (in respect
of many Germany, and Belgium) to make his oftnest residence there, seeing he
will find employment enough in driving the French out of Italy, in keeping off
the Turks from Austria, and in settling Religion.

Having finished, the other Electors desire the Bishop of Trevers to speak,
being a man of learning, judgment, and experience, as one accustomed to
public employments both in Rome and Germany, and well acquainted with the
estate of France. He therefore having commended the Bishop of Mints for his
wise speech, shows, That if his opinion be followed, the old prophecy will
be fulfilled, which was, That Maximilian Francis to Charles, because Spain is
farther off, which having got once the Empire, will hardly part with it again;
besides, if Charles should be elected, because of his principalities in Germany,
then Francis may be chosen, who has the Duchy of Millan, and Kingdom of
Arles, anciently belonging to the German Emperors. Again, the benefit that will
redownd to all Europ, by the Union of France with Germany is very great; for so
Italy will be quieted, the pope satisfied, and the Turks Francis be Emperor,
Millan will be as well ours as theirs, and the Belgians will be less able to
stir against him, and he will have the less cause to War against them, or to
trouble Italy seeing Francis enjoys Millan quietly; so that he will have no
thing to hinder him from falling on the Turk. But if we choose the Spaniard,
Italy, and so the Turkish War will be hindered. The French will fall upon
Naples, and if he prevail, will force the Pope to annihilate our Election,
which will cause unspeakable troubles; besides, how hard it will be to get the
Empire out of the Spaniards hands having once hold of it, may be conjectured by
the Carthaginians, who having once got footing in Sicily, could not in many
years be driven out thence, nor the Spaniards out of Naples, nor can the Turks
yet be expelled Europe.

If we compare these two Kings together, we will find that Francis is the
better Scholar, the wiser man, and more experienced, because more aged: in
Charles there is but an inclination and disposition as yet, to princely and
military arts; but in Francis there is a habit who has with such felicity
managed his Wars in Italy, as to overthrow the Switzers, and subdue Millan:
Therefore he concludes in the affirmative, for Francis, showing what
inconveniences will arise to Germany, by the remoteness of Charles: Germany,
who is such in Habitation, Language, Manners and Original: such a man may be
potent enough, says he, if there be but worth and courage in him, and unity
among us: for when one told Lewis of France, That Maximilian was but Consul of
Auspurbg signifying his weakness, true, says the King, but when he beats his
Drum all France trembles; intimating the Emperors power, which is formidable to
the neighboring Nations, for (says he) inferior Princes, such as Albert Duke
of Saxony, Albert Marquess of Brandeburg, the Bavarian and others, have upon
occasion raised great Forces, why then should we mistrust the Emperors power,
or prefer a stranger to a

After he had spoken, the Electors sat silent a while, musing what was best to
be done: at last Frederick, Duke of Saxony, delivered his opinion, That Francis
by their law could not be chosen: that Charles was a German prince, and that
they stood in need of a powerful Emperor in those turbulent times, and that
Charles was in this respect to be preferred before all others: but yet that
certain conditions for the liberty and safety of Germany, must be proposed to
him. To this the other Electors assented. The Bishop of Trevers told them, that
he foresaw the Fate of Germany, and change of the Empire, therefore wished them
seriously to consider, but Charles his Ambassadors then at Mints, which being
accepted, a day for the election is set in S. Bartholemews chapel: Mints is
first asked whom he thought fit should be Emperor, answers Charles Archduke of
Austria; then he asks the rest, they all answer the same. These suffrages were
indorsed and sealed, and then publicly proclaimed: whereupon the Archbishop
of Mints made a speech to the Nobility and people, thanking God for choosing a
Prince so eminent in Virtue, so excellent in power, so sweet in his own nature
and disposition, who being Alexander when he began his Empire, was fit for
great Actions, and Heroic exploits. He thanked God also for the unanimous
assent of the Electors; whereas heretofore their disagreeing Elections have
been the cause of much bloodshed and Civil Wars in Germany; therefore he
wishes the people to be thankful, joyful, dutiful, and obedient to such a
Prince, who is no stranger to them but of the Austrian Family, which for above
80. years had deserved so well of Germany, who has given already testimonies
of his princely Virtues, by settling and uniting the factions and warlike
spirits of Spain, which now was to be united to the German Empire. When the
speech was ended, all gave a

The Ambassadors of Charles are sent for, and their advice is required about
settling of the Empire in quietness from the French Factions, till Charles
should be ready to come himself: upon this Casimir, Marquess of Brandeburg is
appointed to place Garrisons where there was suspicion, and to have an Army
ready if need should require: some Electors were joined with him as his
counselors: the Ambassadors are accompanied by the Electors to Mintz, who
returning to Franckford, send Frederick, Palatine of the Rhen, with some other
Princes, as their Ambassadors to Charles, one of whom made such have that he
came to Barcinum, or Barellona from Franckford in nine days: He found the King
in Bed, in the morning, whom he acquaints with the glad news of his Election,
for which he is rewarded with good store of Gold: the Palatin is met with by
the King almost three miles without the town, to whom he delivers his letters,
in which Germany.

Charles, by his Orator Mercurinus, answers the Ambassadors, That he was very
joyful for the good will of his Country toward him, and their good opinion
in conceiving him only worthy of that high employment, and honor, therefore
promises to return mutual love to his country, and perpetual good will to the
Princes his Cosins. In the mean while, Charles was perplexed within himself,
when he considered the great weight that lay on him if he accepted the Empire,
to wit, Wars both with France and the Turks, and the offense he should give
Spain in forsaking them: on the other side, he thought it hard to refuse what
God, and the free Election of his Country had cast upon him, tending so much
to the honor of his Family, and welfare of Christendom: Therefore he wishes
Frederick to acquaint the German Princes, that he would accept the Empire: then
he calls to God for wisdom, with Solomon to rule his people, Grace to imitate
the virtues of Trajan and Theodosius, two Spanish Princes called to be
Emperors: then having writ his Letters to the Princes, promises to act nothing
without them, and to be with what speed he can in Germany. He dismisseth the
Palatine, after he had bestowed rich

In the beginning of the spring, Caesar set sail, and arrives in England, where
he is Royally entertained by King Henry the 8. who promised to wait on him at
his Coronation: so a league is confirmed between them. Then he comes into
Belgium, where he is received with joyful acclamations, finding him now a man,
who went from them a child. He made some stay there to settle the Country,
and to receive King Henry who came not, being hindered by the French, with whom
he enters into a league. At last Charles comes to Aix, attended by the flower
of the Burgundian, and Belgian Nobility. He was met by the Electors, and rest
of the German Princes: by the Priests also, carrying the Monuments of Charles
the great. The next day, being the 12 of October, he was crowned, though the
plague was in the town. Mints and Colen put on his Robe, and led him to the
Altar, the Palatine carrying before him the Globe of the world; Saxony, the
Sword, and Brandeburg, the Scepter: Trevers Anointed him: Colon and Mints
Crowns him. After he had sworn at the Altar, then the Sword and Scepter were
delivered to him: after this, the great Feast is prepared, in which Mints
stands with the great Seal in his hand; Brandeburg with the Scepter; the King
of Bohemia's Ambassador is Cup Bearer; and the Palatine, Sewer. Mean while, the
Duke of Saxony Caesar, 1520
with the Princes go to Colen, to confer about the next Diet, which was
appointed to be held at Worms, the first of January: this being done* Charles
returns too into Belgium, and the Princes to their own homes.

CHAP. XVI.
The affairs of Italy, Germany, Netherlands, with the actions of the Popes of
those times, and the Council of Trent, etc. under Charles the 5. Ferdinand and
Maximilian, from the year one thousand five hundred twenty,

CHarles the fifth being Crowned (as is said) in his first Diet held at Worms,
proscribes Luther to ingratiate himself with Pope Leo: but Frederick the
Elector hid him at Wartberg till the troubles were past over, raised by
Carolostadius for breaking down the Images; then Luther returns to Viteberg.
Mean while the Pope makes a League with Charles to drive the French out of
Insubria, and all Italy, which was easy to be French for want of pay.
Millan is restored by Caesar to Francis Sfortia, brother of Maximilian; Parma
and Placentia to the Pope, who shortly after dyed not without suspicion of
poison given him by his Chamberlain, in whose place was set up Hadrian,
Bishop of Utricht, sometimes Caesar's Schoolmaster, but then Governor of Spain:
He gave way for a general Synod to suppress the differences in Religion, and to
correct the corruptions of the Clergy. He made a League between Charles
Caesar, Henry of England, Lewis of Hungaria, and some of the Italian Princes,
having excluded the French, from whom the Venetians fell off: in the interim,
Adrian dies the second year of his Pontificate. In his time the Inquisition
begins to burn Lutherans Bruxels. Luther rages at Henry the 8. for writing
against him, and assuming from the Pope the Title of Defendor of the Faith.
Zuinglius, a Canon of Tigurum, caused the Senate of that City to cast off the
Roman Religion. King Francis of France taking occasion upon the Commotions of
Spain, seiseth almost all Navar, and sends a great Army against Millan: but
Caesar drives the French again out of Italy, and sends Charles of Burbon into
Province, who in vain attempted Massyles. Francis retakes Millan, being
forsaken by Sfortia, but in the siege of Papia is taken himself prisoner,
having separated his Army by the advice of Clements 7. who succeeded Adrian.
Hereupon Clements fearing that Caesar would be too great in Italy, makes a
League with the Sfortia. Caesar sets Francis again at liberty on such
conditions as he would not perform, and being angry with the Pope abolishes his
power throughout all Spain. He takes the Castle of Millan, and the Columnii
invade Rome, where they besiege the Pope in his Castle 1527
of S. Angelo, and plunder his Palace of the Vatican. The Churches are spoiled,
the priests abused, the rich men plundered, the Pope forced to yield upon
Caesar's conditions, and the Cardinals Caps are openly sold. Thus was Clement
punished for breaking his League with the Emperor.

Mean while the Florentines turn out the Medices, and set themselves free:
Genua is forced to submit to the French power, which after this lays siege to
Naples, but the sickness so raged in his Army, that it consumed 20000. the rest
were dispersed. Neither was their French Fortune better in Insubria, for they
lose Genua again with the Castle, and are driven out of Savona, and Burbon
taken prisoner, so that the Confederates are now forced to think of Peace with
Caesar: but Germany is much troubled now with Controversies of Religion: the
Protestants are divided among themselves; Carolostadius, with Zuinglius, and
Oecolampadius, in points of the Eucharist oppose themselves to Luther: many
Lutherans are burned for Heretics: the Rusticks and servants, under show of
Evangelical lib^rty, rebel against their Lords and Masters: Luther with all his
preaching and writing, could not reclaim them, but they in great flocks drive
out the Gentry, pull down their Castles, kill and butcher all that make
resistance. Swevians are overthrown near Ulme, Franconie, and other place.
About 50000 of them are slain, and their Ringleader is roasted alive at a gentle
fire: yet shortly after they fly out again by the instigation of one Thomas
Munzerus, a mad Preacher, but are utterly defeated by Philip, the Landgrave:
Munzerus preaching is spoiled by the loss of his head. Another Rebellion
against the Bishop of Trevers, is quieted by the punishment and death of their
Captain Siccingus.

Mean while Luther goes on boldly in his Reformation. He sets out the New
Testament, and Psalms in Dutch, and causes Divine service to John Duke of
Saxony, who suceeded his brother Frederick by George of Brandeburg, by Ernestus
and Francis of Luneburg, by Philip the Landgrave, Philip of Pomerania, and some
others. These protested against the decrees of Ratisbon, and Spire, in
prejudice to religion: hence came the name of Protestants. Albert, Master of
the Teutonick order, and Duke of Borussia, 1529
marries with Dorothy, Daughter to Frederick, the first King of Denmark; then
did the Rhodian Knights obtain the Isle of Malta, and at the same time the
sweating sickness brake out in England.

Charles preparing against the Turk, makes a League with the Pope at
Barcellona, wherein it was agreed, That Caesar's Daughter Margaret, should marry
with Alexander of Medices, and that he may be restored to his ancient Dominion
of Florence. The Venetians also join in this League, and delivered up the towns
they had among the Samnites, in Picenum, and Apulia.

It is also agreed, That Francis paying 200000 Crowns, should receive his
Children again which were his Hostages. Then after Caesar had beaten Solomon,
he is Crowned at Bononia with great state by the Pope, to whom he swore to
destroy the Lutherans, who at Marpurg tried to be reconciled to Zuinglius, but
could not. Shortly after in the Diet at Auspurg, they exhi Augustana, which was
openly read, but then rejected by Caesar. The Lutheran Princes are enjoined to
restore all to the Church again, under pain of proscription, and not to write
or speak against the Roman Doctrine. But Luther publishes a book, exhorting
the Germans to reject that impious Edict of the Diet, and to oppose the Roman
Tenets, and to defend the Protestant Princes by the sword. Caesar, to retain
the Empire in his Family, caused his Brother Ferdinand, at Colen to be
proclaimed King of the Romans. The same year Florence, after a long siege is
surrendered to Caesar, and according to the Agreement between Caesar and the
Pope, Alexander of Medices, the Bastard son of Laurence, is made Duke of
Florence; but Charles finding the Lutherans, by the mediation of Albert, Arch
Bishop of Mints, and Ludovick, the Palsgrave. In his Army arose a great mutiny
for want of pay, which made him alter his resolution, and return by Italy into
Spain. The Turks wast and plunder all where they came; but in their return lose
both their spoils and lives in Helvetia.

The Bernois after the Example of Zurich and Basil, shake off the Roman
religion: whereupon by the instigation of Ferdinand and Clement, great troubles
are raised, which the French endeavored to compose, but could 1531
not. At last they come to a Battle, in which Zuinglius is killed, and his body
burned. Oecolampadius grieving for the loss of his friend, dyed. The Tigurins
recruit again, and try another Battle, in which there was such loss on both
sides, that they agreed to live peaceably one with another, Westphalia a War is
raised by John of Leyden, the Tailor, who being infected with the madness of
Muntzer, and backed by Bernard Rotman, Minister of Monaster, cavilled against
Baptism of Infants, braging much of Enthusiasmes and the Spirit: A great part
of Monaster sided with him. No disputation nor council could work on these men;
but to strengthen themselves they call in many strangers, they thrust out the
old Senate, and choose new Senators; they call the City Jerusalem, and dream of
new Apostles, Kings, and Judges: but the Bishop by the German forces so
besieged their new Jerusalem, that it was vexed with as great a Famine as the
old, and all kind of calamities John, Knipperdolling, Beruh, and their
Minister Kretchting, are nipped with hot burning pincers, and hanged upon a
high tower.

Pope Clement confirms a new Order of Capuchins, and procrastinates the
promised Synod, leaving that burden by his death to Alexander Fernesius his
successor, whose pontifical name was Paul the third: he seemed very desirous to
have a general council: He makes his Nephews Cardinals: Mantua is the place
first named for a Council, then Vicentia. Fifteen of the protestant Princes,
and 30 Cities do remonstrate to Vergerius: That a general Synod is the
Tribunal of the whole Church, not of the Pope alone; and that the Pope was a
party, therefore no competent Judge: that he ought not first of himself to
condemn Luther, and then force the Synod to do the like. Luther at Smalcald,
frames some Articles, subscribed by certain Divines, which he exhibits to the
Synod at Mantua.

Mean while Caesar makes an expedition into Africa, to restore Muleasses to his
Kingdom of Tunis, being turned out by Barbaross, the pyrate of Mitylene, whom
Solomon had furnished with a fleet, himself being employed in the Persian War.
Barbaross is overthrown, the Moor restored to his Guleta built by Charles,
which made the Christians Navigation the more secure. The Turk took Seleucia,
but in his return lost the most part of his Army by Famine and Want. When Caesar
was returned from Afric, he seizerh on Millan, (now void by the death of
Sfortia) as being Lord of the Fee. The French King on the other side claims it
as his inheritance, and because the Duke of Savoy adhered to the Emperor, he
drives him out of a great part of his Territories, which so moved Gaesar, that
he made a great complaint to the Pope at Rome against the French, and withal
sends an Army into France: but Pope Paul, understanding that the Turk had taken
Clissa in Dalmatia, Corcyra from the Venetians, and subdued Moldavia, makes a
peace of ten years between Caesar and the French at Nicaea, a town of Province,
where he procures for his Nephew Octavius, the Widow of Alexander Medices, who
for his intemperate Letchery, was murdered by his Cousin Jermin, Lawrence.
Cosmus Medices, is by Caesar made Duke of Florence, but against the Popes will.
The fleet which the Emperor, Pope and Venesian sent against the Turk, is
overthrown by Barbarossa and stormy weather. Luther translates the Bible into
Dutch, and prints it; whose example in this, was followed by diverse other 1538
Nations: At Straisburg a College is erected, the Jesuits society is
instituted by Loiola a Spaniard; the Protestant Princes make a league among
themselves, to whom is joined the Dane, who had lately changed his Religion:
Caesar upon the entreaty of his brother Ferdinand, calls a Diet at Francford,
for reconciling the differences in Religion, where a truce is given the
Protestants.

Caesar not long after this, having buried his Emperess Isabel, King John of
Portugall's sister, makes a journey into France, where he is royally received
Francis at Paris, and Eleanor his sister, King Francis his wife; he sends
Ambassadors to Venice to incite them against the Turk, whose metropolis
Constantinople was almost burned down; but the Castle of Guleta was recovered
by Barbarossa; then Caesar hastneth to Belgium to suppress the rebellion of
Gaunt, whose old Privileges he took away, and put to death the seditious
Authors, he appoints a conference at Worms, between the Catholics and
Protestants, which was interrupted by the Pope fearing a Schism. After this
Charles growing more mild toward the Protestants, endeavored to have a
conference of moderate Divines at Ratisbon, for reconciling some controvered
points; but Catarenus the Cardinal fearing the Popes displeasure, averted
Algier in Africa against the Turks, which came to nothing, for the winds and
storms so spoiled the ships before Algier, that they were forced to return into
Spain with great loss; so likewise Ferdinand's preparation in Germany against
the Turks did miscarry, by the sickness in the Army, and for want of
discipline: About this time also, Francis finding that Charles deluded him about
the restitution of Millan, and that he had put to death his Legates going to the
Turks, breaks off the league, and draws William of Cleveland, to whom Charles
had denied the possession of Gelderland, to side with him, who therefore
endeavored to seize upon Antwerp; for Charles Egmund heir of his fathers
quarrel with the house of Burgundy, left Gelderland by his last will to
William of Iuliers, and to his only daughter Mary his wife, whose son William
became heir of Iuliers, Cleveland, Gelderland, and other places; this wealth,
that he might the more easily enjoy and retain, against the great power of
Caesar, he thought it his safest way to enter into a league with France, which
caused afterward great wars. Ch^ls to strengthen his cause against France,
strives to make the Pope on his side, therefore he labors to suppress the
Protestants; yet he would not part with Parma and Placentia, parcels of the
Duchy of Millan, to Octavius, Farnesius, Paul's Nephew. He prepares then to
make war upon France and Cleveland, Cosmus Medices his Castles for two hundred
thousand crowns: The French are assisted by Christian 3d. of Denmark, and
Gustavus the Swede, for some wrong they had received from Charles; But Francis
unwisely divides his Army into 5. parts, and falls upon 5. several Imperial
Territories, by which he weakened his power, and lost quickly the places he
took; Cleveland lost so many of his Towns, that he was forced to submit to
Caesar, and to content himself with the loss of Gelderland: But the French take
Laudress and Luceburg, and assist the Turk in the siege of Nicea, and defeat
the Cesarians in Piemont; wherefore Caesar at Spire gives peace to 1544
the Protestants till the next Diet: Shortly after he recovers Luceburg, and
takes diverse Towns from the French, wasting all his Country almost to Paris,
so that Francis was glad to sue for peace, and to restore Savoy.

During the quietness which the Protestants had under Charles, they erect in
diverse places Colleges, and Schools for learning; but those Halcyonian days
held not long; for Caesar and Francis combine together to restore the old
Religion, and to suppress all gainsayers: Therefore Proclamations are made
through all their dominions against Protestanisme: One Peter Brulius for
opposing the Roman Faith, is burned at Turnay; The Waldenses are massacred in
Provence: Their extirpation was urged in the Diet at Worms. Paul assembleth
the Synod at Trent; with him Caesar, the French, and Polonian join in league,
Caesar is reproved and threatened in a sharp Letter, which Luther answered, for
conniving so long at the Protestants. Henry of Brunswig; for raising new
troubles, is taken prisoner with his son by the Land-grave; the 1546
next year after this Luther died, 29. years after he began this fatal
quarrel. The conference at Ratisbon is dissolved, the Protestants complaining
of their Trent. Mints and Trevers fall off from Herman of Colen, and Frederick
Palatine, who were lately turned Lutherians: Caesar raises an Army, Colen is
proscribed by the Pope, a truce is made with Solomon, lest he should hinder the
war intended against the Protestants: The Pope promises to assist Caesar with
12 thousand Foot, 500 Horse, and good store of gold. Charles declares that his
raising of Forces was not against the Cities, but some Princes who obstructed
justice and the peace: The Saxon and Landgrave, whom Caesar aimed at,
remonstrate that they were free from all crimes except Heresy, which was the
only cause of the Popes war: most of the Princes side with the Emperor.
Denmark was Charles, and the house of Burgundy; therefore to avoid offense,
Christian the third, would not assist the Protestants. The Saxon and Landgrave
are proscribed by Caesar, who has now a great Army of Pontificians, Spaniards,
and Germans, with which, great Forces of the Belgians do join near Ingolsta
notwithstanding the Protestants endeavored to hinder this conjunction: Caesar
to distract the Protestant Army, assists Maurice the Saxons Cousin German, with
Forces against the Elector, with whom before he had a quarrel: Hereupon the
Protestants are necessitated to transferr their Army into Saxony, and to leave
a Garrison in Saevia: The Landgrave returns home with his Forces, unwilling to
fight against Maurice his son in Law; So it was easy for Caesar to subdue the
Sueves and Noricks. Frederick Trent.

The Saxon recovers what Maurice had taken from him, and withal surpriseth
diverse of his Towns, he draws to his side the Bishoprics of Halberstad and
Magdeburg, Caesar puts a mulct upon Ausburg and Strasburg, and receives them
into favor; But Herman Bishop of Colen, upon persuasion of his friends,
resignes his Bishopric: His successor Adulphus presently abolished Caesar
takes in diverse Towns in Saxony, in the interim his great Enemy King Francis
dies, a friend to the Protestants, not out of love to them, but of hatred to
Charles, therefore he used sometimes underhand to furnish them with money: Saxon
being now destitute of the friendship of France, is exposed to the Emperors
fury, who with the Forces of his brother Ferdinand and Maurice, falls upon his
Country; the Duke had sent most part of his Army into the Cities, therefore
makes haste to shelter himself in Witteberg, but Caesar foording over Albis,
overtakes him, and forces him to fight: In this conflict the Duke is wounded
and taken, and by a Council of War condemned to die, but he redeems his life
by resignation Witteberg and Gotha to Caesar; his estate was confiscate, and
bestowed upon Ferdinand and Maurice; a yearly pension was allowed him. At
Dracenburg, though the Protestants had the better of the day from the
Cesarians, yet they were much dejected for the affliction of the Saxon. The
Landgrave by persuasion of Maurice his son in Law, and Brandeburg humbly
submits himself to Caesar, who detained him prisoner: Caesar carried away out
of Germany into his Provinces, about 500. piece of Ordnace, and exacted of the
Protestant 160000 thousand crowns; Ferdinand also punished the Bohemians, for
not invading, but rather defending the Saxons Territories: The Protestants are
forced to submit to the Counsel of Trent in many places; but some jarrs arise
between the Pope and Caesar, for endeavoring to moderate the Counsel upon the
Protestants request, 1548
and for slighting the Papal dignity. Pope Paul being told by his Physicians,
that the air of Trent was not wholesome, transfers the Synod to Bononia,
against which, Caesar by his Ambassadors complains.

Maurice, for his fidelity to Caesar, is made Elector of Saxony, he repairs the
University of Witteburg; in all other places of his Jurisdiction he causes the
Protestant Ministers, to be either deposed, banished, or killed: The example of
Francis Spier, who falling off from Protestanisme, fell into despair at Padua,
was the occasion that diverse were converted. Bucer, Fagius, and Martyr, pass
over into England: Brentius, Musculus, and others, are strangely preserved. The
Captive Saxon, Brandeburg and the Palatine, favor the Protestants. Magdeburg,
Brem, and some other places of Saxony, stand upon their liberty: Flaccus
Illyricus leaves Witteburg, where he condemned Melancthons Faith, and goes to
Magdeburg; which City Caesar proscribed, and commanded the Elector Maurice to
besiege it. The Electors are 1550
wrought upon to transfer the Title of King of the Romans upon Philip, Caesar's
son, by Mary of Portugal, but they would not recede from their first Act. The
Magdeburgers overthrow some Forces of their enemies, among which were 200
Gentlemen. Mean while Paul 3d dies with grief; his son Peter Loisius being
slainbefore by Ferdinand Gonzaga. After three months alteration, to Paul
succeeded Julius 3d whose name before was Johannes Maria Montanus, he had been
President or Moderator of the Counsel. Henry 2d of France, son to Francis,
strives to stir up the German Princes against Charles, chieflly Maurice, Maurice
combines with Albert of Brandeburg, and the Megapolitans with France; for the
German liberty, he is leader of the Magdeburg Army, who having made his peace,
leaves the Magdeburgers to Caesar's mercy, who lays a heavy fine on them,
leaving them to their Religion and Liberty. The Protestant Divines exhibit
their Positions to the Counsel of Trent, but they were rejected. The Elector
Maurice having often Petitioned Caesar for the Landgraves liberty, but still
in vain, makes war against Charles, seiseth upon Auspurg; and having affrighted
the Trent Fathers, with the report of his coming thither, they all fled.
Crescentius the Cardinal, President of the French take some Towns of the
Empire, and by Lorrain break in upon Alsatia, and extorts provision from
Straisburg. Maurice propounds a league with Ferdinand and the Bavarian.

The French King understanding that the Cesarians out of Belgium, were got into
Champany, wasting all with fire and sword, turns nside to Lucemburg. The Saxon
having taken the Alpin Straits, kills and takes about 3000. of the Caesarians,
which so affrighted Charles and Ferdinand, that by the light of their matches,
they stole away from Oenipont to Villacum by night: Oenipont being taken, all
goods belonging to Caesar or the Spaniards, were plundered, but the goods of
Ferdinand and Germans, were not touched. A truce is Belgic prison. A free and
perpetual exercise of Protestanisme in Germany is granted, and all
proscriptions are abolished. Before this transaction, Ulme, Noriberg, with the
Bishops of Bamberg, Herbipolis, and Mints, had suffered much loss and damage
by Albert, who had also subdued Worms and Spire, and taken Trivers by
surprisall. Maurice sends his Army into Hungary against the Turks, who had
taken there diverse Towns in revenge of Caesar's taking of Lephs in Afric
against the peace. Ferdinands losses were so great, that he was forced to buy
his peace from Solomon for an yearly pension of 30000. crowns. Caesar goes
against the French, but loses most part of his Army by sickness, and his
fortune began still to decline, he made war against Parma and Mirandula, being
assisted by the Pope, where he lost many men, but did no good. Sena fell off
from Caesar to the French, because the Caesarians built a Castle in that Town.
The Territories of Sena with long War was Cosmus Medices, who by Famine took
Sena, and added it to his Principallitieby Caesar's permission. Henry, by the
Turks assistance, took the Isle of Corsica from the Germois, and wastes with
fire and sword, Caesar's Territo^ies, who on the other side destroys some
French Towns.

About the beginning of the year 51 of this Century, the Pope dies, to whom
succeeded Marcellus 2d he also the two and twentieth day of his Pontificate,
1551
is suddenly taken away by an Apoplexy, in whose place came John Peter
Caraffa, now called Paul 4th a great Antilutherian and promoter of the
Inquisition, the consumer of 150 thousand Protestants in 30. years Jews, and
caused them for distinction sake, to wear yellow caps, being angry with Caesar
for opposing his Election, he raises an Army against Naples, his own Country,
but Charles being weary of the world, after the Example of Dioclesian lays
down his imperial dignity, leaves his hereditary Kingdoms to Philip his son,
and the Empire to Ferdinand his brother, then retires himself into the
Monastery of S. Hieroms Order, dedicated to S. Laurence by his son Philip, in
memory of the great Victory he had over the French at S. Quintins; this Covent
is in the Escuriel near Madrid. Here Charles spent two years in devotion, and
then died the 38 year, or as some say, the 40 of his Empire, and the 54 French,
makes war against Philip, who in revenge, strips the Pope of almost all Latium,
wherefore he finding Philip too potent to buckle with; now the French being
defeated, and the most of their Nobility taken at S. Quintins, and that
Octavius Fernesius was in favor with Philip from whom he had received
Placentia, admits of peace which was accompanied with the innundation of
Tibris, that did more hurt then the war. In Charles his time, Ferdinand Magellan
found out the Strait, so called from his name, and in two years space sailed
about the world, and returned again to Sivill. In the space of 20 years
Ferdinand Cortes, took multitudes of Towns, the chief whereof Mexico, with many
Provinces: The Country also of Peru is subjugated by Varga and Pizzarus, in
which is the great City Cusco: The Portugalls also take many places in the East
Indies. Castrius obtains a great Victory against the King of Cambaia, and
withal takes Dio, the rich and great City of that Country which became the
chief Seat of the Portugalls under King Emanuel, and King John who looked more
strictly to the Government of that place then Charles did to the Government of
America, being entangled with the wars of Europ, which occasioned the Spaniards
to Tyrannize over the poor Americans.

To Charles succeeded his brother Ferdinand, King of Hungary and Bohemia.
Germany, advances the University of Sena, erected before, by John Frederick
the Elector, appoints a conference at Worms between the Papists and
Protestants, which took no effect because Melancthon and other Lutherans would
not condemn (as the Romanists desired) Calvin, Osiander and the rest who had
receded from the Augustan confession; Yet the peace of Germany was not by this
interrupted: But Livonia, a Province of the German Empire, is much shaken by
John Basilides D. of Muscovia, because upon their civil Wars they had
neglected to pay the tribute, they owed by promise to the Muscovit; therefore
he takes Narva by surprisall, lays waste the Country of Derbat, and
threatens the ruin of Livonia, which at last paid the gold, but yet could not
pacify the Tyrant. Therefore the Rivaliens desired Christian 3d of Denmark to
be their protector against the Russian by reason Estonic had anciently been
subject to Denmark; but he 1559
wisely refused, affirming he had more land then he could well govern; yet he
helps them with money and arms, and the next year died: after he had Danish,
and had set up preaching Ministers in his Kingdom: This year also was fatal
to Queen Mary of England, King Henry of France, the D. of Venice, and Pope Paul
4th whose Marble statue the Romans contumeliously used, by cutting off his
hands and head; they deface all the Scutchions, or Arms of the Fam^ly of
Caraffa, they open the Inquisition prison, and let out the prisoners, and then
set the house on fire. This year also Adolphus D. of Holst subdued Dithmars by
the help of Frederick 2d King of Denmark, son to Christian 3d: This Duke having
utterly defeated the Dithmarsians, they were forced to send their Priests with
white staves to beg pardon for their rebellions, which was granted
conditionally they would Florens for every acre of land they enjoyed. The
Livonians by reason of their continual oppressions, were forced to desire the
King of Poland's protection, who made Gothard Master of the Knights, Duke of
Curland, when that Livonian order had continued 358 years.

After 4 months debate, Pius 4th called before John Angel of the house of
Medices, is made Pope. At his Inauguration 18 men were killed, as they were
scrambling for the money flung that day among the people, and about 40 hurt, an
ominous initiation to his Pontificate: he pardoned those that abused his
Caraffa to death, and diverse other prime men, upon suspicion of Treason. He
confirmed Ferdinand in the Empire, absolves Charles 5th and his son Philip from
Pope Paul's criminations. Abdisu Patriarch of the Eastern Christians came to
him, with a resolution to embrace the Roman Faith, which he did, and was sent
back into Africa with rich presents. He orders the general Counsel to sit
again at Trent, and sent his Legates to invite the Protestants thither; but the
Palsgrave and Saxon with some other Teutonick Princes, meet at Naumburg, and
return this answer to Ferdinand Caesar; that they would willingly yield to a
national or general Counsel if it were free, Popes Legates, that he had no
power over Princes, nor authority to call a Synod. When they came to Lubeck,
they were rejected by the King of Denmark, because the Pope had accounted him
an Heretic; But Philip King of Spain, and Francis 2d of France, persecute the
Protestants; under whose successor Charles 9th they had some rest, and withal a
new name, for they are now called Hugonits, from one Hugo, in whose house they
used to have their meetings. In the Counsel of Trent there is some debate
between the Pope and Spanish Bishops, who would scarce yield that their
dependence should be from him. The Kings also of Spain and France, did strive
there for precedencie, the one preferring the Title of Catholic, the other of
most Christian: The matter being Pope, he gives the precedencie to France.
There was also much altercation about the residence of Bishops, and the
peculiar care of their Flocks, which they should have; but nothing in that
point was determined: At last the Synod is concluded. 27 Years after it was
called by Paul 3d at 1563
Mantua; and 18 years from the first session at Trent: It sat without
interruption 5 years; to wit, two under Paul 3d, one under Julius 3d, and two
under Pius 4th; it was subscribed by 255 Fathers, most of the Canons were made
by the Italian and Spanish Clergy, the French came not till about the end of
the Counsel: Few of other Nations were there present. A strict Oath is imposed
on the Clergy and Magistrates, to adhere to, and maintain the determinations of
that Synod. For this purpose diverse Bishoprics and Archbishopricks are erected
in the Belgian Provinces, as at Mechlin, Cameray, Utricht, Harlem, Middelburg,
Antwerp, Brugis, and elsewhere, which promoted not, but hindered the Pontifican
cause, and raised a rebellion against Philip; which shook off the Spanish Yoke.

About these times, King Philip was beat at Sea by Solomon the Turk, who took
the Isle Meninges on the coast of Afric, in which the Viceroy of Sicily, the
Duke of Medina had strongly fortified the Castle. For Pialis the Bassai that
defeated the Spanish fleet which had besieged Tripolis, takes in the Castle
being weakly manned and victualled, killed and carried away 18000 Christians,
therefore Cosmus Duke of Florence erects a new Order of Knights, called
Stephanits against the Turks, and assigns for their habitation the Isle Ebusa:
Upon the Petition of William of Orange, Egmund and Horn. K. Philip removes from
the Government of Belgium, Antony Perenot, and Atrelacius the Cardinal,
Margaret of Parma. Ferdinand having ruled the Empire 6 years in peace, died,
leaving his son Maximilian to succeed. David George his heresy is detected at
Basil, who taught he was the promised son of David, and his body is burned to
ashes; about that time Francis Xaverius the Jesuit is sent to Iapan and other
Eastern parts, to convert the Indians.

Maximilian 2d succeeded to his Father Ferdinand, both in the Kingdoms of
Hungary and Bohemia, as also in the Empire, when John Sigismund of Trasilvania,
relying on the protection of Solomon, gave himself out to be King of Hungary,
he was by Maximilian suppressed; by reason Solomon was then before Malta with a
fleet of 205 sail; so that the aid he sent to the Transilvanian came too late.
The Turk upon that enterprise lost 22 thousand, Malta holding out all the while
stoutly against him, under the command of John Valet great master of the
Rhodian Knights. The Turks after six months siege, being repulsed, convert
their totterd and torn forces, upon the Isle Chias, which had been under the
Genuois above 200 years, but now by Pialis Bassai is brought under the Turkish
Yoke, at which time Paul 4th died, who having exhausted his treasures on the
Counsel of Trent, and magnificent buildings, was necessitated to exact upon
his subjects, and to wink at Symone. To him succeeded Michael Chisserius, who
called himself Pius 5th. In Belgi^n the seeds of a Spanish harsh severity, a
mitigation whereof was Petitioned for by Henry Bredenrod, and the rest of the
Gentry; these Petitioners were called Geusies, that is, beggars from their mean
apparel which nickname they retained afterward. When they had entered into a
confederacy for Liberty of conscience; this wise course of the Gentry was
marred by the inconsiderate zeal of the Calvinian multitude, who setting up
Pulpits every where, of their own private motion threw down the Images; But
William of Orange caused a form of rites and doctrine to be compiled for the
Protestants 1567
to follow; to whom he gave power to preach in public: at which Margaret of
Parma did connive presently. Philip abolishing all Liberty, and taking Parma.
Ferdinand Alvares Duke of Alba, a fierce natured man, is by him made Governor.
William being affrighted at his coming, departs thence to his Teutons: Egmund
and Horn are cunningly apprehended and beheaded. A Garrison and Castle are
forced upon the Antwerpians. Orange wanting help, obtained Conde's Army, who
had lately extorted peace to his Hugonots from Charles, By the assistance of
John Casimer. Alba proscribes Orange as a Traitor, and puts many of the
Nobility to death; he also overthrew in a battle Lewis of Nassau Orange his
brother. An Army is suddenly raised by this William, intending to win or loose
all. Alba an old beaten Soldier knowing so great an Army could not be sustained
without pay, avoided fighting; so that William is forced to lead his Army into
France for pay, which in the interim mouldred away. The Belgians having pai'd
in Taxes twenty hundred thousand crowns, labor to ease themselves of this
burden, and to avoid the Tyrants cruelty; therefore diverse undertook a
voluntary exile; where consulting with Orange, who was also banished, they
first Briel in Holland, then they make Ulushing, Enchusen, and other Towns to
take their part. Lewis of Nassau by a Stratagem, takes Monts in Henault.
William obtains Ruremund, Lovan, and Mechlin, whilst Alba (...) be sieging of
Monts: But William not being able to raise the siege and relieve his brother,
finding also that the French, wholly intent in persecuting of the Protestants,
were about to desert and betray him, he removes presently to Holland, which
with Zeland he makes his own: So Monts is restored to Alba. Mean while the
Ulushingers and Encusers beat the Spaniard by Sea. Harl^ is besieged 7 months;
at last being forced by Famine yields to the Spaniard* In the midst of these
troubles, Alba is called into Spain, after his arrival Belgium 6 years. Lewis
Requiesensius succeeded him; who shortly after lost Middleburg, the Metropolis
of Zeland; but by Avila and Mandragon h^ defeats the Belgian Auxiliaries at
Neomag, and besieges Leyden, which being almost famished, Orange relieved by
opening the banks, and letting in the water, by which also provision was
brought; after this, he honors the Town with an University.

Requesensius being dead, and a Commonwealth to be guided by States, is settled,
till the coming of John of Austria, the Belgians resolve unanimously, by force
of Arms to drive out the Spaniard: Alba's Statues are abolished; the (...)
perceiving how the Spaniards out of the Citadel had plundered (...), castout
their Garrison, and make themselves free, whose exampe the other Towns follow.
Not long after died Pope Pius 5th and Sigismund King of Poland, in whom ended
the race of the Iagellons, though he married two sisters. Cyprus is lost by the
Christians, but the battle of Lepanp^ is won by them: the Protestants are
massacred at Paris, Poland being 1572
fo^n by Henry, who preferred the Crown of France, is divided about a new
election. Some are for Maximilian Caesar, some for John Bator Prince of (...)
after John Sigismund was dead. Caesar by staying too long in suspense, and
doubting whether he should swear or not to the Polonian Laws brought to him by
the Legates, was prevented by Bator, who marrying Ann the sister of King
Sigismund, obtained the Kingdom. Maximilian shortly after died, the 12th year
of his Empire, a moderate and just Prince, he besstowed diverse privileges on
the Universitie of Helmestad, his saying was wont to be: [To compel the
conscience is to force heaven] About this time John of Austria, Charles the
5th^'s Bastard, restored Amidas to his Kingdom of Tunis, after he had been
flung out by the Turks, and built a new Fort; but perceiving that there was
little trust to be given to Amidas, he makes his brother Fiduciarie King of
Afric, but to no purpose, for the Turk by S^an Bassi suprised Golet and the
new Fort, takes 500 pieces of Ordnance, with other rich spoils, kills and
beats the Spaniards out of Africa. 40. Years after Charles ^th had added Tunis
to his dominions. The same year Cosmus Etruria, died, to him succeeded his son
Francis: The Venesians fortify Corcyra against the Turks. Charles Prince of
Spain for pitying the hard usage of the Netherlanders, is by his father
Philip, pretending Treason, imprisoned, where he died. John Frederick the
younger, Duke of Saxony, for aiding some whom Caesar had proseribed, was
proscribed himself, and imprisoned, where he ended his life: Hamburg is fined
in 100 thousand Jochims to King Frederick for spoiling the Freedom of Trade.
Rostoch by their intestin discords, is subjected to the Megapolitan Dukes; But
upon acknowledgement of their fault, is restored to their freedom: In
Maximilian's time the Protestant Faith is prohibited through France, England,
Scotland, Hungary, Poland, and Belgium, in the Bishoprics also of Magdeburg,
Halberstad, Verdava, and Dukedom of Brunswick: But as they began to increase in
wealth and ease, they fell into diverse Factions caused by needless disputes and
controversies, with which the world has been too Saxony was so vexed, that he
thrust out of his University of Witteberg diverse professors, and imprisoned
Caspar Peucerus his Physician, with Cracovius his Secretary. Valentine Gentilis
for Blasphemy against the Son of God, is burned at Beru. 1576


CHAP. XVII.
The Affairs of Portugal, Afric, Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, Poland,
Hungary, Transylvania, Bohemia, Russia, Venice, etc. under Emperor, from the
year 1576. till 1612.

ROdolphus 2d succeeded to his Father Maximilian, both in his Kingdom and
Virtues. About the beginning of his time, Sebastian King of Portugal made an
unluckie expedition into Africa, to restore Mahumed King of Mauritania, whilst
he warreth with Abdelmelech Uncle to the banished Mahumed, he lost both his
life and Kingdom: In this battle three Kings fell, and the Christian Army
defeated. Abdelmelech in the fight died suddenly of an Apoplexy, Mahumed was
drowned in the bogs, and Sebastian slain. Hameth the other Uncle of Mahumed
enjoyed the Fruit of the victory, with the Kingdom of Fesse: Portugal fell to
Henry the Cardinal, an aged man; and Sebastians great Uncle, who died about a
year after, on whose Kingdom Philip King of Spain, Henry's sisters son seized
by the Duke of Alba; Anthony being driven away, whom Lewis, Henry's brother
begot in Fornication: Lisbon proclaimed him King, but he was forced to fly,
and as he was pursued, flung money behind him, to hinder his pursuers: He by
the help of France and England, hoped to recover his lost Kingdom, but could
not; for he was beaten both by land and sea; and with Portugal he lost also
the Islands Azores: The Lowcountrey wars under John of Austria, and William of
Nassau, was portended by a Commet: John had deluded the Gantois with hopes of
peace; but they being impatient of Tyranny and mock'ry, reject the Spaniards,
send for French and Germans, and resolve to make a Commonwealth of their own;
they invite into Belgium, Mathias brother to Ralph the 2d Emperor, and who
afterward was Emperor himself, to be their Governor, hoping thereby to find
the Emperor Ralphs more favorable toward them; till he came William
discharged his place, who took in Amsterdam, Mechlin, Deventry, and other
Sconces, whilst the Austrian was busy in subduing Brabant, shortly after they
send for John Casimir the Palatine with an Army, and then fall upon Belgium,
with Liberty of Conscience; but the people of Henault and Artois, upon this
were offended, and therefore called themselves 1579
Malcontents, for they would admit no other Religion then the Roman.

The Austrian being dead of a Fever, his Nephew Alexander Farnesius, Duke of
Parma and Placentia succeeded in the Government, whose beginning was
accompanied with an Epidemicall disease in his Army, which by a looseness swept
away 12 thousand: He reduced Utricht to the Spaniard, and labored what he
could to foment the intestin discords among the Belgians in the mean while
Caesar sends into Colen 3 Bishops, and 2 Princes to treat with the States
Ambassadors about a peace between the Spaniard and them, but to no purpose; for
Orange would not hearken to any peace without the enjoyment 1582
of Liberty and Religion; Wherefore he is proscribed by the Spaniard. Mean
while Francis Alanson the French King's brother is invited into Belgium, Orange
and he were together at Antwerp, a desperate young fellow set on by the
Spaniard, shoots Orange with a bullet through the cheeks, so that he hardly
escaped with his life. Alanson having got supplies from England, promised much
in defense of Belgium, but performed nothing, having more regard of his French,
then of those whose defense he undertook, and swore to; which appeared in
Brabant and Flanders, where at Antwerp he received a notable defeat; by means
of the French, his juggling was much more detected at Newport, Dunkirk, and
other places, which give occasion to Parma to recover Newport, and diverse other
Towns for the Spaniard. Hereupon the Government is taken from him by the
States, and he returns into France with his French Forces; but not long after,
Orange and the States were necessitated to send for him again, who died before
he had done any thing for the Commonwealth; it is thought he was poisoned,
because they found he was sorry for his former double dealing with the States.
About a month after, the Prince of Orange is murdered by a Burgundian,
Balthazar Gerard, who had been lately received into Orange his service, he shot
him with a musket at Delph, not without the knowledge (as it is thought) of
Parma, the murderer was cruelly put to death: Shortly after this, Brugis,
Gaunt, and all Flanders almost is reduced to the Spaniard.

In Germany the Protestant Princes and Cities, strive by Conferences and
Synods, to take up the controversies among themselves: Gebhard Bishop of Colen,
professing himself of the Augustan confession, permitted freedom of the Gospel
to his people, and falls in love with Agnes Mansfield, whom he intends to
marry; but he is upon this deposed by the Pope, and forsaken by most of his
Diocese; Ernest of Bavaria being set up in his room: Gebhard in maintenance of
his right, and Ernest on the other side, raised opposite Forces. They fight upon
doubtful terms diverse battles, in one Skirmish Ernest lost 2000 old Soldiers,
at length Gebhard is worsted, and upon the taking of Bonna, totally defeated of
his Bishopric by Ernestus. A national Synod of Germany, but hindered by
factious spirits. Steven Bator the new Polonian King makes war against
Dantsick, for refusing to swear Fealty to him, till first he confirmed their
Privileges: after much slaughter 1583
on both sides, at last by a friendly transaction, their differences were
composed: The Polander to requite the Muscovits wasting of Livonia, falls with
fire and sword upon his Territories, and takes from him many Towns; so that the
1584
Muscovit is forced to renounce all he had taken in Livonia: The Swedes also
take diverse places in Livonia from the Muscovit, which Batorius desired might
be restored to the Polander, but could not prevail; about this time an
Epidemicall infection run through all Europ, accompanied with a cold, and a
Muscovits having had some contestations with the Swede in Livonia, whose
Officers he put to death, for causing some Towns swear Fealty to Magnus, not
to the Russian, died the same year that the Jesuits were obtruded upon Livonia.
Then it was that George Frederick, Duke of Borussia having paid a sum of money
to the Dane, possessed himself of the Diocese of Curion as a Polonian fee. The
next year John Basilides the Russian Tyrant, having knocked his son on the head
with his Cudgel, of which wound he died, and after 25 years war with Livonia,
he died also, exhorting his son Theodor to live peaceably with his neighbors.

The same year the Praecopit Tartars, of the Turks confedrates become
theirslaves. Pope Gregory the 17th about this time reformed the Calendar, by
thrusting 10 days out of the month of October: Amurath the Turk, began to
suspect some plot upon compliance between the Pope and Byzantin Patriarch,
therefore Constantinople; for approving this reformation of the Calendar; which
caused some troubles at Auspurg in Germany, and Riga in Livonia; diverse
Protestants, rather out of pride, then Judgment rejected it: This Gregory
erected diverse Colleges of Jesuits, whose learning and holiness began to be
held in admiration: In Rome is instituted a College or Seminary of all Nations,
to propagate the Roman Faith. 3. Ambassadors of Iapon sent by the Jesuits,
arrive at Rome, after 3 years travel, offering their service to the Pope who
having royally entertained them, died within the space of two hours of a
Squinzee; who all his time could not suppress the insolences and robberies
Batorius King of Poland, by putting to death some of his Nobility, curbed the
insolences of the great men in his Kingdom. So Frederick 2d of Denmark
brought the Rostokers to submit to Ulricus the Megapolitan. The Farnesian
Family of the Dukes of Parma, grew famous by the happy 1585
success of Alexander Governor of Belgium, who after he had besieged Antworp
one whole year, at last upon composition, took it; 4 years were granted to the
Protestants, to settle there, or to depart, whereof many went and settled in
Hamburg. Mechlin and diverse other Towns submit to the Spaniard: A 1586
great storm hung over Riga, for resisting King Stevens edicts of Poland, Roman
Religion, and putting to death some of his Legates: About this time showers of
Locusts fell 1587
in Thracia; of geese and ducks in Croatia, on which many people did feed.
Maximilian of Austria, Caesar's brother, who by his Father was named King of
Poland, marches to Cracovia with an Army; but he was defeated and driven back
toward Silesia, where he was besieged and taken, and forced to redeem his
freedom with the loss of his Kingdom; which Sigismund obtains in the right of
his Mother, being descended from the Kings of Poland.

The year ensuing was fatal to many Princes. Maximilian was thrust out 1588
Poland by Sigismund, Frederick the second of Denmark died, Maurice son to
William (murdered at Delph) and grandchild by the mother to Maurice of Saxony
is by the united States of Holland, made their Governor. The Spanish Armado
consisting of 125 great ships, 20000 Soldiers, 10000 mariners 2000 Ordnance is
defeated: Henry 3d King of France is murdered by James Clements, a Dominican;
the Polander is molested by the Muscovit, who took some Forts from him; and by
the Tartarian, who with fire and sword invaded his borders; so that he was fain
to buy his peace of the Tartar with a great sum of Money. Gregory the 13th
being dead, Faelix Montalt 1589
is made Pope, and calls himself Sixtus the 5th. a mean man of Parentage;
Vatican Bibliothec; He spent 38 thousand Crowns in removing one Obelisk alone.
He incurred the King of Spaine's displeasure by denying to aid the Parisians
when they were besieged by King Henry's Army; whereupon he dyed with grief.
John Baptista Castanaeus succeeded, called Urban 7th his inauguration was
accompanied with an Earthquake through Austria, Moravia, and Bohemia, and a
great siccitie with heat, by which some rivers were dried up; he died within 14
days of a burning fever: To whom succeeded Michelas. Sfondrat called Gregory
14th: he was born the 7th month, and therefore had a weak sickly body, he died
the 10th 1590
month of his Pontificat, in his time the plague and famine so raged in Italy,
that in one year at Rome there died sixty thousand people: He spent upon the
French War 500000 crowns ont of the public treasure, besides 40000 out of his
private Coffers. Grave Maurice mean while seiseth upon Breda his native Brabant,
by a turf boat, within which lay hid many armed men. And shortly after he takes
diverse other Towns. To Gregory 14th succeeded John Antonius or Piemont, who
assumed the name of Gregory 9th; he was of the Spanish Faction against France,
and lived but two months in the Pontificate. 1591
To him succeeded Hippolytus Aldabrandinus or Clement 8h: Grave Maurice
attempteth to take the Sluice and Utricht, but could not; yet he takes
Steinvick, and Covord, and diverse other places upon the death of Parma. To whom
succeeded Peter Ernest of Mansfield, who sent his son Charles into 1592
France; to assist the Spanish faction there.

About this time Sigismund Bator the Transylvanian denies to pay the promised
Turk, and so by the Jesuits persuasion incurs the displeasure of a potent
enemy, to the grief of his friends; some of which he kills for dissuading him.
The Despots of Walachia and Moldavia revolt to him: The Walachians fight the
Turks and beat them, Strigon and Vicegrad are taken by the Christians: Lippa
also submits to the Transylvanian, and in a battle Sinan loses 10000 of his
men. Bator being now allied to the Emperor, is aided by him to take
Tergovistia, the seat of the Princes of Walachia. After many defeats given to
Sinan, he chaseth him beyond the river Agrius, where he died with age and
grief. Albert Arch Duke of Austria, Caesar's brother, of a Cardinal becomes
husband to Isabella Clara Eugenia, Philips daughter, Belgium in great state.
Upon the death of Ernestus he besieges Callis, and takes it: A league is made
between England, France and Holland, against Spain, and confirmed by a victory
obtained by the English and Holland Fleet, against the Spaniard at Cadiz. The
Hollanders send a fleet to Bentam, a Town in Iava the less: And another to
find out the North-east passage; to no purpose, except to their own hurt,
having lost the most of their men with cold. In the mean time Albert takes
Hulst from the confederates, and they beat his Forces at Torvahut, having taken
38 Colors of foot, and two of horse with their baggage and money: About this
time died Philip the 2d of Spain, as they write of the lousy disease: To whom
succeeded Philip 3d, who married Margaret daughter to Charles the Arch Duke; and
then also died Theodor Prince of Russia in whom ended the Basilidan race. Boris
Federovitzius the Queen of Russia's brother; dealt so with the people; that
they preferred him to the Nobility in competition for that Scepter, which by
their favor he obtained, and after this confirmed it by his successful
expedition against the Tartars; but afterward his government proved
Tyrannical: Palfias and Barnestein; Imperial Commanders defeat the Tartars in
Panonia, and besiege Iavarin, but upon the coming of the Turks, the siege is
raised. The Popes Forces which were levied against the Turks in Panonia, were
employed against Caesar Atestinus barstard, son to Alphonsus of Ferraria, who
by the sword sought to obtain the ancient Titles of that Duchy, though he
Romans and beats them: but at last finding his friends fall off from him, he
resignes Ferraria to the Pope; so the war is continued against the Turk, and
Iaverin taken by Swart-zemburg, with the loss of 1600. Turks.

Sigismund Batorius for fear of the Turks, delivers up Ducia or Transylvania to
Caesar, afterward his mind changed, upon the persuasion of Andrew Bator
Cardinal, his kinsman, on whom he confers this Principality, and the rather,
because the promised pension was not paid him. Hence arose wars between him,
and Maximilian, Caesar's brother, which encouraged the Turks, who with 60000
men beleaguer Varadin, but are beat off again; and so is Andrew Bator driven
out of Transylvania by the Austrians, who took Alba Iulia, or Wasisngburg, with
diverse other Towns. Francis Mendoza the Spanish 1600
General under Albert, takes diverse Towns upon the Rhen, which exasperated the
Germans, and caused Caesar to send expostulatorry Letters to Mendoza* Maurice
takes diverse places from the Spaniard: About this time a Monster was seen at
Paris like a Satyr, with a horn on his head. Some maids, both in France and
Germany, fasted 3 years or more. A strange disease called Pl^oa, or Cirragra,
invaded Poland and Hungary. Ferdinand Arch Duke, son of Charles that was Ralphs
Uncle, at this time was Governor of Styria: He goes to Rome, being the year of
Iubilee, and swears to the Pope, to extirpate the Protestants within his
jurisdiction; which upon the Jesuits instigation, he did accordingly, by
pillaging and banishing all of the Augustine confession throughout Styria,
Carinthia and Carniola, though they had paid for their freedom of conscience a
great sum of money: Cams^ Styria is besieged by the Catholics, who were forced
by reason of the cold frost, (which in one night killed one thousand horsemen)
to raise their siege, to leave their Artilery and baggage behind them.

In Belgium Albert the Arch Duke having brought his wife Isabel to Bruxels, is
solicited by the Confederates to send away all the Spaniards out of the
Netherlands, if he would have peace settled there. To this he would not assent,
1601
as being neither safe for him nor honorable, he purposes to besiege Ostend.
Maurice strives to prevent him: At Newport a battle is fought, in the beginning
of which, Albert had the better; till the Confederates by their danger grew
desperate; for being almost enclosed by the Sea, they fell so furiously on
their enemies, that the vanquished put the vanquishers to flight, Transylvania
Michael Valachus Caesar's General, in a long and doubtful battle, defeats
Bators Forces, and subdues also a great part of Moldavia: He was much envied by
George Basta, who accused him to Caesar as one that was ambidexter, and who
aimed at the principality of Transylvania himself: upon this, the chief command
over the army is committed to Basta, whom Valachus scorns to be under,
therefore he goes to the Emperor to clear himself, in the interim Sigismund is
again received by his people, and acknowledged for Duke of Transylvania;
hereupon Valachus is sent back with more Forces, who falls on the Batorians
Basta out of his command, by whom not long after he was murdered: and Dacia
now swears allegiance to Caesar. Ba^orius is driven into the Town Bistricia,
1602
where he is taken; and contenting himself with a yearly allowance for his
maintenance, lives obscurely among the Bohemian Barrons. shortly after one
Moses General of the Ciculi, who had been driven to the hills, takes upon him
now to be the deliverer of Transylvania; therefore having gathered together a
considerable army, seiseth upon Wessenburg, or Alba Iulia. But Mars rages at
Ostend for almost 40 months together; all which time the besieged behaved
themselves gallantly, by often sallies, and bringing in Provision through the
midst of their enemies, by digging a new harbor, when the old was obstructed,
by building a new town, whilst the old is assaulted; by their many conflicts
they had, not only with the enemy, but also with famine and sickness, during
which siege, one hundred and 44 thousand men lost their lives; at last it was
taken by the art and industry of Ambrose Spinola: For which one Town, Maurice
took Grave the Sluice, and diverse other places. After this the Hollanders, and
the other confederate provinces 1604
impose an Excise upon their victuals, to have ready pay still for the
Soldiers: The Indian Navigation is advanced, and the adventurers united in a
Corporation: They beat the Portugalls out of Bantam, they sail about the world,
and return rich with Spanish money.

About this time almost all Livonia is made subject to Charles Suderman, except
a few Towns on the borders of Muscovia, which acknowledged still the Polonian
Scepter. Such devastation was every where in the fields, that thirty thousand
people died with cold and famine, which persuaded some of them to eat their on
children. Charles at last returns to Swede, and accepts of that Scepter he had
before refused. King Henry 4th of France makes a Law against Duels. The Savoyen
attempted in the night time to surprise Geneva, two 1605
hundred Soldiers had already scaled the walls, and killed the watch; but a boy
with a Lanthorn raised the Town, who armed themselves, and apprehend ded the
Conspirators, whom they put to death. Pope Clement dispenceth with Sigismund of
Poland, for marying two sisters of the Austrian Family, Henry of France to call
home again the banished Jesuits. Christian 4th of Denmark, visits in his own
person the remotest parts of Norway, giving Order for settling of Ministers in
those ignorant and remote corners. Hamburg, the most flourishing City of the
Saxons, does homage to him, as Duke of Holsatia, with great solemnity and
magnificence: He errecteth a new Town from the foundation, which by his name he
calls Christianopolis, upon the borders of Swedland. To which he added upon the
same borders afterward, two stronger Fortifications; to wit, Tychopolis and
Christiana: In Belgium there is great joy for the birth of Philip the 4th, heir
Spain: Friesland is now made the seat of the war: Command is given to Count
Bucquoi, to raise Forces about the Rhene, which being passed over by Spinola,
diverse Towns are taken for the Spaniard: Maurice attempts Antwerp, and Spinola
Berg upon Some, but in vain: Bucquoi also takes some places. Peace again is
proposed by the Austrians, but rejected by the Hollanders, as not daring to
trust the Spaniard. The ancient City of Aix, as also Marpurg of Hessia, were
much shaken and weakened upon the change of Religion, and admittance of
Calvinisme. Brunswig was at first like to be betrayed, but the Plot was
discovered and prevented: Then Henricus Julius, the neighboring Prince,
thought to have surprised it by hiding of armed men Brunswig, dams up the river
that it had almost drowned the Town, till a strong wind broke down the banks,
and gave way for the water to return into its old channel: At last by Caesar's
command, a truce is made, and the differences referred to Arbitration: In Rome
Pope Clement 8th being dead, great contestation arises about the election of a
new Pope; The French faction stood for Caesar Baronius the great Annalist; but
the Spaniard opposed him, because he had no good opinion of his claim, and
Title to Scicily: Some were for Bellarmin the great Catholic Champion, but he
was withstood by the Montaltan Faction: Alexander Medices being 70 years old,
is chosen; who calls himself Leo, but he died the 25 day after; whose successor
was Camillus Burgesius, afterward called Paul 5th.

In Russia great commotions were raised by one Demetrius, who gave out he was
the son of Johannes Basilides, who was thought to have been murdered by Boris
Fedrovitzius long ago: He appearing on the Scene, gave out that he was hid in
Monasteries, and educated by the Jesuits, that he might be the more enabled for
Government: The King of Poland believed this had been the true heir, therefore
assists him with an Army, and bestows his daughter on him. Shortly after he
marches with his Forces into Russia, gets the Cossacks to side with him. Many
Towns and Castles fall off to him, in hatred of Fedrovitzius his Tyranny: In
his first Encounter with Boris he was worsted, but in the second he got the
Victory, and withal the life of Boris, who was slain and his children
poisoned. Demetrius with the great acclamations of the people, enters Mosqua,
where he is Crowned; then he Polander, whose daughter he brings in great state
from Poland and married her: But the Russian Nobility storming at the Polonian
insolences and pride, conspire against them, and the rather, because they are
persuaded that this Demetrius is a counterfeit: The people also siding with the
Peers, fall to murdering of the Polonians, whereof 1200 were massacred,
besides 400 Russians disguised in Polonian habits. Demetrius is wounded in many
places of his body, and disgracefully used; his Bride stripped of all her wealth
and ornaments, and sent back to Poland in a poor habit. Basilius Iohanides, the
chief man of the Conspirators, is by the consent of all the Peers, proclaimed
Prince. And Demetrius his carcass drawn naked

At Venice some ancient Laws were renewed; among the rest, that none should
erect Churches or Monasteries, nor bestow lands or houses on the Clergy,
without the Senats approbation; they had also imprisoned some scandalous
Priests. The Jesuits acquaint Claudius Aquavia the General of their Order,
with these proceedings. Pope Clement 8th being a moderate man, winks at the
business; But Paul 5th of a more violent spirit, Commands the Venetians to
abrogate those Laws, which they refusing to do, were excommunicated, and their
whole Territories put under an interdict: Yet most of the Clergy took no notice
of the Pope's anger, but officiated as before. The Jesuits offended at this,
remove thence to other places, and write bitterly, Bellarmin and Baronius)
against the Venetians, whose cause is maintained by Francis Paulis Servita, and
Johannes Marsilius: At last they fell from words to blows, Armies are raised
on both sides, the Spaniards assist the Pope, and the Hollanders the Venetian;
at length the controversy is taken up by the French King: The Venetians are
enjoined to set free the prisoners, and not to stretch the execution of their
Laws, further then their Ancestors intent and meaning; So the Pope's curse was
revoked, and the Jesuits banished out of the Venetian Territories.

In Poland, John Samoiscius had thrown the Jesuits out of his College; after
whose death they grew very great with the King, stopping his ears against
Posomium they burned; upon this, the Nobility calls a Parliament, and shortly
after these Parliamentier s, or Rachosians (for so they were called) take up
arms against the King; one thousand of whose men they killed, and put the rest
to flight, and had not most of the Parliaments Army fallen off to the King,
they had been absolutely victorious. Then arms being laid down on both sides,
the differences are referred to a free Parliament; meanwhile the people
tumultuously thrust the Jesuits out of their Monastery of St Briget at Gedanum;
and at Thorun they 1607
take the great Church from them, and the Nobility urges their banishment:
Rachosians) were too secure and confident; the Kings party falls suddenly upon
them, kills many, disheartens the rest, and dissolves the Parliament: These
troubles of Poland were for the Swedes advantage, who in the interim
strengthens himself against Sigismund, whose esteem was daily lessened in
Swedland: These troubles of Poland moved Mathias the Arch Duke, to settle with
all speed the commotions of Hungaria, by assigning over Transylvania to
Botscadus, and giving Liberty of Conscience: The Prosultan upon the defection
of Alepo, Damascus, and Tripolis, was willing to make peace with the
Christians, therefore it is resolved there should be peace for 20 years, during
which time, Achmet Sultan should call Caesar Father; and he Achmet his son:
That likewise both Caesar's should every third year entertain friendship, by
saluting each other with presents: Botscadus the chief promoter of this
transaction, shortly after died. Ragotscius is elected, whose help the
Rachokans of Poland required, but he Gabriel Batorius; at which time the
Persian Ambassador at Prague, highly commending the power of his Master, and
showing how resolved he was to overthrow the Ottoman Family, made Rudolph slow
in entering into league with the Turk. Mean while Mathias grew gracious with the
Hungarians, and makes way with the Nobility for his election.

This same year was seen a Commet over Germany, portending ensuing troubles
there; for at Donaverd, a Town in Suevia upon the Danow, the Towns people
contumeliously abused the Abbot, as he was carrying the Banner and Caesar, and
subdued by Maximilian of Bavaria, though they had proferred satisfaction to the
Abbot. This occasioned some differences among the Princes of the Empire; the
Protestants desiring the Town to be restored again to its liberty, which the
Catholics would not hearken to. Mean while, in Belgium the War continues, and
diverse Towns are taken and re-taken; A military sedition is raised in Alberts
Army, which could not be appeased, till Diesta was pawned to them for their
pay, which they received shortly after. Diverse of the Mutineers were banished,
and some that stayed behind executed. The Hollanders prepare a Fleet for the
West Indies, which made the Spaniard and 1608
could have been secured of their Liberty; but that they may not be surprised
with expectatiou of peace, a fleet is sent to Calz under Hemskirk, which
infested the Spanish Coast, and spoiled the Kings Navy, 2000 Spaniards were
killed, and so was Hemskirk himself; a truce then is resolved upon, and the
united Provinces declared to be free from all claim or title, either of the
King or Archduke; but withal its required that the West Indies shall not be
meddled with by the Hollander, or Zelander: This disceptation held out some
months, at last John Naius a Franciscan, is sent to King Philip, but he staid
so long, that the French and Danish Agents went away; and so the peace came 1609
to nothing; yet at last a truce of 12 years was concluded, by the mediation of
the French, English, and other Princes Ambassadors, in which liberty of
commerce was left to the pleasure of the Spaniard in his dominions without
Europe; Yet he was not to debar the Hollanders that were employed by Foreign
Princes, in their commerce to the Indies. In Germany, Mathias Caesar's brother
comes with an Army into Bohemia, to disappoint (as it was given out) the
Spanish intent, who had resolved to settle Ferdinand the Archduke in Hungary,
and the other Principalities of Austria, because he was more addicted to the
Pope then the rest. The Bohemians promise to maintain Caesar's Title with their
arms, if he would after the example of Maximilian, permit them to enjoy their
conscience, this their Petition was deferred, therefore Mathias was to receive
Hungary and Austria, who presently forbids the exercise of the Protestant
Religion: The Bohemians take arms with intent to defend themselves, but
vvithall, they humbly petition that they might have the same liberty in
Religion which Hungary and Austria enjoyed: To this the Prince assented, and
the Emperor by his Letters Pattents confirmed; who also committed to them the
ordering of the Universitie of Prague. The not observing of this Grant, was the
occasion of future wars.

Shortly after followed the troubles of Iuliers, for Johannes Gulielmus dying
childless, The Elector of Brandeburg, the Palatine of Newburg, and diverse
others laid claim to it in right of their marriages with the sisters of John
defunct; but the Emperor pretending that it was in his power to decide the
controversy, sends Leopolde of Austria, to rule Iuliers in his right, and in
the name of the Empire. Leopold's part is maintained by the Catholic Princes,
but Brandeburg, and Newburg, by the Protestants: Hence were diverse meetings
Hala in Suevia the Protestants meet, at Herlipolis the Catholics: hence
confederacies with foreign Princes to the ruin of Germany. Brandeburg and the
Palatine raise Forces, and take in most Towns of that Duchy, except Iuliers,
the City which Leopold 1610
held; but this also was taken by Grave Maurice, after two months siege; at
length both sides lay down arms, who choose certain Judges at Golen to decide
the controversy, but to no purpose.

About this time Gambalot the Satrapa of Alepo being defeated by the Turks, and
deserted by his friends, obtains pardon from Achmet, upon promise that he would
turn his Forces against the Persian; who notwithstanding Caesar's assistance by
showing what advantage it will be for him to join with so potent a friend as
the Persian, against the Turk: For this cause the Pope injoynes the Religious
houses to maintain some professers of the Hebrew and Arabic tongues, that he
may employ them among the Eastern Christians. The Polander having composed his
differences with the Rackosians, prepares to be revenged, both on the Russian
and Swede, for the wrongs received from them; and with prosperous success he
defeats the Sweds in Livonia, and the Russians in Lituania. He besieges also
Smolenscum, the Metropolis of Lituania, and after two years Muscovits lost
their lives. Novograd submits to Sigismund, and so does the Cham of Tartar.
Vilna is burned by the Muscovits.

In Holland Arminius being called from his Ministerial charge in Amsterdam, to
be Divinity professor in Leyden, conferred with Iunius by Letters, about the
point of Predestination, and some other Articles, he was opposed by Gomarus the
other Divinity professor, who with Iunius stood stiffly to Calvin's doctrine:
Diverse disputes and conferences were held about these points, so that
Scholars, Magistrates, and inferior people fell out into factions, Arminius's
Disciples were called Remonstrantes; Calvin's Contraremonstrantes. This
controversy Arminius mean while died, the 9th year of this last century. About
whose successor Vorstius, there was no small trouble, some stiffly maintaining
him, others accusing him as a Schismatic and Heretic in his opinions of the
divine attributes, but at length King James got him to be removed from Leyden;
threatening to renounce all friendship and league with them, if he were not
deposed; So he was sent to Gauda, and Arminianisme by degrees suppressed. This
year 1612, died Caesar Rodolphus, in whose 1612
lifetime Mathias his brother cunningly obtained Austria, and Hungary, to
which he added Bohemia a few months before his death; for Leopold's Soldidiers
Iuliers, consisting of 9000 foot, and 4000 horse, invade Bohemia, Buduise is
taken by Stratagem, and the lesser Prague by storm. Mathias coming to aid the
Bohemians, obtains that Kingdom from Caesar, upon promise of payment of a
yearly pension. Leopold's army fearing the power of Mathias, having received
their pay, remove from thence. Rodolphus died as the Civil wars of Germany
were beginning to break out, having reigned 35 years, he left behind him a
rich treasure, he was a good Prince, but too much addicted to women, yet
without Legitimate children: His 3 brothers Mathias, Maximilian, and Albert,
were also childless; Therefore his cousin German was his heir. So the estate of
Maximilian is devolved upon the children of his brother Charles, who by Mary of
Bavaria had 5 sons, and 10 daughters, the eldest son Ferdinand, after Matthias,
obtained the 1612
Imperial Crown. In Transylvania Batorius lost the greatest part of Valachia;
but he overthrew Thorgascius, who strove to make King Matthias Master of
Transylvania, but he was defeated by Batorius, and driven into the woods, there
he lived in great misery, till he went to Poland, where he expected Sutscius
being sent thence with an army against Muscovia, which was overthrown by the
Russians, and withal the Polander lost Smolenscum: Batorius in hatred to the
Turks, applies himself to the Austrians, so that Gabor by the Sultans
assistance, makes way to invade that Principality. A conference between the
Roman Catholics and Protestants was held at Ratisbon, but to no purpose, for
the one would have the Church, the other the Scripture, to be judge; the one
would have traditions with Scripture, the other Scripture alone, to be the rule
of controversies. About this time, the brothers of the Rosy Cross, bragging
much of their perfection and knowledge Africa, Fesse and Maroco being worn
out with mutual wars, are both subdued by Mule Sidan King of Fesse, who had
been driven out of his Kingdom by his brothers. This man's Uncle Schequus, in
recompense of the money and aid he had from Spain, delivers over to the King of
Spain, the strong Fort Alarachia on the Affrican shore, near Hercules his
Pillars. Philip drives out of Spain the Moors, who had been ancient
Inhabitants, upon pretense that they had invited the Affricans, and Turks into
Spain. These being stripped of all except a little Viaticum, are shipped at
sundry times (for there were 900 thousand of them) and exposed on the Affrican
shore to hunger, cold, and the sword.

CHAP. XVIII.
The affairs of Germany, Denmark, Swedland, Holland, Russia, Italy, Hungary,
Bohemia, Transylvania, Poland, Grisons, France, Switzers, etc. under Matthias
and Ferdinand 2d, Emperors; from the year 1612. till 1626.

MAtthias succeeded to his brother Rodolphus in the Empire: He calls a Diet at
Ratisbon, at which were present all the Saxony, who had lost the possession of
Iuliers: And Lodowick of Hassia, 1612
who by his cousin German, Maurice was stripped of the Government of Marpurg;
therefore were both discontented. Here the protestants complain, that in Spire,
Vienna, and other places of Judicature, the Judges were all, or most of them
Catholics, and that therefore the protestants were subject to all
inconveniences, having no other Judges but their enemies. 1613
They desire then, there might be the same number of protestants as of
Catholic Judges and votes; but in this point nothing was concluded; the
protestants depart in anger, and nothing done but only a decree to raise arms
in Transylvania against the Turk; for complaint was made to Achmat Sultan,
against Batorius, for siding with Caesar, and endeavoring to deliver the
possession of Dacia to him. Upon this the Turk strives to make Bethleem Gabor
Fiduciarie Prince of Transylvania under him. Batorius having weakened himself by
his cruelty upon the Saxons in Dacia, putting to death promiscuously every one
that was but suspected of treachery, was for want of strength defeated by
Gabor, assisted with the Turks Forces, and at last was killed at Varadinum, by
the treachery of his servants. Gabor satisfies the Turk by giving him Lippa
with some other Forts, and pacified Caesar by swearing fealty to him. Achmet had
a great mind to pick a quarrel with the Panonians, but was hindered by the
Arabian sedition; in which the Sultan lost Adenum: the Governor also of
Damascus was overthrown in a great battle, by the son of Emeris Saida, who
derived his pedigree from Godfred of Bullion.

After Christian of Denmark, had taken Calmaria and Elsburg, the Swedes Baltic
and the Hesperian sea, a great mortality by the plague ensued, which occasioned
a peace; wherein was articled that the Swede should relinquish his title of
Lapponia, and should pay 12 Tuns of gold to the Dane, for his expenses on the
last war; till the payment of which sum, Elsburg should be left in pawn.

The Hollanders at Constantinople, make a League with the Turk for commerce. At
Aix and Colen, a sedition is raised against the Catholics; at Francfort, 1614
and Worms against the Jews. At Aix the Protestants had been along time
debarred the exercise of their religion, and punished for the same, which the
Townsmen thought was a great oppression, therefore in a popular tumult French
Agents, and those of Iuliers, a patcht peace is made up, to which the Catholic
Senators would not assent.

At Colen many who were forbid the exercise of their religion, remove to
Mulheim two miles from the City; they of Colen fearing lest that new Town of
Mulheim should outrun in wealth, inhabitants, and privileges, their ancient
City, they labor to hinder the building and increase thereof. Brandeburg and
Newburg, are inhibited by Caesar from the building of that place, and the
inhabitants are threatened with destruction. Mean while, Wolfgangus Gulielmus of
Newburg, and Georgius Gulielmus Marquess, the Electors son, Princes near of
kin, fell out about the possession of their mothers lands; and withal Newburg
having married Magdalen of Bavaria, becomes Catholic, the other a Calvanist,
who by the assistance of Holland, fortifies Iuliers, as Newburg had done the
same at Dusseldorp. Caesar proscribes Aix for turning out their ancient
Senators, and the execution of this Edict is committed to Albert Cesars
brother. Newburg puts Cesars sentence in execution concerning Mulheim, which he
destroys; the Elector of Brandeburg complains of these Edicts; as being
against law; in the interim, Spinola seizes upon Aix, and restores the
Senators; the Protestants fly, they that remained, were punished; he overthrows
the remainders of Mulheim, and brings under the subjection of Newburg, Vesalia,
upon the Rhen, and other Towns of Iuliers. Maurice being called upon by
Brandeburg, takes in Emerec and some other places. Newburg upon the death of
his Father Philip Ludovick, sets up the Roman Religion in his Dominions, and
Brandeburg advances Calvinism in his Lands; that he might remove as much in
opinion, as he was in affection from Newburg. At Berlin the people mutiny for
changing Lutheranism into Calvanism, which they hated. The Jews for their great
extortion are driven out of Francfort, but brought back again in great pomp. At
Worms also some Jews are banished: at Salinae in Thuringia, one Ezekiel Meth,
gave himself out to be the great Michael, and Immortal Word of God; Smalcius a
Socinian, denies Christ's Divinity, which blasphemy is entertained in Sarmatia
and Dacia, at this day.

About this time Russia is much infested by the Polander and Swedes, many
Russians did now serve the Polander in this war, in hope his son Laudislaus
should be Prince of Muscovia: but those mutinying for want of pay, gave
occasion to the Tartars to invade Podolia. But these Muscovites being pacified
by gold and large promises, overthrew three several Armies of their
Contrymen. Neuda, Plescovia, and other Russian Towns, are taken by the
Polander and Swede. Mosqua is burned by the Polonians, the Russians resenting
these losses, 1615
begin to lay aside all private grudges, and the Nobility chose a Prince of
their own rank, Michael Federovitius, who sends Ambassadors to Caesar and the
Polander for peace; to which both assented. The death of Francis Duke of
Mantua, caused a war in Italy; for Cardinal Ferdinand Gonzaga, the defuncts
brother, puts aside his hat, thinks of marriage, and lays hold upon his
Ancestors Charles Emanuel, of Savoy, demands his daughters Dowry, who had been
married to Francis: and withal the Marchionat of Montferrat the Mantuan, being
assisted by the vice Duke of Millan, who was a Spaniard, did claim Montferrat
for himself; and having raised an Army of Spaniards, opposes the Savoyen, who
stoutly made resistance, till a peace was made, and the Mantuan promised to pay
the Dowry or portion to Margaret; the other differences were referred to
arbitration. But when the Spaniard proposed hard conditions to the Savoyen, the
war broke out more violently then before, to the great effusion of blood; the
French and Switzers held with the Savoyen, the Italians and Spaniards, with the
Mantuan. The Vercellae for the Spaniard, when in the interim the Savoyen wastes
many places in the Duchy of Millan. At last, the eighteenth year of this
Century, restitution was made on both sides, and a peace concluded in Germany.
Henry of Iuliers, offended with Brunswick, obtains a proscription against that
City, from Ralph the Emperor; the Dukes son Frederick had made peace with them,
if they would have delivered him a key to open their city gate at his pleasure;
this being denied, he besieges them. During which time, 12000 of the
besiegers, and 3000 of the besieged, were slain. At length about the fourth
month after the siege began, a peace is made, in which it was agreed, that the
City, as their Ancestors had done, should swear

The Venetians were infested both on sea and land, by the Croats plundring 1616
oftentimes with small Boats, the Venetian great Vessels. Complaint is made to
Ferdinand the Archduke, against these Pirates, but nothing done, wherefore a
cruel war ensued. In which Caesar and the Spaniard stood for Ferdinand, the
Hollander under John of Nassau, for Venice; but they being unacquainted with
the Italian way of fighting, returned dishonourably home, without doing any
thing. Mean while Ferdinand, as it were adopted by Matthias Caesar, Bohemia, by
the consent of his two brothers Albert and Maximilian, on this condition, that
whilst the Emperor lived, he should not meddle with the government. Hereupon
he is crowned, nobly entertained by the Saxon, and fealty sworn to him by the
Moravians* Silesians, and Lusatians. After a bloody war between him and Venice,
a peace is concluded; and the mercenary Croats, thieves rather then soldiers,
must avoid Senga, in which Town Ferdinand was to place a Garrison of Germans.
The confederate Belgians had now redeemed from the English Flissing and Briel,
which were pawned to Queen Elizabeth. At Amsterdam and Delph great troubles
about Arminianism. The Excise of Wine being diminished, and of Corn increased,
so

The Arminians finding their adversaries too strong, and that a Synod was
called against them, were advised by Barnevilde, Grotius and others, to raise
forces at Utricht, Leyden and Harlem, for their defense, alleging that each
Congregation had power to choose their own Pastor: but Grave Maurice sooner
then was expected, came upon Utricht, seizes on the watch, disarms the
Citizens, imprisons the conspirators, and places there Calvinian ministers;
which much disheartened the Remonstrants. In this mean while, the Holland ships
find out another passage to the Moluccas beyond the Strait of Magellan: in two
years space they pass the Line five times. In Russia before the peace was made,
the Polonians out of Smolenscum, made an irruption on the Russians, of 1517
whom they slew eight thousand, and took two thousand prisoners. By the James,
a peace is concluded between the Russian and Swede. It was agreed that Novograd
and some other Towns taken from the Russian, should be restored to Michael the
Exarch; and that Gustavus Adolphus King of Swede, should retain five Towns:
that neither of them should assist the Polander with arms. In Livonia some
Towns are taken by the Swede, but by the treachery of Furnesbec they are
surprised by the Polander.

The protestants in Germany celebrate a Jubilee this year 1617. being a full
Century since Luther began to oppose indulgences. At this the Roman Catholics
did much storm, and indeed this Evangelical Jubilee (as they call it) has
occasioned much sorrow in Germany ever since: for then the Pope and Bohemia,
which caused that woeful conflagration in Germany, presaged 1618
by the fatal comet seen that year, by the fall of a hill among the Grisons, on
the Town of Plura, which was suddenly overwhelmed, so that neither the place,
nor face of a Town, could there be any more seen, but a Lake where the Castle
stood. This Earthquake fell out the 25 of August, that same year. The palace at
Paris was set on fire by Lightning from Heaven, which consumed the ancient
Monuments and Statues of the French Kings. About that time I being then at
Salisbury, in the Deanery, was called out into the Court to behold (with
multitudes of people, being then nine of the clock at night)

The Papists in Hungary and Bohemia, taking offense at some Churches lately
erected by the Protestants, shuts them up, or defaceth them. The Protestants
complain to the Bishop of Prague and Abbot of Brunonia, that this was against
the Laws of Rodolphus and Matthias; it was answered that none had power to
build Churches in their Territories, without their consent, and that therefore
the protestants were justly punished. Then they appeal to Caesar, who gave them
no satisfaction: he being now gone from Vienna, to be nearer Ferdinands
Coronation in Hungary, the protestant Princes call a Diet, to consult Caesar is
made believe that such conventicles as they called them, were of dangerous
consequence, tending to the Emperors overthrow; and that therefore under pain
of his highest displeasure, they should be dissolved. At this they were so
exasperated, that they flung their Scribe, and two more out of the Castle
window, accusing them as betrayers of their countries liberties, in appealing
to Caesar, yet their lives were saved. They set a guard of soldiers upon
Sternberg, the Governor of the Castle and Kingdom; they secure Prague, and
throw the Jesuits out of Bohemia; and presently by their letters to Caesar, and
their public declarations, they justify what they had done. But Caesar
condemns their proceedings Bohemians would be quiet, he would not stir,
otherwise he would raise such an army as should chastise their contumacy. With
this the people were contented, promising to be peaceable, and desiring no
force might be raised. Nor was Caesar averse to peace, but some turbulent
spirits who could place no security in peace, being guilty of the breach
thereof, and fearful of Cesars displeasure, resolve to make war. Hereupon Caesar
by Tampir and Bucquoi, raises an army, Bohemia draws the Silesians and
Lusatians to join with them; they besiege Budvise a Town wholly Cesarian, and
place a Garrison in Crumavia. Tampir takes in Bistricium, and being repulsed
from Newhouse, plunders the Suburbs, then takes Pilgron: Count Bucquoi comes
with a bigger army to Saslavia, where a doubtful battle is fought, many slain
on both sides; the Palatin and Saxon Electors would fain have hid the sparkles
under the ashes. But it was now too late, for the fire was broke out into a
flame. Mansfield takes Pilsna for the Bohemians, Bucquoi Budvise, takes
Crumavia: Tampir returning with great plunder to Vienna, is met by the enemy,
and plundered of his plunder. Turren makes excursions upon Austria; the
protestants there being angry with Caesar, for undertaking so rash a war,
without their knowledge. The Saxon Elector labors for a cessation, till
peace be concluded: the Bohemians doubt of Cesars fidelity in keeping the
peace. Diverse Commanders at Vienna 1619
undertake a new order of Militia against Heretics. Caesar proscribes
Mansfield, and in the mean while falls sick of a lingering disease, whereof he
died the 62 year of his life, and the 7 of his Empire. The Grisons shortly
after the Earthquake, fall into divisions, proscribing and killing all that
were against Venetians found out the plot intended against them, and punished
the plotters.

Ferdinand 2d, succeeded in the Empire, he was grand child to Ferdinand first
by his son Charles. In his first Letters Patents he establishes the privileges
of Bohemia, and the public Officers of the kingdom, setting by Matthias, but
now thrust out by the Peers. This was disliked by the Bohemians, therefore they
resolve to stand upon their guard. The inhabitants whom Bucquoi affrighted with
diverse irruptions, are commanded to be in arms. Turren breaks in upon Moravia,
and forces them to side with Bohemia. Wallenstein goes to Hungary for aid
from thence. Turren having overrun Austria, faces Vienna, and takes the
Suburbs, where he quartered some days as it were in the Kings presence. But
whilst he is drawing the Hungarian, and Austrian protestants to confederate
with him, Bucquois army increases by new supplies from Italy, Hungary, and
Belgium: With these he fights Mansfield, and defeats him. Upon this diverse
Towns open their gates to him, who laden with spoil enters triumphantly
Budveisa; this caused Turren to hasten his return into Bohemia. Bucquois army
now consisting of 17000, takes diverse Towns upon surrender. Tampir is sent
against Moravia. Turren being beaten back from Vienna, King Ferdinand comes to
Francfort, where the Elector of Mintz, calls a Diet for Bohemians, that
Ferdinand whom they went about to un-King, should sit among the Electors as
King of Bohemia: therefore they send Agents and Letters, to keep him off from
voting, whom they held to be no King. But their labor was in vain, for not
only was he acknowledged one of the Electors, but also was chosen and
consecrated Emperor. The Bohemians on the contrary, kill the Tampirians in
Moravia, and throw the Jesuits out of Silesia, Moravia, and Hungary. Besides,
the very next day that Ferdinand was made Caesar, they depose him at Prague, and
in his place chose Frederic the Palatin. When as the Electors had cited them to
Ratisbon, for deciding of the differences; the Palatin though he was dissuaded
by the Electors, yet unadvisedly accepts of the Bohemian Bucquoi being enraged,
beleaguers Pisseca, storms it, and puts all the Townsmen to the sword.
Mansfield is proscribed by the new Caesar, who rages up and down the Country,
doing more hurt to innocent people, then good to his new king Frederic that
employed him. Gabriel Bethlem, or Bethleem Gabor Pr. of Transylvania did most
hurt to Ferdinand, who conspiring with the Bohemians, and gaping after the
Kingdom of Hungary, took Lassovia, Posonium, and other places; he used the
Cath olicks barbarously, and transferring the Crown of Hungary to himself, took
upon him the title of Prince of Hungary: Afterward meetings were held among
the Correspondents (for so they were called who sided with the Palatin and
Bohemia) at Norimberg, and of the Catholics at Herbipolis, about the way of
promoting, their several interests and religions. Bucquoi been pinched with
want, and forsaken of the Hungarian robbers, went aside into Austria, where the
Protestants seperating themselves from the Papists, had an eye on the fortune
of Bohemia.

In Holland a Synod is called at Dort, at which were present Divines out of
Great Britain, Switzerland, Palatinat, Hassia, Geneva, Brem, and Embden; In
which these 5 controverted Articles were debated. 1. Whether Election and
reprobation were absolute, or had respect to faith and infidelity. 2d. If
Christ died for all. 3d. If in God there are two contrary wills; to wit,
revealed and secret. 4th. If effectual Grace can be resisted. 5th. If the
faithful can finally, and totally fall from Grace. The Remonstrants refused to
stand to their verdict, who were both Judges and Parties, exhibiting a
confession of their Faith with a protestation, would not recant their opinion,
therefore they were condemned of error, diverse of them imprisoned, and most
John Bernevild above 70 years of age, and who had been a good patriot, loses
his head, for favoring the Arminian doctrine and plots, for violating the
Belgic Laws; for accusing Maurice as if he aspired at the sole dominion of
Belgium. Ledenboroius one of the plotters killed himself: Grotius and
Hogerbetins condemned to perpetual imprisonment; and their goods confiscate;
but Grotius by his wife was conveyed out of prison in a chest. Caesar by his
declarations does nullify the Palatins Coronation, because it was not done by
them, who had the power to do it, nor was it done [solio vacante] much less did
it become the Palatin to take his Crown, whom he had acknowledged 1620
to be lawful King of Bohemia, and had with the other Electors Caesar: He
showed also that the Austrians had an hereditary right over Bohemia, which the
Bohemians in their printed books refuted. But Frederick the new King by
abolishing the Roman Faith in the Castle of Prague, and the Lutheran in other
places, procured on himself much hatred; the beginning of his reign was
ominous, for he sent one Slavata to take possession of the Town Gutscinum with
the Castle, which was blown up with gunpowder by Smirsitzia the wife of Baron
Wartenburgius, there perished she, and Slavata, with certain Judges, in all
about one hundred persons: Whilst Frederick is busy in making the Moravians,
Cilesians, and Lusatians swear Fealty to him. Maradas conducts from Caesar new
Forces into Bohemia, Bucquoi Mansfieldians out of order, for want of pay in the
night, and makes a great slaughter amongst them. The Transylvanian makes truce
with Caesar for some months. Bucquoi is forced by the Bohemians to retreat to
Gremsa: The Cossacks which were the Polonian Auxiliaries, spoil all the
Lutheran Countries with fire and sword, multitudes of people are driven into
the woods, where they are killed with cold and hunger, or the merciless enemy.
1623
These also were sometimes beaten by the Silesians and Moravians. Baron Felsius
as he was pursuing those Cossacks, fell unwarily into Bucquoi's quarters, where
he lost his life, with many of his Soldiers. The Elector's pitying the misery
of Germany labor (except Brandeburg) to persuade the Palatine Bohemia,
otherwise they threaten to take arms against him. Frederick replies that the
cognizance of the Bohemian cause was not in a few Electors, nor ^n Ferdinand
Archduke of Austria, but in the Kingdom of Bohemia, or rather the whole
Empire: Neither had he any quarrel with Caesar, but with the Archduke;
therefore says he, foreign Princes desire the matter may be heard in a full
Diet: But the Bohemians were so little moved with the Electors threatenings,
that they named Henry Fredericks eldest son now six years old, successor to his
Father in the Kingdom of Bohemia.

Caesar to vindicate this wrong offered to his Family, sollicites the Pope to
furnish him with money, Spain and Poland with Forces. The Palatine finds not
that supply from England which he expected, The French King thought it best to
reconcile the differences, therefore sends Ambassadors to desire them to be
reconciled: Maximilian of Bavaria, who had a great army of Papists, agrees with
the Protestant army under Ioachim Ernest, that the seat of the war should be
contained within the borders of Bohemia, and the Provinces Bavarian marches
against the Austrians that were in league with Bohemia, and forces them to
renounce their league. John George Elector of Saxony, who had exhorted before
Bohemia and the Palatin to submit to Caesar; is by him employed against the
upper and lower Lusatia, both of which he subjugates to the Emperor, which
greatly advanced Caesar's cause. At the same time Spinola with an army out of
Belgium, by the King of Spain's command invades the Palatinat. The Prince of
Orange with a strong army marches into Vesalia, his brother Henry Frederick
into the Palatinate. In Hungary, Gabor is proclaimed King by a Diet of his own
Faction: Thence Austria, and sends aid to Bohemia, he shoots Tampire dead, as
he was attempting to take in Posonium. Bavare having quieted Austria, joins
his whole Forces with Bucquois's; many towns by them are taken, multitudes of
the inhabitants slain, many of the countrey-people take arms against their
landlords, wasting their Manors, and plundring their houses: the Bohemian
army conducted by the King, did somewhat retard the enemies proceedings, some
light velitations there were, but the Soldiers were unruly for want of pay,
whereas the Imperial army by reason of their great plunders, and the wealth of
Maximilian the Bavarian, was duly paid: The Palatine then marches with all
his Forces toward Prague, and encampeth but in a tumultuary Prague; but most
of his army put more confidence in their heels then hands, for whilst they were
intrenching themselves, Count Tilly, with the Bavarian and Caesarian army
hastneth toward them: presently about 9000 Hungarians laden with plunder, run
away; in the very first encounter of the two armies, the Regiments of Turrin
and Hollach are cut off, which so disheartened the rest, that they began to grow
disordred, and in a confused way being struck with a panick terror, run toward
the City. Anhalden and Count Hollach, prevent the rest, and bring sad news to
the King that the day was lost, and that his chief safety consisted in his
horse-heels. He procures Bohemia, or to fight again: He found it unsafe to put
all on the hazard of another encounter, therefore having put his wife,
children, and best things in coaches and wagons, he hastneth into Silaesia:
The Crown and Records of the Kingdom being left behind. This victory fell out
the 8th of November after 1620
the Roman account; the Gospel for which day is, Give to Caesar the things
that are Caesar's. The next day, the Imperialists enter Prague in a triumphant
way; so in a short time Bohemia submits to Caesar: In this battle were killed
of the Bohemians 8000. and 2000. Caesarians. The Palatin Soldiers being
destitute of their pay, and forsaken by their Commanders, curse Bohemia that
ever they saw it, and so by flight every one shifts for himself.

Shortly after this, Maximilian of Bavaria, returns home, the charge of the
army, is Committed to Tillie, and of the Kingdom to Lichtenstein. Of the
Protestant side, Mansfield had some Soldiers in Pilsna, Hermanus Francus in
Thabor, and old Turren in Moravia, in Valachia and Moldavia, Gratian, at this
time was Vaivod, whom the Polonians protected, the Turks and Tartars opposed,
because he had conspired with the Polander against the Turk; two battles were
fought; in the first the Polanders, in the second the Turks had the better, in
which Gratian with his Auxiliaries were cut off. Hereupon Osman having made
peace with the Parthian, turns out of his Court the Poland Ambassador, and
denounces war against the King, who hardly escaped with his life, being
assaulted by an Assasin, as he was going into the Church; by providence the
blow was averted, the Assasin tortured, and open war against the Turk is
proclaimed. In the Valtelin, Ralph Plant being proscribed Grisons, enters into
a secret plot with the Catholics, to kill all the Protestants there, as well
strangers, as natives, which massacre was effected accordingly: Then being
assisted by the Duke of Feria, Governor of Millan with 4000 Soldiers, seiseth
on the whole valley from Lake Common to Tirol, and beats off the Grisons united
with the Valtebinois: The Duke of Feria mean while builds in fit places strong
Forts. The Venetians could not endure that the gate of Italy should be shut up
against the French and Switzers; The French King by his Ambassadors, desires
the King of Spain to open the passage again. Upon this, diverse consultations
were held, but diversely interrupted: In the interim Pompy Plant with his
friends are murdered in his own

In the beginning of the next year Frederick the Palsgrave is proscribed by 1621
Caesar for accepting the Crown of Bohemia, and so are all those that aided
him. Turren who could not persuade the Moravians to constancy, flies to
Bethleem Gabor, whose election to the Crown of Hungary, Caesar makes null. The
Palatin of Segeberg sueth for aid from the Dane and Saxon, but in vain; for
Caesar having declared he would maintain the peace and liberty of Germany;
neither the Dane nor Saxon would stir, only Christian of Brunswick; Bishop of
Halberstad raises an Army, which he conducted into the Country of Mints, the
Pallatin now was gone for Holland. Bucquoi had subdued Moravia; Saxon Silesia,
which was pardoned upon acknowledging of their errors, the Moravians were left
to Caesar's mercy: Spinola broke the league that was between the Princes of
Onoltzbac, Wirtenburg, Durlacen, and Hasse with some others that were united;
these procured peace for their own Territories, and truce for the Palatinat,
till means was used for a transaction. Mean while Tilly in Bohemia fights with
Mansfield, who had yet the possession of some Towns there, and of the upper
Palatinat. But for want of money, the Captains sold their Towns to Tilly.
Mansfield being reduced to great streights, upon promise of pardon, money and
honors* submits to Caesar; but having strengthened himself, he revolts and
violates his faith, and so through the Bavarian Frankenthal; then he plunders
the Territories of Spire and Straisburg, and possesses himself of Hagenoa: The
Palsgrave publishes a declaration, wherein he shows the causes why he
accepted the Crown of Bohemia, and withal, how desirous he was of peace, if it
could be obtained upon terms of honor and safety.

Count Bucquoi having subdued Moravia, marches toward Hungary, where Gabor
cunningly refuses to be Crowned. Presburg, Posonium, and other Towns, are
taken in by Bucquoi, who persuades Seastin George to fall off from Gabor, he
underhand reconciles himself to Caesar, and does a great deal of Gabor, whilst
he was expecting aid from the Turk; for he intercepted the Auxiliaries that
were sent to him: Gabor at this time was in a low condition, when Bucquoi
besieging Neusolum was killed with 16 wounds, the recovering of his body from
the Hungarians, cost the Gaesarians much blood; his death gave occasion to
Gabor to regain many of his lost Towns and forts: But about the end of this
year, at the Diet of Niclasburg, an accord is made between Caesar and him, and
the Crown of Hungary is restored to Ferdinand. Diverse Towns are left to Gabor,
to be governed by him under Caesar. He obtains also some places in Silesia, and
the title of a Prince of the Empire. Religion is left in the same condition it
was, when Ferdinand undertook the Government of that kingdom. In the interim
Silesia is much infested by Iegerndorff, who lays heavy Taxes on them, and
fights the Saxon with diverse success. Twenty five Incendiaries are apprehended
by the Saxon, and for Treason are condemned at Prague. Whilst the Polonian is
at war with the Turk, the Swedes take Riga in Livonia, and Mitovia, which
afterward was re-taken by Polander, and then a Truce was made.

The twelve years peace between Spain and Holland, is this year 21, expired in
April. The Archduke by his Agent, wishes the Hollanders to return to the
obedience of Spain, they answer, that it was too late to expect obedience of
them, whom Spain had confessed to be free States. Hereupon Spinola in September
sits down before Iuliers, and takes it the next February, notwithstanding
Orange did what he could to help the besieged. Whilst the Grisons strive to
defend, the Valtelin are beaten themselves by the Spaniard; by which means
Leopold of Austria on the one side, and the Duke of Feria on the other, took
occasion to plant the Roman faith there. The King of Morocco in Africa, about
to take the Fort, built by the Spaniard near Alarachia, is beaten Spanish
Fleet, which in the Straits of Cadiz, took 32 Holland ships. Out of the Molucca
Islands the Spaniards and English beat the Hollander. This year died Pope Paul
5th, of an Apoplexy, the 69 year of his life, and of his Pontificat the 16. To
him succeeded Alexander Ludovisius of Bononia, who made the peace between Spain
and Savoy, whom after a few days Cosmus Exarch of Hetruria, followed; he left
many 1622
children behind him, his eldest son Ferdinand, yet a child, succeeded; he was
under the tution of his Grandmother of Lorrain, his Mother of Austria, and his
Uncle the Cardinal. The last of March died King Philip 3d of Spain, Philip the
4th, being 16 years of age succeeded, who thrust out of his Court such as had
abused his Fathers lenity; some he imprisoned, and some he put to death.

In July after died Albert the Archduke, and in September following,
Bellarmine that famous Divine, being almost 80 years of age: he was sisters son
to Pope Marcellus 2d. Gregory 15 made a Law that the Pope should be chosen by
the Cardinals only, without any respect had to the Letters of Kings and
Princes. Brunswic did much mischief this year in Westphalia, he took in many
Towns, persecuted the Roman Catholics, abused the Clergy, defaced Churches,
and made money of consecrated Ornaments; thence he goes into Eisfeldia and
Watteravia, and other places thereabout, spoiling all with fire and sword. Mean
while the Palatin returns into his own country disguised. Mansfield and the
Marquis of Baden, defeat Tilly near Wissoch: but afterward the same Tilly did
totally rout the Mansfieldians, and took all their Artillery, ^aggage and Money.
Shortly after, Mansfield takes Ladenburg, and defeats the Leopoldians, as they
were besieging Hagenoa. Then he hastneth to join with Brunswic, but Tilly did
so hotly pursue him, that he retreats to Manheim. Then Tilly seeks out
Brunswick, where he finds him with a great Army, but without Ordnance, near the
River Moen, where he forces them all to fly. The Duke escapes over the Bridge,
and was so eagerly pursued by the Tillians, Brunswicks other Troops were cut in
pieces by the Cesarians: Besides those that were drowned, three thousand were
killed; Hochsta was regained presently.

The Palatin wanting money to furnish Mansfield and Brunswick, and finding that
his condition was deplorable, he supports his hopes with the agreement at
Brussels, then in agitation by Digby Ambassador for King James; he cashiered
Mansfield, being desirous of the same, many Towns and forts submit to Caesar;
Worms and Spire admit Garrisons; Heidelberg is besieged; the Palatin is
conveyed to Sedan by the Mansfieldians, who joining with Brunswicks Forces,
brake in through France upon Henault, where they had a sharp encounter with
Consalvus of Corduba, in which Brunswicks arm was so torn and shattered, that
the Chirurgions were fain to cut it off. Thence they make their way toward
Breda in Brabant; sharp Skirmishes there were, and many slain on both sides.
Brunswick was like to carry the Victory, had not the Mansfieldians for want of
September Heidelberg after a stout defense, was taken by Tilly, the Garrison all
put to the sword, the Town miserably defaced and plundered, so that Tilly was
fain to command the soldiers to give off. The King of Denmark sends an
Ambassador to the Emperor, desiring him to pardon the Palatins temerity, for
public peace sake, and to restore him to his Electorat, upon his renunciation
of the Bohemian Crown. But Caesar refers the Ambassador to the agreement of
Brussels, which went on with so slow a pace, that in the mean while the Palatin
lost all his Country; for Sir Horace Vere dispairing of any aid, delivers up
Manheim Tilly, upon honorable terms. In October following, Leopold subdues
the Spire, and other parts. The Lands of the Marquisat of Baden suffered all
kind of hostility by the Bavarian soldiers, chiefly the Croats and Cosaoks.
These Cosacks for their cruelty are cashiered by Caesar; for wheresoever they
went, like mad dogs, they raged on all sorts of people, sex and ages, their
cruelties, rapacity, and leachery, which Germany suffered is unspeakable. But
they were met sometimes by the Silesians, and rewarded according to their
merits. The Mansfieldians were little better in Westphalia, and East Friesland:
plundring and spoiling all places as they came, and imposing Taxes at their
pleasure; whereupon the lower Saxony by Cesars consent, take arms for their own
defense. All the Protestant Ministers are banished Bohemia, and Moravia. In
France the Pacification is broken by the King, who not without great slaughter
takes Montpelier, and other Protestant Towns, with which afterward he makes an
agreement.

The same year the Pope Canonizeth Isidor, Ignatius Loyola, Francis Tresia,
Foundress of the barefooted Carmelites, and one Philip Author of the
Congregation of the Oratory. He decrees it a sin, to say, the Virgin Mary was
conceived in sin. He erects a new College for propagating the faith. He sends
into Denmark some Parsonated Divines, to season the Schools and Pulpits with
their Doctrine of Rome, but with small success; two Danish ships richly
laden, return that year home from Ceilan in the East- Indies. Spinola Bergen
ap Zo^, loses 8000 men, and at last is forced to break up his siege.
Maximilian of Bavaria is honored with the Palatin Electorat, against the will
of Mints, Saxon, and Branburg, but with this caution, that hereby the Palatins
sons and ^indred should not be prejudiced. This was done at Ratisbon the 15 of
February. The Popish Doctors are detected in Denmark, and banished. A silver
Mine is found in Norway, and a new Academy erected 1623
in Seland. In Holland a Treasonous plot is discovered against Maurice, and the
Anti- Arminians; the Ringleaders, were Barnfelds two sons, one of which
escaped, the other with his accomplices was executed. The King of Denmark and
the Saxon Princes drove Brunswick out of their Territories into Friesland,
Tilly falls upon his Rear, and by an ambush suddenly surrounds his Army, which
was very numerous; the Tillians were but 5000, who put to slight the
Brunswickians, killed seven hundred on the place, took most of the chief men
prisoners, with all the Ordnance, Baggage and Provision. Brunswick himself
escaped, with some Troops to Brevord. Meppena is surrendered to Tilly. Frisia is
still molested by the Mansfildians, till Count Oldenburg obtained their pardon
from Caesar: For Tilly did not meddle with these cunning Harpies, yet some of
them return to the Province of Munster in Westphalia where they loose 15
Colors. Limbaus with most of his Commanders surrender themselves: From that
time the Mansfieldians fell off daily, their Commander accompanied with a fevv,
flies back to Holland, and Brunswick to Saxony. This year died Gregory 15th of
the Palsy at Rome: His successor was Cardinal Maphaeus Barberinus, who took
the name of Urban 8th. Old Turren assisted by the Turks, did much mischief in
Moravia, so did Gabo^, till the Turks fell off from him, and his German aid not
appearing, he was forced to make peace with the Emperor, who afterward took
from the title of Princes of the Turks returning heavy with plunder, are
killed every where by the Caesarians, and stripped of their spoils: The next
year peace is renewed betvveen Caesar and Transylvania; so at last Iegerndorff
is turned out of Silesia, Turren out of Moravia, and Gabor out of Hungary.

This year strange things were seen in Germany, portending yet more troubles.
For in diverse Poles water was congealed into blood, drops of blood fell from
the beams and rafters of some houses, the bread, the tables, and books in some
places sweat blood: Armies fighting were seen and heard in the air, and corn
grew upon trees. Shortly after this the sparkles of war 1624
begin to break out in Denmark and Saxony. Count Tilly places some Garrisons
Saxony, though Brunswick was fled into Denmark, and had disbanded the remainder
of his Army: These Garrisons so oppressed the Saxons with exactions, and want
of provision, that they complain to the Dane, and he to the Emperor, that
Saxony his neighbor Country was much oppressed, though they were no enemies
either to Caesar or Bavare: It was answered, that those forces in Saxony
belonged to the Bavarian, who could not with safety disband them, because he
feared the Saxon strength; yet if there were any within the King's
Territories, they should be removed. This answer was sent by the King to
Tilly, who returns him this scoff, That his Soldiers had no vvings to fly in
the air, therefore must have some ground and earth for their feet to Brittan,
France, Swethland, and the Netherlands, to stand up in defense of Kingly right.
The Hollanders send a great fleet this year into America, which seisng upon
some Spanish Vessels, take the Bay or port of All Saints, with the Town, where
they met with rich booties: Spinola about the end of August, sits down before
Baieda. Maurice takes the ancient Town of Clive, with some other places; he
aimed also at the Cittadell of Antwerp, but his Stratagem failed. Breda having
held out siege 9 months, in which time Justin of Nassau made many eruptions,
and Henry Frederick with a great army strove to raise the siege, but could not,
therefore the Town was forced May 26. the Soldiers marched out with their arms,
and the Townsmen had their liberties granted, but not their Religion, after
such a day. A little before, Frederick of Toledo, recovered again their Bay of
Brasil to the Spaniards. Philip 4th inhibited commerce between the Spaniards,
and his subjects of Belgium.

About the beginning of the 25th year, the storms and winds were so violent
1625
in Denmark and Golsatia, that not only trees were rooted up, but also many
houses, towers and Churches blown down, bulwarks, banks, and rampires
overthrown by the sea, and land-floods, forerunners of the ensuing troubles.
About the end of March at Lavenberg, a meeting was between Saxony, the King of
Denmark, as Duke of Holsatia, the administrator of Magdeburg, the Bishop of
Brem, the Duke of Brunswick, the Megapolitans; where it is agreed, that the
Regiments raised awhile ago for defense of Saxony be increased, and a strong
Army levied, over which the King should be General. The Grisons war in the
Valtelin is renewed. For France, Venice, and Savoy vexed that a Province, so
convenient for them, should be wholly subject to any other: Therefore they
enter into a Confederacy for regaining it: To whom 4 Towns and 2 Counties come
in and submit. Many that had betrayed their Country were put to death, but the
Catholic Switzers put themselves under the protection of Austria. Presently
Cleve being taken, the whole Valtelin falls off to the confederates. There is
also war made against Genua, for furnishing the Spaniard with money and
provisions: This War was eagerly persued in the beginning by the French, and
Savoyen, in which the Ligurians were sometimes worsted: Preton and Albinga are
surrendered, French were diverted by an intestin War at home, between the
Papists and Hugonots; in which Duke Sonli (...) beat the King's ships at sea,
and shortly after is beaten himself, and driven into England. Rochel is
besieged both by Sea and Land: Pope Urban confirms the new Militia, which began
the 19th year of his age at Vienna, and gives it the name of Saint Marie's
Conception. In Austria, Bohemia, Moravia, and elsewhere, the Protestant books
are burned, their Church Service disturbed, and the professors of Reformation
banished. In France, books were cast abroad that the Hugonots intended to kill
the King, and to recover their Liberty. Marcus Antonius de Dominis, who had
wrote against the Church of Rome, whilst he was in England, Brussels by the
Spanish Ambassador, upon great promises, but from thence he is sent to Rome
where he died; some say he was strangled in prison, and in the beginning of
December was burned. Shortly after the Pope began his Iubilee, at which was
present Uladislaus the Prince of Poland.

Ferdinand the Emperor having made truce with the Turk for 12 years, sends
Tilly and Fridland with their Armies to invade the lower Saxony, although the
King of Denmark had conducted an Army of 24 thousand to Vis^rois without
hurting any man; but declaring that his intent was only to defend the Saxon
Liberties. Till the 10th of July there passed no Act of hostility on either
side: The Tillians made the first breach by seizing upon a Fort Saxony, built
near Huxaria. 10 Days after the King riding carelessly upon the Rampire, fell
with his horse into a cave 29 foot deep, where powder was kept, only covered
over with deal-boards, where after two hours he was found alive, but for three
days together he was accounted no better then a dead man; wherefore the Enemy
drawing near, the Danes retreat toward the Diocese of Verdana: Mean while
Tilly with all his Forces breaks in upon Brunswick, notwithstanding the Saxons
by their Agents deprecated the contrary: He places Garrisons in diverse Towns,
and makes havoc of the Inhabitants of Brunswick, who therefore take Arms in
their own defense; The King also requires in Caesar's name, that he would
remove his Army out of Saxony, but Tilly besieges Niemburg, which the King
being well now recovered defended so stoutly, that Tilly was fain to give off
the fiege with the loss of 4000 of his men: Yet Stoltzenavia revolted to him,
by means of a certain Captain who was bribed. In the interim Mansfield gets
recruits from England, which now was fallen out with Spain for not restoring
the Palatinat. These Forces (but much diminished by the way) with some French
and Flemins, he conducts into Saxony, where he takes up his quarters at
Lavemburg upon Albis, when a little before, Brunswick with good supply of
horse, joins with the King. In this mean time Fridland enters the Diocese of
Magdeburg, where he seiseth upon Hall, his Soldiers also make inroads upon the
Territories of 1626
Halberstad without resistance; but that the flame of this war might spread no
further, by the mediation of the Electors of Saxony and Brandeburg, a Treaty
for peace was held in October at Brunswick, after 4 months disceptation, the
Treaty broke off without effecting any thing; for Tilly would not part with
Minda and Huxaria, neither would he nor Fridland confirm the rights which the
Nobility of Saxony had purchased over the Church Lands. So the War brake out
more fiereely then before; in which Brunswick overthrew a Regiment of
High-vvay Robbers, with 800 of Fridlands men. But Mansfield plundring some
Villages of the Lubekers, was set upon by the Townsmen who sallied out,
killed diverse of his Horse, and stripped him of his plunder. John Ernest of
Vinaria, the Kings Lieutenant, takes in diverse Towns.

Leopold upon the death of his brother Charles in Spain, resignes his
Bishoprics of Strasburg, and Padua, and marries with Claudia of Medices, the
Duke of Urbins Widow; the younger son of Sigismund, King of Poland,
Uratislavia. About this time died King James in March, and Maurice Prince of
Orange, the next April after, both of a Fever, whose deaths was accompanied
with a great plague and mortality through Great Britain, and many other places
of Europe. The King of Sweden falls upon Livonia suddenly, and takes diverse
Towns from the Polander, who labored to recover Riga, with the loss of 600
Citizens, by Turren the younger; the Swede also alarms Borussia in July with a
Fleet of eighty Sail. He takes in there diverse Towns; he injoins the Dantiscans
to put away the Polonian ships, and to pay him the Tribute due to the Polander,
but this City resisted him stoutly, and retarded his proceedings.

CHAP. XIX.
A Continuation of the History of Germany, Denmark, Swedland, Holland, Poland,
Italy, etc. under Ferdinand 2d, from the year 1626. till the end of 1630.

THE flame of the Saxon war did this year break out into a great 1626
conflagration. The Cesarian Army being too numerous to be encountered with, the
Saxons strive to keep off provisions from Mansfieldians therefore the 15 of
April assault a Fort of Fridlands upon the Albis, by which he had provisions
brought him by water. The attempt was desperate and rash; for the Mansfieldians
were but 8000, whereas there was above 30000 Cesarians. The Mansfieldian Horse
fainting, left the Foot to the mercy of the Enemy, who cut off the Holland
Auxiliaries, which were about 4000, the rest fled. Thirty colors were taken,
yet they write that of the Mansfieldians not many above 1500 were slain. In
Hassia the Country people rise in Arms against the soldiers, many whereof they
killed and plundered. Brunswick falls upon the Province of Grubenhag, in the
absence of George Lunebarge possessor Caesar, and fortifieth diverse places with
Garrisons; besides, he beats in Hassia George his new Levies. The Emperor by a
Herald proclaims at Magdeburg proscription against all of the Roman Empire,
that shall assist the Dane. Tilly takes Munda the key of Brunonia, and puts all
to the sword, except a few that hid themselves in Vaults, or on the House tops,
who after the fury of the soldiers was past, ransomed their lives for money.
This was in the end of May; and about the sixth of June Prunswick died, some
think he was poisoned: the 19 of July his mother followed him, the Dane
Garrisons, the Castle of Vorda. Tilly delivers Hassia to William the Land-grave,
and marches to Gottinga, which was surrendered to Dane was coming with all
his Forces to raise the siege. The two Armies meet; the Kings first velitations
were successful, Tilly having lost above six hundred of his men, with some
Colors. The King pursues Tillies Rear, and had now at Lottera found a fit
place for defense, where he was advised to hault, and not to follow the Enemy,
who had got the vvinde and advantage of the ground. But he would go on, with a
resolution to fight the Enemy. The Avaunt Guard advances so courageously
toward Tillies Artillery, put him in some fear, till he was strengthened with
George Luneburgs Auxiliaries; then falling with all his Forces upon the Kings
Foot, so gals them, that the Horse pretending want of pay, wheeled about, and
refused to fight, notwithstanding they had received their pay not long before.
The King did what he could to make them fight, but in vain, for they shamefully
rid away, and left the Foot naked; whereof 1200 were slain by the Enemy, and
1800 taken prisoners, with 28 Colors. Many prime men were slain, Lottera
forced to surrender; many also of Tillians were slain: the King escaped
narrowly from being taken; this Buttel was fought August 1. Tillies Victory was
greater then his Booty, for he durst not venture too far in the pursuit,
because he feared Ambuscadoes. Two days after Duke Brunswick renounceth the
Association of Saxony, and surrenders all Brunonia to Caesar. Tilly
understanding that Wolferlyt, whither the King retreated in his flight, was
strongly fortified, would not besiege it, for fear of losing too much time, but
falls to taking in of other places. In the interim the King recollects his
dispersed Forces, and provides another Army for a fresh encounter with Tilly.

The Vinarien and Mansfield having joined their Forces, which consisted
Silesia, whom Bechman followed* but could do no good, because the Silesians by
reason of his violence, were alienated from him; therefore diverse places submit
to the Vinarien: and now Mansfield being encouraged by the addition of Gabors
Forces, and the marriage of Katherin of Brandeburg, marches into Moravia; and
trusting to the Turks aid, being animated by one of the Bassais, enters
Hungary. Thither Fridland being sent with an Army, is repulsed at Neutra, by
the Turks, and has diverse doubtful encounters with Mansfield; who fearing some
collusion between Fridland and the Transylvanian, resolves to go for Venice,
with the choicest of his men; the rest of his Army he delivers Vinarien. But in
his journey he fell sick of the bloody flux, at Bosnia, (its thought he was
poisoned) and there died. The Vinarien also grieving that the Transylvanian had
fallen off to Caesar, died suddenly, the 32 year of his age. In Moravia the Bores
rise against Count Herbersdorff, for abusing them; they first flung stones at
him, then they fall upon his guard of 1500 men, and killed most of them; then
they take in diverse Towns, and the mean while Petition Caesar for a free
enjoyment of the Gospel. At last they grew so strong by the confluence thither,
of the banished Gentry, and others that had suffered in these Wars, that they
became Masters of all Austria, above Oenus. But their Victories made a stop at
Lintzium, for they could not keep off either provision or men from the Bavarian
Army. At length they were so pressed upon by Herbersdorff, Brenner, and Lobel,
and encompassed by their Forces, that they submitted and flung down their Arms.
But shortly after being incensed by the cruel punishments, which many of them
suffered, and the burning of their Houses by the Duke of Holsatia's Regiments,
they fall upon them betimes in the morning, dispersed, and kill above 4000. They
defeat the Bavarians diverse times, some of whose Captains they killed. Lobel
and Brenner are beat to pieces by the Boores iron cudgels, and above 2000 men
were destroyed. Caesar being much troubled at these disasters, promises liberty
of Religion to the Austrians, and by his Proclamations Prague, calls home the
Bohemians that were banished for their conscience. Afterward whilst these
Boores labor to bring others into their society, they fall to quarrelling and
destroying each other, till (...) came upon them with a Brigade of 8000,
disperses, kills, and destroys them; some escaped, and some were taken and
reserved for public punishment.

Mean while the Wars remove from the Grisons to the French, who fall out among
themselves about matters of Religion. Barbarinus the Cardinal persuades the
French King to make Peace with Spain, and that the Va^n be left in deposito
with the Pope, and that a Passage in the Grisons Straits, be opened for both
Kings. But the Venetians and Sav^yen were at enmity with the Genuois. The
French and English fall out about sending away Queen Mary's Priests, which
hindered the pay promised to the King of Denmark; to wit, 140000 Joachims
monthly from the English, French; yet the King not willing to be a mere
spectator of the German misery, gathered again 6000 Foot, and 4000 Horse, and
suddenly assaults Hoia, which he took, though he was shot through the arm with
a Bullet. Christian 5. Prince of Denmark, hastneth provision into Niemburg;
then the King goes into Holsatia, where he calls a Diet at Redensburg, about
continuing the War. Rantzovius the Vice Duke, promises his best assistance.
Christianus Thomaeus, is sent Ambassador into Belgium and France, but is taken
by the way, and set at liberty again by Isabella. He obtains from the
confederate Belgians some Forces for the Dane. The King had exhausted a great
Treasure, and borrowed large sums of his people, in maintenance of this war,
Denmark and Saxony. Mean while the Vice-Duke died, whose Funeral the King in
his own person honored: Then he builds Forts upon Visurgis and Albis, to keep
off provisions 1627
from Tilly, whose men offering to take the Rampires, are beaten off with loss.
George Luneburg takes Brandeberg by storm. Sla^ersdorff possesses the Black
Friars Church in H^velberg, and fortifieth it; from thence he killed with
Musket shot above 4000. The Marquess of Durlac, and old Turr^n whom the
Venetians honorably discharged, now the Italian War being almost ended, are
entertained by the King; the Country of Lunaeburg is pitifully wasted by the
royal and Cesarian parties, burning each others Germany, there was nothing but
wasting, plundring, and murdering; so that the three Ecclesiastic Electors
desired peace, before Germany be totally ruined. The B^ors of Brunswick, rob
and destroy about the Hyrcinian Woods, whom the Cesarians defeated. N^theim is
surrendered June 17. Mean while the Tillians are pinched for want of provisions,
by reason the Rivers Albis, Visurgis, and Havila were guarded by the Danes:
Therefore Tilly to open a way, marches toward Albis, takes in some places by
the way. About the end of July, whilst the King is at the Diet of Redensburg,
Tilly observing the neglect and paucity of the Watch upon Albis, before break
of day, Ferries over B^nburg, near to which Town were diverse praetorian
cohorts, who in stead of encoun^ring with the Enemy, falls to plundring of
their friends, so that without resistance, Tilly passes over with his whole
Army, and withal seizes upon the Bridge, which the Dane had built; so all
that Country on this side of Albis, becomes a prey to the Cesarians. In
Holsatia also a controversy arose between the King and his Frederick, who
fearing the storm that was coming on his Country, and understanding that
Tillies Army was got over, repairs speedily to him to make his peace. All that
he could obtain, was this, that if he would forsake the K* his Country and
friends should fare the better, which promise was scarce performed.

In Silesia Caesar having pacified Bethleem Gabor, the Danes could look for no
aid thence, but what they should get by the sword. Therefore Fridland seizes
upon diverse Towns and Forts. Him Count Merodius, and Bechman follow, with 7000.
A hot skirmish ensues, in which the Danes had the better, but when the
Polonian Foot, and Croats were come to aid the Cesarians, Baudisius with his
Regiments, betake them to their heels, upon which the prisoners are released.
Brandeburg wishes the Danes to be gone, who having got the Isle Paela, took
sh^pping at Grotenbrod: and now about the end of August, Fridland joins with
Tilly, and Luneberg, who by the River Alstria brake in upon Stormaria; the
Holsatians who had seated themselves near Hamburg upon the confines Albis,
return home. Hamburg victualleth the Cesarian Camp. From Hamburg they march to
Pippenberg, a Castle in Stormaria, where Tilly was dangerously wounded with a
Musket bullet, yet took the Castle, by reason its powder was spent. There were
not in Stormaria above 3 Towns that could hold out a while, and in Holsatia
only Redensburg; so that the strength of Holsatia consisted in the Marchian and
Silesian Troops, most of which were gone from their own homes to Denmark,
Holland, Frisland, Lubec, Hamburg, and those of other places. Those of Merchia
had neither powder, nor shot, nor hearts to fight; yet the Holsatian Horse, and
the Scots Foot, fought stoutly, till they were cut off. The K. of Denmark
finding Gods judgments so heavy against him, and his people, caused a fast
Rendensburg the Enemy received some loss; the K. being forsaken by most, betook
himself into Fionia, he permits the town to make an honorable surrender. The
Castle of Bredenberg held out a great while, to the loss of 4000 of the
Enemies; at last its taken by storm, and the whole Garrison put to the sword by
Fridland. Marsia and Iutia are exposed to pillage, not only of the Enemy, but
even of their own Country men, which made most of the Gentry take shipping, and
remove farther into Denmark, or else to Norway; thinking it safer and more
honorable to forsake their houses and lands, then their Allegiance and
conscience. They only grieved at this, that they were conquered before they
fought, and banished before they took arms. The country thereabouts Brem,
submit and deliver up their Colors to Tilly, whose victories are stopped upon
the shore of Fionia: Stada which was stoutly defended by Sir Charles Morgan,
was for want of food delivered up to Tilly 1628
the 25 of April. Niemburg by the Kings permission is delivered up to the D. of
Lunaeburg. The Cesarians labor to persuade the Hans Towns to join with Caesar
and the Spaniard, against Denmark; but they knowing how powerful the K. of
Denmark was by Sea, did wisely decline such an union, yet showed their
readiness to serve Caesar against Denmark and Holsatia, by carrying to them all
kind of provision, and performing such offices as they were injoined: yet some
Hans Towns, either inveigled by promises, or affrighted with threatenings,
submit Rostok, Wismaria, and all the Towns of Pomerania, except Stralsound, and
Stetin, which with those mighty cities of Saxony, Lubec, Hamburg, Brunswick,
Magdeburg, and Brem, retain their ancient privileges. Pomerania, Marchia, and
East Frisland, with all the lower Saxony, are subject to heavy Taxes, and
domineering soldiers. Hamburg was careful to give all content possible to the
Cesarian Army.

The King in the Month of April, recovers by a strong Fleet Femaria, a rich
Island in the Baltic Sea, having slain or taken the Garrison consisting of
seven hundred. He takes also some Towns, and faces Wagria: but upon the coming
Cesarian Army, he returns with his Fleet into Denmark, having put a Garrison in
Femaria. The Imperialists impose a heavy Tax upon Stralsound; whereof though
they offered a part, yet a Garrison is put upon them by Arnheim an Imperial
Commander. He under pretense of Peace, labors underhand to seize upon
Denhoim, but the Townsmen perceiving his treachery, presently seize themselves
of the place, and insist upon a new agreement. At last, not being able of
themselves to resist his strength, they admit into their Town the Danish
Auxiliaries; by these they stoutly resisted all his assaults, and slew many of
his men. Holk the Commander of the Danish Auxiliaries, understanding, that
Arnheim had been tampering with some to betray the town to him, he causes
Letters to be sent, intimating to Arnheim what hour, and into what place he
should come. Arnheim not knowing his plot, was detected, came at the hour
appointed, when the Townsmen broke out upon him, and drove him back to his
great loss. They also sprung a Mine under his works, which they blew up with
many of his men. Holk being one day absent at a Wedding, the Senate had almost
yielded to surrender the Town; Danes was now in sight of them. In one night
during this siege, there were 5 several assaults upon the Town-works, by
Fridlands whole Forces, and so many repulses; presently the King with his two
sons, Prince Christian and Duke Frederick, came to relieve Holk. Whereupon
Fridland broke off the siege, leaving his Works for the Danes to possess; who
in a short time took diverse places, so that Pomerania now was in hope of
liberty, till the 22 of August, when Fridland routed the Kings Army, and slew
400 of them. Upon this the King, with the remainder of his Army, takes shipping
and returns to Denmark, and Fridland to the siege; this being the third year
since it began. At last a Garrison of the Swedes is admitted into the Town by
the persuasion of Oxinstern Chancelour of Swedland, who for that end was sent
into Denmark. Tychopolis is stoutly defended by Rantzovius; but the Forts on
the River Store, which the French carelessly lost to the Cesarians, so kept off
all provisions, that the Town Cremus after 13 months siege, was surrendered by
Alefeldius the Governor, to Fridland, upon terms of safety for himself, the
townsmen and Garrison. But Tychopolis notwithstanding the plague was in it, held
out so long, that in a short time Fridland lost above three thousand of his
men, and was fain at last to burn his Huts, and raise the siege.

The Cesarians August 18. are beaten at Colmaria, where they lost many men,
besides a thousand wounded. In Stormaria, and Dithmarsia, all places far and
near, are wasted by the Imperial Garrisons there. A strange thing fell out at
Itzeho; the Gate of the Monastery which the Cesarians took, flew open, with a
terrible noise and clamor in the night. The plundered Oxen kept there, were
suddenly strangled, their necks being turned round, their horns fastened in the
ground.

In the 29 year of this Century, the Danish King held a Diet at Hafnia, about
1629
reforming the Church Discipline, and making Peace with the Emperor. For this
cause Ambassadors are sent to Lubec. The Cesarians at first would Danes had
raised an Army, and rigged out a strong Fleet, with which they took the Isle
Stranda, with some other places. Hereupon Fridland and Tilly send to their
Deputies, who were at the Treaties of Lubec, to hasten the Peace, for fear of
greater mischief. A Peace then is concluded, in which Cimbria, Slesvigia,
Holsatia, and all Hereditary places, belonging to the Holsatian, taken from him
in these last Wars, are restored to the Dane. The King renounceth all the other
Provinces of the Saxons. The day before the Peace Wilstria is taken by the
Danes, who by a messenger sent from the King, are commanded to lay down Arms.
The news of Peace was joyfully welcomed by the people, and solemn thanks given
to God; especially by the Dithmarsians, who the year before, strove to
vindicate their liberty, but could not; for finding no end of their exactions,
and other pressures, in a rage took Arms, broke in upon some Garrisons, and
killed above an hundred of them. The Country people rising, slew many of the
Cesarians, which brought greater misery and servitude upon them; for the
enraged soldier hackt some, drowned others, and shot diverse with poisoned
bullets, by which they were tortured to death. They were glad then to be eased
of such cruel Masters, but sorry that the Saxons, Pomeranians, and
Megapolitans, for whose defense they took Arms, did not enjoy the same
happiness of Peace, for the Megapolitan Lands were taken from Adolphus,
Frederick, and John Albert, brothers, and deposited in the hands of Fridland at
first; but now their inheritance is taken away, as if those brothers had been
guilty of Treason, for Dane against Caesar: but they made it appear, they entered
into League with the Dane, for defense of Saxony only, and withal that they
showed their obedience to Caesar, by leaving the Dane, when by the Emperors
Letters, they were called away. The Protestants were much troubled about
Cesars Edict, whereby he restores to the Roman Catholics all Lands vvithheld
and taken from them, since the transaction of Passavia, that is 75 years.

The Hollanders seized upon 22 Spanish ships belonging to the Plate Fleet, and
laden with American wealth; these they spoiled, and brought with them into
Holland so much plate and other things, as was esteemed worth 200 talents
Spanish soldiers, as much as it encouraged the Hollander. The Prince of Orange
lays siege to Sylva Ducis, or Hertogenbosch, by the French called Bulduc,
which had been often heretofore attempted in vain; but now after 4 months
siege, it was fain to yield to the Prince, but not till some of the Gates were
blown up by Mines. It was surrendered upon honorable terms about the beginning
of September. A little before this, Vesalia a rich and potent Town upon the
Rhene, was taken by the Hollander, with one thousand two hundred Foot, and
eight hundred Horse in the night. Some bold spirits swimmed over the Moat, get
into the Fort not yet Losanus the Governor, being suddenly surprised, was fain
to deliver up the keys. The Townsmen who had been dis-armed before, and were
angry with the Spaniards for abridging their liberty of conscience, did not at
all assist the Garrison. There was taken much wealth; the soldiers were
dismissed, but the chief Commanders detained prisoners. In June, Hein who
seized on the Plate Fleet, had a Sea fight with the Dunkarkers, in which he
lost his life by a Bullet, but got the Victory, which not he, but his Country
enjoyed.

The Magdeburgers having studied to please the Cesarians in the Saxon War,
Norbert an ancient Archbishop, to be taken out of his Tomb, and carried to
Prague; yet they were wronged by the Cesarian soldiers, who seized on their
Farms and Villages near the Town, and are kept off from all provision, even
from the benefit of the River Albis. Hereupon some of the Townsmen in a rage
bring away into the Town some Vessels laden with Corn, and put to flight the
Croat Thieves, which were driving away the Town-Cattle. Hence arose a War,
though unknown to Caesar, as that was of Stralsound: Magdeburg is besieged,
Fridland commands them to receive a Garrison, adding high threatenings; but they
behaved themselves so stoutly, and killed so many Cesarian by sallies, that by
the intervening of Stralsound strives also to defend her freedom, though she
was much weakened by sickness. Hatzfield makes an attempt upon the City, but is
beat off again with loss. The King of Swedes having obtained diverse Victories
against the Polander, at last concludes a Peace for six years with his Uncle,
he had the year before subdued Newburg, and Straisburg, with Leather Ordnance,
the invention of one Elias Tripus. The Polander recovered Newburg, but was beat
from the siege of Straisburg by Oxenstern the Chanceller, and from Meve by the
King himself: For peace-sake the Swede restores to Poland, Straisburg,
Dirsavia, and Frauberg, but retains what he had got in Livonia, and Borussia;
some Towns were left in the hands of Brandeburg, as it were in deposito; so an
offensive and defensive peace is made about the end of this year 1629. The
Hollanders take diverse places from the enemy; and drive the Spaniards out of
Velavia: They take also Farnambuck in Brasil, with much booty, and defeat the
Spaniards at Mulheim, whose Commander Johannes Nassovius was mortally wounded.

Charles Duke of Nivern about this time, by the death of Vincentius his cousin
German, takes possession of Mantua, by right of consanguinitie, and by will
also, but without Cesar's knowledge, who is Lord of the Fee. The Spaniard and
Savoyen Storm at this, who have had old quarrels with the Dukes of Mantua about
Monsferrat; so the old Factions between France and Spain are renewed. The
Savoyen takes the Spaniards part. Genua in the interim is full of intestin
plots and treacheries, which lighted heavy at last upon the contrivers: To
Mantua's side are joined the Venetians, the Viceroy of Sicily and Naples, with
the Vice Duke of Millan; these troubles were attended Apulia, which devoured
above 17000 people, there were also prodigious innundations and blood gushing
out of springs. Gasall the chief City of the Marquisat of Monsferrat was by
Consalvus Vice Duke of Millan straightly besieged, till he was forced to rise
thence by the innundation of Po, having lost above 6000 of his men; the Mantuan
is content to refer his cause to Caesar, conditionally arms be laid down on both
sides: This was rejected by the Spaniard, who could not endure that the French
should have any footing in Italy: And by the Savoyen also, who had obtained
almost all Monsferrat. Upon this Nivern supported by France, goes on more
coragiously: Mean while the Grisons submit to the Austrians, Switzers
friendship, at which they were offended; but afterward pacified by the Grisons
Agents, showing that Caesar acted nothing that was prejudicial to the ancient
league. Merodius was General of the Imperial forces; which went from the
Grisons to Monsferrat, but the Plague consumed a third part of them; yet
recruits came daily out of Germany, by which they subdued a great part of
Mantua, and besieged the City it self; but the Citizens 1630
being strengthened by the Venetian Auxiliaries, made a sally upon the
Caesarians, of whom they killed about 3000, so for that time the sieg was
raised. But returning afterward in July, they took Mantua for the Emperor,
after that the French King had subdued Savoy: The Plague at this time raging
throughout all Italy.

Transylvania upon the death of Gabor, seems to be more inclined to the
Sultan, then to Caesar. The French, English, and Hollander, urge earnestly for
the restitution of the Palatin. The Belgian Forces increas still, and incroach
more and more upon Germany. The Swede is angry with the Caesarians, for making
war upon him; therefore by his Manifesto shows, he has just cause to invade
Germany: He inhibits all importation of victuals into the Sea-Towns of
Pomerania and Megapolis, being possessed by the Caesarian Soldiers. At
Dantsick, a Treaty for peace was begun, but before the Ambassadors could meet,
it was broke off: The Famine in Pomerania and Rugia, was also great, that some
like Caniballs fed on men's flesh. Whilst things were Swedish King enters upon
Rugia, having defeated in some battles the Caesarian Forces, and Garrisons:
Then having seized on some Ports, with his fleet comes to Stetin; the Governor
delivers up the Town to him, complaining how Pomerania had suffered by the
Cesarian Soldiers, taking no care of the safety of those that were under them.
Caesar drove Protestanisme out of Bohemia, Austria, Moravia, Glogovia, many
Principalities of Silesia, Stiria, Carinthia, Croatia, Iuliers, Cleve, Grisons;
Bavare does the like in both Palatinats. The Spaniard having deluded King
James, retains Frankinthal to himself, which was depositat in the hands of
Isabel, Archdutchesse; thence Calvinisme is banished, and Manheim destroyed.
The Towns of Iuliers, Westphalia, and the Grisons under the Spaniard, receive
Popery; The Lutheran Cities are spoiled and plundered by Caesar. Episcopal
rights possessed by the Protestant Princes many years, are demanded by the
first owners: A way is making for creating Ferdinand 3d, King of the Romans, he
being Cesar's eldest son by his Lady Mary of Bavaria; and two years before this
was Crowned King of Hungary and Bohemia. Cesar's other son Leopold is made
Bishop of Magdeburg, Christianus Gulielmns being thrust out. In this
distempered condition was Germany, when the King of Sweden came into it.

The King of Denmark had 3 ships in the River Albis, or Elve, which with the
great Ferrie-Boat, were seized upon by the Hamburgers, pretending that the King
had begun to exact a new Custom at Tychopolis from the Seamen, trading in that
River, which they held to be theirs by ancient right; whereas indeed the Dukes
of Holsatia are Masters of that River, as Princes of Hamburg: The King also
declares that he imposed no Tribute or Custom upon Ships, but required
satisfaction for the hurt done by the Hamburgers against all right, upon the
Holsatians, by exacting a new Excise for vendible commodities and victuals.
Shortly after this, the King foughts 3 battles on Albis with the Hamburgers, in
which he had the victory, and drove them out of that River, the benefit whereof
they had kept 4 months from the Tychopolitans.

CHAP. XX.
A continuation of the Affairs of Turkey, Persia, Egypt, Greece, Armenia, and
other adjacent parts under Mahumet 1st, Amurath 2d. Mahumet 2d, Bajazet and
Selymus, from the year 1412, till 1520.

WE have clearly showed that Bajazet the Turk, whom Tamerlan 1412
overthrew, had 5 sons, some say 6; and some but two: However, the Histories
record they destroyed one another, the last surviver was Mahumet 1st, who in a
battle defeated his brother Moses or Musa, drove Mahumet made a perpetual
peace with the Greeks, by whose assistance he obtained the Empire. He imposed a
Tribute on the Transylvanian, in his war with the Venetians for the Islands of
the Ionian Sea, he was worsted, and forced to part with Lampsacum. The
Walachians were defeated by him, he regained many places taken by Tamerlan.
Adriannoclis the chief City of Thracia was his seat.

To him succeeded Amurath the 2d, son to Mahumet: His chief care was to 1418
suppress the Christians; but the Byzantins to hinder his proceedings, take
Mustapha his Uncle out of prison in Lemnos, where he had been kept by the
Greeks, after his escape out of his brothers prison, and furnish him with an
Army: But in his encounter with Amurath, he was deserted by the Turks, who
revolted to Amurath; so he fell alive into his enemies hand, by whom he was
strangled, the 3d year after he had raised this war: Upon this bad success the
Greeks Petition for peace, which being refused by Amurath, they send for
Mustapha his brother, now 13 years old, and an exile in Cilicia under the
tuition of Alibaus Bassa, to whose care he was committed by his father Mahumet.
The Greeks having furnished him with an Army, he takes Nicea of Bithynia, where
he was betrayed to Amurath by his Guardian, and then strangled: These
competitors being gone, Amurath resolves to be revenged on the Greeks their
abertors; having therefore overrun Thracia, and taken the remainder of those
Towes which belonged to the Greek Emperor, he lays siege to Thessalonica
committed to the Venetian care and protection, which he takes by storm and
utterly defaces; presently upon this, he subdues with incredible celerity,
Phocis, Attina, Boeotia, Aaetolia, Acannania, and the whole Country from
Peloponnesus to Corinth. John Castriot did then reign in that part of Macedon
Adriatic, at this day known by the name of Albania; he considering his own
weakness, and the Turks greatness, makes his peace, by delivering up the Town
Croia, and giving for hostages his 3 sons, Constantin, Reposius, and George,
who for his comely personage, and other excellent parts, was in high account
with Amurath, who gave him the best breeding Turkey could afford, and called him
Scandorbei, or Scanderbeg, that is, Alexander the great; before he was scarce
fit to bear Arms, he is employed against Carmannus the Cilician, which war he
managed with great dexterity, and withal, killed two of the chief Combattants,
who provoked him to a Duel: Scythian Footman, the other a Persian Horseman,
relying on the Turks favor, upon the news of his Fathers death, he Petitions
Amurath for his ancient Inheritance, which was granted him. But George doubting
the Turk was not real, makes an escape into Epirus, where by counterfeit
Letters he gets Croia, with other places of Epirus and Macedon. For many years
together he so defended his Dominions against Amurath, and Mahumet; that still
he defeated the Turkish Armies. Amurath having subdued partly, and partly
wasted Illyrus, Albania, and Bofna, marches against the Bulgarians,
Walachians, and Servians, upon hopes to subdue Hungary. George Despot of Servia
humbly Petitions Amurath for peace, proffering his daughter to him George
flies into Hungary to Albert of Austria, who having raised an Army died of a
dissenterie: Hungary being full of intestin broyls, calls in Laudislaus of
Poland. The Turk sets upon Belgrada, but is beat off with great loss.

Amurath by his two Bassais wastes the places about Belgrada, and makes
incursions into Transylvania; both these were defeated and cut off by John
Hunniades, who recovered a good part of Servia and all Moldavia. The Turk also
is beat in Panonia, so that he is forced to sue for peace, and to restore
George Despot of Servia. Then he marches against Carmannus in Cilicia, but is
called back into Europ upon the breach of the 10 years peace by Ladislaus, who
by the persuasion of Julian the Cardinal, in the Turks absence had invaded his
Europian Dominions: The Christian Army was defeated, and Ladislaus slain, as we
have already said. Amurath puffed up with this Victory, marches into
Peloponnesus, to be revenged on the Greeks who animated Ladislaus against him,
there he breaks down the strong wall Hexamilium, built by the Greeks and
Venetians, with 5 Castles on it, to divide this Isthmus (6 miles of length
between the two seas) from the main land of Greece. The Emperors Byzantium,
with his whole Army appointed to guard this wall, are overthrown by the Turk.
After this Constantin Paleologus the Greek Emperor, repaired this wall, which
shortly by command from Amurath, he pulls down again. Here diverse Forts and
Towns are taken by the Turk, who upon a Petition for peace, made the Country
tributary, and withdrew his Army thence to their winter quarters. George
Castriot so manfully maintained the Epirotick war and his fathers patrimony
against Amurath, that during this space, he overthrew seven several armies
sent thither under the command of so many Bassaies, and at last forced Amurath
himself, who had Beleaguered Croia with a formidable army, to raise his siege,
having lost multitudes of his Turks. After this disaster they write that
Amurath vowed a solitary life, with a few Priests in a Cave of Bithynia, where
he gave himself to Contemplation, committing the care of his Dominions to Hali
Bassai. But, he was quickly called off from his Contemplation by Huniades and
Scanderbeg; The one having raised a vast Army of Hungarians, Bohemians, and
Germans to repay the loss of Christians at Varna; The other had subdued all
Macedonia, and restored to Bosna, Rascia, and Illyris, their Despots, and
thrown out the Turk's Garrisons, which Plunder Illyricum and Istria, to the
affrighting of Venice. George that perfideous Despot of Servia, forgetful of
the help Hungary afforded him, betrays all the Counsels of Huniades to the
Enemy, so that by this means he lost two battles, yet was strangely preserved
himself; for being taken by two Turks, he killed one, and made the other fly;
and when he was interrupted by the same George, he was restored by him to the
Hungarians, which occasioned a new war between the Turk and him; but Huniades
to show Turks. Afterward in Epirus, Amurath received so many losses, that he
fell melancholy and sick, then being removed from the Camp to Adrianopolis, he
became mad, and so died, having reigned thirty two years, and lived seventy
five. He was the first of the Ottomans 1450
that instituted the Praetorian Guard after the example of the Macedonion
Phalanx: This Militia as the Mamalucks of Egypt, was made up of Christian
children taken violently from their parents, brought up in the Turkish
discipline and superstition, and forced to renounce Christianity, by receiving
circucmision; these the Turks call Janissaries, they guard the Sultans person:

He left behind him three sons, Mahumet, Tursin, and Calepin, Mahumet being
spectator himself, made Moses Bassai choke Tursin (being but 18 months old) in
the water, when the child's mother cried out upon the barbarous Tyrant,
uttering many curses against him, he to please this his stepmother, delivers
into her hand the author of this paricide bound; she in the presence of the
Tyrant, thrust a knife into his heart, and ripping up his body, pulls out his
liver, which she flung to the dogs: Amurathes had committed Calepin his third
son, to Hali Bassai, a man of great esteem with him: Mahumet Hali, to be
strangled. Afterward Hali himself was stranged, being first tortured by
Mahumet, upon pretense that he held corespondencie with the Christians; but
indeed he was excessively rich, which is crime enough to a covetous Prince.
Some think that this Calepin whom Mahumet killed, was supposititious, and not
the son of Amurath, who was conveyed to Byzantium, and from thence where it was
taken, to Venice, thence to Rome by the Order of Pope Calixtus, who caused him
to be baptized, to take a Christian name, and to be instructed in Christian
doctrine; afterward he went to Frederick the Emperor, who used him honorably:
The rest of his life he spent in Austria.

Mahumet then the second, began his reign with parricid, after the example of
his Ancestors, and continued in his barbarous cruelties; his mother who was the
Despot of Servia's daughter; had instructed him in the Christian faith, but he
adhered more to Mahumetanisme, at last turned plain Atheist, scoffing at
providence, and acknowledging no other deity but good luck: He was most
addicted to Military parts; and first of the Ottomans that made use of
sea fights, and ships of war, by which he strove with Venice for command of the
sea; his first and most terrible warlick exploit was that against
Constantinople, which after fifty four days siege he took the 29 of May: Within
the walls besides the Townes-people, there were but six thousand Greek
Soldiers, and three thousand Venetian and Genuan Auxiliaries; whereas Mahumets
army consisted of four hundred thousand men, most of which were gathered out of
the Christian Territories, he assaulted the City both by land and sea, he made
three several breaches in the walls, where the Turks gave furious assaults,
but were stoutly resisted by the Christians, till 1453
they were overpowred with multitudes: The Turk had brought out of the Aegaean
and Euxin seas two hundred and fifty ships, to block up the harbor against
these seven ships of Genua, three of Crete, and some of Chios were employed:
The Harbor also was chained against the Turkish Fleet; which the Christians
set on fire and so spoiled, that it was useless a great while, till by main
strength the chain was burst, and so the Turks got within the Harbor, and
battered the walls on all sides. The Tyrant stood upon a hill hard by,
exhorting his men to be courageous; and sending some Troops of his own Guard to
slay such as were faint-hearted, promising that he who did first venture upon
the breaches, should have command of the greatest Province in Europe, and if
the City be taken, the Soldiers should Mahumet had provided great battering
pieces of brass, one whereof was so big, that it could not be drawn but by 70
yoke of Oxen, and 2000 men: With these Ordnance he played against the walls
forty days together; then having enjoined a fast for three days, he bids them
all be ready to live or die together: Constantin perceiving small hopes of
defending the City against so great a power, desires a parley, which was
granted, and peace proffered, if he would pay yearly to the Turk one hundred
thousand crowns, or else presently surrender, and depart with their goods.
These conditions were disliked; therefore they fall to battering Justinian of
Genua, who with three hundred stout men sustained the first brunt, was sorely
wounded, so that he gave back, and with him the rest also; notwithstanding
Constantin earnestly labored to have him hold out, his wound not being
mortal: Upon his going away, (by which that Tower where he stood was left
naked, Constantin and those about him began to fly; The Turks perceiving this)
rusht furiously into those places; the gates were so barricadoed with dead
bodies, and the, keys purposly flung away, that fevv or none could escape:
Palcologus was slain, or troad upon in the press, striving to get out at one
gate, where were found eight hundred dead bodies. Justinian escaped to Pera,
and thence to Chios, Turks rage like bloody Wolves through the City, sparing
neither age nor sex. The murders, rapes, plunderings, and insolences
committed, both against the living and dead, against the Pictures and Images of
our Savior, and his Saints, and other Monuments of Christianity, are
inexpressable. Above sixty thousand Gentle-women, Matrons, and virgins, were
carried away for slaves. Isidor the Cardinal who had been sent thither by the
Pope, to reconcile the Greeks to the Roman Church, which he had effected but
too late, was taken and sold; yet disguising himself shortly after made an
escape.

Pera over against Byzantium, which the Lattins had in posssession, is
surrendered to the Turks. Three days after, Mahumet enters the City, and
pacifieth all Tumults: He made search for some Prime men who had concealed
themseves, these he commanded to be cut in pieces. In their feasts, they abused
diverse matrons and virgins, and then barbarously murdered them: This end had
that famous City wherein the Gospel flourished from the first, to the last
Constantin, about eleven hundred and twenty years; that light went out, being
overwhelmed with Mahumetan darkness, which was presaged by that flame from
heaven, shining one night over the City, and the next vanishing away, as the
Turks in their siege observed. Yet Mahumet invited the Christians to dwell
there, and to use their Religion, for that cause he confirmed their Patriarch
which they had chosen, by delivering to him the Pastoral staff openly: This he
did that so great a City might not lie desolate for want of Inhabitants.

Three years after, Mahumet (but not with the like success) attempted Belgrade,
where after two days fight he received a wound under the left pap, and was
carried for dead out of the camp, which the Turks lost with all their baggage
1456
and Ordnances, besides 40000 of their men slain there; when he came to
himself, he was so enraged at this loss and disgrace, that he would have
murdered himsef: After this he provides to invade the Aegaean Islands, but he
was taken off by Ussumcassanes of the Assimbeian Family of the Turks, Lord of
Cappadocia and Armenia, who having lately killed Demorus the Persian King, and
seized on his Kingdom; puffed up with this success, he sends rich Persian
presents, to show the fruits of his Victory, to Mahumet, and by his Turk would
not meddle with Trapezund and Cappadocia, which he had in marriage by his wife,
Despina daughter of David Comuenus. The Tyrant offended that an inferior Lord
should give him the Law, and envying his new obtained happiness, provides an
Army both by land and sea against him: A part of his fleet he sends before to
Pontus, and Synope toward Trapezund, and follows himself by land; he overruns
a great part of Asia with wonderful celerity, and before he was dreamed of,
pitcheth his camp near Usumcassanes: Two great battles are fought near
Euphrates, Amurath Bassai the Turks General, a Greek born, was here killed,
and the Turks Forces much weakened; but the third battle that Mahumet fought,
was Persians, with the unacquainted noise of the Ordnance were dispersed, and
Usumcassanes forced to fly, having lost his son Zeinald who was shot there:
Shortly after this Victory Mahumet subdues Synope, and all Paphlagonia, then he
besieges both by Sea and Land, Trapezund the Royal City, and takes it, with
the Kings Treasure; King David himself, his two sons, and Cousin German Calo
Johannes, whom he sent before to Byzantium, and there in his triumph cruelly
murdered, and with them the whole race of the Comueni: Then having of these
Kingdoms made Provinces, he subdues Caramannus, and takes Cilicia from him,
thence returned to Byzantium; 1459
by his fleet he takes the Islands of Lemnus and Lesbes, destroys the City
Mytilene, Islanders. Catalusius Prince of Lesbos a Genuan, was by his command
cruelly put to death: Then by his Land Forces, he invades Dracula, Prince of
Walachia, by whom he was like to have been surprised and his Army, but that
Mahumet Bassai, who succeeded to Hali Bassai in Office and dignity, got off the
Army, but with great loss. Then having recruited his Army, he falls upon the
upper Mysia, and Illyricum, and drives Steeven King of Bosua out of his
Kingdom, and kills him: But this Kingdom was shortly after recovered by
Mathias Corvinus, with diverse other places in Dalmatia and Croatia, possessed
by the Turks. Before his Asiatin expedition, he entered Peloponnesus, where he
took away the Principality of the Paleologi Thomas and Demetrius, being then
at variance: Demetrius complied with the Enemy, to whom he married his
daughter: Thomas having lost all, fled to Rome; In the interim the Venetians
repair the wall Hexamilium, to keep their possessions in Peloponnesus from the
Turks incursions; which he perceiving, breaks in upon them with 80 thousand
men, wastes all the Country about defeats the Venetians, takes in the whole
Peleponnese, and throws down the wall; shortly after he casts the Venetians
out of Lesbos, having slain 5000 men, for they had lately recovered it with
Lemnus. He takes also the Isle Eubaeo from them, having made a bridge over
Eurypus, then takes Chalis the 30 day after it was besieged, the Venetian
Galleys not daring to give assistance, who having the wind favorable, might
have seized on, or demolished the bridge; the Tyrant being enraged at the loss
of 40000 of his army slain this siege in diverse skirmishes, commanded that all
in the Town above 20 years old, should be put to the Sword.

This Tyrant not yet glutted enough with blood, sends Homaris and Malrecius,
Dalmatia, Homaris being a Genuan by his father, naturally hated the Venetians.
In this invasion Novellus the Venetian General was slain: Stiria and Corinthia
are not free from the Turks fury. The truce being ended between Mahumet and
Scanderbeg; he sits down before Croia and Scodra, and after a long siege, takes
them both. Scodra was surrendered by the Venetians, at which time Solomon Bassa
takes Capha the head City of Bosphorus, and a Colony of the Genuois in Tauraca
Chemsonesus, he makes also the Praecopit Tartars (who had thence driven out the
Goths) tributarys to Mahumet: He cut off the heads of two Gothish Princes that
were brothers; the rest of that Nation afterward Bajazet subdued. Scanderbeg
being driven out of his Country, Italy, where he took part with Ferdinand King
of Naples against the French: After this he died of a Fever, as he was
consulting with the Venetians about renewing the war against the Turk; he died
the 63d year of his life: On his deathbed he commended the care of his young
son John to the Senate of Venice. It Is recorded of this Scanderbeg, that out of
the vehemence 1467
of his Spirit, still when he was going to fight, his lips would cleave and
burst out with blood, he never turned his back, never was wounded, but once in
the foot with an arrow: His army never consisted of above 3000 foot, and 6000
horse; he killed with his own hand above 2000 men, his strength was such, that
with one blow, he could cleave a man to the Navil. Machmet being Huniades and
Scanderbeg, having also subdued his neighbor Princes of Peloponnesus, Mysia
and Illyricum, makes peace with the Venetians on these conditions; that they
should deliver up to him Scodra, Fenarus a promontorie of Laconia, with Lemnus,
and pay yearly 8 thousand crowns, for their trading in the black Sea. After
this he undertakes three expeditions at the same time, gaping at an universal
Monarchy; to wit, against Rhodes by Mesithes Bassai of the race of the
Palaeolegi, by Acomathes Bassai, against Italy and Rome, he himself marched
into Asia. Mesithes after many and bloody attempts (but in vain) upon Rhodes,
returned with the loss of 30000 and disgrace: Acomathes only affrighted Italy,
and made the people fly out Rome. Mahumet himself at Nicomedia, fell into
tormenting fits of the Colic, which in three days put an end both to his life
and victories, the 53d year of his age, and of his reign 31: He subdued the
two Royal Seats of 1481
Byzantium and Trapezund; 4 Kingdoms, Syria, Peloponnesus, Armenia, and
Sclavonia. He took from the Christians 20 Provinces, and two hundred Towns, he
was a most cruel and bloody Tyrant; For when he took Hydruntum in Apulia, he
caused the Archbishop of that place to be cut with a wooden saw, and tortured
many to death; he was a notorious whore-monger, and Sodomit; it is thought he
caused above twenty thousand to be put to death at times, besides those that
were killed in the wars; at last he was poisoned, who himself was the greatest
poison of mankind, chiefly of Christians and Turkish Garrison in Hydruntum,
understanding Mahumet was dead, delivered up the Town to Matthias Corvinus and
the Italians that besieged it, upon condition they might have their lives;
though they knew Acomathis was returning with 25 thousands Turks: The Greek
Muses which were banished by these barbarous Scythians, found an habitation for
them in Italy, and other Western Countries, being transplanted thither by
Chrysoloras, Trapezuntius, Gaza, Argyropilus, Chalcondyles, Lasearas, etc.

To Mahomet succeeded his son Bajazet, who was when his Father died, at his
charge in Cappadocia, being their Governor. His Brother Gemes also was then at
Iconium; the chief City of Lacaonia, that Province being under his command. The
elder brother Mustapha, who had been employed by his Father against
Vsumcassanes, and had put to flight Joseph the Persian General, the great
supporter of King Carmannus, was dead at Iconium, by intemperance and letchery.
Some difference arose among the Bassaies and Ianisares, about Ianisares or
Praetorians proclaimed Bajazet Emperor, by means of the Beglerbeg of Graecia,
and the Aga or Captain of the Praetorians, Bajazets sons in Law. Some of the
prime Commanders of the Horse set up Corchatus Bajazets son, by placing him in
the Throne, and delivering to him the Treasures and Castles of the Empire.
Achmet Bassa, who lately took Hydruntum, joined with these. Bajazet rides post
from Cappadocia, complaining with tears, of the wrong done him, by debarring
him of his right. But he could not prevail till his young son of his own accord
submitted the Government to his Father. The Ianisares whom the Bassais out of
malice had stirred up, were pacified by large bribes.

Gemes also makes haste out of Lycaonia, a near Province, but being prevented
by Bajazet, is kept out of Bizantium; wherefore he makes War, being assisted by
Carmannus, and the Egyptian Sultan, against his brother; who overthrew him in
three Battles: whereupon out of despair, he fled to Rhodes, leaving at Carrae
his mother, and his son and daughter, that were Twins, whom Bajazet put to
death. The Knights of Rhodes sent Gemes to Rome, upon the desire of Pope
Innocent 4. Lewis 11. of France, and Matthias King of Hungary, in hope of some
great Victory against Bajazet. He lodged in the Vatican, and was given as an
Hostage to Charles 8. of France, with Valentin Borgias, the Popes son, by
Alexander 6. when Charles marched out of Rome to the siege of Naples. But Gemes
died by the way, being poisoned by Pope Alexander, Charles in delivering him up
to his brother, should thereby obtain Bajazets favor. Achmet Bassa, who had
preserved the Empire for Bajazet against his brother, was for his good service
strangled by the same Bajazet, pretending that he meant to advance Gemes to the
Throne: but indeed Achmet had great Treasures, which caused his ruin, but to
the good of Christians, whose mortal Enemy he was.

This Bajazet delighted more in Scholarship, then Arms; yet to maintain the
power he had got, makes war first against the Christians, and in the third year
of his reign subdued Walachia. Afterward transfers his War into Asia, to punish
the Sultan of Egypt, for aiding his brother Gemes with Victuals, Men, Carmannus
of Cilicia was already subdued, and his Country made a Province. Caithbaeius at
this time was Sultan of Egypt, by birth a Circassian, and by condition a
servant. From his childhood he was instructed in the Arts, and Manners of the
Mamalucs, and by the Law of Mahomet was made free. These Mamalucs were
Christians of the Muscovite, or Roxalan profession. Out of them the Sultans
were chosen out of the Circassian slaves, who dwelt upon the Fuxin Sea, and
were chosen after the extirpation of Saladius posterity. Now, these Mamalucs
are the children of Christians, and must be baptized, and educated in Christian
Religion, which they are to aband Mamalucs. This Caithbaeius was made Sultan
for his Valor; the Egyptians standing in need of such a man, for suppressing
the Arabian Thieves, and curbing the Persians, who made diverse irruptions upon
Comagene and Syria; and keeping the Turks from breaking out of Cilicia upon the
Egyptian Territories. All these Wars he happily undertook; for he subdued the
Arabians, and made them Tributaries. Then in two battles drove back the
Persians beyond Euphrates, and mastered the Turks twice in Cilicia by the help
and council of two Italian Mamalucs, the two chief Turkish Commanders, Mesithes
Palaeologus, and Cherseogles, were taken. This was the son of Chetsechius,
Prince of Illyricum, who took away his sons wife from him, which so exasperated
his son, that he renounced Christianity, and betook himself to Bajazet, whose
daughter he married. In this Battle of Tharsis, scaree the third part of an
hundred thousand Turks escaped. Bajazet being weary of the Asian wars, returns
back into Europe, where he takes Dyrrachium, and in the large fields of
Liburnis, in Croatia, overthrew the united Forces of Illyrium, Panonia, and
Croatia. Then he made 1493
War against the Venetians, for defending the cause of John Castriot,
Scanderbegs son, who had defeated the Garrison soldiers of Bajazet in Croatia,
and driven the Turks out of his Territories. Besides, the Venetians had
prohibited Bajazets ships in his Syrian Expedition, to harbor in Cyprus,
though he earnestly entreated them. Also Lewis Sforsia, a great Enemy of the
Venetians, egged him on. The beginnings of this war succeeded well to the Turk;
for Schenderus Bassa, by Land made excursions as far as Tarvisium, and Deuches
the Turks Admiral, by Sea, entered even to Iadra in Dalmatia, and carried thence
a great multitude of captives. He was once in danger to have been 1498
taken by the Venetian Fleet, about Peloponnesus, among the Sporade Isles, but
Grimannus, the Venetian Admiral, either for want of courage, or skill, suffered
him to escape to the Bay of Corinth, where he took the Town Naupactum, or
Lepanto, within the Bay of Aetolia, having a little before taken from them
Dyrrachium in Epirus.

Two years after Bajazet with an hundred and fifty thousand men, brake in upon
Peloponnesus; he divided his Army into three parts about Methon. After diverse
Skirmishes on both sides, he gets within the Town, when unhappily the Townsmen
spying three Venetian Galleys, coming toward them with Arms, Men, and
Provision, forsook their station, and went down to the Cherseogles, Bajazets
son in Law. Some other places being affrighted at this cruelty, yielded to the
Tyrant, one of those was Pilus, where Nestor of old lived. Bajazet after this,
returns as a Conqueror to Byzantium, but Spain and France resolve to aid
Venice. Pisaurius the Venetian Admiral, by the advice and courage of Consalvus
the Spaniard, took Cephalonia, in the Ionian Sea, having a double Harbor, and
a rich Soil. He took also by storm Leucade, and Nericum, and put the whole
Turkish Garrison to the Sword. But the French Fleet at Lesbos, Mitylene, had not
the like success, for the ships were so torn, scattered, and wrackt by a storm,
that much ado they had to escape to Tarentum. At last a Peace is concluded on
these conditions, that Cephalonia should continue in the Venetian jurisdiction,
as it was before the Turkish Empire. Leucas and Nericum should be restored to
the Turk. This Peace was the more easily obtained, because in Persia Ismael the
Sophi, descended from Usumcassanes by the mother, had made himself King upon
the death of Iacuppus, the son of Usumcassanes, whom his libidinous wife
perfidiously murdered. This change of the State came in with the change of
Mohammedan superstition, which by the wavering and credulous multitude, was
greedily embraced. These Cappadocia, and Lycaonia, kills Bajazets two Nephews,
Orchanes and Mahumet, two Bassais, the Beglerbeg of Asia, and Hali, and
overthrows two Armies, before Bajazet knew of the danger. Ismael was the son of
Harduellis, a Persian Prince, and of Martha the daughter of Usumcassanes, who
was the first of the Assimbaean Turks, that after the murder of Malconches,
the Persian King possessed himself of that Kingdom. Harduelles the Father,
would have the Mahumetan Law expounded after the mind of Hali, that was
Mahumets Interpreter, and Companion; and not after the way of Homer, whom the
other Turks followed. Harduelles by his affected holiness and strictness of
life, above all other men, drew admiration, and innumerable Disciples after
him, which eagerly maintained his Dictates, rejecting the ancient Rites.
Usumcassanes being yet scarce warm in his Kingdom, began to suspect those great
Meetings, and Assemblies of people, who many times under pretense of Religion,
plot Innovasion; when therefore he finds, that by force he could not suppress
Harduelles, he makes Ismael: but Iacuppus Usumcassanus his son, after his
Fathers death, by some Assasins murdered Harduellis, and banished or killed
his followers, thinking this way to free himself of fear and danger. Ismael
being yet a child, got out of his Uncles reach, into Hircania; and one of the
chief Disciples Techelles, (called from his red Cap, or Turban Cuselbas, which
he wore for distinctions sake) escaped over Euphrates unto the lesser Armenia.

These two overthrew the posterity of Usumcassanes, and so busied the Turks,
that they could have no leisure to prosecute their Victories in Europe. Ismael
by maintaining his Fathers Doctrine, obtained no less love and admiration,
Iacuppus being poisoned by his wife, he resolves to recover his Fathers
patrimony, and his Mothers Dowry; to this purpose, he arms his Followers, and
procured Auxiliaries from Pyrchales, a Prince of Hircania, to whom he had fled.
So in a short time he recovered his Fathers Estate, and daily increasing in
strength, took by storm Symachia, on the borders of Media. Then upon hopes of
obtaining the Kingdom of Persia, marches with his Army to Taurisium, or Taura,
a flourishing City of the Persians in the greater Armenia, where Alvantes the
son of Iacuppus (who drove his brother Miratchamus out of Armenia and Persia)
dwelt. He was hated by the Citizens, because he murdered many of them for
adhering to his brother. Alvantes thence, yielded without blows to Ismael,
with the Kings whole Treasure. Then hearing that Alvantes had raised an Army,
he fights him. Alvantes lost both his life and his Army. Upon the fame of this
Victory, the neighboring places and people submit to his Law and Government.
Thence he marches into Mesopotamia against Moratchamus, the other brother, who
had an Army at Babylon, but he fearing Ismaels power, and his own weakness,
flies with his wife and children, and all the wealth he could convay, into
Arabia. Ismael having with his conquering Army overrun a great part of the
East, he marches out of Assyria into Media, where he takes in some Garrisons of
Alvantes, and returns into Armenia. Albanians, Iberians, and Scythians, beyond
the Caspian Sea, being Tributaries to the Persian, had not paid their Tributes
in four years, nor had they sent all this while any Ambassador to congratulate
the Sophies Victories, therefore he reduced them to their duty by force of
Arms. 1499


In this mean while Techelles by Preaching and Prophesying, drew Cappadocia to
join both in Arms and Doctrine with him; and by the Persian help, he breaks in
upon Lycaonia, a rich and populous Country, where he overthrew Orchanes and
Mahumet, Bajazets Nephews; then he marches through lesser Asia, where
Corchutus, Bajazets son, was with an Army, but refused to fight: then through
Galatia, he breaks in upon Bithynia, where Caragius Bassa, Commander of the
Asiatick Horse, whom they call Belerbei, him Techelles put to flight, and
pursues him to Cauthia, a town in the midst of Asia minor, and there
beleaguered him. At last he takes the town, and Caragius alive in it, with his
wife. From thence he intended to take in Prusia, the Metropolis of Bithynia,
but was hindered by Bajazets new Forces under Halt Bassa, the Maceaontan Eunuch,
whom Techelles unexpectedly meets, and to keep him off from fighting, took
Caragius the Beglerbeg, whom he carried about in chains, and paled him in the
Highway, that they might be affrighted at this sad spectacle; but indeed Hali
Bassa was so enraged at this sight, that because he could not overtake him with
his whole Army, pursues him eagerly with eight thousand Horse, and fights him.
In the first encounter, Techlles was worsted, but shortly after, he got the
Victory, and killed Hali Bassa. To whom succeeded Iunus Bassa, of Epirus, whom
Achmet, Bajazets son, furnished with Forces. He at last drove Techelles out of
Asia: Thus do the Enemies of Christ destroy each other. Bajazet being much
troubled with Bassaes about his successor, which occasioned Civil Wars; for
Bajazet had three sons alive, Achmet, Corchut, and Selymus, besides diverse
grandchildren. Achmet was beloved of his Father, but the Bassais and Ianizaries
inclined in their affections most to Selymus, by their incitation and
assistance of the Praecepit Tartar, (whose daughter Selymus had already married
against his Father Bajazets will) Selymus takes Arms most unnaturally against
his Father, but was defeated, and by the Bassais intercession, reconciled again
to him: yet afterward Haman a Jew, the 66 year of his life, and of his reign
32. he was a better 1512
Philosopher then Soldier.

Selymus began his Reign, not only from the murder of his Father, but of his
two Brothers also, and their children. He strangled Achmet and Corchut, his two
Brothers, having first overthrown Achmet in a battle, and treacherously seized
upon Corchut, thinking no hurt, but following his private study; only when he
heard that his life was sought after, he Rhodes. Mustuphus Bassa, by whose help
Selymus had got the Empire, was for this his good service, first strangled, and
then flung to the dogs; his crime was, that his affections seemed to incline
more to Achmet, then to himself. Achmets two sons, Amurath and Aladin, both
fled; Amurath to Ismael the Sophi, and Aladin to Campso Caurius the Egyptian
Sultan; whence arose new Wars, which kept Selymus off from invading
Christendom. Amurath with a Persian Army, breaks in upon Cappadocia; Ismael
coming softly after, and was like to have carried all this Country, the people
came in so fast to him, had not Chendemus Bassa, Governor of Asia, suppressed
them with a great power. Selymus passes over into Asia, where he fell upon the
united Forces of Amurath, the Turk, and Ustaogle the Persian Commanders, with
whom also Ismael joins his Army. When he heard that Selymus was come, a bloody
battle is fought, in which Ismael was shot in the shoulders, and so was forced
to withdraw himself out of the Army, whom the soldiers followed; by which the
Turk obtained the Victory, but to the loss of thirty thousand of his men,
whereof many of them were of 1514
great account with him; the Persian Army consisted but of thirty thousand
Horse, whereas the Turks were an hundred and fifty thousand Horse and Foot.
After this Victory, Selymus besieges Taurisia, the Persians Cappadocia,
fearing that Ismael was returning with a fresh Army of Iberian, and Albanian
Horsemen, who at this day are called Georgians and Mangrellians, In Cappadocia
the surk takes up his Winter. Quarters, at Trapezund, and Amusia. The next year
understanding that Ismael is troubled with intestine Wars, and that he was gone
against the Hyrcanians, and Bactrians, and some other places upon the Caspian
Sea; though he was willing to weaken the Persian, yet he intends to act nothing
in Armenia, till he have first droven King Aladolus out of that Country, for
the wrongs he suffered by him in his former Expedition against Ismael. The
Kingdom of Aladolus bordered upon the Egyptian Sultan at Alepo, on Ismael the
Sephi by Armenia the less, on the Turks by Orpha, or Edessa, famous for its
Springs against Leprosies, and for the Tomb of Balowin, Godsry of Bullions
Selymus takes the Town Cyammassus, the Key of Armenia, on the farther Bank of
Euphrates. After that, he subdues the Garrisons that kept the narrow passages
between the Hills, then he fights Aladolus, who being affrighted with the
multitude of Musketeers, flies with his Forces into the next Woods. Aladolus
was betrayed by his neighbors, and a kinsman of his to Selymus, who caused him
to be drawn out of the Cave where he hid himself, and his head to be chopped
off, which he carried about upon a long Pole, through Asia, in ostentation of
his Victory; then transmits it to the Senate of Venice. Aladolus his eldest son
escaped to Egypt. Selymus divided his Kingdom into three Europe, to defend the
borders of his Dominions from the Hungarians, whom he quickly suppressed, in
two incursions he made upon them. The same of his Victories, and preparations
he was making for subduing of Christendom, caused Maximilian, Caesar, Laudislaus
of Hungary, and Sigismund of Polonia, to call a Diet for raising an Army
through all their Dominions for the defense of Christianity. But the Turk
understanding, that the Christians meant only to stand upon their own defense,
and not to invade, returns to his Army in Lycaonia, with a resolution to
prosecute the Persian Wars, and utterly to overthrow Ismael.

The Egyptian Sultan being solicited by the daily prayers and tears of Aladin,
the son of Achomat, and Aladols eldest son, had raised a great Army of
Egyptians and Jews, and was now on his March near the River Orontes, ready to
join with the Persian. The Turk sends Ambassadors to desire either his amity,
or at least neutrality. At this time Campson Gaurus was Sultan by the Votes of
the Mamalucks, after diverse tumults and slaughters raised by Caithbei and his
Arabian wife Dultiba, who would have had the Kingdom confirmed on their son,
against the Mamaluc Laws, which made the Sultans Elective, not Hereditary; this
Law Caithbei abrogated, after whose death his son Mahumet invaded the Kingdom,
whilst two prime men Achbardin and Campso, disputed for it. The Mamalucs being
offended that their Law and Privilege Mahumet at a Feast to be murdered. Upon
this diverse slaughters of the prime men ensued. At last the Mamalucs conferred
the dignity on Campson Gaurius, a man of great worth: He remembering the Victory
he had over the Turks at Tarsus, answers threatningly to the Turks request,
that he would not lay down Arms, except Selymus would restore the son of
Aladolus, to his Kingdom, and forbear to meddle with any of Ismaels Provinces;
he also desires to be Arbitrator of the differences between him and the Sophi;
this so exasperated Selymus that he diverts his War from Persia, and falls
unexpectedly upon Comagena, Egyptian Province, and incamps himself not far
from Alepo. Campson brings his Army from Damascus, and encounters with the
Turks; but Cajerbeius Governor of Alepo and Comagena, not only persidiously
forsook, but also pursued Campson, so that the Mamalucs were defeated, and
Campson himself being heavy with arms, and troubled with a rupture in his
belly, fell with his horse, and was troad to death in the dust. Of the Turks
3000 were killed, of the Mamalucks 1000, among which were the Governors of
Damascus and Tripoli, but a great slaughter was committed in the flight, whilst
the Peers and Gentry were posting toward Hierapolis, finding 1516
themselves betrayed by Caierbejus; these Selymus persues, who understanding
they were got to Damascus, takes in Hierapolis, and sends Iunus Bassai with a
party of horse to Damascus, but the enemy was gone thence; whereupon the Turk
marches thither with all his army, to whom the gates are presently opened;
Tripoly, Berytus, Sydon, Ptolemais, and other places did submit to Selymus.

Selymus having obtained Syria so suddenly, resolves to pursue the remainders
of the Mamalucks, who having escaped to Memphis, had made Tomumbejus the
Circassian Sultan there in the place of Campson. The Arcadian highway robbers
are suppressed by Sinan Bassai, who opens a way to Gaza. Tomumbejus had sent
Gazellus thither with an army, who were defeated by Selymus, all the Egyptian
Colors were taken, the Governor of Alexandria, the Praetor of Memphis, one
thousand horse, and great numbers of Arabians were slain, Sinan Bassai lost
2000 horse,. and many prime men. But the Arabians recruiting fell upon the
Turks at Gaza, and killed many of them, till Selymus brought Judea, where he
joins with Sinan Bassai, and takes Gaza upon surrender: Then he marches
within six miles of Memphis, where he is encountered by Tomumbejus, whose
Counsels were betrayed to the Turk by some Fugitives; so that Selymus got the
victory, most of the Egyptian prime men being lost: The choicest of their
horse affrighted with the Turkish Canons, fled and got into the City, the
streets whereof they Barracadoed with great pieces of timber; but this could
not keep out Selymus, who breaks through all impediments, and in three days
fight destroys in a manner the whole race of Mamalucks: Some that had escaped
into a Church and submitted themselves to the Turks mercy, were all by his
command

Tomumbejus beyond Nilus recruited his Forces, another battle is fought, and in
it the Egyptians quite defeated, Tomumbejus was found lurking among reeds up to
the middle in water, after the Turk had a long time tortured him, to make him
confess where his treasures lay; he set him on a poor Jade which carried him
about the City; then he causes him to be strangled, and hanged up on an iron
hook in one of the Gates, for a spectacle to all passengers, of the one's
Victory, and the other's misery: And 1517
thus ended the Kingdom of the Mamalucks in Egypt, which from the extirpation
of Saladins Posterity in Melechlala, had continued about two hundred

Egypt and Syria being subdued, Caierbejus for a reward of his Treachery at
Alepo, is made Governor of Egypt; and Gazelles, who upon the overthrow of the
Mamalucks, submitted to the Turk, is set over Syria: Out of Memphis or Alcair,
above 500 of the chief Families, besides multitudes of Women and Children of
the Mamalucks Progente, and all that could be found of that race, are at
Alexandria cut in pieces by Selymus his Command.

Then he returns in Triumph to Byzantium and threatens Christendom; But in his
preparation for War, he is arrested by a Cankering Thracia, where he
endeavored to entrap his Father Bajazet. He lived forty six years, and reigned
eight. As he was breathing out his cruel soul, he commended his son Solomon to
the care 1518
of Pyrrhus Bassa, of Cilicia, injoyning him to forbear the Persians, and to
make war upon the Christians. He was a most barbarous Tyrant, who spared
neither Father, Brothers, nor any of his kindred, nor his chief Commanders,
that did him best service; nor his own son, whom he would have murdered with a
poisoned Coat, which the mother suspecting, gave it not to Solomon, but to one
of his Chamber, who by it was quickly killed.

CHAP. XXI.
The Turkish History under Solomon, Selymus, Amurath 3d, Mahumet 3d, Achmat,
Mustapha, Osman and Amurath 4th, from the year 1520, till the end of 1636.

Solomon the only son of Selymus, succeeded Gazelles, Governor 1520
of Syria, thinking himself now freed from his Oath by the death of Selymus,
revolted, intending to make himself Master of Syria; for this cause he
entertains all the remainders of Mamalucs, and the inhabitants of that Country,
which flock to him in great numbers. He insinuates himself also into the
affections of the great Master of the Rhodes, from whom he desired some
Artillery, Arms, and Galleys. He sends also privately to Cajerbeius in Al^ir,
Governor of Egypt, exhorting him to join, and to revenge the blood of the
Circassians, and to re-establish in the destruction of the Turks, the old
government by Sultans. But Cajerbeius considering the difficulty of this
business, and that no credit was to be given to an old Enemy, kills the Agent,
and makes the Turk acquainted with the plot. Whereupon Solomon sends Fardtes
Bassai, with an Army into Syria, which so affrighted Gazelles, that though he
had taken Tripoli, and other Garrisons from the Turk, yet he betakes himself
into Damascus; hither Farates repairs, with all speed. Gazelles resolves to
hazard all in one battle, and either to get the victory, or else to die
honorably: both Armies joined; in this conflict, both he and his Mamalucs were
cut off by this victory; Syria is recovered, and the fidelity of Cairbeius is
confirmed.

The next year after this victory, by the persuasion of the Ianizarles, Solomon
resolves to fall upon Belgrad in Hungary, where were set up many Trophies taken
from the Turks; Solomon sends an Army to Sophia, a City in Servia, and he
hasteneth after, so that he was come before the Hungarians knew Eudovick the
young King, was totally ruled by others, so that he was in effect but a titular
King: Hence an Army could not be suddenly raised; whereupon Solomon took
Belgrad without opposition; who after this victory rested a year, then he
resolves to try his fortune upon Rhodes, though he was dissuaded by his friends
who were not unmindful of the loss, disgrace, and repulse Mahumet received
there, besides the danger that might ensue to the Sultans own person by the
Christian Fleet. Notwithstanding Solomon would in this be ruled by none, but by
his own Genius* therefore about the end of June, he repairs thither with 400
ships, and 200000 Turks, with great Rore of 1522
Brass Ordnance placed upon two Hills, which the Turks made themselves,
Villadam the great Master, a French man born, behaved himself stoutly, playing
continually upon the Turks with his great Ordnance, that the Ditches were
filled with dead bodies; yet Solomon would not give over, though he had lost
above thirty thousand of his men by the bloody Flux. At last the Towers and
Walls being overthrown, the Turks seize upon the remote parts of the Town. Then
with their Mortar pieces, they batter down the houses within the City, to the
terror of the inhabitants. All this while the Rhodians had no supply from
Christendom, though the Turk had received Recruits from Egypt and Natolia, for
Cajerbeius sent forty ships with all manner of Warlike provision. Mean while
Pope Hadrian arrived out of Spain into Italy, with some ships and Galleys, and
about three thousand Foot. These he was advised to send to Rhodes, and join
with the fifty Venetian Galleys ready Crete, but he refused to send them:
wherefore the Rhodians having neither help, nor hope, surrendered themselves to
the Turki, conditionally they might enjoy their lives and goods, except the
brass Ordnance; which was granted, and carefully observed by Solomon, who would
not suffer the soldiers to touch any consecrated thing belonging to Saint John's
Church, when he entered Rhodes with thirty thousand men; there was not a word
heard spoken among them, but as silent as Carthusian Monks. When Villadam took
his leave of Solomon, he was dismissed with all courtesy, so that Solomon
turning about to one of his Bassais, said, It grieves me (says he) to see this
unfortunate old man driven from his habitation, and to depart hence with so sad
a Solomon, and dishonor of Christendom, was surrendered after six months siege.
In Egypt Cajerbeius did, to whom succeeded Acomath Bassa, who thought to have
made himself Sultan, but his plot was detected, and he justly punished with
death. Habraim Bassa, Solymans Favorite, is sent to quiet Egypt, which he did
with great wisdom; wherefore he was shortly after called home to
Constantinople, by Solomon, and honored with the Title of Beglerbeg, or Lord
of Lords.

After this, Solomon proclaims war against Hungary: King Ludowic raises an Army
of twenty four thousand Horse and Foot, of raw and unskilful men; 1526
neither had he any supply from the Christian Princes, except from the Pope,
who on his own charges raised for him some German and Bohemian Foot. The
Turkish Army consisted of two hundred thousand men, which made Solomon admire
the Kings folly, that would with an handful of men oppose himself to such a
mighty Army; but the unfortunate King was advised to fight by Paul Tomor,
Archbishop of Collocen, who had heretofore in some light Skirmishes, beat the
Turk, but never encountered him before in any set Battle. In the end, this
unfortunate King, as we have said already, was drowned in a Bog, not being able
by reason of his heavy Arms, to get out from under his Horse; the thousand
Horse, his Lifeguard in defending the Wagons and Solomon marches to Buda,
where the Castle was surrendered to him, the Garrison dismissed with life and
goods. Two brazen Statues set up by Matthias, were carried thence to
Constantinople as a Trophy of Solymans Victory, who stayed not long after in
Hungary, because of the Winter, but returned home; nor 1569
did he after this make any more War upon the Christians, only he laid siege to
Vienna, which with loss and dishonor he was fain to raise again. He also beat
the Spanish Fleet, and took from them the Isle Meninges, over against African
Syrtes, the Castle whereof was defended by the Duke of Medina, Viceroy of
Sicily. Pialis Bassa, defeated the Spanish Fleet, that besieged Tripoli, and
forced the Castle to surrender, for want of water and victuals; about 18
thousand Christians were slain and carried away prisoners to Constantinople,
where at that time Busbequius Ferdinands Ambassador was Resident and relieved
many of them with necessaries. But as Solomon was happy in his Victories
abroad, so he was unfortunate in his affairs at home; for he committed Paricide
upon the false accusation of Rossa or Roxelana, his beloved wife, who hated
Mustapha Solymans son by another venture; this Mustapha had done excellent
service for his Father against the Persian, and was generally well beloved for
his excellent parts, especially by the Ianizaries, wherefore he was accused for
affecting the Empire, which his Father was too apt to believe, therefore marches
toward him with an Army: sends for Mustapha into his Pavilion, who trusting to
his own innocence, came boldly. Solomon gave Mustapha being young and strong,
made resistance a long time; the cruel Father, Author and Spectator of the
execution, caused his body to be laid before the Pavilion, for the Ianizaries
to behold, that they might see in what condition he was now, whom they meant to
make Emperor. At which sight they were much struck with terror and sorrow, but
knew no way to help it. Solomon also was much afflicted by his other son, which
he had of Roxolana, his name was Bajazet, he partly hated, partly feared his
elder brother Selymus, who was to succeed in the Empire: These two brothers had
the command of two Solymans ears, with complaints of some who hated Bajazet,
that he intended to invade the Empire, to destroy his brother Selymus, that he
might not be destroyed by him, when he should come to reign, and that he meant
also to depose his old Father. Presently command is given by Solomon, that the
two brothers should be removed from their Provinces, and two other assigned
them, that might be of a greater distance. Selymus in obedience to his Father,
accepted of his new Province, which Bajazet refused to do, and withal set up a
false Mustapha against his Father, whereby he incurred his Fathers displeasure,
and danger of strangling; but by the inreaty of Roxellana, he was reconciled to
his son, who sending for him, Bajazet flew out again in rebellion, and was
forced to fly into Persia for shelter, where he was Persian having received
satisfaction for the hurt he had sustained by Bajazet, with a rich present from
Solomon, delivers him up to Halsan, the Turks Agent, who carried him thence away
by a Turkish Garrison, and strangled him. The same fate of the Father fell upon
his four sons also, who were all slain. This Solomon also having had good
success against Rhodes, attempts Malta with a Fleet of 205 Sail; but John Valet
the great Master, so stoutly with his forces defended it, by the assistance of
Garcas the Spanish Admiral, that the Turks after six months siege, and the loss
of twenty three thousand men, were forced with shame to Chios, which had been
in he possession of Genua, above 200 years; now it is brought under the Turkish
yoke by Pialis Bassa. And though Solymans body grew weak by age, being now
almost fourscore, yet his ambitious thoughts were not at all weakened, but even
then being solicited by the Transylvanian, besieges Sigethum, a city in
Hungary, with 200 thousand men, but in the midst of his vain hopes, death cuts
him off, having reigned 47 years, he was a Prince temperate in his diet,
comely in personage, careful of his word, and generous in his actions: his
death was concealed by Mahumet Bassai from the Soldiers, least they should be
thereby disheartened. About this time the Tartars beaking in upon Hungary, kept
Lazarus Suendius from relieving the besieged Town which at last was taken,
but not without the loss of 30000 Turks in a sally made by Nicholas Serinius,
who in that action was cut off with his Garrison.

To Solomon succeeded his son Selymus 2d, he also sends aid to the
Transylvanian against Hungary; mean while Suendius takes diverse Towns Tartar,
whom he beats quite out of Panonia, then takes some Towns from the Turk, and
enlarges the Territories of Caesar Maximilian, with whom Selymus makes a peace
for 8 years; about which time Cyprus submits to the Turkish yoke: For Selymus
pretended that this Isle was a member of the Kingdom of Egypt, whereof now he
was supreme Lord; and that the Venetians in that regard paid a yearly tribute
into his Exchequer; but now having falsified their faith to the Turks, they
were bound to make restitution. The Venetians though much troubled at the
burning of their Arsenal lately, yet resolve not to loose that noble Island
which had now been one hundred years in their possession; therefore Plus 5th
and the King of Spain, who rigg out a strong Fleet into the sea; but the
ambition and quarrels of the Commanders staying at Crete, lost all opportunity
of doing good; for in this interim Cyprus is wasted by Mustapha and Plalis the
Turkish Generals: Then the City Nicosia, after a months siege is taken.
Famagusta, called 1570
Salamis of old, having for eleven months stoutly sustained all the Turkish
assaults, at last yielded upon honorable conditions, had they been as honorably
observed by the barbarous infidel Mustapha, who though he promised life,
liberty and goods, yet most wickedly murdered those whom by his Oath he should
have protected; he caused Antoninus Bragadimus his ears and nose to be cut off,
his body to be flead alive, and his skin Venetians that were bound for Crete,
he made Gally-slaves, the chief prisoners and spoils are sent to Selimus, but
a Cyprian Lady appointed for the Sultans lust, set fire by some barrels of
gunpowder on the two ships, that neither she, nor the other prisoners, nor
spoils, were ever seen or enjoyed by Selimus. This Island the Turks bought at
a dear rate, for they lost about 60000 men in this War besides what they lost
the year after, in the battle of Lepanto, at the Islands called Echinadae,
fought by the Christian Fleet, under the command of Don John of Austria, Charles
the 5th^'s bastard. Sebastian Venerus, afterward Duke of Venice, and M.
Antonius Columna, 25 Turks were then slain, and 4000 taken; 14 thousand
Christian slaves were released, the whole Turkish Fleet of 250 Sail, was
either torn or taken; only Uluzal with 30 Galleys escaped. And 1576
the year ensuing the Turkish Armado appeared whole and entire; so that a Turk
compared wittily the loss of Cyprus, to the loss of an arm, which could never
grow again; but the loss of Lepanto to the shaving of ones hair, which will
increase the thicker. Not long after the Turks take Goletum in Africa, from the
Spaniard by Sinan Bassai, besides the new Fort, 500 pieces of Ordnance, and
rich booties, upon the report of which Constantinople, Selymus died, having
reigned 8 years; a little before his death he took Moldavia by treason, killed
the Vayvod and annexeth it to Walachia.

To Selymus succeeded his son Amurath 3d who began his reign with the
parricide of his 5 brothers, whom he caused to be murdered in his own
presence: He intends to make War upon the Persians; over whom reigned Ismael
the son of Techmases, who also slew his brothers: He for his cruelty is
poisoned by his own sister, and so Maumet Hodabandes obtained his fathers
Kingdom. Against him Amurath was incensed, because he fomented and maintained
the Assyrians against the Turks; Besides, Amurath had some Dreams animating him
to raise arms against the Persians as Heretics. The Tartars and Georgians, or
Iberian Christians took part with the Parthian against the Turk. These Iberians
aided by the Colchs, Armenians and Medes had diverse and doubtful incounters
with Mustapha that cruel Turkish General: The first year of this War 70
thousand Turks lost their lives by the sword, famine, and water, besides the
Europaean Tartars, the Turks Auxiliaries were all cut off; wherefore Mustapha
is removed from his Generalship, and Sinan Bassai is made chief Vizier or
Counceller, whose success in this War was no better then Mustapha's, who
fearing public punishment, put violent hands on himself, his estate by this,
fell to the Sultan. Sinan Bassai also for his bad success is put out of his
place and banished; neither was the luck of his successor Ferates much better.
About this time also the Praecopit Tartars, who inhabit Taurica, Chersonesus,
of the Turks confederates are made their slaves, which is the effect commonly
of the Turks friendship. For because Mahumet Tartar, would not upon Amurath's
persuasion assist Prince Osman in his Wars, but went home pretending to
suppress the Cossacks, wasting and robbing by the Euxin sea, therefore by Osman
Bassai, and Islan the Tartars brother, now let out of prison, he deprives
Mahumet both of his life and Kingdom, and caused both his sons to be strangled
with their father; So Islan is made Fiduciary King of these Tartars. But this
Mahumet had one son who escaped, he raised an Army and recovered from Islan a
good part of his fathers Kingdom: Amurath in the interim sends Osman against
the Parthians, who in his journey had many disastures, at last he escaped into
Taurisium, which he fenced, and 5 days Amurath being taken with a fit of the
falling Sickness, to which he was subject, had almost brained himself by the
beating his head against the stones. In Carneola, Amurath is beaten by the
Christians, therefore is forced to renew the peace with Caesar. The Turks also
in a battle with the Parthians which lasted 3 days and 3 nights, lost about 80
thousand men, and Taurisium, one of the Parthian Regal Seats is recovered
again by them: After this Victory, the Parthian King betakes himself to a
private life, and shortly after died. Ibrahim the Egyptian Bassai, subdues the
Maronits of Libanus, and the Trusi of the Christian profession, who were
never till now Turks yoke; but the Panonian Turks, whilst they break 1587
in upon Croatia, are all cut off by the Christians: Near Sisseca 12 thousand
Turks were killed or drowned; but the Grecian Praetor to be revenged, came
before Sisseca with a great Army and took it: Diverse other places are taken by
them from the Christians, and diverse from them by the Christians: Whilst
Matthias, Tiefeubachius and other Christian Commanders in Hungary make War
against the truce breaking Turks under Serinius and Sinan, Amurath weakened with
leachery and fits of the stone, was conveyed by death to Mahumets Paradise,
there to satiate himself with all kind of carnal pleasures; he reigned 21
years, in his time the Turks break the league twice with the Hungarians, for
which the Bassai of Buda is strangled, and Sinan his successor displaced.
Poland also was by them invaded, with whom a peace is concluded. In a mutiny
among the Janisaries at Constantinople 15 thousand houses are burned: Rascia,
Valachia and Moldavia fall off from the Turk.

To Amurath 3d succeeded his son Mahumet 3d, who was circumcised by his father:
He initiated his reign with the murder of 18 of his brothers whom he
strangled. The Valachians who had revolted, fought succesfully against the
Turks, Strigon and Vicegrade are taken by the Christians: Feratus was strangled
for his wealth, and bad success together. Lippa is taken by the Transylvanian:
Sinan in a sharp conflict is beaten, and loses 10 thousand of his men; at last
after many disastures he is driven beyond the river Agrius, where he died with
age and grief: Upon whose death, Mahumet the Sultan marches toward Hungary
with a great army, where he takes Agria, and defeats Maximilian at Cassovia,
this great victory was Nicopolis: After this he returns triumphing to
Constantinople; this victory cost him 50 thousand Turks. Maximilian lost 20000
with 120 pieces of Ordnance and all the baggage. Omat Bassai with 60 thousand
Turks besieges Varadin, from whence he is beat off by the Christians with
loss; Mahumet being informed that his Sultanesse did enquire of some
Soothsayers what should be her sons fate, first caused his son to be strangled
in her presence, and then commanded 1604
her to be flung into the sea, with such as were conscious of her curiosity;
but the next year he paid dearly for this his cruelty; for the Persian took
Taurisium from him. The Knights of Malta destroyed Naupactum and Patrae:
Rusvormius having cut off the Turks at Pestum, recovered Hatuana: The Sultan
with his overgrown belly, and goutie legs, amongst his concubins and
Catamits was surprised by a pestilentiall fever, of which he died the 34 year
of his age, having reigned 8 years: He had caused before he fell sick, all the
wines in Constantinople to be staved, except those that belonged to the French,
English, and Venice Ambassadors, upon a sedition of the Janissaries.

To Mahumet succeeded his son Achmet being yet under age. Upon intestin Wars
between the Hungarian and Transylvanian, raised by George Basta; Pestum is
regained by the Turks, and so is Strigonium which had Rodulphus. Achmet made 20
years peace with Caesar: Matthias having obtained Hungary, confirmed the peace.
20000 Turks are overthrown by the Persians at Babylon; they have diverse
encounters, and various success in the Mediterranean sea with the Florentins
and Maltesses; Batorius being accused before the Sultan, that he held
correspondence with Caesar, and purposed to deliver up Datia to him; therefore
1613
the Turk resolves first to set up Andrew Gretzius, then Bethleem Gabor as
Fiduciarie Prince of Dacia; then he makes a truce for a time with the Parthian
He also renewes the 20 years peace with Caesar, that he might be without
disturbance, revenged on the Cossacks, who having wasted Muscovia, and many
places in Tartary, they burned 24 Turkish Galleys in the Black sea: And being
threatened by the Sultan, grew more insolent; so that they overrun Thracia,
plundring all, even almost to the Walls of Byzantium; they waste also Bithynia
and Paphlagonia, and destroy Trapezund, with it is Harbor, Galleys and
Arsenall; they burn Sinope of Pontus, and so laden with rich booty, return to
Sarmatia or Poland. Achmet sends to the King of Poland to have restitution for
these losses, whose answer was that he was ignorant of those passages: But
that the Turk could not revenge himself upon the Polander, was, by reason of
the Persian, who prevailed mightily in Asia, for by the revolt of a Turkish
Bassai, he did waste with fire and sword the Sultan's Territories Georgian
King out of his Dominion, for adhering to the Sultan.

In the sixteenth year of this last century, the Turks had many disasters both
by sea and land; for in the Mediterranian they were beaten by the Spaniards,
Florentins, and Maltesses in Moeotis by the Cossacks, in Asia by the Persians,
where they lost 40000 by the plague and the sword: But being assisted by the
Tartars, hey invade Podolia, and drove thence great booties. After 1616
this Achmet died in the 14 year of his government: In his time there died of
the plague in one year at Constantinople 200000. The Florentin put to flight
and took 42 Turkish Galleys; In one of which taken by them were ^00 slaves. A
Dervisiar is slain for throwing a stone at the Sultan: The Castle of Lango was
taken by the Florentin: The Jews expelled Pera, Traffic granted to the
Hollanders out of the Turks ill will to Spain: 7 Turkish Galleys taken by the
Viceroy of Sicily. The Bassai of Siden for favoring the Florentin, is pursued
Achmet, whereupon he flies to Florence with 14^00 weight of gold. Nassuff
Bassai is executed for holding intelligence with the Persian. Iacaia, the
supposed son of Mahumet 3d, joined with the Asiatick rebels, hoping thereby to
recover his right: Achmet besides his Circasian Sultanesse, maintained 400
Concubins, he died the 30 year of his age.

Achmet dying, resignes the Government to his brother Mustapha, who had been
shut up in a Cell to follow his devotions; so being preferred to his brother
Achmets sons performs his Funeral Ceremonies, but he was envied 1617
for his austerity, and held unfit for so great a burden as the Government of
that Monarchy, therefore after three months is sent back to his old Osman being
now twelve years of age, is made Sultan; a youth of a fervent spirit.

The Turks to be revenged on the Cossacks, break in upon Podolia, where they
defeat the Governor of that Country with three thousand men. In 1618
Asia they had a great battle with the Persians, which was so bloody to both
parties, that though the Persian had the better, yet was contented to sue for
peace, which was granted upon the payment of an yearly Tribute of silk stuffs
to the Turk; who now being secure of the Parthian, falls upon Valachia and
Moldavia, by the assistance of the Tartars, because the Vayvod Gratian, had
conspired with the Polander against the Turks, therefore Osman endeavored to
destroy him; for this cause he sends Campagius as Polonian prevailed, and
Campagius is killed; In the second the Turks have the better, and Gratian with
his Auxiliaries cut off: Hereupon Osman turns the Poland Ambassador out of his
Court, and denounces open war against him, who at the same time was like to be
murdered by a Villain. In Moldavia a battle is fought, wherein the Turks
defeat the Polander: But the next March 1620
Prince Ladislaus with fifty thousand falls furiously upon the Barbarians, and
utterly defeats them: Osman being highly enraged at this, brings an army of
three hundred thousand into Moldavia, but against the will of his friends.
Ladislaus with sixty thousand Polanders and Germans, defends the borders of his
Kingdom, until his Father Sigismund should bring the whole body of Polonian
horse: The two armies facing each other, Osman assaults the Polander, and
strives to shut up the Cossacks: So great was the slaughter on both sides, that
the Turk being out of hope to proceed any further, proposes peace upon equal
conditions, which the Polander gladly accepted of, all his provisions being
spent, so that he had scarce enough left for one day. Of the Polanders and
Germans were slain about 12 thousand, besides many that died of the sickness:
Of the Turks were killed about one hundred thousand, and as many more that died
by other accidents. About two years Osman the Sultan being suspected that he
would change the Militia and undertake a tedious pilgrimage to Mahumets
Sepulcher, is forsaken by his Janissaries, and his Uncle Mustapha restored to
the Government; who fearing least he might be deposed again as before, caused
Osman presently to be 1622
strangled; which done, he sends to Caesar an Ambassador for confirming the
peace; and assists Turren the elder to waste and plunder Moravia, but shortly
after he is forced by the Janissaries to quit his government, and to give place
to Amurath 4. Osmans brother being 16 years of age; so in the space of 16
months, Turkey saw three Sultans, whose large bribes exhausted the treasury:
For the Spachi and Janissaries esteem their Emperors according to their bribes
and donatives.

The tumults of Turkey fell heavy upon the greatest and wealthiest men, whose
baggs were emptied and estates plundered. Arzironius Bassai to punish the
Janissaries insolences, in offering to put their Lord to death, raised a
formidable army in Asia, with which he threatened and affrighted the Royal
City: The Persians laying hold on this opportunity, brake Turkish dominions,
seiseth on Babylon, lays siege to Edessam 1625
of Mesopotamia. Arziron besieges Prusia and Augeronia: A great army is sent
against the Parthian, which by him is much weakened and shaken. The Tartars to
be revenged on the Cossacks, for the wrongs done by them to the Hungarian Turks
break in upon Podolia: Their first expedition succeeded well; but in the second
they were drawn into an Ambuscado by the Polander, who killed multitudes of
them. The Sultan understanding that Sias Abas the Parthian King, and husband of
800 Concubins was dead, resolves to make a lasting and firm peace with the
Parthians: therefore caused Arzironius to submit, whom he made Governor of
Bosnia then he sets Iambetus Girain at liberty from his prison at Rhodes, and
having defeated Tartary. The French Ambassador who was imprisoned by Mustapha
upon the escape of Prince Coresky the Moldavian out of the Black Tower, was
released by Osman. About which time the Turks take Manfredonia in Sicily, and
Vats in Hungary, notwithstanding the peace; Prince Coresky is apprehended and
strangled in prison: After two years of durance, he was a Lord of Poland, taken
prisoner in the last war. The Turks Galleys return from the Black Sea with 170
poor Cossacks in triumph: The great Defterdar or Treasurer of Turkey is
strangled and flung out in his shirt into the streets; for being too rich. The
Sultan flatters the Tarter to enter Poland, but could not prevail: Georgians
defeat the Persians, and send many of their heads to the Port; wherefore
presently a league is made with those Georgians: 8000 Persians defeated by the
Turks near Mosul, or Ninivie; at the siege of Babylon were killed between 5
and 6000 Turks: News also comes to the Port from Babylon, that the Persians
had besieged the Viziers camp 1626
now in great distress for want of provision, which caused at Constantinople
great distempers; the Janissaries also mutiny against Bostangi Bassai, for
beating one of their order by the Sultans command, who could not be appeased by
the Sultans entreaty, till the Bassai was displaced. Tartarian by the Turks
instigation invades Podolia; but returning thence Cossacks upon this prepare
703 Frigots to fall upon the Sultans armado, which caused great fear in
Constantinople; but by the mediation of the King of Great Britains Ambassador,
who had made a peace between the Polanders and Turks, the differences were
taken off: Another mutiny this year is raised among the Janissaries against the
old Chimacham George Mehemet Bassai, whom the Sultan (who would fain have
protected him) was forced to deliver up to their fury, who first strangled him,
and then cut off his ears and nose, carrying them about in Triumph; some other
great Officers also they execute in spite of the grand Seignior; nor were they
yet pacified, Seraglio petitioning with threatenings that the Sultan would do
Justice on Segman Bassai, Lieutenant to their Aga, and others who had bin
authors of the last murders and mutinies, the Sultan is brought out into his
Court, and placed in his Throne, who at last with good words and wholesome
advice pacifieth the tumult, Segman Bassai's head is cut off before the Court
door, by the Sultan's command, afterward diverse Spachi and Janissaries, were
strangled and flung into the Sea.

About this time the Prince of Dacid to make his credit the greater, procures
the Sultan to write a Letter to the King and Princes united for the liberty of
Germany, that they would persevere in the union, and hold correspondencie with
Bethleem Gabor, and the Vizier or Governor of Buda. The King of Great Britain
also sends a Letter to the Great Turk, concerning the Algier and Tunis,
complaining also of diverse wrongs done to his Subjects, and requiring Justice.
To which the Turk by his Letter answers, that there shall be nothing wanting in
him toward the maintaining of peace and union between themselves and their
Merchants, that satisfaction shall be made for wrongs done, and prevention used
for the future: Overtures of peace are made by the Viceroy of Naples in the
King of Spaine's name with the Great Turk, and promises to set free all Turkish
slaves, to secure the Sultan's Subjects in the Mediterranian Sea, to serve
Turkey with East- India Commodities, by the Red Sea, and to procure the King of
Poland to restrain the Cossacks, from making excursions into the Black Sea; but
this negotiation Gabor, and to divert the Turks Forces from aiding the enemies
of the house of Austria. At Babylon the Turks fled in the night, burned their
Tents, and flung their Artillery in Euphrates; the Persian pursuing, killed
multitudes of them. 1627
The next year Gemon in Arabia revolts from the Turk: A great fleet is sent
into the Euxin Sea to shut in the Cossacks, in the interim six Galleys of the
D. of Tuscany took a Gallion with some lesser Ships of the Caire fleet with
rich booty, which caused 12 Galleys to be recalled from the Black Sea, to
pursue the Tuscans; which they did, overtook them, and recovered their Ships
with the booty: A Persian Ambassador arrives at the Port with overtures of
peace, English for some wrongs done by them to some Turkish Ships in the Red
and Persian Seas; whereupon the King's Ambassadors sent Letters to the English
for restitution: Mean while the Persians besiege Achisca, take it, and kill
3000 Janissaries. The news of the King of Denmarks defeat, the Cesarians
hastened both the Turk and Gabor, to make their peace with the Emperor, it was
articled that Gabor should be true and faithful to the Emperor; that he with
his Army shall depart out of Caesar's Territories, that restitution be made to
Caesar of places, goods, and persons taken lately by the Prince; and that the
Princes Subjects shall do homage to the Emperor. In the peace between Caesar
and the Sultan, it was agreed Croatia should be demolished, that all complaints
be laid aside, no wrongs offered, satisfaction for losses made, and captives to
be restored, and Merchants to have free trade. Halil Bassai, General of the
Turk's Forces in Asia is raised from the siege of Arzirum, with the loss of his
rear Canon and Baggage, and with a mutiny in his Army: This defeat was given by
Abassa Bassai; the Sultan was much discontented at this report; yet resolves to
prosecute the war; therefore sends a new General, and causes new Ordnance to
be cast in his own presence, hoping 1628
now to bring Abassa Bassai the revolted Turk to obedience. Not long after the
Tarta Han is openly declared a rebel and enemy to the Turkish Empire: Thomas
Roe the English Ambassador at the Port is called home, after some contestations
between him and the French Agent, about the Jesuits, which by his procurement,
and the other Romish Orders in Turkey were banished the Turk's Dominions, except
two which the French Ambassador retained for his own Family: The Jesuits order
had been 25 years at Galata, they first quarrelling with Cyrillus Patriarch of
Constantinople, for maintaining the Doctrine of the Greek Church, (which the
Pope by his Emissaries out of the Greek College in Rome, erected by Gregory,
endeavored to subvert) procured the deposition of Cyril, and the instalment of
another. Then Cyril being restored to his place, they got him to be banished
and imprisoned, who afterward clearing himself, was re-established; upon this
the French Ambassador, got the stamp brought from England, for Printing of some
Books of the Greek Faith, to be plundered: but this being restored again by the
Vizier, upon complaint made by the English, the Jesuits are seized on, and sent
away in ships, with all their books and goods.

The new erected Vizier Husseruph Bassa, in the place of Halil Bassa, passes
1629
over with his Army into Asia, where his success was so bad before Bagdat, that
he lost the third part of his Army; whereupon a new Vizier, Halis Achmat Bassa,
is made: some contestation fell out this year between the English and Turks, at
Sea, which procured some intercourse of Letters, and Complements between the
Turk and King Charles of Great Britain; and so the differences were reconciled.
The old Vizier is displaced, and a Cessation of the War with Persia for two
years, is published. Halis Achmat Bassa is made Vizier, to the discontent of
the Ianizaries who hated him, therefore one day they knocked him down from his
Horse with stones; and though the Sultan 1630
came in person and interceded for him, yet nothing would satisfy but his
life; Sultans presence, they barbarously took away, by tearing him in pieces.
And the next morning they enter the Seraglio, and demand the Muffti, with some
other of their Officers of State, to be delivered up to them, whose lives by
the Sultans entreaty, were spared, but their places taken away. These tumults
were raised by the instigation of Husreff Bassa, who was discontented for being
deposed: He was well beloved of the soldiers for his bounty, therefore Mortesa
Bassa has secret instructions given him by the Sultan to strangle Husreff, and
to send his Head privately to the grand Seignour; which was done accordingly,
yet not so secretly, but that the knowledge thereof came to the soldiers ears,
who presently assemble, and rudely enter the house Vizier Regeb Bassa, who
showing that he had no hand nor knowledge in the murder, is forced to go with
them to the Sultan, and to know of him who were the murderers of Husreff: they
stay all the while in the outward Yard; he in the Evening returns and assures
them, that the Sultan would satisfy them the next Morning. Then they gave out
that the Sultan had murdered 1631
his third Brother; but when they were brought forth alive before them, they
were for that night quieted. The next morning they assemble again, and demand
the Sultans Favorite to be delivered to them, which was done; him presently
they tore in pieces, because the Sultans affection was greatly toward him:
then they fall into a new suspicion, that the Sultan had caused his three
Husreff, and desiring the sight again of his three brothers, whom when they
saw, they rejoiced, recommending them to his favor, and the care of his
Officers. The next Morning, the Aga of the Iani^aries, who had hid himself,
being found, was delivered by the Sultan to them, who tore him in pieces, and
hanged up diverse of his limbs in several places of the Town. All strangers
during this storm, lay close within their own Houses. The Dutch Ambassadors
House was assaulted, and so was the French, about some Turkish 1632
Trial in Law.

About this time Fleas Bassa rebelled against the Sultan, and spoiled all the
Country near Smyrna, so that the Consul and Merchants were forced to Transport
themselves, and goods to Scio. This Rebellion was suppressed by an army sent
thither from the Sultan. Regeb Bassai the Vizier, who was thought the first
acter in these troubles, is strangled in the Seraglio, without any mutiny of
the Soldiers, because most of them were abroad upon service. The year following
was memorable for the fight between two English ships in the Bay of Cassandra,
and 30 Turks Galleys.

In this fight the English Ships took fire and were burned, diverse were killed;
the two Masters, Harris and Wild with 60 more, endeavoring to get to shore,
were taken and put to the Oar. Of the Turks were slain 1700. the 1633
Captain Bassai hurt, and many Galleys made unserviceable. King Charles upon the
earnest desire of the English Ambassadors, wrote to the Sultan in behalf Turk,
ordered that no English should trade in corn within the Levant: Mean while the
two Captains died. A great fire this year happened in Byzantium, which consumed
some thousands of houses; and the Persian war is renewed: The great Vizier is
sent forth with a part of the Militia, who durst not encounter the Persians,
but withdrew himself by the way of Aleppo, where he showed his Justice upon a
corrupted Judge or Cadee, whom for his wealth and briberie he sent in fetters
to be a slave in Cyprus; having first cut his hair, then he confiscates his
great estate for the Sultans use: A great fear fell upon all the strangers in
Byzantium this Venetian Merchant was carried up to the Turret on his house, and
there hanged, a red Flag being put out to let the Sultan know that execution
was done: The 4 Ambassadors of France; England, Venice and Holland, were
carried to the Arsenall, and accused for building new houses with Chapels
without the Sultan's leave; wherefore the French Chapel is commanded to be
pulled down, which was done the next day: The Merchants are imprisoned, and are
forced to pay 2000 dollars apiece for their ransom: The English payment came
to 20000 dollars, the 4 Ambassadors are again convented, and desired to deliver
up what arms they had in their houses upon pain of death; all other sorts of
people French Ambassadors debts, which they neglected to pay, though money was
raised in Marselles to that purpose; this made the Creditors call to the Sultan
for Justice.

The Sultan fearing a new insurrection of the Janissaries, caused the Muffti who
had all this while protected himself under the great Turk, from their fury, 1634
to be put to death; whereby they were quickly appeased. The Sultan prepares a
great Army against Poland, for some outrages committed by the Polacks and
Cossacks; this great army marched to Adrianople, where they staid 40 days, till
the messenger returned from Poland, whom the Sultan sent with certain Articles
of peace; which were hearkened to by the Polander, and so the Army is disbanded.
The French Ambassador for some misdemeanors is sent home by the Sultans
command, with his Declaration that he meant to keep all fair correspondency
with the French King, and the other Princes, whose Ambassadors lay at
Constantinople. The Captain Bassai is preferred and sent Bassai to Buda: The
Sultan resolves with all the strength he could 1635
Persians greatness, therefore goes in person with a numerous army; intending
also by this to weaken his unruly Ianizaries, and to keep them from mutinies by
such employments: In this expedition he took Reivan, a place of consequence;
then marching as far as Tauri^, rages with fire and sword without resistance;
so having lost diverse men with want and sickness, returns with more triumph
then conquest. The Sultan was no sooner returned, but news came that the
Persian with a great Army besieged Reivan. An Army is dispatched to raise the
siege, but before they came, being hindered by their Byram, or lent, the Town is
taken, and the Turks in it put to the sword, or ransom. The Ianizaries finding
that the Sultan was not affected 1636
to them, by employing them against the Persians, from whom little was to be
had, but blows; and that by these means he meant to weaken and wear them out,
they resolve soon to depose him, others to put him to death. The Sultan
perceiving this, flings a sop among them to keep them from biting or barking.
He distributes large sums, and so mitigates their anger, and procures

CHAP. XXII.
The Affairs of France under Charles 6th Charles 7th, and Lewis 11th, from the
year 1407, till the year 1483, interwoven with the History of Burgundy, and
other bordering places.

WE have showed how during the indisposition of Charles the Burgundy caused the
Duke of Orleans to be murdered, and how he fled into his own Country of
Flanders, where he found an Army ready, which he conducted against the Ligeois,
because they would not receive the Bishop, who being of a great house, and 1407
near in kin to the Duke of Bavere, and brother to the Earl of Henault and
Holland, would not receive any higher order, then of a Subdeacon, abhorring the
title of Priest, upon hopes of attaining some rich possessions, which so
troubled the Ligeois, that rather then they would admit him, they gave battle
to the Duke of Burgundy, who killed 17 thousand Orleans his widow makes her
addresses to the King for Justice on the Duke of Burgundy, for the murder of
her husband the Kings brother: Burgundy hearing of this, repaires to Paris with
a great train of armed men, where he pleaded for the Justice of his act in
killing him, who endeavored to kill the King, and had by witchcraft or poison
brought him into this distemper, purposly that he might attain the Crown; The
King though he disliked the murder, yet pardons the murderer because of his
greatness, which was so much the more in that the Dolphin had married his
daughter; 1409
wherefore in a manner he governed both King and Kingdom. The young D. Orleans
fortifies Burges, which Burgundy attempts to take, but could not, a little
while after, a peace is made between them and the English who came to aid
Orleans, are dismissed without their pay: They in anger carried with them the
young Count of Angolesme, Orleans his brother into England, where he was kept
32 years. Mean while France is full of troubles by reason of the King's
weakness, the Duke of Burgundie's greatness, the heavy taxes laid on the
people, which the Duke promised to take off, and the English Forces in 1412
Normandy, who had already taken Caen, and Cherbourg, and were now before
Rohan. Burgundy having got one of the gates of Paris by the treachery of John
de Villiers, to be opened to him, enters with a party of horse, and seiseth on
the King; the Dolphin escaped, a great massacre is committed, Andrews Cross
(which was the badg of Burgundy) were murdered, among which were Count
Armignac Constable; and Henry de Marle Chanceller; who there lost their lives:
This taking of Paris caused almost all the rest of the Kingdom to side with
Burgundy. The Dolphin finding the troubles of France could not end without the
death of the Burgundian, made means to have a Parley with him; which being
granted, the Duke is presently murdered by the Dolphin; whereupon Philip,
Burgundie's son, to be revenged for his Father's death, enters into league with
the King of England, who at that time had taken Rohan by Famine, after 7 months
siege, and withal delivers up to him Paris, Charters, Troy in Champanie, the
King, Queen, and their young daughter Catherin; then he cites the Dolphin to
appear at Paris, there to be tried for this murder, but he not appearing, 1418
nor any for him, is declared unworthy to succeed to the Crown, having
treacherously murdered so great a Prince against his Oath, and under Catherin
by her Father the King's consent to King Henry of England, and was contented
that if King Charles die, King Henry should succeed to the Crown of France, and
his sons by Katherin after him.

King Henry as Regent of France takes in some Towns, and leaves his brother 1420
the Duke of Clarence, to guide the kingdom, till he should return from
England, whither he was going; the Duke upon this, marches out of Roven, with
an Army, and sits down before Angiers, which he could neither induce to fight,
nor to yield. At last setting upon some Troops of French and Scots, who held
with the Dolphin, is slain in the place by them, and many France, till they
came to Normandy. King Henry upon the news of his brothers death, returns into
France, where he shortly after died, and King Charles followed about fifty
three days after. Katherin King Henry's Widow, married with Owen Tudar, a Welsh
Gentleman. In this Charles his time, the French reduced the Millanois that had
rebelled, to obedience of the Duchess his brothers wife. This King gave the
Duchy of Nemours to the King of Nevar. The Dolphin and John his Brother died,
and Charles the youngest succedeth. This mad King reigned forty two years.

To him succeeded Charles 7. at the age of 21. He contained himself sometime
1422
within Berry; wherefore in mockery, he was called by his adversaries, King of
Berry: yet he used the Title and Seal of France, though not as yet conseorated
at Rhemes. Whilst he was in his chief troubles with the English, a maid
eighteen years of age, born in a Village of Lorrain, where she used to keep
Sheep, came to him, showing him that she was sent by God to raise the siege of
Orleans: the King wondering at this, caused her to be examined by his Clergy,
who perceiving her constant and resolute, persuade the King to give her Arms,
and some Troops of Horse, which was done accordingly; with these she relieves
the Town, raises the Siege, which had continued English, after they had taken
diverse 1423
Towns, and in sundry Skirmishes beaten the French. About this time the
Burgundian marieth with Isabel, daughter to King John of Portugal; and King
Charles of France at Rhemes, is consecrated, whence he marches with his Army to
Paris: the Duke of Bedford did good service for England, but lost his life
before Orleans with a shot from the Town; the Maid also received a wound in
relieving the Town. After this, she was taken by the English at the siege of
Compend, which she had relieved; but as she sallied out, fell into the hands of
her Enemies, who burned her for a Witch. After this, the English are 1427
defeated by the Bastard of Orleans; but the next year they take Pontarson, and
French Turnay, the Masculine Prophetess, that was burned by the English is
honored by the Orleanois with a brass Statue on their Bridge. The English to
countenance their cause, sends for Henry the sixth, son to Henry 5, of Katherin,
and Crowns him at Paris, being twelve years old. Mean while King 1432
Charles takes Carnutes, or Chartres, by a Stratagem. An Ambuscadoe was made in
the dark, close by the gate: in the morning a Carter is sent with Fish, who
offering to sell them to the Town, got the Porter to open the gate; in break,
they that lay in Ambush, and made way for the rest of the Army, who put all to
the Sword that bore Arms, even the Bishop of that place, because a Burgundian.

Charles being nothing dismayed at the English proceedings, goes on in taking
in of Towns, and the rather because he finds Duke Philip grow slack in
maintaining the English cause. France in the interim is in a miserable
condition. Multitudes fall off from the English to the Burgundian, whose anger
was now pretty well satiated with blood and misery. A Peace therefore is
Artebates, or Aras, the French Gentry remonstrating that 1435
they had no hand in the death of the Dukes Father, and that France had now
sufficiently smarted for that murder. The Duke was willing to hearken to
Peace, but the English in regard of their Title to France, could not be
satisfied; so their Ambassadors went away without effecting any thing: it was
then agreed between the King and Duke, that the King should build a Church in
the place where the Dukes Father was killed, should place Canons in it, to do
service, and appoint sufficient maintenance for them. Besides the King bestows
on him and his heirs, the Cities of Mascon, and S. Gengon, with all their
privileges and dependances; The County of Auxeure to him Philip only, for
which they were to swear fealty, and do Homage to the Crown of France. Upon the
same conditions, he and his son should have the Towns above the River of Sum;
so low was the French King brought, and so Potent a Prince was this Duke, that
he was glad upon any terms to disjoin him from the English; diverse also of
these places were in the English possession. Upon the report of this agreement,
the Parisians underhand, send to the French Commanders abroad, that if they
would procure their pardon, the City should be delivered up to them; which
being promised, and at the time appointed an Army ready at the Gates, the chief
Citizens crying aloud in the streets, France, France, all the people presently
takes English being amazed at this, and seeing the French Army breaking in all
the Gates, presently fly for shelter to the Bastile. The streets are chained,
all the English, and their adherents, that could be found, men, women, and
children, were massacred. These in the Bastile yielded upon promise of life,
and safe conduct to the next Towns held by the English. Burgundy besieges
Calice, but could do no good, because of the unruliness of his own soldiers,
and some differences that fell out between him and his subjects at Bruges;
wherefore he brings his Army straight thither. He was let into the Town, and so
many as they thought they could master; the rest were excluded: but the
soldiers within, breaking open one of their Gates, got out French are now in
case to send Forces into Italy, for recovering of Naples, albeit the English as
yet were not quite driven out of France.

About this time Lewis 3d, whom Queen Jane of Naples adopted, died, and Jane
her self the year after. Ferdinand of Arragon, is advised by his friends to go
for Naples; but they who stood for Anjou, counsel the Duke of Bar, Brother to
the said Lewis, is wished to hasten thither, upon hopes he might prevail before
the rest, because Queen Jane had named his Brother heir to the Crown. But he
was prisoner to the Burgundian, who had raised his ransom Anjou, and Earl of
Province, by the death of his Brother Lewis. Therefore that he might take the
speedier order for his ransom, is set at liberty upon his Parol, which he was
careful to perform. But his wife Isabel, a Princess of great courage, goes
into Province with her two sons, raises men, and provideth Vessels for her
Transportation to Naples; from whence Alphonsus was repulsed by the contrary
Faction to the Isle of Ischia. But recruting himself with more supplies, he
besieges Cajet both by Sea and Land. The Genuois who had great store of wealth
in that Town, and who stood for Anjou, desire help from Philip Duke of Millan,
under whose protection they were. Philip sends help by Land, the Genuois by
Sea: Alphonsus raises all the strength he can in Spain, Sicily, and Naples; to
wit, nineteen great ships, three Galleys, and one Gallion: the Genuois were
scarce half so many, either in number, or greatness of Vessels: the fight was
sharp, and doubtful at first, but at length, some of the Genua ships getting
the wind of the Enemy, fell so furiously Arragon Admiral, where the King and
his Brother, the King of Navarre were, with six hundred soldiers; that both the
Kings were forced to yield. So the siege upon the report of this defeat, is
raised from Naples: the two Kings and three hundred Donns, are led away
prisoners to Millan, where they are most magnificently received, entertained,
and dismissed with rich Presents by the Duke, to whom King Alphonsus shows
reasons why Millan should rather hold with Arragon then Anjou, because at last
France will become Masters of Millan, whose dispositions do not sort so well
with the Millanois, as those of Arragon do, as was observed by John Galeas the
Millan.

Mean while Isabel Duchess of Anjou, arrives at Cajet, and from thence at
Naples, where she assembles all the chief of her Faction; but Burgundy would
not release Duke Rene her Husband, till he had delivered up Cassel for his
Ransom. At which the Genuois stormed, who were in good hope the two Captive
Kings should have paid the Dukes Ransom, therefore were mad, that they should
obtain a victory to their great cost and pains, and Duke Philip should have the
honor of it; of whom they complain for dismissing the prisoners without
Ransom, and for using the Genuois (hitherto a free people, and who had made the
remote Princes, and Kings of the East afraid of them) Rene to Naples, where
they made him to be Crowned presently. Which Act was approved and ratified by
Pope Eugenius, for which cause he was hated by the Duke of Millan, and
Alphonsus King of Arragon, who besieges Naples again, and in it Duke Rene of
Anjou; but the City was so stoutly defended, that Arragon was fain to raise the
siege, having lost his brother by a Canon Bullet from the walls. But before the
siege was quite raised, a Runegado out of the City shows Alphonsus a passage
through a common shore or kennel; by this the Arragonians enter the City, Anjou
flies to the Castle where having little hopes, makes his Composition Alphonsus,
and so returns by Florence, where he saluted the Pope into France. There he
finds his brother Prince Charles in so great favor with the King, that the
whole Kingdom was ruled by his Council, which offended 1440
diverse great men, who advised the young Dolphin to take Arms against his
Father; but this plot was quickly quashed, the Counselors punished, and the
Dolphin pardoned, who not long after caused the English to raise their siege
from Deep. The Duke of Burgundy to take away all occasion of future broils in
France, resolves to reconcile himself to the Duke of Orleans, now a prisoner in
England twenty five years; for this cause he imploys his wife, the daughter of
Portugal, who made means by her Ambassadors, to have a parley England, on the
borders of Flanders. An overture was made of Peace, but could not take effect:
At length she obtains so much favor as to see the Duke of Orleans who was
presently sent for to Calice. There she wrought upon him to forget all bypast
injuries, and to marry with Mary daughter to the Duke of Cleve, and one of
Burgundies sisters: by which means Orleans recovered four hundred thousand
Crowns to pay for his Ransom and a perpetual friendship is procured between
these two families.

About this time Rene, or Renatus of Anjou, returns from Italy, whose daughter
Margaret is married to the King of England, and a three years Peace concluded
between the two Nations. The County of Main is restored again by the English to
the French, and some other places: during which Truce, supplies are sent to the
D. of Millan against the Venetians, and the County of Ast is first promised,
then rendered by the Duke to his sisters son the Duke of Orleans: and the same
day Duke Philip of Millan died, of sickness and grief; the Duke of Orleans
claimed the next succession to Millan, by his defunct Uncle, Duke Philip. The
Millanois aimed at their liberty; Regnauld the French Commander France,
besieges Bosto, but being beaten by the Millanois, was forced to rise and
retreat to Ast, with loss and disgrace: but Francis Sforsa, who had married
Blanch, Duke Philip of Millans daughter, and received with her the City and
Principality of Cremona, who defeated the Venetians, enemies to Millan, does
now fall off from Millan to the Venetians, and taking opportunity by the diverse
Factions of the Citizens, besieges the City, which for want of victuals
yeildeth, and receives Sfosra for their Duke, before France could send any
Forces thither, for their Truce with England was now broke by the English, who
took Tongeres. French took diverse places from the English, and Rouen among the
rest, with the Duke of Sommerset in it, who to have his liberty was forced to
deliver up five French Towns, which were in his possession; and upon the
surrender of Falaise to the French, Talbot is delivered out of prison. A Battle
is fought between Bayeux and Carenton, in which the French beat the English,
and by degrees got all Normandy again from them. Then the French King marches
with his Forces into Guien, where he lays siege to four Towns at one time.
Mean while Bordeaux sends to capitulate with the King, and is surrendered on
their own conditions, which occasioned the other Towns to surrender also. And
so all Guienne returns again to the French, except Bayonne; France, as the red
is of England, they deliver up themselves to the French, preferring the white
Cross to the red.

Not long after, Bourdeaux falls off again from the French, and sends to
Talbot, who coming with five thousand Foot to the gates, was let in. Upon this
report the King sends Prince John, the Duke of Burbons son, with an Army: A
battle is fought, in which both Talbot and his son, lost their lives, and
Bordeaux withal, which the King by building two Castles, did so bridle, that
they could not afterward revolt to the English, who were-all dismissed by the
King, and suffered quietly to return home, having lost all their holds in 1453
France, except Calice, and some places thereabouts. Presently after this, the
Dolphin upon some discontent, takes leave of his Father for four months, but
intending to return no more again to the Court, whilst his Father was alive,
because he more hearkened to his Favorites, then to him.

About this time the Gantois rebelled against their Duke, because he exacted of
them a new Gabel of Salt, and incroached on their liberties; therefore they
cruelly kill their Governor, but they were defeated by the Duke in a battle,
having lost twenty thousand of their men, and were at last content to pay a
great sum of money, and to accept what Laws the Duke would impose on them. In
France, the King was forced notwithstanding the wars were ended, to maintain in
Garrisons five thousand Foot, and fifteen hundred Alphonsus made war in Tuscany,
upon the Florentins, for their aid; the King raises two thousand Horse,
intending that if Alphonsus were worsted, to march to Naples for the claiming a
title to that Kingdom: the Duke of Savoy at first denied him passage through
his country, because he was in League with Alphonsus and Venice, against
Millan, and the Florentins; but the Dolphin, his son in law, wrought so upon
him, that at last he yeildeth a passage. But this Expedition came at length to
nothing, For upon the sad news of the loss of Constantinople, the Italian
Princes made Peace among themselves. John Duke d' Alanzon is declared by the
King guilty of High Treason, for soliciting the English to return into France,
but afterward is pardoned: The Dolphin was now in stead of four months, absent
four years from the Court, carrying himself like a King in his own Country, by
making Laws, and receiving Ambassadors; the King sends an Burgundy, who excuses
himself to the King that being his Vassal, he could not refuse to intertain
his son. Peter Fregose Duke of Genua, being crossed by the contrary Faction,
and fearing the greatness of Alphonsus, King of Arragon, conveys himself and
his estate into France. Mean while Alphonsus dies, and leaves his Fathers
kingdoms to his Brother John, but Naples to his Bastard son Ferdinand; but 1456
Pope Calixtus would not yield that a Bastard should be King of Naples.
Ferdinand alleges that Pope Eugenius on this condition crowned Alphonsus,
that Ferdinand might succeed him, which was confirmed by Pope Nicolaus.

Pope Pius who succeeded Calixtus, to avoid further trouble, fearing lest
Sforza and Ferdinand, who were very intimate, should join their Forces, and
raise a new War in Italy, Crowns Ferdinand King of Naples, conditionally that
this should not prejudice those that could show Title to that Crown.

Upon the report of this Coronation, John son to Rene of Anjou, procures a
great Fleet from Genua and Province, to make War against Ferdinand at Naples,
complaining against the Pope for Crowning his Enemy. Not long after John
obtains a great Victory upon Ferdinand, so that he Naples, had he not delayed
too long till Ferdinand had recruted himself. In the Interim the Genuois revolt
from Duke John, and the French, who had nothing now left them but the Castle
with Savonne. Upon this King Rene marches with a French Army against Genua;
but being defeated, and two thousand of his men cut in pieces, was fain to
retire to Savonne.

Upon report that the Turk had taken Trapezund, that great and rich City in
Pontus, the people sends to the Christian Princes for aid against the Turk,
bewailing the miserable condition of Christendom. The Dolphin being in the
Burgundians Country, resolves to go against the Turks: His Dolphins real, and
reproves the King; he also animates the French to stand by the Dolphin in this
his noble intentions, showing to them the valor and devotion of their
Predecessors, in subduing these barbarous Infidels: the Duke of Burgundy also
protests to make a Voyage himself, or to send an Army against the Turks. The
Dolphin had then a son born to him, whom he called Duke of Normandy: The King
mistrusting he had been poisoned, refused to touch any Victuals; At last being
importuned to eat by his friends, Mary Magdalen, that great sinner, desiring a
share in her 1461
Repentance, as he had in her Sins. He Reigned thirty and eight years. This
was he that confirmed the Pragmatical Sanction, by which the Popes power was
much weakened in France. In his time the Parliament of Tholose was erected for
Languedoc, and another was set up at Grenoble in Dolphiny.

To Charles succeeded his son Lewis 11. who had been a long time out of France;
he changes all the Governors and Officers of the kingdom, and is made Umpire
of a difference between the King of Castile, and Bland, daughter and heir to
the King of Navarre, and wife to the King of Arragon. To obtain the Popes
favor, he renounceth the Pragmatical Sanction, and labors to make the Duke of
Millan his Vassal; he demands of the Duke Britany, that he forbear the title of
[By the Grace of God Duke of Britany] and that his subjects acknowledge the
French King for their Sovereign and Lord. War also is threatened, if the Duke
should refuse: he being astonished at this, desires of the King some time to
assemble and consult with the States of his Duchy, about such weighty matters.
Mean while he sends his Agents disguised in diverse habits, to the King of
England, and other Forain Princes; he makes also a strait alliance with Charles
Count of Charolois, Duke Philips son of Burgundy, to whom the King sends
Ambassadors, accusing his son for allying himself with the Duke of Britany, a
great friend to England; and withal they cast diverse foul aspersions upon him:
the Duke Britany, yet it was not to prejudice France, but to advance the
public good. But shortly after it appeared, that the Princes were much
discontented, among the rest Charles Duke of Berry, the Kings brother, who had
all conspired to restore the Gentry and Clergy of France, and generally 1465
the whole people, now groaning under heavy pressures, to their ancient
privileges and freedom. For this cause the Count of Charolois enters Piccardy
with an Army, as Lieutenant General to the Duke of Berry; he marches Paris,
and by Boats on the River Seine, seizes upon the Bridge of Saint Cleve. The
Duke of Burbon chaseth away all the Kings Officers out of that Country, and
seizes on the Money, that was raising for the King; who was nothing dejected at
all this, but raises what Forces he can, and encounters with Count Charles at
Mont l' Hery, where a sharp Skirmish is fought, to the loss of above two
thousand; the Count was wounded in the stomach and throat: it was given out
that the King was slain, upon which the Count d' Main fled, but that report was
false; for when the King uncovered his Head, and showed himself, his soldiers
took courage again, and fought stoutly.

After the Battle was fought at Mont l' Hery, the King returns to Corbeil, and
from thence to Paris, where he ingratiates himself by fair words and promises,
with the Citizens; for so Sforsa Duke of Millan, who had sent him some
Auxiliaries of Horse and Foot advised him. By his affability he got the good
will of the Parisians, and then he goes into Normandy to raise strength there
also. Mean time the Dukes, Counts, and Barons, had sat down in three several
places before Paris, whether they sent some Heraults to desire them to send
some of their wisest men, to know the reasons why this Army sat down there;
and withal to deliberate about a way of Accommodation. The City having met,
and advised upon this, sends the Bishop Paris, with some other prime men; to
whom the united Princes show, that the Kings insolent Government, his changing
of the Laws and Customs, his despising of the Nobility, and oppressing of the
people, moved them to take Arms, that things might be righted, which would be
done the sooner, if Paris the chief City, would by joining with them, show good
example to others. Hereupon the Parisians thought it sit the City Gates should
be opened to the Princes, conditionally that their soldiers would do no wrong,
but pay for what they take; and that the Kings consent may be required in this
matter. The King being advertised of this, extremely was i^raged, and repairs
to Paris with some Foot Forces, where he reproves the City in general, and
particularly the Bishop, for offering to entertain a Parley with his Enemies:
For this cause the King hated him ever after, and caused his Epitaph over his
Tomb to be taken down. The Princes failing of their intentions, and of the
Cities assistance, resolve to give the King Battle, which he altogether
declined, not willing to Sforsa advised him; but he man's, and fortifies all the
Gates, Walls, and Towns of the City; great hurt was done at Charenton, by the
Ordnance; some Sallies and Skirmishes were permitted by the King, and
Fortifications are raised on both sides. Charolois makes a Bridge of Boats, for
Transporting his Army, which presently after feizeth on some of the Suburbs,
and drives away the Kings men from thence. Then a Truce for two days is agreed
on; the King sends his Chancellor to know the Duke of Berries mind, whom
nothing will content but the Duchy of Normandy; then the King desires a Parley
with Charolois, whom he flatters, and makes believe, that he was sorry
Charolois, then he could do by force. The Truce is from day to day renewed; so
that now there is intercourse between the City, and the Camp, and revolting on
both sides, chiefly from the King, whose pretenses were not so specious, as
those of the Princes, which aimed at the public good; therefore the King gives
order to shoot all such as should either come from, or go to the City without
leave. A false report was brought to the Princes, that the next morning the
King meant to give them battle, which presently alarumed them, so that all
night they stood in battle Nermandy, that the King and Princes had made a
Peace; and that Berry the Kings brother, should be Duke of Normandy, which
gladed the Normans hearts, who longed to have a Duke. Mean while the Duke of
Burbon enters Rohan, and takes it in the name of the Duke of Berry. Upon this,
the King desires another Parley with Count Charolois, wherein he offers
Normandy to the Duke of Berry, satisfaction to the other Princes; the payment
of his sisters marriage portion to the Duke of Burbon, and assistance to the
Duke of Lorrain, for recovering of Naples; so a peace is agreed upon, which the
Princes willingly accept, because of Sforsa's Forces understanding that the
Peace was concluded, returns home, having done much hurt in Burbons Country:
thus the begun War ended, but not the private grudges.

The Duke of Britain grew angry at this peace, by which Charolois obtained all
the chief Towns on the River of Some, and the Kings brother, Normandy for
Berry; whereas he who had been at more charges in this War, then any other,
except Charolois, had nothing advanced himself, either in his estate or honor;
therefore he with diverse Lords, begin to look on the new Duke of Normandy, as a
rising Sun, and to expect advancement by his means. The King who was cunning to
sow the seeds Normandy was lodged upon S. Katherins Hill near Rohan, till the
City was fitted for his reception in State; the Britains meant to carry him away
into their Country, whereupon the Rohaners before the day appointed for
solemnity, brings in the Duke without any state at all, save only that the
Clergy waited on him with the Cross. Britany fearing that this people would be
moved against him, returns home, taking some towns of Normandy by the way,
which he fortified with Garrisons: Mean while the King comes with an Army
against his brother in Rohan; who now being forsaken by Brittany, and Charolois
employed in a war against the Liegeois, was forced to submit, and part with
both his Dutchies of Berry and Normandy, and to retire again into Brittany,
where he had his first assistance in this late war.

The Government of Brittany is restored to Burbony for his good service in
recovering Normandy to the King: Lorrain having received men Naples, did wave
that enterprise, in regard his father and other friends, had so bad success in
it heretofore; he intends therefore to recover the right his ancestors
pretended to the Kingdom of Arragon, having crossed the Pyrenians, he began to
prosper well in Spain, till the Plague seized on his Camp, of which disease he
died: The King presently upon this calls back his Army, and imploys it against
the Duke of Brittany, whilst Charolois is hindered by the Liegeoian war; for
upon the death of his father Duke Philip of Burgundy, who held the Liegeois in
great awe, imposed a tribute on them, and took diverse places from them, for
refusing to obey their young Bishop Lewis of Burbon, the Duke of Burgundies
Nephew, whom 1467
the Pope had confirmed in that rich Bishopric upon the entreaty of his Uncle,
and promise he made to raise an army against the Turk; which young Bishop could
not in a long time be induced to take on him the Order of Priesthood: I say,
Duke Philip being dead, the Liegeois began to reassume their liberty; therefore
they turn the Burgundian Garrisons out of their Towns, which so exasperated
Charles, that he enters their Country with fire and sword, defeats them in a
battle, takes Liege, and dismantles it, and imposes on them heavier burdens
and taxes then ever his Father did.

In this mean time King Lewis forces his brother Charles and the Duke Brittany
to make their peace with him, promising his brother an yearly pension of 35
thousand crowns, conditionally he quit his claim to the Duchy of Normandy; at
which time the Duke of Burgundy, having quieted Liegeois, and Gantois, prepares
to assist his ancient friends, Berry and Britanny. As he was on his march,
news came that they two were reconciled to the King, which he did not at first
believe, supposing this news had been given out by the King, to hinder his
march; but at last by Legates from the King and these two Princes, he was
assured of their reconciliation: The King desires Burgundy to meet him at
Peronne, for finishing this last peace with all the Princes: They met
accordingly, Liegeois had again taken arms: Most of the banished men being
returned half starved, and like savages in their overgrown hairs: They first
take Tongres an ancient City, where Lewis of Burbon their Bishop, was with the
Pope's Legate, who so assuaged the fury of the Soldiers, that little blood was
shed. When Duke Charles understood that this rebellion was raised by the French
King's Ambassadors; in a rage he accuses the King of his treachery and
hypocrisy, and causes the Gates of Peronne to be shut, and kept with a strict
Guard, that none might go out or in, pretending that a Budget with Letters of
consequence was Charles the simple King of France was fain to renounce his right
to the Crown. The Duke sat in Counsel two days to know what should be done to
the King: Some thought it fitting that he should declare himself an enemy to
the Liegeois, and ass^ the Duke with an Army; others would not have him to be
released at all, fearing he would revenge this wrong; a third sort would have
his brother sent for, to have a confirmation of the Conditions in the peace of
Conflans: The Duke was content to let the King go free, if he would send his
Ambassadors to Liege for a peace; which the King swore to do, and promised also
to give the Counties of Brie and Champaigne to his brother, which pleased the
Duke well, because these Counties joining to his, would make him the stronger,
to resist future quarrels with the French King.

The King accompanies the Duke to the siege of Liege: The Citizens Liege: So at
length the City is taken, plundered, and burned, and all the inhabitants that
could be found, cut in pieces: Immediately after this, the King returns into
his Kingdom, and deals so cunningly with his brother, by such as had an
interest in him, that he got him to refuse Brie and Champaigne bordering upon
Burgundy, and in lieu thereof, to accept of Guienne farther off. Not long after
this, a son 1470
is born to King Lewis, Charles by name: The King willing to pick a quarrel
with Burgundy, got some discontented persons to Petition him against the Duke's
injustice and oppressions, showing also that he had incroached upon the King's
Territories, and broken the peace: The Amiens and Saint Quintins return to the
Kings obedience: Who shortly after began openly to force other places. Here
upon the Duke sends to his friends and allies for aid: The Duke of Guienne
sends him Letters privately, that he would send him supplies, the King
perceiving how earnest Burgundy was to recover Amiens, and S. Quintins, sends
to him, that he should have them again if so be he would renounce alliance with
the Dukes of Brittany and Guienne, and not assist Burgundy understanding that
the King meant to cheat him, and that he had already begun to make war upon the
Duke of Guienne, enters France with his Army, and first besieges Beauvais, but
could not take it; therefore he marches toward Normandy, to join his Forces
with Brittany against Rohan; but on the way news came that 1471
the Duke of Guienne was dead: And the Duke of Brittany would not now join with
Burgundy. Seeing now Guienne was fallen to the King by Burgundy was so mad with
the King, that he gave out the King had poisoned his brother by some of his
servants; and surely the hatred he had toward him, might cause suspicion.

The Constable was the Duek's great enemy, and he was suspected to blow the
coals for this flame, and to be the chief fomenter of this war; for he entering
into Burgundy, caused all places to be set on fire, whether he came: At a
meeting he gave the lie to the Duke's Ambassadors; which 1616
procured him much hatred. The King and Duke being both willing to be rid of
him, conspire his death; but he was so potent and cunning, that he would trust
neither of them, but stood on his own guard; therefore he turns the Kings
Garrison out of Saint Quintins, and puts in a Garrison of his own. When the King
sent to speak with him, he refused to come without his Guard, and assurance of
safety; therefore a bridge was set up over a river, and a bar like a lattice in
the middle, that they Purpignan one of the French Towns revolts to the
Arragonian; but it was surrendered again upon certain conditions. Peter of
Burbon, Governor of Guienne, is taken prisoner by Count de Armignack, who not
long after is put to death for incest with his sister, and they were hanged who
betrayed Burbon.

The Duke of Nemours is condemned for Treason, and beheaded. Anne the King's
eldest daughter, is married to Burbon, and Ieane the younger who was crooked
and deformed, to Lewis Duke of Orleans, afterward Lewis 12. About this time the
Order of Saint Michael was instituted by King Lewis 11 which he sent to the
Duke of Brittany, but he refused it, fearing to offend the King of England, and
Duke of Burgundy, his true friends: This the King took ill, that a Duke should
scorn to be his brother in that Order: This Duke of Burgundy helped to
establish King Edward of England in his Throne, to make himself by this the
stronger against King Lewis. The Duke of Gelders at this time is imprisoned by
his own son, but set at liberty again by Charles of Burgundy, wherefore Gelders
disinherits his son, and makes Burgundy his heir: Who having obtained this rich
Duchy, sends a sum of money to Sigismund Duke of Austria, the Emperors
brother, who mortgaged the Ferreste for this money: Then he endeavonrs to
obtain all the land lying between the Duchy and County; for this cause
proposes the marriage of his daughter to Maximilian the Emperor's son, and
labors what he could to be Lieutenant of the Empire; but the Emperor
perceiving his ambition and covetousness forsook him, at the meeting in Trevers
without bidding him farewell: Yet the Duke prosecutes his design.

There was then great contestation about the Bishopric of Colen; he strives to
put in Robert his kisman, who had been driven out by his adversaries: This was
not well resented by the Emperor, that a stranger Germany. Then having called a
Diet, he sends aid to Nuz, at that time besieged by Burgundy: In the interim
King Lewis by his Ambassadors reconciles Austria and the Switzers, so Sigismund
by their help recovers his County of Ferrette without paying the sum
borrowed. At the same time also Rhenatus, or Rhene, grandchild to Rhence, King
of Sicily had obtained by right of succession the Duchy of Lorrain: He by the
French King's instigation, declares war against Burgundy, and pillaged a party
of Luxemburg which belonged to him. The Burgundian is now full of troubles, for
the French King takes diverse Burgundie's favor, he desires the Duke to 1622
send him some Forces, to put within Saint Quintins, which he promises to
deliver up to him; but he could not be so good as his word, though Forces were
sent.

The King invites the Constable to make war upon Henault, which he refused to
do, because he knew King Lewis meant to take away his life; the King upon this
desires to speak with him; he returns answer, that if the King would swear upon
the Cross of Saint La^. which is in the Church of Angers, to do him no harm by
himself or any other, he would come. Now the Tradition was, that whosoever
swore on that Cross, and perjured himself, should die within a year after; the
King would upon no terms swear, which increased the Constables jealousy.
Mean while the King of England comes with an Army to Callis upon Burgundies Nuz
a whole year, but at last he rises upon the persuasions of the King of
England, and the Popes Legate; who procured that during the difference
concerning the Bishopric of Colen, Nuz should remain depositat in the Popes
hands, then Burgundy sends his Army to quarter in Lorrain, purposly to vex Duke
Rene. Burgundy is invited again by the Constable to seize on Saint Quintin;
some English to this purpose are sent before, who being beaten off from the
Town with great Ordnance, disheartened King Edward from any further attempt. In
the interim whilst Burgundy was gone to Lorrain for his Army, to join with the
English: a peace is propounded between France and England, Burgundy, that he
sends Letters to the King of England full of gall, accusing his ingratitude
toward him, who of a poor banished man had made him King. The French King mean
while Courts the Constable with smooth Letters: One time the Constable sent a
messenger to the King, who being called into the Kings Chamber, where some of
Burgundies chief servants were hid behind the Hangings, told the King openly
that the Constable had wrought so with King Edward, and Duke Charles, that they
were quite parted, and 1483
that ill language had been given by the Duke to the King: At last the peace
between the two Kingdoms is confirmed, in which Burgundy is also Edward was
gone home, King Lewis and Duke Charles plot together to be revenged on the
Constable for abusing them both. He remonstrates to the French King how
careful and faithful he had always been to preserve the Kings Towns: The King
seemingly acknowledges it, and commends the Constable, telling his messenger
that in his Counsels he wanted the Constables headpiece; which the King meant
otherwise then the Messenger understood it: For the King meant to have his
head. Therefore it is agreed between the King and Duke, that the French should
have his body, and the Burgundians his goods and Saint Quintin. So that the
poor Constable is now forsaken by all his friends, and knows not whether to
go, nor what to

At last after long deliberation, he resolves to cast himself upon the Duke of
Burgundy, as being easier to be appeased then the King, therefore retires
himself into Henault to those that commanded there under the Duke, who was then
before Nancy, hoping to take it, and to be Master of all that Duchy: Thither
came some Messengers from the King, demanding according to agreements, the
Constable; the Duke who also understood that the King had now an Army upon the
borders of Campaigne, was in doubt what to do: To deliver the Constable was
Nancy, therefore sends order, that on such a day the Constable should be
delivered to the French, hoping before that time, Nancy would be taken, and
then he would recall his Warrant; but the day being come, the Constable is
delivered up, and carried away; and within three hours after, News came that
Nancy was taken: The Constable who had delivered up Saint Quintin, and other
places to the Burgundian, is Beheaded at Paris; But after this, the Dukes
affairs never prospered.

Sigismund Duke of Austria, had by the help of the Switzers retaken Kerreth
from Duke Charles: Wherefore he denounces War against them. They humbly
desire peace, and promise all faithful service to the Duke, if he will
entertain them; They assisted Sigismund, only to recover his Right; they show
also the poverty of their Switzers, but also to make himself great in Italy,
because Frederick, Prince of Tarentum, son to Ferdinand, King of Naples, was
come to marry his daughter; besides old Rene of Anjou, King of Sicily, had
promised to quit his right in Sicily to Duke Charles, and would also put into
his hands the County of Provence, having now no sons of his own. The Duke
of Millan fearing the Burgundian greatness, sends to confirm his League with
France.

The King of Portugal nearly allied to Duke Charles, comes to France to
procure a general peace. The old King of Sicily also comes to see his Nephew
King Lewis. Mean while the Duke of Burgundy takes Lausanne from the Switzers;
and shortly after Granson, where he hanged five hundred and twelve Switzers,
which so enraged the rest of that Nation; that they raised a great Army, fought
and defeated the Duke, took all his Baggage and ammunition, regained Granson,
unhanged and buried their Country men, and hanged as many Burgundians as they
found in the Town.

The Duke having recollected his dispersed Forces, and raised new, Flanders for
a supply of money, which was promised if the Dukes person or Dominions were in
danger, but not on a War so remote and needless: Notwithstanding he returns
with a new Army, and besieges Morat. Rene Duke of Lorrain then in France, is
made General of the Switzers, against Duke Charles their Common Enemy, having
obtained money and men from King Lewis; because he was to pass through the
Burgundian Territories to the Switzers. A second battle is fought, and a second
overthrow given to the Duke, 21 days after the first. The Dukes high spirit
could not be broken with this misfortune, but swelled bigger, raging to be
twice beaten by a young unskilful Prince, Switzers help, Lorrain is restored
again to his own Country with great joy: Duke Charles could not be dissuaded
by the King of Portugal, nor his other Friends, from fighting again with the
Switzers, nor believe that King Lewis had all this while contrary to the peace
aided Lorrain with men and money, obstinately goes again with a Fresh Army,
and besieges Nancy in the dead of Winter, where he lost both his Army and life.

The news of which was so vvelcome to the French King, Orange being of
great Power and wealthy, puts into the Kings hand, both the Duchy and
County of Burgundy, for the flower of the Nobility was killed in the last
three Battles: so little resistance could be feared: The King comes with an
Army into Piccardie, and regains his Towns there, which the Duke had kept from
him.

Mean while Mary the Duke's heir and only daughter, sends Ambassadors to the
King, desiring him to remove his Army from her borders, and showing that by the
Salique Law of France, she could not be excluded from the Counties of Flanders,
Artois, and the adjacent places, that he ought to protect and not injure a
young Lady and Orphan, who would make a fitter match for his son the Dolphin,
then the daughter of England can. These Ambassadors having goods and lands in
those places which the King had taken, in favor of themseves complied in some

Philip Crevecure Governor of Artois is absolved by King Lewis from his Oath of
Allegiance to Duke Charles; so that he becomes now servant wholly to the French,
by his means the King recovers Arras, and Boulongue. The King sends to Princess
Mary his Barbar, one Oliver, to persuade her privately to put her self under the
protection of France, from whence she is both by the Father and Mother: The
Princess was then at Gaunt, of whom the Townsmen were so careful, that they
suffered none to speak with her in private; wherefore the Barbar being
suspected, was commanded to depart thence, who presently retired to Turnay,
where he carried himself so cunningly, that he got thirty of the stoutest there
to aid him upon all occasions, wherefore he writes secretly to the Captains of
the next Garrisons, that they fail not to be at Turnay by break of day the next
morning, which was done; so one of the Gates was opened, they were let in, and
the Town taken. Upon this the Gantois assemble the States of Flanders, who
appoint a Counsel for governing the Princess: Then they send Ambassadors to
France, to acquaint the King, that the Princess had condescended to be ruled
altogether by their Counsel. The King willing to make dissension between the
Flemins and the Princess Mary's Counselors, assures the Gantois that their
Hugonet, brought him Letters from their Lady quite contrary to what they said;
wherefore when the Ambassadors were returned to Gaunt, the Chancellor Hugonet
is accused of Treason, and of the loss of Arras, and so is beheaded.

Shortly after this, the Gantois sets at liberty the Duke of Gelders son, who
had been imprisoned there by Duke Charles of Burgundy, him they employ to regain
Tournay: But the King's Garrison there sallies out upon him, defeats his Forces,
and kills him on the place. Arras hoping to be aided by the Gantois, rebelled
against the King, but he shortly reduced them again, and sends away the
Inhabitants to another part of the Kingdom, French men there. About this time,
Maximilian the Emperors son comes into Flanders, and matcheth with the Princess
Mary: A little before the Prince of Orange who had hitherto complied with the
French upon hope to recover by the King, his Grandfathers lands detained from
him by Duke Charles; and now perceiving he was deluded, raises Forces, and
fights the Governor, one thousand men are slain on both sides: hereupon a great
part of the Country revolts from the King, but Charles of Ambois the new
Governor sent by the King, recovers in a short time the Towns that had
rebelled, and burned Dole; and now the King began to entertain the Switzers,
6000 whereof he kept in pay continually, and put down the Archers instituted by
Charles 7. Great troubles Millan upon the death of Duke Gabeas, who was
murdered in a Church: Hele^ one son very young, Robert of Saint Severin the
Duke's next kinsman, labors to persuade the French King to attempt Italy, but
he was unwilling, because the French could never enjoy any thing they got
there, nor could he ever send Forces to aid the Florentins his allies, but
still they were set upon by Pope Sixtus, and Ferdinand King of Naples; yet to
intimidat the Pope, he calls a Gallican Synod at Orleans, to advise about the
reestablishing of the Pragmatick Sanction in France, and abolishing the power
of sending money thence to Rome for bulls; but here was nothing concluded: The
next year they meet again at Lions; mean while the Pope revokes his censures
against the Florentins, absolves and makes peace with them. The Kings
Ambassador returning from Florence, goes for Millan, where he receives in the
Kings name the homage due to him from Bonne, the Duchess in behalf of her
young son, for Genua, whereof he was then Lord, and which held France.

At that time Province fell to the French King by the death of Rene King of
Sicily. in whom the male kind of the house of Anjou failed, wherefore Anjou
and Main return to the King and Province also, by the last will of Rene, of
which young Rene Duke of Lorrain complained. In the interim Maximilian fights
the French at Ter^venne, defeats them, and becomes Master of the place: King
Lewis not willing to hazard any more upon uncertain battles, desires peace,
which was obtained by the death of Mary the Duchess, Maximilians wife, who
left two young children, Philip and Margaret, the Gantois who undertook the
tuition of the young England, young Princess Margaret now three years old,
should be conveyed into France to be betrothed to the Dolphin, with whom in
marriage should be given the Counties of Artois and Burgundy: To this the King
assented. The peace is concluded, and the banished Artoisuns returned again to
Aras, which since the banishment was new-named French Town: Not long after
this, King Lewis being sickly and 60 years old (an age which none of his
predecessors since Hugh Capiel the first King 1483
of that race have exceeded) departs this life, having acted the Fox rather
then the Lion all his reign; he was desirous before his death to see Reims for
the holy oil, which arrived at Plessis in the Suburbs of Toures, as he was
giving up the ghost.

CHAP. XXIII.
The prosecution of the History under Charles 8. Lewis 12. Francis 1. Henry 2.
Francis 2. Charles 8. Henry 3. Henry 4. Lewis 13. from the year 1483. (...)
1633. wherein the lives of the Popes, the affairs of Italy, Spain, and other

TO Lewis 11. succeeded his son Charles 8. at 13 years of age, whom his Father
would suffer none to see, but his domestic servants, nor learn any more Latin
but this sentence, qui nescit dissimulare, etc. He that cannot dissemble,
cannot reign. In the beginning of his reign he calls a Parliament at Toures,
where each man had liberty to speak, which was denied by the former King; here
complaints are made against him (though dead) for infringing their Liberties,
and ancient Customs, Anne the Kings eldest sister should have the charge of his
person, and a Counsel of twelve men to rule the Kingdom; some would have had
Lewis Duke of Orleans, first Prince of the blood, to be Governor; but that
motion was rejected, because he was too young, being twenty four years old
only, and under his mothers tuition: He thinking himself wronged by being
rejected from the government, endeavored to force it, therefore began to raise
men at his own Town of Orleans, and to make that the seat of the War; which the
Townsmen perceiving, shut their Gates against him: so he was forced to retire,
and raise forces elsewhere, which when he had done, were presently scattered by
the Kings Proclamation: therefore this was called the foolish War.

In Britany Peter Laudais the Dukes great Favorite, was extremely hated,
Laudais, whom they thought to apprehend in the Dukes Bedchamber, but he had
escaped by a back door; a great commotion is in the Town, thinking the D. had
been slain; but it was appeased, by his presence exhibited to the people.
Things being quieted, these Noble men that occasioned this uproar, are
banished; and Laudais in greater favor then ever: So that an order is made for
pulling down the Houses and Castles of all that had a hand in this conspiracy;
For effecting of which, an Army is raised: The banished Lords understanding
this, return to Britany, and raise an Army of their faction. But Laudais, whom
they understood was in the Castle of Nantes; they resolve then to pull him out
of the Dukes Arms; yet by general consent they choose a new Chancelour, whom
they sent to acquaint the Duke, that the peoples fury could not be satisfied
without the life of Laudais, yet promising that he should have a fair Trial
according to Law. So he was apprehended, imprisoned, and attached of many
heinous crimes, for which he was condemned, and hanged, before the Duke knew
his Trial was begun, who otherwise meant to have pardoned him; Orleans comes
into Britany, with a great Train, which so much dismayed the Lords, that they
repaired to the French King; then went out a report, that Orleans meant to
repudiate his crooked wife, the Kings sister, whom he was forced to mary, and
resolved to have for his wife, Anne the Duke of Britains only daughter and heir.

The exiled Lords striving to live securely in their own country, provoke the
King to raise Arms against the Duke of Britany, promising their best service
and assistance, which they did so well, that suddenly entering Britany, they
caused many Towns to yield to the King, taking many prisoners, of Britains that
were for the Duke, having made a Body of six hundred Horse, and sixteen
thousand Foot, were marching against the Enemy, to relieve Plermel, then
besieged; but in their march, one of the Army stood up, and wished them to
consider that their Duke was altogether ruled by the French, and yet they were
marching against the French; and that therefore it were best every man should
return to his own home, and live quietly. Upon this they all disbanded. Plermel
is taken; so is Venues, without blow. Nantes is besieged forty six days; from
which they rise, having done nothing, and with fire and sword they rage over
all the country, driving away all the cattle; at which the Britain Lords
French. So then they began daily to fall off from the Kings army Diverse Towns
also revolt from the King, to the Duke; some of which are re-taken again by the
French. This miserable condition of Britany made the Duke send Ambassadors to
the King, being then eighteen years of age. They found him at Angers, to whom
Count Dunois remonstrates the miserable condition of Britany, and that the Duke
never intended any War against France, 1488
but was contented rather to suffer his country to be overrun by the Kings
army, then to make resistance. They confess the Duke of Orleans, and Prince of
Orange, had been in Britany, not to raise arms against the King, as was falsely
given out, but to visit and comfort, the Duke being much afflicted for the
untimely death of his eldest daughter, which they were bound to do in respect
of their near consanguinity. They grant also, that the Britains took Arms to
relieve Plermel, but when they understood it was the Kings Army Tongeres, which
was besieged by English Britains; the Town at last was surrendered upon
Articles, that the Garrison should depart with their lives and goods. Then
followed a Skirmish, between the French and Britains, in which one thousand two
hundred on both sides were killed, the Duke of Orleans, and Prince of Orange
are taken prisoners. At last the Peace is concluded, upon this condition, that
the French shall retain what Towns they had taken in Britany. Shortly after,
the Duke Charles of France afterward married, having 1491
first put away his former wife, Maximilians daughter, which was one wrong, and
the other was, that he would mary with Maximilian's Spouse.

About this time, Christopher Columbus, a Seaman of Genua, understood by a
Shipwrackt Mariner, that in the Western Sea there were some Lands; 1492
wherefore he on the King of Spains charges, undertakes a Voyage thither, where
he discovers some Islands. Mean while King Charles is now in hope to obtain
Sicily, and Apulia, being heir by the last Will of Anjou, whose race was now
extinct. The banished Neapolitans, Lewis Sfortia, and Pope Alexander, now angry
with Alphonsus, encourage King Charles to make an Expedition Italy, which he
undertakes, with an Army of twenty thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse,
having no opposition; for Maximilians anger was pacified for the loss of the
daughter of Britany, by marying with Blanca Maria, sister to John Galeas, Duke
of Millan. Ferdinand of Spain, was beholding to the French for restoring
Perpenian; the cities of Italy were not against him; the Florentins help him
with money; John Galeas Duke of Millan was now dead, and his Uncle Sfortia
succeeded, who made no resistance; only Pope Alexander being reconciled to
Alphonsus, entertains his son Ferdinand, with his whole Army at Rome: But
understanding that all things succeeded well with Charles, and that he had
gotten Viterbium, he dismisseth the Neapolitans, Charles into the city; having
first for safety retired to the Castle of S. Anhelo, being guilty of his own
crimes, which he redeems by large Bribes given, and promises made to King
Charles, to whom all the 1494
kingdom of Naples submits, except the Castle, which held out a while.
Alphonsus being hated by his people, resignes the kingdom to his son
Ferdinand, and betakes himself to a Monastic life: but the Italians could not
brook long the French pride and rapacity; therefore Alphonsus and the Pope,
solicit Ferdinand, the Venetians, and Caesar, to make a League; in which, Lewis
Sfortia is included, for he was now angry with the French for the loss of
Novaria, taken from him by Lewis Duke of Orleans. Charles hearing what
preparations were against him, hastneth out of Italy, having exhausted the
kingdom Naples; but before his departure, Ferdinand of Spain had fortified
Rhegium in Calabria; and shortly after the Arragonians, with some Sicilian
Forces, recover all Calabria, and Apulia. Charles his Army now consisted but of
nine thousand, a part whereof he sent to Sena, for a Garrison, and some Troops
he dismisseth for Genua. The Florentins now were angry with him, because he
would not restore the Towns they put in his hands; the Venetians and Sfortians
fight him, but are worsted. Charles indeed got the Victory; but shortly after
lost all his booty, being carried away by the Mercenary Greeks, under the
Venetian: so the French return home, having brought nothing with them but the
Neapolitan disease, which the Spaniards conveyed thither from America. Novaria
is besieged by the confederates, where two thousand French lost their lives by
famine. At last the Town is surrendered, upon condition the besieged should have
their lives, and peace should be made with Sfortia, and the Venetians. A Peace
indeed was made, but of no force; for Sfortia France, but rather assisted
Ferdinand. Nor would the Venetians admit any other conditions then these, to
wit, that Charles should make War against the Turk, and leave the Kingdom of
Naples to Ferdinand, he paying an yearly Tribute. The French that were left in
Italy, fell off to Ferdinand, to whom they delivered up their strong Holds; so
that of twenty five thousand, few returned home, and those very infirm.
Ferdinand at the siege of Cajeta, died of a Fever, having lost his father not
long before, whose brother Frederick undertook the government of Naples; so
that in two years Naples saw five Kings; to wit, Ferdinand, Alphonsus,
Ferdinand 2. Charles of France, and Frederick; many disasters Spain in a short
time. Ferdinand of Spain his only son died, his sons wife, Maximilians
daughter, is brought to bed of a dead child, his son in Law Alphonsus, the King
of Portugals son, is killed with a fall from his Horse; his daughter, who was
married to Emanuel, cousin German of Alphonsus now named, died in childbed: so
the inheritance falls to Joan, who was married to Philip. Nor did King Charles
prosper with his unlawful marriage; for he left never a child to inherit his
Crown: He died suddenly of an Apoplexy. At Amboise his death was foretold by
Savonarila, whom the Florentins burned, for being too free in reproving the
vices of the Clergy. At 1493
this time Pope Alexander 6. sat in Rome, who tyrannized over the Cardinals,
Ursins, and shortly after received them into favor.

To Charles 8. succeeded his cousin German Lewis 12. who laid claim not only
to Naples, but to Millan also, by his Grandmother, the daughter of John Galeas;
therefore he makes a League with the Pope, Venetian, Florentin, and Ferdinand
King of Spain, against Lewis Sfortia of Millan, and Frederick of Naples. It was
then agreed, that if Lewis obtained Millan, Cremona should be delivered to the
Venetians, and that Caesar Borgia, the Popes son, who by marying Carlotta, the
French Kings Cousin, had laid aside his Cardinals Hat, should obtain Aemilia,
Flaminia, Picenum, and Umbria, to the ruin of the Spain and France, should
divide the Kingdom of Naples between them. Thus Charles, with a puissant Army,
drives Sfortia out of his Dukedom: so Borgia by turning out, or killing the
Princes of Aemilia, and Hetruria, obtains a large dominion in Italy, under
whose tyranny many execrable oppressions and villainies were perpetrated. This
Pope Alexander bestows on Ferdinand of Spain, the West, and on John of
Portugal, the East- Indies: to John in Portugal, succeeded Emanuel, son to his
Uncle Ferdinand. Americus Vesputius, a Florentin, discovered then the continent
of America, so called from him, for the use of Ferdinand of Spain. Sfortia with
the Pope, and Venetians, desires Cesars help against French; he upon promise of
money, marches unto Italy, but for want of pay, speedily returns again, and
makes peace with King Lewis, who entering Millan, in great splendour, was called
Duke of Lombardy; but Ascanius the Cardinal, Sfortia's brother, in short time
recovers what was lost, by reason the insubrians could not endure the French
insolences. King Lewis upon this raises a new Army, among which were six
thousand Switzers Caesar counseled Sfortia to use no Helvetians, but Savoyens
in his Army, which wholesome advice was rejected, and he thereby ruined; for
when the two Armies met, the Sfortian Switzers would not fight against the
French Switzers, their Country men, but shook hands, and left Sfortia for a
prey to the French, who took him prisoner, as the Venetians did his brother the
Cardinal, both these pined away in a French prison. 1500


Pope Alexander this year keeps his Jubilee, and sets up again the Angel on his
Castle at Rome, which the Thunder had beat down: the next year after, 1501
diverse Crosses were seen, some of a bloody color, upon the garments and
Europe, and of great sicknesses, which shortly after followed, to the
destruction of many thousands. Diverse Isles in the East- Brasil, and Calecut in
the West are detected. The Saracens are expelled Spain, and Ferdinand is
honored by the Pope, with the title of Catholic. Lewis of France, and
Ferdinand of Spain, send Forces against Frederick of Naples, whom they quickly
defeated; but the two conquering Kings could not accord long, they fell out
about dividing, and bounding 1502
their shares in Naples, till at last the Spaniards beat the French quite out
of that Kingdom and City, having first overthrown them in a Battle, and starved
the remainder in Cajeta. So the Spaniard obtains all, and for a Tribute 1504
Adrian the Cardinal, and some others. Borgias by causing himself to be sowed
within the belly of a Mule, lately unbowelled, discussed the force of the
poison, but could not perfectly recover his health. Alexander died the 11 year
of his Pontificate. Borgia seizes upon all his Treasure, and besets the
Vatican with twelve thousand armed men, to force the Cardinals to vote for him.
Presently the people take Arms; Borgias being yet infirm, is carried thence in a
Litter, and Piccolominy is elected, and named Pius 3. who died the thirtieth
day after his Election, as it is thought of poison. Borgias is detained in the
Castle of S. Angelo. Cardinal Julian Julius 2, a man fitter for Paul's sword,
then Peter's keys: He strips Borgias of all his Towns, Castles, and Wealth; and
at last gives him his liberty, who going to Naples, was taken by Consalvus, and
sent over to Spain. Thence having escaped prison, he goes to the King of
Navarre, and is killed in the Cantabrian War. Julius desiring to enlarge the
Churches patrimony, thrusts Beutivolos out of Bononia, and conspires against
the Venetians with Caesar, Spain, France, Ferrara, and Mantua; but afterward
upon their humble submission, without Cesars knowledge, and against the French
Kings will, he departs from the League and makes peace with the Venetians, and
vvithall falls upon Alphonsus, Duke of Ferrara, for siding French. Caesar and
King Lewis raging at the Popes insolency, by means of the Cardinals, call a
Synod at Pisae, whether he is cited to appear; and withal they take from him
Bononia, and Mirandula. He again to cross these Cardinals, convocates a Synod
at Rome, and excommunicates those that refuse to come; he stirs up also
Ferdinand against Caesar and the French, and calls him off from his African
Victories, who having imposed a Tribute upon the Numidians, transports his Army
into Italy, where he took in some strong Forts; with him Henry 8. of England,
is persuaded to join, being the Spaniards son in law; but Henry intends to
recover his right in Guien: on the other Spaniard thrusts John of Navarre out
of his kingdom, because being in League with France, he denied passage to the
Spaniard, and his Army. Pope Julius also calls the Switzers into Italy, and
makes John Medices, banished out of Florence, his Legate; he caused a rumor to
be spread, that Maximilian, and the Venetians, were agreed purposely that the
Brixians, who hated the French, might deliver the Town to the Venetians, which
they did, not without a great massacring of the French: But shortly after, the
French recover the Town again, kill the Venetian Garrison, and make a sacrifice
of the Townsmen. King Lewis finding his kingdom vexed on both sides by the
Spanish and English, he resolves to make Italy the seat of the War; therefore
he besieges Ravenna; the Pontificians and Spaniards come to raise the siege; a
great battle is fought on Easter day, which proved victorious to the Cesarians
and French, who slew nine thousand of the Enemy, and lost three thousand of
their own party. The Viceroy of Naples fled, John Medices is taken, Foxius the
French General, was killed, in whose Funeral eighteen Colors Spaniards, were
carried; diverse Towns submit to the French. 1511


Not long after this, Pope Julius causes the League between Caesar and the
French, to be broken. Maximilian sides with Julius and Ferdinand, he raises an
Army of Switzers, who were incensed against the French, for killing of their
Agent; by their means the French lose Millan, which they had possessed thirteen
years, and bring back Maximilian Sfortia, the son of Lewis. The French King is
proscribed by the Pope, who notwithstanding returns to Millan with a fresh
Army, which was utterly defeated by the Switzers, and the French driven quite
out of Italy. The Fathers of the Council of Pisa, for Switzers, remove to
Lions: Mean while the Pope and his party seize upon diverse Cities of Italy, by
the Helvetian help. But when Venice refused to restore to Caesar, Verona and
Vicentia, then the Pope makes a League with him against the Venetians, and they
with Lewis against the Pope and Spaniard. But when Julius saw that the Spaniard
and French were like to agree, 1513
he died for grief; to whom succeeded John Medices, the Popes Legate, who had
been banished Florence, and taken prisoner in the late wars at Ravenna. He is
now called Leo the tenth; it was this Julius who flung Peter's keys into Tibris,
and drew Paul's sword. Leo gave way that the stones which were hewn by day, for
repairing Saint Peter's Church, begun by Julius, should be carried Medices at
Florence. He procured Lewis 12. to leave off all Reformation of the Church, and
to subscribe to the Council of Lateran; he reconciled the Cardinals that fell
off from Julius; he was much indebted to his sister, but paid her out of the
indulgence money. About this time Lewis makes Peace with England, repudiates his
wife Anne of Britany, and marieth another, and shortly after died.

To Lewis succeeded by the Salic Law, Francis Valois, his next kinsman and son
in Law: He enters into League with England and Venice, and obtains Millan,
having first defeated the Switzers: the Pope having lost Parma and Placentia,
makes peace with Francis, and condescends to confirm by his Bull, France, for
Bishop or Abbot. King Ferdinand the Catholic, being dead, and his heir
Charles, Prince of Belgium; Maximilian knowing how needful the friendship of
France was, gives off the Venetian war, and makes peace with Francis. The Pope
takes Urbin from Francis Feltrius; causes Petruccius the Cardinal for plotting
against him, to be strangled, and those that knew the plot, to be deposed: For
completing the Senate, he makes at one time thirty one Cardinals, by which
means he enriched himself. Upon the falling off of the Switzers from the
French, Millan was re-taken, and restored to Francis Sfortia, Maximilians
brother. The Pope recovers Parma and Placentia, with joy of which, or rather
with poison, Hadrian 6. of Utricht, Charles Cesars Tutor; but the next year
after his Election, he died. King Francis upon the commotions of Spain,
regained almost all the kingdom of Navarre, and sends great Armies into Italy,
for recovering of Millan, which he took, and is not long after taken himself.
Having besieged Papia, and separated his 1525
Army, by the advice of Pope Clement 7 who succeeded Hadrian, the Pope for his
covetousness, is besieged in his Castle at Rome; his Palace in the Vatican is
plundered; Rome by the Duke of Burbon, for the Popes perfidiousness to Caesar, is
taken, and exposed with all her wealth, Priests and Temples, to the fury of
the soldiers. The Pope being famished, yeildeth to what conditions Caesar
pleased: Mean time the Florentins made themselves free, by casting 1527
out the Medices. Genua submits to the French, who besiege the Viceroy of
Naples, being then in Naples; the Viceroy of Sicily is defeated by Auria; but
whilst the French were in hope to take Naples, they were so waste with
sickness, which swept away 20000 of them, that they were forced to Lautrecus
died.

To Pope Clemens succeeded Alexander Farnesius, who took the name of 1528
Paul 3. he excommunicated and proscribed Henry 8. of England; calls the
Council of Trent, and urges Charles the Emperor to suppress the Lutherans in
his Dominions. To Paul succeeded John Maria Montanus, who called himself Julius
3d. King Francis holds a Treaty at Cambrey, where his ransom is paid, and his
hostages restored; he instigateth the Turk against Charles the Emperor, and
about the same time advances Learning in Paris, by allowing and maintaining
new Professors in that University. He makes war 1529
with the Savoyen, and loses his son the Dolphin, whom the Earl of
Montecucullo Rotchellers rebel against him, because he placed a Garrison there;
then he invades Piemont, Luxenburg, and Roussillon because his Ambassadors
were killed as 1538
they were going that way, to make a League with the Turk. He takes many Towns
in Piemont, having fought a great battle there with the Imperialists, of whom
fifteen thousand were slain. He recovers Bollen, and invades England, with
which at last he made Peace, and then died, about three months after the death
of Henry the 8. of England, whose differences were reconciled a little before;
he reigned 33 years. 1547


To King Francis succeeded his son Henry 2. by Katharin Medices: He falls
Belgium overrun and waste Campania; the Pope for grief that the Catholic
cause in England died with Queen Mary, falls suddenly sick, of which disease he
died; to whom succeeded Marcellus 2d, who the 22 day after his Election, died
of an Apoplexy. Petrus Caraffa succeeded, and called himself Paul 4. About
these times Ferdinand Cortez in twenty years space, subdued 1551
all the parts of America about Mexico; Varga and Pizarus, all Peru, with the
City of Cusco: so did the Portugals take diverse places in the East- Indies.
Charles the Emperor being dead, the French renew the war with his son Philip;
therefore a great Army is sent under Francis Duke of Guise, into Campania and
Naples: at S. Quintin a cruel battle is fought, in which the French are utterly
defeated, and most of their Nobility taken, upon which the Town presently 1557
surrendered. Bordeaux rebels for the taxes laid on them, but the Constable
forces them to submit, and to burn their privileges. The ^ame Constable
appeaseth a rebellion in Gascony, raised upon the custom of Salt. About this
time died Henry of Navarre, whose son in Law Vendosme, feizeth on a part of
Navarre. Mean while Casal is taken by the French, but are beat at sea by the
Belgians. The French besiege Doway, but in vain, and are defeated at Graveling:
At last Piemont and Savoy being restored to the Duke, the Dolphin married
Scotland, and peace made with Spain, by the marriage of Elizabeth, King Henry's
daughter to King Philip. In the Nuptial solemnities, 1559
King Henry at a Tilt, is wounded in the right eye by Montgomery, of which he
died in great torture, God letting him feel some part of those tortures, with
which he tormented the Protestants: he died the forty third year of his age,
and of his reign the thirteenth: not long after died Pope Paul 4th, who set up
the Inquisition at Rome, against the Lutherans, but after his death, the people
in a tumult, brake open the prison door, and let out the prisoners, burnt the
house, and for three days together, abused the Popes Marble Statue, and all
Monuments of the Caraffae in the City were defaced.

To Henry 2d, succeeded his son Francis 2d, who though he was young, yet was
beginning to be as cruel against the Hugonets, as his father was, by burning
Annas Burgius his body, after it had been hanged: At which, the Protestants
were so incensed, that they conspire to seize on the King, Amboise, and to carry
him away; but the plot was discovered and prevented. Lewis Burbon Prince of
Conde, is suspected to have had a hand in this plot, therefore is imprisoned:
But whilst at Orleans, the King and his Peers there assembled, were about to
bring him to his Trial, the King fell sick and died, not having reigned full
two years; his mother is made Regent. To Pope Paul 4. succeeded John Angelus
Medices, who took the name of Pius 4. King Philip of Spain, causes 28
Gentlemen of great families, to 1560
be burnt for their Religion: He gives 30000 Ducats toward the Printing of
the Bible called Complatensis.

To Francis 2d, succeeded his brother Charles 9. under whom the Protestants
Beza, Martyr, and Marlorat, had exasperated the Pontificians by their writings;
then Pens were turned into Swords. Francis of Guise stood up for the Papists,
and Lewis of Conde for the Hugonets. A battle is fought, in which were slain on
both sides about nine thousand. Conde was taken prisoner, and Guise shortly
after killed by a Pistol shot. Upon this, the Queen Regent gives way for the
Protestant Nobility to exercise their Religion in their houses, and the people
in the suburbs. Pius 4. died, to whom succeeded Michael Chisserius, called by
the name of Pius 5. Conde 1562
against the promise made him when he was taken, is shot to death. Shortly
after at Monconture, another battle is fought, in which the Hugonets were
Gascony, and took so many Towns, that at last they forced a peace for
themselves. Mean while the King of Spain marieth the fourth time, with his
sisters daughter. The Duke of Alba tyrannizeth in Belgium, and turns out the
English thence. The Netherlanders weary of oppression, begin to vindicate their
liberty. Pius 5. dies, to whom succeeded Gregory 13. France having rested a
while from Civil broils, falls to Clandestin butcheries. At Paris the Nuptials
of Henry of Navarre, with Margaret the Kings sister, are solemnized and
besprinkled with Protestant blood: The chief Protestants are invited to the
Wedding; suddenly by command from King Charles the Paris are massacred, without
respect of age or sex. Caspar Castilios head is sent as a present to the Pope,
and letters from the King, who writes, that in few days he put to death above
seventy 1572
thousand: For this slaughter was not only in Paris, but also in other Towns of
France. This Massacre was committed on Saint Bartholomews day, betimes in the
morning. The next year after, Henry King Charles his brother, besieges Rochel,
possessed by the protestants; but being elected King of Poland, he leaves the
Siege, and goes into Poland; where having reigned six months, he is called
home to possess the Crown of France by 1574
the death of his brother Charles, who reigned fourteen years. Philip of Spain,
understanding that his son Charles was grieved for the cruelties exercised on
the Netherlanders, puts him in prison, where he lost his life, upon suspicion
that he intended Treason against his father.

Pope Gregory reformed the Calender, which occasioned some troubles in diverse
places; but in France, by Proclamation, it is commanded generally to be
received: Diverse Colleges of Jesuits are erected under Pope Gregory, and in
Rome for strangers; he was suddenly taken with the squinzy, which suffocated
him in two hours. Henry of Navarre strives to have a National Synod of
Protestants, for settling of their differences; for this cause he sends his
Ambassador to the Princes, who gave him good words, but nothing could be done
by reason of the troubles of those times. The Cardinals of 1583
Burbon and Guise, with other Pontifician Ringleaders, conspire against Henry
of Navarre, utterly to destroy him. A great Army therefore is raised; Henry
procures for his assistance, out of Germany, 20 thousand Foot, and five
thousand Horse: but these were wholly overthrown by the Guisians, being first
Helvetians. The same year King Henry 3d, was so curbed by the Guisian faction,
that his subjects began to slight him; wherefore to be rid of their power, he
under show of great friendship and serious business, invites the Guisian
brothers to a Conference, whom he presently caused to be slain, and the rest of
their confederacy to be imprisoned. Katherin Medices, 1588
the Kings mother, called by some the fourth fury of France, as being the
fomenter of seditions, died with grief. The Parisians declare Charles Main
brother to the Guises, Governor of Paris, and of the Isle of France, leaving
out the Kings name: but the Sorbonists were against Main. He having raised an
Army, declares he will maintain the Roman Religion. Lions, Orleans, Rohan,
Henry was assisted by the King of Navarres forces, and the Nobility; by which
the Pontifician Army is defeated, and Paris so strictly besieged, that they
were like to starve within. When in the mean while Jacob Clement, a Dominican,
under pretense of speaking with the King, run him in the belly with a poisoned
knife, whom the King killed immediately with the same knife. King Henry died of
his wound within fourteen hours, having first named for his heir Henry of
Navarre; to whom the Nobility swore Allegiance, conditionally, that he would
permit Liberty of Conscience; then he falls presently to weakening the Guisian
faction, and taking in of Towns. In the time of King Henry the third, the
Navarre and Conde are by the Pope excommunicated: Conde at last is poisoned,
and Navarre excluded from succession. The Battle of Courtrey is fought, in
which Navarre was victor, and the Duke Ioyeuse slain. 1589


In Henry 4. King of Navarre, after seven Civil Wars, the Crown of France is
transferred to the House of Burbon, which Henry as yet could not quietly enjoy;
for De Main troubles him, till he was defeated at Arque. The Parliament of
Rohan pronounce all those Traitors, who side with the King. The Popes quarrel
with him for his Religion; to wit, Gregory 13. and his successor Felix
Montaltus, or Sixtus 5. who from obscurity, was elevated to this Paris, when it
was again besieged by the King, fearing to make Spain, (which now gaped for
France) too great. Yet King Henry out of pity to his people, permits Alexander
Farnesius, to carry in provisions. Pope Sixtus having procured the Spaniards
displeasure, for not affording his assistance to them, fell into a deep
melancholy, and so died, having before showed great joy for the conversion of
the Marquess of Baden to the Roman faith; which Marquess, James by name,
shortly after died of a dyssentery, in the flower of his youth. Presently John
Baptista Castanaeus, is elected, and called Urban 7. whose election was 1590
accompanied with an Earthquake that shook Austria, Moravia, and Bohemia, with
an extraordinary dry Summer, that the Rivers were like scalding water Urban
being taken with a fever, died within thirteen days, leaving the Chair to
Nicholas Sfondratus, or Gregory 14. he was born the seventh month after his
conception, and died the tenth month after his election. About which time the
plague and famine so raged in Italy, that at Rome in one year there died sixty
thousand people: yet this Gregory spent on the French wars, five hundred
thousand Crowns of the public Treasury, and forty thousand out of his own
coffers. King Henry perceiving that Farnesius would not fight, caused his Army
to take up their Winter Quarters all about Paris. Farnesius after four furious
assaults, takes Corbilium upon Seen, which by the King is again retaken. The
Spaniards are defeated by the Momorancies, and the Savoyen prepartions in
Province, hindered by Digvier. The Germans plunder Lorrains Country, and are
now on the borders of France. Parma returns to the Netherlands, having enough
to do with Grave Maurice. The Popes Army under Sfondrat, the Popes Nephew, did
no great matter; for Parma not being Gregory's death; to whom succeeded
Johannes Antonius of Piemont, called by the name of Innocent 9. he sat but two
months, and was of the Spanish faction: to him succeeded Hippolitus
Aldobrandinus, or Clement the 8. King 1592
Henry besieges Rohan, which at last is relieved by the Duke of Parma. Diverse
skirmishes and encounters there were, to the loss of much blood. Parma leaving
the greatest part of his Army in France, returns to Belgium, and deludes the
King by delays. At last as he was returning now the third time to drive the
King from the siege of Paris, he was taken in Artois, with sudden and sharp
tortures in his body, of which he died: Maurice strives to take the Sluice
Steinvick, and some other Towns. King Henry sets out a Remonstrance, whereby he
declares that he is no enemy to the Roman Religion, as the world thought, but
that his intentions and endeavors were to maintain and preserve it in all
places, where hitherto it has continued; for this cause the Parliament of
Turon condemns the Popes Bull, in excommunicating King Henry for heresy, and
causes it to be burnt by the Hangman, as a seditious and impious Libel: The
Popes Legate is also commanded to appear before them, that he might be tried by
Law, and receive due punishment for his temerity.

The French being weary of their Civil wars, an assembly of the Guisian
faction, Isabella, the Infanta of Spain; but that election was against the
Salic Law: others for Ernestus the Archduke, Governor of Belgium, Farnesius
the Duke of Parma being dead; which Ernestus was also appointed Husband for the
Infanta: but this motion was generally rejected. Others again, will have him to
be King, whom the Spaniard shall nominate, and that he shall mary the Infanta.
Henry son to Guise that was killed, is nominated King by some; Main seeing they
could not agree about the Election, procured three months Truce with Navarre,
to gain so much time for settling the kingdom. This Truce was disliked by the
Popes Legate. Upon this the Nobility persuade Salic Law, that an Heretic should
be King of France, and against reason, that he should be called the most
Christian King, who was the chief Patron of Heresy, and an enemy to that
Christian profession which has continued in France hitherto since the
beginning of Christianity. The King fearing all would forsake him, if he
continued a Calvinist, desires a Conference with the Bishops, and other Doctors
of the Church. At length after five hours discourse, the King in white, with a
shining Taper before him, goes to S. Dennis Church, where being asked by the
Bishop of Biturix, what his desire was; answered, his desire was to be received
into the bosom of the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Lewis Gonzaga, Ambassador to
the Pope, who in all humility and submission, desires the Popes Benediction:
who answers, that he shall never be persuaded the Kings reconciliation to the
Church to be sincere, till an Angel from heaven come down, and tell it in his
ear; but the Guisians to pacify Pope Clement, cause the Counsel of Trent,
purely, and without any condition to be proclaimed and observed, and strengthen
their own side as well as they could; but some Monks suborne one Barterius to
kill the King, who was prevented at Melodunum, 1594
and put to death: The Truce drawing to an end, the Pope, Spaniard, and Main,
are devising new plots. Mean while Meux, Orleans, Bourges, and others fall off
from the League to the King, who is inaugurate at Chartres by Thuanus Bishop
there.

In the absence of Main, Brissacus Governor of Paris opens the gates and
delivers the Town to the King with such order and care, that there was no
killing nor plundering at all; The Garrison is dismissed without the least
affront offered them. Rowen follows the example of Paris, so does Poictiers
and many more Towns; but other places that refused, are forced by Arms to
submit. Henry of Guise reconciles himself to the King, who perceiving that the
Spaniard did still foment Factions in his Kingdom, upon the persuasions of
Henry of Bullion, he sends supply of men and arms to Grave Maurice against the
Spaniards. Shortly after one John Castle being persuaded the King was yet an
Heretic, and not truly Paris where the King was, whom he struck at with his
knife, and beat out two of his teeth, intending to have stabbed him in the
throat: The fellow is presently apprehended and examined, he confessed his
intention, and that he was bred in the Jesuits College at Paris, but was sorry
he had not killed that Heretic King; whereupon he is condemned and tortured to
death. The Jesuits are banished France, and it is made Treason for any to send
their children out of the Kingdom to be instructed by them. The young man's
father is banished for 9 years, and his goods confiscate, his house is levelled
with the ground, and a Pyramide of Marble erected with a golden Cross, Ernestus
being 1595
dead at Brussels, Peter Gusman undertakes the Government of Belgium, and
regains Hoi, lately taken by Henry. He fights a great battle with Bullion, near
Durlan which he takes with diverse other Towns. After this the King is
entertained at Lions with all solemnity, and at Rome by the intercession of
Bishop Perrone, and many other Prelates whom he had sent thither, he obtains the
Apostolical Benediction, and is absolved from his Curse; so being received
into the bosom of the Church, is [most Christian] Charles Main, Henry of
Savoy, Ioyeuse, and other great men are reconciled to the King, who freely
pardons them, and undertakes to pay their debts, but to the grief and
oppression of the people. Cassal Consul of Marsylles is slain, for intending
to deliver up that City to the Spaniard: So all now is quieted except Britany.
1597


A peace between France and Spain is at last concluded. Mercurian with his
Spanish Faction in Britany submits to King Henry, to whom King Philip restores
Callis, Capel, and diverse other places, and he to Philip the Principality of
Carolotons; and so all old quarrels are composed. Savoy hereafter Salusses
between France and Savoy, was not yet decided, but left to the Popes
arbitration; two years after the War is renewed, in which the Duke loses his
Cisalpin Jurisdiction, his Fort of Saint Catherin which 1599
threatened Geneva, is demolished, and diverse other Towns surrendered to the
French. A Divorce being made between the King and his Queen Margaret, sister of
Henry the second, because of their consanguinity, to which Divorce she
willingly assented, only desiring that in stead of the Kings Wife, she might
be called his Sister: I say, this Divorce being made long since, the King is
desired to marie again for procreation. Therefore Mary the daughter of Francis
Duke of Florence, is betrothed to him, by whom he had Lewis, with other
children. The King was by Peronne accused of diverse falsquotations in Philip
Mornays Books, purposely to disgrace him and his profession: The edict of Nan^s
concerning the Protestants Privileges, procured much hatred against the King,
by the Pontificats; 1600
therefore diverse desperate plots against him were contrived, and Charles
Ridicove of Gaunt, Peter Angere, and Nicholas English justly suffered death. At
this time was seen in Paris, a Cornuted Monster, some Virgins also in France
and Germany, were known to endure hunger three years and more, a strict Law is
made against Duels, and death threatened to the challenger. To Clemens the 8 at
Rome, succeeded Alexander Medices, called by the name of Leo, who died 25 days
after, his successor was Leo Camillus, or Paul 5. Duke Ioyeuse enters the
Order of Capuchins, after a while takes arms, and then returns to his
Monastery. Cardinal Aldebrandin comes into France to make the Duke of Savoys
peace, whom the French had subdued for not restoring Salusses, according to the
Articles of peace at Verv^que. Marshall Byron intends Treason against the
King, is sent for, and denies all that Fin^us his accuser laid against him;
but the proofs were 1602
so manifest, that he was condemned and privately executed; on the Scaffold he
opened his breast, and showed the wounds he had received in the Kings Cause. By
Father Cottons means the Jesuits are restored to certain places. Count Avergne
is imprisoned for new practices: After this the Duke of Orleans is born to the
King, and the year after was born the Kings third son, the Duke of Anjou, and
two years after, Mary was born, 1607
who married to King Charles of Great Britain. King Henry after he had Germany,
which caused 1609
diverse suspicions among the Catholic party, is at last murdered by Ravilliac
in his Coach, as he was viewing the preparation that was making for his Queens
reception, who was Crowned the day before: He was stabbed twice in the heart;
the murderer being apprehended would confess nothing; neither for fair words
nor tortures, nor did he show any signs of sorrow, affirming that he was set
on by none but by inward 1610
motions, and the dictates of his conscience, having put on this resolution
three year a go: So he was put to death by exquisit tortures of burning
pincers, and his body torn in sunder by horses: In this Kings time France. The
Jesuits Pyramid was demolished, and a fountain erected in its place. The Order
of Carmelit Nuns is set up by Catherin of Longevil in the Suburbs of Saint
Jacob. A French Colonie is transported into Canada in America.

King Henry the fourth of France being dead, his Queen is made Regent during
her sons Minority, who is publicly proclaimed heir to the Crown of France, and
so the great Army is disbanded, which some thought had been intended for
Cleve,, others for Artois, others for the Empire. The Queen Regent brought much
obloqui and envy on herself, by preferring Ancre her favourit; and of the
Florentin Family, before all the Princes of France: It was said he used
enchantments, he held indeed the young King, the Queen, and the whole kingdom
in subjection: He exhausted the Exchequer, made Laws, and unmade them as he
pleased: Which caused Henry of Burbon, Prince of Conde, Henry of Bullion,
Nivern, and others to forsake the Court in discontent, and to raise Tumults.
The Decrees of the Counsel of Trent at last are divulged, by the importunity
of the Italian and Pontificiall Party; but the Parliament of Paris ordered
that the writings of Mariana, Suarez, Belarmin and others concerning the Popes
power of deposing Kings, should be suppressed. Cardinal Perone with the Clergy,
and most of the Nobility stand up in defense of the Counsels Authority; but
King James by his writings declared he 1614
was of a contrary mind. Conde's and Ancres Forces had a sharp encounter, but
Ancre prevailed, which Victory was at last his destruction, and Conde's
captivity: For when Longueville, Bullion, Main, and other Princes Conde was
detained as a prisoner in Paris by Ancres means, they suddenly depart the
Court, and are proscribed by the King: The Parisians being madded at this, fall
presently to plundring of Ancres treasures, and spoiling his house, so that
with much ado were they pacified at last by the Kings Guard. The Princes
publish a Remonstance, to let the people know what corruptions were now
maintained, both in Court and Kingdom, and that therefore they were
necessitated to take arms to suppress these abuses; they also by their
friends, privately acquaint the King of the dangers that would fall on him and
his Kingdom, 1615
if such abuses were tolerated, and Ancres treacherous actions countenanced;
therefore they humbly beseech him that he would not hazard his own fortunes,
and the welfare of a most flourishing Kingdom for one man's sake. Upon this,
Order is given to Vitrius Captain of the Guard, to dispatch Ancre, who one day
stops the proud and great Favorit, as he was entering the Palace. At this, Ancre
presently began to draw upon the Captain, but before he could pull out his
sword, he is shot dead on the place with a Pistol: When his death was known in
the City, the people exceedingly rejoiced; and to show their hatred on him,
(though now dead) they found out his corpse which was privately buried, this they
Blois; and Conde for his unruly tongue is detained in custody.

After these sad passages, some joy follows in France upon the marriage of
Victor Amadeus, the Duke of Savoys eldest son, Prince of Piemont, with
Christina the Kings sister, the King was married already to the Infanta of
Spain. The Queen Mother being weary of her abode in Blois, got Duke de Espernon
to convey her thence to Angolesme without the Kings knowledge, who took this
ill, and as a slighting of his Authority, therefore he raises an Army
purposely to be revenged on Espernon; but being at last pacified by diverse
messages from Espernon and the Queen Mother to him, she is permitted to stay at
Andes; and Conde is set free. A certain Italian being found teaching of
Atheism at Toulouse, is by the Kings 1620
command apprehended, his tongue cut out, and he burnt alive. Mean while the
French King is courted by Ambassadors from the Emperor, Frederick Count
Palatin, now in contestation for Bohemia. King Lewis sends Ambassadors to Spain
for opening the Valtelin, which being the mouth of Italy, was now stopped and
shut up against the French and Switzers, diverse contestations were held about
this business, but still interrupted. At this time de Luine the Kings Favorit,
was in great power on whom he had conferred all Ancres estate: This was ill
resented by the Peers, chiefly by Longuevil, Nemours, Main, and Rohan, who
betake themselves to the Queen Mother; but the King preventing them by the
faithful service of Conde, possesses Cain in Normandy, before the Princes
could unite their Forces. More of their towns submit to the King: At length the
Queens army being defeated, the Princes were brought to such a strait, that
they were fain to Petition for pardon, and the Queen Mother to acknowledge her
sons mild Government: then the Kings army is turned upon Gascony; those of
Bearn were commanded ^o restore to the Roman Clergy, their old Rites and
Revenues, which they refusing to France. This put the Protestants to new shifts
and consultations, diverse meetings to this purpose were had; a Synod is called
at Rotchel, which contrary to the Kings strict and peremptory command is held,
to the undoing afterward of that town, and the Protestant cause in France; for
the King subdued the Town of Saint John after a hard siege of 20 days, and
beats down the Walls; the like he did to Clerak in Gascony, and many other
Protestant Towns to the number of 60. Montalban also is besieged a long time,
but in vain; for sickness and the winter floods forced the besiegers to rise
and be gone: Among diverse that lost their lives here, Henry of Main, Viceroy
of Gascony was one. After this, whilst the King was beleaguering Mugurt, Duke
d' Luin, Master of the Horse (which place Ancre had before) in the midst of his
honors and wealth, which was exceeding great, died in December: A sudden fire
having in October before burned down the two bridges of the goldsmiths, and the
exchange, to the great loss of the Merchants. 1622


Pope Paul 5 died of an Apoplexy the 69 year of his age, and the 16 of his
Pontificat: K. Lewis, the pacification being broke, besieges and takes
Montpelier with some other Protestant towns, at last upon the sight of so much
blood shed, and so many slaughtered men, he comes to a new agreement, at which
diverse of the Pontifician side were offended. At Rome Gregory 15. called before
Alexander Lodoisius, who succeeded Pope Paul 5. died of a Palsy: To whom
succeeded Cardinal Maphaeus Berberin, he took the name of Urban 8. In France
things being somewhat quieted, King Lewis enters into league with the Venetians
and Savoyens against Spain, for 1624
regaining of the Valtelin, which after many skirmishes and towns taken, French
and Savoyens enter Italy, and make war against Genua, for furnishing the
Spaniard with money and provisions; but a new fire of civil war breaking out in
France, calls home the French forces out of Italy. The Duke of Sonlize with the
Rotchellers had defeated the Kings fleet in a sea-sight; whereupon under
Montmerancy the King renewes his sea fight, and beats Sonlize, who presently
fled into England. Rotchel is besieged both by sea and land, diverse Forts being
erected against it, diverse eruptions are made from the town, diverse Petitions
are exhibited for peace, but all in vain; the Protestants complain that the
Articles of the last pacification were not kept by the Rotchel, were not as yet
demolished, that the Synodicall meetings of the Ministers were hindered;
hereupon the two brothers, Rohan and Sonlize, the chief of the Protestant Party
in France, implore the assistance of England, which now stood not upon good
terms with France, since the sending away of Queen Mary's French Clergy, for
being too busy about her confessions and penances; the English also had taken
some French Ships carrying provision for the Spaniard, and the French had made
a stay of all English goods there, for satisfying their los. ses: Hereupon a
fleet under the Duke of Buckingham is sent to the Isle of Ree, lying over
against Rotchel; at first he drove the French into the Castle, but afterward
out of carelessness he suffered his forces to be cut off, and so returns home
with loss and dishonor. Vendome the Kings bastard brother is imprisoned.
Diguiers lat^y converted to the Church of Rome, is made Master of the horse,
Cardinal Richelieu being Admiral of France, is employed against Rotchel. Conde
rages with fire and sword against their Gascony, putting all ages and sexes
promiscuously to death; but at last has a defeat given him by Rohan; the
Rotchelers stoutly resisted the siege, so long as their hopes of English aid,
and their provisions 1628
continued, but when both failed them, and famine began to prevail, their stout
hearts were forced to yield, for the harbor was so stopped and barricadoed,
that ships could not get in to relieve them, nor return the provisions which
Buchingham had borrowed from them, therefore they surrender the Town, promise
to pay the fine laid on them, and to maintain the Kings Garrison there, till
they build him a Castle within the walls, Rohan and Sonlize are both comprised
within these articles of Rotchel conditionally they restore what they yet
withhold from the King; Montalban also with some other places are included in
the same peace, if within 3 months they lay down arms, and submit to the King;
upon this peace between the King and his Protestant subjects: a peace also is
concluded between England and France, by the death of Buckingham, who began and
fomented this war.

France being now at peace with England, is better able to assist the Niverne,
Charles by name, to recover his right in Mantua, which 1629
he claimed (his cousin German Vincentius being now dead) as his due both by
will and propinquitie of blood: this Principality he seized on without
acquainting Caesar Lord of the Fee; the Spaniard and Savoyen stormed at this,
who had an old quarrel with the Dukes of Mantua about Montsferrat; so now
France and Spain renew their old strife. The Savoyen sides with Spain, the
Venetians with Mantua; Naples, Sicily, Millan prepare for war. The quarrel in
France between Gasto Duke of Orleans, and Cardinal 1630
Richelieu, took rise from the desire the Monsieur had to coin money with his
own stamp, as being next heir to the Crown, and a privilege equally belonging
to him, and to the King; this was denied and

The King by the Cardinals advice, set a Guard upon his Brother; this the Duke
considering to be both dangerous and disgraceful, withdrawes himself
privately thence, and raises an Army of Malcontents: A battle is fought, in
which the Duke is defeated, and Montmorancie taken in the skirmish; the King to
appease all civil differences, is content to pardon his brother, and his
Courtiers; he commands 1632
all foraigne Soldiers to depart the Kingdom, Montmorancie is Lions in great
State; but Montmerancie, with whom the King was more implacable, is condemned
of High Treason. Much intercession was made for him, but in vain. His head is
cut off at Tolouse the thirty fifth year of his age. Gasto being struck with
this rigor, departs the kingdom, and wrote back to the King, that he was not
now tied to any Articles or Covenants, yet promises that he will act nothing
to the prejudice of his Native Country.

CHAP. XXIV.
A Prosecution of the English History, under the reigns of Henry the 4th, Henry
Henry the 6th; from the year 1399. till the year 1460. containing diverse
passages of the French and Scots affairs.

HEnry the fourth of Bullinbrook, Duke of Hartford, son and heir to John of
Gaunt, the younger brother of Lionel D. of Clarence, is elected and Crowned
King, his predecessor 1399
King Richard being deposed as is already said. Which deposition is condemned
by John Bishop of Carlisle, in that first Parliament assembled by King Henry 4.
Marshal, and imprisoned in the Abbey of S. Albons; then was the Crown intailed
to King Henry and his heirs, and forthwith Henry the Kings eldest son is made
Prince of Wales, D. of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester. After the Parliament was
ended, the K. is invited to Oxford, where solemn Justs were to be holden, by
Edw. Plantaginet Duke of Aumarle, Thomas Holland Duke of Surry, John Holland
his brother Duke of Exeter, both half brothers to King Richard, John Montague
Salisbury, Hugh Spencer Earl of Gloucester, with others, who pretending a
Triumph, intended the Kings destruction privately, by Indentures under their
hands and seals. All these plotters met at Oxford, attended with a strong guard
of Archers, only Aumarle was absent, because his father the old Duke, having
found out the plot, by the Indentures, which by chance he spied in his sons
breast, made haste to acquaint the King therewith, which the young Duke
perceiving, being well mounted, out-rod his father, and came to Windsor Castle,
where the King then was, preparing for his Oxford journey, which he diverted by
revealing the Treason, and so obtained his pardon. The King presently raises
an Army to suppress those conspirators, Magdalen (who was one of the plotters,
and much resembled the deposed King) in royal robes, giving out he was King
Richard; and so with all their Troops 1400
they march toward London, against the King, who was now on his march with
twenty thousand men toward them. The noise of the Kings approach so
disheartened the companions of these traitorous Lords, that they ran away and
left their Lords helpless, and comfortless, who shortly after in their flight
are taken and executed. 1401


The King being delivered from this danger, caused Richard to be murdered (as
is said) left in his name the like Treason might be attempted: Charles France,
Father in Law to King Richard, hearing of his sufferings and wrongs, but not as
yet of his death, raises an Army to relieve him, and to be revenged on King
Henry. He was marched as far as Piccardy, where he understood that King Richard
was dead, whereupon he changes his resolution, knowing he could do the dead no
good, and disbandeth his Army: Yet shortly after, purposing to be revenged on
King Henry, by taking his towns in Aquitan, raises another Army; but before he
was ready, King Henry was landed in France with an English Army, conducted by
Piency Earl of Worcester; which caused King Charles alter his mind, and
disband his forces. Yet Henry distrusting the weakness of his Title, desires
that Isabel King Charles his daughter, and wife sometime to King Richard, should
be married to his eldest son Prince of Wales; which Charles refused to do,
wherefore she is conveied into France, and married to her cousin Charles, her
uncles eldest son, the Duke of Orleans. The noise of the late Treason, of the
French preparation, of the murder of King Richard, animated the Scots and
Welsh against him. Owen Glendor spoils the Marches near him: The Lord Gray of
Ruthen, and Edmund Mortimer, rightful heir to the Crown, are sent against him;
but they lost the battle, and are taken prisoners: Edmund is kept in a dark
Dungeon, on 1402
hope the King would ransom him, which was least of his thoughts, knowing it
was more safe for him, to have Edmund a prisoner, then at liberty. The Scots
invade the Northern parts, but are repulsed by King Henry, who pursues them
with fire and sword into their own Country. But he was no sooner gone, when
they return with twenty thousand spoiling Northumberland; Sir Henry Hotspur son
and heir to Henry Piercy, fell upon them, killed ten thousand, and took five
hundred prisoners; among which were four Earls. The next year Glendor, from
France, to be Leaders of his disordered Rout: But twelve of their best ships
were drowned in a storm, the rest returned home with much difficulty. After
this, twelv thousand French are sent into Wales, who safely landing, joined
with the Welsh forces, consisting of ten thousand. King Henry in his own person
marches with a strong army into Wales: Upon the report of which, the French
doubting more of the Welsh inconstancy, then of their own power or valor;
return to their ships without striking stroke. Hereupon the Welsh fled and
vanished, so that the King finding no enemy to fight with, returns in peace.

King Henry to strengthen himself with friends abroad, against his troubles 1403
at home, married with Jane, Widow of John, Duke of Britany, and gave his eldest
daughter Blanch in marriage to William Duke of Bavarr, son and heir apparent of
Lodowick Emperor; then he matched Philip his youngest daughter to the King of
Denmark. After this, Piercy of Northumberland, Piercy of Worcester, and Henry
Hotspur, are required by the King to deliver up to him their Scots prisoners.
This they refuse to do, as being against the Law of Arms, which caused some
distaste* so that discontent daily rising, the Piercies desire the King to
ransom Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March, their imprisoned Cousin, hoping thereby
to restore him to his Crown; this is denied Owens prisoner, to countenance the
Welsh rebellion, and treacheries against his Crown. Upon this, the Piercies in
anger paid his ransom, and set him free on their own cost, and withal made a
League with Owen Glendor, to depose King Henry, with whom also joined the
Scots, the Earl of Stafford, and Scroop, Archbishop of York, the beheaded Earl
of Salisburies brother, with many others; then they published and sent him
these ensuing Articles: 1. That against his Oath he took after his banishment,
never to meddle with the King nor Crown, has wickedly seized on the Crown, and
made himself King. 2. That he had imprisoned King Richard, and caused him to be
murdered. 3. That he has ever since unjustly kept the Crown from Edmund
Mortimer, the true heir, as being of Clarence the elder brother to John of
Gant, father to the usurping King. 4. That he had imposed on the people diverse
needless and heavy Taxes. 5. That against his Coronation Oath, he had procured
Burgyships for the Parliament, of such as would serve his turn. 6. That he has
hitherto denied to ransom his Cousin, giving out falsely he was become a
voluntary prisoner, to color the Welsh Treason and Rebellion. And so upon
these Articles, they defy the King, vow his destruction, and the Earl
Mortimers restitution. Hereupon Armies are raised on both sides; and near
Shrewsbury a battle is fought, in which a great part of the Scots who bravely
assaulted the King, are cut off; Hotspur, with some other prime Leaders, and
many thousands more are slain, Worcester is taken prisoner, the rest fled: On
the Kings part were lost one thousand six hundred; of the enemies six thousand,
of which, thirty six the King slew with his own hand. 1404
Earl Duglas for his valor in a duel with the King, is set free without
ransom. The next day thanks are given to God: Worcester is beheaded, and many
of

The King to prosecute his Victory, sends his Army under the Prince of Wales,
against the Rebels, but they were fled: Glendor forsaken, and at last famished
in the Woods, many of whose consorts were taken, and executed. Piercy of
Northumberland voluntarily submits to the Kings mercy, protesting his ignorance
in that Treason; the King for that time gave him good words, with liberty to
come and go, because he had the Castle of Barwick, and some other strong holds
in his possession. After this, Lewis Duke of Orleans, sends a challenge to King
Henry; to whom he returns this answer, that his former actions could acquit him
from the name of a coward; that Kings ought not Vergien in Guien, where having
lost many of his men after three months siege, was forced to rise and depart
with dishonor. The Duke of Burgoin also, by the French Kings leave, raises
six thousand men at Armos, one thousand five hundred Cross-bows, and twelve
thousand foot men, for regaining of Callice. But the French King hearing what
preparations are making in England, and considering the difficulty of this
attempt, requires the Duke to desist from his intended enterprise. Orleans, who
was jealous of Bourgoins valor. King Henry having escaped two dangers by
rebellions, is now like to fall into the third, plotted by Piercy of
Northumberland, Scroop Archbishop of York, Mowbray Earl Marshal, and by the
Lords Hastings, Faulconbridge, Bardolph, and others. But the plot in the
infancy of it, was discovered; therefore the King comes unexpectedly into the
North, with an Army, surprised the Lords, and struck off their heads, but
Piercy and Bardolph fled. Piercy afterward returns from France into Scotland,
where he is promised aid against the King; to prevent which, the Prince of
Wales is sent 1408
with an Army thither, where he rages with fire and sword, recovers the
Castles Barwick, and Anwick, and makes the Scots embrace a peace. After this
the K. crossing the Thames from Kent, to Essex, under the conduct of the Lord
of Camois, was like to be taken by French Pirates. The Lord was suspected and
attached of Treason, but was cleared by his Peers; the Scots enter
Northumberland with Piercy, and Bardolph, doing much mischief. King Henry upon
this, levied a strong Army, but Sir Ralph Rokesby then Sheriff of that County,
had defeated the Scots already, and had smote off the two Lords heads, which he
sent to the King for presents. In the eleventh year of his Reign, a Parliament
is called, some good Laws are enacted; the Kings three younger sons are made
Thomas Duke of Clarence, John Duke of Bedford, and Humphry Duke Gloucester. The
rest of this Kings life was peaceable; he intended wars against the Turk, and
was for that purpose providing ships, men, money, and other requisits; but was
hindered by an Apoplexy, which at last killed him, the 1411
forty six year of his life, and 14 of his reign. On his deathbed he caused
the Crown to be placed by him on his pillow, fearing some other might take it
that had better right. The Prince thinking he had been dead, takes away the
Crown; whereat the King started up, asking who had taken away the Crown: The
Prince answered, that it was he; then falling back into his bed, sighed and
said, My Son, My Son, God knows what right I had to this Crown, and how I have
enjoyed it: to whom the Prince replied, good Father comfort your 1412
self; the Crown you have, and if you die, I will take it, and keep it with my
sword, as you have done; and then the King died: In this Kings time Guild Hall
in London was built.

King Henry 5. succeeded, who of a wild and loose young Prince, became Richards
body from Langlie, which with pomp he interred at Westminster by Queen Anne his
first wife. The next year he calls a Parliament at Leicester, where he is
Petitioned to suppress the Religious houses of the kingdom, because they were
abused; the Revenues 1413
of which houses were proportioned to yield to the king the annual rent of
twenty thousand pounds, and would also maintain fifteen Earls, fifteen hundred
knights, and above six thousand men at arms, besides almshouses for the poor.
But to divert this violent stream, Chichly Archbishop of Canterbury being
solicited by the Abbots, discovers to the king his right and title to the
France, showing the Clergies willingness in furthering his regaining of it, by
offering to him a vast sum of money: This speech dashed the Petition; and now
all men's desires are bent on France: For this cause the Duke of Exeter, the
Kings Uncle, the Archbishop of Dublin, the Lord Gray, High Admiral of
England, and the Bishop of Norwich, attended with five hundred Horse, were sent
to Charles sixth of France, to demand that Crown, with the Dutchies of Aquitan,
Normandy, and Anjou, with the Counties of Poytou and Main; which if they may be
delivered up peaceably, then King Henry will mary Katherin the French Kings
daughter, and endow her with all the said Duchess and Provinces; otherwise he
would gain them by French King amazed at this message, desired some time to
deliberate, promising to send Ambassadors of his own to King Henry, whose youth
the Dolphin so slighted, that he sent him a Tun of Tennis Balls as a present,
fitter for him to play with, then the Conquest of France. King Henry was so
incensed at this scoff, that he swore he would ere long toss so many Iron Balls
in France, that the strongest Rackets there should not be able to return them.
The Dolphin hearing of the great preparations in England, sends to King Henry,
that if he would live peaceably with France, and take to wife his sister
Katherin, then he should have with her a large sum of money, with some small
Territories in that kingdom; the French Ambassadors were honorably Henry will
have his Provinces and Seigniories which he demands. With this he prepares for
his march, having first fortified the borders from Scottish invasions, and made
his mother Queen Regent of England, in his absence. Then he sends Letters of
defiance to the French King; but in the mean while Richard Earl of Cambridge,
brother to the Duke of York, Henry Lord Scroop, and Sir Thomas Gray, upon great
rewards promised them by the Dolphin, conspired either to kill king Henry in
his Tent, or to deliver him unto the French King; but the Treason is
discovered, the Traitors apprehended, arraigned, and executed the next day.

The King being landed in Normandy, near Harslew upon the Sein, besieged
Dolphin not being able to relieve, was surrendered to Henry, who sacked it, and
ransomed the inhabitants, which money, and goods, he bestowed on his soldiers.
Then having left his uncle Thomas Duke of Exeter, as Governor there, with
thirty five Knights, and one thousand five hundred soldiers, resolves to go to
Calice by Land, for the Winter coming sooner then usually, caused fluxes,
fevers, and great mortality in his Army; for there died above one thousand
five hundred men, besides the Earl of Stafford, Bishop of Norwich, and some
other Lords; the Kings strength then consisted only in two thousand horse, and
thirteen thousand Archers: yet the French durst not adventure upon them, though
the Dolphin who managed this war, by reason of his fathers infirmity, had
assembled above thirty thousand men: So that the English burned and spoiled all
in their way, without resistance. The French (then at Rohan) being unwilling
the English should pass through France unfought with, advises with his Council
what he should 1414
to king Henry, whose answer was, that his men were now sick, and in want, yet
strong enough to repel all violence, if he were interrupted in his march. A
great Army of French being assembled, they intend to fight the English, who
therefore place themselves in good array near Agencourt; the Constable of
France accompanied with ten thousand horsemen, besides footmen, pages, and
other attendants, draw near to the English Army; that night was spent by the
French in jollity, presuming an absolute victory the next day, because of their
multitudes, and the English paucity: so that before hand, they cast lots for
their prisoners. The French Army is divided into three battaliaes, Bar, and
of Alanson: the third was Marshalled by the Earl of Mark, Damp, and others,
King Henris Vaunt-guard consisting of Archers only, is conducted by the Duke of
York. The main Battle is commanded by the King himself, in which were his
strongest Bill men; with him were the Duke of Gloucester, Earl Mashal Oxford
and Suffolk: the rear-ward is directed by Thomas Duke of Exeter, the Kings
Uncle. And to keep off the French horse from the English foot, they are all
environed with stakes headed with sharp irons at both ends, for the easier
pitching of them in the ground. An Ambush also of 1415
English Archers is placed within a new-cast hedge, which galled the French
horse; so that their first battle is overthrown, not only of the horse, but of
the foot also, who were wounded and trodden to death by the disordered horse;
many of them also were knocked down by the English Axes and Bills. Then the
French main battle is assaulted by the English, who being courageously charged
by the French horse, retreated orderly, and quickly slipped behind their
stakes, to train the French horse upon them; who ignorantly rushing forward,
goared their horses so, that the main battle was put out of order, and
vanquished. In this encounter the King fought hand to hand with the Duke of
Alanson, whom he felled to the ground, whose life he would have saved, French
horse entered the Kings Camp, weakly guarded, riffling all that they could, and
slew many of the Guarders, which caused a great outcry: the King hearing it,
supposed a fresh Army had been come to fight him again; whereupon Proclamation
is made that all ordinary prisoners should be slain, lest they should endanger
the Army in the new conflict. A pitiful slaughter is made among them, which
cost the K. many sighs and tears, when he understood that no

Though the K. and his men were tired with that days service, yet fearing the
worst, he puts his whole Army in Battalia, when presently the Earls of Marle
and Faulconbridge, assailed him with six hundred men, but they were quickly
overthrown and slain. Toward the Evening of this day, the King with his Army
gave solemn thanks to God for his Victory, and then gave leave to his soldiers
to riffle those they had slain. Which being done, he marches into Calice,
where he is received with great joy. In this battle were slain the Constable
and Admiral of France, the Duke of Alanson, the Duke of Brabant, the Duke of
Bar, with diverse Earls, twenty five Lords, eight thousand Knights, Esquires,
and Gentlemen, besides multitudes of common soldiers; the Duke of Orleans, the
Duke of Burbon, with diverse Lords, many were taken prisoners. On the English
side were slain the Duke of York, the Earl of Suffolk, with six hundred others:
So after the King had refreshed himself and Army some time in Calice, he
returns with much spoil and wealth into England, and is received into London
with much triumph. Not long after this battle, the Dolphin died; the Earl of
Arminack is made high Constable of France, and none put in offices but stout
men. At the same time Thomas Duke of Exeter, Governor of Harflew, issued out
of the Town with three 1416
thousand men, spoiling all the Country, till almost he came to Rohan. The new
Constable with five hundred horse, made the Duke retire, but orderly; the
French were so hot in the pursuit, and came so near Harflew, that the rest of
the English within issued out, and being joined with the Dukes forces, put the
French to the flight for two miles, taking diverse prisoners, which they
dismissed, not without ransom. The Emperor Sigismund came into England Henry
accompanies him to Calice, whether Henry of Burgoin upon hostages repaired. A
Peace is concluded between them concerning Flanders and Artois only; this peace
made the French jealous of the Duke, as of a secret enemy to France. Not long
after Harflew is besieged by the Constable, both on sea and land: but this
Fleet of five hundred French ships, is defeated by the English Fleet of two
hundred sail, under John Duke of Bedford, King Henry's brother: Many French
were killed, and many sent prisoners to England. Upon this the Constable
raises his siege, and the Duke of Bedford new victualled, manned, and
fortified the Town, and so returned to England.

King Henry understanding that the French Peers were fallen out into diverse
France, his opportunity now to regain it, his good success hitherto, the many
wrongs done by the French upon the English, and withal his want of money. These
motives were so inducing, that money is presently granted, and with cheerfulness
levied. Hereupon John Earl of Huntington son to that D. of Exeter, beheaded
under King Henry the 4. being sent out to scowre the seas, fell upon nine
Carricks of Genua, hired for the French Kings service; six of which he sunk,
the other three he took with great store of money and money worth. King Henry
shortly after landeth with his Army in Normandy, before the Castle of Tonque,
which he took; the report of this made the Normans fly all to their strong
Towns, so that the English without resistance, march, and pitch before Cane,
which after long and stout resistance by the Normans, and many furious assaults
by the English is taken, the Townsmen having flung down their arms, and
submitted to mercy. The A being heaped together in the Market place, and kept
with a guard of English, the King enters the Town, and in the great Church
gives solemn thanks for his victory. Then he assembles the inhabitants at their
Senate, where he censured the chief of those who refused his mercy, some to
death, some to ransoms, 1417
which he divides amongst his soldiers. The Dolphin and Constable, finding
John Duke of Burgoin, their mortal enemy, to be protector of the King during
his infirmity, and Regent of France. Hereupon grudges and quarrels arise, the
two factions of the Dolphin and Regent laboring to undo each other; so the
public good is neglected, and the English animated in the Conquests,
especially in Normandy, where the people for want of aid from France, are
willing to submit to the English; therefore the King proclaims that all who
would yield and become his subjects, should enjoy their own, and receive his
protection: Whence most of the greatest Towns there yield themselves into the
hands of King Henry, and his two brothers, Clarence and Gloucester. All which
the King strongly fortifieth; English officers are placed also in Cane.

Whilst the King is thus employed, he understands that Rohan is manned, and
strongly fortified, and that the whole wealth of the Country is conveyed
thither; therefore he lays siege to that City, and chains the River, having
Warwick with an hundred good ships enters the mouth of the River, and causes
the Town of Caodeback give them a quiet passage toward Rohan, promising to
yield it to King Henry, if he took Rohan, otherwise to let him return
peaceably: so he goes for Rohan. At this siege one thousand six hundred Irish
under the Lord of Kilmay repair to the King, and are entertained by him. The
King at first assaulted the City, but to spare his men, resolves to starve it;
for there were at that time in it, above two hundred and ten thousand souls:
therefore he keeps in the Townsmen by his Archers, and a deep Ditch.

During the eight days Cessation from Arms, many consultations were had, but
nothing done. One day more is desired, and granted; mean while the commons do
mutiny in the Town, accusing and threatening their Magistrates, and Commanders;
who fearing the worst, made them all meet in the Market place, and demanded
what they would have; they answer, a rendition of the City to King Henry. So
after four days Truce more, the City is surrendered. Burgundy fearing ensuing
dangers, strives to reconcile the two Kings, hoping thereby to avenge himself
upon the Dolphin, and the Constable. Many parlies were had, but to no end. The
King at last told the Duke, that either he Katherin the Kings daughter, with
all the Seignories demanded, or else he would drive both his Master, and
himself out of that kingdom. The Duke replied, that the thing was not so soon
done as spoken: Hereupon the Duke reconciles himself to the Dolphin, at least
in outward show; which was 1418
a great hinderance to King Henry's resolutions, who to show he was not
dismayed, created some Earls, and suddenly takes Ponthoys, with one thousand
five hundred men; thence he marched to Paris, and sat down before it two days,
but left it again, by reason of his paucity: Mean time, all the Towns of
Normandy yield to King Henry, except Mount S. Michael, which was never
besieged. But whilst Burgundy sought to reconcile himself more fully to the
Dolphin, is treacheously murdered by the same Dolphins procurement. At which,
Philip Earl of Carolois is so grieved for his fathers death, that he meant to
put away his wife, the Dolphins sister, but that he was dissuaded by 1419
his friends. At length he strives to make peace between the two Crowns, which
after much ado, was concluded, and King Henry married to the Lady Katherin, in
whose right he is proclaimed Regent and heir apparent of France. Charles and
Queen Isabel his wife, should be styled the Father and Mother of King Henry. 2.
King Charles, and Queen Isabel, during their lives, should enjoy their Regal
Dignities and Revenues. 3. That Queen Katherin should have in England a Dowry
of twenty thousand Marks. 4. That King Henry should not be styled King of
France, during the life of King Charles. 5. That after the death of King
Charles, the Crown of France should come to King Henry, and to his heirs. 6.
That King Henry should be Regent of France, because of the Kings infirmities.
7. That the Court of Parliament in France, should enjoy their accustomed Henry
should assist, defend, and protect the Peers, Clergy, and people of France. 9.
That he shall suppress intestin broils, and administer justice. 10. That he
shall place none in offices of Justice and Government, but such as are every
way able. 11. That he shall strive to reduce the Dolphin and Constable to the
obedience of King Charles. 12. That he shall cause all to swear obedience to
king Charles, during his life, and after him to king Henry and to his heirs.
13. That all possessions won from rebellious subjects (excepting Normandy)
should be converted solely to the benefit of the French King, except the
offenders submit. 14. That Normandy after king Charles his death, shall submit
to the Scepter of France. France, be not burdened with Taxes, nor undue
levying thereof. 16. That after king Charles his death, France and England
should be governed by one man only, without subordination, each kingdom
retaining their privileges. 17. That the subjects of both kingdoms live
quietly and lovingly together. 18 That neither the French, nor English king,
shall make peace with the pretended Dolphin, except they two concur in the same
with the Duke of Burgundy. 19. That none but French attend the person of king
Charles. 20. That both the kings, with their people, shall ratify by their
hands and seals, and swear to these Articles.

These Articles were proclaimed in England and France, and ratified by oaths;
James of Scotland, the Duke of Burgundy, the Prince of Orange, twenty one
Earls, forty five Barons, besides multitudes of knights and others, make war in
Burgoin, taking in all places that had sided with the Dolphin. The murderers
of John Duke of Burgundy, are apprehended, sent into Paris, where shortly after
they were sentenced and executed. King Henry is proclaimed Regent and heir
apparent to the Crown of France, first at Paris, then at London. At Paris the
two kings kept their Christmas: Such was king Henry's entertainment and
bounty, that he wins the love of the French. The late murdered Duke of
Burgoins widow, before both the kings at Paris, complains of the Dolphin, and
seven others, Dolphin hearing this, goes to Languedoc, where he is aided with
men and money, by Arminac, the Constable that was. After this king Henry and his
wife, go to Rohan, where they receive homage of the Nobles of Normandy; for
that Duchy then having left his brother Thomas Duke of Clarence, General of
France and Normandy, and Salisbury the said Dukes Deputy; he with his wife go
to Calice, and so to London, where they are received with much joy: and shortly
after, the Queen is Crowned at Westminster. Mean while Alanson the Dolphins
Lieutenant General, levied a great Army, against whom Clarence marches with
his Normandy Garrisons, and pitched near Angiers in Anjou. One Forgusa a
Lumbard, to whom Duke Clarence trusted too much, betrayed him, by making him
believe that the French Army was small, disordered, and inconsiderable;
wherefore he marches with his horse only, leaving his Archers behind, and
falling into the Ambushments of his enemies unawares, was forced to fight upon
great disadvantages, having

In this battle were slain of the French, above 1000 two hundred, of the
English the Duke of Clarence, the Earls of Tankervile, and Kent, the Lord Ross,
and about two thousand more. The Earls of Somerset, Suffolk, and Perch, the
Lord Fitzwater, and many others are taken prisoners; Sir Thomas Beauford,
Commander of the Archers, understanding that Clarence was betrayed, hastened to
succor him, but came too late, the battle was fought: the French upon the news
of Beaufords coming, were fled, with their prisoners and booty. So finding the
dead bodies, he buries them, and sends the corpse of Duke Clarence into England,
where it was buried at Canterbury, near his Henry 4. The news of this defeat
being come into England, the King grieved much for the loss, chiefly of his
brother. Then he sends into Normandy, as successor to Clarence, the Earl of
Mortaign, brother to Somerset, lately taken; and withal calls a Parliament,
showing how needful it was to send an Army against the Dolphin: For undertaking
of which business, he wanted not men, but money. Whereupon the Temporalty gave
him one fifteen, and the Clergy two; and for avoiding expense of time, the
Bishop of Winchester, the Kings Uncle, disbursed twenty thousand pounds, which
were repaid him out of the fifteens. An Army of four thousand men at Arms, with
twenty four thousand Archers, is raised and sent to Calice, under John Bedford,
the Kings brother, whom the King in his own person followed. Who understanding
that the Dolphin with seven thousand men had besieged Chartiers, he marches
directly thither; in the way he was met by the Duke of Burgundy, who brought
four thousand men to him. But the Dolphin distrusting his own strength, raises
his siege. Hereupon the King sends Burgundy into Piccardie, to suppress S.
Iacques Harcourt; King James of Scotland in the mean time, besieges the Town
of Direx, and by storm takes it. King Henry pursues the Dolphin from Tours to
Burgys in Berrie, but being unwilling to tire out his men in long pursuits, he
returns over the river of Loire, taking in Towns and Castles by the way. Mean
while news is Katherin was delivered of a young Henry at Windsor, of whom the
King spoke thus* [I Henry, born at Monmouth, shall remain but a short time, and
gain much; but Henry born at Windsor, shall reign long, and lose all.] After
this, the King takes by force the Town of Meux, in Brie; hereupon the other
Towns yielded. In the interim, the Dolphin falls with fire and sword upon
Burgoins Country, and besieges Cosney, the Duke sends to the king for aid, who
himself in person marches thither with great Forces; but by the way he fell
sick, and so was fain to send his brother John Duke of Bedford: whereupon the
Dolphin raised his siege, and retired into Berrie; Bois in Vincennis, where he
died; before his death, he called to him John Duke of Bedford, and Humphrie
Duke of Gloncester, his brothers: he makes John Regent of France, and
Lieutenant General of Normandy; and Humphrie Protector of England, and of his
sons person. Then exhorting them with his Nobles that were present, to keep
friendship with Burgundy, unity among themselves, loyalty to his young son; to
take care of his afflicted Queen, to maintain what he had conquered, to
prosecute the war against the Dolphin and Alanson; he thanked God for all his
conquests, and so departed the 38 year of his age, and the 10 of 1422
his reign, his body is conveyed into England, and honorably interred at
Westminster. The Queen afterward married to Owen Teudor, by whom she had three
sons, Edmund Earl of Richmond, Father to Henry 7. King of England. 2d. Jasper
Earl of Pembrok. And 3d. Owen. In this Kings time, Sir John Oldcastle, who in
the right of his wife, was called Lord Cobham, Wickliffs opinions, which could
not be suppressed till Sir Robert Acton, and diverse others were condemned by
the Clergy for Heresy, by the laity for Treason, and so were hanged, and then
burned gallows and all.

King Henry the 6. at his Fathers death, was but 9 months old, the French King
being dead, the people there began to shake off the English yoke, and to adhere
only to their new King Charles. The Lord Grandvyle is sent to Pont-Melance,
which he surprised; but not long after, Montacute Earl of Salisbury regained it
to the English. The Parisians send to England for protection, which is
promised. The league is renewed Burgundy and Britany: The Regent 1423
marries Anne Burgundys brother, but the wavering Parisians, diffiding in the
English protection, desire King Charles to receive their City into his hands;
which the Regent understanding, comes upon them suddenly with his Army, seiseth
on the City, puts to death many of the chief plotters of this revolt, and
Masters the Citizens with English Garrisons. In the mean time the Lord William
Stewart Constable of Scotland, with a strong Army besieges the Town of Cravant
in Burgundy, which siege is raised by the Earl of Salisbury, with the loss of
21 hundred of his men, and 8000 of his enemies. After this the Earl is made
Vicegerent of France, Bry, and Champaigne, and Sir John Fastolfe Deputy of
Normandy: The King of Scots is released and ransomed, who marries with Jane
the Kings Cousin German, and daughter to the deceased Earl of Somerset. The
Protector sends 10000 men with money to the Regent in France: Diverse Towns are
taken and retaken; the Duke of Britany revolts to the French, and so did his
brother Arthur Earl of Richmond, whom Henry 5 had made Earl of Yury in
Normandy, and Governor there; whereupon the Regent besieges the Town, which
promised to yield, if help came not from the French King at a certain day:
Messengers are permitted to go and acquaint the enemy of all things. Alanson
shortly after with French made show to raise the siege, but did nothing, then
he sits down before Vernoyle, giving out that he had defeated the Regents Army,
which was false, yet by this falsehood he got the Town; and by his retreat
suffered the Regent to be Lord of Yurie: Then the Regent gave battle to the
French and Scots at Vernoyle: the fight lasts three hours; in the end the
English got the day, who lost of their own men 21 hundred, 1425
of the French were slain 7000, of the Scots 2700, besides 5 Earls, 2 Vicounts,
and 21 Barons: Alanson with diverse prime men taken prisoners, Vernoyle is
surrendered too, and fortified by the Regent, who thence goes to Rohan, where
he is joyfully received; then he sends 10000 men to Mine under Salisbury, who
won Maunts, and diverse other Towns in Richmond now Constable of France with
40000 Scots, French, and Britans, besieges Saint James in Benyon defended
only by 600 English; but this handful sallying out furiously on the enemy,
and crying hidiously Saint George, Salisbury, presently defeated this great
Army, supposing Salisbury with his Forces had been got into the Town; many of
the enemy were drowned, more slain, some taken prisoners, but most ran away,
leaving behind them 14 piece of Ordnance, 40 barrels of powder, with match,
wine, and other provisions; The new Constable to redeem his lost honor, burns
a few Villages in Anjou, having recollected his dispersed Forces.

But at home fell out a dangerous difference between the Protector and his
Uncle Henry Bishop of Winchester, and Chancellor of England: For appeasing of
which, the Regent makes a journey into England, where by order of Parliament,
the differences are composed and ended; Warwick the Regents Lieutenant in
France, takes many places in Main, and is threatened by the French Bravadoes,
to no purpose, for having made show to fight, they run away: Things being
quieted at home, the Regent with his Uncle, the Bishop of Winchester returns
into France; and upon Burgundies entreaty he sets Alanson at liberty for the
ransom of 200 thousand crowns; which money he might have had again if he would
have sworn allegiance to King Henry of England, which he would upon no terms
consent to. About this time the Bishop of Winchester was made a Cardinal at
Callice, more for his wealth then for Auranches an English Garrison in Normandy
is besieged by Rustian Marshall of Britany; but the English sallied and
defeated the Army, and took the Marshall prisoner. Pontorson is besieged by the
English under Warwick and the Lord Scales, who forraged the enemies Country
there about; and being encountered by some French Lords, and 6000 other
Soldiers, he defeats them, and takes some of these Lords, with one thousand
more prisoners: The Garrison of Saint Susan surpriseth the Castle of Ramfort;
which twenty thousand French appointed to raise the siege of Pontorson, regains
from the English, when in the mean while Pontorson is taken by Warwick, Mouns
is betrayed by some of the Clergy and Magistrates within, who in the night
murdered the English Guard that maintained the first watch, opened the Gates,
and let in five hundred French men, who committed great slaughter there, the
Earl of Suffolk, Governor of the Town, with most of the English Soldiers enter
the Castle, and held out a siege, till the Lord Talbot in the night with seven
hundred men, by the assistance of Suffolk and the others in the Castle,
regained it; the English crying S. George Talbot so amazed the sleepie French
in the dark, that many broke their necks over the walls, thirty Citizens,
twenty Priests, and fifteen Friars who had betrayed the City, were tortured
1427


About this time died the Duke of Exeter, the Kings Tutor, which charge was
conferred on Warwick, and in his room was set up Thomas Montacute Earl of
Salisbury, who is sent into France with five thousand men, to which number as
many more were added; with these he marches against Orleans, seated on the
River of Loyre, it was strongly fortified by the Bastard and Bishop of that
place, a Bulwark was erected on the Bridge, out of which issued the Bastard of
Orleans, but was beaten back into the Town with the loss of his men, and of the
Fort: About two months after the Town was besieged, the Earl of Salisbury
looking into English, who began now to decline in their victories. Suffolk is
made General in that siege, whom the Regent furnishes with new supplies by
Sir John Falstolph; who in his return toward the siege, is set upon by 9000
French, under Delabreth, and Steward, now Constable of France, who with five
thousand five hundred of their men are slain, and eleven thousand taken
prisoners.

This was called by the French the battle of herrings, because the English
chief provision then was such Lenten Stuff. Orleans being weary of so long a
siege, and finding the French aid failed them, sent to the Duke of Burgoin, to
take them into his protection, to which he assented if the Regent would so
agree thereunto; but he refused, thinking it a dishonor for King Henry to beat
the Bush, and another to catch the Hare: Wherefore the Duke's affection to the
English

At last Alanson in the night time (the English Watches being careless)
conveyed many Regiments of men, and Provisions are conveyed into the Town, so
that shortly after they Sallied out, slew six hundred of our men, and took two
Bulwarks. They assaulted also Talboat, in the Bastile, who beat them back into
the Town with loss of their men. The next day Suffolk quitted the Siege; and
was himself within few days after Besieged, and taken Prisoner, with his
Brother, and many more, in the Town of Iargzaux, by Alanson, who kills all his
Prisoners, except the former two. 1428


Alansons Army consisting of twenty three thousand men, was increased by the
coming of Arthur of Brittan, Count Vaudeme, and many more, who fall upon
Talbot, Scales, and Hungerford, as they were conducting five thousand men to
Fortify the Town of Meum, these three are taken Prisoners after some Bloody
blows, and twelve hundred of their Company slain. The Report of the French
good Success, made many Towns and Forts revolt to them: Hereupon the French
King with a great Army enters Champaigne, takes Troys, the Chief City of that
Province; Challons and Rhemes revolt to King Charles; upon this he is presently
Crowned there; the report of whose Coronation, caused many places to rebel,
and submit to the French King.

The Regent finding the French so fortunate in recovering their Towns, means
to try them in a Pitched Battle, therefore Summons King Charles to a Fight,
who accepts of the Challenge; but when it came to the upshot, he raised his
Camp in the night, and run away; the next morning the Regent pursues him, but
could not induce him to fight; wherefore he returns with his Army to Paris,
where hearing of daily revolts, marches out again with his Army of ten
thousand men, hoping to make the French (whose number was more then double) to
engage, but could not; about this time King Henry was Crowned. The Regent
perceiving that the Towns of France generally revolted, resolves to make
Normandy sure; therefore 1429
King Henry had to that Duchy, the miseries they endured under the French,
and their happiness under the English Government, and withal promises them a
further addition of immunities. Mean while King Charles labors to win the Duke
of Burguoin by great promises, and shows of grief, for the murdering of the
Dukes father, with which passages the Duke acquaints the Regent; the King
perceiving he could not win the Duke, sets down before Paris with his whole
Army, scales the walls, and thinks to take it by storm, but is beat back by the
English Garrisons Henry understanding of the daily revolts in France, from him,
comes to Callice with a great Army, and by the way of Rohan marches to Paris,
where he is anointed and crownedKing of France, receiving homage and fealty
from the nobility and Citizens. At length a peace being urged by Pope Eugenius
4. both Kings condescend to a truce for 6 years, which lasted but a while, for
shortly after King Henrys return into England, Ann the Regents wife, and sister
to the Burgundian died, whereby the Dukes affections to the Regent grew cold
daily; the truce lately concluded, is broken by the French, who by secret
underminings possessed themselves daily of towns and castles; they secretly
convey 200 soldiers into the castle of Rohan, hoping to surprise it, but the
treason is detected, and the conspirators 1432
driven into the dungeon, whence some are hanged, some tortured, some
imprisoned, and a few ransomed. John Lord Talbot is now redeemed out of prison,
who brings from England 800 men, and joins with the Regent, 1433
he challenges the French to fight, but they refused* About this time Pesants
of Normandy rebel, who marching toward Cane, used much cruelty, but they are
quickly suppressed by the Earl of Arundel, and the L. Willoughby, who slew
above 1000 of them, and put their ringleaders to death by tortures. The E. of
Arundel as he was besieging Gerbory Castle, is shot with a Culvering, and being
taken prisoner, shortly after dies. The D. of Burbon after 18 years
imprisonment is ransomed for 18000 pound; but died in London the same day he
intended for France: The Regent and D. of Burgoin being exasperated against
each other by some tale-tellers, were again reconciled by their friends, and so
far as to meet at S. Omers for a conference, but whilst they both stood upon
punctilios of honor, the Burgundian as Lord of that town, they departed
discontented; and forthwith Burguoin makes a league with the French King, the
murderer of his father; about this time S. Dennis was betrayed to the French
by the bastard of Orleans, and shortly after recovered again by the English,
who beat 1434
down the walls and towers thereof. Ponthois also rebels, and thrusts the
English garrison out of the town; mean while the Regent dies, and is solemnly
buried in S. Marles Church at Rohan in a rich monument, at which the Norman
Nobility stormed, who not long after entreated K. Lewis 11. to pluck it down,
and cast the Regents carcass into the open fields, which he York is made
Regent, which place was aimed at by Somerset the Kings cousin. Paris revolts
with diverse other places, using the English cruelly and scornfully: The Normans
also rebel and insult over the English, till they were subdued again by Talbot
and Scales, who slew 5000 of these rebels. The new Regent with 8000 soldiers
lands at Harflew, and from thence comes to Rohan, but his proceedings were much
hindered by the D. of Sommersets private grudgings; the D. of Burgundy pretending
a title to Callis, besieges it with 40000 men, by 3 assaults he attempted to
win it, but is still Flanders and Artois with fire and sword, and then returns
with rich booties to Callice, and from thence into England, being in much
trouble about the Scots invasion with 30000 men under K. James 1. who besieged
the Castle of Rosburg; which the Scots left and retreated into their own
country, upon the coming of the Earl of Northumberland with his army. About
this time Q. Catherin the Kings mother died. The D. of York is discharged of
his Regency in France, and the 1436 1437
E of Warwick is put in his room, who after 7 times imbarking arrived in
Normandy, and sends Talbot, Faulconbridg, and sir Thomas Kyriel with 5000 men
to raise the siege from Crotoy, before which Burgundy lay with 1000 men. The D.
upon this flies into Albevyl, and from thence into Amiens; the English finding
that he would not fight, enter Piccardy and Artois, spoiling all before them,
and carrying away much booty; Kyriel surprised the Dukes carriages and
ordnance. The E. of Mortayn, Somersets son, took the 1438
castle of S. Auyan in Mayn, where he slew 300 Scots, and hanged all the French
Paris upon the rebellion of the Dolphin against his father, therefore a great
army is prepared, but the Dolphin was reconciled again to the French K. and so
the English hopes were strangled in their birth. John L. Clifford in a frostie
and snowie night clothes himself and followers all in white, and so having
passed over the ditches of Ponthois, they scale 1439
the walls, and take the town, in which they killed the most part of the men
found there, some ransomed themsevles; upon this the French King in person
besieges Ponthois, giving it many furious assaults, but to no purpose: Richard
Beauchamp E. of Warwick and Regent of France died; so Richard D. of York is
made Regent the 2d time, who with a great army repairs to the siege, daring the
French K* into the field, which he refused; so leaving his Ordnance in the
Bastyl of S. Martin which he had erected, raised his siege in the night, and
went to Poysy; the English next morning seize themselves of the tents and
provisions left behind, so having fortified the town, the Regent with his army
goes toward Poysy and dares the French King; who finding it good sleeping in
a whole skin, refused to fight; whereupon the Regent forsakes him, and marches
to Rohan; when the French K. heard that the English were so far off, he
besieges Ponthoys the 2d time, assaulting it almost every hour, he lost before
it almost 3000 men, and in the end he won the town, where he slew 400 English.
At last both Kings being weary of war, desire a parley, for which Callis was
appointed, because Charles of Orleans who had bin a prisoner in England ever
since the battle of Agencourt, was to be conveyed thither; the Ambassadors
could not agree, because K. Henrys demands were thought unreasonable. 1440
1. In demanding 300000 crowns for his ransom, too great a sum. 2. For
requiring the possession of Aquitan and Normandy, without acknowledement of
homage to the crown of France. 3. For desiring al Towns and Forts in France to
be delivered up to K. Henry, which the English had enjoyed within Philip of
Burgundy paid the D. of Orleans his ransom. In the interim the Regent divides
his forces into 4 troops, which in several places invade France and Normandy;
the French on the other side being 60000. fall upon Aquitan and Guian, taking
in many towns and forts, which shortly after were retaken by the English: about
this time dissension arose between the protector and his uncle the Cardinal of
Winchester, and the Archbishop of York, whom he accuses for doing public
things for their private gain, the matter is referred to the counsel, but no
redress was had, because most of them were Clergy 1442
men; and to vex the Protector the more, they accused and convicted his wife of
witchcraft, and that she had conspired against the Kings life, wherefore London,
and then committed to perpetual imprisonment; diverse of her associates were
executed.

King Henry made the L. Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, and sent him into Normandy
with 3000 choice men. The E. of Arminac to strengthen his title of inheritance
to the Countess of Comings lands, offers his daughter in marriage to King Henry,
with much money, and a surrender of all the lands in Aquitan belonging to him;
this offer was willingly hearkened unto; but the French King prevented the
matoh, by making himself owner of the said Earls dominions; So King Henry will
think no more on that match. After much effusion of blood, a peace is made
between the two Kingdoms 1443
for eighteen months; in which time the Earl of Suffolk without any Commission
or acquainting his associates, sollicits a match between King Henry and
Margaret, Cousin to the French King, and daughter to Reyner Duke of Anjou, and
titulary King of Sicily, Naples and Jerusalem. He demands no money, because the
Duke was poor, he also consents that Henry shall freely release to her Father,
all his right to the Duchy of Anjou, and Country of Main: This motion was
well liked by the French Lords; and King Henry; but opposed by the Protector,
because the Duke was poor, his honor but (...). ^ar. 2. That the King was
engaged to Mary, Arminacs daughter. 3. (...) his loss would be great to part
with his interest in Anjou and Main; but these reasons were rejected, the King
resolves to have her, and therefore bestows new honors on them who were
inclined to this match; among others this Earl of Suffolk is made Marquis, whom
the King sends richly attended into France, to receive the young Queen from the
French King, and Reyner her Father; France for renewing the War, King Henry to
encounter those preparations, calls a 1445
Parliament, in which the Marquess of Suffolk makes a speech highly tending to
his own commendations, in commemorating his former services, which he desires
may be recorded; this was consented to with great applause, and he is made Duke
of Suffolk.

Such was the condition of France at this time, that within few years the whole
Kingdom with Aquitan and Normandy is lost to the English; partly by the wise
Counsels of the Duke of Orleans, who had he been England, and partly by means
of this unfortunate match between the King and Queen, whereby he lost Arminac,
and other friends, nor did this Lady bring either money or new friends to
strengthen his cause: Besides, the giving up of his right of Anjou and Main,
lost him both Normandy and Aquitan. The murder also of Gloucester his wise
Counselor, and the Kings own mild and peaceable disposition, were main causes
of the loss of France; now the Queen being of a haughty and revengefull spirit,
scorned that the King should be altogether ruled by Gloucester the Protector,
therefore she being encouraged by Buckingham, Suffolk, the Cardinal of
Winchester, and the Archbishop of York, all enemies to the Protector, calls
him in question, French Wars; then in Parliament they condemn him to
imprisonment, for high Treason; and the next day he was found dead; thus was
that good Duke of Gloucester rewarded for his faithful service. Upon his death
the Duke of York begins secretly to set on foot his Title to the Crown, the
Duke of Suffolk fills his Coffers with the peoples money. The Soldiers are
neglected, the Kings Counselors disabled, and the people discontented. The
Truce with France is violated on the English side, by taking the Town of
Tongyers on the Frontiers of Normandy, belonging to the Duke of Britany,
without satisfaction given to the Duke, and on the French side, by taking
Pont-Larch Rohan, where the English were cruelly slain, and their goods rifled;
so within a few years after, the most Towns in Normandy and Guyan are delivered
up to the French among the rest, Harflew, and 1448
Rohan, by Sommerset and Shrewsbury: These disasters went not alone, but were
accompanied with a rebellion in Ireland, which drew thither the Duke of York
with an Army, who both suppressed the Rebellion, and by his wisdom, courtesy
and valor, obtained the love of the Nation.

The Irish expedition hindered the affairs of Normandy; yet Sir Thomas Kyriel is
sent thither with 1400 men, who regained some lost places, and 1449
then joined himself to Matthew Gough and others, so that now their army
consists of 5000 who encountering with 7000 of the enemies marching to the siege
of Cane were overthrown, 4000 of them being slain: Cane is closely besieged,
and assaulted by the French, but so stoutly defended Sommerset importuned by
his wife, and clamours of the meaner people, resolves to surrender it, though
he was much opposed in this by Sir David Hall, Captain of Cane, who affirmed
that this Town belonged not to the King, but to the Duke of York, and that
therefore Sommerset though the Kings Lieutenant there, could not surrender it;
but at last it is yielded upon Articles: And so now all Normandy is lost. Sir
David Hall in anger sails into Ireland, and incenseth York against Sommerset,
whom he persecuted so, that at last this Sommerset lost his head. The Queen is
blamed for the loss of Normandy; 1450
so was Suffelk, who is accused of high Treason. 1. In causing the Duke of
Gloucester to lose his Protectorship and life. 2. For placing ill Counselors
about the King. 3. For misguiding the Queen, and misruling the Kingdom. 4. For
losing Aquitn and Normandy. 5. For reporting that his daughter in Law, heir to
John Duke of Somerset, was next heir to the Crown, if the Kings issue failed.
6. For persuading the French to transport an Army into England, that his son
John by his wife might succeed to the Crown. 7. For causing the Duke of Orleans
to be set at liberty. 8 For persuading the French King by the same Duke to make
sharper war in Normandy. 9. For having secret correspondence with King Charles.
10. For discovering to the French King, the Henrys provisions. 11. For bragging
he had power to work the French King to any thing. 12. For stopping supplys
from the Kings Army in Normandy and France. 13. For his ill gotten wealth, and
monopolies of the chief Offices.

The Queen to prevent the Dukes further peril, who could not clear himself of
these Articles, caused him to be sent to the Tower, and then concluding the
Parliament, restored him to high favor with the King; the people repine at
this, and then openly rebel, under Blewbeard their Commander, but this
rebellion was nipped in the bud, and the Ring leaders executed. Upon this a
Parliament is called ar Leicester, where in the lower House Justice is required
to be done of Suffolk, France, he is taken, landed on Dover sands, and his head
chopped off on a boats side: Thus was the blood of Humphry Duke of Gloucester
revenged. Mean while the Dvke of York in Ireland, sets on foot here in England
his claim to the Crown, as being descended lineally from Philip heir of George
Duke of Clarence, the elder brother of John of Gaunt, great Grandfather to
King Henry 6. It was also whispered about that God blessed not King Henrys
usurped succession, as might be seen by the loss France: The weakness of the
King, the ambition of the Queen, and wickedness of the Counselors; hereupon a
Kentisb Rebel, Jack Cads, who falsely called himself Mortimer, made an
insurrection there, and with his armed crew marched toward Greanwich, where
the King then was, to whom he sent messengers, to inform him, that he meant not
to hurt his person, but to remove his evil Counselors, who had oppressed the
people. The King upon this is counseled to encounter these Rebels, not with
words, but swords; therefore an Army is suddenly raised, the Rebels retreat,
whom the Kin^s Forces under Sir Humphry Stafford, and his brother, pursued: the
Rebels taking advantage of place and time, confronted and overcame many of the
Kings Forces. After this victory, Jack with his graceless rout, came to black
Heath, thence to London, where they did much mischief; but at length the Kings
pardon is proclaimed to all, except to the Ringleaders; so the fearful
multitude left their Captains. Jack is proscribed, and a thousand Marks
promised to him that shall bring him dead or alive. In the end he was found,
and slain; as he fought desperately for his

The Duke of York being advertised by his friends, and such as disliked the 1451
present Government, that a Parliament was at hand, left his Deputation in
Ireland, and returns home, where he advises with John Duke of Norfolk, and his
other friends, how he might without usurpation, or treason, set forth his Title
to the Crown. After long debate, it was concluded, that the Duke of York should
raise an Army, under pretense of removing the Duke of Somerset from Court, for
mis-ruling the King and Queen, for oppressing the people, for occasioning the
loss of France, and for other treasons. The King upon this raises also an
Army, who understanding from the Duke of York, that he intended nothing against
his person and state, but only the removal of Somerset; the King sent Somerset
(for a show) to the Tower. Hereupon York dissolves his Army, and privately
repairs to the King, where unexpectedly he meets with Somerset, and is accused
by him of treason, for raising an Army to destroy the King; wherefore he is
detained prisoner: but because the Kings Council thought it unlikely that he
aimed at the Crown, seeing he had dismissed his Army upon Somersets commitment,
he is shortly after released. In the midst of these troubles, the Lords of
Acquitain offers secretly to surrender that Dutehy again into the hands of King
Henry. Hereupon 1452
Talbot Earl of Shrewsbruy, is sent over with three thousand choice men, French
King with two and twenty thousand came suddenly and fought the English; here
the Earl, and almost all his Army, was slain, and Aquitain regained. Shortly
after 1453
Prince Edward is born, Edward Tuthar King Henry's brother by the mother side,
and father to King Henry the seventh, is made Earl of Richmond. The Duke of
York complains to diverse of the Nobility, of the Treasons and Treacheries of
Somerset, and strengthens himself by the assistance of the Earls of Salisbury,
and Warwick; then he causes Somerset to be arrested of High Treason in the
Queens great Chamber, whence he was conveyed to the 1454
Tower, and shortly after accused in the Parliament of Treason.

The Parliament is adjourned by reason of the Kings either real or feigned
sickness: Shortly after, Somerset is enlarged, and made Governor of Calice, to
the great discontent both of Lords and Commons; the Duke of York, and his
associats, raise another Army within the Marches of Wales, both to be revenged
on Somerset, and to set the Crown upon Yorks head; so they march toward
London. The King to prevent his coming thither, meets him with another Army at
Saint Albons; a bloody battle is fought, on the Kings part were slain
Somerset, Stafford, Buckingham, Clifford, and more then eight thousand Lords,
Knights, and others. The King is taken prisoner, and brought to the Duke of
York, who having power to kill him, yet used him with all London; where upon
the Dukes request, a Parliament is called, and York made Protector of the Kings
person, and kingdom. Salisbury is made Lord Chancelour, and his son Warwick,
Captain of Calice; and so the kingdom was governed, to the content of all good
men; but Humphrie Duke of Buckingham, who lost his eldest son in the battle of
S. Albons, and Beauford, the new Duke of Somerset, who then lost his Father,
inform the Queen, that for all this fair show, these Triumviri 1455
would bring misery on her, and on the King, whose Crown they meant to set on
the head of York, if their plots be not prevented.

Hereupon the Queen and they in a ^reat Council held at Greenwich, remove York
and Salisbury from their government: Hence diverse broils are bred; the
Merchant-strangers in London, for growing richer then others, because of their
parcimony, and vigilance, are robbed, but the chief offenders in this were put
to death. The French burn and rob some Frontier Towns in this kingdom. The
Scots also did much hurt in York shire, till 1456


The Queen made great show of love to York, but meant his ruin; therefore she
got the King to make his Progress to the North, Hunting and Hawking by the way:
Mean while by her letters she requires the three Lords to come to a speedy
Conference with the King: whereupon they came, suspecting no hurt, and were
kindly used. But being advertised of their danger, the Duke of York fled to
Wales, Salisbury to his own Country, and his son Warwick into Calice. The King
fearing that these jars among his Nobles, would occasion London. The
Lancastrian Faction lodged in the Suburbs, 1457
the Yorkish within the walls, the Citizens fearing blows, remained Neuters;
and to keep the Kings Peace, guarded the streets night and day with armed men.
But at length the Archbishop of Canterbury, with other Clergy men, prevailed
so with their Rhetoric, that the King, Queen, and Lords, met, and friendly (at
least in show) entertained each other. This union is honored with a Religious
procession through the City; in which the King wore the Crown, the Queen was
led by the Duke of York, the Lords of each Faction, went hand in hand, at which
the people much rejoiced. Warwicks, in which the Kings servant was wounded, the
Kings guard assaulted the Earl and his followers, as he was taking horse; much
blood was shed, but no man killed. The Queen who hated the Earl, commanded he
should be apprehended, and sent to the Tower; which he 1458
hearing of, posted away into York shire, where he complains to the Duke of
York, and to his Father, of the wrongs done him by the Kings servant, and the
Queen notwithstanding the late friendship; but fearing he might be outed of his
government in Calice, he posts thither, his father the Earl of Salisbury,
marches to the Court with ^ve thousand men, complaining to the King of Audley
to encounter him on his way with ten thousand men, and to bring him dead or
alive; she also came after with another Army. The two Lords fight desperately
on both sides: at last, the Lord Audly with two thousand four hundred of his
men are slain, and Salisbury remained Master of the Field.

The Duke of York perceiving that his life was secretly aimed at, raises an
Army, and claims his Title to the Crown in the open Field. Therefore he 1459
with Salisbury, march into Wales, where Warwick repairs to them, with Trallop
and Blunt, two expert Commanders in the French wars. Their Ludlow: the two
Captains, which pretended they were for the Lords, and had intended to invade
the Kings Army, betimes the next morning, (being checked in conscience to fight
against their Sovereign) secretly fled, came to the King, and acquainted him
with the Enemies project; for which service they are pardoned, and rewarded.

The Lords understanding their two chief Captains were revolted, and diffiding
in their cause, fled from their Army in the dark; the Duke into Wales, and
thence into Ireland, the other two into Devonshire, and from thence to Calice.
The King glad at their flight, pursues them, but too late; he pardons the
ordinary soldiers of the Yorkish Faction, but their Captains were executed. The
Lords are proclaimed Traitors, their goods and lands confiscated, the
government of the North is committed to the Earl of Northumberland, and to the
Lord Clifford. Henry the young Duke of Somerset, is made Commander of Calice,
who going to take possession, not thinking his Enemies were there, was beat off
by the great Guns from the Castle. The Sandwich; but the Mariners, who favored
the Yorkish Faction, boarded these Ships, as they lay at anchor, and conveyed
them with the Lord Rivers, appointed Admiral of them, to Calice; Warwick sails
in them to Ireland, to confer with the Duke of York. In his return, the Duke of
Exeter, Admiral of the Seas, intended to take him, but his Mariners, Favorers
of the Yorkish Faction, were cold in the pursuit: so Warwick returned safe to
Calice. The King upon advice of his Parliament, attainteth all the Lords of the
Yorkish Faction, of high treason, and fills all the Sea Ports with Garrisons,
for fear of Invasion: But the Earls at Calice had secret notice of every thing
done Dynham had brought thither, in which they arrived within the haven of
Sandwich, and took Sir Simon Mountfort prisoner, Warden of the Cinque Ports,
vanquished the Town, and carried away such of the Kings Ships, as they found
there. They arrive at Sandwich the second time, and are assisted by the Lord
Cobham, with twenty five thousand men, who march toward London, whither the
Lord Scales is sent to secure it for the King: but the Lord Major would not
suffer him to enter, showing he had power sufficient to keep the City for the
King; so Scales in anger, possesses the Tower, and annoics the Londoners.

The King marches with Buckingham and Somerset, and with many other Lords, and
a strong Army, against the Enemy: the two Armies met near Northampton; the King
is for Peace, the Queen for a Battle, who therefore incourageth the soldiers.
The fight began, and lasted two hours very furiously: At last the King is
overthrown, two thousand of his men slain, among which were Buckingham,
Shrewsbury, and many others. The Queen with Somerset and the Prince, fled to
Durham, hoping to raise a new Army, or else to shelter themselves in Scotland.
The King is taken prisoner, and carried honorably to London. The Tower is
delivered to the Lords by the soldiers, against the will of the Lord Scales,
who striving to escape disguised in a wherry, York hearing of his Victory,
repairs to London, calls a Parliament in the Kings name, and sat down in the
Kings seat in the upper House, where in an eloquent speech, he discovered his
title to the Crown, being heir to Anne daughter of Roger Mortimer, son and heir
to Philip, the only daughter of Lionel Duke of Clarence, the third son of
Edward the third, and elder brother to John of Gant, who was Father to the
Usurper, King Henry the fourth. He related also the several calamities that
fell upon this kingdom, under that unlawful government. Lastly, he requires no
favor, but what justice will afford him, nor other possession, then what his
descent and title will allow him. The Lords and Commons after long
deliberation, Henry should continue King for his life; that the Duke of York
should be proclaimed heir apparent of the Crown; that he should be Protector
both of King, and kingdom; and that the present possession of the Crown, should
be delivered to him, if at any time King Henry, or his friends, should attempt
to infringe these Acts, now confirmed by Oaths.

The Duke of York, being now Protector, sends to Scotland in the Kings name, to
the Queen, Somerset, Exeter, Devonshire, Clifford, and Ross, and the rest of
the Lords fled thither, to repair to the Kings presence; but they instead of
obeying this command, come to the Court with an Army of eighteen thousand
English and Scots. Hereupon the Duke of York, with his younger son, the Earl of
Rutland, and the Earl of Salisbury, leaving the King with the Duke of Norfolk,
and Earl of Warwick, march with five thousand men, and met the Queen at
Wakefield. The Duke in expectation of his eldest son Edward, Earl of March,
with a great Army, would needs fight, which unfortunately he did, for there he
was slain, and almost three thousand Rutland being but twelve years old,
kneeling, desired mercy, but was cruelly stabbed by the Lord Clifford.
Salisburies head, with diverse others, are struck off, and set upon the walls of
York, in spite of the Yorkish Faction. The young Duke of York after this, with
three thousand men, fights Pembroke, the Kings half brother, and some other
Lords, with their companies. In the first encounter, Pembroke, and the Earl of
Ormond fled, four 1460
thousand of their friends are slain, Owen Tuthar Father in law to King Henry,
is taken prisoner, with many others, and put to death. Mean while the Q. Army
beats the Duke of Norfolk, and rescues King Henry from his power. But when she
heard of young Yorks victory, she retreats Northward, and raises Towton, is
met by York, Warwick, and almost forty nine thousand men; a cruel battle is
fought, in which above thirty six thousand English are slain; among which, were
diverse Earls, and Lords, the two Dukes, Somerset and Exeter fled, Devonshire,
with many others, taken prisoners; the King, Queen, Prince Edward, and others,
are fled into Scotland, where they are friendly entertained by the young King;
in recompense of which favor, Barwick is delivered to the king of Scots. The
Duke of York being Victor, rode triumphantly into York, took down the heads of
his Father and Friends, and in the same place causes the heads of Devonshire,
and some others, to be set up. King Henry sends his Queen, with Prince Edward,
to her Father Reyner, desiring him to procure aid from the French king: In the
mean while he resolves to stay in Scotland, in expectation of better fortunes.
These troubles were presaged by a blazing star, diverse prodigious births, and a
monstrous cock out of the sea. A Porcland crowed three times, turning his head
to the South, North, and West. In king Henry's time Paul's steeple was fired
with Lightning, and Leaden Hall in London built. Upon a League with Spain, our
Sheep are transported thither. The white and red Roses began to be the badges
of York and Lancaster. Whittington College, and Newgate are built. The Bishop
of Salisbury is pulled Edington, is barbarously murdered by the Wiltshire men.
Each one of his tenants carrying away in triumph, a piece of his bloody shirt.
In this kings time also, France, Normandy, and Aquitain, are lost, five main
battails fought between the two great Factions: 1. At Saint Albons, in which
the Yorkish prevailed. 2. On ^loar Heath, wherein the confederate Lords are
Victors. 3. At Northampton, in which king Henry is overthrown. 4. At
Wakefield, wherein the king was victorious. 5. At Towton, in which the new
Duke of York prevailed.

CHAP. XXV.
A Prosecution of the Scottish History under Robert Duke of Albany, and Mardo
Earl of Fife Governors; also under James the first, and James the second,
Kings, from the year 1400, till the year 1460.

WE showed before, that the peace being broken by Piercies 1400
invasion of Scotland, open war is denounced by the Scots against England.
Archibald Duglas, with ten thousand New Castle. Henry Piercy, and George
Dumbar, meets him with a strong Army; a battle is fought, the Scots are
defeated, and Duglas having lost one eye, is taken prisoner, with some other
Lords. This battle was fought at Hamildon in Northumberland; 1401
About this time died Annabella the Queen, and Trale Archbishop of S. Andrews,
who kept Prince David, a lascivious and unruly youth, in some awe; but when
they were dead, he flew into all kind of disorders, complaints came daily of
him to the king his father, who desires his brother the Duke of Albania, Lord
Protector, to keep a strict hand over the young Prince: he willing to
extinguish his brothers race, makes David a close prisoner, purposing David,
takes care for his younger son James, now under the tuition of the Archbishop
of Saint Andrews, who with others of the kings friends, advise him to send the
Prince to Charles the sixth King of France, Sinclar Earl of Orkney, his
Governor, toward France; but stops at Flamburg, by reason of the wind, or his
own sickness, where he is detained by the English, and sent up to the King, who
retains him as a prisoner, against the Law of Nations, and Articles of Peace,
made lately for eight years.

The king of England having received Letters from the Scots King, showing the
causes of his sons going to France, and withal desiring he may not be detained
in England, desires to be advised by his Council, what he should do in this
case; some were of opinion, that seeing this Prince was sent away to secure him
from danger, and that there was now a peace with Scotland, the Scots Prince
should be set free, and hospitably used; and that there was no policy at that
time to exasperate the Scots: but others affirmed, that his detension was just,
because the Scots had aided Piercy against the king, and that old Piercy being
a traitor, is maintained and sheltred by the Scots king. This opinion
prevailed; Prince James is retained, and care taken for his education. But when
news came of his captivity to king Robert his father, being then at Supper, he
fell suddenly so ill, that they could scarce keep life in him; so grieved he
was, that within three days he died, the 16 year of his Reign. The Government
of the kingdom is committed to his brother Robert. In the five 1406
following years, diverse incursions of English and Scots upon each other were
made, and diverse places taken and re-taken. The battle of Harlaw among the
Scots themselves, was memorable. Donald Lord of the Isles, laid claim to the
Country of Ross, as being next heir, and which the Governor wrongfully detained
from him; therefore having raised ten thousand men in the Isles, enters Ross,
where none made resistance, all acknowledging him for their Morray land, which
also submitted to him; then having plundered Bogie, he threatens Aberden; the
Governor against this sudden and unlooked for enemy, prepares an Army, but
before he could be ready, the Earl of Mar, with most of the Gentry of those
parts, encounters him near the Village Harlaw; a bloody battle is fought,
which continued till the night parted them: so great was the loss on both 1411
sides, that neither party brag of the Victory. More Gentry were lost in this
intestin quarrel, then before at any time against a Forain Enemy. About this
time the University of Saint Andrews was erected.

For ten years after this, no memorable action is recorded between the two
kingdoms; either because of the Truce, and the English employments in France,
under Henry the fifth, or else because the Governor of Scotland durst not
stir, fearing lest the king of England should send home the right heir to the
kingdom Some inroads the Borderers made now and then upon each other, but not
by public Authority: The Dolphin of France being disinherited by his
crazy-headed father, sends to Scotland for aid, according to the old League. A
Parliament is summoned, and seven thousand Voluntaries under John Earl of
Buchan are sent, who got the French a memorable victory against the English,
for which, he is made High Constable of France, the Robert Protector of
Scotland dies, fifteen years after the death of king Robert the third. In his
place is set up his son Mordacus, a man unfit for Government; which called the
Earl of Buchan home from France, who shortly after was invited again by the
Dolphin 1420
into France, whither he hasteneth, with five thousand Scots, and lands at
Rotchel. King Henry of England carries over with him into France, young King
James of Scotland, purposely by his means to alienate the Scots from the
French, which he could not do; for when the Scots King did press them to
forsake the French, and join with their King; they answered, that their King
being now under another jurisdiction, had no power over them: wherefore Henry
having found in Meldin which he took, twenty Scots, he caused them to be
hanged, pretending they fought against their King. Two years after, the English
having got a victory at Vernol, Earl Buchan, with other Lords, and two thousand
Scots besides, were there slain. And three years after this, the Scots had
another overthrow, as they were conveying provisions to Orleans. Scotland in
the interim, is untowardly governed by Mordacus, and his three unruly sons, who
slighted their old father. Walter the eldest, being in love with one of his
fathers Falcons, begged him, but having received a denial, in anger wrung off
his neck; to whom the old man thus spoke Son, (says he) because thou will not
obey me, I will send for James.

A Parliament is called at Perth, where it is unanimously concluded, that the
King must be sent for, all men being weary of the present Government.
Ambassadors are dispatched into England, the Duke of Gloucester being then
tector of the young King, calls a Parliament; in which it was resolved the
Scots King should be sent home, and to indear him the more to England, the Duke
of Somersets daughter is given to him in marriage; her portion should be
retained for half of the Kings Ransom, for payment of the other half, some
Hostages should be left: So James returns home the eighteenth year of his
Captivity, to the great joy of the people, who complained of their grievances
1423
suffered by Mordaos three sons, and others, who to satisfy the people, were
sent to prison till the next Parliament

The King and Queen are Crowned about the twentieth of April, Mordac set the
King in his Throne, a ceremony belonging to the Earls of Fife. A Mordacus Duke
of Albany, with his two sons, Walter and Alexander, and diverse others, are
apprehended, and sent to several prisons; the Dukes Castles are seized on for
the King. James the Dukes youngest son, seeing the ruin of his Fathers Family,
in revenge, raises some Forces, and burns Dun-Britton; then having murdered
the Kings Uncle, with thirty more, flies into Ireland, where shortly Sterling,
where. Mordac with his two sons, and his wives father, are arraigned of High
Treason, and beheaded. Not long after this, Ambassadors come from France, to
renew the old League, and to make a match between Charles the sevenths son, and
King James his daughter, being as yet children.

The next year after, the King makes a Progress into the Northern parts, 1426
for suppressing some turbulent spirits there. Diverse of the factions
Ringleaders are apprehended, and put to death. Alexander Lord of the Isles,
upon entreaty of friends, is pardoned, and conditionally that he will be quiet,
and Innernesse, which he first plunders, then sets on fire. He besieged the
Castle, but could not take it; therefore rises, upon the report of an Army
sent by the King against him. He was now ten thousand strong, but two of the
Clans, to wit, Chatan and Chameron, upon the news of the Kings Forces coming,
forsook him. Hereupon, mistrusting the fidelity of the rest, disbands his
Forces and flies into the Islands, and thence intends for Ireland; but finding
no security, except in the Kings wonted clemency, procures some potent friends
Edinburgh, and in a white sheet upon Easter day, casts himself at the Kings
feet, and submits to his mercy; the Queen and Lords then present intercede for
him: he is commanded to stay till Divine Service was ended. Mean while the King
thinking it fit to yield somewhat to the Queens request, and yet not safe to
send home so potent and factious a man, without some punishment, he sends him
to Tentallon Castle, and his pragmatical mother to the Isle Aemona: the
Clan-Catans, and Clan-Chamerons, destroyed each other by their fewds. In the
Isles, Donald Baloc, to revenge his Cousin Alexanders wrongs, makes new stirs.
Against Mar and Cathnesse, raise some Forces, whom Donald suddenly overthrew.
Alan Earl of Cathness, was killed: Alexander of Mar, fled with a few. Donald
upon this good success, goes with fire and sword, through all Abria, or
Lochabor, but hearing the Kings Army was coming, hastneth to the Isles, with
rich booty; the chief of these Clans repair to the King, to clear their
innocence, but he will admit of no purgation, till they bring to punishment,
the Ringleaders of these Rebels. Upon this, they go home, where they apprehend
many of them, whom they put to death, and three hundred they sent in chains to
the King, whom he commanded to be hanged; Donald himself could not be found.
There were some other of these Clans left, who by their private quarrels,
destroyed each other. Mack Donald, a notable Rebel, for shooing a widow, whom
he had robbed, with horse shoos, was so shooed himself, and carried about the
streets in that manner, with twelve of his companions, and then hanged upon
Gallows near the highway. Match Donald the Islander, hid himself in Ireland;
where his head was cut. off, and

After this, the King sends diverse wise and sincere men about the kingdom, 1 40
to hear complaints, and to look to weights and measures. At this time he had
two Twins born to him, which occasioned much joy, and the enlargement of Duglas
and Kennedy out of prison, who had been sent thither for speaking too lavishly
against the present Government. He advances learning, and sends for some
skilful in all sorts of Manufacture out of Flanders. He had a mind also to
reform the abuses of the Clergy, but durst not adventure, because of their
power and exempt jurisdiction: Yet he was blamed for the luxury Mar and
Buchans patrimonies, who were dead. Whereas his Uncle Robert, and this Roberts
son, his Cousin German Mordacus, the last Governors of Scotland, had been very
bountiful to the people, whose inheritance also fell to the King, against whom
the Gentry grumbled; also for keeping all the Wardships in his own hand, which
ought to be given as Rewards to well deserving men. The King excused his
parcimony, by showing how poor his Revenues were by the profuseness of the
former Governors and Kings; France to bring away Margaret, who had been
betrothed to Lewis, Charles the sevenths son. This Ambassie is crossed by
another out of England, desiring an union of the two kingdoms, which is more
natural, then with France, that neither speaks the same language, nor is
consned within the same Island. This union was then earnestly desired, because
Burgundy was fallen off from England, and France was beginning to grow too
strong. Barwick, Rossburg, and the other places, now controverted, are promised
to the Scots, if they will assent to an offensive and defensive League with
England. The matter is referred to a Parliament, wherein it Englands aim was to
make the Scots forsake their old friends, to the end they should be wholly
subject to the English. Therefore they resolve to be constant to their old
League. This being denied, the Ambassador threatens war against Scotland,
showing there was already a Fleet prepared to intercept the Lady and her
company. Notwithstanding these threats, the King sends away his daughter, who
escaped the English Fleet, because that was engaged in pursuit of some Holland
Vessels, laden with wine from Rotchel, which they took for Prize, (England and
Burgundy being now enemies) but this Prize was re-taken by the Spaniard. The
Scots ships arrive safely at Rotchel, from whence the young Lady is conveyed by
French Nobility, to Turon, where she is married, to the content of both Nations.

The King of England had now twice provoked the Scots to make war; once by
laboring to intercept the Scottish Lady; and then by sending Piercy with four
thousand men to plunder the borders of Scotland, who was met by Duglas Earl of
Angus, between whom was a hot Skirmish, and many killed on both sides, some say
about 20^, of the English were taken 1500. K. James raises a great Army, and
besieges Roxburg; but when he was in hope of a surrender, the Q. comes post to
him, and in a great fright assures him, that a plot was intended against him,
suddenly to take away his life: Upon this, he rises from the siege, and
disbands the Army, for which he was much blamed, in that he would be so
uxorious, as at his wives report to dismiss an Army raised with so much
trouble and charge. The King in his return, retires himself into the Dominicans
Covent at Perth, to try what he could learn there of this plot. Mean while the
Traitors (the chief of which was Walter of Athol, the Kings uncle) hasten to
bring the Treason to maturity. One of 1437
twenty eight wounds. The sad news of the Kings death being spread abroad,
inquiry is made every where for the Traitors, who were all found out, and in
less then forty days justly executed. Walter Earl of Athol, had his limbs
disjointed the first day, by the Strapado; then he was set upon a Pillar, and
there Crowned with a burning Crown of Iron, to accomplish what the Witches had
told him, to wit, that he should be crowned in a great Assembly Edinburgh upon
an Hurdle. The third day his bowels are taken out, and burned, he being yet
alive; his heart is pulled out, and his head cut off, and advanced upon a Pole.
At last his body is quartred, and set up in four several places: Some others of
the same wicked crew, are tortured to death, with hot pincers; and others with
other punishments. This King reigned thirteen years, and lived forty four: he
was buried in the Charter House of Perth, which he founded.

To James the 1. succeeded James the 2d, and youngest of the Twins, for
Alexander the other died. This King is Crowned at Holy Roods in Edinburgh.
Alexander Leviston is made Protector or Regent. Archbald Earl of Duglas, being
angry that this honor was not conferred on him, suffers, or rather encourages
the Ananders under his jurisdiction, to spoil and plunder the Country.
Complaints are made against him, which he slighted, commanding his people not
to obey the Kings Edicts, alleging he had Regal power himself. Besides there
were private quarrels between the Regent and Chancellor, crossing each others
power, to the great disturbance of the people; which at last broke out into
public hatred, to pillaging, and burning of Houses and Villages. The Q. being
much troubled at this distemper, and willing to get her young son out of the
Chancelors custody, who kept him with Edinburgh Castle, cunningly insinuates
her self so much into his good opinion, as that she got leave to lie in the
same Castle with her son, whom at length she conveyed away in her Trunk, where
she kept her Linen, to Lies, and from thence in a ship to Sterlin, where the
Regent resides. Thither the chief of his party came to see the King, and to
consult, how the Kingdom should be freed from the Chancelors tyranny, who had
abused his trust, wronged the King, oppressed the people, and filled his own
Coffers with the wealth of the kingdom. There the Queens wisdom and care is
highly commended; and its agreed, that an Army be raised, and Edinburgh Castle
besieged, before the Chancelour know any thing. Presently the Regents Faction
arm themselves Duglas for aid, assuring him that the Regent aimed at the ruin
of them both. Duglas who hated them both equally, answers him that both the
Chancelour and Regent were perfidious, and aimed at nothing but their own
private good, and that therefore the Kingdom should be happy if they were both
dead. Upon this answer, the Regent and Chancelour make Truce for two days, and
came to a parley, in which they made known to each other, how dangerous it would
be for them to jar, seeing Duglas desired the ruin of them both, aiming at the
sole rule of the kingdom, which he would easily obtain, if either he could
ruin one or both of them. Thus they two agreed: The Chancelour delivers the
keys of the Castle to the King, where he supped that night, and the next day
confirms the one in his Chancelorship, the other in his Regency. But not long
after, Duglas their mortal enemy died, whose son being fourteen years of age,
by reason of his great wealth and power, and pufft up also French King,
mentioning the merits of his Progenitors to the Crown of France, and so he
obtains the Title of Duke of Turon, or Tours. Which honor his Grandfather
received from Charles 7. and his father till that time enjoyed it. So formidable
was the power of Duglas, that the Regent and Chancelour committed the Queen and
her husband James Stuart of Lorn to prison, upon suspicion that they complied
with him. Nor were they set free, till they had cleared themselves, and
promised not to meddle with

Whilst the kingdom was thus distracted, the Islanders land with great Forces
upon the main land, and with fire and sword, spoil all before them, sparing
neither sex nor age. To these miseries were added a great famine and pestilence;
the cause of all these calamities is ascribed to the Regents tyrannical
government, who sleighting the Chancellor, ruled all by himself. But the
Chancelour seeing how discontent the people were with the Viceroy, seizes
himself of Edinburgh Castle, and then watched an opportunity, to get the King
out of the Regents custody. One day the King was hunting in the Woods near
Sterlin, with a small company, the Regent also then was out of the way; the
Chancellor Edinburgh, where he is received with great acclamation. The Viceroy
being much perplexed, that he was thus overreached by the Chancellor, and not
knowing whom to trust, resolves to cast himself upon the Chancelour: therefore
with some of his retinue rides to Edinburgh, and Aberden and Murrey, procured
the Chancelour to give him a meeting in the church of Saint Aegidius; where
having met, the Viceroy desires there might be no difference between them,
seeing they both aimed at the same thing, which was the good of the King, and
Kingdom, though in the manner there might be some diversities.

He wishes him to consider how many enemies they had, how glad they would be
(says he) of our jars, how happy might both we and the Kingdom be, if we
accord, which if we do, we shall secure our selves, disappoint our enemies,
advance the Kings, and Kingdoms good; therefore if by either of us, any thing
has been done amiss, let it be forgot and forgiven, for the to concur equally
in government of the kingdom. Then a Parliament is called, in which many
grievances and complaints are exhibited, by those who had suffered in the late
distractions. The Regent told them that Duglas might quickly remedy these
evils, if he would comply with the Parliament, which can do but little good in
settling of affairs, so long as so potent a man stood out against them. Upon
this, an Order is made to invite him to the Parliament, that he with the rest
might act for the public good; that he would not degenerate from his noble
Progenitors, who had been always faithful Patriots; that if he please to come,
he shall have what share in the Government he will desire.

Upon this invitation, and persuasion of friends, and desire also of more
power, he comes. The Chancelour met him diverse miles from the City, and
entertains him for two days together at his house, called Crichton Castle,
where he desires him to acknowledge the Kings power and government, and to
submit thereto; that he would put away from him all lewd persons, and not
protect highway men, nor oppress the Kings subjects. What has been by him
hitherto acted, shall be imputed to his ill Counselors, and his own
inexperience and youth. By these fair words, he was allured to go; who also had
brought with him his brother David: But some of his wisest friends suspected
treachery, and therefore wished him to return, or at least to send back his
Duglas was entered Edinburgh Castle, the Viceroy meets him, and makes much of
him, causing him to sit down at the Kings own Table. About the midst of Dinner,
some of the Kings Guard in Arms, brings into the room a Bulls head in a Dish,
which they set down before him. In those times, this was a sign of death to
those that were to lose their heads. The young Gallant being affrighted at this
sight; began to withdraw from the Table; but he was presently laid hold on and
carried out into the Castle Court, where he for his intemperate youthfulness,
Duglas, consisted the Kings security and happiness. Duglas dying without issue,
the Earldom being intailed, fell to James, nicknamed Crassus, or Gross; and
his other Patrimonies, which were very great, to his sister Beatrix.

Gross died within two years after; and his eldest son William succeeded, who
1443
married with his Uncles daughter, heir of many Countries; which brought much
envy on him, both because of the great power and wealth was fallen to him, and
likewise the propinquity of blood between him and his wife; of Duglas into the
Kings favor, aimed at both their ruins; resigned up their places, and took
leave of the Court. The one retired himself to his own Country Mansion; the
other to Edinburgh Castle: and as they feared, so it fell out; for Duglas their
absence, not for any crime they were guilty of, but because they had too many
enemies at Court, to whose censure they should be loath to submit; therefore
they would reserve themselves for better times.

Upon this answer, Duglas got a Parliament to be called at Sterling, in which
the Regent and Chancelour are proclaimed public enemies to the State, and
their estates confiscate. To this purpose, Forces are sent to demolish the
Castles, or to new Garrison them; which was done accordingly: the Chancellor in
requital, raises some Troops, and commits great spoil in the enemies Country,
being aided by Kennedy, Archbishop of S. Andrews, George Earl of Angale, and
John Earl of Morton. Upon these Duglas wracks his anger, one quarrel begets
another; so diverse Forces are raised by these Crichton, is beleaguered in
Edinburgh Castle by Duglas. At length, after nine months siege, Crichton is
pardoned for all offenses of his against the King, and is permitted to march
away with his Forces; so the Castle is surrendered. Not long after, Crichton is
again made Chancelour, but he left the Court, and all public imploiments:
every one knew that Duglas was the cause of all these civil broils; yet so
great was his power with the King, that no man durst accuse him: some great
ones he caused to be put to death, some to be banished. Having done what he
Crichton, he tries what he can do against Leviston the Regent, whom he causes
with his son James, and diverse others, to be summoned to the Parliament at
Edinburgh, where they are accused of high crimes. The Regent, and the two
Dundasses, are sent to prison in Dunbarton Castle, the rest are beheaded. James
the Regents son, on the Scaffold, complained much against the inconstancy of
Fortune, and vanity of worldly Honors; showing, that notwithstanding his
Father had been Viceroy of Scotland, and had done so much good service for the
King and kingdom, yet all is forgot, the Kings pardon slighted, the
entreaties of the Nobility for his life rejected; therefore wishes all men to
beware of public employments, and honors, being

In the midst of these Civil broils, Crichton the Chancelour is sent Ambassador
into France, to renew the old League, and to get a wife for the King. About
this time Cameron, Arch. Bishop of Glasgow, for his cruelties and oppression of
his tenants, was called upon by a strange voice to appear before Christ's
Tribunal; being then asleep, he awaketh in fear, and calls up his servants, who
sat down by him: He calls for a Book, and as he was beginning to read, the
voice summons him again, to the amazement of his servants; but when the voice
called the third time, he gave a hideous groan, England is expired: whereupon
incursions are made into each others Territories, fire, and sword, raging on
both sides; so that the Country for many miles is laid waste: therefore a new
Truce for seven years is concluded; before the expiration of which, the
Borderers begin to spoil and rob each other. Complaints being made on both
sides, Armies are raised; a battle is fought, in which the Scots had the
better; three thousand of the English being slain, and of the Scots six hundred
only; many were taken prisoners, and much booty is carried into Edinburgh. This
battle was fought at a place called Sarc. Upon the news of this overthrow at
London, a new Army is appointed to be sent against Scots, for re-gaining of
what was lost: but this Expedition was hindered by the intestin commotions in
England; therefore Ambassadors are sent to Scotland, with Propositions of
Peace: upon which, when they could not agree, a Truce is made for three years;
and presently after a Messenger is 1448
sent from the Chancelour out of Flanders, about the marriage of the Duke of
Gelders daughter, sister to the Duke of Burgundy, with King James. She the next
year is conveyed into Scotland, with a great company of Lords and Earls, and is
Crowned at Holy Roods.

After this, Earl Duglas undertakes a journey for Rome, being the year of
Jubilee, accompanied with many Lords and Gentlemen; who in his absence is
complained of by his enemies to the King, who durst not in his presence,
whisper against him. He is accused of diverse oppressions. The King was not
willing to hear any complaints against him, being absent; yet to stop the
clamours of the people, he sends to the Earls Proctor, to appear, and to take
notice of the crimes objected against his Lord. He refuses to come, wherefore
he is imprisoned for contempt; but at last he submits, and comes Galloway to
force them. The Earl hearing of these passages at Rome, was much perplexed; he
was also forsaken by diverse of his followers: so that he returns home with thin
Attendants.

Before he came to the King, he premises his brother James to sound out how he
was affected toward him; and finding he stood right in the Kings opinion,
returns home; and upon promise that he would suppress the Annanders, Scotland;
which afterward he forfeited, by having secret correspondency with the King of
England. Crichton the Chancellor was again advanced, which so angerd Duglas,
that he set some of his followers in the highway one night, as he was going
home from Edinburgh, to murder him but being a stout man, he escaped, by
killing one, and wounding another, but he was wounded also himself. Shortly
after, being recovered, he returns unexpectedly to Edinburgh, with a great
Train of his friends and servants, and had almost surprised Duglas, who having
escaped the danger, Rosse, and Craford. So that now he began to slight the
King; for one Sir John Harris of Galloway complaining to Duglas of the wrongs
he had suffered by the Ananders, his Vassals, and finding no redress, falls
himself upon them with some Forces, which he had raised, hoping to recover his
losses. But he with his Train was surprised by the Earls Forces, and hanged,
notwithstanding the King by his Letters entreated his pardon. This made people
give out, that Duglas aimed to be King himself; for when the King had
interceded again for a chief man of the Maclellans, whom Duglas kept in prison
for killing one of his name, he slighted Duglas, sends for him, who because of
his guilty mind, refuses to come, knowing that he had many enemies at Court.
Yet at last, upon the public faith, confirmed by hand and seal; he adventures
to come to Sterlin with a great Train, where he is kindly used by the King, who
after Supper, calls him aside, and reproves him for his ingratitude, and
insolences; yet promises to pardon all bypast offenses, if he will break off
the league with Rosse and Craford, which could not consist with the Kings
safety or honor. At this the Earl began to boggle, and use tergiversation,
saying, he would advise with his friends, and that the King needed not to be so
1451
brothers, and his faction; but the tumult was at last appeased. The Earldom
falls to James the next brother, who speaking bitterly against the
perfidiousnesse of the King and his Court, desires his brothers, friends, and
followers, to besiege the Castle; but they wanted strength enough for that
enterprise, therefore they take the Kings Patent containing the Public Faith,
and ties it to a horse tail, dragging it up and down the streets, and using all
opprobrious speeches against the King and his Court. Then in the Market place
the King and his adherents are denounced Perjurers, Truce Breakers, and enemies
to all good men, by the sound of five hundred horns: at last they plunder the
Town, and fire it.

Within few days this enraged multitude falls to spoiling of all the Kings
lands and tenants; they besiege also Dalketh Castle, but could not take it. In
the interim the King raises an Army, but because the Duglassians were too
strong for him, he resolves to forbear action, till Alexander Gordon come with
his Northern Forces; the Earl of Craford to keep these from joining with the
Kings Southern Forces, encounters with Gurdon at Brechin in Anguse. A fierce
Battle is fought, in which the Crafordians are defeated, many prime men on
both sides were killed, Gordon here lost both his brothers, and was forced to
return home with his victorious Army, to suppress the Earl of Murry, who was
raging with fire and sword in Huntlies Country of Bogy; but the Gordons beat
him not only thence, but also out of his own Country of Murry. Mean while a
Parliament is called at Edinburgh, to which Earl Duglas and the Lords that
followed him, are summoned to appear, who refuse to come. The Earl also caused
a paper to be fastened the next night on the Church door, wherein he renounceth
all Allegiance to the King, saying, that he will never trust him, who murdered
his Cousins at Edinburgh, and his brother at Sterlin, being allured thither
upon the public faith; for this contumacy, this Earl James, with his brothers,
and Beatrix, his deceased brothers wife, with the Earl of Crawford, are
proclaimed Rebels. An Army is raised to pursue them; their houses are plundered,
fields wasted, barns fired, and their cattle James in the mean time to keep the
wealth once gotten, still in his Family, marieth with Beatrix, his defunct
brothers wife, and deals with the Pope for a dispensation, which the King by
his Letters hindered. The three ensuing years are spent in destroying each other
with fire and sword; whereupon followed the famine and pestilence. Some of the
Earls wisest friends, advise him to submit to the King, rather then stand out
to the ruin of himself, family, and friends: but he is resolved never to trust
those that had murdered against their faith, his Cousins, and brother: Earl
Craford being weary of the wars, and of the injustice of the cause, resolves in
time to submit to the Kings mercy; therefore one day barefooted, and
bare-headed, he comes Kennedy, his wise Councelour, considering also that
Crafords falling off from Duglas, would weaken that party, receives him into
his favor, which Craford ever after retained till his dying day. Duglas
perceiving his Forces to grow weaker daily, had little hope left him now, but
in the King of England, from whom he expected help; therefore sends Hammilton
to London, who receives this answer from the King, that he would not make war
upon Scotland, except the Earl will become a subject of England, and trust the
King with his person and estate: This hope failing him, and being weakened every
day by the Kings Forces, Hammilton, to venture his Fortunes upon a battle.
Abrec^ Castle was now besieged by the Kings Army. The Earl raises all the
strength he could to relieve the Castle; but when he came within view of the
Kings Army, he made a halt, and kept off his soldiers so long from fighting,
that they grew weary with delays. And Hammilton one night revolted to the King,
who after he had imprisoned him a while, receives him to his favor. Others
also following the example of Hamilton, forsook Duglas, so the Castle at last
is taken by the King, and demolished. The Earl being forsaken by most of his
men, flies to England, with a few of his friends: but shortly after, he got
some new Forces, and with them enters Annandel, but is beaten by the Kings
party; he escapes again with his brother John; Archbald Earl of Murrey is
slain, and George is wounded, and afterward beheaded. Then a Parliament is held
at Edinburgh, Duglasses, James and John, with Beatrix, are proscribed.

Earl James having lost his brothers, forsaken by his Soldiers, slighted 1455
by the English; betakes himself at last to Donald Lord of the Isles, and Earl
of Ross, with whom he enters into a league; they fall first upon the Kings
lands next to them, then upon Argile, Arran, Lechaber and Murray, which they
waste with fire and sword, they took the Castle of Innerness and fired the
Town. Mean while the English invade the Scots borders, and carry away great
booties. Beatrix who had married two brothers, being checked in conscience,
submits her self to the Kings mercy, who pardoned her: The like did the wife of
Donald; and the like favor she obtains. Piercy and the banished Douglass
invade Marcia again, but are beat back with loss by George Douglass E. of
Anguse; Donald being weary of his wicked courses, sends an humble Petition to
the King by his friends, acknowledging his faults, and promising all fidelity
and allegiance for the future, presuming his Majesty would be no less gracious
to him, then he had been to Crawford and others: The King upon the importunity
of his friends, and the necessity also that lay on him then, to settle his
distracted Kingdom, sends him a pardon; and so all being quieted at home, he
prepares now to make war upon England. In the interim the confederate Lords,
namely the Duke of York, the Earls of Salisbury and Warwick, Scots aid against
King Henry their enemy, who had lost France, oppressed his Kingdom, and
injured the Scots, withal they promise restitution of what had been lately
taken from the Scots; this proffer is accepted by King James, who having raised
an Army, and being now on his march, is met by an English Imposter who had
lived long in Italy; he feignes himself to be the Popes Legate, sent from his
holiness, to forbid him to make war upon England, for the Pope was resolved to
make a general peace in Christendom; this being believed, the King disbands his
Army, not knowing that this Imposter was sent by King Henry, till afterward;
when he saw he was deluded, Roxburg Town, which he took and demolished; then he
sits down before the Castle, where an Ambassie from the English Confederates
assures him, that their King was defeated, and the war ended; therefore having
thanked him for his good will toward them, desires him to raise his siege from
Roxburg; otherwise an Army will be sent against him: To these the King answers,
that as hitherto he has not made use of the Confederates favor, so for the
future he will not fear their power: He set down before a Castle built on his
own ground, from which he is not to be removed by words, but by arms: Mean
while Donald of the Isles with fresh Forces Huntley also brings some more
supplies; the King growing weary of this long siege, falls to storming of the
Castle with great Ordnance, but whilst he was giving fire to one of the pieces
himself; standing too near was suddenly struck dead; his death was a while
concealed, least the Soldiers should be disheartened, the Queen calling the
Lords apart, desires them not to give off, nor be dejected for the Kings death,
she would bring another King shortly in his room, so they fall furiously on the
Castle; in the interim the Kings son James, now 7. years old, is brought into
the Camp and saluted King; shortly upon this the Castle is surrendered, the
Garrison is permitted to depart with their baggage: And that this Castle may
breed no more quarrel, it is levelled to the ground. King James died the 23
year of his Reign, and of his life the 29. 1460


CHAP. XXVI.
The English History under King Edward 4. Edward 5. and Richard 3. from the
year 1460, till the year 1485.

Upon the overthrow of King Henry 6. Edward Duke of York is proclaimed King,
and Crowned: He begins his Reign with many good Acts; Repeals the last 1461
Kings Statutes, concerning Treason, and puts the Earl of Oxford with some
other of King Henry's Councillors, George and Richard are made Dukes; the one
of Clarence, the other of Gloucester; diverse other Lords also are created. The
Duke of Somerset, Sir Ralph Pery, submit themselves to the King, who pardons
them; but afterward they revolted. When the Queen had returned with new Forces
from France, and in Scotlrnd had raised an Army to invade Northumberland, King
Edward sends a Fleet into the Northern seas, and an 1462
Army by land under the Lord Montacute; he follows after himself with another.
Montacute is incountred by the Lords Ross, and Hungerford, and Piercy. The
Lords fled, and Piercy was killed. These being defeated, Montacute marches
against the King and Queens Army, who before K. Edward came up with his Forces,
disordered and routed the Queens Somerset with diverse other great prisoners are
taken, and executed. King Henry with many more fled into Scotland; an Army is
sent into Northumberland, where diverse Castles were taken; in one of which, was
Sir Ralph Gray, who was degraded by leaving off his spurs, renting his Coat of
Arms, and breaking his sword over his head, and then beheaded. Montacute for
his good service, is made Earl of Northumberland; the Earldom of Pembroke is
given from Tuthar to the Lord Herbert. But shortly after, Northumberland upon
submission, is restored to his possessions and honors; and Montacute was
contented with the title of Marquess. Then the King rewards his Captains and
Soldiers with the enemies 1463
many Castles on the Sea Coast, to keep off Pirates, and on the main land, to
suppress Thieves and Rebels. Mean while King Henry disguised, and coming for
London, is taken and imprisoned in the Tower. King Edward being desired by his
Council to mary, sends the Earl of Warwick Ambassador into France, to procure
the Lady Bona, daughter to Lewis Duke of Savoy, for his wife. In the interim,
this young King being almost out the age of twenty four years, and impatient of
long delays, falls in love with the Lady Elizabeth, the Widow of S. John Gray,
who was slain in Albons, as he was fighting for King Henry, and at last
marieth her; then he makes her Father the Lord Rivers, an Earl, and High
Constable of England. Her son, Sir Thomas Gray, is made Marquess Dorset; this
match was the occasion of much mischief, as will appear. 1464


The news of this hasty marriage highly displeased the Earl of Warwick, who took
this as an affront; yet dissembles his anger, resolving to depose the king,
when time served. The King fearing the power of this Earl, endeavored secretly
to abridge him of his Authority. Warwick gets leave to go to his Castle for his
recreations sake, where he hatcheth some plots against the K. About which time
was born the Lady Elizabeth, afterward the wife of K. Henry 7. 1465
and mother to K. Henry 8. K. Edward to make himself the stronger against Lewis
the French K. who was offended with his marriage, taking it as a frump on him
and his Q. sister, makes peace with Scotland for 15 years; and to engage the
Kings of Arragon and Castile, he sent them as some think, many sheep K. also
marieth his sister to Charles D. of Burgundy, as he had formerly married two of
his sisters to the D. of Exeter, 1466
and Suffolk. Warwick aiming to restore K. Henry, got his two brothers, the
Arch-B. of York and Marq. of Montacute, to join with him; yet the Marq. was
still a secret friend to K. Edward. The D. of Clarence also being offended with
his brother the K. joins with the Earl of Warwick, upon the Earls persuasions,
who complained of the K. for sleighting his own kindred, and preferring the
kindred of his wife: the D. also marieth with the Earls daughter, being then at
Calice; and a rebellion is made in Yorkshire by the Archbishop of York and
Montacute, causing the country people to believe that the yearly alms of Corn
which they gave to the poor of S. Leonards Hospital, was converted by the
Governor York; but in the night Montacute sallied out upon these Rebels, killed
many, and struck off their Capt. head. The Rebels weary of the siege, march to
London, conducted by S. John Conyers. Herbert Earl of Pembroke, and Humphry
Lord Stafford, with 9000 Welsh men and others, march against these Northern
Rebels, 2000 Archers are utterly defeated by the Yorkshire men. A division also
fell out between Pembroke and Stafford, so that Stafford departs with his
Archers from Pembroke, who being hereat troubled, but not dismayed, set upon the
Rebels Clapham carrying the Earl of Warwicks banner, and accompanied with 500
Northamptonians, crying a far off, a Warwick, a Warwick, so affrighted the
Welsh, supposing Warwick had bin coming with another Army, that they ran away,
and were utterly routed, to the loss of 5000 of their company. Sir Richard
Herbert, and 8 more, are beheaded at Banbury, by the rebels; so was Earl
Rivers, the Q. father, and Sr John his son, being apprehended at Grafton,
without any legal proceeding. The Lo. Stafford is executed by the K. command,
for deserting the Earl of Pembroke. At last, the K. marches on with his Army
against the rebels, with whom were joined the D. of Clarence and Earl of
Warwick.

A Parley is proposed for peace, and many messengers for that purpose sent to
and fro; this made the K. secure, who in his bed was seized on by the Earl of
Warwick, rushing with a good Guard into the Kings Camp, slew his watches, and
took him, whom secretly he conveyed as a prisoner to the Archbishop of York
his brother, who gave the K. so much liberty to hunt, that he made shift to
escape to London: at which Warwick was much troubled, with Clarence and the
confederates, who had upon the K. Captivity dismissed their Army, but they
presently raised another, and so did the King; all things now were in a
combustion, injustice and violence raged every where. At length by the
mediation of some great and peaceable Lords, a parley was granted between the K.
Westminster Hall, but to no purpose, such bitterness there was on both sides.
The K. also brought much envy on himself, by cutting off the heads of the Lord
Wels, and his brother in law Sir Tho. Dymock, because they could not persuade
Sir Tho. Wells, the Lords son, and General of the rebels, to forsake them, and
serve under him, Sir Robert to revenge his fathers and uncles death, ventured
too rashly upon the K. great army, with his handful of men, the confederates
not being come yet with their army, so that the K. got the honor of that day.
In this battle of loose coats (so called, because the rebels slung off their
coats, that they might run the more nimbly) were slain 10000 men; Sir Rob.
Wells, with some other prime men lost their heads. Upon the report of this
overthrow, Warwick and Clarence, fled to Exeter, from thence to Dartmouth, and
so to Calice, the K. was much grieved that they escaped. But to prevent their
landing in England, with forain forces, the K. entreats his brother in Law the
D. of Burgoin, to hinder all aid from the said Earl, and to surprise him with a
Navy; to which the D. was willing enough, being angry with the Earl for
hindering his marriage with Margaret the K. sister; for siding with K. Lewis of
France, the D. mortal enemy, and because the Earl was more beloved of the
people, then the K. himself. But when the Duke and Earl came with their wives
and friends before Calice, the Earls Deputy Vawcler beat them with his Ordnance
from the Castle, not permitting any help or succor to be afforded from the
Town to the Duchess, who was brought to bed on shipboard. The King was so glad
of this, that he made the said Deputy chief Captain, and Burgoin gave him an
annual pension of 1000 Crowns; yet the Deputy encouraged 1469
the Earl to ask aid if Franceo, and Calice should be his, when time served.
Upon this the Earl puts to sea, takes some of Burgundies ships richly laden,
then Deep. Upon invitation, he repairs to the K. who used him and his company
graciously and bountifully, for the hatred he bare to K. Edward, and the D. of
Burgundy. Upon the report of this intertainment, Q. Margaret, and Pri. Edward
her son, with some others, repair to the confederates, and consult about
restoring of K. Henry; they gave their solemn oaths to each other, to stand
firm, and for the more strength, the Earl of Warwick married his 2d daughter to
Pri. Edward, which made Clarence a secret enemy to Warwick, fearing that this
match would be the undoing of the family of York; therefore he gave private
intelligence to his brother K. Edward of all Warwicks proceedings.

The English Lords being furnished with all necessaries from the French K.
Burgundian Fleet in the mouth of the river Seen, which the next evening a
sudden storm drove into the sea, drowned many, and dispersed most of them.
Warwick glad at this mishap of the Burgundian, and understanding by Letters
that he was howrely expected in England, where he should be sufficiently backed,
makes haste, leaving the Q. and Prince behind, and so with great celerity lands
at Dartmouth. The K. mean while trusting to the Burgundian Fleet, which he did
not know was spoiled, neglected his own Fleet, and gave himself to dalliance
with Ladies. Warwick sends out Proclamations, commanding all in K. Henry's
name, to aid him, and to oppose Edward the Usurper; and so in a short time, his
army mightily increased, London. K. Edward also levied a strong army, but
understanding that the people every where affected K. Henry and Warwick, his
heart failed him, so that he mistrusted his own army, wherefore he left his
army in the night, and with 800 of his best friends, posts to Lincolnshire,
thence to Holland, resolving to stay with the D. of Burgundy till times were
better; the Kentish men hearing that K. Edward was fled, assembled tumultuously
in great numbers, and would by force have entered London Gates, but being
resisted, they fire and riffle the suburbs, and murder much people, but were
at last suppressed and punished by the Earl of Warwick, who presently goes to
the Tower, sets K. Henry at liberty, and conducts him triumphantly thence to
Paul's, where having performed his devotions, he keeps his Court in the Bishops
Palace; then York is settled on the D. of Clarence, though the second son; the
Crown is intailed to K. Henry, his heirs male, and for default of such issue,
to Clarence and his heirs. The Q and her son Pr. Edward, offer diverse times to
come over by sea, but are hindered by cross winds and storms, which the people
construed as a judgment on her, for her cruelties in causing so much blood
shed. Burgundy was loath at first to furnish K. Edward with ships and money,
fearing lest Warwick would make a new war on him; yet understanding that K.
Edward was invited by his friends into England, and that there were great
hopes, he furnishes him with 50000 Florence of gold, and 18 tall ships, with
2000 land soldiers: He lands in Yorkshire, where he found cold welcome, the
people being more addicted to King 1470
Henry. Yet he marches to York, where he publishes; that he made no claim to
the Crown, but to his Duchy, of which he was unjustly deprived, and shows that
in this, they were in equity to aid him. Upon this, he took his oath, that
Henry, therefore he was let in, entertained, and monyed; but before two days
were at an end, he plants a Garrison there, and forces the inhabitants to
furnish him with all things needful for an army; then he hires soldiers every
where, and many Gentlemen came in to him. His old friend Montacute, who had a
strong army, gave him free passage to march. Warwick comes to the City of
Warwick, with his forces, and writes to Clarence, to hasten thither with his
Army, for he meant to give the K. battle; but Clarence made no haste, which
bred suspicion in Warwick, that he meant to fail him in his need; therefore he
goes to Coventry with his army. K. Edward dares Warwick into the field, who
kept close within the walls, to try what Clarence would

K. Edward went thence toward his brother Clarence, who likewise refused to
fight: Hereupon the D. of Gloucester, brother to them both, reconciled them and
their armies: then the 3 brothers strive to win Warwick to their side, but he
cursing the D. perfidiousness, would not unite with them. Wherefore King Edward
to increase his strength, repairs to London, which excluded him a while. But
when they considered his just title, his abilities for government, and his
great army, whereas K. Henry was weaker every way, chiefly in the gifts of the
mind, they open their gates, lets him in, and salutes him K. then was K. Henry
seized upon again, and committed to the Tower. Warwick thought to have
surprised the K. in his march toward London, but was prevented; therefore he
Barnet 10 miles from London, purposing to venture all upon one battle. K. Edw.
army being furnished with all things needful, by the Londoners, marches also
to Barnet. The right Wing of Warwicks army was commanded by his brother
Montacute, and Oxford. The left Wing by himself, and the D. of Exeter; the main
battle by the D. of Somerset. K. Edw. Vantguard was led by the D. of
Gloucester, the main battle by himself, and Clarence, in which was K. Henry;
the Rereward was conducted by the Lord Hastings. A cruel battle of 5 or 6
hours is fought, and it was not known a great while, who had the better; at
last Warwick perceiving that his men and friends Montacute. The death of these
two was the overthrow of the whole army, who ran away, and left the Victory for
K. Edward, who that afternoon enters the city triumphantly with his prisoner K.
Henry. In Paul's he offered up his standard, with thanks to God for his Victory;
in this battle were slain almost ten thousand men.

The K. grieved much for the death of Montacute, his true friend; both he and
his brother Warwick are brought to London, where in Paul's Church they lay open
faced for 3 days, that the people might see they were truly dead; then Margaret
landed at VVaymouth, with some Forces, before she heard of K. Edwards Victory;
therefore with her son the Prince, she takes sanctuary in the Abbey of Beaulieu,
whither the D. of Somerset Earl of Pembroke, Earl of Devonshire, with diverse
others resorted, resolving to raise a new Army: the Q. and Somerset levy forces
about Bristoll and Gloucester, intending to join themselves with Pembrokes
Welsh men; but the K. prevented those designs, who sent his brother the D. of
Gloucester with an army, who overthrew the D. of Somersets forces in one hour,
of whom above 3000 were slain, among which, was the Earl of Devonshire, with
some other prime men. The Q. and Pr. are taken prisoners, with diverse others,
who the next day are beheaded, except the Q. the Pr. is murdered by Clarence,
Gloucester, Dorset, and Hastings. Not long after, Reyner sold Naples and
Sicily, and with the money of that sale ransomed his daughter Q. Margaret. K.
Henry in the mean while was found dead in his Chamber in the Tower, being
murdered by K. Edw. brother, the D. of Gloucester. To assure the people he was
dead, his body is exposed to the public view one whole day in S. Paul's Church;
his two brothers Clarence and Gloucester for their perjuries and murders,
afterward Edw. was settled his brother in law the D. of Burgundy, persuades him
to renew his wars 1473
with France, which he did, because of his title to that kingd. and for that the
Fr. K. had assisted Q. Margaret and Warwick, against K. Edw. and for that the
Fr. K. made war upon the D. of Burgundy. Now because money was wanting, a
benevolence is demanded, and paid, but grudgingly. One old widow, though a
niggard, gave the K. 20 l. for which he kissed her, she being proud of this
kiss, gave the K. 20 l. more, showing that 40 l. was little enough for a kings
kiss.

The K. having at Dover 500 ships and boats, 1500 Horse men, and 15000 Calice;
but the D. of Burgundy failed him, who promised to meet the K. with 2000 Horse,
who after he had triffled away much time in the siege of Nuyce, sent his forces
to Berroys in Lorrain, to be revenged on Reyner, Q. Margarets father, for some
ill language he gave him. Yet K. Edw. marches by Bollen to Perone, where he
had no provision of the D. for his Army; thence he goes to S. Quintins, but is
beat back from thence, contrary to promise. At last a peace is concluded with
the French K. for 9 years, on these conditions: 1. That the Fr. K. pay to Edw.
75000 Crowns, and 50000 more for an annual pension. 2. That the Fr. K. within
one year mary the K. of Englands daughter to the Dolphin, allowing them for
their maintenance yearly 50000 crowns Guyan to them. 3. That the Lo. Howard and
S. John Cheny, should stay with the Fr. K. as Hostages til the Engl. army be
landed in England: The D. of Burgundy storms at this peace, showing it was a
dishonorable act in K. Edw. who replied that it was more dishonorable in the
D. to call him in, and then to fail him. So the D. went away in a chafe. The
Fr. K. to confirm his amity with England, sends to the English Army 100 Wagons
of wine, and gave them leave for 3 or 4 days to solace themselves in Amiens,
where they found good cheer provided for them. And because they carried
themselves civilly to the Townsmen, the Fr. K. sends to the chief Commanders,
plate and money. Shortly after, K. Edw. by gifts, entreaties, and protestations,
Richmond, 1475
got him to be delivered to his Ambass. by the D. of Britany, whom presently
they conveyed to S. Malos; but the D. being informed that a marriage was
pretended, but his death was intended, and fearing this delivery would be a
perpetual stain to his Honor, sends one Peter Landoys to S. Malos, where the
young Earl was, expecting a fair wind. This Peter by his cunning, got the Earl
into a Sanctuary, so was the sheep delivered, and the woolf deluded of his
money. But the D. promised faithfully to retain the Earl by him as his prisoner,
which in some sort contented K. Edw. After this the D. of Clarence, K. Edw.
brother, was condemned of Treason, against the K. life, and is imprisoned in
the Tower. 1477
But not long after, he was drowned in a But of Malmsie, not without the kings

This K. the 5 last years of his life, grew extreme wretched and covetous, so
that with his exactions, he lost his peoples affections. In the 20 year of his
1488
reign, he sends into France to have the marriage accomplished between the
Dolphin and his daughter. But K. Lewis deluded him with frivolous excuses, and
marieth him to Maximilians daughter, which Maximilian was the son of Frederick
the Emperor, against his oath and articles. James 3d K. of Scots desires a
match between his son and K. Edw. daughter, which was willingly assented to,
and good sums of money disbursed aforehand, conditionally it should be repaid if
the match broke off. But the Scots K. after things were concluded, sends an
Army to invade England, which spoiled all before them with fire and sword;
against whom Gloucester is sent with 21000 men, who took the town of Barwic,
and besieged the Castle, but could not take it; thence he marches into
Scotland, wasting all in his way, and forced K. James into Edinburgh Castle;
the Nobility desire peace, and obtain it, on these conditions, that a full
amends be made for James would restore his brother the D. of Albany, to his
honors and possessions. 3. That the Castle of Barwick be delivered up; and 4.
That repaiment be made of K. Edw. money lent to K. James. The 3 last conditions
were assented to; K. Edw. being deluded by the Fr. K. about the marriage 1483
of the Dolphin, and likewise the tribute of 50000 Crowns, which was to be paid
him yearly during his life, was denied; resolved to invade France with a Royal
Army. But in the midst of his preparations, he fell sick, as some think of a
surfeit, or as others of melancholy, and shortly after died the 23 year of his
reign.

To K. Edw. 4. succeeded his son Edw. 5. at 13 years of age. His uncle the D.
of Gloucester (a man as deformed in body, as crooked in conditions, who had
Henry, and his son Pr. Edw. and his brother also the D. of Clarence) resolves
with the D. of Buckingham, and Lord Hastings, to remove from the young K. all
his mothers kindred, being mean people, and to undertake the charge of
government themselves. Therefore when he understood that the Q. with her
brother the Earl Rivers, and her son the Lo. Gray, intended to conduct with an
army the young K. out of Wales, toward London, there to be crowned. He wrote
to the Q. advising her not to come up to London, in that posture, for fear the
people would grow jealous, and raise Civil wars; therefore wishes her to put
aside that Train, and to disband her Army: he swears withal, that this his
advice proceeded from his good will and love to her and hers. Rivers, and the
Lord Gray. So the army is dismissed, and the K. is accompanied by Rivers, Gray,
and some other friends to Northampton, and thence to Stony Stratford, which
little town not being capable of the whole train, the Earl with his followers
remained that night in Northampton. But Gloucester, and Buckingham, with some
resolved attendants, bore Rivers company that same night; but withal in the
night time, the two D. seized upon all the keys of the Inn, and caused all the
ways between these two towns, to be guarded, and none to pass that way; then
they fell upon the Earl, who was confident of them till now, and commits him to
safe custody. Stony Stratford, and presented their service to the K. which he
accepted, having no suspicion of what was done; then they seize on the Lo.
Gray, the K. half brother, and some others, whom they sent to Pomfret Castle,
where without any judicial proceedings, they lost their heads; they remove also
the K. menial servants and officers, giving out that the Earl with the rest of
his confederates, meant to destroy all the Lords of K. Edwards blood, and to
rule all themselves. The Q. being then at Westminster, hearing of these
tragical passages, took sanctuary there, and repented she had advised upon
Gloucesters cunning letters, to dismiss the army. The K. also grieved much, but
the 2 D. protested, they acted nothing but for his weal; and that they would be
faithful to London, where he is met by the Major and his brethren, in whose
presence Gloucester demeaned himself so submissively to the king, that they
all, and most of the Nobility and Counselors of State, were persuaded of the
Dukes real intentions for the kings good; so that he was made protector of king
and kingdom.

Gloucester having obtained his chiefest desire, labors next to get the young
D. of York into his hands; for that end, he complains to the K. Council of the
wrong the Q. did both to the K. in that she would not permit him to enjoy the
company of his only brother, and to the kingd. in detaining the said D. in
sanctuary, as a malefactor in prison; by which all Counselors and Officers of
State, are scandalled. This motion so well pleased the Lords, that presently
they employ the Cardinal Arch-B. of York, who was gracious with her to desire
she would send the young D. to his brother the K. to solace him, for these
reasons: 1. Because it was dishonorable to the whole kingd. that a child so
near to the K. should be kept in prison; for what else is a sanctuary. 2.
Because that place was only for such as by their conscience were accused of
some crime, K. who was exceedingly joyed with his company: but shortly after,
he conveyed them both through London in great pomp to the Tower, pretending he
did this out of his care to them during the troubles of the kingdom; whereas
indeed there were no troubles but by his procurement, and the other Lords who
adhered to him.

The Protector having secured the two young Princes, next bethinks himself how
he shall obtain the kingd. which he knew would be difficult without the D.
Buckingham, who was a powerful man; therefore he acquaints him with his
intention, desiring his assistance, promising to mary his son to the said D.
daughter, to give him the Earldom of Hartford, to which the D. pretended a
right, but never could obtain it, from Edw. 4. and lastly, to share with him in
the K: treasury. Upon these terms Buckingham assented to, and assisted him in
the plot: but the Lo. Hastings, whom the Protector had made Chamberlain, could
not be won to this wicked design; for one Catesby a Lawyer, and a Favorite of
Hastings, was employed by the Protector to sound his inclination, which when he
had craftily done, he informs the tyrant there was no possibility to win him.
Hereupon the Protector calls a Council of the Lords at the Tower, under
pretense Morton, B. of Ely, whom he hated, yet imploys him to procure some
Strawberries out of his garden, which were very good. The Bish. glad to
pleasure him, hastneth home; the Protector also presently went out, and returns
within an hour, but with a discontented countenance, and troubled mind. All
wondered at the sudden change; at last after some silence, he asks what
punishment he deserved, that intended to murder the K. uncle and Protector. At
length Hastings answered, that he deserved the greatest punishment imaginable.
Then says the Protector; that sorceress the Q. and that strumpet Shores wife,
have conspired against my life; of which that you may be sure, you shall Shores
wife. Hastings who after K. Edw: death, conversed with Shores wife, was
beginning to excuse her; but presently the Protector interrupted him, calling
him traitor for doubting of that which he spoke, and with that clapping his
hand rudely on the table, the chamber suddenly was filled with armed men, one
of which, knocked down the Lord Stanley under table with his Holbard, but killed
him not. Hastings is arrested by the Protector, accused of Treason, and without
any other proceeding, carried out into the Green, where his head is chopped off.
This execution was done that very day, and hour, that the Earl Rivers, Lord
Gray, and Sir Thomas Vaughan, were executed in Pomfret Castle, without legal
proceeding.

After the execution, the Cardinal of York, the Bish. of Ely, and the Lo.
Stanley, Buckingham, put themseves presently into arms, and sends for the chief
Citizens; to whom the Protector complains, that his death was conspired that
morning by Hastings and his accomplices; therefore they are required to certify
the City of the true cause of this broil and execution in the Tower. Two hours
after the execution, a long Proclamation is read by an Herald of Arms, which
was thought to have been written and sealed some days before. Then was Dr Shaa
imploid to Preach the next Sunday after at Paul's Cross, a Sermon in
commendation of the pedigree, virtues and valor of the Protector, and in
detestation of the last K. Edw. lascivious acts, and familiarity with Shores
wife, and others; also to Lucy, before he married the Lady Gray, and was also
affied to the Lady Bona, sister in law to the Fr. K. he also accuses the
Protectors own mother of incontinency, in the generation of K. Edw. and the D.
of Clarence. At last, he hoped the people would receive the Protector, as their
Lo. and K. But the Doctors eloquence could not prevail with the people, to
accept Richard for their K. yet the next day in Guild Hall, Buckingham labors
by arguments to make the Protector right heir and inheritor of the Crown, and
with much reluctance, got diverse of the townsmen to go with him to the
Protector at Beynards Castle, where they prayed him to undergo the office of a
K. which he refused

K. Richard being Crowned, to insinuate himself into the good opinion of his
1483
enemies, makes Stanley whom he imprisoned, Steward of his house, and enlarged
the Arch-B. of York: but Morton of Ely, he sent prisoner to the Duke of
Buckingham. Then he creates his only child Edw. Prince of Wales, John Howard is
made D. of Norfolk, his eldest son Sir Tho. Howard, is created Earl of Surry,
the Lo. Barkley is advanced to the Earldom of Nottingham, and the Lord Lovel is
made Viscount Lovel. He sends also Ambassadors to King Lewis of France, to
conclude a peace; but Lewis would not admit any of them into his Gloucester,
appointing that the children should be murdered in his absence, thinking this
would take off all suspicion from him. He first writes to Brakenbury Lieutenant
of the Tower, to execute his bloody sentence, which he refused to do. Whereupon
cursing the Lieutenant, he writes to one Terril, promising him great rewards to
execute this murder, to which he assented, and by the K. command takes the
keys of the Tower from the Lieutenant, and then the next night he sends two
wicked executioners into the childrens chamber, where they smothered them in
their beds, and buried them at the stairs foot. The news of the two Wales. D
Morton, a witty and learned man, being 1484
Buckinghams prisoner, observing the D. ambitious humor, insinuates so into
his favor, that they began to be inwardly familiar, and to impart their secret
thoughts to each other: vvithal, the Dr shows, how ungratefully the Usurper had
used the D. by whose means he had obtained the Crown, in not rewarding him,
nor restoring to him the Earldom of Hartford, but rather laboring to suppress
him, being jealous of his greatness. He complains also of the kings ingratitude
to his mother, in making her unchaste in the conception of his two elder
brothers, K. Edw. and the D. of Clarence. Lastly, of his murders committed on
the Lo. Rivers, and the rest; chiefly of Pr. Edw. son to Henry 6. and of the
murder of the same K. and of Clarence his own brother, and of the murdering
York and Lancaster, by bestowing K. Edw. eldest daughter on the Earl of
Richmond, descended from John of Gant the 4th son of K. Edw. the third; by
which means the kingdom should be quieted, both from Civil wars, and this
monster of men.

The D. though ambitious enough, yet he knew there was much envy, but little
security in usurpation; he therefore thought it best to make the Earl K. The
Bishop was desirous to go into the Isle of Ely, promising to furnish the D.
with men and money; but the D. fearing lest the Bishops escape should be
required Ely, where having furnished himself with money, sails presently into
Flanders, animates the Earl of Richmond then in Britany, to mary K. Edw.
daughter, to depose the Tyrant, and to make himself K. He also by letters stirs
up the Gentry and Lords to assist the Earl, who so prevailed with the D. that
he inlargeth him, and meant to give him aid, notwithstanding K. Richard had
importuned the D. to deliver up the person of Richmond to him, for jewels,
money, and large Richard knew of it; therefore he means either to win
Buckingham, or to dispatch him: for this cause he kindly invites him to the
Court; but the D. knowing Richards bloody disposition, 1485
excuses his not coming by the indisposition of his body; the K. writes a
sharp letter, commanding him to come; the D. returns a peremptory answer, that
he would not come to such a monster and tyrant, who was no K. but an Usurper.
With this the D. hastneth into Wales, where he raises an Army; forces also are
levied in Devonshire by the Courtneys, some in Kent, by the Gentry there, and
some in Yorkshire, by Gray Marq. Dorset. K. Richard to support his bad cause,
raises another Army, by which he meant to suppress the D. forces, Severn, at a
low Foord; but God for his assenting to the murder of the two young Princes,
crossed him so with continual rains for ten days, that both his passage was
hindered, and the Country thereabout almost drowned, to the great loss of the
inhabitants; the Welsh men run away, and left him alone. The D is enforced to
harbor himself near Shrewsbury, at one Banasters, who was his servant. The D.
friends hearing of his bad success, disperse their companies, every one
shifting for himself; diverse of them took shipping for Britany; as the
Courtneys, Dorset, and many knights. The K. proscribes Buckingham, promising
1000 pound to him Banaster betrays him to the Sheriff of Shropshire, who with
a strong guard, conveys him to the King then at Shrewsbury. The D. upon
examination confessed all, and without farther proceeding lost his head. In the
mean while the Earl of Richmond with 500 enters the sea, not hearing of his
friends arrival out of England, nor of their overthrow; but by a sudden storm,
his ships were scattered, and driven back, some upon Normandy, some on Britany;
the ship in which the Earl was, kept the sea, with one more. The next day the
Earl came before Pool, but finding the Coasts all along filled with armed men,
doubting they were his enemies, though they labored to train him in, returns,
and lands safely in Normandy; whence he sends to Charles 8. for a free passage
into Britany, which the K. granted, and withal sent him store of money: so
having come into Britany, he meets his exiled friends, who acknowledge him for
their K. conditionally, that he mary with K. Edwards daughter, which he
promised by solemn oath to do. So they make ready a Fleet by the D. of
Britanies help, and levied what soldiers they could ^et.

Mean while K. Richard tyrannizeth over Richmonds friends, he makes him a
Traitor by act of Parliament; many Lords he puts to death, and seized upon
their whole estates as Traitors. He executed one for this distich.

The Rat, the Cat, and Lovel the Dog,

Rule all in England under the Hog.

That is, Ratcliff, Catesby, and Lovel, the Tyrants 3 Favorites, ruled all
under K. Richard, who gave a Hog for his supporter, to make himself the
stronger. He concludes a peace with K. James of Scotland, and matcheth his
Niece the Lady Anne with the Prince of Rothsay, the said K eldest son. He also
Richmond into his hands, but could not; for the D. of Britany was then sick,
and Peter Landois* who at S. Malos had freed the Earl heretofore, now disposed
of all business in that Country. He being greedy of so great a prey as was
promised, to wit, great store of money, and all the Revenues of the Earl and his
confederates, promises to betray the Earl; but D. Morton hearing of the
danger, presently acquaints the Earl therewith, who hasteneth out of Britany
into France, where he was welcomed with his friends by the French King, and
help promised him. Landois had appointed some companies of armed men to attend
the Earl into England; but indeed to surprise him. Now when it was given out,
that the French K. would assist the Earl, diverse Commanders from Calice
secretly repair to the Earl, who courteously received them. But K. Richard
understanding of preparations in France to aid Richmond, he devises a new plot
to keep him off from marying with the Lady Elizabeth, as he intended;
therefore he gets the Q. Mother upon large promises made to her, to deliver
into his custody, her five daughters, hoping hereby to hinder the uniting of
the two Houses. So out of covetousness, she delivers her daughters to him, who
had killed her first husband, executed unjustly her brother, and her son, and
had bastardized and murdered her two other sons. Having got them into his
custody, he intends to mary the said Elizabeth his brothers daughter, but that
was hindered by Q. Anne his wife, who within a few days after is found dead in
her bed; some think she was poisoned; others, that it was grief killed her,
because she perceived the designs and plots of her wicked husband.

The Queen was scarce cold, when King Richard makes love to the Lady
Elizabeth; but she kept him off with fair words, desiring him first to subdue
the Earl of Richmond, and to settle himself and kingdom. Mean while false news
comes to him, that Richmond and his friends were out of hope to receive any
aid from the French King. Upon this, King Richard began to be secure, and to
discharge his Garrisons on the Sea Coast. When news was brought to Richmond,
that his Lady, and her sisters were by their mother delivered into Rich. hands,
that the wife of this Richard was found dead, and he now made love to the Lady
Eliz. his chief hopes. This news hastened Richmond to come for England;
therefore having obtained of the French King money, ships, armor, artillery, and
2000 men, he arrives at Milford Haven in Wales. The Welsh understanding that he
was the son of Owen Tuthar, their Country man, and that his marriage with the
Lady Elizabeth, would settle and unite the kingdom, they flock to him from all
parts. Besides these, Thomas Lord Stanley, Father in Law to Richmond, came to
him with 5000 men; Sir George Talbot also, came with the power of the young
Earl of Shrewsbury, (then in Ward) which consisted of 2000 men. All these had
been levied for King Richards service, but were now revolted to a more lawful
power. King Richard grieved much at this revolt, yet raises an Army of 20000
men, purposing to venture all upon a battle. The D. of Norfolk could not be
drawn away from K. Richard, but remained loyal till his death. The 22 of
August, and third year of this Tyrants Reign, at Bosworth in Leicestershire,
the two armies met, and fought for two hours space. King Richard perceiving
his men to fight William Brandon, the Earls Standerd bearer, whom Richard slew.
He also knocked down Sir John Cheney, a stout man, and gets to the Earl, whom he
fights, but is at last killed by him, and so by the death of this Tyrant, the
long quarrel ended. Richard lost the Duke of Norfolk, and 1000 more. The Earl
lost not above 100. King Richards carcass was found naked in the field, filthy
with dirt, and gory blood, which was cast on an Horses back, and carried to
Leicester like a Calf, his head and hands hanging down on the one side, and his
legs on the other, and so was basely interred, as he had buried his two
Nephews. Richmond, by the Lord Stanley his Father in Law. There in the field
Henry is Crowned, with the acclamations of the people. And then he gives solemn
thanks to God; and 1485
so ended this Tyrant Richard, who in his life was monstrous, in his death
courageous: He had a deformed body, but a cunning brain, an eloquent tongue,
and a ready hand.

CHAP. XXVII.
The English History under the Reigns of King Henry the 7. and King Henry the
8. from the year 1485. till the year 1548.

KIng Henry the 7. being crowned, according to his promise marries the Lady
Elizabeth, uniting thereby the two Roses. After the manner of France, he
chooses a guard to attend upon him, and makes his Uncle Jasper Earl of
Pembrook, Duke of Bedford; The Lord Stanly his father-in-law is made Earl of
Derby, and diverse other honors he conferred; Stafford the Buckinghams eldest
son is restored to his fathers honors and possessions. Then he calls a
Parliament, wherein all former Acts prejudicial to him, or his, are cancelled;
the Crown is entailed on him and his heirs. He makes also good Laws, and
pardons his enemies upon their submission. He bountifully recompensed the Duke
of Britany for his former favors, and so he did the French King, thereby
redeeming his Hostages, the Marquess Dorset and Sir John Bourchier. But King
Henry was not suffered to enjoy long quietness, by reason of unruly spirits,
such as the L. Lovel, Humfrey Stafford, and his brother 1486.
Thomas, who leaving their Sanctuary at Colchester, made many people in the
North take Arms against the King, who upon this news suddenly sends Bedford
with three thousand men, whose breast-plates were made of tanned leather, for
want of better Armor. But Lovel perceiving that the King would force him to
fight before he was ready, and that a better strength was coming with the King
himself, his fear made him fly to Sir Thomas Broughton in the North; the two
Staffords took sanctuary in Culnham Abbey near Oxford, and the Rebels Army left
to the Kings mercy, who upon their submission pardoned them. The Staffords are
taken out of the sanctuary, which must not protect Treason; Humfrey was put to
death, the younger brother spared, because he was instigated by his restless
brother Humfrey.

Shortly after the quenching of this fire, breaks forth a new flame blown by
Simond a Priest, who knowing that Edw. Plantaginet Earl of Warwick, son and
1487.
heir to George Duke of Clarence, brother to King Edward the fourth, had been
kept by the two last Kings a prisoner in Yorkshire ever from his infancy, and
that King Hen. had secretly removed him to the Tower; this Priest (I say) got
the tuition of a witty boy, one Lambert, but of mean parents; him the Priest
instructed in all manner of literature and court-ship, making him believe that
he was the only son and heir of the Duke of Clarence; the boy being now
seventeen years old, (the true Plantaginets age) and made fit to act his part,
is transported by the Priest into Ireland, who quickly works upon the fickle
Gerardin the Chancellor are all drawn into this net. Gerardin concludes from
his person, feature, gesture, speech, and other Princely qualities in him, that
he was the Duke of Clarence his heir, and therefore furnishes him with money
and other necessaries, so did the other Lords of Ireland: he informs also the
Lady Margaret King Edward the fourths sister, daughter to Charles Duke of
Burgundy, and supposed Aunt to this counterfeit, of his being there, which she
knew to be false, yet entertained the conceit out of malice to Henry of the
house of Lancaster, (she being of the house of York) therefore she gives out
that the true Plantaginet was in Ireland, that the Irish had received Flanders
to the Duchess Dowager, her nephew the Earl of Lincoln, Francis Lord Lovel,
with some other prime men, at whose coming the Duchess caused to be levied
two thousand men in her Country under Martin Sward; these sail for Ireland, and
join with Sir Tho. G^rardin the Chancellor who had raisied two thousand Irish
ready to pass for England. Wise and vigilant King Henry caused the true
Plantaginet to be brought from the Tower through the streets, into Paul's Church
there to be seen by the people. Then he prepares an Army to encounter Lamberts
forces who were arrived near to Lincoln; the two Armies courageously join
battle, but in less space then an hour, the naked Irish are slain with their
Commanders, Lovel, Gerardine, Sward and Broughton, the rest submitted, and are
pardoned, the Priest is sent to perpetual imprisoment; his personated Pupil is
first made a skullian, and afterward the Kings chief Falkoner. Then the Queen
is crowned; Archbishop Bourchier dies; Morton Bishop of Ely succeeded in that
See, and was also made Lord Chancellor, who shortly after received from
Alexander 6. the Cardinals Hat.

The troubles between the French king, and the Duke of Britany did perplex 1488.
King Henry, for they both had been his friends, therefore was unwilling to
side with either, but rather to mediate a peace; the Duke being ruled by his
French guests, the Duke of Orleans and his accomplices refused to hearken to
those conditions of peace which the French king proposed. About this time the
Lord Woodvile, Captain of the Isle of Wight, and the Queens Uncle, without the
Kings knowledge sailed into Britany with four hundred expert soldiers to aid
the Duke, who was then ready to fight the French king near to Tongiers. Fifteen
hundred Britains were clad in coats with red crosses, as if Englishmen; but in
the end the poor Britains are slain, with the Lord Woodvile, so that the French
got the day. Upon this King Henry is advised by his Parliament, rather to
adhere to the Britains, then to the French, because he had been more beholding
to that Duke, then to King Charles; besides if the French should get Britany
from the Duke, they would prove bad neighbors to England. Hereupon an Army of
eight thousand men is sent under the Lord Brooks; but as soon as they arrived,
the Duke died, and the war ended by the affiancing of the Lady Anne the heir of
Britany to King Charles.

The Northern Rusticks of York and Durham, refusing to pay the tax granted
British war, rushed furiously upon, 1489.
and murdered Henry Earl of Northumberland, for distraining the goods of such
as would not pay, and not resting here, they grow to a great body, and force
the Gentry of those places to take their parts: Hereupon the King sends an Army
under Thomas Earl of Surrey, who was taken prisoner at Bosworth field, but is
now set free by King Henry, and received into his favor. The king had another
Army coming after, which so affrighted the Rebels, that they all fled every
man to his own home; but the king made strict enquiry after the Ringleaders,
who being apprehended were executed, the meaner sort were pardoned.

King Charles having corrupted the British Nobility, obtained the Lady 1490.
Anne for his wife, and returned the Lady Margaret to her father Maximilian
king of the Romans, who scorning thus to be slighted, resolves to be revenged,
therefore he desires aid from king Henry, who by advice of his Parliament
concluded to assist him, because France by the addition of Britain would
become too great. A benevolence is demanded and granted by the Gentry, but
grudgingly. A fleet of ships is prepared to transport the Army under the kings
Uncle Jasper Duke of Bedford, and John Earl of Oxford, but when the Army was
ready to be embarked, the king is informed that Maximilian had no military
preparations at all, which vexed king Henry, fearing lest the people France in
revenge of the wrongs lately offered to king Henry.

Shortly after, the king sailed over to Calice, and there having marshalled
1491.
his Army into four battles, he lays siege to Bulloign; the French king
fearing lest the Britains (whom he had lately offended by altering some of
their customs) might fall off to the English, sends Articles of peace to king
Henry, who accepted of them, and shortly after a peace is concluded, and the
sum of 186000. and 200 pounds is paid toward king Henry's charges, besides a
yearly pension of five and twenty thousand crowns was duly paid whilst king
Henry lived: and so the king returns by Calice into England.

Mean while the Duchess of Burgundy, a mortal enemy to the house of Lancaster,
devises a new trick to vex king Henry: she had got a Dutch boy, comely,
learned and witty, his true name was Peter Warbeck, but nicknamed Perkin, which
in Dutch signifies weakness; he waseducated by this Lady in all York and
Lancaster, that no man could exceed him; for she made him believe that under
the name of Richard D. of York second son to King Edward the 4. her brother,
she meant to make him King; then she sends him over into Ireland, where he was
received as their Lord and King: the French king also willing to divert the
English Army intended against him, and to remove King Henry, sends for this
Perkin Warbeck, resolving to make him King; as soon as he was come to the
French Court, he was received and entertained as if he had been born to a
Kingdom, but on a sudden his honors vanished into smoke, for a peace was
concluded between the two Perkin ran away secretly to the Duchess of Burgundy,
and fearing lest the French would have betrayed him to King Henry, the Duchess
receives him with great joy, giving him all the accommodation beseeming a
Prince, with a guard of thirty Gentlemen; then she caused it to be published in
England, that her nephew Richard Duke of York lived in her Court, therefore
wishes all true hearted English to stick by him, as rightful heir to the Crown.

The report is suddenly believed by those who were willing to fish in troubled
waters, who delight in the change, who were discontented with the Lancaster,
and complained they were not rewarded by King Henry as they deserved. Upon this
Sir Robert Clifford is sent into Flanders to enquire the truth of things, who
having conferred with the Duchess, and seen the behavior of this Mock-prince,
certifies his friends in England, that this is the true son of King Edward the
4. The persuasion of which grew so general, that King Henry prepares for future
storms, and Perkins invasion; he guards all the Seacoast, and by his letters
informs the Burgundians and Flemings of the vanity and foolery of this device;
he sends also privately some politic 1493.
heads to find out of the Duchess and Perkin, who of quality in England sided
with him, upon whose information some were put to death. King Henry finding
that Maximilian King of the Romans, and his son Philip Archduke of Austria and
Duke of Burgundy secretly favored the attempts of the Lady Margaret concerning
Warbeck, removed the English Mart from Flanders and Callice, prohibiting all
importation of Flemish wares into England; Maximilian also forbad all English
commodities in his Countries: Upon this, great discontent arose among the
English Merchants, who could not keep so many Apprentices and Journy-men as
formerly, therefore a multitude of Journy-men and Apprentices run furiously
into the Still-yard, broke open warehouses and shops, rifling all in their way,
and abusing tht Easterlings, till the Lord Mayor with his forces dispersed
them; the Ringleaders being about eighty, were with many others imprisoned,
but at last they obtained the Kings

Sir Robert Clifford repenting of his journey into Flanders, obtains the Kings
pardon, and leave to return home, who in the Tower before the King and his
Lords, discovers the whole practice and purpose of the Lady Margaret and
Warbeck. The King also enjoins him to discover the Conspirators, that if they
were great ones, they might be presently seized on, without further trouble,
being already in the Tower. Sir William Stanly only is accused, whom the king
had highly loved, and made him his Chamberlain: but now having nothing to say
for himself, is imprisoned, and a few days after beheaded. Yet for all this,
many out of several ends were so desirous of change, that they could not keep
their tongues from speaking despitefully of theking; but he curbed their
tongues by strict punishments, and strengthened himself against all assaults or
invasions.

King Henry remembering the aid which the wilde-Irish gave to Perkin two years
ago, sends an Army thither under the command of Sr. Edward Poynings, 1495.
who could do but little good upon that wild people, sheltring themselves in
Bogs and Woods; nor did the Nobility there give any aid to Sir Edward, for
which the Earl of Kildare was suspected, being then the greatest man in that
Island, and the kings Deputy. He being falsely accused, is brought over into
England; but he so cleared himself before the King, that he is dismissed with
honor, and leave to continue in his place: Mean while, Perkin with the offscum
of diverse Nations, came upon the Kentish coast, some of them landed to try what
the people would do for Perkin; the country people cunningly trained them
further into the land, with their fair promises to live and die with Perkin
against the King, till finding opportunity, they fell upon them, and killed
London, where they were tried and executed in diverse places of the kingdom.
Perkin in discontent returns to Flanders, where he recruits himself with more
rascals, and with them he sets sail for Ireland; where finding men, but no
arms, he leaves the Irish, and comes into Scotland, imploring the help of king
James the fourth, being then young. The Scots taking opportunity by this to
invade England, raise an Army and enter Northumberland, wasting, burning, and
destroying all before them with much inhumanity and cruelty; and after they had
left that Country desolate, finding no English aid coming to their new king,
they return home with their booty, Perkin shift for himself.

Upon the great desolation of the Northern parts, king Henry raises a puissant
army to be revenged on the Scots; for the maintaining of which war, a tax is
granted: No sooner was this Army on foot marching northward, but it is suddenly
recalled; for the Cornish-men refused to pay the Tax, and were in arms,
pretending that the king and kingdom were abused by Archbishop Morton, and Sr.
Reinold Bray, the kings two faithfullest Counselors; that these two polled the
people, to enrich themselves. One Joseph a Blacksmith, and Flamock a lawyer,
were the two main men of this faction; these being in a great body, press
forward toward London; and by the way they make Audley their chief Commander;
the king gives them leave to march on, because the farther they are from their
own home, the less help they shall have; and the long march also will tire
their soldiers. Now when they came into Kent, the help which they expected
there, failed them; and not only so, but were ready also to resist and
suppress them. Wherefore the Cornishmen being no ways daunted, retired to
Black Heath, intending to try their fortune. The king having divided his Army
into three parts; charge the Rebels in the face with his own part, the other
two on either side; the Cornish resist stoutly, so that the fight lasted some
hours, in which the Lord D'awbeny was taken prisoner by them, but presently
let go again, hoping thereby to

Whilst king Henry was busy about the Cornishmen, lest the Scots should make
an invasion, he requires Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey, with Richard Fox Bishop
of Durham to withstand, till he sent more power to aid them. In the interim,
the Scots invade England again, and are met with an Army of twenty thousand,
which made them retreat; the English enter Scotland, and destroy diverse Towns
and Forts near the borders without resistance; in the nighttime, the king of
Scots dismisseth his Army, who disperse themselves into the woods and
mountains: the English pursued a while, but were forced to give off by reason
of the storms, and want of provision in that barren part of Scotland.

About this time, an Ambassador arrives from Ferdinand king of Castile, to
Warbeck be banished out of Scotland. The peace also between France and England
is ratified; the English trade is also restored to the Flemings upon the desire
of Philip Archduke of Austria, and great joy was used in Antwerp upon the
return of the English. And now king Henry had peace every where, except with
Perkin, who being turned out of Scotland, sails with one hundred and twenty
ragged soldiers and four ships into Cornwall; the discontented Cornish flock
to him, and aid him with three thousand men; with these he marches toward
Exeter; which because they within would not yield upon his entreaties, he
besieges it round; and for want of Artillery Perkin falls to his scaling again,
but to no purpose, whereat he was much disheartened: Mean while, the King
resolves with his Army to raise the siege; but before he came, Courtney Earl
of Devonshire with a good Army forces the Rebels to give over the siege, who
march away thence to Taunton, which they besiege: The king directs his march
thither, upon the report of whose coming, Perkin flies away with sixty horse
to Beauly Abbey, where

After this, king Henry goes to Exeter, where having thanked and commended the
inhabitants for their valor and loyalty, gave to them his sword from his side,
commanding that hereafter it should be born before the Major publicly, as
formerly and for the like purpose king Edward the fourth had done. Then the
king sends some bands of soldiers to Beauly to apprehend Perkin, who yielded
himself, and was brought to the king, by whom he is carried 1498.
prisoner to London; but escaped to the Abbot of Shene, who procured Cheapside,
1499.
from thence he is committed a close prisoner in the tower. But as he was
practicing to escape with young Warwick, who had been a prisoner from his
infancy, he is condemned of high treason, and executed at Tyburn two days
after: and the young Earl of Warwick on the tower hill; for no other crime but
for affecting his liberty; for which fact king Henry was much blamed.

After these things, Arthur Prince of Wales being now fifteen years old, is
1500.
betrothed by deputation to the Lady Catherine, daughter to Ferdinand king of
Spain, being of the age of eighteen years. The next year she is joyfully
received into England, and married in Paul's Church. Not long after, king James
the fourth of Scotland is affied to the Lady Margaret, king Henrys eldest
daughter, and afterward married: by this match, king Henry aimed at the union
of 1501.
the two Crowns; and he knew that if his two sons and their issue failed, the
Scots king would be drawn into England, as to the richer and greater kingdom;
which was better then if England should wait upon a greater kingdom, and be
commanded by a Deputy.

Prince Arthur about five months after his marriage died, to the great grief
of all good men, and was buried in Winchester: his brother Henry Duke of York
succeeded in the Principality of Wales, and was the next year after created
Earl of Chester by the king. The Lady Margaret, king Henry's eldest daughter,
with a great train of Nobility and Gentry, is sent into Scotland to king 1502.
James, who meets her on the Borders, receives her from the Earls of Surrey and
Northumberland, and is married to her in Edinburg. After this, the king to
enrich himself and impoverish his people, takes advantages of forfeitures upon
the penal Laws, the chief charge of which business is committed to Empson
Dudley, two corrupted Lawyers, who by their Catch-poles miserably 1503.
polled and pulled the people, so that no man was master of his own; this
impoverishing of the people was held a good way to keep them from rebelling.

Philip Arch Duke of Austria going by Sea to take possession of the Kingdom
1505.
of Castile, fallen to his wife Jane by the death of her mother, was driven by
storms with his Queen into Waymouth; Sir Thomas Trenchard entertains them both
at his house, and acquaints by posts King Henry of the Archdukes arrival: The
king presently sends to invite them to his Court, being then at Windsor; The
Prince of Wales with a great train meets them about five miles from Windsor,
and within half a mile, king Henry with his Nobility welcomes them, with all
the joy and solemnity that could be conceived; after some stay at Windsor, the
king conducts his Royal Guests to London with all imaginable magnificence;
where, after much mirth, the League is renewed; and so having parted with much
love, Philip and his Queen embark themselves for Spain, where they both died
not long after. Within a while king Henry began 1506.
to grow weak and sickly, and so Empson and Dudly took more liberty to oppress
the people then before. But as the kings time grew short, so he grew better;
for he remitted all offenses against his penal laws, he enlarged prisoners
(except traitors and murderers) and paid the small debts of those that 1507.
were in Wards; he gave also money to those that had been wronged by these two
wicked Cormorants; He repented heartily for the wrongs he had done, and lent
money gratis to diverse Merchants. At last he died, having lived two and fifty
years, and reigned three and twenty, and was buried in his Chapel 1508.
which he had erected at Westminster.

Henry the eighth succeeded at the age of eighteen years; he married Catherine
daughter to Ferdinand of Arragon, Prince Arthur his brothers wife, by
dispensation from Pope Julius: In the beginning of his Reign, to please the
1509.
people, he causes the heads of Empson and Dudly to be chopped off for their
Ferdinand of Arragon, got king Henry to aid him against the Moors, which he
did; He helped also Pope Julius against the French ^ing, who had invaded the
Churches Patrimony, and proclaims war against him for detaining from him Guyen
and Normandy, and his other lands in France; For this his assistance of the
Pope, both against the French sword, and Luthers pen, he obtained the title of
Defender of the Faith. Ferdinand also his father in law promises to help king
Henry against France, if he would land his men in Bisca, from whence they might
march to Guyen. King Henry accordingly sends ten thousand men under Gray
Marquess of Dorset, who being landed in Biscay did no good at all; nor had
they any aid from Ferdinand, whose intention Navarre for his own use, which he
did; for having raised an Army under Duke D'Alva, which he pretended to join
with the English forces, he suddenly rusheth upon Navarre, surpriseth
Pampalona, and seiseth himself a great part of that kingdom: nor did Ferdinand
at all assist the English as he promised, but suffered them for four months
to perish with want and sickness, so that the Soldiers return to England in
discontent.

Whilst things were acted thus by the Spaniard, the English Admiral Sir 1512.
Edward Howard takes diverse French vessels, burns and spoils Britany in diverse
places; the Britains dated indeed the Admiral, and he came into the field with
two thousand and six hundred men against ten thousand; but when they perceived
the English courage, they ran away. King Henry upon this sends more aid to his
Admiral both of ships and men; with these he encounters the French fleet: the
Regent of England, in which were seven hundred soldiers, and the great Carrick
of Breast wherein were nine hundred, both these ships being fast grapled
together, were unfortunately burnt and drowned in the sea, Breast. King Henry
also inlargeth his Fleet, with which the English Admiral resolves to set upon
the French at Breast, but as he was entering in, the foremost Ship was splitted
upon a Rock, which made the rest forbear to proceed. The Frenchmen upon this
fortify the Haven, placing in the mouth thereof four and twenty old Flemish
hulks, which were to be set on fire when the English Ships did draw near them;
they raised also diverse Rampires and Bulwarks for their great Ordnance.

The English Admiral fearing the Haven was too shallow for his great Ships,
1513.
enters into the harbor with oared Barges, and manfully assailed the three
Rhodes, brought thither by a knight called Prior John; but when the English
Barges were gone, the French in great numbers rush into the Galleys, and with
continual fresh supplies overmaster the English, the greater part whereof being
slain, the Admiral with a Pike is born over-boord and drowned, the rest are
taken prisoners; the Lord Thomas Howard, brother to the deceased Admiral, is
put in his place. Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury is sent into France with eight
thousand men, and Somerset Lord Harbert with six thousand, these besiege
Tyrwin; shortly after the king himself with eleven thousand comes over and
joins himself with the two former bodies, having left the care of the South
part of the kingdom to his Queen, and of the North to Howard Earl of Surrey,
because of the Scots: At Tyrwyn there were diverse sallies of the French upon
the English, and many skirmishes, till the French king came with a great Army
to raise the siege; after many bravado's and threats, the battles join with
great eagerness, but at last the French are beat, many whereof are slain, many
taken prisoners, the rest fled, Tyrwyn is surrendered, pillaged, and burnt down,
only the Bishops Palace was preserved with the Cathedral Church; In this siege
Maximilian the Emperor served under king Henry.

After this, king Henry besieges Turnay, which after many sharp assaults and
Henry. Wolsey the kings Almoner takes of them the Oath of allegiance, and Sir
Edward Poynings is made Governor of the Town, and so the winter drawing on,
king Henry returns home, mean while the English Admiral vexes the French both
at sea and land. The Scots, in the absence of king Henry, invade England with
^ight thousand men under the command of the Lord Humes king James his
Chamberlain, these having done much mischief with fire and sword, are suddenly
assaulted by Sir William Bulmer and one thousand Archers, who defeated them,
and stripped them of their booty, being too secure and confident. King James in
revenge of this defeat, against the peace and articles of marriage, enters
England with one hundred thousand fighting men, and besieged the Castle of
Norham, which he took, the Earl of Surrey being aided by his eldest son the
Admiral, marches with six and twenty thousand fighting men, among which were
many Lords and Knights, against the Scots; a bloody battle is fought in Floden
field, where after a sharp dispute the Scots are defeated, of whose army were
slain king James, two Bishops, twelve Earls, fourteen Lords, twelve thousand
Gentlemen and common soldiers; on the English part were killed fifteen hundred.

King Henry to reward the service of those who had fought for him against the
French and Scots, confers on them diverse honors. Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey
is made Duke of Norfolk, and his son the Admiral is made Earl of Surrey.
Brandon Viscount Lysle is styled Duke of Suffolk. Sommerset Lord Herbert is
created Earl of Worcester. Stanly is made Lord Monteagle, and Thomas Wolsey is
Bishop of Lincoln. About the end of this year the enclosures near Islingtown
are thrown down by the Londoners, as hindering their recreations. The French
under Prior-Iohn land in Sussex in the night time, and 1514.
his men, and with a wound in his face; to requite this, Sir John Wallop from
the Admiral lands in Normandy with eight hundred men, where he burns and spoils
one and twenty villages. After this a peace is concluded between France and
England, upon a match between the French King Lewis the 12. and Mary King
Henry's sister. Hereupon the Duke of Longuevil, and the other French prisoners
taken at the battle of Tyrwin, are released; the Lady with a great train is
landed at Bulloign, where the Dolphin with the French Nobility receives and
brings her to Abuyle, where she is married, and shortly after crowned at Paris;
but within twelve weeks after the marriage King Lewis Mary is brought again
into England by the Duke of 1515.
Suffolk, who with the kings consent married her. Francis the first successor
to Lewis, renews the peace with England.

About these times, Thomas Wolsey born in Ipswich of mean parents, became the
most potent man in the Kingdom; First he was the Kings Almoner, then Bishop of
Lincoln, then a Privy-counsellor, at last Archbishop and Cardinal of York;
yet not content with all this, he gets the King to take the great Seal from
Canterbury, and to give it him, whereby he became also the Chancellor of
England, so that now without him no matter of Church or State was managed. He
demands accounts of all officers in the last wars, and thereby enricheth 1516.
they that had nothing were punished; He erecteth also new Courts of
Judicature, by which he enriched his coffers: Such was his pride, that he would
not suffer Cardinal Campeius the Popes Legate here for England to land, until
he had sent back to Rome for a new Commission, in which Wolsey is made 1517.
Campeius his Collegate; so at last both the Legates repair to Greenwich, where
the King was; before them were carried two silver Crosses, two silver Pillars,
two gilded Axes, and two embroidered Cushions; their message is delivered in
an Italian speech to the King, for his aid, with the other Christian Princes
against the Turks; to this the King required some time of consideration: then
Wolsey by his Legative authority without the king, erect a Court, in which he
visited all Bishops and their Diocesses, enriching himself by bribes, and
sequestring for his own use the probate of Wills; and such was his pride, that
before and after meat when he washed, he was attended on by Dukes and Earls.

The King and Queen, the twelfth year of Henry's Reign, resolve to pass over
into France, for which cause great and rich preparations are made by Sea 1520.
and Land; they came at last with all their train to Callice, and the French
King with his Queen and attendance to Arde. Cardinal Wolsey is sent before with
a large Commission to treat about a further peace with king Francis; the Lords
and Gentry that attended on Wolsey were clothed with crimson velvet, and Arde,
the French king royally entertained him, and having seen his large Commission,
gave him the like under the great Seal of France: Then did both the Kings with
their Queen and train meet in the valley of Andrea, where they feasted and
rejoiced some days together, and then friendly departed to their own homes;
and because there was like to be wars between the Emperor and French, King
Henry being in league with both, mediated for peace, therefore Commissioners
from these three Princes were to meet at Calice; the Cardinal is employed by
king Henry, with the Earl of Worcester, 1521.
and some others in this Commission; he with his Colleagues ride proudly
through London, where he is met by the Mayor and his brethren, and the
Companies in their several Liveries; thence he passes in Barges to Gravesend,
and thence to Canterbury, where he is met by the Archbishop and his Clergy with
a solemn procession; from thence he goes to Dover, and so to Calice; where he
meets the other Ambassadors, a conference there was had, but nothing effected:
Wolsey to show his greatness, would needs go to the Emperors England, which no
Chancellor before durst do; he is accompanied with four hundred and sixty
horse, being in all places met and saluted by the Gentry. At Bruges he was met
about a mile from the Town by the Emperor himself, who highly honored him,
both because of his large Commission, and of the broad Seal of England which
was carried before him in great state; but the want of the same in England
hindered the passing of writs and patents.

At Bruges, the causes of the war beween Caesar and France are disputed at
large: the Cardinal makes a witty speech commending the excellency of peace,
which the Emperor liked well, but withal told the Cardinal, That God had not
put Henry's help, seeing all Princes were bound to support right, and suppress
wrong; he complains also of the wrongs done by the French to him, in
repudiating his daughter the Lady Margaret, in detaining from him his Towns and
Castles in Picardy, in getting treacherously from him his wife the Lady Jane
the young Duchess of Brittany, in mantaining his rebellious subject the Duke
of Gelders against him, and lastly his surprisal of the kingdom of Naples from
the house of Castile. The Cardinal could reply but little to what was said,
therefore England, where he is welcomed and feasted by the king.

The proud Cardinal, under color of the kings aid to Caesar against France,
grants forth Commissions under the great Seal of England for every man to set
1522. 1523. 1524. 1525.
down the true value of his estate, and to pay four shillings in the pound; the
same sum is also demanded of the Clergy: this proceeding was most distasteful
to all men, as consisting neither with law, nor the peoples liberty, nor with
the welfare of those whose credits exceeded their estates, besides that the
sums demanded were not payable; notwithstanding Wolsey would not (though
generally petitioned) mitigate this rigor; and though in Hampshire Viscount
Lysle wrote to the Cardinal the danger that was likely to ensue if there were
no mitigation, seeing the people were ready to rise, yet he received no other
answer, but that it should cost him his head, for offering to differ from his
instructions; but at last when he saw how heavy this burden was to the people,
new Commissions are sent out to demand the sixth part of each man's substance;
but the people instead of paying the money cursed the Cardinal: so great was
the distemper every where, and danger of insurrection, that the king was much
grieved thereat, and caused these Commissions to be recalled, protesting they
were sent abroad without his knowledge, and that he would require nothing of
his people but by way of benevolence.

The Cardinal perceiving how the king had laid all the blame upon him, to
London with his brethren before him, to whom he protested that he had kneeled
to the king to persuade him to revoke the Commission, and to rely on his
peoples benevolence; to this purpose he directs his letters to all the Shires,
but this policy could not get the peoples good opinion of him; then
Commissions are made for the benevolence, but they also did not take with the
people, some pleading poverty; others, that demanding of benevolences was
against their liberty, and the statute made in the first year of king Richard
the third.

About this time, the Cardinal procures a license from the Pope to pull down
some small religious houses, for appropriating their lands and revenews to two
Colleges which he had erected, the one at Oxford, the other at Ipswich: this
gave a hint not long after to king Henry to demolish all such houses. Then this
busie-headed Butchers dog (as the people called him) took upon him to reform
the kings house; therefore he put out some of his menial servants, and puts
worse in their rooms: He bestows on the king his Manor of Hampton Richmond.
The French king, about this time, desires in marriage the Lady Mary, king
Henry's only daughter; but this motion liked not our Statesmen, who 1527.
foresaw that if king Henry died without issue male, France being the greater
kingdom, would make this but an attendant upon that. The Cardinal also made a
scruple of the lawfulness of king Henry's marriage, and it was disputed at
Paris, whether Mary were legitimate, being king Henry's daughter by Catherine
his brother Arthurs wife. This doubt the Cardinal first raised in displeasure
to Caesar, because he had not used his utmost power to make him Pope. Dr.
Longland Bishop of Lincoln and the kings confessor, told him that he had

The King presently upon this, imploys the Cardinal in an Embassy to the
French king, the substance whereof was only known to the king and him; at his
departure, the king takes his leave of him, as of a familiar friend: when he
rode through London he was attended on by twelve hundred Horse. At Calice and
Bulloin he is received with great honor, and flattering Pageants are presented
to him at Bulloin: as he rode toward Amiens, he is met by the Provost and
chief Citizens, and within half a mile by the king himself, who in great state
conducted him to his lodging, on the gates whereof was written Cardinalis
Pacificus: after much entertainment and diverse conferences, a Peace is
concluded, and sealed with a seal of gold: of which afterward the Cardinal
bragged in the Star Chamber, and that he had made an everlasting peace; but the
people muttered, that France never kept peace long with England; and that a
peace with Caesar and the Flemings (which the Cardinal kept off) had been
better.

The nullity of the kings marriage being smothered a while, is revived again;
1428.
and the king upon this refrains her bed: Wolsey procures a Commission from
the Pope, to be directed to him, and his brother Campeius; that before them as
supreme Judges the matter might be debated: the Commission Wolsey acquaints the
Queen therewith, who accuses him as being chief cause of these troubles,
because the Emperor her Nephew had not made him Pope, and because she had
gently told him of his tyranny, covetousness and leachery: The king permits
the Queen to choose her own Councillors, who named four Doctoors, two of the
law, to wit, Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, and West Bishop of Ely; and two
of divinity, namely, Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Standish Bishop of Assaph:
a stately Court is erected in the great Hall at Black-friars, where were placed
two Chairs, and 1529.
two great Cushions, covered with Cloth of gold; the Legates took their places,
Wolsey the right hand: The King and Queen are cited; He by his Proctor Rome,
which appeal was not allowed: the proceedings of the Court were so tedious,
that the King with the Queen came in person, where he desires a quick end, and
withal protests how much he loved the Queen, and what an excellent wife she
had been to him; but that now he was troubled in Conscience to keep her company.

At Rome, there is a custom that all legal proceedings cease from the last of
July till the fourth of October; which the two Cardinals willing to observe,
resolve to adjourn their Court, at which the king is troubled, and sends the
Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk with other Lords to the Legates for dispatch of
their sentence, but could not prevail, which made Suffolk cry out in open
Court, That never any Legate or Cardinal did good in England. The king resolves
to wait till October; but understanding that Campeius was bound for Rome, being
sent for by the Pope, and that this business was to be determined in the Court
of Rome, which would prove both tedious, chargeable, and troublesome: He began
to be sensible of the juggling of these two Legates, and Wolsey, whom of nothing
he had raised to such honor and greatness. The kings Counsel and Nobility
being glad that Wolsey was like to fall, help to further it, by framing
articles against him, for his pride, tyrany, oppression, and secret
correspondency with the Pope, by which the kings power was diminished;
therefore they conclude he incurred a praemunire and forfeiture of all his
estate, and promotions, and liberty to the king: these articles were delivered
to the king and subscribed, who concealed them for a while; then Campeius takes
his leave of the king at Woodstock; Wolsey is commanded by the king to attend
him into London, not knowing what had passed; as they were journying from
thence to the seacoast, by order, Campeius his VVolsey's letters to Rome, but
they were sent away a day before by the post.

The Cardinal was indicted the next Term in the kings Bench, upon the Statute
of Praemunire, by Hales the kings Attorney; and the Indictment being found
against him, the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk are required to take the great
seal from him, which was bestowed on Sir Thomas Moore; then the Cardinals goods
by command are seized on, and he is confined to Asher near Kingston: then being
required to plead to his Indictment, by his Attorney he confessed all; his
places are taken from him, and conferred on others; yet the king left to him
the Bishoprics of York and Winchester, and sent him also Wolsey.

In Parliament a complaint is made against the Clergy for exacting large sums
as fees for the probate of Wills. 2. For demanding Mortuaries of poor
housekeepers. 3. For becoming Husbandmen, and Grasiers, and Farmers. 4. For
keeping Tanning-houses, for being Grocers, for engrossing Wool, Cloth, and
other commodities. 5. For enjoying great revenews and benefices, in which they
neither preached nor kept hospitality. 6. Because some dunces kept above twelve
benefices. This complaint is much opposed by the Bishops, Rochester, who told
the Lords, that these proceedings of the Commons were like those of the
Bohemians, which proceeded not of Faith: The Commons complain to the king
against the Bishop for counting them Heretics and Infidels; the king sends for
the Bishop and accuses him, who clears himself that he spoke that phrase of
the Bohemians, not of the house of Commons. Then shortly after this debate
between the Bishop and Commons, in which some uncivil words were used, Articles
are preferred against Wolsey, which are these; 1. That he got himself by
sinistrous means to be made the Popes Legate, to the kings prejudice in
ecclesiastical things. 2. In writing still, Ego and Rex meus; as if the king
were his inferior. 3. For calling the Church England a reprobate Church, in
his letters to the Pope. 4. For carrying beyond seas the great seal of the
kingdom, without leave. 5. For sending a commission under the seal, without
the king, about making a Peace betwixt his Majesty and the Duke of Ferrara. 6.
For presuming to come near the king and breath upon him, when he had the French
^ox. 7. For causing a Cardinals Hat to be stamped on the kings coin. 8. For
inhibiting the kings Clark of the Market to execute his office in St. Albans,
being a parcel of his Abbey. 9. For conveying in sixteen barrels two hundred
and forty thousand pounds to the Pope, besides other sums at other times, and
for exacting by his commissions infinite sums of money from the people,
purposely to disturb the kingdoms peace; all these articles Wolsey confessed,
and submitted himself to the kings mercy.

The king understanding that the Emperor and Pope were together at Bononia,
sends an Ambassador to them, to let them know, that it was not out of any
dislike he had of his Queen that he desired a divorce, but because the
President of Paris and many grave Divines conceive this marriage unlawful;
Rome; but he meant no such thing: for if he should give sentence against Pope
Julius his dispensation, he would make all future dispensations of no validity;
and if he should give sentence against the Queen, he would make Caesar his
enemy. King Henry seeing nothing but delays, imployes the chief Divines of
England to travel into all Universities to know their opinions about this
match: these returning, brought twelve Instruments sealed by so many
Universities, all concluding the Kings marriage unlawful. At this time Wolsey
gets leave to live Tork; one Cromwell a servant of his, left him, and got into
the Kings service and favor also. The King was content, that the Cardinals
College at Oxford (called then Kings-Colledge, now Christ-Church) should be
endowed with the Lands which were forfeited; but he destroyed his Colleges at
Ipswich, as being needless.

The King understanding that Wolsey had got a Bull from Rome to curse him, if
he did not restore him to all his goods and places, causes a Proclamation to
be published, That all Appeals, Provisions and Instruments procured from Rome
against the Kings power, within one year next before that time, or to be
procured hereafter, to be be void, and the procurers thereof to be punishable.
Wolsey being puffed up upon this, makes great preparation for his instalment in
the Archbishopric of York, inviting the Northern Gently thither, meaning to
feast them magnificently; he erected his seat in the Cathedral-church, in
height and state like a Kings throne. The King understood of all these
proceedings, that they were done to affront him; therefore to prevent his
instalment, a Commission is sent to the Earl of Northumberland to arrest him
and commit him to Sheffield-castle; he stood upon the privilege of a Roman
Cardinal, and that he was exempted from the secular

The Clergy being guilty of a Praemunire, by maintaining the Cardinals
Legantine power, paid to the King an hundred thousand pounds, to prevent
further mischief; and by a public Instrument acknowledged him Supreme Head of
the Church of England. So Wolsey being gone, the King causes the Opinion of
the Universities to be read openly in his Parliament, and then to Rome,
whereupon the King gets her to be divorced, and the Archbishop to pronounce the
marriage null; and then he falls in love with the Lady Anne Bullen, whom he made
Marchioness of Pembrook, and afterward married her.

In this Kings time, on May Day, great outrages were committed upon
Merchant-strangers and their goods, by multitudes of unruly Londoners; but they
were quickly suppressed by the Lord Mayor, and diverse of them executed, the
^est were pardoned by the king who sat then in Guild Hall, Tournay is
delivered up to the French by king Henry for sixty thousand crowns, which was
disliked by some, because it was a curb to the French, and a nurcery for
training the English youth in martial discipline. Charles after the death of
Maximilian, coming from Spain to receive the Empire, by the way is reyally
entertained in England. King Henry being told by his Privy-counsel, that some
Gentlemen of his privy-chamber were too familiar and bold with him, the king
thanked them, and left those gallants at the Counsels disposing who removed
them, and put wiser men in their room: King Henry as he returned from visiting
the French king, by the way gave the Emperor a visit at Graveling, Buckingham
being made believe by a Monk that he should be King, because he bragged of it,
and seemed to rejoice thereat, was arraigned at Westminster before the Duke of
Norfolk High-steward of England, and was beheaded on the Tower Hill.

The peace concluded between England and France is broken by the French; 1. In
sending John Duke of Albany into Scotland to raise new wars. 2. In detaining
from King Henry the yearly tribute due for Normandy, and Aquitain etc. 3. By
seizing on the English Merchants goods, and committing them to prison. Mary
Dowager of France her yearly pension. 6. And by refusing to pay the money
promised for Tournay. For those wrongs King Henry prepares his Navy, which he
delivers to the charge of the Earl of Surrey; then he restrains the French
Ambassador of his liberty, seiseth on the French men's goods, (except such as
were Denizens) and imprisoneth them. The English Admiral lands some men in
Brittany, whom he conducteth to Morley, and having beaten open with great shot
the chief gate, enters the Town; rifles and burns it. Forces also are sent to
Scotland to prevent the coming in of the Scots hither. The Admiral having
ransacked diverse Towns in France, returns with great booty into England. John
Duke of Albany by the French kings Scotland to invade England; against them two
Armies are sent; the one under the Earl of Shrewsbury; the other of eight and
twenty thousand under the Lords Rosse and Dacres; but these Armies only viewed
each other, and so parted without blows.

Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk is sent into France with thirteen thousand
men, where he makes great havoc, and takes Bell Castle. From the Emperor to
the Dukes service came three thousand foot and five hundred horse, with these
the Town of Bray is taken by assault, then they pass over the river Some into
France, and do much hurt; but the winter approaching, and the Burbon who was
revolted from the French to the Emperor came not with his ten thousand men as
was promised, as also because the English had not carts as the Burgundians to
carry away their booty, they were resolved to disband; Suffolk sends to know
the Kings pleasure, who would not assent to their return, but sends the Lord
Mountjoy with six thousand men, yet notwithstanding the soldiers without the
Dukes leave disband themselves.

Mean while the Duke of Albany raises an Army of eighty thousand Scots,
against whom the Admiral and Treasurer of England march with forty thousand,
but there was no blow at all given, for the Scots retreated; then the Scots
Henry's eldest sister, obtains a truce till a peace could be concluded: Albany
perceiving that the Scots Nobility could not endure that he being a Frenchman
born, and (next to the king) inheritor of that Crown; should have the rule of
their king and kingdom; and fearing some mischief, fled secretly into France;
upon whose departure a peace is concluded, and a match proposed between the
Lady Mary king Henry's daughter; and young king James of Scotland, the Emperor
also sends to have the same Lady Mary for his wife, on whom he proffers to
bestow for her dowry the Low Countries; he desired also that her portion-money
might be presently disbursed for Caesar's wars, and that king Henry would in
person with a royal Army invade France which was an enemy to them both: the
king being offended with the Emperor for raising the price of his gold within
his Provinces, answered, That his daughter was too young to marry. Then the
French king sends to have her for his son the Dolphin; but this motion was
crossed by the Duke of Burbons Army, and the Marquess of Piscary, who took the
French king and his children prisoners as he lay at the siege of Pavia. About
this time king Henry Moody had not plucked his head out of the mud: Not long
after this, the king bestows diverse honors; he made his bastard-son begot on
Elizabeth Blunt, Henry Fitzroy Earl of Nottingham; Courtney Marquess of
Exeter; Brandon Suffolks eldest son by the French Queen Mary his wife, is
created Earl of Lincoln; Manners Lord Rosse is made Earl of Rutland, with
diverse others.

Ambassadors are sent from the Queen Regent of France for concluding a peace,
with the proffer of twenty hundred thousand crowns for arrearages of the
tribute, whereof fifty thousand pounds sterling should be paid in hand, Mary
her dowry: upon this a peace is made, and now the King by the means of Thomas
Cromwell (whom of Wolsey's servant he had made a Baron and Counselor of 1532.
State) curb by degrees the Popes authority here, in making a law that all
should incur a praemunire, who appealed to the Sea of Rome, and procured thence
any process or judgment whatsoever; the Clergy freely submit themselves to
him in spiritual affairs, the Pope is utterly deprived of his Anuates and
first fruits; the lawfulness of his marriage with Queen Anne is established,
and the unlawfulness of his former match with Queen Katherine, the Crown is
entailed on him and his issue; to this Act all swore except Sir Thomas More,
who disliking the Kings proceedings against Queen Katherine and the Pope,
Fisher also Bishop of Rochester refused to swear, and both protested against
the said Act of Parliament, for which cause they both lost their heads. The
next year the Kings supremacy is confirmed by Parliament.

The Lord Dacres about this time is suspected of treason, and acquitted.
Elizabeth Burton the holy Maid of Kent with her accomplices were executed for
conspiring the kings death, under the show of devotion. The next year the kings
supremacy is again confirmed, and the Popes power banished; firstfruits also,
tenths and benefices, with all Church-dignities are granted to the 1534.
king. Not long after Queen Anne and the Lord Rochford are beheaded unjustly
for suspicion of carnal commerce; within twenty days after he marries with
Jane Sir John Seymours daughter, mother to king Edward, but shortly after his
birth she died. The Lord Thomas Howard is beheaded for marrying 1535.
without the kings consent; Margaret his sister, and wife first to king James
the 4. and then to Archibald Douglasse, by whom she had a daughter called
Ma^garet. Two and thirty Commissioners are named by the king who were to make
Ecclesiastic laws, and by the same Parliament all religious houses not
exceeding in revenue yearly two hundred pounds, were dissolved and given to the
king; a book of Articles also concerning Church Government is published
Lincolnshire men to rise in a body of twenty thousand; the king levieth a great
Army, and marches against them; they humbly petition that the religious houses
may not be dissolved, nor the old Church Government altered: but the king would
hearken to nothing, except a hundred of their Ringleaders were sent to him to
be punished; upon this every one suspecting himself, they all forsook the field
and went home; but Captain Cobbler (indeed Dr. Mackarel) with some others were
shortly after found out and executed. This was no sooner appeased, when another
Rebellion starts up in the North of forty thousand men, complaining also that
the old Religion was changed and wronged: Against these the Dukes of Norfolk
and Suffolk are sent with a great Army; but their intended fight was hindered by
the sudden swelling of a small Brook that lay between them, upon a shower of
rain; which so wrought upon the Rebels, that a general Pardon being promised,
they all went peaceably home.

In Cumberland a third Rebellion breaks out, by Tilby and Musgrave, with 1536:
eight thousand men against the King; but they were defeated by the Duke
Norfolk, seventy four of their Commanders are taken and executed. The Lord
Darcy is put to death for a murder; the Lord Hussy with diverse Knights and
two Abbots, and many more, are executed for denying the Kings Supremacy, and
so was Friar Forest for heresy. Diverse honors are likewise conferred:
Viscount Beauchamp is made Earl of Hartford, Fitz-William Earl of Southampton;
and among the rest, Sir Thomas Cromwell Counselor of Estate, Knight of the
Garter, Lord Privy Seal, Lord Cromwell, is made the Kings Vicegerent in all
Church Matters, and had the precedencie of the Archbishop of Canterbury; and to
show how officious he was, he destroyed Images and Exeter 1537:
Henry Poole, with diverse Gentlemen, for conspiring with Cardinal Poole (now
beyond the seas) to reestablish the Popes authority, are executed, and so are
diverse Abbots and others for denying the Kings supremacy. Shortly after this a
Rebellion brake out in Ireland by O-Neale, but is suppressed by the Lord Gray
Deputy. The Lord Cromwell is made Earl of Essex, by whose advice the king
quarrels with the Religious houses, pretending their vices and idleness, but
indeed aiming at their wealth and revenues, which amounted to more then two
hundred thousand pounds yearly; all this wealth was given by the Parliament to
the King, who exchanged these lands with Noblemen for other lands.

Cromwell having made havoc of the Church, persuades the King to marry the
Lady Anne of Cleve, a good woman, but no ways lovely, except in her flattering
pictures; which made King Henry, after he had been married four months, to
slight her. Hereupon the Clergy, to flatter the King, pronounce this marriage
to be null, because she confessed the King could not afford her that
benevolence due from a husband to a wife: The like sentence is published by the
Parliament, and withal, that it was lawful for him and her to marry when and
whom they pleased; it was also enacted, that whosoever spoke or wrote to the
contrary, should be held as traitors. King Henry being Katherine Howard the
daughter of the Lord Howard, brother to the Duke of Norfolk: And withal he
began to cast off his favorite Cromwell; which his enemies perceiving, prefer
a Bill of High Treason against him, wherein he is accused of diverse things in
general; so then being by Parliament attainted of Treason, and of Heresy also
in supporting the Lutherans, he is beheaded with the Lord Hungerford on the
Towerhill. About this time also Gray the Deputy of Ireland, for procuring the
Irish Rebels to enter and make havoc within the English pale, is condemned of
treason and beheaded.

Queen Katherine being accused for her unchaste conversation before her 1541.
Francis Dyrham, and after with Thomas Culpeper; the two Gentlemen suffer death
at Tyburn; the Queen, and the Lady Rochford who brought Culpeper into the
Queens chamber, are beheaded. In this Parliament the King is proclaimed King of
Ireland, which title his predecessors never assumed. Then the King married
Katherine Parre the Marquis of Northamptons sister, the Lord Latimers wife
sometimes, who had not escaped with her head, had king Henry escaped death.
About this time Oneal and his son re^air to the Kings Court, submissively
confessing their rebellions, for which the King pardons them, and made the
father Earl of Tyrone, and his son Lord of 1542.
Duncan.

And now the Scots, who had been quiet a while, begin to stir again: therefore
king Henry sends to king James 5. his Nephew, that he may do homage for
Scotland, which was flatly refused; then king Henry demands some territories
due to him on the Scots borders, for which he had old evidences to show, these
are rejected by the Scots commissioners as fained: then king Henry desires to
meet and confer with king James in friendly manner upon the borders Henry goes
to York, where he understood king James would not meet him but by his
Commissioners, whereupon king Henry leaves Commissioners there, and returns
home. But during this Treaty, a party of Scots invade the Western marches,
spoiling and burning all before them; complaint is made, and satisfaction
promised, but nothing performed, neither had the Scots commissioners sufficient
authority from their king to conclude any thing but what was dishonorable to
king Henry: wherefore he is forced to send an Army of twenty thousand into
Scotland under the Duke of Norfolk, who was accompanied with diverse other
Earls, Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, who march into Scotland burning and
Dacres, Musgrave, and the Lord Wharton, with open forces, and a secret ambush
defeated the Scots, being in mutiny among themselves; there were taken
prisoners the Earls of Cassels and Glencarn, the Lords Maxwel, Fleming, and
others, with two hundred Gentlemen and eight hundred common soldiers, with 24
pieces of ordnance, and four carts laden with spears; four and twenty of the
chief prisoners are sent to the Tower, and two days after dispersed and
committed to the charge of diverse Lords and Gentlemen. This overthrow so much
vexed king James, that he died with grief a few weeks Mary, newly born. Upon
his death, a motion is made for a match between king Henry's only son, and
this king James his only daughter; the Scots prisoners promise their best
assistance for the furtherance thereof, for which cause king Henry set them all
at liberty without ransom, and besides bestowed on them diverse rich gifts.

Mean while the English and French Merchants spoil each other at sea;
complaints are made, but no redress; wherefore king Henry transports an 1543.
English army into France, which being landed besiege the Town of Landersey;
upon this the French king comes with a strong army, raises the siege, relieves

The match between Prince Edward and the Infant-Queen Mary of Scotland, is
concluded in their Parliament, and ratified by the seals and oaths of the
Nobility; for that purpose the Queen should have been sent into England. But
shortly after, the French king by cunning plots alienated the Scots from that
match: so that king Henry is forced to make unwonted preparations against both
kingdoms; he first then sends a mighty Army against Scotland by sea in two
hundred ships under Lisle the Admiral, and by land under the Earl of Hartford:
The fleet having landed all the men, they seize in the Firth Lies, and being a
while resisted by six thousand Scottish horse, they took the Town and plundered
it: thence they march toward Edinburgh, where the Provost and chief Citizens
met them, who delivered to the Earl of Hartford the City-keyes, conditionally
he would preserve it from fire, and suffer the soldiers to depart with their
baggage out of the town: Hartford the General answers them, That their
Nobility by falsifying their oath had drawn these Armies on them; if the
soldiers and inhabitants would come disarmed into the field, and yield their
lives and goods to him, he would do as he thought good, otherwise they must
expect all extremity; the Citizens upon this return discontented, with a
resolution to resist, which they did, till the gates and walls were battered;
the English enter the Town, a part whereof they burned, and plundered the rest:
mean while four thousand English horse more are sent by king Henry, great
spoils and booties are carried away by sea into England; Holy-roods, Leith,
Haddington, with diverse other places thereabout are defaced. Then King Henry
sends two strong Armies into France, the one under the Duke of Norfolk, which
besieged the Town Muttrel, but after much loss of time, were fain in the end
to leave Suffolk, who besieged Bulloign; to this siege King Henry himself
came, who so battered the walls, that the Town was fain to yield, conditionally
the inhabitants may depart with bag and baggage, which was granted; there came
out sixty seven horse, one thousand five hundred sixty three foot, eight
hundred Gunners; eighty seven hurt men, besides multitudes of others, the whole
number was four thousand four hundred forty four souls.

Whilst King Henry is thus employed in France, Caesar underhand makes a peace
with the French, whereat King Henry was much troubled; therefore leaving order
for repairing the Town and Castle, he dismisseth his Army, and England, where
because of his daily wars he demands a benevolence of all his subjects, which
was granted, only Alderman Read refused, therefore was forced to serve the
King in person against the Scots, by whom he was taken prisoner, and at last
ransomed; after King Henry was gone, the Dolphin in a dark night suddenly
surprised Base-Bulloign, but was fain to quit it again, being beat out by those
of the upper Town: shortly after Monsieur de Bees came with fifteen thousand
men to erect a Fort before the Town, but Hartford, Lis^ and Gray put them to
flight, and forced them to leave behind their ordnance, tents, and other
provisions: The French king to be revenged, sends in a fleet of two hundred
ships, and seven and twenty galleys, with sixty 1545:
Wight; but as the English fleet passed out of the harbor of Portsmouth, the
Mary-rose one of the Kings best ships, with Sir George Carew, and above four
hundred men in her, were all suddenly sunk under water, by reason the ordnance
were left untrigged, and the under port-holes open, so that when the ship
turned the ordnance ran back to one side, and bare the port-holes under water.
The French Admiral hearing of King Henry's preparation, hoised anchors, and
returns into France without acting any thing. Whilst the King is absent in
France, the Scots invade England, making havoc of all before them: the Earl
of Hartford with twelve thousand men, in requital, commits the like outrages
upon the Scots Lisle the High-Admiral lands within the haven of Treport, the
Suburbs of which he burned, with some other places thereabouts. After all this
stir, at last a peace is concluded between England and France, Bulloign is
restored for eight hundred thousand crowns: but the Duke of Norfolk, with 1546:
his son the Earl of Surrey, after many brave services done by them, are
suddenly apprehended and sent to the Tower, because they bare in their Escuchen
certain Arms which were pretended only to belong to the King and Prince, which
Arms notwithstanding their Ancestors had born time out of mind without
controlment; for this sole cause the Earl lost his head, but the Duke his
father escaped this fate by the Kings death.

When the King perceived that his sickness was incurable, he caused the
Gray-friars Church of London to be opened again after he had suppressed it; and
to be made a Parish Church, the revenues whereof he gave to the City toward
the relief of their poor, and withal gave five hundred marks yearly of lands
toward the maintenance of the Divine-service, and reparations of the Church:
he ordained his children to succeed each other, if issue failed; he ordained a
thousand marks for the poor, and twelve pence a day for twelve poor Knights at
Windsor, with a white-cloth Gown yearly, an embroidered Garter, with S. George
his Gross, and a mantle of red-cloth to be worn thereon; so having reigned
seven and thirty years and nine months, he died in the six and fiftieth year of
his life; he had six wives, 1. Queen Katherine king Ferdinands daughter of
Spain. 2. Queen Anne the daughter of Sir Thomas Bullen Earl of Wiltshire. 3.
Queen Jane Sir John Seymours daughter. 4. Queen Anne sister to the Duke of
Cleve. 5. Katherine daughter to Edmund, and niece to Thomas Howard his brother
Duke of Norfolk. 6. Katherine daughter to Sir Thomas Parre of Kendal, and
sister to William Parre Marquess of Northampton; by his first wife he had two
sons that died young, and Queen Mary; by his second Queen Elizabeth by his
third King Edward, and by Elizabeth Blunt he had a bastard called Henry
Fitz-roy, whom he made Earl of Nottingham, Duke of Richmond and Sommerset,
Lord Warden of the Marches against Scotland, and Lieutenant General of the
North of England. He was a Prince more eminent for his vices, then virtues, for
he was counted ambitious in affecting the title of Spiritual supremacy;
covetous, in appropriating the revenews of religious houses to his own uses,
and extraordinary exactions from the people; he was also prodigal, in wasting
so great a treasure as was left him so quickly

CHAP. XXVIII.
The affairs of Scotland under King James the 3. and King James the 4. from

KIng James the 2. being slain in the camp, his son being nine years old
succeeded, by name James the 3. There was much contesting between 1460.
the Queen Mother and her party, with Angus and the rest of the Nobility, who
should have the government of the young King and Kingdom; a Parliament is
called, and arguments alleged on both sides; the Queen pleads the right of a
mother, the Lords the ancient customs of the Kingdom. At last to prevent all
animosities which were like to arise, it is ordered that two able men of each
faction should be named to govern the King and James: of the Queens side were
chosen Grame and Boyde, who was then Chancellor; of the other party, Robert
Earl of Orkney, and John Kennedy, to these were added two Bishops, of Glasco
and Dunkel; to the Queen was permitted the tuition of her son, but she was not
to meddle with the affairs of State; she had also leave to educate her other
children, to wit, the Duke of Albain, and the Earl of Mar, with the two young
Ladies. Things at home being thus composed, the English Ambassadors who came to
make peace, had audience, and a peace for fifteen years is concluded, the next
year the Kings mother died; Alexander the Kings brother returning from France
is taken by the English, but released again upon the 1463.


Scotland continued not long quiet; for Donald Lord of the Isles, hearing the
King was dead, caused himself to be proclaimed king of the Isles, threatening
death to all that should acknowledge any other King there: being invited by the
Captain of Innernesse-Castle to a feast, he seized on the Castle, and thrust
out the garrison; then having gathered an Army of malcontents and loose
persons, he falls upon Athol, and seiseth on the Earl and his wife, who had
taken sanctuary in S. Brigets Church; but Donald violates the Sanctuary,
carries away the Earl, his wife, and many others, with all their wealth, which
for security was laid up there, and then sets fire on the Church, and killed
diverse of the Priests for making resistance: but as he was returning home by
water with his sacrilegious booty, a sudden storm sunk most of his vessels, and
he narrowly escaped with his life, and after that time till his death continued
mad; thus God uses to reward sacrilege. Many of his followers being touched in
conscience, went barefooted, and in white sheets to S. Brigets Church,
offering gifts for their atonement. At Court Robert Boyd a potent man, and
great with the young King, to whose counsels he too much hearkened, by his
brother Alexander Boyd advises the King to shake off his governors, and to
manage the kingdom himself: Kennedy a grave man, and one of the kings
governors, for advising the king the contrary, and for offering to stop him
from hunting at an unseasonable time, is abused by this Alexander, who with his
bow which he had then in his hand broke Kennedy's head, this caused a great
fewd between these families, to the disturbance of the whole kingdom: shortly
1466.
after Kennedy died to the great grief of all good men, for in his life and
doctrine he was exemplary and powerful; he had been a great benefactor to the
University of St. A^drews: Patrick Grame is in his stead elected Bishop by the
Canons, who repairs to Rome, for confirmation, which was a while hindered by
York, claiming a power over the Scots Bishops; but at last it is decreed at
Rome that Grame should be Primate of Scotland, and the Popes Legate also for
three years, that the Priests might be reformed, and Churchdiscipline
established, yet Grame durst not return home so long as the Boyds continued in
their greatness, which came to that height, that Robert Boyd the elder was made
Viceroy by the king during his minority, his son also Thomas is honored with
the marriage of the kings eldest sister, which brought much envy upon Boyd and
his family, for the people began to repine at his greatness, and to ascribe all
the distempers of the Kingdom to Boyds misgovernment, these coals were blown by
the Kennedies.

Mean while Ambassadors are sent to Denmark for a match between the young King
and the Danes daughter, with instructions for removing the old controversy
between the two Kings about the Islands of Orkney and Shetland, the chief
Ambassador was Andrew Stewart Chancellor of Scotland, who sends word to King
James that the match was concluded, and these Islands given to him for his
wifes dowry, so that the Dane upon this parted with all his right: Thomas the
son of Robert Boyd, and Earl of Arran, is sent with a great train of Nobility
and Gentry to bring home the new Queen; in the interim the Kennedies begin to
work upon the kings affections, and to draw him from the Boyds, against whose
insolent government the people did much complain; Thomas being absent longer
then was expected, because of the winter which makes the Northern seas
unnavigable, and the two elder Boyds by reason of infirmities, were not able to
frequent the Court as they were wont; for this end a Parliament is called at
Edinburg, to 1469.
which the two Boyds Robert and Alexander are summoned; Robert out of his
guilt, and perceiving the kings mind was alienated, and that his enemies were
grown very powerful, fled into England; his brother Alexander not being able to
fly, because sickly, appears; it was there objected that he and his brother
had by their own private motion made the king come to Edinburgh from Sterling
against the will of his governors; he replied, that they had the kings Robert
a few years after died with grief at Anwick in England; his son Thomas though
now employed upon public service, is before being heard proclaimed traitor,
and his estate confiscated.

The next Spring the young Queen arrives with the Danish fleet. Thomas Boyd
understanding by his wife who met him on the shore, the calamity that had
befallen his family, the alienation of the Kings mind, and the 1470.
power of his adversaries; though some of his friends would have had him repair
to the King, from whom in this public joy he might obtain pardon, yet durst
not venture, therefore sails back again into Denmark, from thence he travels
through Germany into France, and from thence he goes to Charles Duke of
Burgundy, whom he served in his wars, and was highly honored by him: the King
sends into Flanders to his sister Boyds wife, to come home, upon hopes that she
might so far prevail with her brother as that he may again receive James
Hamilton, far inferior in birth and wealth to the former, her children also
are called home by the king; mean while he dies with grief at Antwerp, and is
honorably buried there by Duke Charles of Burgundy: so that family of the
Boyds in a few years flourished and faded; and they that overthrew it, were in
hopes that things both in Court and Country would have mended, but it fell out
otherwise, for the king gave himself altogether to his pleasures, and his
Courtiers to rapine and oppression; among other

Grame the Archbishop being now at Rome, and hearing of the great abuses crept
into the Church of Scotland, resolves to come home, and sends before 1472.
him the Popes Bull for being Legate; which procured to him much envy, Grames
power from the Pope, the privileges of the Church of Scotland were infringed,
and that the king himself should be brought into subjection: Upon this,
messengers are sent to Grame, not to meddle with his function, until the king
had received satisfaction about some complaints exhibited against him; who was
therefore summoned by such a day to appear in Edinburgh; who being come, and
having produced his Patents for the Archbishopric of St. Andrews, and Primacy
of Scotlan^, and for being the Popes Legate to reform the Church abuses,
Sevess, who had studied Astrology at Lovan, to be made Archdeacon of St.
Andrews, whom the Bishop would not admit; hereupon he combines with the Rector
of the University to excommunicate the Archbishop, which he slighting, was by
the king inhibited from meddling with any Church within his Diocese, and all
his goods are confiscated; besides, the Popes Auditors send out an
Excommunication against him, for non-payment of his Fees in the Court of Rome,
for his Pattents or Pulls: then they made him abjure his Bishopric, and
imprisoned him in a Cloister within a remote Island or rock rather, called
Aemona; Dumfermlin castle, and from thence to Lake Lommond, where he died of
grief: thus was that good man persecuted for his pious intentions.

About this time, the Lord of the Isles understanding of great preparations
1476.
making against him both by sea and land, comes humbly to the Court,
acknowledges his faults, and is pardoned: Only Rosse, Kintyr, and Knapdale
are taken from him; the command of the Isles is left to him. This year the
peace is renewed again with England, which was like to break out into an open
war; because the English had seized on a great ship which was built by Kennedy,
being driven in by storms: King Edward gave order, that the value of the goods
taken should be estimated, and satisfaction made. The king was much addicted to
the study of Astrology; therefore understanding by the Scots Merchants in
Flanders, of one Andrew a Physician and Mathematician, who had foretold the
Duke of Burgundies death, he sends for him, and prefers him in his Court: by
him he understood of his own danger, and how the Lion should be killed by his
own Whelps; wherefore he became very tyranical, suspecting every man that was
near him: He was jealous of his Lords also, John, for speaking too freely
against the corruptions of the Court, is imprisoned, condemned, and by the
opening of a Vein is forced to bleed to death; It was given out that he had
consulted with Witches against the King, and that it might appear the more
probable, twelve Witches are condemned and burned: The other brother Alexander
upon suspicion also is imprisoned in Edinburgh Castle; but he having feasted
his keepers and made them drunk, escaped with his man by his sheets, which he
fastened to the bars of the Window; his man broke his leg in the fall, so that
his master was Dumbar Castle, which he fortified, and from thence to France.

Not long after this an Ambassador comes from king Edward of England to renew
the peace, and to conclude a match between his daughter and king James his son,
when they should be both of years; but this correspondency held not long, for
the borderers made diverse incursions upon each other; Besides, Douglasse an old
exile, and Alexander the kings brother, lately being returned from France into
England, blew the coals of sedition: King Lewis also sends into Scotland, to
rouse up their drooping spirits against the English, who under Gloucester were
preparing an Army: but the Scottish Nobility being more discontended Archbald
Douglasse Earl of Angus animated first to reform the abuses of the Court before
they invade England; For he lets them see, how careless the king was in his
Government, how much addicted to Magic and unlawful studies; how the chief
officers at Court were mean men, how the Nobility was slighted, how the kings
own brothers were used, the one being murdered, and the other banished, and
now by the English employed in the head of an Army against them; therefore he
wishes them to consider how much more dangerous a domestic enemy was then a
foreign, Cocheran one of his Court-officers to see what the matter was; as he
was coming, Douglasse apprehends him by his gold-chain which hung about his
neck, and delivered him to be secured; mean while Douglasse with some officers
of his Army breaks into the kings bedchamber, and there presently apprehends
all such servants that were there, or

Whilst these things were thus acting, the Duke of Gloucester enters Scotland
with his Army, and demands restitution of the portion-money which was disbursed
by the king of England upon hopes of the match, and the surrender of Barwick
Castle; It was answered, That the children were not fit for marriage, nor was
the day of repayment of that money come; as for Barwick, the English should
have it, if they could take it. Mean while, Argile, with the Chancellor and two
Bishops, of St. Andrews and Dumblain, send to Alexander then in the English
Camp to return home, and to enjoy his estate, which in the next Parliament
should be established on him. This business he imparts to Gloucester, who
kindly dismisseth him, who being returned home, a Parliament is called, in
which he is made governor of the kingdom; and because the State of Scotland
was then unsettled, it was held dangerous to make war with 1482.
England; therefore they resolve to deliver Barwick, after one and twenty
Edward fearing lest the Scots should disinherit their kings Posterity, with
whom they were highly offended, sends to Scotland to disannul the match between
the two young Princes; and to demand back the portion-money; which at a day
appointed, was repaid.

Alexander, out of his affection to the king his brother, sets him at liberty
out of Edinburgh-Castle, and restores to him the government: But the king being
more mindful of old injuries, then of new courtesies, intends to dispatch his
brother, being thereto animated by his enemies, who accused his popularity and
affectation of the kingdom: therefore by the advice of his friends he flies
into England, and delivers up Dumbar Castle to king Edward. Whereupon England
against his native Country. William Crichton also his chief Counselor and
Abbettor is proscribed, and his estate confiscated: after this, Alexander and
Douglasse with five hundred English horse falls upon a party of Scots, who
defeated them, and took Douglasse prisoner; Alexander escaped again. 1484.
The Earl of Richmond having got the crown of England, makes a progress to
Newcastle, whence he sends Ambassadors to Edinburgh to conclude a lasting
peace, or truce for some years: King James returns answer, that the Scots being
a warlike people, would not hearken to any long peace; yet he would prevail
Henry returns Southward. Not long after, the king lost his Queen at home, and
his brother in France, which two kept him in some aw; but now they being gone,
he returned to his old ways, in slighting the Nobility, in pillaging of the
people, in filling places of trust with new upstarts: Among the rest, was one
John Ramsey, whom he made steward of his house; this man fearing the Nobility,
which was beginning to raise arms, causes a Proclamation to be made, that none
near the Court should bear arms, except Ramsey and his followers; which
incensed the Lords so much the more against him: the king in the interim
studieth by all means to suppress the Lords. George Earl of Angus, telling him
that he meant suddenly to seize upon, and cut off the chief Lords and heads of
this faction: the Earl disswades him from this, as being dishonorable, to cut
off treacherously so many great personages, being reconciled to the king, and
having the publique-faith; but his better way were to arrest them openly, one
after another, that they may in open Court plead for themselves. The king being
satisfied with this advice, dismisseth the Earl, who presently acquaints the
other Lords with the kings intention: Upon this, they take arms; the king
finding his own danger, takes shipping, and gets over to Fife side, where he
raises an army out of the Northern parts: The Lords seize upon French and
English kings for aid against his rebellious Lords, showing the like danger
may befall themselves; He sends also to Pope Eugenius the eighth, that he by his
Apostolical authority would command them to obey their king; but the Lords who
knew of all these messages, hasten to fight the king before either foreign
aid or Ambassadors should come; the King contained himself in
Edinburgh-Castle, till his Northern forces were come; but upon the persuasions
of some, he was content to remove thence to Sterling Castle hoping there to be
more secure and nearer his forces; but when he came thither, the governor
being made by the adverse faction, denied the King entrance, wherefore not
knowing whither to fly, and being followed close by the enemy, he was forced
to fight with such forces as he then had, which being defeated, and the king
having his horse slain under him, fled into a water-mill near Sterling, hoping
from thence to escape by some ships that lay near the place, but he was pursued
so eagerly, that he and such as fled with 1488.
him thither were slain; this death of the king was adjudged just in the next
ensuing Parliament: he died the eight and twentieth year of his reign, and of

To James the 3. succeeded his son James the 4. being fifteen years old; a
Parliament is called, at which few were present except those that had a hand in
the kings death; the best of the kings ships held out against the new king,
Edinburgh-Castle is summoned to surrender to the young king which it did, and
so likewise did Sterling-Castle; many grumbled at the kings death, complaining
that things were not thereby bettered, but worsted, for the young king did not
command, but was commanded by those who had a hand in his fathers death: mean
while the English took occasion by these intestine broiles Scotland to invade
the kingdom; the young king labors to reconcile the Seamen, lest they might
cause troubles in his absence, therefore he wins with fair promises Andrew Wood
an expert Sea-captain, who had the command of two men of War, with which he
surpriseth five English ships before Dumbar and brings them all to Lies; mean
while the adverse faction cries out, that the kingdom was abused by a company
of traitors, who had murdered one king, and kept the other as a prisoner;
withal Alexander Lord Forbes, chief of that family, carried about the streets
of Aberdene, and some other chief Towns, the kings bloody shirt, exhorting all
good people to take Arms, and to revenge the kings death; Matthew Stewart also
Earl of Lenox endeavored to raise what forces he could in the Southern parts:
in the interim the English Steven Bull with a fleet, promising a great reward
if he could bring Andrew Wood dead or alive; Bull watches his opportunity, and
sets upon Woods fleet furiously, they fought so long till the night parted
them; the next morning they fell to it again with such eagerness, that they
perceived not the tide fail them, wherefore the English ships being of a 1490.
greater bulk were forced to yield, being stuck on the sand; Bull with the
other English Sea-captains are brought by Wood to the king, who restores both
the Captains and Ships to king Henry of England, who took this very kindly, and
James.

About this time a strange monster was born in Scotland, which beneath the
navel was one body, but above two distinct bodies, having different senses,
souls and wills; any hurt beneath the navel is equally felt by both bodies
above, but if any of the upper members were hurt, one of the bodies only felt
the pain: this monster the king caused to be instructed in Music and diverse
languages; one of the bodies died some days before the other, which also
shortly after pined and consumed away, it lived eight and twenty years. A
Parliament is held in Edinburgh, there all differences are composed, an Act of
oblivion passed, and friendship between the great families confirmed by mutual
Warbeck the counterfeit Duke of York comes into Scotland, insinuates himself
into the Kings favor, obtains in marriage the Earl of Huntly's daughter, and
an Army against England, by which all Northumberland is wasted and spoiled, and
great booties are carried into Scotland; this wrong king Henry meant to repay,
but that he was retarded by the Cornish rebellion; after this the Scots invade
England again, but are hindered from doing any great hurt by Fox the Bishop of
Durham, and the E. of Surrey who enter Scotland, and having burned some places,
return home; In the interim an Ambassador comes into England from Ferdinand and
Isabella of Spain about the marriage of Katherine with Prince Arthur; the same
also is sent into Scotland to negotiate for a peace with England; the
Ambassador with Bishop Fox, could not draw the Scots Commissioners to deliver
1497.
up Warbeck to King Henry, for King James did not think it could stand with his
Warbeck might in that time shift for himself as King James advised him to do.

Warbeck being gone, a peace is concluded, which was like to break off again,
upon a quarrel between some of the borderers; but upon complaint made by the
Scots, satisfaction is promised by king Henry. The Bishop of Durham is sent
into Scotland, who there advises with king James about his marriage with king
Henry's daughter, which three years after was consummated, 1500.
after which followed peace and plenty for diverse years, the Court and Country
began to abound with riot and luxury; the King gave himself to building of
stately houses, monasteries, and great ships, one whereof was said to exceed
any that had been built before: Francis the French king, and Henry the 8. of
England strove to exceed this ship in greatness, but both their ships proved
unserviceable. The king having exhausted his coffers upon these needless
expenses, is advised by Elphinston Bishop of Aberden, to make the Gentry
compound for their Wardships, and such also as had sold half of their lands
without their Lords consent. This and some other waye^ proposed being
distastefull to the Gentry, the King resolves (partly to lessen his charges
Syria: for this purpose a Fleet is made ready, a great many bind themselves by
vow to wait thither on the king, who had acquainted the neighboring Princes
with his resolution.

Mean while a war was breaking out between France and England: For, Pope
Julius, Ferdinand of Spain, Maximilian the Emperor, the Venetians and Switzers,
with the English, were entering into a league against France, the affairs of
which had lately succeeded well in Italy. King James was not willing to side
with either party, yet was earnestly importuned by the French faction, who to
pick a quarrel with king Henry, sends the Bishop of Murrey to demand Arthur.
King Henry knowing this message was a preparative for a breach, returns this
answer, That not only this debt, but whatsoever else is due to king James,
shall be truly satisfied: upon this he resolves not to invade England, yet to
help France, therefore sends his fleet thither which he had lately built, of
which James Hamilton Earl of Arran is made Admiral; but he in stead of going
into France, goes into Ireland, and takes Knockfergus, which he burned, and so
returns home.

In the mean time letters from France come to the king, complaining he was not
so good as his word, and that the promised ships were not come; whereat
Archibald Douglasse Earl of Angus to take Hamiltons Commission from him, and
to succeed in the Admiralty; but he understanding the Kings mind beforehand,
hoised anchor and was gone to sea, where his fleet by storms is torn and
shattered, and the great ship is made unserviceable and left in Britany.
Besides some private quarrels fell out among the borderers, about killing of
Sir Robert Car king James his favorite, by three Englishmen, and the taking
of some Scots ships by the English, without making satisfaction, occasioned a
breach between the two kingdoms: The English borderers began to drive booties
out of the Scots ground, where Alexander Hume Governor of the three Scottish
Marches, with three thousand horse enters England, and plunders the seven next
villages before any help could come; the booty was carried safe into Scotland,
but Alexander with some part of his forces staid behind, and were set upon by
three hundred English which lay in ambush, diverse of the Scots were killed, and
two hundred taken prisoners. In the mean time the King calls a Parliament, to
advise about making war against England; the wiser part were against it, but
the French Ambassador and his faction mainly for it; the King inclines to the
French England; a Herald is sent to King Henry then before Tournay, to denounce
war against him, for the wrongs done by the English without satisfaction, as
also for molesting Lewis the French king his ancient friend, and Charles Duke
of Gelders his kinsman. King Henry returns answer, That he heard no more then
what he expected from a King who kept covenant neither with God nor man; His
threatenings should not make him give off his enterprise, nor should he care to
lose his friendship, who was so inconstant in his affections.

Mean while, whilst the King was at Divine service in his Chapel, an ancient
man of a venerable aspect, with long hair, a long garment, and a linnengirdle,
England takes diverse Castles and overthrowes them, Northumberland is pillaged;
he was advised to besiege Barwick, which then might have been easily taken, but
he slighted that opportunity. In the interim Heralds come from the English, to
know of King James what day and place he would appoint for a battle: the King
was advised by his friends to return home with his Army, rather then to venture
himself with so few (for many of his forces France; and if he will fight, he
were best fight upon his own ground, where he will find more provision and
advantages then in the enemies country. When the day appointed for the fight
came, the English appeared not; wherefore the King is desired again to retreat
home, for the enemies policy was by delays to increase their own Army, whilst
the Scots did daily diminish; and that it was no more shame for him to retreat,
then for the English to fail of the day appointed: but the King was so
obstinately bent on a battle, that he told his Lords, if there Douglasse Earl
of Angus, who told him that he had done sufficiently for the French king, to
divert a great part of the English Army from France hither; and that it was
unreasonable, why to please the French Ambassador, he should expose himself and
his handful of men to six and twenty thousand expert English soldiers: The
king bid the old Earl go home, if he was afraid; who answered, That his former
actions in defense of his Country show how little afraid he was, but now being
aged and weak he was content to take his ease, yet was willing to leave his two
sons behind as pledges of the love he bore his Country; and so departed.

The Scots now are resolved to fight, and by reason of their paucity take the
advantage of the ground; which the English perceiving, to draw them upon even
ground, make show as if they were resolved by the way of Barwick to enter
Scotland, which the Scots fearing left their advantage, and so the Armies
encounter: Alexander Gordon who commanded the Scots right-wing, defeated the
English left-wing; but the Scots other wing, in which were Lenox and Argile,
was utterly routed by the English; the body of the Scots Army where the king
was, fought stoutly, till night parted both Armies; great slaughter on both
sides; of the Scots were lost above five thousand, of the English about the
same number, but these were of the meaner sort, the most of the Scots that were
slain were Gentlemen, this battle was fought near the hill Fluddon: what became
of king James is uncertain; some think he was 1513.
killed there, others, that he escaped, and afterward was murdered by the
Humes; but whatever became of him, he was a brave Prince, had he not been too
headstrong, who for his zeal in the Christian Religion was styled by the
Pope, Protector of the Faith.

CHAP. XXIX.
The Scottish History, under King James the fifth, and his young Daughter Queen
Mary, from the year 1513. till 1544.

KIng James the fourth left his Queen Margaret, and two sons behind Sterling
declares King; Hume is made governor of all that part of the kingdom on this
side Forth, Gordon Earl of Huntley of all beyond. The Queen is Regent, for so
King James had ordered it in his last Will, which he had made before he went to
battle; This dignity she was to enjoy so long as she continued unmarried,
which was not long, for within few months she married with Archibald Douglasse
Earl of Angus, a Youth endowed with all the parts of fortune and nature. A
great part of the Nobility being slain, the Clergy began to rule in Parliament.
Stewart Archbishop of St. Andrews being killed at Fludon, three fell in
competition for that place, one named Douglasse, who was chosen by the Hepburn
Abbot of St. Andrews, whom the Monks (as they were wont) elected for
Archbishop; the third was Forman Bishop of Murry, on whom also Lewis the
eleventh of France bestowed the Archbishopric of Biturix; besides, the Pope
conferred on him the Archbishopric of St. Andrews, with the two rich Abbeys of
Dumfermling and Aberbroth, and made him also Legatus a latere. Alexander Hume
upon promise of the Abbey of Coldingam to his youngest brother, causes the
Popes Bull for electing of Forman to be proclaimed in Edinburgh, which
occasioned much mischief, for Hepburn sought by all means to be revenged on the
Humes for this.

The Queen perceiving the distractions of Scotland, wrote to her brother of
England, to forbear making war against her and her children, who were
sufficiently troubled already with domestic broils; who returns this answer,
That he will not quarrel with the Scots, if they quarrel not with him. And now
the Queen by her marriage having lost the Regency, the kingdom is divided into
two factions: the Douglasses would have the Queen continued, pretending that
would be a means to keep peace with England; but the Humes would have another
elected, because the times were troublesome; The Queen had lost her Regency,
and it was not the custom of Scotland to be ruled by women; at last after much
debate, John Duke of Albany being then in France, is chosen Alexander brother
to king James 3. Francis the French king was glad of this election, for he knew
it would be for his advantage; therefore he furnishes him with men and money
for his journey: In the interim, for want of one head, the kingdom is much
vexed with highway men. Forman fearing lest Hepburn would cross him in his
title to the Archbishopric, remits all the profit he made of it, during the
vacancy; besides, he resignes to him the Bishopric of Murry, and promises to
allow him a large yearly pension out of the Church-revenues.

The Duke of Albany upon his arrival into Scotland, is declared Earl of March
and Viceroy during the kings minority: King James 4. his bastard son is made
1515.
Earl of Murry: Hepburn insinuates himself into the Viceroys affections, and
discovers to him the humors, greatness, and factions of the Scots Nobility; he
acquaints him being a stranger in Scotland, with the qualities of each family,
chiefly of the Douglasses and Humes, which he hated; therefore wishes the
Viceroy to send for French forces, to suppress in time the growing factions of
these great families. Hume perceiving which way the game was like to go, and
that Hepburn had accused him to the Viceroy, as if he had murdered king James;
repairs to the Queen, and makes her believe that the Viceroy intended to
murder the young king, that he being next in blood might transfer the Crown to
himself: therefore how dangerous and unreasonable it was, that a stranger, and
the son of him who would have murdered his brother the king, and has
therefore lived still since in exile, should have the custody of the young
King; he wishes her therefore to fly into England with her son, and cast her
self upon her brothers protection. This coming to the Regents ears, he
presently seiseth on Sterling Castle, where the Queen was, and removes her with
the Douglasses from the king, whose tuition he committed to three of the
Nobility, whom he most trusted, with a sufficient guard. The Humes England, and
so does the Queen shortly after with her husband Douglasse; whom king Henry
ordered to stay in Northumberland, till his further pleasure was known. The
Regent troubled at their departure, sends Ambassadors to king Henry, to assure
him, that neither the Queen nor her followers had reason to leave their
country, but their causeless jealousies; he also deals so with the Douglasses
and Humes with large promises, that he persuaded them to return home: the Queen
was fain to stay, because of her great belly; for shortly after, she was
delivered of a daughter Margaret: When she was fit to travel, king Henry sends
for her.

The Regent banisheth the Earl of Angus his Uncle, with some other prime 1516.
men; and summons Alexander Hume to appear in Parliament, which he refusing to
do, is condemned, and his estate confiscated: Upon this, he suffers or
countenances the highway-men to do much mischief; for suppressing of whom, and
taking of Hume, ten thousand horse and foot are raised; but before they come,
he submits himself to the Regent, who sends him to Edinburgh, and confines him
to the Earl of Arrans house his sisters husband; Hume persuades Arran to
undertake the government himself, being the sisters son of king James 3. and
fitter to be Regent then a stranger, and a banished man: Upon this, they go
away; the Regent presently takes Hamilton Castle upon surrender; Hume destroys
with fire and sword a great part of the town of Dunbar: John Stewart Earl of
Lennox; these seize upon Glascow Castle, which upon the coming of the Regent
they forsook, and afterward all of them are pardoned and received into the
Regents favor, but not long after, upon new suspicions, are condemned and
beheaded; they were accused of the kings death, and of treachery in Floden
battle; but Hepburn the Abbot was their chief persecutor, ever since they
crossed him in the Bishopric of St. Andrews. Alexander had three other
brothers, two of whom were banished, and the third was murthred by James
Hepburn.

The December following, the Regent brings the king from Sterling to Edinburgh,
where having obtained leave of the Nobility, he takes shipping for France: The
charge of the government lies upon the Earls of Huntley, Angus, Arran, and
Argile, with the two Archbishops of St. Andrews and Glascow. The Queen about a
year after her departure, returns into Scotland, where 1517.
new troubles arise upon the killing of the Governor of Dunbar by David Hume,
whereupon the Viceroy is sent for: quarrels also arise between the Earl of
Angus and the Kars. A Parliament is called at Edinburgh, where complaint is
made against the greatness of Angus, who falling foul with the Hamiltons in
the streets of Edinburgh, a great slaughter was made, so that 1520.
about seventy two were killed; among the rest, Arrans brother, and Eglentons
son: The Hamiltons to be revenged on the Douglasses, besieged one of their
Castles, but to no purpose. The next year, Douglasse with the two banished
Humes, enter Edinburgh, and take down the heads of Alexander and William Humes,
which had been set up all this while on an eminent place of the City. So the
whole five years of the Regents absence, was filled with slaughter and rapine:
When he was come, he intended to weaken the power of the Douglasses; therefore
banisheth the Earl of Angus into France, his Uncle the 1521.
Bishop of Dunkell he sends to the Pope, to be punished by him, but by the way
he died of the plague in London.

The next year after the Regents return, a Parliament is held at Edinburgh, and
an Army raised, which is sent into Annandel, with an intent to invade England:
When they were come within three miles of England, Gordon Earl of Huntley
dissuaded the Nobility from entering, pretending it was unsafe to provoke a
foreign enemy, when they had so many enemies at home; but this was indeed to
cross the Regents design, who to please the French, intended to invade
England. The Regent to save his credit, had a party with Musgrave France, where
he stayed some months longer then he expected, because the English fleet lay
in wait for him: Therefore he sends five hundred French soldiers before with a
fleet, which falling upon the English near the Isle of Man beat them. In the
interim, Howard Earl of Surry is sent with an Army of ten thousand mercinaries,
besides others, into Scotland, where having no ressistance by reason of the
Regents absence, and the domestic distractions, they waste Marcia and Teviot;
upon his return, the Scots borderers plunder Northumberland, so that Howard is
forced to come back again; who with much loss to his own party, took Iadburg.
About which time, five hundred Scots; three days after the English Army
disbanded. The Regent perceiving that the English fleet lay still in wait for
him, gave out that he would not remove from France till the next spring:
Whereupon the English fleet returned home; but as soon as they were gone, the
Regent claps three thousand French foot besides one hundred courisiers in fifty
ships, and arrives safely in Scotland.

King Henry of England at this time did much court the Scots for an Union,
alleging diverse reasons why their union with England would be more
advantageous then with France, in respect of vicinity, identity of language,
Mary with king James, would make a perfect Union, and much increase the
happiness of Scotland. Notwithstanding all this, the French faction being
bribed, carried it against king Henry; for they alleged that this was not the
first time the English deluded them under shows of friendship and union: Edward
the first, against his oath, by which he was bound to end the controversy
between the two kings, Bruce and Balliol, he increased it, by making Balliol
king; Edward the fourth also pretended to marry his daughter Cicil to king
James the third's son, but when it came to the upshot, upon some divisions in
Scotland, he fell off; therefore king Henryes aim Scotland, being destitute of
all foreign aid: they deny also that greater benefit can accrue to Scotland
by their union with England, or more security, then with France: Therefore they
advise them not to exchange without a cause, their old trusty friends, for new
and slipery pretenders. The news also of the Regents being landed with foreign
forces, confirmed the French, and cooled the English faction.

The Regent having made his Rendezvous at Glasco, and from thence being come to
Edinburgh, he assembleth the Lords, highly commending their constancy to the
French, and the old league, and exhorting them to unity: then having refreshed
his Army, and united the Scots forces with the French, he marches into England
with the French, but the Scots would not follow, knowing this expedition was
only to gratify the French king; the Regent with his French besieged
Werk-Castle, and battered down the outward wall with their ordnance, but they
were beaten off again; the Regent seeing no good could be done by the French,
and that the Scots would not fight, hearing also of an Army of forty thousand
English coming against him, returning France, desiring the Lords to keep the
King at Sterling, and to make a peace with England before his return; but in
his absence all growing out of order, the young king by diverse of the Lords is
conveyed to Edinburgh, where at Holy-Roods he undertook the government himself,
and all took the oath of allegiance to him, most officers of State were changed
for a while, he rode in state to the Parliament; shortly after the Bishops of
S. Andrews and Aberdene for disliking this change are imprisoned, who to be
revenged, curse all within their jurisdiction with bell, book and candle, but
all are reconciled Archibald Douglasse who was banished into France, returns
home through England, and is kindly used by king Henry, purposely to cross the
Regent; Lenox and Argile who were out of public employment, are glad of his
coming; but the Queen whose affections were alienated from him, and Arran,
which two ruled all, were much troubled at it, so was also Hamilton who feared
his greatness, these with the King kept themselves in Edinburgh-Castle; but the
adverse faction of Lords chose Douglasse, Lenox and Argile, protectors of the
King and kingdom, these presently seize upon Sterling, and thence without
opposition enter Edinburgh, the Castle being unprovided then for a siege is
yielded up to them, out of which all are dismissed except Triumviri were to
rule four months by turn, but this government lasted not long, for under the
Douglasses such corruptions and disorders crept both into the Church and State,
that the other two fell off, and the king grew weary.

Whilst Douglasse waited on the king into Teviot, there to suppress the
Bandito's or highway men, who having summoned the chief of each family
enjoined them to find out and apprehend these robbers, which they did
accordingly, and many of them were put to death: I say, at this time a plot was
laid by Lenox and the other Stewarts to get away the king from the Douglasses,
which because they could not effect by secret plots, they resolved by open
Stewarts were in Arms, the Douglasses with their friends in a great tumult fly
also to their Arms, a hot skirmish followed in which the Stewarts were worsted,
1526.
the king all the while stood as a spectator: after this the Douglasses to
strengthen their faction, procured the Hamiltons (who had been a great while
kept from the Court) to enter into league with them; the Stewarts on the other
side, got diverse Lords and Bishops to join with them, and in the kings name to
call a Parliament at Sterling, and to set upon the Hamiltonian forces, before
they joined with the Douglasses; Lenox with his party being too hasty, fell
upon the Hamiltonians having the advantage of the ground, by whom Lenox to the
kings great grief was slain; the Douglassians were hasting with their forces,
and the king from Edinburgh; but the king faining himself to be ill-disposed,
came so slowly, that George Douglasse suspecting he did this purposely to
retard them from joining with Hamilton, told him, Sir, rather then the enemy
shall take you from us, we will cut you in two pieces, and reserve the one half
for our selves: this speech made so deep an impression on the young king, that
he could never after be reconciled to him, though he was to others.

The work being done before the Douglassians came, inquisition by them is made
of those prime men that took up arms against the king, among the rest the Earl
of Cassels is summoned to appear, his kinsman Kennedy appeared for him,
showing that the Earl fought not against, but for the king, and by his
command, and with that he produced the Kings letters. James Hamilton the
Bastard was so mad at Kennedy, that not long after he caused him to be
murdered: Douglasse takes the murdered Earls son into his protection, and
bestows his daughter on him; he also plunders Archbishop Betons Castle, for
Lenox. Beton, that he might not fall into Douglasse his hands, was glad to hide
himself, and so was the Queen, who both feared and hated her husband. Shortly
after, one of James Stewarts Grooms, being grieved for the death of his master,
stabs Hamilton the Bastard in six several places of his body, in revenge of
his masters death: This fellow, though pinched all over with burning irons,
showed no manner of grief either in word or gesture. Not long after this, the
King in the nightime, accompanied with a few horse, made an escape out of
Falkland, and came to Sterling, where being now out of the power of the
Douglasses, he sends for the Lords, who counsel him to remove the Douglassians
from all government, and that neither they, nor any of their George from
coming; a Parliament is called at Edinburgh, out of which the Douglassian
faction removes, when they heard the King was coming with an Army: the Earl of
Angus is ordered to be banished beyond the Spey, his brother George and
Archibald his uncle are to be imprisoned in Edinburgh-castle; but they refused
to obey this Order, therefore they are summoned to appear in Parliament, in the
interim the Chancellorship and Treasurership are taken from them: but when the
King was gone, they thought by the aid of their friends to take possession of
Edinburgh, and to hinder the meeting of the Parliament; but the City was so
well guarded, they could do no good; upon this, Douglasse goes to his Castle
Tantallon, fourteen miles from the town.

In this Parliament the Douglasses are proscribed, and their estates
confiscated; whereupon they fly out into open hostolity, and let loose the
reins. to all high-way-men, so that much mischief and robberies are committed.
The king besieges Tantallon-castle, but could do no good on it: Argile is
employed by the king to suppress the Bandito's: the Douglasses being forsaken
by the Hamiltons, fly into England. King Henry of England preparing to make
war against Charles the Emperor, sends to make a peace with Scotland, and to
have the Douglasses restored: king James would not hear any thing of restoring
Douglasse, and so the peace could not be concluded, only a truce is made for
five years; in the mean while Tantallon-castle is delivered by Douglasse to the
king. The next year, the king makes James Earl of Murrey Viceroy, whom he sends
to the borders to meet the Earl of Northumberland, concerning the peace, and
reparation for wrongs, but nothing was concluded: The king sends the Earl
Bothwell and some other Lords into Edinburgh-castle, upon information given,
that they were underhand raising war against England; then he goes in person
with eight thousand men to suppress the rebellious borderers, whose Chief
Maxwell with diverse others he caused to be apprehended and hanged, at which the
English were glad, for he had done them much

About this time, one John Scot a mean man in Edinburgh, grew famous with 1531.
Fasting; for when he pleased, he could abstain thirty, or forty, or fifty
days together without meat or drink: Experiments of this he gave both to king
James in Scotland, to the Pope at Rome, to the Venetians, to the English in
London, where he was imprisoned for preaching at Pauls-Crosse against king
Henry's divorce, and falling off from the Church of Rome: when he was asked by
what means he fasted so, he still answered, By the help of the Virgin Mary. The
Duke of Albany obtained of the Pope, that the Clergy should out of their
revenues allow an yearly salary for Judges to end controversies between man and
man about bargains or pecuniary matters: Dumbar Bishop of Aberdene in 1532.
this point appeals to the Pope, and then at Edinburgh was set up the College
of Justice: the king to please the Pope, makes strict inquisition against the
Lutherans, in recompense of which, the Pope bestows on him all the Tithes for
three years. This year the English having entered into a league with France
against Caesar, are willing to pick a quarrel with Scotland, therefore upon
some David Beton is sent into France to complain that the old league with
Scotland was neglected; an Ambassador is sent from France to compose the
differences between the Scots and English; Caesar sends an 1534.
Ambassador from Toledo by the way of Ireland into Scotland, to draw the Scots
into a league with him against England and France, complaining of the wrongs
done to his Aunt Katherine by King Henry; then a match is proposed either with
Mary of Hungary, or Mary of Portugal, or Mary of England; but King James
inclined rather to the king of Denmarks daughter by Isabel Charles Caesar.
About this some time was required for deliberation.

Things being settled at home, the King resolves to sail about Scotland, for
reducing the Islanders to obedience; first he sails to the Orcades, which he
setleth, and puts garrisons both in the Kings and in the Bishops Castles; then
he settles the other Islands, and sends away their chief disturbers to
Edinburgh and Dumbar-Castles; the Lutherans are severely enquired after, and
some burnt: the Earl of Murry, and the Bishop of Aberdene, are sent into France
about a wife for the king, to whom king Henry of England sends by one of his
Bishops a book containing the Articles of the Reformed Religion, which James
upon persuasion of his Clergy rejected as heretical: then king Henry sends to
desire king James to give him a meeting about settling of both kingdoms in one,
which was by marrying king Henry's daughter, whereby king James after king
Henry's death should be heir of both, in assurance of which, king Henry
proffers to make him Duke of York, and his Deputy or Viceroy of England: king
James intended to give king Henry a meeting, but was at last dissuaded from it
by the Hamiltons, who being next heirs to the Crown, would not have the king
marry at all; by the Bishops also, who pretended that king Henry meant to have
the Religion of Scotland altered; they alleged the danger that might befall
the king if he should trust his person in England, whereas king James the
first, Malcolme the first, and his brother William kings of Scotland, were
drawn into England upon great promises, and then forced to assent and act such
things as stood not with the honor and safety of their kingdom.

With these reasons, and with promises of great sums of money, king James his
mind was changed, and so king Henry was angered, which occasioned new quarrels.
King James being impatient of caelibate, and finding that his Ambassadors in
France trifled away their time, resolves to go thither in person, but without
the knowledge of his Lords; the first time he set to sea he was Deep, being
accompanied with many of his Lords, who suddenly coming to Paris before king
Francis knew of his arrival, was most courteously entertained, and a match
presently concluded between him and Magdalen the French kings daughter; after
1537.
much joy and solemnity they both sailed into Scotland, but not long after she
fell into an hectic fever and died, to the great grief of all except the
Priests, who feared she would incline the King to Protestanisme, for she had
been bred by her Aunt the Queen of Navar; after her death, Ambassadors are sent
to marry Mary of the house of Guise, and widow to the Duke of Longevil: Bothwel
for suspected treason is banished out of Scotland, England and France: the Lord
Forbes is beheaded, being accused by one Straughen of treason, and persecuted
by Huntlies faction: the Earl of Angus his sister was burned for conspiring
with some others to poison the king; her husband thinking by a rope to escape
out of Edinburgh-Castle, fell and so bruised himself that he died presently;
the next year Mary of Guise is with great solemnity married at St. Andrews by
the Archbishop to King James. Many Protestants that year suffered George
Buchanan escaped out of prison: 1539.
The Queen this year was brought to bed of a son, and the next year of another.
King Henry sends again to have King James give him a meeting at York, which he
refused upon the disswasions of his Clergy. James Hamilton for treason is
beheaded, and his limbs set up in four several places of Edinburgh; not long
after, the King dreamed that this Hamiltons ghost appeared to him in a ghastly
manner, brandishing his sword against him, with which he cut off his right
hand, and then his left; the king being awakened, and thinking much of the
meaning of this dream, news is brought him that both his sons were dead about
the same time, the one at St. Andrews, and the other at Sterling.

Not long after this, the two kings quarrel, the borderers are wasted on both
sides; at last Armies are raised, the Scots Army mutined because the king had
by his letters named one Oliver Sinclar for their General, and so in a confused
manner were marching home, which the English perceiving, they set upon them
with their whole Army, and routed them; the news of this overthrow so vexed the
king, that shortly after he sickned and died, having left one daughter heir to
the Crown five days old, he was entombed in the Abbey-Church of Holy-Roods,
near his first wife Magdalen. The loss of the Army, and the kings sudden
death, put the Scots into a great deal of anxiety; Hamiltons were now in hope
to obtain the Crown, at least during the nonage of the child Mary: the Scots
prisoners at London are for two days shut up in the Tower, and from thence
being brought in solemnity through the streets to the king, were checked by the
Chancellor for breaking the peace, and then were dispersed into some private
houses; but when news came that king James was dead, having left one daughter,
the prisoners are sent for to the Court and kindly used by the king, who having
tried how they were inclined to a match between his son and their young Queen,
he sends them home into Scotland, 1543.
the two Douglasses return with them after fifteen years banishment: The
Cardinal of St. Andrews got himself to be made Viceroy before they came, but
James Hamilton Earl of Arran is named Viceroy.

The next March a Parliament was called, whither Sir Ralph Sadler is sent
Ambassador from king Henry to conclude a peace, and to make up the match, his
proposal was much opposed by the Queen, Cardinal and Clergy; the Cardinal is
confined, and great hopes appear of a full union, so that the Merchants begin
again to traffic freely; but the Cardinal (being set at liberty) with his
Clergy and the Queen, strive what they can to hinder any union with England,
therefore they cause affronts to be put upon the English Ambassador, and
withal the hostages which were promised upon the setting of the Scots England,
were denied, for they feared this union would be prejudicial to France, and
that it would bring in with it an alteration in Religion: Sir Ralph complains
of the affronts, to whom the Regent promises reparation, but shows it was not
in his power to deliver any hostages: the Earl of Cassils alone professed
openly, that he would return to England, and there remain a perpetual prisoner,
rather then his two brothers which were his hostages should suffer for him, and
so he went straight to London; the King highly commending his resolution, sets
both his brothers at liberty, and sends him also back again with some rich
presents. Mean while King Henry staye^ all the Scots ships that were within his
harbors, threatening war and destruction against those who had broke the peace,
and violated the Laws of Nations: but the Queen and Cardinals faction sends to
the French king, that he should now or never hinder the Scots union with
England, and to that purpose should send home Matthew Stewart Earl of Lenox,
who was the Hamiltons great enemy, to suppress them and their claim which they
laid to the Crown, he being next heir by King James his last Will; they promise
also to marry him to the widow Queen, and to make him heir to James Hamilton
lately Lenox, if he would go home.

The young credulous Earl upon these great proffers and promises goes for
Scotland, where having saluted the Regent, he repairs to the Cardinal, to whom
he shows the causes of this his journey; his friends to the number of four
thousand accompany him to the Queen: Hamilton to avoid blood, proposes some
Articles for peace, to wit, that the Queen should be transported into Sterling,
and that she should be educated by four of the Nobility which were of neither
faction; hereupon she was crowned at Sterling: the Regent finding himself too
weak for the other faction, in the Gray-Friars at Sterling Lenox out of the
way, by writing to the French king, and desiring him to call back Lenox again,
for he had done what they desired in diminishing the Regents power, but they
were afraid lest his greatness may cause some faction; in the interim the
Queen Mother bare him in hand that she would marry him, and entertained him at
Court with feasting, ^othwel whom King James the 5. banished, is now returned,
and was a great servant also to the Queen Mother, which bred emulation in
Lenox, yet he at last got Bothwel to forsake the Court; but when he perceived
that the Queen and Cardinal did put him off with long delays, and that they
went about to delude him, he grew angry, and with intent of revenge went to
Dumbritton, where he receives from the French king a great sum of money
which he was to employ by the advice of the Queen and Cardinal, but he
distributed a great part of this money among his friends, and some he sent to
the Queen; the Cardinal finding that no share thereof came to him, in anger
complies with the Regent, and wishes him to Glascow which might unawares seize
upon Lenox and the money also; but Lenox understanding of this plot, raises
presently seven thousand Volunteers, and with them he marches to Leith, and
sends to the Cardinal that he was come to prevent his journey to Glascow, and
withal to fight his forces; the Cardinal puts him off from day to day with
promises of a fight, but when Lenox saw that he lost time, that his Volunteers
were beginning to hold correspondence with the Enemy, and that he was not
provided to make a siege, makes his peace with the Regent.

Shortly after Lenox understanding that a plot was laid against him, he retired
to Glascow, where he fortifies and victuals the Bishops Castle; thence he
Dumbritton, where he understands that the Douglasses and Hamiltons were
reconciled, and that King Francis affection was alienated from him upon the
calumnies of his enemies; in the interim the Earl of Angus, and Robert Maxwel
came to Glascow, to take up the differences between the Regent and Lenox; mean
while King Henry of England sends his fleet which was intended for France,
against Leith and Edinburgh, which had slighted his proffers, and affronted his
Ambassador; ten thousand men being landed they quickly seize on the Town, most
of the Merchants being gone elsewhere; here they stayed three days till their
Artillery was landed, with which they battered the walls of Edinburgh which
they took and plundered, and having set fire on some houses, they marched up
and down that Country, wasting diverse Gentlemen's houses and villages; and so
having done what spoil they could, return to their ships; Lenox in the mean
time sends a messenger with letters to King Francis clearing his own
innocence, and accusing his enemies of false calumnies against him; but the
King was so prepossessed by the Queen Mother, and the Guisian faction, that he
would not admit the messenger into his presence; Lenox being much perplexed
that he was thus abused by the Queen and Cardinal, Glascow with an Army, and
after ten days siege had taken the Castle, resolves now to comply with the
King of England; and having received some encouragements thereto, intends first
to be revenged on the Hamiltons, therefore with eight hundred Townsmen of
Glascow and others, he encounters the Hamilton forces which were far more
numerous; in the first encounter he beat off the enemy from their Ordnance, but
fresh supplies coming to the Hamiltons got them that victory, about three
hundred were killed on both Glascow is plundered, and Lenox having left the
Castle of Dumbritton to George Sterling, set sails for England, where he is
honorably received and entertained by the King who marries him to Margaret
Douglasse, King James the fifths sister, and daughter to King Henry's sister.

CHAP. XXX.
A continuation of the Scottish History under the two Regents, Hamilton and the
Queen Mother, from 1544. till 1560.

THE Hamiltons being glad to be rid of so potent an enemy as Lenox, 1544.
whole estates confiscated; whilst Scotland is thus pestred with homebred
seditions, the English invade it with an Army, to resist which, the Queenmother
with the Cardinal and Regent, raise between eight and nine thousand men, but
the Regent out of cowardice fled with a few to Dumbar, the Army upon his sudden
departure began to disband: Archibald Douglasse Earl of Angus, with some few of
his friends, brought back the Artillery to Dumbar, even in the sight of the
enemy, wherein he showed great resolution and boldness; the English mean while
wastes all the Country to the Forth, and so return Thomas Howard the Duke of
Norforlk, with some others, beg from King Henry in recompense of their good
service in Scotland, all such lands there as either they had, or should subdue,
and with all a sufficient Army, till the work were done; this was assented to,
so they return with three thousand mercinaries, besides the borderers who were
voluntaries, and warred on their own charges: the Earl of Angus whose estate
lay most about the borders repairs to the Regent, showing him the danger the
kingdom was in, and reproved him for suffering himself to be led by the
Cardinal and his Clergy, for which he had lost the hearts of the Nobility;
hereupon summons are sent abroad to invite the Lords to a meeting, that an Army
might be raised, they Fife, and some more forces under Walter Scot; these
encounter with the English who had both the sun and wind against them, so that
being blinded with the sun now in the West, and the gun-powdersmoak, they we^e
presently disranked and confounded, and so suddenly flung down their arms and
ran away; the Scots pursued with great eagerness and made a great slaughter;
of the Scots two only were slain; of the English about two hundred, and a
thousand taken prisoners, eight hundred of which were Gentlemen.

About this time, the Gourdons under George Earl of Huntly, or rather the
Reginaldins by his instigation, fought a battle with the Frasers; in which the
whole family of the Frasers were killed, so that it had been utterly extinct,
but that there were 80 of their wives left big with with child; all which were
brought to bed of sons, who lived till they all came to men's estate. Five
hundred horse and three thousand foot are sent out of France into Scotland, to
retard the English from invading France; an Ambassador also is sent to enquire
Lenox, that he suppressed much of the French money, 1545.
that he spoiled the public cause by falling out with the Cardinal, and of
his going into England; he had also order to leavy an army in Scotland,
whereupon fifteen thousand make their rendezvous at Haddington, whence they
march into England, wasting for six miles together all with fire and sword. So
having spent ten days in plundering, they return laden with spoil. Mongomery
the French Ambassador enquires and finds that the Cardinal had wrongfully
accused Lenox, and forced him to fly into England; Then the Regent and
Cardinal undertook a progress into Perth, Dundee, and other towns, to punish
and suppress the Protestants; they take away the Provostship of Perth from the
Ruvens, in whose family it had continued many years, and put one upon them,
whom they would not admit, which caused great troubles and tumults in the town,
so that sixty men were slain, and many in the confused press of the people
resisting their new Provost and his forces, were trod to death. After this the
Cardinal conveys the Regent to St. Andrews, where having sumptuously
entertained him for three weeks, he goes to the National Synod then held at
Edinburg, where George Sephocard a Minister is accused of Heresy; him they
fetch away with a troop of horse from John Cockburns house where he was
entertained, then he was carried to St. Andrews, where he was condemned by the
Cardinal and his Clergy to be burned as an George, as the rope was about his
neck, and the fire ready to be kindled, told the Cardinal, that ere long, for
all his great state, he should be laid as low as he; so he was strangled, and
his body burned to ashes: This severity procured much obloquie and hatred from
the people and Nobility on the Cardinal, who to make his party the stronger,
marries his eldest daughter to the Earl of Crafords son.

Mean while, the Cardinal understanding that there was a great fleet from
England coming to infest the coast of Fife, he sends to all the Nobility and
Rothus son, by the assistance of fifteen more that were of the plot, entered one
day betimes in the morning into the Cardinals Castle at Saint Andrews, the gate
being opened to let in the workmen who were then repairing and fortifying of
the place; these conspirators break into his Bedchamber, and with many wounds
they stab him to death: then upon a tumult in the Town, his dead body is
exposed to public view in the same place where he beheld the Ministers
execution; the murderers are summoned to Edinburgh, who stand upon John Knox
preached damnation to them. The English again invade the borders, and new
levies are raised to resist them, about which time a French fleet in which were
21 galleys arrived; the French and Scots join their forces, and suddenly
besiege the Cardinals castle, which they batter with their brasse-ordnance from
the towers of the two next Churches, so that at last the besieged were forced
to yield, being promised their lives; in this castle was found the Cardinals
treasure, with much provision, furniture and housholdstuffe, besides much
wealth hid there for security by the Citizens; the castle by command is pulled
down to the ground.

About this time news came, that the King of England was preparing both by sea
and land to invade Scotland, and to force the Scots to make good their 1547.
promise about the marriage of their young Queen with king Henry's son. The
Regent raises what forces he can to oppose the common enemy; some skirmishes
there were, and diverse both English and Scots killed: at last the English
perceiving the Scots army to increase daily, they send letters to the Regent
and the Lords, desiring them to consider how unnatural this war was between
Christians and neighbors, how happily and quickly it might be composed, if
they would stand to their promise and league about the match, which would be so
advantageous to them; how impossible it was to find a husband so fit for their
Queen, as one born of so great a Prince, in the same Island, of the same
language, so near in blood, and of such excellent endowments, Douglasse Earl of
Angus leads the Van, Gordon Earl of Huntley the Rear, the Regent 1547.
ground, pursued, killed and took many of them; there fell of the English horse
in the first encounter about two hundred, of the Scots the number is not
certain, whose Rear retreated homeward in safety; all this while the Scots army
suffered much harm by the English fleet, which played upon them with their

This battle being fought, the English waste all the Country for six miles
together, and take in certain Castles: The Regent repairs to both the Queens at
Sterling, being sad for this disaster; but the Queen Mother was not much sorry,
though she made show, because she aimed to displace the Regent, and to get the
government into her own hand: The young Queen is secured in Dumbritton, whilst
the Lords consult about settling of the kingdom. Ambassadors are also sent to
Henry of France, for aid against the common enemy, with hopes that the young
Queen shall be conveyed over into France, and married to the Dolphin; but the
French aid came not so soon as was expected: Galloway by the assistance of
Lennox, to 1548.
whom a great part of that Country submitted; they waste also the Country about
Haddington: In the interim three thousand German foot, two thousand French, and
one thousand horse, are sent from King Henry of France; to these the Regent
with eight thousand Scots do join, and besiege Haddington: A meeting is had of
the Lords about transporting of the Queen; many were for the union with
England, chiefly those that desired a reformation of Religion; but the
Catholics, and all such as were bribed by the French, chiefly the Regent, who
was promised a yearly revenue of twelve thousand Francks, besides a Captainship
over a hundred Curisiers; all these being the major part, voted the Queen
should be sent into France: The fleet that waited for her at Lies, sailed
about the coast and took her in at Dumbritton; who after a stormy passage
arrived in Britany, from whence she is conveyed to the Court.

Whilst the siege continues at Haddington, the Scots surprise Hume-Castle with
some other places from the English. James Stewart the Queens brother with some
forces in Fife, fell upon twelve hundred English lately landed, and Montrose in
the night; but the governor of the Town perceiving by the lights in their
ships where they were, places diverse armed men in ambush, who fell upon eight
hundred of them as they were landing, and drove them back into the Sea, so that
scarce the third part of them escaped. The siege at Haddington continues still:
Thomas Palmer with one thousand foot and three hundred horse from Barwick are
sent to relieve the besieged, but they were almost all cut off by the Scots in
ambush; after these three hundred French lay in wait, but missed them: Then
news came that a great army was coming out of England to raise the siege;
whereupon the Scots army not willing to hazard all upon one battle, leave the
siege, and send back the Artillery to Edinburgh; where the Provost was killed
with his son and others by the French, because he resisted them as they were
entering the City, fearing lest they should fall to plundering after their
accustomed manner. The French return again suddenly to Haddington, where they
killed the watch betimes in the morning, but as they were breaking open the
gate, the English are awaked, who discharging the murdering piece before the
gate, did such execution French, that they ran away; but not long after, they
made incursions upon England, and did much hurt there.

Not long after this, Dessius the French General is called home, upon the
Regents letters complaining of his insolences, and sedition raised by him at
Edinburgh: but by the way he retakes from the English Keth-Island, and puts
most of them to the sword. Termius is sent into Scotland with some more French
supplies, who regain some Castles from the English; and upon the departure of
their Army into England, sits down before Haddington, which at last, the
English garrison for want of provisions were forced to quit, having 1549.
first set fire on some houses. Mean while, news is brought and proclaimed in
Scotland of a Peace between France and England; whereupon the French are
shipped away. But in this subsequent three years of peace, many disorders,
insolences and oppressions were committed by the Regent, and his brother the
Archbishop of S. Andrews, who was altogether ruled by his Concubine; for which
their government grew odious to the people: whereupon the Queen Mother makes a
journey into France, for she aimed at the government, which she hoped to obtain
by the French assistance: the French king willing to advance her without
tumult, bestows great pensions and offices on the Regent and his son, and on
Huntly, whose son had married the Regents daughter, on others also that were of
the Queens faction, who were employed to Rosse an eloquent man did the Queen
good service in this business, for which the French king rewards him with an
Abbey in France. The Queen Mother hoping now a way was made for her greatness,
returns home through England, being accompanied with a French Ambassador, who
by their favorites persuade the Regent to resign his Regencie, so full of
troubles and care, and which he could not keep long, by reason the young Queen
was almost of age, and that the French king would recompense him sufficiently;
the Regent was contented to resign, conditionally that he might never be
questioned for the late kings goods which he had used, not for any act he had
done in his Regency, which was granted him, and withal the title of Duke of
Castellerot, rich presents, and a yearly pension of twelve thousand Franks; it
was also voted, that if the Queen died without issue, Hamilton should be
declared next heir to the Crown; these Articles were sent to France, and there
confirmed by the young Queen and her protectors, to wit, King Henry 2. of
France, the Duke of Guise, and his brother Charles the Cardinal; but the Regent
repenting 1555.
to the French Ambassador, who received them in the name of the young Queen,
and by her command delivered them to the Queen Mother, a thing not seenbefore
in Scotland, that a woman should govern that Kingdom; but it was ordered that
the Castle of Edinburgh should not be committed to the French, lest if the
Queen should die childlesse, they would make it the place of their tyranny.

The Kingdom being settled, Huntly is employed by the Queen-Regent to suppress
the high-way-men, which he undertook, but performed not, wherefore he is
imprisoned, and not released until he had resigned his right to Moravia, and
his offices he enjoyed in the North, and then he was dismissed, and made a
Privy-counsellor; then the Queen-Regent makes a progress as far North as
Innerness, where she caused diverse delinquents to be executed, and sent the
Earl of Athol against the Rebels, who brought with him their chief Commander
Muderac with his whole family to the Queen, but shortly after he made an
escape, and did more mischief then before; some of Cardinal Betons murderers
are advanced by the Queen; a new project is set on foot by Huntly was the
aurhor of this project, purposely to bring the Queen-Regent in dislike wit^ the
people.

The French king sends to the Regent of Scotland, that she would according to
the old league denounce war against England, because Queen Mary assisted 1557.
her husband King Philip against the French; but the Lords would not consent to
any war against England at this time: then a plot was laid to build a Fort near
Barwick, purposely to induce the English to quarrels, which fell out
accordingly, Osellius, for taking upon him to rule the Kingdom; at which both
he and the Queen-Regent were offended, but know not how to help it, except by
hastening the marriage between the young Queen and the Dolphin, by which means
the power of the Lords would be curbed: After diverse excursions, a great
skirmish there was between the Duke of Norfolk and Andrew Car, in which many
were wounded and killed on both sides, and Car taken prisoner: After this, a
Parliament is held in Edinburgh, in which the French kings letters were read,
desiring the Scots to send away for consummating of the marriage, and
confirming of the old league, some of their Rothuse, and Reed Bishop of Orkney
saved themselves in a Fisher-boat; when all the Commissioners were come on
shore they hasten to the Court; the Guises who had now the command of all
France, use all the celerity they can to consummate the marriage; there were
five brothers of them, the eldest was General of the French forces in France;
the second of the Ligurian forces; the third of their Army in Scotland; the
fourth commanded the Galleys at Marsieles; and the fifth who was Charles the
Cardinal, had the disposing of the whole treasure of France: after the nuptial
solemnities were finished, the Chancellor of France desires the Scots
Commissioners that the Queens husband might be solemnly installed and created
King of Scotland, and that it might be confirmed by Parliament, which motion
was rejected by them as unreasonable, and as no ways contained within their
Commission: shortly after four of the prime Commissioners, with diverse of their
attendants died suddenly, not without suspicion of poison; James the Queens

About this time the borders are infested on both sides with mutual incursions,
a fleet of English was sent to infest the Scots coast, which arriving in
Orkney, landed many men to plunder and burn the Bishops seat, and Town of
Orkney, but the ships were scattered and torn by storms, and all that came on
shore were cut in pieces by the Islanders: great troubles fell out in St.
Andrews about the burning of one Milvins a revolted Priest, whose tomb was
erected and taken down again diverse times, till at last the stones were quite
carried away for other buildings: At Edinburgh on the festival day of S.
Aegidius the Cities Patron, his statue that should have been carried about in
Procession, Paul Mefan a Minister, is summoned to appear at Edinburgh, which he
refused, being backed and supported by Dundee; upon this diverse prime men out
of Fife and Angus, dispersed themselves through the kingdom, exhorting the
people to shake off the old Religion, and to subscribe to the Reformation, and
withal they send to the Queen Regent, that the Divine-service might be used in
the vulgar tongue, that the people might choose their own Ministers, and have
power to Leith and Edinburgh; the Priests notwithstanding ceased not to
persecute the Ministers, and caused some old Canons to be printed and fastened
to the Churchdoors, the copies of which, because sold up and down for farthings
a piece, therefore the people called the Roman religion, The Farthing-faith.

In the Parliament at Edinburgh the French Ambassador, with his faction, labor
hard to have the Crown of Scotland set upon the Dolphins head, which at last
after much debate was assented to; the Earl of Argile, with James the Queens
brother, are appointed to convey the Crown into France, but they Scotland to
France, put off the journey with long delays; in the interim Queen Mary of
England dies, and Mary of Scotland claims that Crown, therefore assumes the
Title and Arms of England, which her husband likewise did: the Queen Regent
also began to carry herself more imperiously then before, petitions were
preferred to her in behalf of the Protestants, which she rejected; whereupon
threatening speeches are given out of shaking off her government. The Town of
Perth publicly receives the Protestant Religion, for which she threatens Raven
the Provost; then she sends to Haliburton Provost of Dundee, to apprehend
Mefan, Sterling all the Ministers of Scotland, who at the day appointed came
with multitudes of their own side to guard them, so that the Regent was afraid,
and dismissed them without acting any thing against them, save only that she
proscribed such as had not appeared there, as contumacious.

At this time Knox is Preacher at Perth, who with his knocking tongue beat down
the quires and chancels of Cathedrals, with the religious houses, beginning
first at Perth, where the mad multitude in a few days destroy the the
buildings of the Franciscans, Dominicans, and Carthusians; The like fury was
seen in Cuper of Fife, and afterward like a Gangrene it crept into other
places. This so highly incensed the Regent, that being assisted by the Earls of
Argile and Athol, with the French, she suddenly raised an Army against Perth:
The Lords of the Reformation with seven thousand repair thither to defend the
Town; but by the mediation of friends, a peace is made without sheding Scots
there, she goes to Sterlin. This much incensed the people against her;
wherefore they assemble in great numbers, being countenanced by some Lords, and
fell upon S. Andrews and other Towns, spoiling all the Religious houses, so
that the Archbishop with his guard were forced to fly: whereupon the Regent in
a rage commands all French and Scots of her side to be in arms at the sounding
of the trumpet; about three thousand Scots and French repair to her, but the
number of her enemies was far greater; wherefore she sends to make peace with
them, which they refuse, because she did not use to keep promise with
heretics, and they knew also that she labored to gain time, whereby she might
have foreign aid; yet some hopes appeared, if she would dismiss her garrison
at Perth, and suffer the Town to enjoy her old liberties, which she refused to
do; wherefore the Protestant army from Cuper besieges Perth, which shortly
after is surrendered to them, and Ruven is restored to his Provostship; then
they march to the town of Scone, which they burn, for murdering a Protestant
against Sterlin, understanding that the Regent was sending thither a French
garrison, and there they pull down the Monastery, thence they march toward
Edinburgh, which put such a terror in the French and Scots Catholics, that
they fly to Dunbar; the Protestant Lords in the interim set up preaching
Ministers every where.

Mean while news came of the death of king Henry of France, which made the
Scots secure, and the Queen doubtful lest she and her French should be 1559.
expelled the kingdom: but hearing that most of the Scots army was disbanded,
she hasteneth with her forces to Edinburgh, where being met with Duke Hamilton,
and Douglasse Earl of Morton, they obtain a truce for some Edinburgh, That no
religious houses be demolished or converted to other uses, That the Mint and
Palace with all the Royal furniture be restored to the Regent. These things
being agreed upon, the Regent causes strange reports to be spread abroad, that
the Scots Protestants made religion a pretense of their rebellion, and that
James the late Kings bastard strove by undermining the lawful heir to usurp
the Crown: letters also are sent to him from king Francis and Queen Mary,
complaining of his ingratitude and defection, to which he answers by Lies; the
Earl of Arran also fled out of France and came home, being threatened with death
by the Guises for promoting the Protestant cause in France; He persuades his
father James Hamilton, lately Regent of Scotland, to join with the Protestant
party, who now were preparing to besiege the French in Lies, to whose relief
the French king sends two thousand men; the Bishop of Amiens also with three
Sorbon Doctors are sent to dispute if need were; the Regent upon their coming
was so lifted up, that she vowed to be revenged on the Kings and Churches
enemies, therefore diverse of the Lords are summoned to appear, who refuse to
come, because they saw the Regent and the French were bent to enslave the
kingdom, by fortifying Leith, and filling it with garrisons of strangers; to
these she sends a Herald of Arms, showing that her whole aim was to mantain
the ancient Religion, and to keep the kingdom in quietness, not for her self,
but for her daughter that was the sole lawful heir; therefore she commands them
to lay down Arms, and appear to their summons, or else they must be proclaimed
Rebels: the Lords Leith with the Ambassador, Sorbons and garrison, or else they
must force her, which they are loath to do, by reason of the league between
Scotland and France, and the nearness of blood between her and their Queen.

Presently upon this it is ordered, that the Queen-Regents power and authority
was void, that the Embassy from her daughter and son-in-law was of no
validity, and withal an Herald is sent to Leith to command all the Scots
there to depart within four and twenty hours, after this some light skirmishes
there Castellerot was fearful and wavering to help these evils, chiefly to
content the soldiers, they send into England. To borrow a sum of money, for
they could not supply so great a sum of themselves, nor could they coin their
plate, because they had not the command of the Mint; but Cockburn who was sent
to bring money out of England, is apprehended by Bothwel, and brought to the
Regent with his money; the Earl of Arran and James Stewart thought to have
rescued Cockburn, but were prevented Bothwel. The Provost of Dundee, with his
Trained-bands of foot, and some mercinaries, as they were marching toward
Leith, were driven back by the French horse in great disorder; so that many who
seemed to be Protestants, slide back again to Popery; Arran and Stewart, with
some forces brake out of Edinburgh upon the French very rashly, by whom they
were defeated, and forced to forsake the City, which they did in the
nightime, and the next day came to Sterling, where Knox encouraged them to
perseverance.

The Protestants perceiving the French side increase daily, resolve to send to
the Queen of England for aid, showing her the danger that might redound
England, if the French should have the command of Scotland: hereupon supplies
are promised; mean while some part of the Protestant forces stay at Glascow,
and the rest march into Fife; the French before the English came fall upon
those in Fife; plundering and wasting all the Protestant Towns, houses and
villages in their way. The Protestant forces assemble at the Town of Disert,
and for twenty days together have light skirmishes with the French, and lying
in ambush apprehended about a hundred Savoyans, half of which they killed with
their Captain, the remainder they send prisoners to Dundee; in the interim a
league at Berwick is made between the English and them on these Articles, That
they should help each other against any strangers in either Kingdom; Elizabeth
should pay both the Scots soldiers in England, 1560.
and the English in Scotland; That the booties should be permitted to the
English, but the Towns and Castles to their right owner; and upon this the
Scots were to give Hostages.

CHAP. XXXI.
The continuation of the English History under King Edward the 6. and Queen
Mary, from the year 1546. till 1558.

TO King Henry succeeded his son King Edward the 6. over whose minority and
Kingdom, his uncle Edward Lord Seymour, Earl of Hereford 1546.
and Duke of Sommerset is made Protector: He began his Reign with altering of
Religion; Mean while the Protector not obtaining the promised Edward, marches
in person with a great Army to Scotland, and sends about by sea a strong fleet;
the Regent of Scotland, caused the Red or Fire-crosse to be set up, a custom
used in times of sudden danger, thither all from sixteen to sixty must repair;
the place of Rendezvous is Musselburgh, there the two Armies meet, diverse
skirmishes before the battle, some killed and taken prisoners on both sides;
the Earl of Huntley, to avoid effusion of blood, sends a challenge to the
English Protector either to fight man to man singly, or ten to ten, or twenty
to twenty; this demand was denied and a battle is fought, in which the Scots
first encounter was so furious, that the English horse were forced back, and in
retiring bare down a part of their own Orey hurt; the Scots hoping too much to
a deceivable victory, and being too courageously forward disranked themselves
for haste, and fell upon the disbanded English, who being brought again into
array, pressed hard upon the enemy, who for want of shot, confusedly retired to
the main body, which thinking the day had been lost, turned their backs and
fled, the chase was followed almost five miles, diverse men of quality were
slain, besides ten thousand commons soldiers, and a thousand taken prisoners.

The Protector upon his return, calls a Parliament at London, in which all
Paul's in London, which caused great stirs, chiefly in Devonshire and Cornwall,
where one of the Commissioners were stabbed, and a great insurrection against
the King is hatched; ten thousand take Arms, and besiege Exeter, which was in
such distress, that the Townsmen fed upon bran and horseflesh, for this
loyalty the Cities Charters were confirmed, their liberties enlarged, and the
Manor of Exilend bestowed on them; the Rebels mean while spoil the Country, of
which at last growing weary, and not finding the aid they looked Henry the 8.
be used. The King upon this sends them a general pardon, blaming them for their
presumption and folly, showing them that their demands were not to be granted,
and that if they did not submit, they should feel the dint of his sword;
notwithstanding all this, they persist in their rebellion till Sir John Russel,
Lord Privy Seal, was sent with some forces against them, with whom he
encounters Honiton; a cruel fight was maintained by the Cornish till their
hearts failing them, they began to give back and fly; the Royalists disorderly
fall to the spoil, which the Cornish perceiving, suddenly returned, and gave a
new onset, a cruel encounter followed, three hundred Rebels are killed, and the
rest take to their heels.

After this, the Royalists being now a thousand strong, by the addition of an
Italian-band intended against Scotland under the Lord Gray of Milton; the Lord
Russel marches over the Downs to the relief of Exeter; the Rebels encounter
with him again, and are again defeated, with the loss of most of their lives;
the rest got into the Town of S. Mary Clift, who were aided presently with
multitudes of people, carrying into the field the Crucifix under a Canopy;
another battle is fought wherein the Rebels are utterly defeated and slain,
their chief Captains are taken and executed by Marshal-law; Boyen the Mayor of
Bodmin in Cornwall was commanded by the Provost-marshal to set up a pair of
Gallows; on which he was immediately 1549.
commotion was in Norfolk raised by John Flowerdew, and Robert Ket, casting
down one another fences and hedges: At last this Ket is made Captain of this
commotion, to him multitudes flock, the High-Sheriffe made Proclamation for
them to depart; but had not his horse been the swifter, he had been killed by
them; they make Monshold the place of their Rendezvous, Roger Woodhouse for his
kindness in bringing them two carts laden with beer and victuals, loses both
his horses and apparel, and almost his life, having his body abused and cast
in prison; to these the scum both of Norfolk and Suffolk assembled, who by
ringing of bells, and firing of Beacons set all in an uproar, they forced
diverse good subjects to dance after their pipe; in the Kings name they gave out
warrants to apprehend and imprison whom they pleased, their number now was
increased to sixteen thousand; Ket the Tanner sits as supreme Judge in an old
Tree, which

These men were now so high, that they scorned the Kings pardon, which by an
Herald at Arms was proclaimed to them; they batter the walls of Norwich, and
enter into it, seizing upon all the provision and munitions, imprisoning the
Mayor and other Citizens; thither Par Marquess of Northampton is sent by the
King with one thousand five hundred horse, to whom presently the Magistrates
surrendered the Cities Sword, and so he enters; the Rebels that same night
assaulted it with the loss of three hundred of them, the next day they enter
the Town and began a bloody fight, in which the Lord Sheffeild was cruelly
slain, having fallen from his horse, and the Marquess forced to forsake the
City; Sir Thomas Cornwallis is taken prisoner, and at last the Town is
ransacked and set on fire by the Rebels: After this the Lord Dudley is made
General against them, who showing himself upon the Plain before Norwich, sent
again the Kings pardon, which is rejected, wherefore he plants his Ordnance
against Saint Stevens Gate, which being forced open, the Earl of Warwick
enters, and in the Market place, with small resistance, executes threescore
Rebels by Marshal-law; but they seized on the Earls powder and shot, and
conveyed it to their Camp, they manned the streets and kill many Monshold,
against which place Warwick planted his Ordnance, but the Rebels fell with such
violence upon his forces, that they gave back, leaving the Artillery to the
Rebels.

The Earl being over-mastered, was advised by some to be gone, but he drawing
his sword, caused his friends to do the like, who with a mutual kiss confirmed
their courage and resolutions; then they stop all provisions from the Rebels,
but they arose thence and entrenched themselves in the valley called
Dussindale, upon a vain prophecy that [Hob, Dick, and Hick] that is, the
Rusticks with their clubs should fill that valley with dead bodies; the next
day the Lord General prepares to fight, having received a supply of one
thousand and four hundred Lances, but first sends a pardon which they reject
again; the Rebels place all their prisoners coupled in irons in the fore-rank
of their Army, and with a shot struck the Kings Standard Bearer in the thigh,
whereupon the Earl discharges his whole Artillery upon them, and so opened
their battle that most of the captive Gentlemen escaped; the Royalists Ket; the
chase continued three miles, with the slaughter of three thousand five hundred
Rebels, some resolute men staid to keep the Ordnance, to whom the General
proffers a pardon, which they refuse, choosing rather to die like men then to be
hanged up like dogs, as was intended; the General sends again that he would
come in person and confirm the pardon if they made any doubt thereof, which he
did accordingly, and so they flung down their Arms and prayed for the King.

Captain Ket the next day hid himself in a barn, and was betrayed by two of his
servants, then with two hundred horse was conveyed to Norwich, nine William Ket
the younger brother was hanged upon an high steeple, and Robert Ket the
Arch-rebel in chains upon the Castle of Norwich; the Townsmen solemnised yearly
the day of their delivery. The North also was not a little troubled about
Religion, diverse parts of Yorkshire standing up for the old Faith, the flame
brake out first at Seimer in the North Riding, the Beacons are fired, and
multitudes flock together, who first murdered White a Gentleman, with some
others, whose naked body they left upon the Would before Seimer, then they
carried many prisoners away, and being now increased to three thousand began to
grow formidable; but when the Kings pardon came, Ombler a Dale a Parish-clerk,
the chief Ringleaders, were forsaken by the multitude, and shortly after with
some others were executed at York.

Not only is the Country disquieted, but the Court also by the Kings two
uncles Queen Ianes brothers, to wit, Edward Duke of Sommerset the elder, and
Protector of the Kings person and Kingdom; and Thomas Lord Seymour the
younger, Admiral, who married Katherine Par King Henry's last wife: she
striving for precedencie with the Protectors Duchess, raised such a Tragedy,
that Lord Thomas is accused, attainted and condemned of Treason, and under his
brothers handwriting, beheaded on the Tower Hill for purposing Henry the 3.
for which they lost their privileges, therefore he advises them to petition
the King that complaints may be heard against the Protector; whereupon the King
is sent to, from him; for erecting a Court of Requests in his own house; for
selling of Offices, Bishoprics and some of the Kings lands without consent;
for commanding multiplication by Alonmistry, to the abuse of the Kings Coin;
for setting forth Proclamations against enclosures, causing thereby diverse
insurrections; for giving Commissions against law, concerning Commons,
Highwayes, and Cottages; for not suppressing the Rebels, and for encouraging
diverse of them; and for setting forth Proclamations in favor of them; for
neglecting the Forts of New Haven and Blackness; for sowing discord among the
Lords, and incensing the king against them; and lastly, for accusing the Lords
of high treason, because they consulted how to have these abuses reformed.

The protector notwithstanding these accusations, is by the king set at
liberty, though not restored to his former dignity, and so he remained
untouched two years: Mean while the Lord Gray was not idle in Scotland, but
took in some forts; before him one Newton and Hamilton fought a duel, accusing
each other for some opprobrious words uttered against king Edward, Hamilton is
slain, and Newton rewarded with a gold Chain and the Lord Grey's Gown: But not
long after, the English by the Scots and French are totally driven out of
Scotland, and all the Forts retaken by them. The French also attempt to
surprise Bulloignebergh, but were prevented by one Carar an English soldier,
Iersey and Gernsey, but were repulsed with the loss of one thousand of their
men, which made them ashamed to divulge this expedition. But not long after,
the French obtain by surrender, Hamiltonne, Blackness, Balloignebergh, and
Bulloigne it self. About this time the sweating sickness 1550.
raged fiercely in England, and on the English only beyond seas, which made
them to be shunned in all places.

The Duke of Sommerset is now again apprehended, after he had married his
eldest son the Lord Lisle to the Earl of Warwicks daughter, which Earl had
Sommersets means is made Duke of Northumberland; but is accused notwithstanding
by Warwick and the other Counselors, for wearing a coat of defense under his
garment at the Counsel-Table, as if he intended the death of some Counselor;
wherefore he is attached, 1551.
and sent to the Tower, with the Lord Gray of Milton and some others; and the
next day the Duchess of Sommerset is committed, all upon suspicion of Treason:
The Duke was indicted of treason and felony; but having put himself upon his
Peers, is cleared of the treason, but not of the felony; for which he is
condemned to die; therefore is sent back to the Tower, where he kept a sad
Christmasse: the 22 of February after, he was brought to the Anthony Browns
riding toward the Scaffold; the people thinking a Pardon had been come, for
which they were glad; but the Duke desired them to be quiet, that he might die
without trouble; and praying for the prosperity of the King and his Council,
laid down his head to the Axe.

The king takes the Dukes death so much to heart, that he fell into a
Consumption: Dudley Northumberlands fourth son, and Jane, Suffolks eldest
daughter; the other was betwixt Herbert, Pembroks heir, and Catherine,
Suffolks youngest daughter; the third between Hastings, Huntingtons heir, and
Catherine, Northumberlands youngest daughter. Jane the eldest daughter of
Suffolk was thought fittest for the Crown, to whom king Edward left it by his
Will, being persuaded thereto by those who would have disinherited Mary and
Elizabeth. This was subscribed by the Kings Council, the Lords, the Bishops,
and Judges; only Sir James Hales Justice of the Common Pleas would not
subscribe; shortly upon this the king died. He was a Prince, though young, yet
of great hopes and parts; much inclined to mercy, so that he could hardly be
induced to set his hand to the Warrant of Joan Butchers execution, a notable
Heretic, till he was urged thereto by Cranmer his Godfather, and Archbishop
of Canterbury; He was very zealous for the Protestant Religion, so that he
could not be moved by Charles the Emperor, to give way that the Lady Mary
should have Mass said in her house, but wept Ridley preached before him,
concerning mercy to be showed by rich men to the poor, he was so touched in
conscience, that he conferred after dinner with the Doctor of some way, whereby
he might do most good to the poor; the Doctor advises him to take directions
from London: The king upon this writes to the Lord Major about this business,
and sends his letter by Bishop Ridley, who having conferred with the Major and
his Brethren, returns to the King with the Cities advice: Hereupon, he gives to
them St. Bartholmews Hospital by Smithfield, and the Gray-Friers Church near to
it, with all its revenews; also his Bridewell (new built by king Henry for the
reception of the Emperor) to be a House of Correction for idle and dissolute
persons: He gave also the Hospital of Saint Thomas in Southwark, with seven
hundred Marks by year out of the rents of the Hospital of Saint John Baptist or
the Savoy, with bedding and other furniture; other charitable works he also
did, and then 1553.
died at Greenwich the seventeenth year of his Age, and the seventh year of his
Reign, and lies buried at Westminster, near Henry the seventh.

To him succeeded his sister Queen Mary; but the Statesmen concealed his death
two days, intending Jane should succeed, as being more firm to Protestantisme
then Mary; for this cause the Counsel sends for the Major of London, Jane: But
the Lady Mary hearing of this news, writes to the Lords, accusing them for
concealing her brothers death; for neglecting her who was next heir to the
Crown, ordained by act of Parliament, and her fathers testament; therefore
wills them to Proclaim her Queen in London, and other towns: To these letters
the Lords made answer, that according to the last Kings Will, Jane daughter to
Henry Duke of Suffolk should succeed to the Crown; they also put her in mind
of her mothers Divorce, and her own illegitimation; therefore they wish her to
desist from any such claim: this letter was subscribed, by the Archbishop, the
Chancellor, and diverse Lords. The Lady Mary upon Freminsham Castle, to whom
the Suffolk-men resorted first, hoping she would establish Protestantisme: The
Lords at London Proclaim the kings death, and Queen Jane his successor by his
last Will; but at Norwich Queen Mary is proclaimed, and assisted by the Earls
of Sussex, Bath, and Oxford, with the Lord Wentworth, and diverse others: To
encounter these, Queen Iane's father is appointed with an army to repair into
Norfolk, which so grieved Queen Jane, that with tears she got him to stay; then
was the Duke of Northumberland assigned Lord Lieutenant for Queen Jane, whom
his son had married; he fearing the worst, wished the Lords to be careful of
what they went about, and so with six hundred men he marches London through
Shoreditch, the people showing no sign of joy at all, which the Duke observed.

Mean while the Lord Windsore with others, raise the Commons of
Buckingham-shire, and proclaim Queen Mary; the like is done in Oxfordshire,
and Northamptonshire; all these made forward toward Norfolk: besides six tall
ships, appointed to have taken the Lady Mary if she had fled, being driven by
storms into Yarmouth haven, revolted to Queen Mary; at the report of this, the
Lords in the Tower began to be afraid, and their Tenants to deny them any aid;
Northumberland still solicited the Lords for more assistance, but little came;
Dr. Ridly Bishop of London by command maintains Queen Ianes cause in his sermon
at Paul's Cross, but could not work upon the people; which the Lords
perceiving, fell off from the Duke then at Bury, and proclaimed Queen Mary in
London: the Duke willing to follow the stream, returns to Cambridge, where
being forsaken by most of his soldiers; he proclaims her Queen himself without
Trumpet or Herald, and in sign of joy threw up his Cap: yet all were pardoned
by her, except this Duke and Sir John Gates Arundel, and thence was conveyed
with his three sons, the Earl of Huntington and diverse others to the Tower,
where also the Lady Jane and her husband Dudly were imprisoned.

At the Queens entrance into the Tower, Thomas Duke of Norfolk was released,
who had lain there from the last of Henry the eighth; so was Edward Lord
Courtney, whom she makes Earl of Devon-shire, Tunstall Bishop of Durham, and
Gardener of Winchester are released also; Doctor Ridly and some other
Protestant Bishops are deposed, Ridly, and Cranmer Archbishop, are sent to the
Tower; so constantly devoted she was to the Catholic Religion, that her Edward
could never work upon her; nor any worldly respects alter her resolution: The
Duke of Northumberland upon the Scaffold renounces 1554.
the Protestant Faith, and exhorts the people to the Catholic Religion; yet he
was beheaded with Sir John Gates and Sir Thomas Palmer. The Queen is crowned at
Westminster by Gardener Bishop of Winchester; the Lady Jane with her husband
are condemned in Guild Hall; she was pitied, because she was in a manner
forced to accept the title of Queen; therefore she had the liberty of the
Tower, and had been pardoned, but that her father the Duke of Suffolk went
about to hinder the Queens marriage, with king Philip of Spain; and to this
purpose instigates Leichestershire and Warwickshire against the Huntington is
sent who takes Coventry, and afterward the Duke, whom his own servant betrayed,
and his brother John Lord Gray; the other brother Lord Thomas escaped, but was
retaken, and all three sent to the Tower: Lord Gilford Dudley is first
beheaded, whose bleeding body was in the sight of his sad Lady brought into the
Tower Chapel; who was the next that suffered, and was much lamented for her
innocence: Judge Margan that condemned her, fell mad eleven days after the
Duke of Suffolk was executed on the Tower Hill, and about two months after his
brother Lord Thomas Gray in the same place suffered.

Gardener, now Lord Chancellor, sets forth highly the match with Spain, to
Thomas Wyatt of Kent, who at Maidstone published a Proclamation against the
Queens match; from thence he goes to Rochester, and breaks down the Bridge;
diverse sided with Wyatt and many in Kent were against him, so that the Country
is much divided. The Duke of Norfolk is sent to Gravesend with five hundred
Londoners to maintain the Queens cause: when the two adverse factions met, a
cruel skirmish ensued; but at length the Queens party prevailed, and the other
fled; but shortly after, the Duke by his own treacherous party was so betrayed,
that he was forced to fly, and leave behind him to Wyatt eight brass pieces
of Ordnance; Wyatt assaileth Cowling-Castle, but was resisted by the Lord
Cobham: Shortly after, he had a Parley at Dartford with Sir Edward Hastings,
Master of the Horse, and Sir Thomas Cornwallis, who demand of him the cause of
this Rebellion; he answers, that he feared the Land would be overrun by
strangers: Then they desire him to come and communicate the cause before the
Queen, which he refused except he might have the custody of the Tower, and the
Queen in it, with power to place and displace the Queens Counselors; to which
Hastings replied, That Wyat and twenty thousand more should die, before he
should have his traitorous demands granted; so they parted, and Wyat
approaches with his forces toward London, at which both the Court and City
were afraid, who all take Arms, even the Lawyers in Westminster pleaded in
harness. The Spanish Ambassadors steal away by water.

Mean while good news came, that the seditious Carews and Gibs in Cornwall were
defeated and fled; the Queen comes in state to Guild Hall, where before the
Mayor, Aldermen, and chief Citizens, she made a speech, declaring her Wyats
demands, making her marriage a cloak for his pretended purposes against her
person and dignity, she also shows her true love to them, and that she will not
marry but by their consent, and for their good, therefore she wishes them to
be as careful of her honor and safety, as she will be of their weal and
happiness; the Queen having said, returns to the Court, and makes Herbert Earl
of Pembroke her Field-General, and proffers a hundred pound land by the year to
him that shall bring Wyat dead or alive, who understanding all passages
marches toward London with four thousand men, at whom the White-tower shot but
did no hurt; he enters Southwark peaceably, the people there joining with
Winchester house is rifled contrary to his Proclamation.

Wyat having got Southwark, comes to the Bridge, but finding the gate shut, he
planteth his Ordnance against it; the Lord Mayor cuts down the drawbridge, and
fortifies the City every where, causing the Ordnance in the Tower to be
levelled against the Bridge-foot: much Artillery is planted against Southwark,
which made the inhabitants with tears to beseech Wyat to be gone, who
presently marched to Kingston upon Thames, where finding the bridge broken
down, he quickly again repairs it, and so marches to Branford; the Queens Army
takes S. James fields; Wyat marches toward Charing-crosse, the Ordnance
playing upon each other, but to little purpose; the Lord Chamberlain at
Charing-crosse made some resistance, but Wyat, who in the interim hasteneth to
Ludgate, but could not there have any admittance; some of his straglers that
had taken into Westminster, coming before the Court-gates, shot their arrows
into the garden and into the windows, but no hurt was done: At Charing-crosse
as they were going to join with Wyat, they are encountered by the Captain of the
guard and defeated, twenty of them being slain; Wyat returns discontented from
Ludgate, and is staid at Templebar by some of the Queens horse, some bickering
there was, but upon the Wyat submits to the Queens mercy, who with Cobham and
some others are carried to the Court, and thence to the Tower; in London 50
were hanged for Wyats conspiracy, and 400 more led through the City to
Westminster with halters about their necks, who were all pardoned by the Queen;
Wyat having acknowledged his offense upon the Scaffold, and exhorted the people
to take heed they rise not against the higher powers, submits his neck to the
stroke of the Axe.

In Kent diverse persons were executed for this rebellion; the Lord Courtney and
Lady Elizabeth the Queeens sister are suspected as aiders unto Wyat, and
therefore are sent to the Tower; the Lady Elizabeth being sick at Ashridge, is
Gardener and nine more of the Council, that she was privy to Wyats conspiracy,
and the stirs in the West, all which she constantly denied; then they told her
she must go to the Tower, at which she was much troubled, desiring the Lords
that they would mediate for her; but about an hour after her attendants are
discharged, except her Gentleman Usher, three Gentlewomen, and two Grooms of
his chamber, and withal a strict guard is set over her; the next day she is
commanded to the Tower, and her Barge was ready for her; she desires to stay
till the next tide, which was denied her, then she entreats so much time as to
write a letter to the Queen, one of the two Lords that came to her would not
yield to her request, but the Earl of Sussex granted it, and promised to
deliver it with his own hand to the Queen; in the interim the tide was spent,
and they durst not trust her to the next tide, which fell out in the night, for
fear she might be forcibly taken from the guard; therefore the next day being
Palmsunday, and the Londoners then all at Church, she is conveyed to her Barge,
casting her

When she entered the Tower, she rested her self a while upon a cold stone in
the rain, and then was put into a room which was locked and bolted upon her, so
with her family she went to prayer; the Lords would have had her been a close
prisoner, but the Lord Sussex would not yield to it; then after two days it
was commanded she should have Mass in her lodgings: Winchester with James
Croft a prisoner, and of her removing from Ashridge to Dunnington-Castle, and
of such other frivolous matters, at which the Lord of Arundel was offended that
she should be vexed thus causelessely: growing sickly in her close prison for
want of air, liberty was given her to walk in the Queens lodgings, and in the
garden, all prisoners being inhibited to look that way whilst she was there;
she took delight in a little boy that brought her flowers every day, but upon
suspicion the boy might convey letters between her and the Lord Courtney, he
was kept from her; some of her enemies had got a warrant to be signed for her
execution, at which Mr. Bridges the Henry Bennifield was placed in his room;
she was not long after removed from the Tower to Richmond, where upon the
removal of her servants, and placing of soldiers about her, she thought she
should have died that night, but the Lord Tame who then attended her, assured
her of the contrary.

From Richmond she is conveyed to Woodstock; the people who wished her well,
not being suffered to salute or pray for her; some were put in the stocks for
ringing the bells, hoping she had been delivered: when she was at Woodstock, it
was suspected that some Ruffians had been sent to murder her, but they could
not have any access to her; one night (whether accidentally or purposely it
was not known) her lodgings took fire, to the great endangering of her person;
so comfortless was her life to her, that one day seeing a maid milking her
kine in the Park, she wished that her self was a milk-maid.

Queen Mary shortly after her Coronation called a Parliament at Westminster,
and a Convocation in S. Paul's Church, where she commanded a disputation 1553.
to be had of some controverted points of Religion; for six days disputations
were had, but to no purpose, wherefore she by Bonner dissolves the Assembly;
Cranmer, Ridly and Latimer, sometime Bishops, were sent to Oxford to dispute
upon the same points, but these three at the end of the disputation are
condemned to die, and were burned as heretics: at London a Rainbow inversed,
and two Suns at once were seen, which were held bad presages of the marriage
with Spain, much disliked by the people; but the queen gave order that London
and other places should be informed of the benefits which would accrue to this
Kingdom by that match; the Earl of Bedford and the Lord Fitz-waters were sent
into Spain to conduct King Philip, the Lord Admiral with eight and twenty ships
secured the seas, Philip with a Navy of 150. sail arrived in England, and lands
in Southampton, he was the first of the fleet that landed, all the way as he
went he bare his naked sword in his hand; but before he went to his lodging, he
betook himself to his devotions in Holy-Roods Church, the like he did at
Winchester; the Earl of Arundel Steward of the Queens house presents him with
the Garter, and the Mayor with the keys of Southampton; the Queen meets him at
Winchester, where these Articles were agreed on: 1. That Philip should be
styled King of England during the Matrimony, Mary should be Queen of the
dominions of Spain. 3. That her dowry should be yearly sixty thousand pounds
Flemish. 4. That their issue male or female should succeed according to the
Laws. 5. That if Charles the Infant of Spain died issuelesse, then the eldest
son of this Matrimony should succeed in all the dominions of Charles the
Emperor. 6. That the dominions of the Low Countries and Burgundy should be
excluded from the said Charles his issue if they remained, and should be
enjoyed by the eldest born of this marriage, without further claim to any other
dominions of Spain. 7. That the eldest female of this marriage, for want of
male, should possess these dominions, provided she marry a Nobleman either of
Belgium or of England. 8. That the eldest daughter of King Philip and queen
Mary should succeed to the Realms of England, Spain and Belgium. 9. That these
several dominions be governed by their Natives. 10. That a firm peace be
concluded betwixt these Nations for ever.

Besides these generals, the King articles, That he will bestow no English
preferments on strangers, That his Court shall be replenished with natives of
the land; That he shall not violate any privileges of England; That he shall
not carry the Queen out of her Kingdom without her consent, nor her children,
but by the assent of the Lords; That if he die issuelesse, the succession shall
come to the nex heir; That he suffer not to be carried away the Jewels of the
Crown, neither guns, nor any furniture of war; And lastly, That he England with
the wars of his father, and the French King. 1554.
Things thus ordered, the marriage is solemnized at Winchester on S. Iamses
day, where Caesar's Ambassadors pronounced, That their Master in consideration
of this marriage had given to his son Philip the Kingdoms of Naples and
Jerusalem; whereupon their titles were there solemnly proclaimed; then they
went from the Church, having two swords carried before them. So discontented
were some Protestants at this match, and advancement of the Roman faith, that
one Bourn preaching at Pauls-crosse, had a dagger thrown at him, which caused
the Cross the next Sunday to be guarded by the Queens Pendleton had a gun shot
at him; A maid was taught to speak in a wall, as if it had been an Angel,
against the Queen, the Prince of Spain, and the Mass; a Cat was hanged on a
gallows in Cheap, her head shorn, and wearing a vesture like a Cope, and many
other abuses were offered, which made the Queen and Bishops ever after jealous
of the Londoners.

Queen Mary, to be better directed in matters of Religion, sends for her
kinsman Cardinal Pool, the son of Margaret Countess of Salisbury, the only
daughter of George Duke of Clarence, King Edward the 4. second brother, he had
been bred in Oxford, and made Dean of Exeter by K. Henry, at Padua he studied
seven years, where understanding the King had cast off the Pope, refused to
return into England, wherefore he is proclaimed Traitor and his Denary taken
from him, to recompense which loss, the Pope made him a Cardinal; he did
solicit foreign Princes against King Henry, for which he not being able to be
revenged on Pool, wracks his anger on his mother, being now eighty years old,
whom he caused to lose her head; then he was made Legate of Viterbion, and is
appointed by Pope Paul the third to be one of his Vicegerents in the Council of
Trent; he was afterward chosen Pope, but being accused by Cardinal Caraffa, as
a favourer of Protestants, he cleared himself, and was chosen again; but he not
being nimble enough to strike the Iron while it was hot, the Cardinal de Monte,
afterward Julius the third, steps between him and the Papal-chaire, who caused
Caraffa to ask Poole forgiveness; then Poole retires to Verona, where in the
Monastery of Saint Bennet, of which order he was both Professor and Patron, he
resides a while.

Shortly after this, Queen Mary sends for him into England, for she had been
bred under the Countess his mother, and he was also of the blood royal, which
put him in some hopes he might change his Hat for a Crown: But Caesar Mary.
Caraffa being now Pope, sends Friar Peto to discharge Poole of his Legative
power, which much incensed the Queen; so that the forbids Peto to enter the
land, till the Pope and Poole were reconciled: The queen caused all the acts
made by king Henry against Poole to be repealed, and the house of Parliament
upon their petition to him is absolved, and received again into the bosom of
the Church: All the ancient Ceremonies of the Church are restored again, and
all Church Livings that had been assumed to the Crown; The queen affirming,
that she preferred her souls happiness to ten kingdoms.

Though queen Mary was pious and zealous in her Religion, yet many barbarous
cruelties were by her Officers exercised on Protestants, her power in this case
being much abused; so that five Bishops, one and twenty Divines, eight
Gentlemen, eighty four Artificers, besides many others, even women and
children, were cruelly put to death; many were forced to fly the land, amongst
whom was Catherine Duchess of Suffolk, who had married Richard Bartie
Esquire, these were persecuted by Bishop Gardener, because she had persecuted
him and other Papists in king Edwards days; she was forced to go disguised on
shipboard, with her young daughter, her husband being gone away before: she
suffered much by storms at sea, and more by want, persecution, Belgium and
Germany where she traveled; till she was relieved with her husband and child,
by Perusel a Minister in Wiesel: After this, they endured much more hardship,
till they got into Poland, where they staid till queen Mary's death.

Queen Mary being supposed to be with child, caused Te Deum to be sung, and
solemn prayers made for her safe delivery; in hope of which, Mid-wives,
Rockers, and all things else were provided. An act was made, that king Philip
should be Protector of her issue and realm; but yet king Philip had no great
confidence that his queen was with child, nor dust he trust the English, or
think that they could be kind to strangers, who were so cruel to their own
Paget and some others had consulted to cut off the Lady Elizabeth's head;
therefore in compassion to her, he never gave off, till he got the queen to set
her at liberty; so she is brought to Hampton Court, where after fourteen days
she was admitted into the queens chamber; there falling on her knee, she prayed
for her, and declared her loyalty to her Majesty, which the queen questioned,
and checked her for not acknowledging her offense; but she still pleaded for
her own innocence: seven days after the Lady was discharged of Benefield her
Jailour, her maids are sent to the Tower; and Gardener died shortly after.
About this time, one Fetherstone Edward 6. but being taken at Eltham in Kent,
he was brought to Hampton Court, where being found by his simple answers little
better then frantic, is sent to the Marshalsie, and from thence with a
paper-crown on his head to Westminster, and from thence whipped to Smith-field,
and then banished into the North: but the next year falling into the same
madness, is apprehended, condemned of treason and hanged at Tybur.

The time of Queen Mary's deliverance being come, it was given out that a
Prince was born, which caused great joy and triumph, both in London and
Antwerp; but all this came to nothing, for she was never with child: Hereupon
King Philip, in anger, went over the Seas, pretending to visit his father, and
to take possession of Belgium, where he staid one year and a half, to Queen
1555.
Mary's great grief; who met him on the way as he returned, and brought him
with great pomp through London. In his absence, some plotted to rob the Queens
Exchequer at Westminster, to raise war in the land; but the plot was
discovered, and the plotters executed. One Clebeck a Schoolmaster, read
publicly a traitorous Proclaimation against the Queen, persuading the people
Thomas Stafford dispersed slanderous books against the Queen, and by stealth
took the Castle of Scarborough, incensing the people against her; but he was
suppressed by Thomas Piercy Earl of Northumberland, and sent to London, where
he was beheaded. About this time, Charles Caesar called his son Philip into
Brussels, where he resigns to him all his dominions, counselling him to
entertain peace with the French, for the general good of Christendom; 1557.
a peace for five years was made, but held not long; for the Pope being then
besieged by Duke Alva at Rome, sends to the French for aid, who by the Guise
made his way open into Rome; but the French falling away for want of pay, the
Pope renounced his amity with France, and entertains it Spain. Queen Mary to
show her love both to the Pope and king Philip, falls out with France,
pretending diverse wrongs from thence; so she sends a Defiance unto King Henry
of France, and proclaims wars against him in London, contrary to her promise
and articles. King Philip passes over to Flanders, after whom the Queen sends
one thousand horse, four thousand foot, and two thousand pioniers under the
Earl of Pembroke as General, these joined with king Philip, whilst the Dukes
of Savoy and Brunswick, with some Lords, had invaded the French confines, and
besieged St. Quintins; which Montmorancy Constable of France came with great
forces to relieve; but he so miscarried, that he was hurt, and taken prisoner
with eight Knights of the order: Shortly Quintus is taken by king Philip and
the English.

Upon the taking of this town, the English grew secure, and negligent of
Calice, so that the Duke of Guise with great celerity approached the English
frontier, under color to victual Boloigne and Ard, he divided his Army into
two parts; the one he sends to Ricebank, whilst the other battered two forts
at once, which they wan in twelve hours space; Ricebank is also abandoned by
the English, and left to the Guise: then the Duke batters the walls of Calice
three days together, and made a great breach, He planted also fifteen double
Cannons against the Castle; they within finding themselves too weak, thought to
blow up the French with Gunpowder, as they entered, Ager Marshal of the Town,
his son and heir, and eighty English more. The Lord Wentworth, Deputy of the
Town, sent to the Castle for a parley, which was granted, and these Articles
agreed on. 1. That the Town with the Artillery, Victuals, and Munition should
be yielded freely to the French. 2. That the lives of the Inhabitants shall be
saved. 3. That the Deputy with fifty others remain prisoners till they pay
their ransom.

The English were shut up in two Churches, where they remain a whole day and
night without meat or drink. The Duke commanded that all their plate, Edward 3.
eleven months siege, and had been possessed by the English two hundred and
eleven years, fifty prisoners are sent away into France. King Philip being
solicited by Queen Mary to recover this lost honor, makes an attempt upon
Breast, and takes Thermes the new Captain of Calice prisoner; yet Calice could
not be regained, which so grieved Queen Mary, that she said, The loss of
Calice was written in her heart, and might be therein read when her body should
be opened. The loss of this Town, and long absence of king Philip, increased
her melancholy, which ended in a fever that was her death, at 1558.
S. James; she reigned 5 years, 4 months, and 11 days, and lived 42 years and
9 months. Cardinal Poole died the same day with Queen Mary.

CHAP. XXXII.
The English History, interwoven with the History of Spain, France, Ireland,
and Netherlands, under Queen Elizabeth, from 1558. till 1602.

QUeen Elizabeth succeeded, being twenty four years old. She presently 1558.
orders that the Liturgy be said in English. As she was passing through Cheap
in her Chariot, the Bible was presented to her, which she took Westminster, she
is crowned by the Bishop of Carlisle, the Sea of Canterbury being vacant. In
her first Parliament, the title of Supremacy, with the Tenths, First Fruits,
and Benefices are restored to the Crown; Queen Mary's Acts are repealed in
favor of Catholics. A Conference was held at Westminster concerning the
English Service Book, the changing of Ceremonies, and the Mass; but this
Conference came to nothing. She was petitioned by her Parliament to marry; but
she told them, that she meant to reign, live, and die a Virgin.

A peace being on foot between France and Spain, the Queen interposeth for
England, and demands restitution of Calice, being lost not in the quarrel of
England, but of king Philip, against the will of the English Council. It was
alleged, that great sums of money for arrearages were due to the English from
the French king, all which the Queen was willing to remit, conditionally that
Calice may be restored, without which restitution no peace could be concluded
between England and France; it was at length agreed, that Calice should remain
French for eight years, and then return to the English, upon forfeiture of five
hundred thousand Crowns, but neither the one nor the other were ever performed.
The Lord Wentworth Deputy of Calice, was arraigned at Westminster Poole
deceased, Porker is made Archbishop of Canterbury: the Monasteries are again
suppressed, and Images abolished: then care is taken for refining the Coin, and
for furnishing the kingdom with munition, armor, and powder. The French king,
in favor of his son the Dolphin, and Queen Mary of Scotland, caused their
right to the Crown of England to be proclaimed at Paris, commanding England to
be put among their Titles, and the Arms thereof to be impaled with Scotland and
France, in their Seals, Plate, and Tapistry: but afterward upon Articles of
Accord between England, Scotland and France, it was agreed, that the Arms and
Titles of England and Ireland should not thenceforth be used by the French
king, nor his Queen of Scotland.

Gustavus King of Sweden proposes a Match between his eldest Son Ericus and
Queen Elizabeth, which suit afterward was renewed by Ericus himself being
King, but is both times rejected by Queen Elizabeth. Who sends aid first into
Scotland for supporting of the Protestant religion, then into France 1560.
for the same purpose: her Forces are received into New Haven, Roan and Deep,
under the command of Ambrose Dudley Earl of Warwick, who is assisted by some
Scots forces from Deep: but New Haven, after eleven months possession, 1562.
was lost again by the English, for want of water, which the enemy had cut off,
and by reason of the Plague which raged there, and afterward in England
receiving infection from thence. About this time fell out the Massacre at
Paris, in which the Admiral was barbarously murdered, mangled and abused,
besides many thousands of men, women and children.

About the same time Ireland rebels under Shan or John O-Neal, who claimed an
hereditary right to the Province of Ulster, as the O-Neals had formerly
Ireland; for when Edward Bruce named himself king of Ireland, Donald O-Neal
styled himself king of Ulster and heir of Ireland; but the English quashed his
title, till in the wars between York and Lancaster, they forsook Ulster. At
this time Henry O-Neale raised his family, by marrying the daughter of Thomas
Earl of Kildare, from whom issued Con O-Neal, surnamed Bacco from his halting,
who cursed his posterity, if they learned the English tongue, sowed wheat, or
built houses. But king Henry the 8. so crushed Kildare, that he submitted, and
was content to hold his revenues in fee of the King, with the title of Earl of
Tiron or Tir-Oen to him, and to Matthew his false reputed son, and to their
lawful heirs. Shan O-Neale upon this murders Matthew, and Con Bacco out of
his house and all his possessions, so that he died for want and grief. Shan
being then chosen, and inaugured by an old shoe cast over his head, seized upon
his fathers estate, and to secure himself, he murdered Brian Matthews eldest
son, the other two Hugh and Con-mack escaped: so being seated in Ulster, there
he plays the tyrant, declaring that he was the son and heir of Con O-Neal
lawfully begotten, and that Matthew his supposed brother was a Black-smiths
son, and was obtruded upon Con by his Concubine the said Smiths wife; he pleads
also the Irish law Tanistry, whereby a man at his full years is to be preferred
before a boy, and an uncle before a nephew. So bearing himself as absolute king
of Ulster, he overthrew O-Raily in the field, O-Donel prisoner with his wife
and children, and committed adultery with her.

This Shan hearing of the Lord Deputies preparations against him, went over
into England, and humbly submits himself to Queen Elizabeth, who sends him back
upon promises of allegiance, and for a while he carried himself loyal and
civilly; but afterward fell off again, fired Armach, besieged Dundalk, and
spoiled the Country. Against him Sir Henry Sidney then Deputy of Ireland came
with seven Companies of foot and a Troop of horse; O-Neal in a pitched field is
overthrown, and in diverse other skirmishes so foiled, that he purposes with an
halter about his neck to submit himself to the Deputy: but his Secretary 1565.
advises him to try his fortune once more by the sword, in making amity with
the wild Scots then in Claneboy; this counsel he takes, and repairs with
O-Donels wife his Adulteresse-concubine to the Scots camp, where being at first
welcomed and entertained, was afterward hacked in pieces by Mac Gillespic and
Alexander Oge two Scots Captains, because Shan had killed heretofore this
Alexanders brother; a few of Shans followers escaped by flight; and so Ulster
is freed from its oppression under O-Neal.

The eight years being expired for restitution of Calice to the English, Sir
Thomas Smith is sent with Sir Henry Norris, to demand the Town and Forts about
1567.
it, according to agreement; but the Towns-governors will not be spoken
Charles, who told them, That none had right to Calice but himself; the
Queen Mother also added, That the English by invading Scotland and New Haven,
had forfeited Calice: Sir Thomas replies, That the French had lost Calice by
sending forces into Scotland, and soliciting the Scots Lords to invade
England, which they refused to do, as being against their late treaty and
league with Queen Elizabeth; the French also had armed Normandy and Britany,
and hired diverse German forces against England, and did bear also the Arms of
England: The Queen Mother replied, that the English did bear the Arms of
France; but however she affirms, that what the King of Scotland did in his
Wives right, should not be imputed to King Charles her son. Then the King willed
the Ambassadors to absent themselves a while, till he had talked with his
Council; and so after an hour they were sent for again, and told, That five
thousand French only were sent into Scotland to suppress the rebellion of the
Protestant Lords there, and not to invade England, whereas Queen Elizabeth had
sent fifteen thousand thither to assist the Rebels: Sir Thomas answers, That
the Queen hearing of such great preparations, was necessitated to send great
aid both by sea and land, not to assist Rebels, France also tells him, that
Calice stood upon French, not English ground; and as the English had right to
it by the fortune of war, so now the French have the same, besides that they
enjoyed it long before the English took it, who had also once possessed and
enjoyed Aquitain and other places, which long since they have lost; the English
claim two hundred years possession, the French above five hundred years; if
prescription then could stand among Princes as among private men, the French
can prescribe a far longer time then the English: As for king Francis the 2. he
did not therefore intend to invade England, because the English thought so, for
suspicions and thoughts are no France, upon a fair pretense of keeping the
Towns for the Kings use, but she kept New Haven as a pledge for Calice, whereby
she has lost her right to Calice: withal he shows, that God having divided
England from France by the sea, the English should content themselves within
their own confines: therefore he wishes them to entertain peace with France,
which will do them more good then the gaining of Calice. To this Sir Thomas
answers, That the English made no invasion upon France, but were invited
thither by diverse of the Nobility and others then in danger; nor when they were
landed did they use any hostility, or take an hen or egg but what they paid
for; and if that aid had not come from England; France had been ruined: As for
the Queens keeping of New Haven, she had reason so to do, having been at so
great charge and cost; she deserved to have some reason offered her in her
right to Calice. But (says the Constable) so much provision of victuals, men
and ammunition, and so many ships, could not be for New Haven alone; therefore
the Queen must have had further designs: No (says Sir Thomas) it was only
out of providence that this provision was had, because sea and wind do not
serve at all times. At last after much debate, both the King and Queen Mother,
and all the Council told him plainly, that they would entertain amity with the
English Queen, but France would not part any more with Calice.

At the same time the troubles of Scotland were so great, that the King was
1569.
shamefully murdered, and the Queen banished; who setting sail for France, was
by contrary winds driven into Cumberland. Queen Elizabeth solliciteth the Scots
on her behalf, but they could not be induced to admit her again, so she is
forced to stay in England. Mean while the Earls of Northumberland and
Westmorland with some others, pretending Religion, fly out into Rebellion,
intending to surprise the Earl of Sussex Lieutenant of the North; but they
were prevented, and the Queen had notice of their intents, wherefore she sends
for Northumberland to the Court, who out of fear removed from his Castle of
Topcliffe in Yorkshire, and goes to Bransp^th, where meeting with the Earl
of Westmorland, they command the Country to take arms, pretending it was to aid
the Queen, and to restore the old Religion; which if they should neglect,
foreign Princes would do it, to the danger of the whole kingdom. From thence
they go to Durham, where they tore the Bible; at Rippon they heard Mass;
thence they went to Bramham-Moore, where they mustered sixteen hundred horse
and four thousand foot; then they fall upon Barnards Castle, which in eleven
days they took; they grew so high, that in their letters they called the
queen, Elizabeth the late and pretended queen: Upon this they are proclaimed
traitors; Carlile-Castle is kept against them by the Lord Scroop and Earl of
Cumberland. The Earl of Sussex Lieutenant of the North with an army follows the
enemy, who was both heartlesse and moneyless, the one hundred thousand crowns
failing them which the Pope promised. The chief heads of these Rebels finding
their inability to resist so great a power as was coming against them, resolve
to fly into Scotland to those Lords that stood out for the Roman religion,
which they did accordingly, and left their army Sussex, who surprised them
without resistance, so that at Durham and about in the country many were put to
death.

This execution made many desperate, who in revenge of their friends put to
death, gather head under Leonard Dacres; these near to Naworth fought
desperately with the Lord Hunsdon, who at last caused them to give back, and
1570.
Dacres to fly into Scotland; where Northumberland is taken by the Regent, and
sent into England, and beheaded at York, declaring the Popes supremacy, the
Queens heresy, and the kingdoms misery, being now in a schism. Westmerland
was shifted away into Flanders, where he died miserably of ulcers.

About this time, Nicholas Morton an Englishman, made Bishop by Pope Pius
Quintus, procures at Rome a Bull against queen Elizabeth, whereby she is
declared an Heretic, an usurper, and incapable of the Crown; therefore all her
subjects are absolved from their allegiance to her, and curses denounced
against such as should obey her: this Bull was hanged up at the Bishop of
Londons gate, and had many patrons and abettors, who came to untimely deaths;
among whom was Dr. Story a Civilian, who having escaped out of prison, got over
into Antwerp, where being employed by the Duke Alva to search all ships for
English-bibles, was caught by one Parker a Merchant, as he 1571.
was searching his ship, and carried over into England, where he was executed
at Tyburn. One Sommervel intended to murder the queen, but was prevented, 1573.
apprehended, imprisoned and condemned, but in the prison he strangled himself
to death. One hundred and twenty Jesuits were apprehended, fifty three of which
were banished, the rest executed, among whom was Edmund Campian; Robert Parsons
escaped. In Cornwall, Cutbert Main disswades the people from obeying the Queen;
In other places, Nelson and diverse others were employed to the same purpose:
Thompson brought holy-oyle to anoint the Priests, and Hemford a dispensation
from the Pope: Haidock was employed to find out the fittest landing-place for
strangers, and to prepare aides at home: John Pain with fifty more were
encouraged to kill the queen by a violent assault.

Francis Throgmorton was employed by Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador in London,
to collect the names of the English great-men who stood for the Catholic 1583.
cause; to whom was joined Charles Paget: abroad diverse were set on work, to
solicit the king of Spain to invade England. The Duke of Guise undertook to
be the leader, if Rome and Spain would bear the charges. Throgmorton delivers
to Mendoza his chard of the Havens of England, with a list of Catholic aiders;
Arundel in Sussex was held the fittest place for landing: but Throgmorton upon
suspicion is apprehended, and his study searched, where were found the list of
his Catholics, the Havens for landing, with pedigrees touching the English
Crown, and some libels against the Queen; but a casket Throgmorton confesses,
and suffers. William Parry for burglary was to die, but obtained pardon from
Q. Elizabeth; yet afterward he went about to take away her life, by pretending
that he would discover 1584.
the names of diverse who had plotted against her, but still his heart failed
him, when he came to speak with her. At last his treason was discovered by one
Mr. Nevil whom he thought to be sure on his side, which Treason he confessed
himself, and by his letter to the Lords of the Council seems to abhor it, and
craves pardon for it, but when he saw he was to be executed, he denied his
former confession. One Appletree (whether purposely or casually was not known)
discharged a bullet, and shot the water-man in the Barge where the Queen was,
within six foot of her seat, but she pardoned the offender. Henry Percy Earl of
Northumberland, being of Throgmortons conspiracy, was sent to the Tower, where
he murthereth himself by discharging a dag with three bullets under his left
pap.

There were besides these, diverse other Treasons hatched by the Earl of
Arundel, Sir John Perot Deputy of Ireland, Babington, Tichburn, Ballard, and
Tyburn; Babington, Charnock and Savage in Lincolns-Inne-fields. Cullen an Irish
Fencer undertook the death of the Queen for thirty pounds, he suffered at
Tyburn. Sanders wrote against the Queen, so did Creswel under the name of
Philopater, and Parsons under the title of Doleman concerning titles of the
Crown. Dr. Lopez the Portugal Physician for a rich jewel given him by a Spanish
Counselor, and a promise of fifty thousand crowns, undertakes to poison the
Queen by a potion; but the matter was not carried so close as was thought:
Lopez was appointed to give the Queen physic, purposely to try him, the
physic being brought, the Queen wishes him to minister to the Treasurer Cecil
who had more need of physic Cecil he is apprehended for a Traitor, the
ingredients of his potion are examined by other Doctors, and it was found
poison; so he is arraigned, and with his two consorts hanged at Tyburn.

After these, Yerk, Williams and others, were animated at Bruxels by Holt the
English Jesuit to kill the Queen, but the plot was discovered and prevented,
and the plotters hanged. The last that publicly attempted the Queens death was
Squire, first a Scrivener, and then a Purveyor in the Queens stable, he being
taken at sea (as he was sailing after Sir Francis Drake) by some Spaniards, is
set upon by Walepool an Englishman, to poison the pommel of the Queens saddle,
which he did as soon as he came into England, being exchanged for a Spanish
prisoner; but the poison had lost its virtue, for it did no hurt neither to the
Queen, nor to the Earl of Essex, as was intended; but Walepool hearing no news
of his plot, suspected Squire for a false brother, and fearing he would reveal
diverse secrets, prevents him, by dispatching one into England to inform against
Squire; this Informer at first was not credited, yet Squire was examined, and
some passages in his answer laid hold on, which made him be suspected, and so
upon advice of his friends he confessed, and accordingly suffered.

The thirteenth year of her Reign an Act was made that none should name 1571.
Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, for favoring too much the Scots cause, is
beheaded on the Tower Hill. This year was seen that strange Star or Comet in
Cassiopaea, it was 1572.
observed to be higher then the Moon, and not much lesser then Venus. Queen
Elizabeth sends fifteen hundred men to aid the Regent of Scotland against the
1573.
other faction; Edinburgh-Castle is battered with thirty Canons, and at last
for want of water is surrendered by composition to the use of the young King.
1576.
About this time the Royal Exchange was built by Sir Thomas Gresham. Sir Martin
Forbusher made sail into the North-East-seas, further then any other had done;
he attempted the next year thirty leagues further, and a third time Francis
Drake with five ships, and a hundred sixty four 1577.
men past the line three and thirty degrees of latitude, and in the six and
thirtieth degree enters the river Plate; with three of his ships he passed the
strait of Magellan, leaving the other two as impediments to him, the Marrigold
was also lost, Mr. Winters ship shaken off by storms recovered England, but the
Pelican, whereof he was Admiral, held on her course upon the West of America,
where he passed the line to the latitude 47 but finding no passage by reason of
fogs and ice, returned South-west, and came to anchor eight and thirty degrees
from the line, where the King of that Country presented 1578.
unto him his Crown of feathers, admiring our men, and sacrificing to them as
to gods: this place he calls Nova Albion at his departure he erects a Plate of
brass as a monument, wherein was engraven the Queens name, and her picture,
with her Arms in a piece of silver under the Plate; from thence he came to the
Isles of Molucco, and thence to Iava Major, and so to the Cape of Good-hope,
and then he fell with the coast of Guinea, whence crossing again the line, he
came to the height of the Azores, and then to England, having 1580.
Dock near Deptford, and the Captain Knighted.

And now the English begin to trade with the Muscovites and Turks; the Sultan
upon the request of the English Ambassador made peace with the Polander, which
Sultan by his letter to Queen Elizabeth inciteth her to make war against Spain.
Pope Gregory the 13. stirs up the King of Spain, having obtained 1583.
Portugal, to war against England, in favor of the Irish Rebels, offering to
acquit him of the fruits of the Archbishopric of Toledo, long retained in his
hands; the Archbishop being suspended, wherefore they two join in hope to
conquer Ireland; the Pope sends six-hundred men under the command of Thomas
Stukely, whom he styled Marquess of Ireland; the Spaniard bears all the
charge, with the addition of three hundred Spaniards, and sends money to raise
four thousand men more; these landed in the County of Kerry, raised their
Standart, and built a fort; by these means Desmond hoped to be King of Ireland.

The Lord Gray Deputy of Ireland, with his forces fell upon these strangers,
and puts them to the sword, a few being reserved for ransomes: the Fort had
store of money, armor, shot, powder, and other provision; all the Irish there
as well women as men died, and Desmond driven into the woods, was in a cottage
wounded by a soldier, who at length cut off his head. The Earl of Essex is
sent over to reduce the wild Irish in Ulster, which had been pretty quiet
after the Queen had enacted, That no man should assume the name of O-Neale till
Turlogh Leinigh, a brothers son of Con-More grandfather of Shan-O-Neal, of
whom we have spoken already. This Turlogh disquieted the Scots of the Islands,
and slew Alexander Oge, the slayer of Shan O-Neal his son in law; Hugh Baron of
Duncannon escaped from him into England, on whom the Queen bestowed the command
of a troop of horse, and a thousand marks per annum, and for his good service
against Desmond he obtained the title of Earl of Tir-Oen; upon this old Turlogh
resigns to him the government of Ulster on certain conditions, chiefly, that
they both should join their forces Roman Religion. Mac-Guyre encouraged by
Guaran Primate of Ireland, began first to stir, but is discomfited by Sir
Richard Bingham, and Guaran slain in the field. Mac-Guyre after this flies out
into open Rebellion, whom Tir-Oen pursues and receives a wound in his thigh,
which made him gracious at the English Court: he procured Fitz-williams the
Deputy to be called home, in whose place Sir William Russel is put, whom he
flatters with such fine words, that although the Marshal charged him with many
subordinations of Mac-Guyre, yet he was dismissed, to the great discontent of
the Queen, and disquietness of the land.

King Philip of Spain had before this been incensed by Queen Elizabeth, for
Netherlanders his subjects in her Kingdom, whom she thought she could not in
honor banish, having fled thither for the safety of their lives, and liberty
of their consciences: She also desires that Westmerland, with others of her
Rebels should be banished the Spanish dominions. The Netherlanders abhorring
the Spanish Inquisition, send to Queen Elizabeth to protect them, which at
first she seemed to be unwilling, as being loath to provoke Spain against her,
but sent to King Philip to commiserate his afflicted people, which he refusing
to do, she sends (being solicited the second time by the Netherlanders) in
Bullion the value of forty thousand angels in part of an hundred thousand
pounds promised, which made Don John of Austria then governor of Belgium
interpose himself in the Scottish affairs to disturb England. The French to
make England surer to them, send over Monsieur Duke of Anjou the Kings brother,
to marry Queen Elizabeth, whom she magnificently entertained, but would not
assent to marry him.

The fame of this Monsieur was so great, that the Netherlanders (having
declared against the tyranny of King Philip) chose him for their Protector; but
he died not long after in France, and William of Nassaw is proclaimed Traitor,
Delph; therefore the Queen is solicited again, as also Henry the French King
for relief; the Queen sends the Earl of Derby into France in behalf of these
Provinces, but he being in danger of the Guise and the League, recommends back
1585.
again their distresses to the Queen, promising his relief; hereupon she
undertakes their protection by advice of her Council, because she was bound
(say they) to defend the Gospel, to relieve the oppressed Protestants, to keep
off the strength of Spain from settling too near, and to revenge the invasion of
Ireland: hereupon Articles being drawn, Sir John Norris is sent over with
Flushing, Bril, two Sconces, and the Castle of Ramekins in Holland were pledged
to the Queen.

The Pope and Spaniard were highly displeased with the Queen, who in two books
tax her of ingratitude to K. Philip who saved her life, and of intended
murdering of the Prince of Parma, to which an answer was published, and
reasons showed why she undertook the protection of these Provinces, because of
their situation and vicinity, because of many ancient leagues between England
and the Dukes of Burgundy, because of the Spaniards tyranny, and Mendoza
practiced with Throgmorton to bring into England foreign power.

Things thus ordered, Robert Dudly Baron of Denbigh, Earl of Leicester, and the
Earl of Northumberlands son, is sent over as the Queens Deputy-General, who at
the Hague took an oath of the States to the Queen, and claimed absolute
authority over them; at which she was offended, declaring she promised to be
their Protector, but not their Sovereign; mean while all English ships and
goods are arrested in Spain. Pope Sixtus 5. sends to the Prince of Parma a
consecrated Sword, with a Hat. The Netherlanders are put in fear that the Queen
meant to make peace with the Spaniard without them, but by her letters
Spaniards and English skirmish near Zutphen, in which though the Spaniard was
worsted, Sir Philip Sidney being 1586.
shot in the thigh lost his life: but the States grew discontented with
Leicester their governor, for making York and Stanly two Spaniolised persons
governors of Towns, to wit, of Deventer and Sconce, which afterward they sold
to the Spaniard, and for some other points of his misgovernment; but he
hasteneth over into England to be present in Parliament at the handling of the
Queen of Scots cause, who was beheaded at Fotheringhay-Castle; Queen 1587.
Elizabeth seeming much grieved at it, by punishing her Secretary the chief
Mary was interred in Peterborough-Church under a hearse of black-velvet, and
was translated thence by her son King James to King Henry the 7. Chapel, and
laid under white-marble.

In Leicesters absence, many disorders were committed by the English; wherefore
Maurice the younger son of William Prince of Orange is chosen Governor.
Buckhurst is sent into Holland to examine complaints, at which Leicester is
offended, who recalls Sir John Norris, (to the dislike of the States) and sends
him into Ireland; then he returns into Belgium, where he is blamed for the
surrendering of Sluice; factions did increase, and many Towns reject his
government; hereupon he is recalled into England by the Queen, and commanded to
refign his government, which done, it is proclaimed through all the Provinces.
Mean time king Philip is preparing of his great Fleet, and withal bears the
Queen in hand that he aimed at a general peace, which she believed, but could
not persuade the States to give credit that he intended peace, who was head of
the Holy-league, persecuted Protestants, and was preparing 1588.
are sent out of England to confer with Parma about the peace, with king
Philips Commissioners; much time is spent about precedencie, and the place of
meeting, at last the English have the priority, and the place is Ostend.

The Queen demands a Cessation of arms, a present Truce, a dismission of
foraign soldiers, a restitution of the moneys lent by her to the States, an
enjoyment of their ancient Liberties, and a Toleration of Religion for two
years, and a Confirmation of the Articles of Gaunt; so she promises to deliver
up the Towns again. All these demands are rejected by the Spaniards. Sixtus 5.
sends out his Bull to confirm the Excommunications of his two former
Predecessors against the Queen; and Cardinal Allen sets out a bitter book,
wherein he exhorts all to join with King Philip and Parma against her: This
book the Queen sent to Parma, but he slighted it off with a complement. In the
interim it is given out, that King Philip had kept fifty thousand men in pay
almost a whole year, by means of that Treaty: And at last the great Armado
begins to appear, in which were 72 Gallions and Galliasses, 47 Ships and
Hulks, 11 Pinaces and Carvals, 2843 great Ordnance, 8094 Sailers, 18658
Soldiers, 2088 Gally-slaves, 220000 Bullets for great shot, 4200 Kintals of
Powder, 200 Kintals of Match, 7000 Muskets and Calivers, Philip thirty thousand
Ducats every day. The General was the Duke of Medina, the Admiral Don
Martinez; Don Martin Alorcon was Vicar General for the Inquisition, with whom
were an hundred Monks and Jesuits; Cardinal Allen is Superintendent of
Church Matters, he translates the Popes Bull into English and sends it away; In
this Fleet were diverse of the Nobility and Gentry of Spain and Portugal. The
Duke of Parma also prepared a great Navy, with 300 small Boats, and 70
flat-bottom'd, every one able to bear 30 horses, with a world of all sort of
furniture and provision: Near Newport he had 30 companies Italians, 2 of
Walloons, and 8 of Burgundians; at Dyxmew he had 80 Companies of Netherlanders,
60 of Spaniards, and 60 of High Dutch, besides 7 of English. The Pope sends
forth his Crusado, and promises a million of gold, with a proviso that he
should hold the English Crown as feudatory to the Sea of Rome.

To prevent this storm, Charles Howard High-Admiral of England is sent into the
seas; the Lord Seymer with the ships of Belgium kept betwixt Calice and Dover:
The Queen being advertised by the French king, that this fleet was for England,
caused all the Trained bands through the kingdom to be mustered and in
readiness, the Earl of Leicester is made Lieutenant over Tilbury i^ Essex was
the place for the Camp; there were two and twenty thousand foot and sixteen
hundred horse; the Queens guard consisted of two thousand two hundred and fifty
two horse, and of foot thirty four thousand and fifty. But the great Spanish
Navy is so tossed with a storm, that the Duke of Medina is driven back into the
Groine, and eight other of their ships dispersed and torn, besides three
Portugal galleys which fell upon the coast of Bayon and were set upon by their
own slaves, who freed themselves by the slaughter of many Spaniards. Sir
Francis Drake Vice Admiral goes westward, and joyneth his fleet with the rest,
which made up an hundred sail.

The Admiral hearing in what distress the Spanish fleet was, did bear sail
toward Spain; but the wind turning South, he returns homeward and Anchored his
fleet in Pliniouth haven; the Spaniards put again to sea, and at last cast
anchor in the Channel of the Narrow-seas; some Pinaces are dispatched to Parma,
to forward his charge for the kings service: sudden news is brought to the
Admiral, that the Armado was come, which by reason of sickness, and the former
storm, was not expected that year: Wherefore all hands are set on work to warp
out the ships then in the harbor, and many of the men on shore; Spain; a
Gallion in which were some Dons, was sorely battered by the English, whose
ships were lower and nimbler, whereas the Spanish high Vessels were fitter for
defense then offense: The next day Drake commands this Gallion to yield, Don
Pedro at first refused, but understanding that it was Drake, who had him in
chase, came on board his ship, where after some complements, he is kindly used
by Drake, and lodged in his own Cabin; the rest of that company were sent to
Plymouth, where they Oquendo's great Gallion fell on fire, the upper part
whereof, and most of the persons were consumed, the Hulk was brought into
Plymouth.

Near Portland a fierce encounter was between the English and Spaniards,
wherein a great Venetian ship with some smaller were surprised. The 24. day of
July, a great fight was between four Galliasses and the English fleet, in which
though the Spaniards were galled with chain shot from our ships, yet they had
the advantage because our powder failed; which being supplied, our fleet is
Drake, Hawkins, and Forbisher. July 25. against the Isle of Wight, was a cruel
encounter, each discharging their whole-sides. The 27 of July, the Spaniards
anchored in sight of Calice, intending for Dunkirk, there to join with the Duke
of Parma, to whom Medina sends to hasten his forces; but the Spanish ships were
so planked with beams, that Bullets could not pierce them; wherefore eight
English-ships are filled with powder, brimstone, and other combustible matter,
which July 28 about midnight were let drive with Wind and Tide among the
Spanish fleet; this caused the Spaniards, being suddenly affrighted, to cut
their cables, or else they had been all fired; in this confused haste, one of
their Galliasses of Naples fell foul on another ship, and lost her rudder, and
so Calice; her General Moncado was slain in the fight, and many more Spaniards,
many leaped into the Sea and were drowned: In her were four hundred soldiers,
and three hundred slaves, which were now freed from their fetters; and a booty
found of fifty thousand Ducats; the governor of Calice would not suffer the
vessel to be set on fire.

The 29 of July, over against Greveling, a sore conflict continued that day, in
which a Gallion of Bisca perished, wherein the Captains in madness killed each
others: Two great ships besides presently sunk; Francis de Toledo, with others,
Ostend. The St. Philip a Gallion of Portugal, in which he was, with the
soldiers in her, were taken by the Plushingers. The St. Matthew, another
Portugal Gallion was so shot, that her leaks could not be stopped. Don Diego
Pimentelli, refusing Medina's courtesy, who would have saved him in a skiff,
was afterward taken on the coast of Flanders by five men of war, and carried
into Zealand; In the interim, Seymer with his squadron is sent to join with the
35 ships of Holland, that lay on the coast of Flanders to keep in the Duke of
Parma; but the Armado being weary of fighting, spread their main-sails and put
to sea, the English Admiral following lest they should put into Scotland, but
they bent their course toward Norway, so about the degree of latitude 57. our
Admiral left them.

The Spaniards considering with themselves, how they had lost five thousand of
their men, that many maimed and sick soldiers lay on their hands, twelve of
their greatest ships were sunk, lost and taken, their tackling spoiled and
anchors lost, their victuals failing and fresh water spent, which made them
fling their horses and mules overboard, knowing also that Parma could not,
Scotland would not help them, by reason of their correspondencie with England,
they held it best to return into Spain; so sailing between the Orcades, about
Caithnes and the coast of Ireland, kept westward in the main ocean, and
returned at length into Spain, where the Duke is deposed from all his authority
and confined to his house; The residue of the ships, about forty in number,
were so battered on the coast of Ireland, that diverse of them perished, amongst
others Oquendo's great Galliasse and two great ships of Venice, some were
driven on the English, some on the French coast, and were taken; so that of 134
ships only 53 returned to Spain, of the whole fleet were missing 81 vessels,
and of 30000 soldiers 13500. above 2000 prisoners were taken in England,
Ireland, and Low Countries.

All danger being past, the Camp at Tilbury is disbanded, and not long after
Leicester died. The Queen on the 8. of September gives solemn thanks to God for
this Victory in S. Paul's, where on the lower battlements eleven Spanish Ensigns
are hung up, the next day they were spread upon London Bridge; the 19. day of
November was appointed to be kept holy throughout the Land; the Queen upon the
Sunday following, being the 24. of November, went in state from White Hall to
S. Paul's, where at the West-door she fell down on her knees, giving solemn
thanks to God, and exhorting the people to the same duty. The Zelanders on
their Coin stamped the memorial of this day and Hollanders.

It being reported that king Philip was preparing a new Fleet to recover his
lost honor, It was resolved by the Lords and Commons of England, That an
attempt be made upon Spain, and aid given to Don Antonio the expulsed King of
Portugal, who was given out by king Philip to be a bastard; after he had driven
him out of Portugal, he proclaims eight hundred thousand crowns to him that
should bring him either dead or alive, yet he was kept disguised eight months
in Portugal; then he fled unto the Court of France, where he received aid from
the Queen Mother, a competitor also for the Portugalcrown. A fleet is sent to
the Isles of Terceres, which by the Spaniards is overthrown, Antonio having no
more hopes of France, repaires into England, where he desires the 1589.
Queen to land him safe in his country; whereupon six of her ships, and twenty
more of war, besides others for transportation, accompanied Don Antonio from
Plymouth, Sir Francis Drake was Admiral, Sir John Norris General for
land-service, with eleven thousand soldiers, two thousand and five hundred
mariners; these landing in the Bay of Galicia near the Groin, were encountered
by the enemy near the Town, who forced them back to their gates.

Norris the next day, forced the Galleys which played upon his troops, to
abandon the road; the Base-town is surprised, five hundred that fled thence to
the rocks were slain; in this Town was an incredible magazine of money,
victuals, and arms provided against England; the English by immoderate drinking
of wine, caused a great infection and mortality in the army; a great Gallion is
set on fire by overcharging the great ordnance, this burned two days together,
so that of fifty great pieces, sixteen only were left; the higher Town held
out, being built on a rock; the Miners attempting to blow up the walls,
overthrew a part of a tower, the other part falling down unexpectedly, slew
Captain Sydneham with thirty soldiers; after this Norri^ with nine Regiments
met a Spanish Army coming against him, and a hot skirmish ensues, in which
Sir Edward Norris, with some other Commanders are wounded, notwithstanding the
whole Army of Spaniards was routed in this service, the Kings Standard is
taken, which was displaied before the General; then returning to the Groine,
the English fired the base Town, and so put again to sea, the Earl of Essex
meets with the fleet, and they all land in Portugal, under shot of the Castle
of ^oniche; the enemy fell presently on the English, but are beat so, that they
take their heels and leave the Town undefended, which presently Don Antonio was
there.

Seven Companies of foot being left to guard the ships, the main Army marches
over-land to Lisbon, and took a Castle by the way: many of the English
soldiers were poisoned with drinking of standing waters, and eating of
poisoned honey left purposely in the houses. The 25. of May our Army came to
Lisbon, whose Suburbs were abandoned and storehouses fired; the enemy in the
night time (whilst the English were at rest, being wearied with six days march
and watching) sallied out, and killed Colonel Bret, with diverse Captains and
others; but the Earl of Essex fell on them unexpectedly Cascu is surprised, the
inhabitants being fled to the mountains, who understanding their King was come,
professed their loyalty to him, but the Castle held out for the Spaniard.

The Duke of Bragans^, Francisco de Toledo and others, promised to aid Antonio
with three thousand horse and other supplies, but could make no head, because
of the Spanish Commanders every where: Antonio hoping aid would come at last,
desired the English to stay before Lisbon for nine days, which could not be
granted, because the English were sickly and much weakened, Portugals; Antonio
desires the Suburbs might not be spoiled: Essex in a bravery run his spear and
brake it against the gate of that City, challenging any Spaniard within to
fight with him, but none appeared. The Castle of Cascais is rendered upon
conditions. Sixty Spanish hulks laden with provision for Lisbon are taken.

The English being at sea again, are overtaken in a calm by nine galleys which
sunk some of our straggling ships; Captain Minshaw fought to the last after his
ship was on fire; so continuing seventeen days on board, many dead soldiers
are cast into the sea: Then they came to Vige a Town, which with the Country
for seven miles compass they set on fire: Then Drake arrives Plymouth June 21.
and Norris July the 2. after.

The state of France at this time was much distracted and out of order,
therefore a meeting at Bloys is appointed of the three Estates for establishing
peace and union: For the Clergy appeared a hundred thirty four Deputies, among
whom were four Archbishops, one and twenty Bishops, and two Generals of Orders;
For the Nobility, a hundred and eighty Gentlemen; For the Commons, a hundred
ninety one Merchants and Lawyers: To these King Henry the third made a speech
tending to union, which was prosecuted by the Chancellor, by the Archbishop of
Bourges, and by the President for the third Estate; whereupon an oath of union
is taken, Guise in his Throne, who temporised with both. The Clergy
excommunicates King Henry of Navar as an heretic, and deprived him of the
government of Guienne, but King Henry would have him to be summoned, and again
to be sworn to the union. To this it was answered, That he had been many times
wrought upon to renounce his heresy, to no purpose; he was excommuninate by
the Pope, and therefore king Henry was bound to subscribe thereto, otherwise
Guise would dissolve the assembly; and so Henry of Navar is pronounced
incapable of the crown of France.

The king to be rid of the Guises, intended to destroy them both; notice was
given to the Duke of this, but he would not believe it, presuming on his own
greatness; but at last, he was killed by the kings guard, and so was his
brother the Cardinal not long after; which so incensed the people, that they
defamed the King, defaced his furniture, brake his pictures, dragged his image
through the streets of Paris, and beat down his arms: The Sorbonists also
concluded, Guise was highly commended and lamented. The Leaguers prevail so
against the Parliament, that all sorts of insolences were permitted, besides,
one Clement a Iacobin, vowed to kill the King, which he did at Paris; where he
delivered the king a Letter, and with a knife wounded him in the belly, which
the king drew forth, and struck the Iacobin above the eye, whom also the kings
servants stabbed to death: So Henry died of his wound.

Upon this, Henry of Navar is proclaimed by the Army, and named by the last
Henry of France his successor, in his last Will; him Queen Elizabeth assisted
against the leaguers with twenty thousand pounds, with ships, Arms, and Powder,
1591.
Parma who was entered France, she sends over Essex with four thousand foot and
two hundred horse, these landing in Normandy, laid siege to Rohan, where his
brother Devereux was slain: Henry finding the Leaguers too strong for him, and
the Popes power so great; at last renounced his 1593.
religion, and embraced the Roman Faith; so he is absolved and crowned. In
Brittany the Spaniards are worsted, with the loss of Captain Forbisher, and
diverse other English: The Leaguers by treasons lay wait for his life, and cross
him what they can at Rome; at last, war is proclaimed between France and Spain.

To Ernestus in Belgium, succeeded Albert Archduke, who prepares against the
French, and falls first upon Calice. Richbank left unmanned, is seized on by
him, and the town at length upon composition is surrendered: Queen Elizabeth not
willing the Spaniards should possess that Town, proffers aid to the French
king against him; but he weakened by war, was more inclined to harken to
conditions of peace; whereat the Queen was displeased, and prepares 1596.
another sea expedition, with a Declaration, showing the causes of preparing
this fleet, to wit, for defense of her friends and subjects; All which she wills
to forbear helping of, or trading with the Spaniards: Then about 150 sail of
English and Flemmins met at Plymouth, under the command of Charles Howard Essex:
before they put to sea, the Queen prayed solemnly for their good success: At
sea, they met an Irish Bark from Cadiz showing the strength of the Town, and
shipping in the Bay, to wit, twenty Galleys, ninety ships, five great Gallions,
two Galliasses, with diverse other vessels, all richly laden, and bound for
diverse places.

On the twentieth of June the English attempt to land on the West side of
Cadiz, but could not; the place was so strong, the next day the Spanish fleet
prepares to fight: Lord Thomas Howard, with some Londoners, and a squadron of
Belgic ships began the skirmish; Essex and Charles Howard seconded them: Wink
field assailed the Galleys, which got passage at the bridge: The Spanish
Admiral St. Philip is sore battered, and set on fire, and so was the St.
Thomas; that they might not come into the English hands, the rest of the
Spanish fleet ran themselves on ground. Then Essex lands his men; some
Regiments are sent to the Bridge to impeach all supplies from the main, Essex
with the rest took toward Cadiz, which at first played so sore upon the
English, that the foremost began to give back, till Essex caught his own
Colors, and cast them over the wall into the Town, to engage his men: a
furious assault is made, the Colors regained, and the Town surprised, though
with the loss of many English, among whom Sr. John Wink field was slain.

The Town and Castle being surrendered, the fury of the soldiers is staid by
proclamation, great respect was showed to religious Persons, women and
children; the Ladies were suffered to depart quietly with their Jewels, the
Generals standing by to see them safely shipped. The Bishop of Cusco is
released without ransom, the spoil of the town is given to the soldiers, one
hundred and twenty thousand Ducats are promised by the townsmen for their
ransom; the ships also that ran on shore offered two millions and a half of
Ducats for their ransom; but the Duke of Medina Sidonia, Admiral of Spain,
caused them Matthew was saved, and so was the Andrew: thus was that rich fleet
suddenly consumed, the town ransacked and burned, and the whole Island wasted.

The English having abandoned Cadiz, set sail Westward toward Faro, a town in
Algarva; where the Earl landing his men, took what they found in the town
forsaken by its inhabitants, and forraged the Country for three leagues about.
Thence they put to sea again, and landed safely at Plymouth, August 7. The next
year, the Earl of Essex is employed by the Queen, both as Admiral 1597.
and General in another Voyage against the Spaniard, with six thousand men,
besides Mariners, in one hundred and twenty ships, which July 9. set sail
Plymouth for the Azores, but were driven back by storm; they set sail again
August 17. and September 15. they arrived at those Isles, which submitted
presently; they sacked the town Villa-Franca, took a Brasil-man, and three
prizes, which they brought into England, worth four hundred thousand Ducats.

The traffic of Spain failing by reason of these wars, the young king of
Poland, Sigismund, sent an Ambassador to Queen Elizabeth, who had audience at
Greenwich; He complains that the Poland Merchants are hindered in their trade
with Spain by sea, which should be open to all; therefore wishes some redress
and restitution be made, or else his Master who is so nearly allied to Spain
and house of Austria, would seek some means to right himself: to this the Queen
in latin answered, That his Master was too young and unexperienced in
negotiating with Princes; and that his threatening speech savoured more of
ignorance and arogance, then of judgment and good manners; She shows him that
it was not against the law of nature for her to intercept military helps from
any to her enemy: so wishing him to wait for a further answer from her Counsel,
she rises in anger.

Another Ambassador comes from Denmark, to entreat a peace between Spain and
England, and amity between England and Denmark, and a free Traffic between
Spain and Denmark; whereas hitherto the Danish Merchants Spain, she told him,
she broke it not, nor would she sue for confirmation of it, especially by so
young a King as the Dane was; as for peace with Denmark, she was willing to
continue it; but for any wrongs done by her ships on the Danish Merchants, she
knew not; if any should appear, satisfaction should be made. Shortly after
this, the English Merchants are arrested in the Sound, for which cause the
Queen sends thither an Ambassador, to whom all satisfaction and content is
given by the Dane.

Mean while Tir-Oen, whom the Queen had made an Earl, and pardoned Black-water,
by which the entry lay into his country, and got it by surrender; Then he
writes to Kildare, to side with him; and to Sir John Norris appointed Lord
General, to use him mildly, lest he should fly out into disloialty: In this
mean time, his guard consisted of one thousand horse, and six thousand two
hundred and eighty foot of Ulster, and two thousand three hundred of Conaught;
all which are proclaimed traitors: The Queen willing to be quiet, sent
Commissioners to confer with the Earl, who complains of the wrongs done him by
Sir Henry Bagnal Marshal: then he petitions that he and his may be pardoned,
and restored to their estates; that they might freely exercise the old
Religion; that no soldier or Sheriff should meddle with the jurisdiction of
his Earldome; that he may be restored to his pay, and Company of fifty horse;
that the spoilers of his Country be punished; and that Bagnal should pay him
the thousand pounds promised him in Dowry with his sister, Tirons wife: Then
the Commissioners propounded these Articles to him, That he would lay down Arms
and submit, reedifie the defaced Forts, admit the Queens Officers, restore the
Tir-Oen would not hearken to these demands; therefore Norris with the Deputies
help, marches into Armagh; whereupon Tir-Oen forsakes Blak-water Fort, fires
the Villages about, and plucks down Duncannon town, with part of his own house:
Norris sets a garrison in the Church of Armagh, and proclaims Tir. Osn traitor.

Tir-Oen to gain time, presents a feined submission, prostrates himself before
the Queens Picture* ungirds his sword, and craves pardon; where in the interim
he deals with Spain for aid, and messengers thence are sent him with promises
of men and arms: Hereupon he makes havoc of the country, Philips letters, and
the causes of his own discontent to the Deputy: In the mean time, most of
Connaught revolteth, and all Ulster rebelleth, except seven Castles that kept
for the Queen. Thomas Lord Borough is sent Deputy into Ireland, and Norris
upon discontent dies. The new Deputy makes forward to meet with the Rebels,
who encountered him, but they loose Blackwater Fort again; and whilst they
endeavored to rescue it, Kildare interposeth, and discomfiteth them, but with
the loss of some prime men, and dear friends; for which he died of grief.
Tir-Oen rallieth his forces again, and in the Deputies absence, beleagures it
1598.
with all his strength: The Deputy hearing of this, hasmeth to rescue it, but
Ormond made Governor of Ireland. Tir-Oen again complains of the wrongs he
sustained, and oppressions of Ireland under the English, by which his
disaffection to the English Nation was known: Bagnel is sent to raise the siege
at Blackwater with fourteen companies; near Armagh the enemy meets him, where
in a bloody conflict Bagnal is slain, and the English quite defeated: here
thirteen Captains were slain, and fifteen hundred common soldiers were routed
and cut off; hereupon the garrison of Blackwater is surrendered, and Tir-Oen
furnished with all sorts of provision and arms.

Tir-Oen puffed up with this success, sends four thousand into Munster, who
Philip of Spain, promising to keep his allegiance to Spain, and enmity with
England. In this sad condition of Ireland, the Earl of Essex is sent over with
sixteen thousand foot, and four thousand horse; being arrived thither, he falls
upon the Rebels of Munster, and chaseth them into the woods, with great loss
both of men and time; thence he made into Leimster, against the Rebels there,
whom he vanquished; but Sir Conyers Clifford governor of Connaught is slain,
and his forces defeated; whereupon the Lord General enters Ulster; Tir-Oen
desires a parley with him, which is denied: The next morning, the Earl desires a
parley again, and is again refused; Essex for an hours space, then both returned
to their Companies, and some choice men are appointed to confer with Tir-Oen,
and Commissioners for a treaty of peace. But the Queen was highly displeased,
that so much blood and money 1599.
had been spent in vain, and so much time lost without service upon the
Archrebel: Wherefore Essex having received sharp letters from her, who was also
incensed by his enemies, he hastneth into England, where at Non-such, he had
access to the Queen; but shortly after, is commanded to his Chamber, and then
committed to the custody of the Lord Keeper.

The news of this commitment gave occasion to Tir-Oen to fly out again, who
gives out, that he would restore Ireland to her ancient religion and liberty,
and expel all the English; he receives from Spain money, and arms; and from
Rome Indulgences, with a plume of Phoenix feathers, for a trophie of his
victories: After this, in the midst of winter, he goes on Pilgrimage to the
holy-crosse in Tipperary, whence he sends Mac-Guire to spoil the Country; whom
Sir Warham Saint Legar ran with a Lance through the body, and was by Tir-Oen
returns from Munster. The Lord 1600.
Montjoy at this time is made Deputy of Ireland, who in May prepares to invade
Ulster; where he forced Tir-Oen to draw back into his old corners; He kills the
chiefest of the Rebels, he breaks through the Irish Pallisadoes, beats the
enemy back, and plants a garrison eight miles from Armagh, which he named Mount
Norris, in memory of Sir John Norris; at Carlingford he gave a total rout to
the enemies. In the midst of Winter he clears the Glinnes or Valleys of
Leimster from Rebels; he subdues diverse other places, fortifies Armagh, and
drives Tir-Oen from Blackwater.

In the mean time, king Philip of Spain sends Don John de Aquila with two
Tir-Oen; these land at Kinsale in Mounster, where they publish their
Commission, and Queen Elizabeth's Deposition: The Deputy encamps near Kinsale,
and Sir Richard Levison, with two of the Queens ships incloseth the Haven; but
hearing of two thousand Spaniards more at Bere-Haven, makes haste thither, and
sinks five of their ships; to this new supply of Spaniards, the rebels repair,
who made up six thousand foot and five hundred horse: These intended to have
put the Spaniards and eight hundred Irish into Kinsale, but they were prevented
by the Deputies vigilance, who followed the Rebels as they were retreating
toward a Bog, where their horse were routed by the Earl of Clanricard; the
main Tir-Oen flies to his starting-holes in Ulster, and Odonel driven into
Spain.

The General being returned to the siege of Kinsale, and having mounted his
Canons, is sent to by D. Aquila for a parley, complaining of the Irish rudenes,
perfidiousnesse, and cowardice; and showing that he desired peace not out of
want either in the town, or from Spain: the Deputy willingly hearkened to a
peace; and it was Articled, that D. Aquila should quit all places he had in
Ireland, and should with his Spaniards depart; with arms, money, munition,
England or Ireland, that a cessation should be from war, that their ships
should freely pass without molestation from English ships; Many of Tir-Oen's
men were drowned in their flight by the Winter floods, and he himself shifted
from one corner to another.

The next Spring the Deputy marches from Dublin toward Ulster, where he
forces Tir-Oen to set his own house at Duncannon on fire, who flies from place
to place; then the Deputy wastes all his Country, and takes in many places, so
that now the Rebels exclaim against Tir-Oen, and resolves to come in and to
depart the presence, which he did, and had been sent over into England, had not
the news of the Queens death hindered this design.

The Earl of Essex was ever held in jealousy, since his conference with
Tir-Oen; yet presuming on his own merits and innocence, carried himself so
stoutly and stubbornly to the Queen, that the Lord Keeper by a Letter prudently
advises him to yield to the times, to submit to the Queen, and not to live
such a discontented life as he did, whereby he wronged his friends, his honor,
his fortunes, his country, and his Sovereign, and withal encouraged the
foraign enemy to rejoice and insult: He entreats him therefore to yield, if he
be guilty, out of duty; if not guilty, out of policy; for in this he would

The Queen notwithstanding this Letter, which laid all the blame of his
sufferings on her, was contented he should be removed to his own house; then
she sends some of her Counselors to convent him about the manner of his
treating with Tir-Oen, and his leaving of Ireland, contrary to the Queens
command: his answer was, That he had to do with bogs and woods, as well as
Drury-house they consult and agree to bring the Earl by violent hand into the
Queens presence, and to remove thence his opposites: but the Queens jealousies
increased, by the continual flocking of Lords, Knights and Captains to
Essex-house, by his refusing to come before the Lords of the Council when
London, his followers crying that Essex should have been murdered by Cobham,
Cecil, and Rawleigh; so he past to Fanchurch-street, where he entered the house
of a supposed friend, one Essex is proclaimed Traitor; in Gracious-street he
stood a while with a halbert in his hand, and a napkin about his neck, but no
body came to assist him; Then he passes toward Ludgate, but there he is
resisted by some Pike-men, and thrust through the hat, some of his company were
hurt, and young Tracy slain; So returning thence to Queen-hive, he took Boat
and lands at his own house, which he fortified, and the Lord Amiral assaulted;
upon resistance some are slain, which the Earl perceiving, presently yielded,
desiring civil usage and an honorable trial, so he was carried to
Lambeth-house, and from thence, with some others, to the Tower.

Upon the 19. of February, Essex and Southampton are arraigned; and Essex the
25. of February is executed on the Green within the Tower, having first 1600.
confessed this great sin of Rebellion, but that he never meant to wrong the
Queen, desiring all to think charitably of him, to hear the confession of his
faith, to forgive him, and to pray for him, so his head was cut off at three
strokes, to the endangering of the Executioners life by the multitude: diverse
of his accessaries died, some at Tiburn, some on the Tower Hill, the Earls
death was Southampton was imprisoned in the Tower till he was released by King
James. At last Queen Elizabeth having settled her dominions in peace, died the
24. of March, the 69. year of her age, and of her Reign the 44. She was a Queen
of such eminent endowments, that to saylittle were to wrong her, and to say
much 1602.
were to flatter her, therefore let her own works praise her. She was happy in
this, that never any Prince of this land had such wise Counselors, such
politic Statists, such resolute and courageous soldiers.

CHAP. XXXIII.
The History of Scotland under Queen Mary, from the year 1560. till the year
1567.

WHilst an Army is preparing in England to assist the Scots Protestants, the
French plunder Disert and Wimes, two Towns in Fife, then they 1560.
march toward St. Andrews, and in the way they spy eight great ships afar off
in the sea, who being in hope that these were ships from France coming English
fleet coming to aid the Protestants, and that a Land-army was upon the
borders, their joy is turned into fear and grief, and they presently disperse
themselves sundry ways, the richer sort of those places send away their wealth
into remoter Countries. The French plunder friends and foes, affirming that the
Scots Catholics were too sparing in helping their friends, for which cause
many of them fall off from the French faction, so that all Fife turns
Protestants, the example of which was followed by diverse other Countries in
shaking off the French tyranny; two ships in the interim with a thousand foot,
and some horse are sent from France, French were no sooner landed, but the two
ships are carried away by the Scots in the night: shortly after eight French
ships more arrive with men, money and munition, but finding the Frith so full
of English ships, they return home again; another English fleet comes, so that
now the Isle of Keth is beset round, and all commerce by sea kept from Leith;
mean time the governors of Fife meet Huntly at Perth, where after three days
conference, he with all the Northern parts come in to the Protestant party.

The Lords of the Reformation hearing that the English Army of six thousand
foot and two thousand horse were come, they go to meet them at Haddington; the
Regent with some few of her servants, to be out of danger, Edinburgh-Castle;
Areskin the governor, though he held the Castle for the Protestants, yet was
content to admit the Regent, hoping thereby she would be the easier wrought
upon, being now in his power; to this purpose the Protestant Lords send a
letter to her, wherein they complain of the wrongs sustained by her means in
filling the Kingdom with French, by whom the people are much afflicted; that
they have often besought her to dismiss them, which because she will not
consent to, they have therefore entreated the Queen of Englands assistance, not
thereby to cast off their allegiance to their own Sovereign, but to ease their
own necks from the strangers yoke; therefore they beseech her to dismiss the
French forces, who shall have safe conduct by the English either by sea or
land; if she refuse this, they take God to witness, they are clear of the
mischiefs that will ensue.

Upon the approach of the English, thirteen hundred French came out of Leith to
seize themselves of a hill not far off, there was skirmishing for five hours
for obtaining that place: at last the Scots horse furiously breaking in French
Army drove them back into the Town, and had the English horse been in
readiness, that French party had been all cut off; some parlies were held with
the Regent about a peace, which took no effect, because the Scots would consent
to nothing till the strangers were sent away; and now the English having shot
often against Leith to no purpose, draw nearer to the Town with their Ordnance,
a part of which casually fell on fire, and burned till the next day, so that
much of the French provision was consumed; then the English set the water-mills
near the Town on fire, which the French would have quenched, but could not; the
besiegers assayed to scale the walls, but were beat off with the loss of a
hundred and sixty of their men; whereupon the English forbear to attempt any
more till they have further directions from the Queen; in the interim letters
come from the Duke of Norfolk, wishing the English to be courageous, and to
continue the siege, promising them aid enough, and his own presence, if need
required, withal he sends them his pavillion, and shortly after two thousand
Auxiliaries, so the siege is renewed again, and diverse skirmishes followed.

In the mean time Queen Elizabeth sends some English Commissioners into
Scotland to treat with the French Commissioners for a peace; about which time
the Queen-Regent died of grief in the Castle of Edinburgh, a Lady of her own
nature inclined to goodness and peace, but she was overruled by the France,
and they by the Guises; the Commissioners at first could not accord, because
the French desired to carry home all their booty with them, which was denied;
wherefore they broke out again into open hostility, but the French sinding
their provision almost spent, and no hopes of supply; the English also growing
weary, and the Scots soldiers wanting their pay, they all inclined to peace,
which was concluded on these Articles, That the French should be gone within
twenty days, and some English ships should be provided for them: That Leith
should be restored to the Scots, and the walls demolished: That the
fortifications erected by the ^rench about Dumbar be thrown down: That the
English should withdraw their Armies out of Scotland: And that an Act of
oblivion pass. It was also agreed that sixty French should keep the possession
of Kerth-Island and Dumbar-Castle, lest the Queen should think that she is
quite deprived of all government.

After the French were gone, Scotland was very quiet till Queen Mary came over,
a Parliament is held in Edinburgh, where the Protestant faith is established,
and sent to Queen Mary for her approbation: Ambassadors are also sent into
England to thank the Queen for her assistance; and now about this time King
Francis dies, at which the Scots were glad, hoping now to be quite freed from
the French yoke. James the Queens brother hasteneth into France to his sister,
who with her uncles was retired in Lorrain from her mother in law, who Mary
signifies to her brother, that she was willing to return into Scotland, and
therefore appointed a day for that purpose, desirous rather to command as a
Sovereign in her own Country, then to live as a subject to a mother-in-law in a
foreign Kingdom; mean while she sends back her brother into Scotland, with her
Letters Patent for calling of a Parliament, that the French Ambassador who was
lately sent thither, might have audience; his demands were to have the old
league renewed with France, and the new broken with England, the Priests
restored again to their places and revenews: To the first, it was answered by
the Lords, they never broke the league with France, but the French have broke
with them, by endeavoring to infringe their liberties: as for the league with
England, they can no ways break without extreme ingratitude to their
deliverers; as for the Priests, they need none of their service, being they
know no use of such, but are now better supplied.

In this Parliament an Act was made for demolishing of all Monasteries, and
Commissions sent abroad for that purpose; but the Queens friends advised her,
that at her first coming into Scotland, she should not meddle with matters
Charles the Cardinal counseled her to leave in his custody her richest
household stuff, jewels, and robes, because of danger by sea; but she told him,
that her life was more dear to her, then her jewels, if then she trusted the
one to the sea, she would not leave the other behind: An Agent is sent to Queen
Elizabeth to sound her how she was affected, if queen Mary should make her
journey through England; It was answered, that none should be welcomer to her
then queen Mary her kinswoman; With this an English fleet is sent out, some
thought it was to Mary, if she should go home without visiting queen Elizabeth;
but queen Mary notwithstanding, by reason of a great mist, got into Scotland,
upon the report of whose arrival, the Lords and Gentry flock from all parts of
the kingdom, some for one end, some for another: At first it was agreed that
the Religion should stand as it was now established in Scotland, only the
Queen should be permitted to have Mass at Court for her self and family.

Shortly after, as the Priests were going into the Queens Chapel, one s^atcht
the Taper out of the hands of one, which made a sudden bubburb, but all was
pacified again by James the Queens brother; the Earl of Huntly, whose family
has been ever constant to the Roman profession, took this affront in very
French Peers, who accompanied the Queen into Scotland: shortly after, an
Ambassador is sent by the Queen and her Lords to Queen Elizabeth, for
confirming of the league, and continuing mutual love to each other; withal she
is desired to declare the Queen of Scots to be her next heir, as being next in
blood, if so be she have no children of her own: To this she answers, wondering
that Queen Mary and her Peers 1567.
did not rather send a confirmation of the league at Leith; this the
Ambassador excused, that he was presently sent away upon the Queens landing,
and Elizabeth, she was tied by her hand and seal to confirm that League;
therefore she needed no great time for that; to this the Ambassador could say
nothing, as being no part of his Commission: then says the Queen of England, I
grant that your Queen is next in blood to me; and all the world knows, I never
attempted to do her wrong, even when she wronged me, in usurping my titles and
arms; but I impute this rather to others, then to her self; however, I hope,
she will give me leave to enjoy my kingdom, whilst I live, and my children
after me, if I have any, if I have none, I shall not any ways hinder her
right,

A few days after she sends for him again, and wonders what the Scots Lords
meant, to send her such a message, upon the landing of their Queen, and before
satisfaction be made for former wrongs; I am not (says she) destitute either
of force at home, or friends abroad, to maintain my own right: the Ambassador
answers, That their intent was only to show their affection to their Queen, and
to avoid the shedding of much blood, and setting the two kingdoms at odds, if
any question should arise about the title of succession: I dislike not their
intent (says she) but what needs all this, seeing I never went about to
question her title? but however, I am not willing whilst I am alive to look
upon my own winding sheet; nor do I think it prudence in me to declare her my
successor, for that will breed many disputations according to peoples
affections; besides, I am married to my kingdom, whilst I live this marriage
cannot be dissolved, when I am dead let them succeed that have most right;
again, my Charles 7. of France to Lewis 11. and he to Charles 8. and lately
Francis to Henry his successor: again, I know the inconstancy of this people,
and how more do worship the rising then the setting sun; my sister Mary was not
willing to hear that I should succeed her; I know that many out of every
discontent, and because I do not satisfy their expectations, their covetous
and ambitious thoughts will be apt to fall off from me to my successor, who the
more he or she shines in the peoples

After diverse other discourses, Commissioners are appointed on both sides to
review the former League, and to bring it into these heads, to wit, That Queen
Mary should forbear the titles of England and Ireland, and likewise the Queen
of Englands Arms; on the other side, That Queen Elizabeth should not either by
her self or her posterity go about to hinder the succession of Scotland to the
Crown of England. But whilst these things were in agitation, Edinburgh to the
Castle, for setting forth a proclamation, That all Papists must avoid the City
by a certain day. The Ministers of Edinburgh complain against the Queen in
their Sermons, for celebrating Mass with such solemnity upon All Saints day,
showing that it was lawful for the people to force the Prince to observe the
Laws established, and to abolish Popery: but the Nobility were loath to hearken
to this doctrine. In the interim the Borderers fell to spoiling and plundring
the neighboring countries; against these James the Queens base-brother is sent
with some forces, who suddenly surpriseth them, of whom he hanged eight and
twenty, others upon hostages given he dismissed. The Queen also Aran (whom she
did not affect for his religion, being a rigid Calvinist) intended to seize on
her person, and to carry her to his castle sixteen miles off; she angered also
the Priests, by exacting of them the third part of their revenues for
maintenance of Preachers, and the rest for her own use, having wasted much of
the Crown-revenues. To make herself more gracious with the people, she creates
her brother James Earl of Mar; but this honor being found to belong anciently
to the Areskins, she makes him in stead of Mar Earl of Murry, and procures him
the Earl-Marshals daughter for his wife; Huntly storms at this, having been
governor of these two Provinces a great while, and challenged Murry for his
inheritance; so that at this time he was the richest and powerfullest Peer of
the Kingdom, and all the Northern parts were at his beck, only Makintose a
great man among the Highlanders refused to be subject to him; which so incensed
Huntly, that he unawares seized upon his person and imprisoned him, and in his
abseuce his Countess caused his head to be struck off, not without suspicion
that it was done by Huntlies command.

The same Huntly was also highly incensed against the Earl of Murrey, whom he
accused to the Queen that he aimed at the Crown, but his proofs were invalid.
The Earl Bothwel at this time, having lavishly wasted his patrimony, knew not
how to live but by fishing in troubled waters; therefore to set the Kingdom in
a Civill-war, he endeavors to make dissension between Murrey and the
Hamiltons; so he strives to persuade Murrey that the Hamiltons aimed at his and
the Queens destruction, and promises assistance to cut them off, which says
he, will be a work acceptable to the Queen, for so she shall be rid of near
kinsmen pretending to the Crown, besides that Aran is her great enemy: Murrey
refused to meddle in such a bloody business, therefore Bothwel incenseth the
Hamiltons against him, accusing him as their great enemy, and that it was easy
to seize upon him as he usually walked alone in Falkland Park. Aran abhorring
this plot, by private letters informs Murrey with it, who returns answer by
the same messenger; but Aran being absent, his father opens the letters, and
withal imprisoneth his son, who escaped in the night to Falkland, where the
Court then was, and discloseth the whole plot; whereupon Bothwel and Galvin
Hamilton the chief actors are apprehended and imprisoned, the one in Edinburgh,
the other in Sterling Castle, and Aran himself who faltered Andrews-Castle,
where he feigned himself mad, lest he should detect his father who had a hand
in the plot; but he so constantly accused Bothwel, that he offered in
vindication of the truth to fight a duel with him.

Mean while Huntly uses all the means he can to cut off Murrey his competitor,
diverse ways he attempted, but all failed; at length he procures some of his
followers to fall upon him in the nightime as he was going home from the
Queen, for he usually staid late with her; but Murrey hearing of the plot, got
some of them who lay in wait for him to be apprehended in their Arms, Huntley
excused the matter, that they meant to ride home in their Arms, and Guises with
Huntley and others, did altogether aim at Murries destruction, not only out of
private respects, but also because he was a main supporter of the Protestants.
The Queen is advised to bear Huntley in hand, that she would marry with his son
John, purposely to further his designs in promoting the Catholic cause; for
this end she makes a progress into the Northern parts: now she hated both
Huntley for his greatness, and Murrey for his religion; she tells Huntley that
she could not with her honor be reconciled to his son John who raised a tumult
lately in Edinburgh, till first he were imprisoned in Sterling-Castle a while,
this she intended, because she knew that during John's absence, she could
Huntley was not willing his son should be committed to custody, chiefly under
Mar, Murries uncle, who was governor of Sterling-Castle: but John Gordon
Huntlies son, who had escaped out of Edinburgh-Castle, was now near Aberden
quartered with a thousand horse.

About the same time Bothwel by a rope escaped out of Edinburgh-Castle: the
Queen intends to go further North, the murder was put off till she came to
Strathbogie the Earls house; but in the way when she could not persuade him to
be content that his son should be sent a prisoner for a while, she turned aside
and would not lie at his house, but went for Innernesse; when she came thither
she is not suffered to enter the Castle which was kept by Huntlies forces,
wherefore Clanchatans, Frasers and Monroes, with diverse other families
understood in what danger the Queen was, repaired all to her aid, and presently
lay siege to the Castle, which for want of necessaries yielded, and diverse of
the garrison were hanged; from thence she returns to Aberdene, where she
expresses her indignation against Huntley: he perceiving there was no way to
obtain his will over the Queen, but by the death of her brother, he intended to
dispatch him with all speed; Murrey understanding in what danger he was raises
what forces he could and marches out against Huntley, a hot skirmish ensues
in which the Huntlyans are discomfited, 120. were slain, and 100. taken
prisoners, among whom was Huntley himself with his two sons John and Adam; the
father being aged and corpulent, died as soon as he was taken, the rest are
brought to Aberden, where John was beheaded, or rather mangled by the unskilful
Executioner to the great grief of the spectators, and of the Queen her self,
for he was of a comely presence, and in the flower of his age; Adam is pardoned
because he was young: many Gordons George Huntlies eldest son fled to his
father-in-law Hamilton, who came to the Queen, now being returned from Aberden
to Perth, to beg pardon for his son-in-law; the Queen gave good words till she
had got him out of Hamiltons hands, then she sends him to Dumbar-Castle; the
next year he is sent to Edinburgh, where he is condemned of Treason, and 1563.
remitted to Dumbar.

Things being thus settled, Bothwel is summoned to return to his prison, which
because he refused, is proclaimed Traitor; Matthew Stuart Earl of Lenox, after
two and twenty years banishment returns home, and is restored again; his son
Henry returns out of England: Mean while the Archbishop of St. Andrews 1564.
for saying Mass is imprisoned in Edinburgh-Castle. The Queen falls in love
with young Lenox, being her Aunts son, and a comely youth, and equally allied
to Queen Elizabeth as her self, who seemed to approve of this match, thinking
it safer for her that Queen Mary take him for her husband then a foreign
Prince; yet she sends Ambassadors to Queen Mary, desiring her not to be too
hasty in a matter of that consequence; a Parliament is called at Sterling, some
of the Lords were for the match, some against it, chiefly Stuart of Ochiltry,
who said he would never assent to have a Popish King over them, and it was held
fitter for the people to choose a husband for one, then that one should choose a
King for them all; at last her side prevailed, and to make this Darly the
fitter for so high a fortune as to marry a Queen, and the widow of so great a
King, she honors him with the titles of Duke of Rothesay, and Earl of Rosse.

The Queen fearing lest her Uncles the Guises would hinder the marriage, makes
what haste she can to finish it, being thereto also advised by David Riz, whom
of one of her Musicians she had made her Secretary for the French-tongue, and
who sowed the coals of dissension between her and Murrey, whom he intended to
murder, who also advised her to send for Bothwel out of France, George Gordon
Earl of Sutherland out of Flanders (who had been George Gordon of Huntly out of
prison, which she did, and restored them to their honors. Murrey was much
incensed at Bothwels return to advancement, so that he forsakes the Court, and
sueth Bothwel for the wrongs he had done him in seeking to murder him; but
Bothwel presuming on the Queens favor and his friends, slighted his citation,
and did not appear: mean while the marriage between the Queen and Darly is
hastened by David Riz for his own private ends, and also for promoting the
Roman Religion, whereof both Earl Matthew and his son Darly were stout
assertors, and which the Guises were striving to advance through all
Christendom.

The marriage is performed about the end of July, and the next day Darly is
proclaimed King, to the great offense of diverse Lords, and of the people, who
grumbled they should have a King imposed on them without consent of Parliament;
diverse Lords absented themselves, who are therefore banished, and their enemies
called to the Court; the banished Lords met at Passet, the King and Queen with
a guard of four thousand go to Glascow, Hamilton-Castle is summoned to be
delivered up to the Queen, which is denied: the banished Lords were of
different minds; the Hamiltons would have both the King and Queen to be slain,
saying there could be no security for them but in their deaths; the other Lords
(who perceived the Hamiltons drift in aiming at the Crown as next heirs, by the
death of the King and Queen) would have all differences composed in an amicable
way; of this opinion were the Hamiltons at last, except James their chief:
these discontented Lords repair to Edinburgh to consult of raising an Army,
but were so shot at from the castle, that they were forced to be gone thence
toward Dumfrize; the Queen makes the Earl of Lenox Lieutenant of the West; the
goods of those are plundered England, and an oath is taken of the Nobility of
Fife to be in arms for the defense of King and Queen, if any forces should come
out of England.

The next year a Parliament is called at Edinburgh, for sequestring the estates
of those Lords who were banished, for degrading of them, and tearing of their
1565.
Arms, which the Prince cannot do there without consent of the Parliament. In
the interim the Queen is advised by David to raise an Army for suppressing of
her enemies; and because she could not trust her own subjects, to send for
German soldiers, or Italians rather his countrymen, who would be at his beck:
thus diverse strangers are brought in by parcels and privately, that there David
is blamed for being the cause of this; wherefore the King by the advice of his
friends conspired his death, which the Queen understanding prevented, but the
second conspiracy was carried more closely; for as the Queen was one night at
supper, the King with some armed men by the private stairs enters the room,
pulls David from thence, and held the Queen in his arms, till in an outward
chamber the Favorite was stabbed to death by the Earl of Mortons servants, who
were there waiting on their Lord purposely for this execution, at

Upon this murder, a great tumult arose in the Court: the Earls of Huntley,
Athol and Bothwell, being at supper in the other side of the Palace, as they
were upon the noise going out of the chamber, are by a guard kept in: Patrick
Ruven a great actor in this tragedy, comes into the Queens chamber, and
advises her to be more careful of her Nobility and Laws, without which she
ought not to act any thing, and not to rely too much on strangers, who are
altogether for their own ends, and which the Nobility cannot brook. In the
interim, upon the fame of this murder, the Citizens take arms and come in
great multitudes Seton with two hundred horse was ready to receive her, who
first conveyed her to his own house, and thence to Dumbar; there having raised
sufficient strength, she persecutes all those that had a hand in the death of
David, some with banishment, some with fines, and some with death; she David's
body to be transferred from before the Church-door where he was buried, into
the next Kings tomb, which occasioned great obloquies among the people. Not
long after she betakes her self to Edinburgh-Castle, where she is brought to
bed of a Son, called James the sixth. 1566.


James Melvin is sent to queen Elizabeth to signify the birth of this young
Prince, who presently sends Henry Killegrew to congratulate with her for her
safe deliverance, and to wish her not to favor any more Shan-O-Neal the Irish
rebel, nor to entertain the English fugitives, and to punish the theevish
borderers. Not long after, the Earl of Bedford is sent from Queen Elizabeth,
being Godmother, with a Font of massy gold for a gift; and commanded that
neither he nor any of his followers, should call the Lord Darly by the name of
king: after the ceremony was finished, Bedford dealt with queen Mary about
composing the differences between her and her husband; and ratifying the treaty
at Edinburgh: this last she refused to do, as being derogatory to her and her
sons right unto the crown of England; yet she promises to send Commissioners
to queen Elizabeth about this Treaty; and that she will forbear to England,
whilst queen Elizabeth lived: But before these Commissioners were sent, about
a month or two after the Prince was Christened, Darly the Queens husband is in
the dead of the night villanously strangled in his bed, and cast into a garden,
so was his servant that attended 1567.
on him in his chamber, and then the house is blown up with Gunpowder; a rumor
is spread that this was done by Morton, Murry, and their confederats, who laid
is from themselves upon the Queen.

Bothwel being now reconciled to Murry, was the man who was employed to murder
the king, in hope he might obtain the Queens marriage after: Murry goes home
fifteen hours before the murder, to avoid suspicion; afterward Bothwel,
purposely to overthrow her. Lenox the kings father accuses Bothwel of the
regicide, who is commanded to bring in his accusations before the Parliament,
within twenty days, which he durst not do, having so many enemies in the
City, and Bothwell so backed with friends; so Bothwell is acquitted, Morton
maintaining his cause; and most of the Lords under their hands and seais gave
their consents to the marriage; Upon this he is created Duke of Orkney, and a
suspicion is raised that the Queen was consenting to her husbands death:
wherefore the Conspirators intend to kill Bothwel and depose the Queen; Murry
to avoid all suspicion goes into France. Immediately after, these men that
persuaded the marriage, Bothwel, willing him secretly to be gone, lest being
taken, he discover the plot; and withal, that they might lay hold of his
flight, as an argument to accuse the Queen of killing the King; but when they
took her, they used her contumeliously, putting an old cloak on her, they
thrust her in prison at Lochlevyn, under the custody of Murry's mother, king
James the fifths Concubine, boasting that she was king James his lawful wife;
which insolences were highly resented by queen Elizabeth: Therefore she sends
Throgmorton into Scotland, to expostulate with the Conspirators for their
insolences against their Queen; she desires her restoration and justice on
the Regicides, and that the young king be sent rather into England then into
France for his

But so much was queen Mary hated, that neither the English nor French
Ambassadors could have access to her; some would have her restored, and
Bothwel divorced; others will have her banished, others again desire she may be
publicly arraigned and imprisoned; but Knox and his fellow-Ministers will have
her deprived of life and kingdom, by a public execution; at last by
threatening her with death, for tyranny, incontinency, and violation of the
laws, they forced her to put her hand to the Letters-pattents which she never
read, wherein she resignes her realm to her son, now thirteen months old,
makes Murry Regent, during the Kings minority, and if he refused, then James
Duke of Chastelroy, Matthew Earl of Lenox, with Argile, Morton, Glencarn, and
Mar. Five days after this resignation, James her son was anointed, and
crowned King, the Coronation Oath in his name was taken by the Earls of Morton
and Hume, That he will maintain the Laws and Religion, as it is now established.

CHAP. XXXIV.
A continuation of the Scots History under King James the 6. from the year
1567. till 1602.

WHen Queen Mary and Bothwel perceived that an Army was raised to apprehend
them, they make an escape in disguised habits to Dumbar; in the interim the
conspirators repair to Edinburgh, where Hamilton, Huntley, and other Lords of
the Queens side were; these are driven into the Castle, being let in by Balfour
the Captain, the City presently submits to the Leith; the sudden news whereof
awakes Edinburgh, all the inhabitants are in Arms and in the field by break of
day: As the two Armies were ready to join battle, Crocus the French Ambassador
endeavors to make atonement, by showing them the uncertainty and danger of a
battle, and the Queens willingness to give a general pardon, and her
propensity to peace: to whom Morton answered, That he took Arms not against the
Queen, but the murderers of the King, whom if she will either punish, or put
from her, they will lay down Arms and Crocus takes his leave and returns to
Edinburgh: Bothwel to end the controversy, challenges any one of the
conspirators Army to fight with him, three after each other present themselves,
but the Queen would not give way: the Lords that were with her, finding the
unwillingnesse of the common-souldier to fight in this quarrel, desire the
Queen to forbear fighting till some other time, whereupon Bothwel perceiving
his own danger, escapes to Dumbar in great haste and fear.

The Queen understanding that Huntley, and Archbishop Hamilton were coming
with some forces, she desires of the Army leave to meet them, promising Henry
lying dead, and his infant-son by him praying to God for vengeance on the
paricides; at which sight the Queen swouned, who toward the evening was
brought to Edinburgh in great contempt, the streets being filled with people to
see her. That Banner we spoke of, was the next day presented again to her as
she looked out at a window, complaining of her wrongs; the day after she is
sent prisoner to Loch-Leven: Bothwel finding no security for himself, nor help
for the Queen, flies into the Orcades, thence into Shetland, and at last turns
Pyrat. The Queen as we have said, is forced to resign her Crown, and Murrey
being lately returned from France, is by the conspiring Lords made Regent.

Shortly after the Infant-King was crowned, a Parliament is summoned, where it
was ordered that a fleet should be sent to catch Bothwel, who did much hurt in
the Northern-seas; but though some of his fellow-pyrats were taken, yet he
escaped into Denmark, where being known by some Merchants, is laid in irons, so
he continued in much misery for ten years, and then falling mad, died. Not long
after this, an Ambassador comes from France, showing that his Commission was to
speak with the Queen, or else to return instantly; the Regent told him, that it
was not in his power to help him to the speech of Hamilton a small Town eight
miles from Glascow, where she is guarded with five hundred horse, and a great
many more flock to her from all parts: the French Ambassador goes to and fro,
pretendinga pacification, but indeed he encourages the Queen to fight, who was
now 6500 strong, whereas the Regent was scarce 4000. A battle is fought,
wherein the Queens horse had the better a while, till they were so galled by
the Regents archers, that they were forced to fly to the Queen, who about a
mile off beheld the fight; she with her horse fly toward England. The Regent
appoints a Parliament, which the Queens party do what they can to hinder, queen
Elizabeth also sends letters to him for that end, that he should not be too
hasty in determining any thing against the Queens party, whom she would not
suffer

The Regent, notwithstanding those letters, calls a Parliament, in which it was
questioned, Whether all they that assisted the Queen should not be condemned of
treason, and their estates confiscated? At last it was resolved, that some
should be punished for example sake. Shortly after the Regent raises an Army,
and subdueth those parts that stood out for the queen: but queen Elizabeth's
letters put some stay to his proceedings; for she was informed by the banished
Lords, that queen Mary was extremely wronged by her subjects, and the Majesty
of Princes slighted, if this power should be tolerated in people to depose
their Princes; therefore she desires Commissioners may be sent to Elizabeth
should fall off from him, he should be exposed to inevitable danger, having
Lorrain the queens uncle, who ruled the Court of France, against him, and
diverse of the Scottish Nobility, therefore he appoints certain Commissioners to
go, but perceiving them unwilling, he goes himself with two Lords, one Bishop,
one Abbot, two Lawyers, and George Buchanan, he takes also with him William
Metland, fearing to leave so public a man, and so well-affected to queen Mary
behind him; his whole train was but an hundred horse. At York he is met by
Norfolk, (who was thought to marry with queen Mary) the Earl of Sussex, and Sir
Ralph Sadler; A few days after, queen Mary's Commissioners came to complain
against the Regents proceedings, who excuses himself that he acted nothing but
by consent of Parliament: queen Elizabeth sends for two of the Regents side, to
be fully instructed in the particulars; Metland and Macgill are sent; and at
last the Regent is desired to come to the Court, that the queen might know what
he could say for himself, or against queen Mary.

In this mean while rumors are spread abroad in Scotland, that the Regent went
about to betray the kingdom and the young king to the English, whereupon great
commotions and distempers began to break out; the Regent to Elizabeth to gain
the more time for queen Mary, therefore she advises him to leave one of his
friends behind, that might answer to any crime that might be objected against
him. But Hamilton now being returned from France, is set on by the banished
queens side to stand for the Regencie, as being so near in blood to the young
King; but his suit is denied him, because by many instances it was proved, that
there is less danger for a young Prince to be under the tuition of strangers
then of a near kinsman who aims at the Crown, as may be seen in king Richard
3. of England his cruelty to his brothers sons: Therefore Hamilton is detained
in England, till the young Kings Commissioners were first gone, lest Elizabeth
gives order that all the suspected ways through which he was to travel should
be strongly guarded.

The Regent being returned safely into Edinburgh, a great meeting ensued of the
Kings Lords at Sterlin, who ratified all that was concluded and agreed upon
with the English last; Hamilton also being returned is forced to submit to the
Kings side, for he found that help came not to him as he expected, and that the
Regent had an Army in readiness; but when he understood that queen Mary had
more liberty in England then before, and that she was to marry with the Duke of
Norfolk, he began to fall off again from the conspiring Lords; wherefore he is
sent with Maxwel to Edinburgh-Castle. Argile is questioned for coming to
Glascow with fifteen hundred men, purposely to raise the Country for the Queen
whilst the Regent was absent; but he upon his submission, and taking the oath
of allegiance is pardoned. Huntley also is accused in raising forces for the
Queen, and in oppressing of diverse families, and he likewise is absolved, but
withal is enjoined to make restitution to

After this the Regent makes a journey into Aberden, Elgin and Innernesse, for
settling of these places and the Northern Countries; thence returning into
Perth, he receives letters from the Queen of England which he imparts to the
Nobility being summoned thither; the contents of these letters were, That
either Queen Mary should be restored to her former dignities, or else that she
may be colleague with her son in the government; or if neither of these could
be obtained, that she may live privately at home, and be made capable of such
honors as might not be derogatory to the young King; this last clause was
assented to, but they would not yield that the Kings power Mary's letters,
wherein she desires that if her marriage with Bothwel be unlawful, she might be
divorced: At this the Conspirators were offended, in that she styled her self
Queen, and wrote to them as subjects; therefore they thought her letters not
fit to be answered, showing that her best way to dissolve the marriage, were to
send to the King of Denmark to do justice on Bothwel as the murderer of her
husband, and so he being de^d, she might marry with whom she pleased. Then an
Agent is sent to Queen E^zabeth, with the Regents answer to her letters, with
which she was not satisfied, but desires further satisfaction; upon this
Petcarne is sent to acquaint her, that for diverse reasons they could not admit
Queen Mary into any share of the government, fearing that she who was so
unnatural to her husband, would not be too kind to her son, having obtained
her Crown and dignity from her.

Mean while a plot is detected in England, that Queen Mary and Norfolk 1569.
were suddenly to marry; and that they might obtain both Kingdoms without
opposition, Queen Elizabeth and King James were to be murdered at one time;
hereupon Norfolk is sent to the Tower, and Queen Mary is appointed to be sent
home to the Regent by sea; but this resolution is altered: About the same time
Metland and Balfour Captain of Edinburgh-Castle, are convented Mary, but both
are pardoned, only Metland is confined to a private house in Edinburgh, whom
Kircady the Captain of that Castle got into his custody; by feigning the
Regents letters, as if he had written to Kircady to take Metland into his
custody, at which the Lords were angry, the Regent sends for Kircady, who
refuses to come; hence it was conceived that he sided with the Queen, who was
now said to be coming with Norfolk out of England; but it was otherwise, for
he is sent to the Tower, and she is confined: the Regent notwithstanding his
repulse, goes up next day into the Castle, and having conferred with Kircady,
comes away thence well-pleased, and marches toward the borders Elizabeth, who
also thanked him for apprehending Northumberland, who fled thither out of
England, whom the Regent imprisoned in Loch-Levin.

Queen Mary's faction perceiving the Regents power to increase daily, by the
correspondencie he held with Queen Elizabeth, and finding that no good could be
done so long as he lived, they combine to kill him; therefore one day as he
rode through the streets of Lithgo, he was shot by one Hamilton out of a
private place through the body a little beneath the navil; finding himself hurt
he lights from his horse, and is carried to his lodging, where he died shortly
after; Hamilton escapes into France: upon the death of Murrey great disorders
arose, Metland and other prisoners are let out of the Castle; great debating
there was who should be Regent, and by what power he should be chosen. 1571.
Car and Scot with some forces they had raised, invade the borders of England
with fire and sword: Queen Elizabeth sends Randolph to complain, and to desire
the Lords to unite themselves to choose a Regent, and to settle the Kingdom,
that justice may be done on those who had invaded her borders; but Sussex to
assist the Kings side against the other faction who stood out for the Queen;
these understanding that the Army was upon their march, write letters to the
Queen of England to be conveyed by the Earl of Sussex, who is desired by queen
Mary's side; not to march further till he should receive the Queens answer; but
he suspecting that these were delatory letters to gain time, and his charge
being to make haste, opens them, wherein he finds nothing but brags and
threatenings, therefore he marches on.

When the queens faction heard that the English Army was on the borders, they
remove presently from Edinburgh to Limnuchum, where the Earls of Huntley, Aran
and Argile call a Parliament; the Kings faction sends to the queen of England
to have her assistance in naming of a Regent, showing they should be ready to
embrace him whom she will nominate; in the interim the English Army fall with
fire and sword upon the Cars and Scots Territories who had lately invaded
England: Hume-Castle with much wealth in it, is surrendered to Sussex, upon hope
that he had been of Norfolks faction. The Lord Scrupe on the other side enters
Anandel, and spoils the lands of the Iohnstons, who had also invaded England.
The Hamiltons upon the report of the English Army hasten to Glascow to pull
down the Archbishops Castle, fearing lest Lenox returning from England should
make it the seat of the war; they besiege English Army to Edinburgh they rise
from the siege, and hasten away; Huntley goes home, Hamilton and Argile into
Argiles Country; the English two days after come to Glascow, and spoil all the
lands belonging to the Hamiltons, or those who had a hand in the Regents death,
or who had received any English fugitives; they set on fire the Hamiltons
Palace, with the Town, and beat down a part of the Castle; so the English
return to Barwick, and the Scots who aided them to their homes.

In the interim Petcarne returns from the Queen of England, who wonders that
after four months they should now acquaint her with their business; she Spain
and France had importuned her to hear the complaints of Queen Mary, which she
had promised to do, if in the mean while queen Mary will give order that her
side will forbear all acts of hostility, and suffer things to remain as they
were in the Regents time; but she will have no hand in choosing them a new
Regent, lest she should seem to wrong queen Mary, her cause being not yet
heard; but withal she wishes them to forbear a while the naming of a new
Regent: At this the Kings side was troubled, fearing lest by this delay the
Queens faction would gather strength, therefore they resolve to choose an
Inter-Rex, or Viceroy for a while, till Queen Elizabeth's business at home be
settled, who was troubled Scots had a hand: Then they name for their Viceroy
Matthew Earl of Lenox the young Kings Grandfather; mean while Queen Elizabeth
writes that she will not name any Regent for them, but she thinks none fitter
for that place then Lenox, as being nearest and dearest to the young King; so
he is presently of a Viceroy made Regent.

He having taken his oath, gives order for raising of an Army to hinder the
Parliament appointed by the Queens faction, and withal summons a Parliament in
the Kings name to be held in Edinburgh: then he sends to the Governor of
Edinburgh-Castle for some Brasse-guns and other warlike necessaries; at first
he promised, but afterward denied, showing he was for peace, not war;
notwithstanding the Regent with five thousand goes to Limnuch, where hearing
of some forces of Brechin placed there by Huntley, who was raising an Army in
the north, to hinder his design sends a party to Brechin, at the news of whose
approach Ogleby and Balfour fled, leaving a garrison, who maintained the
Church-Tower and the Countess of Mars Castle a while against the Regents
forces, but at length yielded, and thirty of them were hanged: Huntley
Edinburgh to the Parliament, where nothing was acted against the murderers of
the Regent, because Q. Mary's cause was not yet heard. In the interim the
Queens side solicit the Pope, Spain, and France, to send forces into England
for restoring of Q. Mary. Montgomery Earl of Eglinton with some others submit
to the Regent, who had lately hurt himself by a fall from his horse. An attempt
is made upon Dunbritton-Castle, which with much difficulty at last they took by
scaling-ladders; Fleming the Captain escaped into Argile; but Hamilton the
Archbishop of S. Andrews, with some other prime men, and the French Agent who
lay there as a Spy, are apprehended. 1572.
thither, where he restores to Flemings wife her plate and household stuff; and
wondering at the courage of the soldiers who could venture to scale such an
inaccessible Rock, commends them highly. The French Agent is accused for
robbing some Merchants, wherefore he is sent to S. Andrews to answer to their
suit, but he escaped from thence. There was also an Englishman taken and sent
home, who afterward was found to have been sent by the Norfolkians purposely to
poison the young King. The Archbishop being found guilty both of the Kings
death and Regents, was hanged at Sterlin; his chief accuser John Hamilton a
principal actor in the Kings death had confessed the whole murder secretly.

Morton being returned from his English embassy, gave an account thereof
before the Lords at Sterlin; How they had exhibited in writing to Q. Elizabeth
the reasons that moved them to depose Q. Mary, alleging diverse precedents out
of ancient and modern histories, of the like deposition of Princes by their
people; but yet the Queen was not fully satisfied of the legality of this fact,
therefore she desires there may be an expedient found out for composing the
differences betwixt her and her subjects; it was answered by the Commissioners,
that they had no commission to treat about any expedient, nor could they
consent to the diminishing of their Kings power, nor if they did consent, Rosse
who was one of Queen Mary's Agents, had received answer from his Queen of these
passages; at last her answer came, wherein she complains of the hard measure
offered to her Elizabeth wishes them to show their duty to their Prince, upon
her true repentance, and so she dismisseth them.

The Commissioners having finished their relation, a Parliament is appointed to
be held at Edinburgh; but because the Queens party were masters of the Town,
they resolve to sit in the suburbs; in the interim it is proclaimed at Leith,
that no provisions or arms either by sea or land be brought to Edinburgh upon
pain of treason; the Herald was accompanied with about an hundred horse and
foot, on whom some Citizens sallied out as they were returning home near the
walls, but were beat in again. Whilst the Parliament sat without the Town,
they within call a Parliament of their own; the Castle in the interim played
with their Ordnance upon the Kings Parliament, but no hurt was done. When both
the Assemblies were dismissed, two hundred and twenty musketeers, and a hundred
horse, with two field-peeces, are sent out of Edinburgh against Dalketh, where
the Earl Mortons house was, who hearing of this presently arms two hundred foot
and sixty horse; a skirmish followed, in which the Queens men were put to run,
which the City-garrison perceiving Mortons men to fly, some were slain and
taken on both sides, some also of the Queens party were killed by a barrel of
gunpowder accidentally having taken fire. Some bickering also there was between
the two factions about a company of Scots soldiers lately arrived out of
Denmark; these intended all to serve the King, but six and twenty of them were
intercepted at Leith by the Queens party, and carried to Edinburgh-Castle.

When Drury the English Agent, who had been mediating for peace, to no purpose,
was upon going, away, a skirmish fell out between the two factions, Mortons
forces, who killed fifty of the enemy, and took a hundred and fifty prisoners;
almost there were daily skirmishes: the Regent kept Leith to intercept all
provisions by sea from the Edinburgers; land-provisions could not be cut off,
being so many ways to bring it: A French vessel laden with arms, in which also
good store of money is found, was taken; the money paid the soldiers, and the
arms were carried to Sterlin; shortly after another French ship was taken with
letters from the French, promising speedy aid to the Queens party. The Regent
being gone to Sterlin, the Edinburgers with all their forces march out into the
field, to draw the Kings party out of Leith; who fallying out furiously, drove
their enemies Edinburgh, of whom they killed and took diverse.

After this, the Queens party with two hundred horse and three hundred foot
march out of Edinb^rgh toward Sterlin, by the way they press all the horses
they found, then b^times in the morning they enter the Town without resistance,
all being secure and asleep, they beset the Lords lodgings with armed men,
Mortons house they set on fire, and himself having escaped the fire they took
prisoner, the Regent is also taken, the Earls of Glencarn and Eglinton are
secured: Areskin Captain of the Castle sends some companies of musketeers to
seize upon his own house, not then quite finished, which looked full upon the
marketplace possessed by the enemy, who being fore galled by the David Spence,
who to keep off the blows received them himself, and died the same day of his
wounds, two of those that killed him were put to death, the other prisoners in
the flight escaped, and the Regent himself also died of his wounds that day.
Three Regents are named till the next Parliament, to wit, Argile, James
Douglasse Earl of Morton, and Areskin-Earle of Mar; He by all the suffrages is
preferred to the rest, who resolves to besiege Edinburgh, but it was so
strengthened that he could do no good that way; after this for diverse months
there were many excursions and skirmishes

About this time the North was much troubled by the falling out of two great
families, the ^ordons and the Forbeses; these were for the young King, but the
Gordons for the Queen: the quarrel grew to that height, that near Aberden a
great battle was fought, in which the Gordons had the upper hand; many other
skirmishes were between the two great factions, till Edinburgh was strictly
besieged by the Regent, who pulled down all the Mills near, and intercepted all
the provision that came thither, and made garrisons of all the Noblemens houses
round about: Blackness is betrayed to Hamilton, by which means all navigation
between Leith and Sterlin is hindered. Mean time the King of Spain sends from
the Low Countries seven great pieces of Ordnance with powder and arms to
Huntley Lieutenant of the North, for queen Mary's use, who sends the Lord
Seaton to the Duke of Alba for his aid, and that he would forbid the Scottish
rebels to traffic there; he answers, That he would aid her with money, but he
could not hinder the Scots from trading, because it was contrary to the liberty
of the Low Countries.

The Bishop of Rosse Agent for the Queen of Scots, is committed into custody of
the Bishop of London, because he had secretly kindled the Rebellion in the
North: but being now delivered, deals with the French king, that he would use
means with queen Elizabeth for delivering of queen Mury, which queen Elizabeth
would not assent to, as being dangerous to her self and kingdom, seeing queen
Mary aspired by all evil courses (says she) unto the kingdom of England; yet
she urges a confirmation of the Treaty of Edinburgh, which in part was
assented to, so far as concerned Q. Elizabeth's title, but the Scots could not
be induced to break their old league with France, except England would allow
them the same privileges and benefits they have in France. The Bishop Ross is
searched for letters sent to him from the D. of Alba about Q. Mary's
deliverance, and is sent away into the Isle of Ely; some money also which Q.
Mary sent to her friends in Scotland is intercepted. Rosse, being found to have
often conference with Q. Elizabeth's enemies, is committed to the Tower, after
it had been argued by the Lawyers, that an Ambassador loses his privilege who
raises rebellion. The Regent Mar, having ruled 13 months, died.

To him in the Regencie succeeded James Douglasse Earl of Morton, who enacted
1573.
certain laws against Papists and Heretics: the custody of the King is
committed to Alexander Areskin, because the Earl of Mar was under age, to whom
by peculiar right does belong the custody of the king in his minority; Hamilton
Duke of Chastelroy, and Huntley, are drawn by queen Elizabeth's means to submit
to the king and his Regent, and to acknowledge the religion established; she
sends also Sir William Drury with forces into Scotland, to join with the Scots
in reducing of Edinburgh-Castle, which was at last surrendered the 33. day of
the siege, Kircady the governor is hanged. The Bishop of Rosse is banished out
of England, who notwithstanding leaves not to solicit foraign Princes in
queen Mary's behalf, who all gave good words, but did Henry 3. of France, and
his mother, labor what they can to get young king James into France, so did
queen Mary, hoping thereby the Catholics would be more mildly dealt with here.
Q. Mary is blamed also for contriving a marriage between Charles uncle to the
Scots king, and Elizabeth Candish daughter to the Countess of Shrewsbury. The
Duke of Chastelroy and the Earl of Arran, who were Q. Mary's faithful friends,
died this year. Don John of Austria intends to marry with the queen of Scots,
therefore deals with the Pope about the expulsion of Q. Elizabeth, and
sollicites the king of Spain to invade England. Morton the Regent is removed
from his regencie, and the government is delivered to the king being now twelve
years old, and to twelve Morton was one; but he loath to leave his greatness,
drew all the power to himself, and kept in his hand the king within the castle
of Sterlin, wherewith the other Lords were angry, who made the Earl of Athol
their Captain, and raised an Army, whereupon Morton yielded and went home
secretly, and Athol died incontinently, not without suspicion of poison.

Esmeus Stuart, son of John brother to Matthew Earl of Lenox the Kings
grandfather, and called Aubigney of a Town in Berry, which was bestowed upon
John Stuart by king Charles 7. for defeating the English at Baugy, is now come
into 1579.
Scotland to see his Cousin, who made him a Privy-Councellor, Lord Chamberlain
of Scotland, Captain of Dunbritton, Earl of Lenox, and after Duke, which
procured some envy on the King as a favourer of the Guises and Roman religion;
therefore the Ministers and some envious Lords raised one James Stuart of the
family of Ochiltree, Captain of the Guard and Earl of Arran, to affront 1580.
him; but the King in short time reconciled them: Then they accuse him to queen
Elizabeth, as one sent by the Guises against the Protestants, to free the
England and Scotland; but he cleared all objections, and showed himself a
Protestant: It was also feared, that by Dunbrition he would either let in the
French, or transport the King into France; and that he persuaded the King to
resign to his Mother the Crown, and take it again by a lawful resignation:
Hereupon Robert Bows is sent to challenge Lenox before the King and his
Council; but before his cause was heard or known, he would have him removed
from the Council, which was denied as a thing not heard of; withal they desire
him to show his Instructions, which he denied, and so being unheard was called
home.

Upon this, Alexander Hume is sent to queen Elizabeth, who admitted him
Burleigh, who complained that the Queens Ambassador was slighted, and the Kings
French cousin, a Papist, and who perhaps aimed at the Crown, was preferred to
the Queen of England: so Hume is sent back, with a caveat to the King to beware
of the French plots and faction. In the interim Morton is accused by Arran of
treason, and imprisoned, though a great friend 1581.
for England; therefore Sir Thomas Randolph is sent into Scotland to conserve
amity with England, to defend Morton from wrong, and to remove Lenox; He told
both the King and his Council, what queen Elizabeth had done in freeing
Scotland from the French, in defending their King and Religion, without taking
a foot of Scottish ground; that now Lenox has diverted the Kings Lenox was
wronged; that in justice he must bring to trial a man accused of treason. Then
Randolph strives to stir up Argile and some other Lords, to effect by arms what
they could not do otherwise, showing that English forces were ready on the
borders to join with them; but this took not effect with these Lords. Angus and
Mar devised plots for Morton against Lenox; but the King banisheth Angus beyond
the river of Spey, and the Castle of Sterlin is taken from Mar. Randolph
fearing danger to himself, got away secretly by sea to Barwick; the English
forces are called back from the borders; Morton, as privy to the murder of the
kings father, is beheaded; Angus with others who stood in his defense, fled
into England. 1582.


William Ruthen, lately made Earl of Gowry, with Mar, Lindsey and others, in
the absence of Lenox and Arran, invite the king into the Castle of Ruthen,
where they detain him violently, and put away his best servants, they imprison
Arran, and call back Angus, and send away Lenox into France; they force the
King to approve this his surprise, by his letters to queen Flizabeth; the
French King hearing of this, sends two Ambassadors to set the King free, and to
confirm the French faction: queen Mary in the mean while in her letters to
queen Elizabeth bewaileth the hard condition and miseries of her son now
detained Elizabeth for countenancing and supporting such, showing her needless
jealousies and fears, and how she had persuaded her to resign her kingdom,
and had denied her assistance when she had escaped out of Lochlevin, when she
sent back the Diamond which she had received from queen Elizabeth as a pledge
of her love, and how she suffered her (when she escaped to England for shelter
as her last assured anchor) to be intercepted and guarded with keepers, and to
be shut up in strong places till now; she clears her self also of any
combination with Norfolk prejudicial to queen Elizabeth, upon whose persuasion
she had suffered diverse of her friends to be put to death in Scotland;
therefore she desires that she may have some more liberty, however some
Catholic Priest to direct her in Religion, a courtesy not denied to foreign
Ambassadors; as for the suggestions of Beal about her transferring her right of
Scotland to her son, withoutqueen Elizabeth's promise, she desires that he may
not be credited, and so concludes, wishing her to commiserate 1583.
a distressed queen, and her nearest cousin.

These letters much trouble Queen Elizabeth, who sends Beal a Clerk of the
England was content she should be delivered, conditionally, That she practice
nothing against Queen Elizabeth; That she would disallow as unjust what was
done by king Francis her husband; That she claim no right to England during the
life of Queen Elizabeth; That she procure the king and States of Scotland to
confirm these, and give hostages withal; but the Scots of the English faction
rejected these proposals. About this time the Earl of Lenox died, the
Ambassadors depart unsatisfied, and the king escapes from the government of
the three Lords to the Castle of S. Andrews, and openly declares that this his
surprisal was traitorous, yet the busie-headed Ministers in their Synod
pronounced

Gowry with some others conspire to take the King again, pretending his good,
the security of Religion, and amity with England: but Gowry is apprehended 1584.
and imprisoned; his other conspirators suddenly surprise Sterling, and as
suddenly quitted it out of fear and want of supplies from England. Mar, Glames
and Angus fled unto queen Elizabeth for her help and mediation with the King;
in the interim Gowry is arraigned before his Peers at Sterling, for imprisoning
the King and conspiring against him, for intending to seize upon Perth and
Sterling, for resisting the Kings authority at Dundee, who being Elizabeth
makes show of a treaty with queen Mary, if she would mediate with her son for
the Scots fugitive Lords, and detect the plots of the Guises: for the first
queen Mary was content to mediate, if these Lords would submit and turn loyal;
for the second, she refused till she were fully assured of her liberty; for she
will not lose certain friends for uncertain hopes, therefore she desires the
same usage from her which she had from her sister queen Mary when she was her
prisoner, or the King of Navarre from the French king; but this Treaty was put
off, and came to nothing, upon discovery of some letters carried by Crithton
the Jesuit, importing the invasion of England by the Pope, Spaniards and
Guises: then she Navus her Secretary with proffers of entertaining a strict
league of amity with queen Elizabeth, of renouncing all claim to England during
her life, of acting nothing against her, or the rebellious Scots, and their
Religion, nor in her sons marriage without the privity of queen Elizabeth.

But the Presbyterian Ministers, and their upholders, crossed all means of
pacification; so the Pulpit being advanced above the Throne, all went as the
Presbytery would have it, till this year they were curbed by some wholesome
Laws advancing the Kings power over them, and restraining Presbyterial
assemblies, and abrogating equality of Ministers by restoring the Bishops, Mary
is taken from the custody of Shrewsbury after fifteen years, and is committed
to Paulet and Drury, purposely to make her fall upon desperate attempts;
strange whispers went abroad about the deposition of queen Elizabeth, and the
marriage of queen Mary with some Noble English Catholic, but who this man
should be could not be found out. About this time Henry Percie E. of
Northumberland being a prisoner in the Tower, and suspected to have been a
plotter against Queen Elizabeth, murdered himself; upon the discovery of
Babbingtons treason, Queen Mary's closet is broken open whilst 1585.
she was hunting abroad, and all her cabinets, desks and papers are sent to the
Court; all her money also was seized on, diverse letters of strangers were
found, and about sixty kinds of ciphers; diverse letters also of English Lords
offering their service to her, which the Queen dissembled; Queen Mary's two
1586.
Secretaries were examined, and confessed that she knew of Babbingtons plot,
wherefore Commissioners are sent to Fodringhay-Castle to examine Queen Mary,
and to pronounce sentence of death, if found guilty: when they came Elizabeth's
letters, which she read with great and Princely magnanimity, showing she was a
Queen, and not subject to their Laws, nor was she guilty of what she was
accused; therefore refuses to appear or answer as a criminal, or to admit that
law lately made against her, yet upon persuasions she appears, diverse
accusations were brought in against her, of which (though she stoutly defended
herself) yet she was found guilty. Shortly after the Parliament petitioneth
that she might be put to death, which Q. Elizabeth seemingly refused to consent
to, as being a dangerous president.

Yet shortly after Buckhurst and Beal are sent to Queen Mary to acquaint her
with the sentence given against her, and that therefore she should repent and
Elizabeth, desiring her body might be sent into France there to be laid by her
mother, and not into Scotland where violence has been offered to the ashes of
her Ancestors, that so she may have rest after death, who could never enjoy any
in her life. Secondly, she desires to die publicly that she might witness her
faith in Christ, and her obedience to the Church. Thirdly, that her servants
might peaceably depart, and enjoy the legacies she had bestowed on them.

King James being much afflicted about the sentence of death against his
Elizabeth, showing how much he was bound both in honor and nature to intercede
for a Queen, and his mother, how dishonorable and dangerous it might be to
Queen Elizabeth to shed the blood of a Queen so near to her: but the Ministers
of Scotland, and the rest of her enemies were so earnest and prevalent with
queen Elizabeth, that the Kings letters could not prevail, nor the French kings
Ambassadors which he also sent to this purpose; besides the Queen was
affrighted daily with rumors of the Spanish fleet, of the Scots invasion, of
the Guises preparations, of domestic rebellions, of plots to murder her, all
to hasten the Scots queens death, therefore she delivers to Davison her
Secretary letters Shrewsbury, Kent, Derby and Cumberland, which four Earls came
to her, willing her to prepare, for she was to die the next day; she with a
settled mind answered, That death was welcome to her, and that her soul was not
worthy of eternal joy, whose body cannot endure the Executioners blow; she
desired the speech of her Confessor which was denied her, yet she wrote to him
that he would pray for her; that night she supped, drunk to her servants
encouraging them, she read over her last will, then went to bed, slept a while,
and spent the

The next day she came in a Majestic manner to the Scaffold, carrying the
Crucifix before her, where having professed her constancy to the Roman
religion, and taking leave of her friends and servants, laid down her neck on
the block, repeating these words, Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit;
and so at two blows her head was cut off, her body was buried in
Peterburgh-Church, and her magnificent funeral kept at Paris at the charges of
the Guises, she lived forty six years, and was a captive eighteen: when Q.
Elizabeth heard of her death she was ready to swound for grief, she commands
her Counselors, to come no more into her presence, and Davison to be brought
into the Star Chamber; then she writes a letter to King James, showing how
without her knowledge his mother was put to death, and how grievous it is to
her; withal she assures him, none shall be more affectionated to him, nor so
careful of him as her self; mean while Davison is sharply reproved in the
Star Chamber for his forwardness, and fined ten thousand pounds, and
imprisonment at the Queens pleasure.

The King was so displeased at the death of his mother, that he would not
English Ambassador to come into Scotland, and would hardly hear him by another
man, or receive his letters; he called home his own Ambassador out of England,
and threatens revenge; the Estates of Scotland proffer to spend their lives
and estates in this quarrel; some persuade him to require a Navy of the King of
Denmark, to whose daughter he began to be a Suitor; some would have him join
with Spain and France, and the Pope, and that he should not trust Protestants
who had killed his mother, lest they also kill the children; some would rather
have him stand as neuter, but others advised him to keep peace with England,
and be constant to his Religion. Queen Elizabeth perceiving the French
tampering with King James to withdraw him England, sends to him, to let him see
how dangerous it will prove to him and his Kingdom to fall out with England at
this time, how uncertain the aids of France and Spain will be, how he may by
this lose his claim to the Crown of England, and how she will be a mother to
him; withal she sends him the sentence against Davison, and the Judges of
Englands opinion, showing that the sentence against his mother was no ways
prejudicial to his right of succession. 1587.


From this time till the coming of King James into England, fell out no
matters of great concernment in Scotland, except the driving of some Spanish
1588.
Orkney; the voyage of King James to bring home his new married Queen Anne from
Denmark; 1589.
the attempt that Bothwel made upon the King and Queen in their chambers, from
whence he was repulsed and forced to fly, some of whose Pages and 1591.
followers were apprehended and hanged, for which treasonable attempt of his he
is proclaimed Traitor, and because he was harbored by the Earl of 1592.
Murrey, contrary to the proclamation, Huntley by command seiseth on Murrey in
his own house and kills him; Bothwel in the interim escapes into England, 1593.
where he lurked a while, and from thence returning is apprehended and
consined, he endeavors to raise a rebellion, but to no purpose. This year
Prince Henry was born; diverse contestations the King had with the Presbyterian
1594.
Ministers about the Bishops and Church Government, in which the King was
extremely vexed, persecuted and preached against by them, whose power was at
that time no less formidable then the Popes heretofore. About this time was
fought that cruel battle of Avinian between Huntley and Argile, in which seven
hundred of Argiles side were slain, and the rest put to flight; these stirs
were raised and somented by some rigid Presbyterian Ministers, as Robert Bruce
Super-intendent of Edinburgh, Balquankel and others, because the King kept
correspondency with Catholic Princes, and was not cruel enough against the
Papists in Scotland; therefore they encourage Bothwel against the Scots from
the Turks; Bothwel with three hundred horse surpriseth Leith, the King desires
the assistance of the Edinburgers against him, but they would not stir, being
forbid by their Ministers to help the King, so that he was forced to come up to
the Church of S. Giles, and there publikly before the people held up his hand
and protested he would be an utter enemy to the Papists; whereupon the Citizens
take Arms, whereby Bothwels hopes were frustrated, who cursed the Ministers for
deluding him thus.

Upon this the King was forced by the importunity of the Ministers, to make
Argile (who was their great Protector) Lieutenant of the North, a man unfit for
that employment, as being of too haughty and cruel a disposition, and besides
weak in horse, though powerful enough in foot-forces; the King also was
persuaded to bestow on him the Country of Lochaber which belonged to Huntley:
Argile having received his Commission, raises an Army of twelve thousand, with
which he intends to prosecute Huntley, Aerrol and Angus, three Catholic Earls,
with fire and sword; they hearing of this preparation, raise also a thousand
horse with a foot-army, I mean Huntley and Aerrol, for Angus had an Army of his
own to defend his Country, and could not come in time to join with the other
two, because of the Rivers between. Argile placed two thousand musketeers in
his Van, against which Huntlies great Ordnance did so play that they forced
them to give back, and join with the main body where Argile was himself, which
Aerrol perceiving, wheels about with his horse, and falls upon them in the
Rear, and withal receives two wounds with forked arrows, one in the arm,
another in the foot; to help him, Huntley breaks in furiously with all his
horse upon the main body of Argiles Army, and puts them with Argile himself to
flight; the fight continued two hours; of Huntlies side few were killed, but
many wounded, and above two hundred horse slain; of Argiles side some say seven
hundred, others five hundred. The next five years fell out no memorable
accident, but Gowries 1600.
Treason, and not long after the birth of Prince Charles. 1601.


CHAP. XXXV.
The History of England and Scotland together, from the coming in of King
James to be sole Monarch of the whole Island, from the year 1602. till 1625.

QUeen Elizabeth being dead about ten a clock in the morning, King James the
very same day (Secretary Cecil reading his Title and Queen 1602.
Elizabeth's Will) was proclaimed by sound of Trumpet first at Whitehall, then
in Cheap Side, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland. Sir Robert Carry,
the Lord Hunsdons younger son, posted away unsent, to King James with the news
of the Queens death, who afterward was made a Baron: A few days after, the
Lords of the Council send Sir Charles Percy and Mr. Thomas Sommerset, and after
them Sir Thomas Lake Clerk of the Signet, to acquaint the King of the peoples
affections toward him, as likewise with the State of of the Kingdom. Egerton
Lord Chancellor, Buckhurst Lord Treasurer, Nottingham Lord Admiral, and Cecil
chief Secretary are confirmed in their places: Thomas Howard the brother, and
Henry Howard the son of Norfolk who had suffered for the Kings mother, are
advanced by him, though they were Catholics, to let Pope Clement 8. see he was
no such enemy to Papists as some would have had him, and that his two Bulls
sent out against his succession to the Crown were needless.

King James having settled Scotland, on the fifth of April begins his journey
England, and comes to Theobalds the third of May, where he was met by the 1603.
Lords of the late Queens Privy-councel, and entertained with an Oration by the
Lord Keeper: Here diverse Lords of Scotland are made Privy-counsellors of
England. The seventh of May he rode toward London, where by the way near
Totnam-High-crosse, the Mayor, Aldermen, and five hundred choice Citizens all
mounted with chains of gold, met him and attended him to the Charter House,
where came forth Proclamations the same day against Monopolies and Protections,
and diverse other abuses. All the way the King had traveled, prisoners for
small offenses were set free, and he plentifully distributed his favors,
chiefly the Order of Knighthood. Diverse Lords and Countesses are sent to
conduct the Queen, with Prince Henry now nine years old, and the Lady
Elizabeth; the King meets them at Easton in Northamptonshire: Charles Duke of
Albany came not, being weak and sickly, till the next year: The king also makes
diverse Barons and Earls: Diverse Abassadors arrive to congratulate his happy
coming to the Crown, namely from the Palsgrave, the Hollander, the Archduke,
the Spaniard, the Venetian, the Florentine, and the French; for entertaining of
whom a Master of the Ceremonies is ordained: Valentine Thomas for conspiring
against Queen Elizabeth, was drawn, hanged and quartered. The Lord Montjoy
returns out of Ireland, bringing with him Tir-Oen whom the king pardoned, who
sends to his brother of Denmark the Earl of Rutland with the Garter, and to be
godfather to his son Christianus. The Lord Spencer also is sent with the
Garter to the Duke of Wirtinberg.

This year produced a plot against the King and Prince Henry, by the Lord
Cobham, Sir Walter Rawleigh, and diverse others, upon some discontents, they
knew not what; they are apprehended in July, and arraigned in November at
Winchester, because of the sickness then at London, wherefore the Term Gray
is accused for raising two thousand men to defend the Low Countries, but indeed
to seize upon the king and Prince: Cobham and Rawleigh met in S. Martins, and
consulted about raising sedition, altering Religion, and setting up Lady
Arabella; it was proved that Watson the Priest was designed to be Lord
Chancellor, and others for other offices: Rawleigh was to treat with Count
Aremberg for money, and Cobham with the Spaniard and Archduke for assisting
Arabella; these pleaded, the king not being yet crowned this could be no
Treason, and that it was only discourse, and not matter of fact; but they were
refuted and condemned, the Priests Watson and Clerk were executed, and Brook
beheaded; Cobham, Gray and Markham, at the point of George at Windsor, where
the Prince with some others are installed; the Earl of Southampton is restored;
diverse other honors are conferred, and on S. James day the King and Queen are
crowned and anointed at Westminster by Archbishop Whitegift; command is given
for observation of Gowries conspiracy. The King calls in all letters of Mart
against the Spaniard; and concludes a peace with him, which was confirmed by
mutual oaths solemnly taken: the Spanish Ambassador held the Kings hands
between his, and in like manner the English Ambassador at Valledolid held the
King of Spains hands, when they took their oaths: Nottingham England, and
Valesco Constable of Castile 1604.
for Spain: by Nottingham the king sent these presents to the Spaniard, six
horses with saddles and saddle-cloaths embroidered, whereof three for the King
and three for the Queen, two crosse-bows with sheaffes of arrows, four
fowling-peeces inlaid with plates of gold, and a couple of lyme-hounds. The
Earl of Hartford is sent Ambassador to Albert and Isabella to take their oaths,
who bestowed on the Archdukes servants three thousand pounds, so the Archduke
presented him with a Jewel of nine hundred pounds value, and a suit of Arras
worth three hundred pounds, and bare his charges all the time of Bruxels.

After this, the kings second son Charles Duke of Albany is created Duke of
York, being now four years old. Richard Haydock a Physician, pretending to
preach at night in his sleep, acknowledges his forgery to the king who had
detected it. One Douglasse a Scots-man, for counterfeiting the kings Privyseal
to diverse Princes in Germany, is sent over by the Palsgrave, and in Smithfield
hanged and quartered. A second Parliament is called at Westminster; four days
before the sitting, the King, Queen and Prince rode solemnly through London,
where diverse Pageants were erected, Presents given, and speeches made. In the
time of this Parliament was discovered the Gunpowder-plot, 1605.
contrived by Catesby, Percie and others, who hired a cellar under the
Parliament House, laying in it twenty barrels of powder which they had under
billets and faggots; their intent was to blow up the King and Prince, Nobles
and Commons, to surprise the Duke of York, and to proclaim the Lady Elizabeth
Queen; but the plot was detected by a letter sent to the Lord Monteagle, which
his footman received from an unknown man, the Salisbury by Monteagle, who
could make no sense of it; but the King when he read it, apprehended presently,
that by the word (blow) was intimated a blowing up with Gunpowder, therefore
command is given to search all the rooms about the Parliament House, in the
cellar under the faggots were found six and thirty barrels of powder; Fawks
upon suspicion is apprehended, in whose pocket is found a piece of touch-wood,
a tinder-box, and a watch, to try the short and long burning of the touch-wood:
the plot being discovered, some fled to Worcestershire, where Catesby and
Percie were slain by one shot of a musket, Wrights John and Christopher are
likewise slain, the rest were publikly executed, except Tresham who died of the
Strangury in the Tower, whither Northumberland upon suspicion is sent; great
joy there was for this deliverance, so that the Spanish and Archdukes
Ambassadors made bone-fires, and threw money amongst the people.

About this time the King receives as a present from the Spaniard six Jennets
of Andalusia, with embroidered saddles, and saddle-cloth of Tissue, one of
these Jennets was snow-white, whose main reached to the ground: the Queen of
Spain also sent to our Queen Anne rich presents of embroidery, ambergreece, a
rich cap and girdle in a basin of gold to congratulate the kings happy November
is appointed to be kept holy, and the Lord Monteagle is rewarded with two
hundred pounds a year for ever, and five hundred pounds besides for his life.
Shortly after a rumor was spread that the king was slain at Oking, which caused
great fears in London, till within two hours after news came that he was safe,
to the great comfort of all; so that the Spanish Ambassador gave Sir Lewis
Lewknor a chain of gold for bringing him the news. Henry Garnet Provincial of
the English Jesuits, suffered death for concealing the Gunpowder-treason:
Northumberland is fined to pay to the King thirty thousand pounds, to forfeit
all his offices, and to be kept prisoner during the Kings pleasure for
misprisions of Treason.

At Hampton Court an Assembly of Divines is called by the King to confer about
the Liturgy and Church Government; the first sitting was in the privychamber,
where in the presence of his Privy-councel, he showed the causes why he called
these Divines, not that he thought there was any thing in the Church that
required alteration, all things being so well settled already, but like a wise
Physician to make search into the supposed diseases thereof, and to remove the
occasion of complaints, that the mouths of complainants may be stopped, and
sober minds satisfied: He acknowledges Confirmation after Baptism, by
Episcopal benediction and imposition of hands, after the child has professed
his own faith, to be of great use and antiquity in the Auspurg, Saxony and
Bohemia, and that Christ gave power to his Ministers to pronounce it: for
private Baptism, they say, That it it is not to be administered by women and
Laics, but by lawful Ministers only: and as for Excommunication, they say,
That the abuses being removed, it ought to retain its vigor in the Church: and
so for that day the Assembly of the Prelates was dismissed.

The Monday after, the King calls into his privy-chamber the complaining
Doctors, telling them, That he meant not to innovate the Church Government so
sound and so long established, but to settle uniformity and unity, and to
remove abuses if there be any, therefore desires them to declare their
grievances: hereupon Dr. Reynolds the foreman reduced all the matters in debate
to these four heads: 1. For preservation of true doctrine. 2. For placing of
good Pastors. 3. For sincere Church Government. 4. For explanation of some
clauses in the Service Book. All these points were exactly handled and cleared
by the Prelates, and so moderated by the King with that judgment and learning,
Scotland to confer with the Divines there about an uniform government in both
Churches:

The king, to show how willing he was to unite the two kingdoms into one,
causes one name to be given to both, and himself to be proclaimed king of
Great Britain; he causes another Proclamation to come forth for banishing of
Jesuits and Priests, and a third for confirming the book of Common Prayer, as
it was in the late Queens time.

In the fourth year of the kings reign, the king of Denmark arrives in the 1606.
Thames with eight ships, and anchored before Gravesend, thither the King with
the Prince and Lords went in Barges to meet him, and conducted him to London,
where he stayed till the 12. of August, having landed the 17. of July before;
after whose departure arrived at London, Francis Prince of Vandemont the Duke
of Lorrains third son, accompanied with seven Earls, ten Barons, forty
Gentlemen, and sixscore common persons, who were for fourteen days together
entertained by the king at Hampton Court. The next year in May, some
malcontents in the Shires of Northampton, Leceister and Warwick in great
companies began to throw down Enclosures, whose Ringleader was one Reynolds,
or Captain Pouch, so called from his green-leather-pouch hanging by his side,
where he said he had sufficient to defend them against all opposers, but when
he was apprehended, there was nothing found there but a piece of Cook the chief
Justice, suppressed them by force of Arms, and punished some of them by death,
others by fines. In June following the King dined with Wats the Lord Mayor, who
after dinner presented him with a purse full of gold, and then the King was
made free of the Company of Cloath-workers, to whom he promised a brace of
Bucks yearly for ever, to be spent at the election of their Master.

In July following, the king dined at Merchant-Taylors-hall, where he was
presented with a purse of gold, and a Roll showed him wherein were registered
seven Kings, one Queen, seventeen Princes and Dukes, two Dutchesses, one
Tir-Oen, with some other Irish Lords went away to solicit foreign Princes
against the King, and to offer Ireland to the Pope.

This year Virginia is planted. George Iervis a Priest, and Thomas Garnet a
Jesuit are executed; a pardon was offered to Garnet, if he would take the 1608.
Oath of Allegiance, which he refused. Diverse English Pirates turn Turks. The
New-Exchange is erected, where a long old Stable stood before, by Salisbury the
Treasurer, and is named by the King (who with the Queen and Prince came to see
it) Britains-Burse. Foraigners are prohibited to fish upon the 1609.
Kings coasts without leave. Now Allom is made in England, which heretofore was
brought from other places; This year also Silkworms were brought into England.

The King having received aid for Knighting Prince Henry, and he being 1610.
now come to the age of seventeen years, is made Prince of Wales. Garter King
at Arms bore the Letters Patent, Sussex the Purple-Velvet Robes, Huntington
the Train, Cumberland the Sword, Rutland the Ring, Darby the Rod, and
Sh^ewsbury the Cap and Coronet; Nottingham and Northampton supported the
Prince, being in his Surcoat only, and bare-headed: Thus he was conducted to
the King, and attended on by five and twenty Knights of the Bath; Salisbury
read the Letters Patent, the Prince kneeling all the while before the King,
and at the words accustomed the King put on him the Robe, Sword, Cap and
Coronet, the Rod and Ring, and then kissed him on the cheeks; so then he was
allowed to keep Court by himself.

The King to keep peace at home, in his own person heard the differences
between the Ecclesiastic and temporal Judges, argued touching Protections; he
heard also the complaints of the Victuallers and other Officers of his Navy.
Upon the news of king Henry 4. of France his death, king James by proclamation
commands all Priests and Jesuits to avoid the land, and all Recusants to
return home to their dwellings. The East India Merchants are made a Corporation
for ever, who built a ship of 1200 Tun, which at Bantham was lost: the King
also builds a ship of 1400 Tun, which he gave to the Prince, who called it by
his dignity, The Prince.

About this time Mr. Car, who had been one of the Kings twelve Pages, whom he
dismissed upon taking so many Footmen, was afterward made one of the
Bedchamber, upon breaking of his leg, as he lighted from his horse in the
kings presence, who ever after cast an affection toward him; he made him
knight, then his Secretary, then Viscount Rochester, and a Privy-councellor,
afterward he made him Earl of Somerset, and at last Lord Chamberlain. These
great Honors made some to envy, others to admire and flatter him; among the
rest the Countess of Essex the Earl of Suffolks daughter, who so much fell in
love with him, that she slighted her own husband, and procured Mrs. Turner, one
Gresham, and Dr. Forman, by enchantments to disable him, and to procure Cars
love; places of meeting are appointed at Hammersmith, where much loose
behavior was used between them, so that Sir Thomas Overbury, Cars favorite,
was much displeased with it; and Prince Henry hearing of his loose kind of life
with her, slighted him, which some think hastened the Princes death.

The Lady Francis Howard complaining of her husbands frigidity, and that she
was still a Maid, procures a Divorce, which was granted upon a search made on
her by twelve Matrons: then a marriage is thought on by Car and Howard, to
which Overbury was altogether averse; upon this Rochester and the Countess
meet, and conclude the death of Overbury, who was a main obstacle to their
proceedings; for the facilitating whereof, Wade is removed from the
Lieutenantship of the Tower, and Elvis is preferred; then the Countess confers
Turner, complaining of Overburies insolency for defaming her name; hereupon
they resolve to poison him, by one Weston an Apothecary sometimes servant to
Dr. Turner. And because Overbury was to be employed as an Ambassador into the
Low Countries to the Archduke, Rochester disswades him from that employment,
promising to take him off with credit; but in stead of so doing, he incenseth
the king against him, showing that Overbury was become so insolent, that he
scorned that employment to the Archduke as too mean for him; therefore the king
having received a denial from Overbury, sends him to the Tower; Northampton
and Rochester his two great enemies, command the Lieutenant to keep him close
prisoner, and Weston is preferred to wait on him in the Tower; Gresham in the
interim dies, and one Franklin is entertained in that business, a man fit to
make poisons.

Shortly after, Elvis the Lieutenant was acquainted with the poisoning of
Overbury by Weston, as he was carrying a part of his supper in one hand, and a
glass of blue water in the other: The next day Elvis is sent for by
Northhampton, by whom he was encouraged to persist, and a thousand pounds
promised Overburies mind, how he is affected to the match between Rochester
and the Countess; in the interim more poisons are sent by the Countess, which
by Weston are tempered with his broth and meat; some poisoned Tarts and Jellies
also are sent by the Viscount to Sir Thomas Monson, whose servant delivered
them to Weston, which brought the said Sir Thomas to be suspected as having a
hand in this act; by this means Overbury grew very sick, but by a cooling bath
he received some ease: hereupon the Lieutenant is commanded by the Council (as
he gave out) that no man might have liberty to speak with him.

Now the intended marriage comes to light, much questioning and debate there is
about it; the bishops are divided, Canterbury and others against it, Winchester
and Ely for it, at last a nullity is obtained, and order is sent to Essex to
repay the portions of five thousand pound: when Overbury heard of the marriage,
he grieved exceedingly both for the Earl of Sommerset, as for himself,
suspecting it would cause his death; therefore he writes to the Earl to be
released, who returns him some Court holy water, and a white-powder to case his
pain, which it did shortly after, for being given to him in a glister, proved
poison, which the next day with excessive pains in the guts killed him; after
his death, it was spread abroad he died of the pox by excess of

This year gold is enhaunsed; one Legate an Arian is burned; and the Lantgrave
1611.
of Hesse comes to visit King James. The next year the Lord Zanchir is hanged
for causing one Turner to be murdered. The body of Queen Mary of Scotland is
removed from Peterborow to Westminster, where a stately tomb of 1612.
marble is erected over it. The Palsgrave Elector comes into England, who
with Grave-Maurice are invested with the Garter. The year following was 1613.
fatal to this Island by the death of Prince Henry, and the marriage of his
sister the Lady Elizabeth to the Palsgrave.

The nullity being obtained, the match is made, and honored by the Kings 1614.
Spanish fleet, as if intended for England, and this suspicion increased by a
Proclamation against Spanish money: the Scots in the Western Islands fly out
into rebellion, so do the Wilde-Irish in Ireland, but were quickly suppressed.
In the Islands of Orkney there was great commotions raised by the Earl of
Orkney then a prisoner in Edinburgh-Castle, who wrote letters to his
Bastard-son, and other of his friends there to take possession of his houses,
whereof he accounted the Castle of Kirkway one; whereupon the Counc^l at
Edinburgh send thither some ships Cathnesse, who besiege the Castle both by sea
and land, which at last yields to mercy; the Earls son with the besieged are
hanged up close by the Castle, which is demolished, the Ordnance carried away,
and not long after the Earl himself was beheaded at Edinburgh.

The Earl of Northampton is publikly spoken against for countenancing and
advancing the Roman Religion; a Bill is exhibited in the Star Chamber by him
against such as defamed him; but Canterbury maintains their cause, showing
there were never in his time so many Priests in England as now: My Lord hereat
being much troubled, went to Greenwich, made his will, then returned to his
house at London, where he died. The Cloath-workers obtain at last that no more
white-cloaths be carried over the seas undied and undressed, the Dutch proclaim
that none shall buy any such clothes so dressed and died: hereupon wools are
prohibited to be transported out of the Kingdom; yet at last it is ordered by
the Council, that a certain number of white-cloaths shall be transported.

Sommerset having lost Northampton his great friend, and fearing the detection
Overburies death, procures a general pardon of all treasons, misprisions,
murders, fellonies, outrages whatsoever, which the King signed, but Chancellor
Egerton refuses to let it pass the Seal, and acquaints the King of the danger
might arise thereby: whereupon the King suspecting all was not well with
Somerset, withdraws his favor from him, and begins to cast his affection upon
a young Gentleman lately come from France, Mr. George Villiers, on whom he
bestows a thousand pounds, then Knights him, invests him with the Garter, makes
him Master of the horse, and afterward Earl, Marquess, and Duke of Buckingham.

Sommerset being troubled in conscience about Overburies death, sends to
France to have the Apothecary dispatched who gave the Glister; he causes
Overburies man to my Lord Cook, and upon the information of Sir Ralph Winwood
to the King Weston, is examined, and after much ado at last confesses all, who
with Turner, Franklin and Elvis are condemned and hanged; Sommerset is
committed to the Dean of Westminster, he stood still upon his innocence, and
denied all, but his Countess confessed; whereupon his money, plate and jewels
worth 200000 li. and his lands to 19000 li. per annum, are seized upon for the
Kings use, who bestowed diverse of them upon

About this time Sir Walter Raleigh, after ten years imprisonment in the Tower,
was set at liberty: he hated Sommerset exceedingly, because he had begged and
got his lands; the Countess of Shrewsbury also, who was privy to the escape of
the Lady Arabella, was released out of the Tower.

In the year 1614. the English sends a Plantation to the Barmudes, as the
Londoners had done the year before into Ireland. The King of Denmark this year
came privately into England again. Hugh Middleton brought the water into
London, and Suttons Hospital is founded. The next year after, the Lady Arabella
who married to Mr. William Seymour, now Marquess of Hartford, 1615.
dies, which also was the fatal year of Sir Thomas Overbury. The trial of
Sommerset and his Lady is put off, because she was with child; but after she
was delivered of a daughter, the Lord Chancellor is authorized to be
High-Steward of England for the time being, to whom were joined eight Judges
for his assistants, a Seat-Royal is placed in the upper end of
Westminster Hall, the two prisoners are brought from the Tower; the Countess
pleaded guilty, but Sommerset pleaded not guilty; yet being found guilty by his
Judges, is condemned, and sent back to the Tower, they were afterward both
pardoned and released out of the Tower. This same year the Archbishop of
Spalato 1616.
comes into England, and the Cautionary Towns are restored to the James, who
were to maintain thirty foot-souldiers in Ireland for three years, after the
rate of eight pence a day, and to pay the wages of one whole year upon the
passing of their Patent, then they must be Gentlemen of three descents, and
should be worth a thousand pounds per annum, the number to be installed was not
to exceed two hundred. An Ambassador came from the Russian Emperor to King
James, desiring his amity, and to mediate for a peace between him and the King
of Swethland, and presents him with rich Furs: and not only the Russian, but
the Persian also, admiring the wisdom and happiness of King James, some time
before this, sent Sir Robert Sherley to desire his amity, and withal freely
offers commerce to the Kings subjects through all the Persian dominions: This
Sir Robert was made an Earl of the Empire by Rodulphus Caesar, then having
served the Persian ten years, was made General of his Artillery, and married
him to the Lady Teresia, whose sister was one of the Queens of Persia; she was
brought to bed here of a Henry Christened. About this time Moorfields, before a
stinking place, were made out into pleasant walks: Prince Charles is created
Prince of Wales, which action was accompanied with much joy, and the installing
of five and twenty Knights of the Bath.

This year the King after fourteen years absence returns into Scotland for 1617.
settling both the Church and State there, whose presence was so welcome, that
every place and City whither he went did strive to outstrip one another in
magnificent entertainment: having settled all things, and confirmed the five
Articles of Perth, after six months abode there, he returns into England; Sir
Walter Rawleigh being now at liberty persuades the King to afford him some 1618.
Guyana, where he thought was a Mine of gold, which would enrich him and the
whole kingdom without any prejudice to the Spaniard, but when he came thither
no treasure could be found; wherefore that he might not return empty-handed, he
falls upon S. Thome, a Town of the Spaniards, which he sacked, pillaged and
burned: Gundomore the Spanish Leiger complains: King James to avoid a breach
between Spain and England, prefers the death of one man, already condemned,
before the breach of public peace, therefore he is newly arraigned and
condemned to die, his head was cut off on a Scaffold in the Pallace-yard.

Queen Anne, after she had been married twenty years, died at Hampton Court,
1619.
In a Parliament at Westminster (in which Chancellor Bacon for bribery was put
from his place, and sent to the Tower, into whose place Dr. 1621.
Williams Dean of Westminster succeeded) Montpesson and Michel are for abuses
censured: Sir Richard Weston is sent Ambassador to the Emperor to solicit the
restoring of the Palsgrave to his own Country: Gundomore assures the king there
was no readier way to recover the Pallatinate, then by making a match between
Prince Charles and the Infanta of Spain, which might be effected, if the Prince
were sent thither; whereupon the king sends him with Buckingham, Porter and
Cottington by land; in the way at Paris, being disguised, he saw the Mary, whom
afterward he married; Gundomore in the interim obtains of some Ladies large
sums of money for places with the Infanta when she came: The Prince being
arrived in Spain, was received with as much love and magnificence as could be
expected, so as the charge of his 1623.
entertainment stood the King of Spain in nine and forty thousand Ducats, yet
he was so restrained from the Lady, that the eight months time he stayed in
Spain he saw her very seldom, and that at a distance, and never spoke with her
but twice, and that before company, and was limited also in his speeches.

This match was hindered by the falling out of Buckingham and Count Olvares the
King of Spains great favorite: much time also was protracted upon pretense of
difficulties to obtain the Popes dispensation; wherefore King James wearied
with delays sends for the Prince home, who having taken his leave of the King
of Spain, returns by sea, and lands at Portsmouth, to the great joy of the
people: the Articles of the marriage were so strict and large for exercise of
the Catholic Religion, and none at all for restoring of the Palatinate, that
King James broke off all treaty of the marriage, and signified so much to the
Spaniard and other Princes; wherefore a consultation is had for recovering it
by Arms: to this end a great contribution by way of benevolence was collected
for raising men. Then another match was thought on for the Prince; for this
cause the Earls of Carlisle and Holland are sent into France to treat of a
marriage with the younger daughter of Henry 4. which was accomplished shortly
after King James his death. About this time the Archbishop of Spalato was
burned at Rome for apostacy; he came into this Kingome petending Religion, as
he showed in his writings by maintaining 1624.
Protestanisme, and was therefore made Dean of Windsor, and Master of the
Savoy; but being fickle-headed, after he had stayed here five years, he
retracted all he had written or said before, and therefore is commanded by the
King to depart the Kingdom within three days, and so he returns to Rome,
where he inveighed as bitterly against the Protestants, as he did here against
the Papists.

This year was fatal by the fall of that great Cedar King James, the wisest,
fortunatest, and most peaceable Prince that ever was in this lan^; under whose
1625.
two and twenty years government, this kingdom attained to the height of
peace, plenty and happiness; in whose halcionian days, more works of piety
were done then in any other Princes reign of the like continuance; such were
the reparations of Paul's begun then, the endowments of S. John's College. in
Oxford by Dr. Land the Archbishop, the Almshouse at Croyden by Archbishop
Abbot, and that in Sussex by Robert Earl of Dorset, that of Sutton in the
Charterhouse, Wilby College in Oxford by Mr Nicholas Wilby, Dulwich Almshouse
by Edward Allen the Player, the History-Lecture at Oxford by Mr. Cambden, three
thousand and six hundred pounds given to good uses by Mr. Patyn Grocer of
London, Camden-Hospital in Glocestershire founded by Sir Baptist Hicks, five
thousand pounds given by Mr. Thomas Teasdale for maintenance of seven Fellows
and five Scholars in Ballyol College, three fair Hospitals founded by Henry
Earl of Northampton, one at Rising in Norfolk, a second at Clun in Shropshire,
the third at Greenwich in Kent, 8000 li, given by William Jones of London for a
Free School and Almshouses in Wales, and a 100 li. for ever yearly to a
preacher in London. Not to speak of Chelsey-Colledge, diverse Churches and
Chapels by private men, and other sums of money left by charitable men; all
which were the fruits of his peaceable government: and among the rest, we may
not omit the Plantations of Ireland, Virginia, Barmudas, and New England; in
Virginia, the first Town that ever was built there bare his name; for though
this was discovered in the Queens time, yet it was not planted till the kings:
the next was the plantation of the Barmudas, and the last of New England, the
patent whereof was granted by king James to Bristol, Exeter, and Plymouth. In
his time also diverse Schools, Churches and Hospitals were erected in Scotland,
Canada, which in king Charles his time was set on foot. This king James for his
wisdom was admired of foreign Princes, for learning by the Universities; for
his wise, just, and peaceable government, by his subjects. Protestanisme had
never a greater Champion, as may be seen by his books, by his care in causing
Conferences to be held in Scotland about uniformity of Discipline, and unity of
Doctrine; about expelling Vorstius out of Leyden, and sending Divines to the
Synod of Dort, and his learned moderating of the Conference at Hampton Court;
so that he was Plato's Prince, a Philosophical King, or a Kingly Philosopher.
He died the 27. of March, the 59. year of his age, having Great Britain 22.
years complete. In his time fell out diverse strange accidents; the great
Plague, whering died in London above 38000. in one year, the great Frost, great
inundations and fires, chiefly that of Dorchester, the falling of the room at
Black-Friars, a Whale within eight miles of London, the Blazing-star, the
killing of a man by Archbishop Abbot.

CHAP. XXXVI.
A Continuation of the History of Great Britain, under King Charles, from the
year 1625. till the year 1641.

PRince Charles being about the age of 25 years, is proclaimed King of
Great Britain, etc. Who shortly after his Coronation was married to 1625.
Henrieta Maria, younger daughter of King Henry 4. of France. The Match Charles
should swear never to withdraw from, or persuade her to embrace any other
Religion. Her Portion was 800000 Crowns; her Dowry 18000 lib. sterling; besides
so much Lands as should maintain her and her Court, answerable to her
Greatness.

Not long after the marriage was consummated, all amity with Spain is rejected,
and Commerce prohibited: a Fleet of 150 Sail, with 10000 Foot and some Horse,
are sent against Spain; they landed at Cadiz, but were beaten back into their
ships with loss, by Ferdinand Gironius; the ships by storms in their return
were much shattered, many of the passengers died with sickness and cold, so
that few returned home. This unlucky Expedition hindered the League that was
made between England, Denmark, Swethland, Venice and Holland, against the House
of Austria.

The next year, King Lewis of France falls out with King Charles of
Great Britain, 1626.
because he sent back the French Priests into France, upon some distaste
Subize, and armed him against the French King: and however King Charles was
content to allow the Queen twelve Priests and one Bishop, twelve Women, one
Chamberlain, one Secretary, one Physician, and three other Catholic servants;
yet he could not be dissuaded from defending Subize, and the Protestant cause;
which occasioned a war between them; therefore the English ships and goods
are arrested in France, and the half of the Queens dower was retained: Upon
this, an English Fleet is sent to the Isle of Rhee, under the Duke of
Buckingham, who took it; 1627.
but not long after it was lost again, and the English driven to their ships,
not Charles being nothing dismayed, prepares another Fleet against the next
year, for relief of Rochel now besieged by the French King; but whilst the Duke
was ready to imbarque at Portsmouth where the Fleet lay, he was suddenly
stabbed by one John Felton, which caused 1628.
great discontent in the King, and a tumult in the Dukes lodgings; the French
being accused as actors in this murder; but Felton confessing that he had
killed the Duke, the tumult was appeased, and he apprehended, who confessed he
could not be quiet in mind till he had acted that tragedy, being persuaded that
the Duke was no good Patriot, having exasperated the King against the former
Parliament which was assembled for giving aid to the King in defense France and
Germany, the King of Denmark being brought very low by the Emperor.

Notwithstanding the Dukes death, the Fleet was dispatched to the relief of
Eoch^l, but could do no good, because it came too late; for the Town was begirt
with impregnable Barracadoes and Circumvallations both by sea and land, so that
re infecta it returned home. The next year a Parliament is called; Peace is
concluded with France; A new Plantation is begun in America, called
New England. Not long after, on the 29. of May, Prince Charles was borne: the
next day, the King at Pauls-Crosse gave thanks to God for the Queens safe 1629.
delivery, and the birth of his Son. This year a Peace is concluded with Spain.
In the year following, the King sends to the Emperor for restitution of the
1631.
Palatine into his inheritance, but nothing was effected. In the year 1633. the
King about May began his journey into Scotland, where he was Crowned the 18. of
June, with great solemnity. Not long after, as he was crossing the Ferry
between Leith and Brunt-Island, there arose so sudden a storm, that he was in
danger to be cast away; some of his servants were then drowned, and much of his
Plate and household stuff was lost. He erected about the same time a Edinburgh,
and settled Mr. William Forbes of Aberden (an eminent man for learning) Bishop
there; but he died shortly after, being vexed by the people of that place, who
could not endure to be subject to a Bishop. The King having called a Parliament
there, in which some things in favor of the Church were enacted, which pleased
not diverse of the Great ones there; whereupon the King returns abruptly into
England, which was ill resented by the Scots Lords.

The next year following, King Charles for maintenance of his Navy, raised 1634.
the Tax of Ship-mony, by which means the Seamen were well paid, and for per
annum, forced to pay 15. l. for his Tax the first year.) This Ship-mony was at
last opposed and voted down in Parliament, In the year 1636. the King sends
again to the Emperor in behalf of the Palsgrave, in which Embassy much money
was spent to little purpose. In the year after, the Popes Nuntio's are received
and entertained at the Queens Court. In Scotland fell out the great Tumult at
Edinburgh, July 23. upon the reading of the New Service Book in S. Giles
Church, the Women beginning the fray Weems. So things remained quiet till the
next Spring, that new troubles arose. A General Assembly, against the Kings
command, is held at Glascow, in which the Bishops are deposed, excommunicated,
and abjured; the Articles of Perth, Service Book, and Canons are rejected by
the Presbyterian Assembly, who also impose an Oath and Covenant upon the
people, the chief promoters whereof were three Ministers, Henderson, Dickson,
and Cant; who coming to Aberden, received some stop by the an. 1585. 3.
Whether they ought to fear any danger of Innovation in Religion, seeing the
King has protested, declared and sworn to the contrary, and has removed all
occasions of fear, as the Service Book, Canons, and High Commission. 4. What
Perth, and to have an interpretation of the Negative Confession imposed on them
against their judgments. 5. Whether the abjuring of the late introduced Rites,
be not an assent that the former Rites are unchangeable; whereas all Rites
according to times and occasions may be changed. 6. Whether the abjuring of
Perth-Articles be not a contradicting of the judgment of most modern Divines,
who hold them in their own nature lawful; as also a condemning of the ancient
Church, which practiced them. 7. Whether they can abjure these Rites as Popish,
which according to the light of their conscience and sincerity of their hearts,
they have practiced as lawful so many years; And whether they ought not to
have some time given them to consider of so weighty a business. 8. Whether the
Kings person ought not to be defended, though he preserve not the true
Religion. 9. Whether this can be consistent; To swear to maintain the Kings
authority, and yet swear disobedience to the Articles established by his
authority. 10. Whether the abjuration of Perth-Articles be not prejudicial to
the liberty of Voting in a National Assembly. 11. Whether the an. 1567. in
Parliament, be not sufficient to show the sincerity of their Profession. 12.
Whether the late practice of the Covenanters in contemning Authority, and Gods
service in his own house, on his own day, as to lay violent hands on the
Prelates and Pastors in time of Divine service, whilst they practice what the
King and his Council commanded: I say, whether these disorders are tolerable,
or is it fit that the Anticovenanters should join with them. 13. How this
Covenant can be subscribed without scandal; first, of dissenting from other
Reformed Churches; secondly, of dissenting from Antiquity; thirdly, of perjury,
having sworn obedience to the Articles of Perth, and to the Ordinary at their
admission

To these Quaere's the Covenanting Ministers put in their Answers, but such as
were not satisfying to the Divines of Aberden, as may be seen in their Replies
and Duplies. The Bishops also protested and declared against the Assembly at
Glascow, as being altogether unlawful, because it met without the Kings
warrant; because it consisted of more Laymen then Ministers; because most of
these Ministers were scandalous either in their lives or doctrine, or both;
because they were enemies and persecutors of the Bishops, to whom Athanasius,
Hosius of Corduba, and Maximus Patriarch of Constantinople, did except against
some partial and prejudicating Councels, or Luther against the Council of
Trent, because he was precondemned by Pope Leo. But these Reasons of the
Bishops were slighted, Hamilton to dissolve it: For the Presbyterial side
prevails more and more; who made an Act against the Bishops, and expelled them
the kingdom; whereat the King was so angry, that he caused the Scots ships here
to be seized, and their Trading with England to be prohibited.

Mean while, the Queen Mother of France, King Henry the Fourths widow, came to
London, October. 31. whom the King received courteously, and entertained royally.
In November Proclamation is made against the Assembly in Scotland, by the King:
but it was so slighted, that an Army is raised by the Presbyterian Scots;
against whom the Bishops contribute and raise among March, the King begins his
journey 1639.
for Scotland, whom his Army followed under the conduct of the Earl of Arundel,
accompanied with most of the English Nobility; the two Armies pitched their
Tents in view of each other, but there was no resolution or desire in either
side to fight; therefore a Peace was concluded the same year in June: but when
the King returned to London, the Articles of the Peace were publicly burned,
which again incensed the Scots, so that the next year they raised another Army;
upon which the King summons a Parliament in April, for 1640.
raising of money and new forces against the Scots; but finding his people
averse either to contribute men or money, he dissolves the Parliament in May,
which both discontented the English, and encouraged the Scots, on the 17. of
August following, to enter England, and possess themselves of Newcastle.
Hereupon the King raises new forces to resist the Scots; but the new-raised
Soldiers grew mutinous, killed diverse of their Officers, and would neither
march nor fight: Yet the Clergy desisted not to animate both the King and
people against the Scots, and in their Convocation gave a great sum to

About the midst of October the former year, the Spanish Fleet, close by the
English shore, for want of powder and ammunition (which they alleged the King
had promised them) were defeated by the Hollanders: There were in this Fleet
8000 Spaniards, which should have been planted among the Wallons, and so many
of them to be transported into Spain. About the same time also, a Bill is
exhibited against the Londoners, for some misdemeanors committed by their
Underofficers about Londonderry; wherefore in the Star Chamber the Londoners
are fined, and their Plantation forfeited to the Scots. When the King saw he
could raise no money, and that the common-souldiers would not engage; upon the
earnest entreaties of the Lords, he summons a Parliament at Westminster, the 3.
of November.

But before we conclude this History, I will speak a little more fully of these
fatal begun troubles in Scotland. When the King understood what Forces were
raising there, he sends to Marquis Douglasse, to the Earl of Nidsdale, to
Traquair the Treasurer, to Roxburgh and other Lords of his side, to be ready
1639.
with their Forces: but the Covenanters seize upon all the arms and ammunion in
Scotland, and send 10000 foot, with 4000 horse, and 30 pieces of canon, against
Aberden, which held out for the King, and whither he meant to send great
forces. Of the Nobility that stood out for the King, were about twenty Lords
and Earls, of the Covenanters about eight and twenty. When the King was come to
Barwick, he understood that the Scots Army was divided into two bodies; one
under Hume, of 8000. not far from Barwick; the other of 5000. under Iohnston
near Carlisle. To these the King sends his Heralds with a Proclamation,
commanding them not to come near the borders of England, for then he will
construe it as an invasion: They on the other side send him a Petition,
desiring their complaints may be heard, and grievances redressed. Arundel with
other Lords are named by the King to confer with the Scots Commissioners, and
to know their grievances: They desire that the King would by Parliament ratify
the Articles of Glascow. 2. That all Church Affairs in Scotland may be
determined by their General Assemblies, and that all Civil matters may be
decided by Parliament, which they desire may be held every second or third
year. 3. That the King would withdraw both his Ships and Landforces, and
restore to the Scots their Ships again. 4. That all the Incendiaries and
seditious persons who were fled into England, may be sent home to be tried and
punished. 5. That the King would confirm

The King was not well pleased with these particulars; therefore the Lord
Lowden desires him, that he would but confirm their Religion and Liberties
according to the Ecclesiastical and Civil laws of Scotland, and that should
content them: Upon this, the King declares, That he will confirm the Canons of
the Assembly of Glascow, concerning the abolition of the Liturgy,
High Commission, Book of Canons, with the five Articles of Perth; That the
Ministers shall be bound to take no other Oath at their admission, but what is
prescribed in Parliament, and that the Bishops shall stand to the censure of
the General Assembly of Glascow; and that all things shall be determined by the
Assembly and Parliament which shall be held in Edinburgh the next August, in
which an Act of Oblivion shall pass, and at which he will be present himself;
and withal he promises to restore their ships and goods, and to recall his
fleet, conditionally they will disarm and disband their Armies, and dissolve
their tables and meetings, and that they will restore his Forts and Castles,
with their Ammunition, as likewise the Crown, Scepter and Sword, with his other
Royal ornaments; and besides, that they will suffer his good subjects to enjoy
their

The peace being concluded, and the Armies disbanded, the King is received into
Edingburgh with great solemnity, and his Castles are restored, on condition
that they shall not be victualled for above four and twenty hours at a time.
But shortly after the King declared, that he would have the Bishops sit in the
General Assembly, which was denied; and the Bishops were excomunicated, and
withal two hundred thousand pounds is demanded to be raised upon the Bishops
lands and estates, for satisfaction of the damages sustained by England: the
Parliament then sitting, rather favored the Assembly then hindered it, or
discountenanced their proceedings, wherefore the King would have adjourned the
Parliament till June the next year, which could not be assented to; but four
Deputies are sent to the King to compose all differences. In the interim, new
forces are raised both in England and Ireland, whilst the Scots Commissioners
are kindly entertained at Court; 1640.
but the Scots being jealous (because their Commissioners were so long detained
in suspense) that the King meant to keep them as prisoners, when his Army was
ready to march, they seized upon two English Lords, whom they meant to detain
till their Commissioners were returned.

The Presbyterian Scots understanding that hoth the Armies of England and
Ireland were ready to march, enter presently into a Covenant which they called
National, and tax the tenth part of their estates toward maintenance of the
war; sixteen thousand men are raised under the conduct of Argile, to guard the
Seacoast, and hinder the Irish forces from landing: The like number is to be
in readiness against the King begins his march. They would not suffer General
Ruven, governor then of Edinburgh-Castle, to repair a part of the wall that
was fallen down; nor would they suffer the Garrison-souldiers to go out and in,
but at their devotion; therefore they place a guard of five hundred men before
the Castle gate, and raised a Fort in the Town to keep the

Mean while the English Fleet puts to Sea; and the Landforces of England
consisting of forty thousand, are divided into three bodies, under Hamilton,
Goring, and Northumberland. The Scots main body consisted of thirty thousand
under General Lesly in Lothien, the rest of their Army was employed to guard
the borders and coasts on all sides, to wit, six thousand under the Lord
Leviston near Kelso; Lothien and Johnson had the command of eight thousand on
the Western marches; Rothes and Lindsey commanded fifteen thousand in Fife;
Montrosse and the Earl Marshal encamped near Aberden with twelve Argile guards
the coast on the Irish-seas with sixteen thousand. In the interim the Lord
Lowden one of the four Scots Commissioners, is sent to the Tower, for having
about him a copy of the Scots Declaration which had been burned. This incensed
the Scots so much the more, complaining that the imprisoning of their
Commissioner was against the Law of Nations; the King sends Commissioners to
examine him in the Tower, to whom he would not answer, being a subject of
Scotland, where he ought to be examined and tried by his Peers; and also told
them, that what he was accused of was acted before the Pacification 1639. when
an Act of oblivion passed. Hereupon he is enlarged and employed by the King in
a new Commission into Scotland, to settle the troubles there.

Whilst these things are acting, Edinburgh raises two Batteries against the
Castle, the great Ordnance play upon each other without any great hurt; at
length the Governor is summoned to deliver up the Castle within fifteen days;
which time being expired, and the Castle not likely to be surrendered, the great
Artillery from the batteries played so furiously on it, that a breach was
England with thirty thousand; fifteen thousand march into Cumberland, and the
other fifteen thousand. into Northumberland, with a Declaration that they come
in as friends, not as enemies, for no other end but to have a ratification of
the last years Treaty; they promise also to take nothing but what they shall

The King being at York with six thousand horse, and eighteen thousand foot,
understood that the Scots were marching toward Newcastle, therefore sends
fifteen hundred horse, with a battalion of Infantry to dispute the passage over
the Tine; a skirmish followed, in which four hundred of the English were slain,
and two hundred Scots, whose Army being far greater then the other, caused them
to retreat. Then the Scots for two hours lay siege to Newcastle, which upon the
first summons opened their gates. Then the Scots make themselves masters of
Hartpool, and of two Castles on the Tine. Upon this the King sends to them to
know their demands, and withal disswades them from English Lords being
assembled at York, desire likewise of the King that he would call a Parliament,
which at last was assented to, and five and twenty thousand pounds Sterling was
assigned to the Scots toward the defraying of their charges; in the mean time
the Castle of Edinburgh is delivered up, and some English horse, with five
hundred of their foot, (which were sent from Barwick to Dunce, to carry away
nine pieces of Ordnance left there by the Scots) are defeated and slain by the
Lord Haddington.

Hitherto we have seen King Charles in his glory: but now, [Nox atra caput
tristi circumvolat umbra] The bright day of his Reign is overcast with a dark
Virgil.
and dismal cloud. The morning of his day shined out clear, but it was shut up
in a dismal evening: Quem dies vidit veniens superbum
Hunc dies vidit fugiens jacentem. Seneca.

Whom Phoebus rising sow with Glory croun'd,
Him Phoebus setting sees flat on the ground.
In the tragedy of his life, we may see the catastrophe of humane felicity.
Kings are crowned with thorns as well as with gold; and with Peter they walk
upon the waters; their heads like Nebuchadnezzars Image are of gold, but their
feet are of clay; they live like gods, but dye like men: Quisquamne regno
gandet? O fallax bonum,
Quan^um malorum, quam front blanda tegis?
U^ alta ventos semper excipiunt juga,
Rupemque saxis vasta dirimentem freta, Seneca.

Quamvis quieti verberant fluctus maris:
Imperia sic excelsa fortunae objacent.
^ho'l dote on Kingdoms? O man's vanity!
What mischiefs under smiling faces lie?
As storms rage most on Hills, and as the Rocks
Which part the Sea, are subject to its knocks:
So highest Principalities and Crowns
Are liable to angry Fortunes frowns.


And here I will conclude, being arrived into the wished for Harbor: and nunc
immensum spatiis confecimus aequor: I have sailed over a great Sea, and it is
time to cast anchor. I will not venture upon the stormy rocks, quicksands,
contrary tides, and whirlpools of these last ten years, lest I make shipwreck,
and so be forced to hang up my wet clothes in Neptunes temple: Ne me tabula
sacer votiva paries indicet uvida suspendisse potenti vestimenta maris Deo. In
the mean while, let us beseech Almighty God, who has set bounds to the Sea,
Paul and his passengers; that he would bring again the Sun and Stars so long
hid from us, and that he would conduct the weather-beaten ship of this Church
and State into the harbor of Tranquillity; that at last enjoying some serenity
and Halcion days, we may sit securely under our Vines and Fig Trees, and sing
the songs of Sion in our own Land.

Amen.
FINIS.
A BRIEF CHRONOLOGY OF THE Principal Passages Fallen out in the WORLD: FROM THE
MACEDONIAN KINGDOM, TILL The last TEN YEARS: Divided into 180 DECADS,
containing 1800 YEARS; BY ALEXANDER ROSSE.

LONDON, Printed for John Saywell, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the sign
of the Greyhound in little-Britain, without Adlersgate, M. DC. LII.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sr JUSTINIAN EISOM, KNIGHT and BARONET.
SIR;
AS Aeneas after seven Years tossing and tumbling upon the impetuous Billows of
the angry and enraged Sea (Per Syrtes and inhospita saxa) was at last so happy
as to cast Anchor in his long-wish'd for Harbor, (Seeds ubi Fata quietas
ostendunt;) So I having some Years crossed the Ocean of History, (where
likewise I have been crossed by Storms and contrary Winds and Tides) at last
have sheltered my Weather-beaten Historicall-Ship, under the Lee-shore of a
knowing and honorable Patron. I have adventured also to secure this
Chronologicall Cock-Boat under the Cliffe of your Protection, being thoroughly
acquainted with your Worth, Ingenuity, and Learning. That Latin-Piece you set
me upon, wherein I show how far short the Latin Poets are of Virgill, is not
as yet come to perfection; in the interim I was desirous, as an earnest of
that, to present you with this Piece; not doubting but ere long I shall be able
to give a full account of my Pains in the other; So with a thankful
recognition of your Favors toward me, I take leave, and will ever be found

(SIR) Your humble servant, ALEXANDER ROSSE.

A brief CHRONOLOGY Of the Principal Passages since the end of the MACEDONIAN
KINGDOM till these present Times, according to the years of CHRIST, before or
after his Birth: Divided into Decads.
IOnathas brother to Judas is made General of the Jews. Yea. bef. Chr.


Demetrius encroacheth on his Neighbors, is overcome and slain by Alexander
the supposed son of Epiphanes. 158


The Dalmatian War, and then the Spanish under Claudus, Lucullus, and Scipio.

Simon succeeds Ionathas, he takes Gaza, raseth Sion, etc. is slain with his
two sons Mattathias 148
and Judas; John escapes.

Ptolomy Physcon or Evergetes marries Cleopatra the mother, kills her son, and
then marries her daughter.

The third Punic War, and Carthage destroyed.

John Hyrcanus succeeds his father, besieges Ptolomy, makes peace with
Antiochus Pius, demolisheth the Temple on Mount Garizim, renews the League
with the Romans, besieges 138
and takes Samaria.

The Servil war in Sicily. Numantia destroyed.

Demetrius freed from the Parthian captivity, to him succeeds his son Antiochus
Gryphus. 128
Fabius recovereth Lusitania, and cuts off the right hands of all the Rebels.
Pompey is beaten by the Numantines.

Antiochus Cyzicenus brother to Grypus, makes war against him. 118


Ptolomy Lathurus or Lamyrus reigns four years with his Mother, by whom he is
expelled.

The Romans make war against the Thracians, and Dalmatians, and Mithridates
King of Pontus and Iugurtha.

Aristobulus the first King of Iudaea since Zedechias. 108


Ptolomy Lathurus kills his Mother, and assumes again the Government.

The Romans make war against the Cymbrians.

Alexander Iamnaeus son of Hircanus, brother to Aristobulus, obtains diverse
Victories against 98
his enemies.

Ptolomy Alexander, Cleopatra's other son, is forced by her to marry Selene,
taken from Ptolomy Lathurus by Cleopatra.

At Rome, Metellus is banished and revoked. Marius raises sedition at home,
and stirs up Mithridates abroad. Rutilius condemned for extortion in Asia.
Livius Drusus slain for raising sedition. The Marsi and others in Italy make
war against the Romans.

Hanna the Prophetess becomes a widow; the Pharisees overcome Alexander; he
crucifieth the authors of the Rebellion, and kills their wives and children; he
falls sick of a 88
Quartan Ague, which held him three years till his death.

Tigranes King of Armenia is invited by the Syrians, over whom he reigns 18.
years in peace.

Aretas King of Arabia obtains Damascus, by killing Antiochus Dionysius the
fifth brother of Seleucus.

Latharus returns to his Kingdom of Egypt.

Pompey, father, to Pompey the Great, defeateth the Piceni, with others. Scylla
overcommeth the Samnites. Sulpitius slain by Scylla, Cato by the Marsi,
Octavius and Merula by Cinna. Scylla has diver^ Victories. Rome besieged by
Marius, Carbo, Cinna and Sertorius. Pompey killed with thunder, Cinna stoned,
Marius slain.

Alexandra Sabonne, wife of Iamnaeus, great with the Pharisees.

Ptolomy Anletes, so called from his delight in Musical Instruments, King of
Egypt, he was 78
father to Cleopatra the wife of M. Antony, he dies about this time.

Antiochus Cizicerus ^urks in Cilicia till Tigranes was defeated by Lucullus,
who again restores him to his Kingdom of Syria.

At Rome, Scylla tyrannizeth, then dies. Lepidus defeated. Sertorius rebels in
Spain, who beats Pompey and Metellus, Mithridates overcome by Lucullus, the
Dardani by Scribonius, Cassius by Spartacus, who is at last defeated and slain
by Crassus: Nicomedes of Bithynia makes Rome his heir; It Is made a Province.

Aristobulus possesses two and twenty Castles, overcomes Hircanus, and
deposes him. Antipater, Herod's father, attempts the restoring of Hircanus.
Aretas the Arabian besieges 68
Aristobulus in Jerusalem, the siege raised by Pompey, who takes Jerusalem; he
hears at Damascus the difference between the two brothers, and gives the
Priesthood to Hircanus, but not the Kingdom, and carries Aristobulus with his
two sons to Rome, Alexander the younger escapes.

Syria with Cilicia is made a Province by Pompey; Tigranes submits to him, who
deposes Antiochus for not keeping his Kingdom when he had it.

At Rome the Capitol is rebuilt. Metellus ends the three years war in Crete,
called therefore Creticus. Pompey ends the Pyratical war, and has diverse
victories. Catelines Conspiracy defeated. Clodius defloureth Pompeia. Pompey
triumphs. Helvetians attempt Gaul.

Alexander the Jew submits to Gabinus, then rebels, and is defeated. Crassus
robs the Temple 58
of Jerusalem.

In Syria, Gabinius is President; he brings seventeen millions to Rome, is
banished, and Crassus sent in his place, who was slain by the Parthians, and
melted gold put in his mouth. The Parthians expelled out of Syria by Cassius.

In Egypt, Ptolomy is deposed by his Subjects, is restored by Pompey; his
daughter whom the Egyptians made their Queen, strangleth her husband, and
marries one Archelaus; both are killed by Gabinius, when Ptolomy was restored;
To him succeeds Ptolomy Dionysius, with his sister and wife Cleopatra.

At Rome, Crassus, Pompey, and Caesar make a league; Caesar subdues the
Galliceans, has Illyria and Gaul assigned him for five years, makes war with
the Gauls nine years, defeateth Ariovistus, makes an attempt upon Britain,
envied by Pompey, he had many victories, he retains his Army for his own
defense. Cicero banished and restored.

Aristobulus released by Caesar, and slain by the Pompeians, his son Alexander
beheaded by Scipio at Antioch. Antipater made Governor of Iudaea, who makes
Phaselus his eldest son 48
Governor of Jerusalem, and Herod of Galilee, who was in danger for executing
Ezechias the thief, but acquitted by Hyrcanus. The Jews made Citizens of Rome.
Antipater poisoned by Malichus, and is killed by Herod, whom Cassius makes
Governor of Cael^-Syria. Antigonus son of Aristobulus invades Galilee, whom
Herod expels, who with Phaselus are made Tetrarchs of Iudaea by Antony.
A^tigonus takes Jerusalem by means of Pacorus the Pa^thian, and lends Hircanus
and Phaselus bound to Galilee. Phaselus dasheth out his own brains. Herod
escaped into Egypt.

In Egypt, Ptolomy banisheth Cleopatra, who takes Caesar for her Protector.
Ptolomies Tutors kill Pompey. Ptolomy defeated by Caesar, and is drowned.
Alexandria and the Library burnt by Caesar, who setleth Cleopatra; she
poysoneth her brother, and kills her sister Arsinoe; she dissolves a Pearl in
Vinegar; Antony doats on her.

At Rome, the civil war between Caesar and Pompey lasted four years; Pompey
defeated in Pharsalia, and flies into Egypt; Caesar has diverse Victories,
and is made Dictator; Pompey's son stirred up by Cato and others to renew the
war; Scipio slain; Cato kills himself; Caesar subdues Africa, makes Numidia a
Province, defeats Pompey's son in Spain, and kills him, reformes the Calendar,
and is slain with 23 wounds.

Herod made King of Iudaea, gets many Victories, takes Ioppe, recovers Galilee,
overthrows Antigonus, marries Mariamne the Niece of Hircanus, takes Jerusalem,
and beheads Antigonus, 38
so ends the Asmonaean Race; Aristobulus drowned by Herod; he overcomes the
Arabians, and puts Hircanus to death, and is at Rhodes confirmed King.

Syria is regained by Ventidius from Pacorus the Parthian.

At Rome, Octavius and Antony are reconciled; Sext. Pompeius seizes on the
Corn going for Rome, with whom Octavius has war; at last Pompey flies into
Parthia, and is killed. Lepidus resigns his Triumvirate. Antony has bad
success in Parthia; The Dalmatian and Panonian war; Africa, Iudaea, and Spain
subdued; Mauritania made a Province; diverse other places subdued; Octavius and
Antony at variance about Cleopatra; the battle at Actium; Antony is defeated,
and kills himself.

In Iudaea, Mariamne executed, with Alexandra, and others of Antigonus his
Faction by Herod; His buildings at Jerusalem, at Samaria, which he called
Sebaste, and Caesaria, called 28
Stratons Tower.

In Egypt, Cleopatra kills her self; Egypt is made a Province.

At Rome, the Temple of Ianus is shut; Octavius triumphs, and is called
Augustus. Gallus President of Egypt is banished, and kills himself; Spain
subdued; the Pantheon built; Tyber breaks in upon Rome.

In Iudaea, Herod builds a Temple of white Marble to Augustus, reedifieth the
Temple of Jerusalem, 18
and builds the Tower Antonia, he brings back his two sons from Rome. Agrippa
entertained by Herod at Jerusalem; he accuses his two sons Aristob. and
Alexander by Mariamne.

At Rome, Augustus confines the Senate to a less number; Agrippa recovereth
the Roman Ensigns taken by Mithridates, and regains the Colors which were lost
by Crassus and Antony. Augustus adopteth Agrippa's sons by his daughter.
Agrippa overcommeth the Spanish slaves, and the Bosphori, but refuses a
Triumph. Tiberius subdueth the Panonii, and is made Colleague to Augustus.
Drusus overcommeth the Frisians.

In Iudaea, Herod is reconciled to Augustus, he accuses his sons, and they are
executed. Antipater conspireth against his father, and is put to death; A Tax
is imposed on the Jews 8
by Cyrenius. John the Baptist is born, and six months after our Savior Jesus
Christ:

Herod commands the children of Bethleem to be murdered, he dies shortly
after; Archelaus succeeds: Antipater Tetrarch of Galilee, and Philip of
Trachonitis: At the Passover 3000. J^ws slain.

At Rome, Claudius the son of Drusus is born, Drusus is killed with a fall from
his horse: Tiberius triumphs, and has the Tribunes power for five years, to
keep under Caius and Lucius, Augustus his Nephews: A general Tax over the Roman
world; the Temple of Ianus shut the third time. Varus President of Syria
pillageth the country. Caius Caesar parts Herod's lands among his children.
Lollius being accused of Treason, slew himself. Augustus forbids any man to
call him Lord. Christ is born in Bethleem. Archelaus confirmed by Augustus.
Christ flies into Egypt. Archelaus marries incestuously with his brother
Alexanders widow; is accused to the Senate 1
for his cruelty, for which he is banished to Vienna; And Iudaea annexed to the
Province of Syria.

At Rome, Augustus adopteth Tiberius. Armenia is left by the Parthian to the
Romans. Ariobarzanes governor of Armenia. Cinna conspireth against Augustus,
is pardoned and made Consul. Agrippa Nephew to Augustus banished for his
insolences; and Iulia, Augustus his daughter for adultery. Germanicus makes
war in Dalmatia. Ovid banished. Vespasian born. Magicians and Astrologers
expelled Rome, the Panonians sue for peace.

In Iudaea, the Samaritans profane the Temple; Christ disputes there: Judas
Gaulonites 10
raises a sedition. Caesarea Philippi built by Philip the Tetrarch, in honor
of Augustus. The Jews are expelled Rome and Italy, and employed against the
Samarit^ns. In Syria Varus is governor; he being defeated by Arminius, kills
himself in Germany.

The Romans under Tiberius break league with the Goths, who therefore waste
Maesia. Augustus dies at Nola; Tiberius succeeds, who puts Agrippa to death,
and famisheth Iulia. Tyber overfloweth. Germanicus has diverse victories, and
triumphs over the Catti, etc. not long after he is poisoned by Piso, who
being accused of this murder kills himself. Zeno king of Armenia makes peace
with Parthia.

In Iudaea, Pilate is president, who upon the Jews threats, removes his
standards with the statue of Tiberius, out of the Temple into Caesarea: He
takes also the Corban or Treasure 20
out of the Temple, and with it pays for the public waterworks. Herod
Antipas builds Tyberias, divorceth his wife Areta, and marries Herodias his
brother Philips wife, and then beheadeth the Baptist; for which he is defeated
by the Arabians: Christ is Baptized.

At Rome, the Players are expelled the City: Pompey's Theater repaired by
Tyberius, and the statue of Sejanus erected in it. Livia poysoneth her husband
Drusus, and lies with Sejanus, who destroys the friends of Germanicus.
Taefarinas killed by Dolobella. Sejanus put to death, his son strangled, his
daughter defloured, then murthred. Tiberi^s goes into Campania, then to
Capreae, upon the burning of Mount Caelius. Agrippina bears Nero to Domitius.
At Fidenae the Amphitheater kills with its fall 50000. people. Tiberius his
hatred against the family of Germanicus. In this ten years space the French,
Thracians, and Fristans rebel.

In Iudaea Christ suffers, after him St. Stephen; and St. James is Bishop of
Jerusalem: the Disciples are persecuted; St. Paul, the Eunuch, and Samaria
converted. Paul preaches 30
in Arabia, James in Spain. Peter heals Aenaeas, and raises Tabitha.
Cornelius converted; Paul and Barnabas expelled Antioch by the Jews. Pilate
writes to Tiberius about Christ's Miracles. Herod Agrippa imprisoned at Rome for
wishing Tiberius dead; he is released by Caligula, and made King of Iudaea, and
gives him a golden Chain which he hanged up in the Temple. Philip dies, his
Tetrarchy annexed to Syria. Herod banished by Caligula to Lions, whom Herodias
follows, his Tetrarchy is given to Agrippa. Caiphas the High Priest kills
himself.

At Rome, Nero son of Germanicus is starved by Tiberius, so was Agrippina wife
to Germanicus. Tiberius rages and tyrannizeth over the people and Nobility; he
has wa^, then makes peace with Artabanus King of Parthia. Caligula succeeds,
he spends a hundred millions in three years, abuses his three sisters, wished
the Romans had but one neck, makes himself a God, executes many innocent
people in sport, pillageth France and Spain, employes his Army to gather
Cockle-shells on the British shore: he had two books called the Sword and
Dagger, in which he writes the names of those he meant to murder. Nero the
Emperor, and Titus Vespasian are born.

In Iudaea, Petronius is commanded by Caligula to set up his statue in the
Temple. Agrippa having obtained Jerusalem and Samaria of Claudius without
tribute, was struck with 40
vermin and died. Iudaea again is made a Province. Theudas for an insurrection
is beheaded. Paul and Barnabas stay two years at Iconium. St. Matthew writes
his Gospel. The name Christians begins at Antioch; St. James is beheaded; St.
Peter delivered out of prison miraculously; St. Mark is Bishop of Alexandria;
Paul stoned at Lystra; the Apostles Synod at Jerusalem; Barnabas and Mark sail
to Cyprus; Paul and Sylas pass through Syria; Timothy is circumcised; Many
Jews smothered between the Temple-Gates upon a sedition.

At Rome, Caligula is slain. Claudius succeeds; his wife Messalina insatiable
in lust: He makes war with the Britains, from which he calls his son Britanicus:
He depriveth the Rhodians of their privileges, for killing some Romans.
Vespatian goes into Britain; he renews the secular Plays. Messalina and her
Paramour Silius are both slain. Claudius marries Agrippina his brother
Germanicus daughter, who by her persuasions adopts her son Nero, and recals
Seneca, whom he makes his Tutor. Vespatian takes the Isle of Wight; and
Claudius, Orkney: the Britains and Picts yield to the Romans. Asinius Pollio is
banished; and Valerius the Consul kills himself.

In Iudaea, Cumanus the Governor maintains a faction between the J^ws and
Samaritans, 50
which was the destruction of many; wherefore he is banished, and Foelix set in
his place; who marries Drusilla, Agrippa's sister, and puts Jonathan the
High Priest to death, and tyrannizeth over the Jews. To Foelix succeeds Portius
Festus. Lydia, and Dennis the Areopagite. Iustus and Crispus are converted.
Paul writes his two Epistles to the Thessalonians, his first Epistle to
Timothy, his two Epistles to the Corinthians, to Titus, to the Romans, and his
other epistles. St. Luke writes his Gospel. Philip is crucified at Hierapolis.
Paul fights with beasts at Ephesus, raises Eutichus, is imprisoned at
Caesarea; appeals to Caesar: his shipwreck and imprisonment.

At Rome is a great famine. Nero marries Octavia, daughter to Claudius, who by
Agrippina his wife is poisoned. Caractacus General of the Britains brought to
Rome. Nero succeeds to Claudius, a good Emperor for the first five years: he
poysoneth Britanicus, fearing that Agrippina would make him Emperor: He builds
an Amphitheatre in Campo martis. Ianus Temple shut the fifth time. Artaxata the
chief City of Armenia taken by Corbalo. Poppaea Sabina becomes Nero's
Concubine: he commits incest with his mother, then murders her; he institutes
the Quinquennal games, called Neronia: a thunderbolt struck the Cup out of his
hand: he committed many works of darkness in the night.

In Iudaea, the Jews and Agrippa differ, about a Prospect which he erected on
his house. 60
Annanias High Priest, and son of Annas, is deposed for stoning of St. James.
Jesus Ananus foretells Ierusalems destruction. Agrippa beautifieth Caesarea
Philippi, and calls it Neroniades. The building of the Temple is finished:
strange Prodigies and Apparitions were seen at Jerusalem. Florus for his
cruelty is slain by the Jews, and six thousand Romans. Agrippa stoned out of
the City. Vespasian is sent thither, who takes diverse places. Titus is left to
end the war. Three factions in Jerusalem, with a horrible famine, in which a
woman eat her child; at last it is taken by Titus.

In Rome, Nero kills his wife Octavia, and marries his Whore Poppaea: by
Suetonius he overcomes the Brittans, and expels Vologesus the Parthian king out
of Armenia: in a woman's habit he marries Pythagoras; he sets Rome on fire, and
sings Homers Iliades. Upon the discovering of a plot, he kills Seneca, Lucan,
and many more: he kicks Poppoea great with child, and kills her. He crowns
Tiridates king of Armenia, at Rome. He goes into Greece with his Fiddlers,
marries Sporus an Eunuch; attempts to cut the Isthmus in Peloponnesus: is
proclaimed an enemy to the State, and murders himself. Galba succeeds, who is
slain by Otho; he kills himself being defeated by Vitellius, who also after nine
months is killed.

The Church begins to b^ persecuted generally under Nero. St Mark having
written his Gospel from St. Lukes mouth, is slain at Alexandria: St. Luke
writes the Acts; St. Paul returns into Italy, and writes his second Epistle to
Timothy. Joseph of Aramathaea converts the Britains: the Christians are
secretly warned out of Jerusalem. St. John's Gospel written at Ephesus; Peter
and Paul suffer at Rome. Menander the Heretic, father of the Gnostics, makes
himself the Savior of man. The Nazarens observe the Law with the Gospel.

In Iudaea, Titus commands the two Drachmes usually offered to the Temple, to
be paid 70
to the Capitol; the ornaments and wealth of the Temple brought to Rome, and
laid up in the Temple of Peace. Many miseries befall the Jews. The Temple of
Onias at Heliopolis is shut up by Vespasians command.

At Rome, Vespasian is Emperor, who with Titus triumphs over the Jews. The
Batavians are brought to obedience: He expels the Philosophers out of Rome for
some abuses: He dedicates the Temple of Peace; and the Temple of Ianus shut the
sixth time. Ichaia, Greece, and diverse other places made Provinces; The
Sarmatians invade Maesia; He sets the Image of the Sun upon Nero's statue,
instead of Nero's head: The Alani waste Media and Armenia; Two Senators plot
Vespasians death; he dies of a Flux; Titus succeeded for two years; he built
an Amphitheater, at the dedication of which 5000. beasts slain.

In the Church Linus succeeds St. Peter; the Nazarens held there was but one
soul in substance of man, beast, and plant.

At Rome, the Capitol is fired from heaven, which is consumed with many fair
buildings. 80
Titus dies, the delight of mankind; whom Domitian succeeds, the Fly-catcher,
and an excellent Archer; he repudiates his wife, and marries his brothers
widow Iulia; he makes Laws against Adultery, and Gelding; he kills his cousin
Flavius Sabinus, and causes more Corn to be sowed, and less Vines planted;
The Capitol is rebuilt. Agricola having subdued the Britains, passes over to
Ireland, then is made Governor of Syria. Philosophers and Mathematicians
expelled Rome. Nerva banished, and recalled. Plays appointed every fourth year
to Jupiter. Capitolinus his tyranny over the Senators; he assumes divine
titles. Agricola subdueth Fife in Scotland.

In the Church, to Linus, who was martyred, succeeded Cletus, or Anacletus. St.
Andrew crucified in Achaio. The Nicholaitan Heretics held promiscuous
Marriages, and the creation of all earthly things by Angels: The Ebionites
called also Sampsei and Elcesaitae denied Christ's Divinity, and rejected St.
Paul's Epistles, and all the Gospels except St. Matthews: Corinthus denies
Mary's Virginity, makes Jesus and Christ two different persons, held
Circumcision, and are the first Millenaries; St. John would not stay with him
in the Bath.

At Rome, Domitian triumphs over the Dacians and Germans; he unjustly buried
alive 90
Cornelia, the chief Vestal virgin. The Romans lose diverse Armies. Decebalus
the Gothish King, deludeth the Romans by putting Armor on the stumps of Trees;
he murth^reth diverse, and puts all the Line of David to death; he intended to
kill his wife, with many others, who conspire and murder him. Cocceius Nerva
succeeded, who ruled well, and repealed all Domitians Acts; he died after one
year and four months; Trajanus whom he adopted, succeeded for 19. years, a
just Emperor, whose Tutor was Plutarch.

The Church is persecuted the second time by Domitian. John having escaped the
scalding Oil, is banished into Pathmos, where he writes his Revelation. St.
Dennis is beheaded at Paris; Timothy stoned at Ephesus. Protasius and Garvasius
suffer at Millan; Flav. Clemens the Consul slain for Christianity; his wife
Domicilla is banished into Pontus; Clemens Pope ten years.

At Rome, Trajan refuses Consulship; The Dacian wars lasted five years; He
defeats Decebalus, 100
and renews the Sword-playing; he builds a Bridge over Danubius, and overthrows
Decebalus, who for grief kills himself at Zarmis or Alba Iulia; his treasure is
found hid in the River; the Bridge is broken down, and Colonies planted in
Transylvania; he erects a Library and Column at Rome, he has diverse Victories
in the East; Nero's golden house burnt; he builds a Fleet in the Red Sea; he is
styled Optimus.

In the Church, a third persecution is raised by Trajan. John dies at Ephesus,
whose successor was Onesimus. Simeon Bishop of Jerusalem is crucified. Ignatius
Bishop of Antioch is sent bound to Rome, where he is torn by the Lions.
Onesimus, St. Paul's Disciple, is stoned. Clemens bound to an anchor, and cast
into the sea. Anacletus succeeded for 10 years.

At Rome, the Pantheon is burnt by lightning. Trajan in the East beats the
Kings of Armenia 110
and Parthia. Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Assyria made Provinces. Trajan's Column
finished: He takes Nisibis, Edesse, and burns Seleucia: He is endangered by the
Earthquake at Antioch: He makes the Haven at Ancona navigable: He dies at
Seleucia; his bones are buried under his Column. Adrian succeeded for 20
years; he kills Palma and other brave men; he subdueth the Sauromatae; he
gives Armenia and Mesopotomia to Cosroes. The Britains, Scots, and Picts rebel.

In the Church, the persecution cease, upon Pliny's letters in behalf of the
Christians to Trajan. Papias S. John's disciple Bishop of Hierapolis,
maintains the Millinaries Sect. Quadratus Bishop of Athens, who lived in the
time of Christ, died about the time of Hadrian. Anacletus martyred.

At Rome, Adrian forbid men and women to use one Bath: he builds Adrianopolis
in Thrace, 120
sends Antoninus Proconsul into Asia, and visits all the Roman provinces: He
plants Colonies in Cyrene and Lybia; He honors Platina, Trajans widow, with a
Temple, for by her he got the Empire: He makes a wall in Britain, to keep out
the Scots: He disputes at Athens with the Philosophers: He setleth the
Provinces in Africa, and erecteth a Library at Athens, and a monument to his
dead Horse.

In the Church, Evaristus a Greek is Pope 9 years, and then is martyred. In
Asia, the Christians are persecuted by Antoninus. Alexander the first is Pope
10 years; he brought in Holy Water. Diverse Apologies written in the Christians
behalf, which made Adrian stay the persecution, and was minded to build them a
Church, but was hindered by their enemies.

At Rome, Adrian makes his own Tomb, called Moles Adriani: He builds a City to
his 130
favorite Antonius, who was drowned in Egypt; he rebuilds Jerusalem, and calls
it Aelia. The Jews rebel, because he built a Temple to Jupiter there where
Solomon's Temple stood; Julius Severus is sent against them. Adrian dies, to
whom succeeded Antoninus Pius 22 years, who adopted M. Annius Verus, and calls
him Aurelius. The Northern Britains rebel, and are subdued by Lollius.

In Iudaea, the Jews are forbid to dwell in Jerusalem. They rebel, and are
defeated with their Captain Cochebas, by Severus, who destroys their Castles
and Towns, and wastes all their Country; their Captives are sent into Spain,
where they continued 1500 years, till Ferdinand and Emanuel expelled them.

In the Church, Pope Alexander is martyred. Sixtus the first succeeds Pope 10
years; be instituted Altars. Justin, of a Samaritan becomes a Christian: Aquila
Ponticus, of a Christian became a Jew; he translated the Bible into Greek, and
was cast out of the Church for studying Astrology. Saturninus the Heretic
held Christ's body fantastical, that Marriage was the doctrine of Devils, that
the Jews and Christians had two different gods, etc. Basilides the Heretic
held, that Christ suffered not, but Simon of Cyrene; that Faith was natural,
and diverse other wild opinions.

At Rome, Antoninus repaireth the decayed Bridge, and forbids the reading of
Sybilla's books: 140
He reforms diverse abuses; subdues the Moors, Daci, and Alani: He is bountiful
to Rhodes and other places shaken with earthquakes.

In the Church, Sixtus is martyred. Telesphorus succeeded 11 years: He
appointed Lent-Fast, and the Hymn [Gloria in excelsis] Mark, the first
uncircumcised Bishop of Jerusalem; the debate about the observation of Easter
began: Carpocras the Heretic makes Christ a mere man, holds transanimation,
denies the Resurrection, and affirms that Satan made the world; his disciples
were called Gnostics. Cerdon, another Heretic, held two Gods, denied Christ's
humanity, and the Resurrection, and the Law: Heraclion held the same opinions,
and after him Valentinian. Marcus, father of the Marcionites, held the same,
and had a peculiar form of Baptism.

At Rome, Antoninus causes persecution to cease, upon the inundation of
Tibris, fires, and 150
Earthquakes; he makes men as well as women subject to the Law of Adultery.

In the Church, Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna converts many at Rome from
Heresies, and then is martyred: Justin writes his first Apology: Churches are
consecrated, and Witnesses ordained in Baptism by Pope Higinus, who succeeded
Telesphorus the Martyr; he sat four years, and the first that styled himself
Pope: Pius succeeds 9 years; he appointed Nuns, and that Easter should be kept
on Sunday; and Fonts in Churches.

At Rome, M. Aurelius Antoninus Philosophus reigned 19 years; his brother Luc.
Aur. Verus is made Colleague, who marches against the Parthian, but dallies at
Antioch, but his 160
Army fight successefully, and takes Seleucia, with 40000. Captives: The Catti
are expelled out of Rhetia: Antoninus makes good Laws; his son Commodus made
Caesar; Pertinax defeats the Germans, who had invaded Italy: The Marconian war
is begun. Lucius returning home, dies by the way of an Apoplexy: The Britains
rebel, and are suppressed by Agricola, who repaireth Adrians wall broken down
by the Scots and Picts, who had invaded Westmorland.

In the Church is raised a fourth Persecution, in which Justin having written
his second Apology, is beheaded at Rome. Polycarpus differs from Anicetus (who
was now Pope 8 years) about the time of Easter; but it was agreed, that each
Country should use their own custom. Marcion a Bishops son, of a Christian
became a Cerdonian: Polycarpus is martyred at Smyrna: Photinus Bishop of Lions
suffers with many others: Hegesippus of a Jew becomes a Christian, and writes
the Church-story: Melito Bishop of Sardis is also martyred. Pope Anicete
ordaines shaving of Priests, and consecrating of Bishops.

The Gnostics about this time lived; they held two Gods, two souls in each
faithful man, Jesus and Christ to be different, that Christ remained 18
mon^ths on earth after his Resurrection, and that the world was made by Angels:
Tatian held that Adam was damned, Marriage was fornication, Flesh and Wine not
be eat and drunk; he held many Gods, and denied Christ to be of David; of him
came the Eucratites: Marcion denied Christ's Divinity, transanimation he held,
and rebaptisation as often as marcion fell; he rejected Marriage, the Old
Testament, and eating of flesh, he also held all wars unlawful.

At Rome, the Emperor pawnes his Plate and Jewels, to ease the people of
Taxes, which 170
afterward he redeemed. Cassius in Armenia calls himself Emperor, and is slain
by his Soldiers: The Romans defeat the Marconians, by the Christians prayers:
Commodus is made his fathers Colleague, they defeat the Scythians: Antoninus
dies in Panonia: Commodus reigned 12 years, he kept 300 Concubines, and 300
boys; he killed his sister Lucilia, and ravished the rest: before he subdued
the Germans, he triumphed over them. In Britain, Lucius is the first Christian
King; he erected three Archbishops, and built St. Peter's in Cornhill Land.
which was the Cathedral till Paul's

In the Church Pope Anicetus is martyred; his successor Soler sat four years;
he ordained the Fathers consent, and Priests Benediction in Marriage; to him
succeeded 180
Eleutherius 15 years; he sends Damianus into Britain to baptize King Lucius
and his people. The Ophit Heretics worshipped the Serpent, holding Christ to
be that Serpent which deceived Eve; they denied the Resurrection, and Christ's
humanity. The Caini held diverse of the former opinions; so did the Scethitae,
but that these made Seth the Savior of the world, the others Cain, Ejau, and
Judas. The Adamites were naked in their Assemblies, had women in common in the
dark, and denied Prayer. Montan^s affirmed himself to be the Holy Ghost, denied
the Trinity, allowed Incest, and baked the bread of the Sacrament with man's
blood; his chief disciple was Noetus; Lucian and Apello were Marcions.

At Rome, Commodus gives himself to pleasure, and leaves the Government to
Perennius, who 180
murdered many Senators, at last he and his son are put to death for treason,
and Cleander put in his room, who makes sale of all places and offices. The
Daci are subdued by Albinus and Niger: 2000 die daily at Rome of the Plague;
the Ca^itol and Library are burned by Lightning. The Britains after the death
of Lucius have civil Wars, and rebel, but are subdued again by Marcellus:
Pertinax being sent hither, was almost killed by the Soldiers, and is sent
away again. The Scots and Picts again break Adrians Wall.

In the Church Theodosian makes the third Translation of the Bible; he was a
Marcionite, then a Jew. Pantaenus, whose scholar was Clem. Alexandrinus, sets
up the first Christian School at Alexandria: Apollonius the Senator is
martyred: The Jews Thalmud is now made: The Pepuzian Heretics, so called from
Pepuza a Phrygian Town, were Montanists; they held Pepuza to be the heavenly
Jerusalem mentioned in Scripture: The Apostolici held all things in common,
condemned Marriage, thinking the Apostles did so; made Apocryphal Books their
Gospel, and refused to admit those into the Church who fell after Baptism:
Artolyritae made up their Sacrament of bread and cheese. Originiani and Turpes,
so called from their filthy lives, forbidding Marriage, and extolling
Fornication.

At Rome, Commodus removes the head from the Colossus, and puts his own head on
it; 190
He acts Hercules in a Play, and is at last strangled by Martia his
Concubine, and Laetus. The Temples of Vesta, Peace, and others are burned.
Pertinax reigned not full three months, being slain by the Soldiers, and Did.
Iulianus not much above two months, being also killed by them; then Niger in
Syria, Albinus in Britain, Severus in Panonia, (who reigned 17 years) are made
Emperors: Severus defeats Niger, and besieges Byzantium three years; he has
many Victories in the East, and makes Caracalla his son, Caesar; he takes
Bizantium, kills Albinus, and sends his head to Rome, where he put 29 Senators
to death; he makes Geta his other son, Caesar, and makes Caracalla his
Colleague. The Britains help Albinus against Severus, whom he defeats: Virius
Lupus sent to Britain.

In the Church, Tertullian being vexed by the Roman Clergy, turns Montanist.
Severus the Heretic followed Marcions opinions. Theodosius denied Christ's
Divinity, and took upon him to alter the Gospel. Quarto-decimani kept Easter on
the 14. day of the Moon, and then fasted, they were Antilapsarians. Alogi
rejected the Gospel and Apocalypse, saying they were written by Cerinthus; they
denied Christ to be the Word, or God. Victor Pope 9 years.

At Rome, Severus undertakes an Expedition into the East, and makes League with
the King 200
of Armenia; he wastes Arabia, and mastereth King Abgarus, and has diverse
other Victories; he repaireth the Pantheon: Plautianus the Favorite is killed
by Caracalla's treacheRy, whose daughter Plautilla his own wife, with her
sister, he banisheth: Caracalla striving with his brother, breaks his own
thigh. Severus with his sons go into Britain, where at York he resides, and
makes a wall 132 miles long, then dies: About this time Scotland receives the
Faith. Many of the Caledonians massacred for rebelling against the Romans.

In the Church the 5. Persecutionis raised by Severus. Leonidas, Origens
father, suffered at Alexandria, so did Philip Governor of Egypt. Irenaeus
Bishop of Lions, with others, are martyred. Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem
flies into the wilderness: Speratus martyred at Carthage. Symmachus
translates the Bible. Zeplirinus is Pope 18 years; he ordained the Eucharist to
be received once a year. Hermiani and Seleuciani held the Chaos eternal with
God, Angels Creators of men's souls, that Christ left his flesh in the Sun, they
denied Baptism and the Resurrection. Praxeas, father of the Patrispassiani,
held that God the Father only suffered. Melchisedeciani made Melchisedec
greater then Christ, whose Divinity they denied.

At Rome, Caracalla reigned six years; Geta ruled one year with him, whom he
killed in 210
his Mothers arms, and multitudes of his party; he married with Iulia his
mother-in-law; he overcomes the Germans, he marches into Asia; he murders the
Alexandrian youth, for calling him Oedipus, and his wife Iocasta; burns
Aristotle's books; treacherously murders the Parthians; is slain by Avitus,
Caracalla's Bastard, who succeeds, and is called Heliogabalus, a most luxurious
and cruel Prince. The Britains rebel.

In the Church, Calixtus is Pope six years; he instituted the four Embers or
Fasts before Ordination, and Churchyards: The fifth Edition of the Bible,
called Vulgata, found at Jericho. A Council in Africa about Repabtisation. The
Elcesai Heretics held two Christ's, denied Mary's Virginity, deified the Water,
rejected Scripture; Angelici adored Angels.

Heliogabalus brings his God, the Sun, to Rome, and builds a Temple for him.
Bassianus his 220
cousin made Caesar; Heliogabalus is slain with his Mother, and his body
dragged and flung into the Tibris; Alexander Severus succeeded thirteen years,
a good Prince, he had Christ's Picture in his Closet; Ulpian his chief Lawyer
and Counselor is slain by the Soldiers. Armenia invaded by the Persians.

In the Church a persecution is raised by Ulpian. Calixtus martyred. Pope Urban
succeeded seven years. Christians begin to build Churches. The sixth Edition of
the Bible.

Alexander the Emperor goes against Artaxerxes the Persian, and returns to
Antioch with loss; he was severe against corrupt Judges, Harlots, Thieves, and
false Notaries; he 230
erects an Hospital for children, triumphs over the Persians; France invaded
by the Germans: He is slain with his Mother Mammaea. Maximinus a tall Goth
succeeded two years, a great Trencher-man; he had been a Mulettor; Gordian is
set up against him, who hanged himself upon the death of his son: The Senate
choose two Emperors, P^lbinus and Pupienus, whom the Soldiers slew: Maximinus
is slain before Aquileia, and his carcass flung to the dogs; Gordianus
succeeded five years.

In the Church, Urban being martyred, Pontianus succeeded Pope four years, who
being banished, dyed miserably in Sardinia: Anterus succeeded one month, who
being martyred, had Fabian for his successor 14 years. Cecilia the Virgin and
others are martyred. Origin instructs Mammaea in the faith, and finisheth his
Octopla. The sixth Persecution is raised, and ends with Maximinus his death.

At Rome, Gordian opens the Temple of Ianus, and defeats the Persian; he is
slain by Philip the Arabian, who succeeded 5 years; he makes peace with the
Persian. In the secucular 240
Plays, Pompey's Theater and many houses burnt, Philopopolis in Thrace is
built by him.

In the Church, Pope Fabian admits Philip the Emperor upon his repentance:
Laurence (...) Deacon is broyled on a Grid iron. A Council is held in Arabia
against the Heretics which held the souls Mortality, of which opinion was
Beryllus Bishop of Bostra, whom Origin reclaimed.

At Rome, Philip leaves his son, and goes against Decius, whom the Soldiers
in Illyria chose Emperor: Philip with his son are slain: Decius succeeded one
year, who being 250
slain by the Goths, Gallus succeeds two years, who became a tributary Prince
to the Goths, the Empire is wasted by the Goths and Persians. Gallus and his
son are slain by Aemilianus, and ^e by Valerian, who reigns 7 years; The
Goths waste the Eastern parts; so does Sapores the Persian, who made Valerian
his footstool, and flaid him alive.

In the Church, Fab. Pope is martyred. Novatianus makes a Schism: Cornelius a
Roman Priest is banished, whipped, and beheaded. Lucius is Pope two years; he
is martyred; Stephen Archdeacon is Pope three years; he ordained sacred
Garments for those that served at the Altar; he also is martyred, whom Sixtus
followed: Diverse Synods were held about this time about the cause of Novatus,
and the Lapsed: Paul the Eremite lived in the wilderness till Constantine;
from him the Monks sprang up. The seventh Persecution is raised: Cyprian and
many others are martyred: The Valesii held that they only were saved, who made
themselves Eunuchs: Novatus, father of the Cathari, who would admit none
Lapsed: Sabellius denied the Trinity and Unity of God, and held that the matter
was coeternal with God.

At Rome, Galien reigns alone, who mitigates the Christian persecution: Many
Commanders 260
usurp the Empire, which is wasted by the Barbarians, and the Commanders
destroy each other: Galien is slain; Aurelius succeeds ten years, who is
defeated and slain at Millan by his Soldiers: Marcus Aurelianus succeeds
six years.

In the Church, to Sixtus succeeded Pope Dionysius nine years, who divides Rome
into Parishes, and the Country into Diocesses. Hierachitae denied Marriage and
the Resurrection, debarred children from Heaven, and held Melchisedech to be
the Holy Ghost. Originists made the Holy Ghost a creature, held that the souls
were created before the body, and that the Devils after 1000 years should be
released from punishment. Samosatenus Bishop of Antioch denied Christ's
Divinity, therefore would not baptize in Christ's Name.

At Rome, Aurelian uses the Diadem, overcommeth the Goths; is beaten by, and
beats 270
the Marconians; He erecteth a Temple to the Sun; defeats the Goths in Thrace;
incompasseth Rome with a Wall of fifty miles about; He triumphs over Zenobia
and Tetricus; she dies at Rome. Silk brought out of India: The Boii are
suppressed; he is slain^y the treachery of his Secretary Mnesteus, who for this
is flung to wild beasts: Tacitus succeeds 6 months, and is slain by the
Soldiers; his brother Florianus is slain; Aurel. Prolus succeeds 6 years; He
has diverse Victories. Constantine is born in Britain to Constantius and Helena.

In the Church, Falix sat Pope three years; He instituted Consecration of
Altars, and Registered Martyrs names. Eutiehianus succeeded 10 years, who buried
with his own hands 342. Martyrs. A Synod is held at Antioch against
Samosatenus. The ninth Persecution is raised by Aurelian, whose hand became
stiff as he was subscribing the Edict; but he dyed before it took effect.
Manes, father of the Manichees, held all the Heresies of the former Heretics:
He was flai'd alive by the Persian King.

At Rome much mischief is done by the Sword-players, who broke prison. Probus
280
overcommeth the Goths, gives peace to the Persian, and defeats Proculus and
Bonosus, usurpers; He is slain by his Soldiers. Aurelius Carus succeeds one
year; obtaines diverse Victories, and is slain by Thunder: Dioclesian succeeds
20. years: He subdues the Sarmatae, and Persians, and Goths in Panonia, and
Rebels in France and Germany, and Julian the Usurper; He had six years wars
with Achillaeus the other Usurper. In the Church, Caius sat Pope 13 years: He
instituted the 8 Ecclesiastical degrees. Cyril Bishop of Antioch, for hindering
Numerian from entering into the Church, is slain by him. Proclianite heretics,
of one Proclus, held that Christ was not come in the flesh.

At Rome, Dioclesian assumes divine honors. Constantius Chlorus is made
governor of Britain; 290
Galerius is made Caesar: these have diverse victories. Dioclesian takes
Alexandria, and Archillaeus in it, whom he flung to wild beasts. Galerius
defeated by Narses the Persian, and then defeats him. Constantius kills the
French and Almains.

In the Church, Caius is martyred. Marcellinus succeeded Pope 8 years; he
sacrificed to Idols. Anthony the Eremite then flourished. Arnobius converted to
the faith, and writes against Porphyrie. Amphibalus, and ten more, suffered
martyrdom in Britain. Susanna Niece to Pope Caius, martyred, for not marrying
with Maximian a Heathen.

At Rome, Dioclesian and Maximian triumph over the Persians and Goths: Diocles.
will be called Iovius, and Maximian, Herculeus. They give over the government.
Galerius and 300
Constantius made Emperors, this of the West, the other of the East.
Constantius dies; to him succeeded his son Constantine 30 years, who married
Fausta Maximian's daughter: He makes a Bridge over the Rhine, and has diverse
victories. Fausta discovers Maximians plot against Constantine.

In the Church, Pope Marcelline having at the Synod at Sinvessa in Campania
publicly in a hair-cloth confessed his fault, is at last martyred, and his
body after 36 days was interred by his successor Marcellus, who sat 5 years,
and was stifled to death by the stench of a filthy stable where he was
enclosed; that stable afterward was turned to a Church, and called by his name.
To him succeeded Eusebius 2 years. Many Christians are burnt in a house at
Nicomedia, by Valerius. The tenth Persecution is raised, in which incredible
numbers suffered in Egypt S. Alban and others martyred in Britain. Constantine
expels those of his Court, who for rewards would sacrifice to Idols. At this
time the Donatists had diverse Conventicles at Carthage. The traditors or
betrayers of the Bible, are condemned in a Synod at Cyrta in Africa. Bishop
Meletius an Antilapsarian; he had many followers, who held diverse Jewish
ceremonies. Fifteen Cardinals were instituted by the Pope, to bury and baptize.
Donatus the Priest of Carthage, held the true Church no where but with him and
his followers; He rebaptized, and held the Persons of the Trinity superior to
each other.

Galerius having made Licinius Emperor in Illyria, kills himself, being
troubled with a loathsome disease in his privities. Constantine defeats three
times Maxentius, who is 310
drowned in Tyber. Constantine triumphs, and marries his sister to Lieinius.
Maximinus is defeated by the Persian, then by Licinius, at last strangles
himself. Constantine, by himself and his two sons, gets many victories; He
overcomes Licinius, who turns Apostate. The Britains rebel, and defeat
Traherus.

In the Church, Pope Eusebius is martyred. His successor Melchiades sat three
years, who abolished Fasting upon Sundays and Holy Days; he dyed a Martyr.
In his time fell out the Schism between Donatus, and Cecilian Bishop of
Carthage. Sylvester succeeded Pope 21 years; he instituted the feast of S.
Peter ad Vincula; he appointed the Albe and Corporal for the Altar. Diverse
Councels held at this time against the Donatists, Antilapsarians, Jews and
Arians. S. Catherine is martyred at Alexandria. Constantine becomes Christian,
upon the sight of a Cross in the air. Arius brocheth his blasphemy, and is
condemned in a Synod at Alexandria; Constantine confutes him by his letters.

Constantine appeaseth the tumultuous soldiers in Gaide; defeats the
Sauromates and Licinius 320
two times, at last puts him to death for plotting against him: He kills his own
son Crispus, upon Fausta's false accusation: He repairs Jerusalem, and executes
the younger Lucinius: Fausta, for her falsehood, is put to death in a hot Bath.
He repairs diverse Towns; and transfers his seat to Byzantium, which he new
names Constantinople.

In the Church, Constantine ordained burning of Wax-candles by day. Sylvester
is discontented, because Soothsayers were tolerated; therefore retires to Mount
Soracte. Constantine ordains the LORDS Day; builds S. Peter's Church, S. Paul's,
and the Lateran His mother Helena finds the Cross. The first General Council
of Nice, held against Arius; where the Nicene Creed was made, [Sicut in
principio] added to [Gloria Patri.] S. Basil gathers together the dispersed
Monks, and makes laws for them. Arius is recalled by Constantine, upon his
sisters entreaty. Athanasius is persecuted. Constantinople made a Patriarchate.

Constantine subdues the Goths, and gives them Panonia to inhabit; he makes
his son Constans 130
Caesar. Sapores (who was made King in his mothers womb) wastes Mesopotamia.
Constantine is baptized, and dies at Nicomedia, leaving the Empire to his
three sons: Constantine the eldest had the West, and reigned 3 years;
Constantius had the East, and reigned 24 years; Constans had Italy etc. and
reigned 12 years, he slew and defeated his brother Constantine.

In the Church, to Sylvester succeeded Marcus 8 months: He ordained the Nicene
Creed to be sung after the Gospel. Julius succeeded Pope 15 years. Conventicles
are held at Tire, Jerusalem, and Byzantium, against Athanasius, and in favor
of Arius. Athanasius is accused of fornication and murder, by Eusebius. He
refuses to admit Arius into his Church, wherefore he is banished by the
Emperor. Arius dies by the falling out of his guts. Athanasius restored by
Constantine the younger, and is accused to Pope Julius by the Arians. The
Theopaschites held, that Christ's divinity suffered.

Constantius raises Sapores (who had destroyed many Christians) from the siege
of Nisibis. 140
He persecutes the Orthodox Bishops; shuts up the Heathen Temples; condemns
Sodomites; dedicates the Golden-Temple of Antioch; defeats the Persians, but
with great loss. Constans subdueth the Gauls; and is odious for his evil life.

In the Church, Pope Julius holds a Synod at Rome, where Athanasius and
Marcellus are restored, to the grief of the Arians. At Rome, Athanasius writes
his Cr^ed; he is deposed in a Conventicle at Antioch. Great tumults in
Constantinople, and slaughter about the deposing of Paul the Orthodox Bishop,
and consecration of Macedonius the Arian. The Arians new form of Faith is
rejected by the Western Bishops. The Council of Nice is confirmed by that of
Sardis now assembled. Paul and Athanasius restored to their seats. Marcellus
denies Christ's Divinity. The Macedonians reject the Holy Ghost. Photinus held
Christ's Kingdom but temporary. Euphrates denies Christ's Divinity.

Constantius makes Gallus his cousin, Caesar; who kills the rebellious Jews,
and takes 150
diverse Towns from them: He defeats Magnentius three times, who had murdered
Constans, usurped the government, tyrannised in Rome, martyred his own mother,
wounded Desiderius his brother whom he had made Caesar, and at last kills
himself; Decentius his other brother, and Caesar, hanged himself. Constantius
being sole Emperor, puts Gallus to death for his cruelty, and makes his brother
Julian Caesar, who beat the Almans, and got diverse victories. Silvanus the
Usurper is slain. The Germans, Sarmatae, and Persians do much mischief; but are
subdued. Sapores takes Amida. Julian studyeth Magic; and is saluted Emperor by
the Army, but refuses it.

In the Church, Licerius sat Pope 15 years: He is persecuted for not
condemning Athanasius; Felix is placed in his room, and again displaced,
Liberius being recalled. Diverse Synods and Conventicles were held about this
time. The Acatian heretics held, that Christ was like his Father in will, not
in substance. Aetius was an Arian, and held besides that God was
comprehensible. About this time the feast of the Annunciation began to be
observed. Paul Bishop of Constantinople is strangled by the Arians, and diverse
Bishops banished by them, among the rest Athanasius. Osius Bishop of Corduba,
out of fear subscribes to the Arian new Confession of faith, which is rejected
by the Council of Ariminum. S. Andrew's bones translated to Constantinople.

Julian is saluted Emperor, and defeats the French and Almans; he reigned one
year. 360
Constantius returning from the Persian war, dies. Apollo's Temple is burnt.
Julian marches against the Persian, and threatens the ruin of Christianity;
but is wounded and dies. Iovianus succeeds 7 months; he makes his Army
profess themselves Christians; he makes peace with the Persian, and is stifled
in his bed with coal-smoke. In the West succeeded Valentinian 11 years; in the
East Valence 14 years. The Picts and Scots kill the Roman Commanders, and seize
on the greatest part of Britain. Valentinian restores the Standard and
Crucifix, despised by Julian. He had both good and bad success against the
Germans: he makes his son Gratian his Colleague 16 years; Ambrose is made
Governor of Lombardy. Valence overcomes Procopius the Usurper, and kills him;
then wastes the Goths territories, and defeats their King Theodosius; having
settled Britain, calls it Valentia. Romachus the Tyrant of Scotland is beheaded
by his Nobles, and his head fixed on a pole.

In the Church, a third schism arose about the Popes election. Ursicinus and
Damasus are both chosen, hot without great slaughter: but Valentinian banished
Ursieinus, and chose Damasus, who sat 17 years; He added Gloria Patri to the
end of the Psalms, and Allelujah. About 11 Councels were assembled within this
Decad of years. The heretic Eunomius held, that the Holy Ghost was created by
the Son, and that Christ assumed man's body without a soul. Iovianus made all
sins equal, denied Mary's Virginity, contemned Fasting, and held that men
sinned not after Baptism. Collyridiani offered sacrifices to the Virgin Mary.
Lucifer said, that Satan made man's body; and held self-murder lawful; he
rejected some part of the Old Testament. The Christians are persecuted by
Julian, who advances Gentilisme, and condemns Athanasius to death. He is
hindered by stranger prodigies from rebuilding the Temple of Jerusalem; he
writes books against Christ. Valentinian restores the Christian professors.
Valence is baptized by Eudoxius the Arian Bishop. Prodigious Hail falls at
Constantinople. Marriage is forbid in Lent, by the Council of Laodicea. The
Order of S. Lazarus in Savoy founded.

Severus subdueth the Saxons, and Valentinian treacherously kills them;
therefore becomes odious. Firmus the Usurper in Africa kills himself. The
Romans are beat by the Quadi; 370
the Sarmatae defeated by Theodosius; peace granted to the Almans. Valentinian
died suddenly, when he understood what base beggarly people the Sarmatae were,
with whom he had so sten fought. Gratian kills the Germans. Valence in the
East, executes the Philosophers, and imprisoneth them whose names began with
Theod. He kills Para King of Armenia treacherously; he suffers the Goths to
plant in Thrace; they waste Thrace and Thessaly; Valence going against them, is
burnt in a cottage. Theodosius succeeds 16 years, who subdued the Goths. Great
wars between the Scots and Picts.

In the Church, a great tumult was raised in Alexandria about Athanasius, who
hid himself in his fathers monument Evagrius the Orthodox Bishop is banished by
Valence, and 80 Priests drowned. Athanasius dies; his successor Peter flies
to Rome. The Stracens are converted. Ambrose made Bishop of Milain. The Goths
turn Arians. The feast of Epiphanie observed. The banished Bishops restored by
Gratian. Audeani or Anthropomorphites, gave to God a man's body; held Darkness,
Fire and Water eternal. Apollinaris gave Christ a heavenly body; he denied the
Trinity, held traduction of souls, that the Ceremonial law should be in use
after the resurrection, and denied Christ a humane will. The Messalians denied
the Trinity, made God visible; contemned Christ's sufferings, Sacraments and
Alms; allowed perjury, to advance Religion; and ascribed salvation to Prayer
alone.

Gratian in the West, defeats the Goths of Macedonia and Ioanonia. Maximus the
Usurper in Britain, makes his son Victor Emperor; he kills Gratian
treacherously at Lions; then 380
seiseth upon Spain, France, Britain and Afric. Maximus invades Italy.
Valentinian flies to Theodosius. Maximus and his son Victor both are slain;
their General cast himself into the sea. In the East, Theodosius falls sick,
and is baptized. The Goths submit to the Romans. Antioch rebels against
Theodosius, whom Flavian the Bishop asswageth: he makes his son Arcadius
Emperor at 8 years of age: he defeats the Scythians, restores Valentinian, and
defeats Maximus; his governor is killed at Thessalonica, which cost 7000. men
their lives, for which he after was sorry.

In the Church, Siricius is Pope 13 years: he was an enemy to the married
Clergy; he added Anthems to the Liturgy. Priscilian the Heretic, denied the
Trinity, makes the soul to be of the Divine essence; he condemned Marriage and
Flesh-eating, allowed Perjury and lying in Religion. Euchyts held Baptism
needless. Helvidius author of the Antidicomarionites, held that Joseph had
children by Mary, after Christ's birth. The second general Council at
Constantinople against Macedonius; besides nine other Synods within this Decad.
The Nicene Creed (read after the Gospel) is confirmed by the Council of
Constant. Ambrose is persecuted by Valentinian and Iustina the Empress. Psalms
began to be sung by turns; and Anthems brought into the Church by Ambrose.
Maximus subdueth Armortica, and names it Little-Britain. Ursula and 1100.
Virgins going from London in Britain, lost their lives to save their Virginity.
The Order of Augustine Friars began now.

Theodosius, upon the slaughter of Thessolonica, makes a law, that 30 days
should come between 390
the sentence and execution; and is excluded the Church, till he had made
public Penance; he makes his son Honorius Caesar, and defeats Eugenius near
Aquileia, he dies at Milan. Arcadius reigns 13 years, his Tutor Ruffinus
rebels and is killed. Eutrcpius succeeds, who proclaims Stilico a traitor, and
banisheth good men. Alaricus invades Greece, he flies to the sanctuary upon a
capital crime, but is not saved by it; for he made a law against sanctuaries.
In the West, Arbogastes strangleth Valentinian, and sets up Engenius a
Schoolmaster to be Emperor two years. Theodosius having triumphed over him,
makes his son Honorius Emperor in the West 28 years, whose assistant was
Stilico; who falls our with Eutropius. Sword-players are put down by Honorius,
who marries Stilico's daughter: Gildo is strangled: the Empire begins to
decline.

In the Church, Anastasius is Pope four years; he ordained that the Gospel
should be heard standing: 13 Synods were held within this Decad; St. Hierom
instituted Ca nonical hours for Prayer. The Baptists head is brought out of
Cilicia to Constantinople. Hierom expelled his Church for condemning Origin; he
translates the Bibl^ out of the Hebrew. The Marcomans and Huns converted.
Stilico burns the Sybils books at Rome. The third Council of Carthage, ordains
that the Eucharist should be received fasting.

In the West, Alaricus invades Italy, besieges Honorius, and is twice defeated
by Stilico; who 400
also defeats and kills Rhadagisus the Goth; Stilico conspires with Alaricus
against Arcadius, but he is slain by Honorius, upon suspicion that he aimed at
the Eastern Empire The Vandals waste Germany: one Constantine is chosen
Emperor in Britain. The Scotbeat down the wall of Severus and pillage Britain.
Alaricus besieges Rome, and sets up Attalus against Honorius, who unites
himself to Constantine the usurper. In the East, Theodosius the younger is
born, and baptized by Chrysostom; he is made Emperor, but under the
government of Isdigerdes King of Persia 42 years.

In the Church, Innocent 1. is Pope 15 years; he made Saturday a fasting-day,
excommunicates Arcadius and the Eastern Bishops for persecuting Chrysostom.
About this time began the rights of Patronages in the Council of Mela.
Chrysostom for taxing Eudoxia is banished twice; he died in exile. Ten
Councils held within this Decad. Vigilantius an enemy to Churches and
Virginity. Triformiani held the Divinity imperfect in each of the three
Persons. Melangismonitae held that the Son was in the Father, as a lesser
vessel in a greater. Pelacius held Adam mortal by nature before his fall; that
his sin was merely personal, that there is no Original sin, that our natural
concupiscence is good; that men have free will to good without grace; that the
Infants of faithful men are saved without baptism, but shall not enter into
Gods kingdom.

Rome is taken by Alaricus, and Attalus degraded; the Roman Commanders kill
each other. Maximus is defeated in Spain: Heraclian the Usurper in Africa is
defeated and 410
slain. Attalus is set up by Athaulphus the Goth, and then taken; Honorius cuts
off his right hand, and banisheth him to Lipara. Constantius marries Placidia,
whom he rescued from the Goths, the sister of Honorius, of them came
Valentinian, who succeeded Honorius. The Burgundians take Trevers, and obtain a
seat near the Rhene. Alaricus lost all the spoils of Italy in a storm. The
Vandals sack Majorca and Minorca, seat themselves in Betica, and call it
Vandalasia, whence they are expell^d by Vallia and the Goths.

In the Church, Zosimus was Pope two years, who prohibited Priests to drink in
Taverns; to him succeeded Boniface the first, 5 years; with him Eulalius is
chosen by some, which makes the third Schism, but Eulalius is expelled by the
Emperor: In this Decad were ten Councels, the chief was that of Carthage which
condemned Pelagianism. The Jews kill many Christians at Alexandria. The
Donatists, to be accounted Martyrs, kill themselves. The Jews crucify a child
in Palestina. Pelagius at Diaspolis in Palestine recants his Heresies.

In the West, Honorius makes Constantius his Colleague. Constantius dies.
Placidia his widow, and Valentinian her son being suspected by Honorius, fly
to Theodosius, who entertains 420
them. Maximus and Iovinus Usurpers in Spain, are sent in bonds to Rome, and
there executed. Honorius dies: his Secretary John inv^des the Empire.
Valentinian created Caesar by Theodosius. John is taken and beheaded.
Valentinian 3. reigned 29 years. Boniface governor of Afric rebels, and calls
the Vandals into Afric out of Spain, whom Placidia could not remove thence.
Venice is founded by the Romans, flying from Attila and the Huns. Martian,
afterward Emperor, sleeping is covered with an Eagle. Genserious makes a league
with him. In the East, Theodosius warreth against the Persians, who are forced
to sue for peace, and to give off persecuting the Christians. Theodosius
recovers Panonia from the Huns.

In the Church, Celestinus is Pope 8 years. The wanton Heretics, called
Paterniani and Venustiani, held that man's lower parts were made by Satan.
Nestorius Bishop of Constantium, gave to Christ two personalities, but one
will; He would not have Mary to be called the Mother of God. He was condemned
in the Council of Ephesus, which was the 3. Ecumenical; his tongue was eat up
with worms. Within this Decad were held 6 Councels. Pope Celestine sends
Palladius into Scotland, to suppress Pelagianisme there; and Germanus for this
end is sent into Britain. The Emperors ordain, that Christ's picture be not
placed near the ground.

In the Western Empire, Hippo is taken by the Vandals, and Africa subdued by
them; a 430
peace is made with them, and Numidia given for them to dw^ll in; but
Gensericus against the League takes Carthage, and seizes upon all Africa. In
the East, Constantinople burns for three days; a great Famine followed.
Peace is granted to the Persian. Theodosius gives a great sum to the people to
buy Corn; He finisheth the Code. The Scots break down Severus his Turff wall;
Aetius rebuilds it of brick; this also the Scots and Picts overthrow. Clodio
called Crinitus reigned in France.

In the Church, Sixtus the third sat Pope 9 years; He was accused of
Fornication by Bassus, but is cleared afterward; this Sixtus imbalmed and
buried with his own hands the body of Bassus. Four Councels held within this
Decad. The Burgundians are converted. Patrick is sent into Scotland, where he
sat Bishop 60 years. The Jews of Crete are drowned in following their false
Moses through the Sea. The Orthodox Bishops are persecuted by Gensericus the
Arian. Eudocia, Theodosius his wife, builds St. Stevens Church at Jerusalem.

In the Western Empire, Sicily is invaded by Gensericus; He becomes tributary
for a part of 440
Africa. In the East, the Hunns waste Thrace, Maesia, and Greece. Theodosius
helps Valentinian against the Vandals. The Emperor is fain to buy peace of
Attila. A great Earthquake at Constantinople. Saturnine slain by the Empress.
Attila threatens war for want of his tribute; He is defeated by Authenius.
Theodosius dies with a fall from his horse in hunting. The Anglo-Saxons called
into Britain by Vortiger the Usurper. The Scots and Picts vex the Britains. In
France, Clodio beats the Romans; Merovee succeeds him, whose posterity
continued till Pipin.

In the Church, Leo sat Pope 20 years; He was excommunicated by Dioscorus
Bishop of Alexandria, for rejecting the Council of Ephesus. Nine Councels held
within this Decad. Eutiches, Abbot of Constantinople, gave Christ but one
Nature, divine only, which he made passible; He is absolved in the Council of
Ephesus St. Patrick converts Ireland. Rogations or Letanies instituted by Pope
Leo. The Manichees at Rome recant and burn their Books. The seven Sleepers
awake after two hundred years sleep.

In Italy the Famine was so great, that Parents exchanged their children for
food. Attila 450
invades France, and is overthrown; He takes Aquileia. Pope Leo persuades him
to leave Italy; he is forced by the Alani into Scythia. Valentinian kills
Aetius with his own hands; Aetius his Soldiers kill him in revenge: Maximus is
killed by Eudocia. Avitus usurpeth the Empire 9 months. Gensericus is expelled
Italy. Mauritania lost and won by Majoranus. In the East, Martian is Emperor 6
years; he dreamed that Attila's Bow was broken, the same night he died; Martian
died two years after; Leo succeeded 17 years; Majoranus is by him made Emperor
of the West. In Britain, Vortiger is deposed and restored; 300 of the Nobles
slain by the Saxons, and Vortiger taken prisoner. The French and Gauls unite
themselves by Marriages. Childericus reigns. Attila strangled by his own blood
in the night. Theodoricus the second reigns in Spain. Attila's sons lost what
he had got.

In the Church, Pope Leo refutes the Acephali. Diascorus the Eutychian with his
Disciples, were called Monophisitae and Theopaschitae, for saying Christ had
but one divine Nature passible; these with Eutyches are condemned in the fourth
General Council of Chalcedon; five Councels were held in this Decad.
Contestation between Rome and Constantinople about supremacy. The Orthodox are
persecuted by the Vandals in Africa. Austria, Bavaria, and Panonia converted.
Avitus, of an Emperor becomes Bishop of Placentia. The Eutychians cruelty
against Proterius Bishop of Alexandria, whom they slew, and chewed his
entrails. Bells used first at Nola in Campania. Monks called Studeae at
Constantinople.

In the West, Majoranus beats the Goths in Gaul, and is beaten by the Vandals
in Spain; He is slain by Severus his General, who reigned 3 years. Ricimer
expels the Alani out of Italy, 460
and poysoneth Severus. Authenius, Martians son-in-law, is made Emperor by
Leo, five years. In the East, the Goths waste Illyria. Gensericus spoileth the
Seacoasts of the Empire. Canstantinople burns 4 days. Leo sets out a Fleet
against Gensericus, to whom it is betrayed. Leo hated by the people, for
betrothing his daughter to Aspar's son an Arian. In Britain, Hengist reigns
over Kent: Vortiger driven into the woods. Theodoricus the Goth drives the
Romans out of Spain, after 700 years possession; He persecuted the Catholics,
and wrote the Gothic Laws: The Ostrogoths defeat the Huns in Hungary, cut off
their Kings head, which they sent to Constantinople: The Sueves in Gallicia
take Lisbon. The Vandals expelled Sicily by Marcellinus, who was treacherously
slain.

In the Church, Hilary sat Pope 6 years; He excluded unlearned men from the
Clergy, and prohibited Popes from naming their successor: To him succeeded
Simplicius 16 years. 4 Councels held within this Decad. Paulin Bishop of Nola,
was the first that introduced Historical Pictures and Crucifixes into Churches;
He pawned himself to redeem a widows son that was captive. The Painters hand
withered at Constantinople, for offering to paint Christ like Jupiter. Litania
minor, or three days Rogation in Ascension-week, instituted by Mamarcus and
Sidonius Apollinaris, against Wolves and Bears.

In the West, Ricimer rebels against the Emperor; is reconciled; rebels again,
and 470
kills Anthemius. Diverse petty Emperors at Rome expel each other; the last is
Augustulus, whom Odoacer one of the Heruli banished, and took Rome. Thus ends
the Western-Empire. Odoacer and the Heruli reigned in Italy till Justinians
days. In the East, Leo, to please the people, causes all Aspars Family to be
slain: Leo dies; To him succeeds Leo the second, and after him Zeno 17 years;
He is deposed by Basiliscus, and afterward recovereth, and deposes Basiliscus.
Marcion, Ricimers son, defeateth Zeno. The Lombards transport themselves into
Panonia. Childerick of France takes diverse places from the Empire. Vortiger is
burnt in his Castle in Wales. Stone-hedge erected on Salisbury-Plains, in
memory of the Saxon treachery there.

In the Church, Aratius Bishop of Constantinople claims the second place after
the Pope, which is confirmed by Leo the Emperor. Peter Fullo the Eutychian is
made Bishop of Antioch, and condemns the Council of Chalcedon. The Hebrew
Vowels were invented about this time. Basiliscus condemns the Council of
Chalcedon, but upon Zeno's raising of forces, he recants. The Library of
Constantinople burnt, in which was Homer in Golden Letters.

In the West, Julius Nepos is slain. In the E^st, Theodorick the Goth
threatens Constantinople, 480
and dies of a fall from his horse. Idus and Leontius, Usurpers, are taken,
and their heads sent to Constantinople. Zeno gives himself to tyranny and riot.
Clovis the great, the first Christian King of France. In Britain, Hengist is
slain; the South Saxons possessed Surrey and Sussex. Hunnerick the Vandal
persecutes the Catholics, and is killed by worms.

In the Church, Faelix is Pope 9 years; He instituted the Feast of S. Michael:
Six Councels were held within this Decad. Eutychus his heresy spreads far in
the East.

Zeno the Greek Emperor is buried in a fit of the Epilepsie; A^iadna would not
suffer the 490
Tombe-stone to be removed, though he revived, so he died miserably: Anastasius
Dicorus succeeds 27 years. Longinus, Zeno's brother, usurpeth in Isauria, and
occasions a war. The Emperors statues dragged about the streets of
Constantinople: Longinus is taken and tortured to death. The Bulgarians waste
Thrace; for money they give off and return. Clovis the King of France has
diverse Victories; so has Aurelius in Britain, who was poisoned by a Monk.
Theodorick the Ostragoth wastes Italy, takes Ravenna, kills Odoacar
treacherously at a Feast, so he becomes sole King of Italy 33 years; He has
diverse Victories. The Heruli and Lombards live together, and then quarrel; the
Heruli defeated. The Vandals make peace with the Romans, and recall the
banished Catholiqu^s. The Goths burn the Roman Governor in France within a
brazen Bull.

In the Church, Galasius is Pope 5 years; He excluded the lame and blind from
the Priesthood: Anastasius the second succeeded two years; He was an Acatian,
and died the death of Arius: Symmachus succeeds 15 years; His Antipope was
Laurence, and so there followed a fi^th Schism. Four Councels held this Decad.
Acephali, so called from having neither Bishop nor Priest; they were called
also Theodosiani, from Theodosius Bishop of Alexandria; they rejected the
Council of Chalcedon, and were Euychians. The Canonical Scripture distinguished
from Apocrypha. The Babylonian Thalmud, which is the Jews Civil and Canon Law,
is finished.

In the E^st, Cabades the Persian takes Amida, which is redeemed again. The
Bulgarians 500
take Syrmium in Panonia. The Emperor hires the Goths to depart his Dominions.
Anastasius repaireth Daras in Mesopotamia, and aideth Clovis with men and
ships. Uther-Pendragon, in Britain, father of Prince Arthur, makes a League
with the Scots. Cherdick foundeth the Kingdom of the West- Saxons, which
contained Berkeshire, Hampshire, Wilts, Sommerset, Dorset, Devonshire and
Cornwall. Alaricus and his Arian Goths slain by Clovis the French King.
Theodorick the Ostragoth relieves Rome with Corn, expels the Magicians thence,
and erecteth Waterworks at Ravenna: By Vitiges he takes Syrmium from the
Bu^garians.

In the Church, Symmachus is confirmed Pope by Theodorick; He banished the
Manichees, does many good works; 8 Councels held within this Decad, whereof 5
were kept at Rome, 3 of them about the cause of Symmachus. Anastasius murdered
3000 Catholics; He is excommunicated by the Pope. The Feast of Peter and Paul
instituted. The Christians persecuted in Arabia and Palestine. The Emperor
hates Images, therefore causes diverse Monsters to be painted. As an Arian was
going to baptize, the water dried up suddenly in the Fon^.

In the East, Vitalianus the Scythian helps the Catholics; subdueth Thrace,
Scythia and Maesia; forces Anastasius to revoke the banished, and is bribed
with money and honors to depart. The Huns also are bribed to leave the wasting
of Armenia and Capadocia. Anastasius is slain by thunder. Justin succeeds 9
years, who got the Empire by bribing; he defeats his Usurpers, and kills
Vitalianus: he makes peace with the Persian. Clovis of France dies, and leaves
his kingdom to his 4 sons. Arthur in Britain takes London, and beats the
Saxons.

In the Church, Hormisda sat Pope 10 years. In this Decad were held 8
Councels. Anastasius persecutes the Catholics against his own Instrument made
to the contrary, which he burned: he added to the Trisagion [Who was crucificed
for us] this caused a sedition: he slighted the Popes Ambassadors. 350
Orthodox Monks slain by Severus the Eutychian Bishop of Antioch; who being
condemned to lose his tongue, flies into Egypt. Bennet founded his Order on
mount Cassin.

The Selavi of Scythia takes Istria: the Lombards for the service against the
Goths obtain Austria 520
of Justin; he dies: his sisters son Justinian succeeds 38 years; he sends
Belisarius and Procopius against the Persians, and aideth the king of Colchos
against them: he sets out his Code: by Mundus he defeats the Getes and
Bulgarians in Britain; York yields to Arthur, who forces the Saxons to
Peace: the East-Saxon kingdom sounded by Erchenwyn; it contained Essex,
Middlesex, and part of Hartford-shire: the Scots and Picts aid king Arthur.
Sigismund king of Burgundy is slain and cast into a Well. Gondamare is chosen,
and expelled by Clodomire and Thyerre. Athalaricus king of the Ostrogoths, son
of Amalesunthia a, learned woman in all languages. The Lombards possess
Panonia. Hilderick is imprisoned and slain by the Vandals.

In the Church, John sat Pope 3 years, he is imprisoned and famished: his
successor Faelix fouth, sat 4 years; he instituted Extreme Unction, and did
good works. Seven Councels held within this Decad. To the Order of Bennet the
Italian Monk belong the Caelestians, Carthusians, Cisteaux, and Monks of
Clugny. Zaras king of Colchos baptized at Constant. Pope John is forced to
intercede with Justin for the Arians. Gethes king of the Heculi baptized at
Constant. Justinian ordered swearing by the Gospels. Tzani of Armenia subdued
by Justinian, and converted.

Belisarius is defeated in Persia, he overcomes Probus and the other Rebels.
Sardinia is rendered to Justinian. Belisarius recovers Carthage from Gilimer,
after it had been possessed 530
95 years by the Vandals. Gilimer brought captive to Constantine, and kindly
used by Justinian, who divides Africa into 7 Provinces. Belisarius takes
Syracuse and other towns in Sicily. Mundus and his son slain. Belisarius has
diverse Victories and Conquests in Asia, being aided by Narses the Eunuch.
Vitiges the Ostrogoth led in triumph to Constantinople by Belisarius. Cosroes
the Persian makes a long league with the Romans, but is soon broken. Cardick
the West Saxon takes the Isle of Wight; Henrick his son overthrows the
Britains: the French kings divide Burgundy amongst them, so that kingdom
ends: The French invade Spain, and makes the Goths abjure Arianisme. Amalari
the Visigoth is killed by his wives brothers. Vitiges king of the Ostrogoths,
is employed against the Persians. Gilimer the Vandal puts out his brothers
eyes. The Vandals being driven out of Africa, seek out new Plantations in
Poland, Hungaria, Greece and Germany.

In the Church, Boniface sat Pope 2 years; his Antipope was Dioscorus, which
made the sixth Schism. John 2 sat 3 years: Agapetus 3 years: Silverius 3
years; his Antipope is Vigilius, and so is the 7 Schism. This Vigilius sat 16
years, who banished and famished Silverius. 9 Councels held this Decad.
Dionysius a Roman Abbot begins to reckon the years from Christ's Birth, which
before were reckoned from the Era of Dioclesian. Justinian publishes his
Institutions and Pandects. Zanabarzus king of Iberia baptized at
Constantinople. The spoils of Jerusalem taken by Titus, and transported by
Gensericus to Africa, are restored by Justinian to Jerusalem. He converteth the
Stews into a Covent of Penitents: he becomes an Eutychian, and is converted by
Pope Agapetus. Bavaria is converted. Justinians [Constit. novell.] published.

In the East, Belisarius beats the Persian; Justinian repaireth Antioch, and
builds a Church there: Belisarius called out of Persia into Italy, where he
raises Totila from the siege of Hadruntium in the West. Totila takes Rome,
which is by Belisarius retaken; with other 540
towns in Italy. Belisarius recalled into Persia: a plot discovered against the
Emperor; Cosroes upon the coming of Belisarius returns home from vexing the
Empire: he is removed by bribes from Edessa. In Britain Arthur, and Mordred
differ, and are slain; Mordreds two sons killed by Constantine the Usurper.
Northumberland a kingdom, founded by Ella and Ida; it contained besides
Northumberland. Yorkshire, Lancashire, Durham, Cumberland, and Westmorland. At
Rome, Basilius was the last Consul. The French returning from Spain with much
booty, bring with them the garment of Vincentius the Martyr, and build a Church
for him at S. Germans.

In the Church, Vigildus sits as lawful Pope; he sends diverse ships to Rome
with corn, which Totila incercepteth. 3 Councels held within this Decad. An
Indian king sends to Justinian for some to Baptize him and his people. The
Feast of Purification ordained at Coustantinople.

Rome and all Italy subdued by Totila, who also wastes Sicily: Artabanes expels
the Goths, and recovers it. Narses kills Totila and recovers Italy; the Persian
defeats the Romans, 550
and is defeated by them: Justinian kills his Commanders for slaying the King of
the Lazii. After Totila and Thaeias his successor were killed, there were no
more Gotish kings in Italy: but Narses governed it under the title of Duke,
till being angered by Justinians wife, he called in the Longobards: the Goths
had held Italy 70 years, the Lombards kept it 204 years, that part which is
between the Alps and Appenin In France Clothayre subdueth the Saxons and
Thuringi; he pursues Cramnus into Britain, and burns him.

In the Church, the 5 General Council is held at Constant. for suppressing of
Heresies, there were four more National Synods within this Decad: Vigilius
opposes the Council of Constant. and is banished; at last submits and dies.
Pelagius succeeds 4 years: The Western Bishops at Aquileia reject this fifth
General Council, which made a Schism between the Eastern and Western Churches,
almost 100 y^ars. To the Bishop of Constant. is assigned the next place to the
Pope. Julius Halicarnassaeus taught that Christ's body was impassible after his
Conception: the Armenians are again converted to the Faith.

In the Empire to Justinian succeeded Justin second 11 years; he was a just
Prince, in giving 560
way that an exemplary punnishment should be inflicted on a great m^n, who had
oppressed a poor woman; but he was unfortunate in his wars against Persia; so
he fell into a Frenzy, and dyed. In France, a hill near Rohan bellowed many
days like an Ox, and then brake a sunder to the destruction of many Villages,
People and Cattle. King Clothaire dying left his kingdom to his four sons.
Levigildus king of the Visigoths in Spain, wins Corduba and other places: the
Exarchat of Ravenna now began. Alboinus reigns in Lombardy 3 years.

In the Church, John 3. sat Pope 12 years: the Christians are persecuted by
the Jews and Samaritans in Palestina, but are suppressed and punished by the
Emperor. The Monothelites increase about this time. The French and Spanish
Clergy differ about the time of Easter. The Church of Armenia is vexed by
Cosroes the Persian. Alboinus king of Lombardy, murders the Christians of
Italy and Sicily; and he not long after is murdered. Theodimiras in Galicia
king, of an Arian becomes a Catholic. 2 Councels held within this Decad.

In the East, Martian was forced to raise the siege from Nisibis. Apamea taken
by the Persians. The Avares pass Danubius and do much hurt: Cosroes defeated
by Justinian the 570
General. Tyberius is Emperor 7 years in Britain. Vssa founded the kingdom of
the East Angles, containing the Isle of Ely, Norfolk, Suffolk and
Cambridge-shire. The Lombards enter France, and are repulsed: Charibers
brethren dissent: Civil wars in France. Livigild wins Campanio. Alboin the
Lombard ^or making his wife drink in her fathers skul, is murdered; she is
poisoned. Clephes Alboins s^n, reigned 1 year 6 months, and was slain: then
Lombardy was governed 10 years by 30 Dukes. Longinus the Exarch lost his eyes
at Constantinople, for which he killed two Patritians. The Huns expelled
Germany by the French.

In the Church, Bennet is Pope 5 years; Pelagius 2. succeeded 12 years. He was
the first elected Pope without the Emperors consent, the City being besieged
by the Lombards. Two Councels held this Decad.

In the East, Hormisda Cosroes his successor, is beat by the Romans. Mauritius
regaineth all 580
from the Persian that was lost. Tiberius died of a surfeit of Gourds.
Mauritius succeeded 16 years. The Huns take Sirmium: they are defeated by
Commentiolus. Philippicus beats the Persians twice; and Germanus once. Malgo
Conanus King of Britain, a wicked Prince. Crida founded the kingdom of Mercia,
containing 17 Shires, and half of Hartford-shire; after the death of Carecaus,
lost the East part of the kingdom: wars between the Scots and Picts. Childebert
of France goes against the Lombards, at the Emperors desire; he is murdered.
The kingdom of the Sueves in Gallicia, after 176 years possession is annexed
to the Visigoths. The Lombards chose themselves a new King: Livigild the
Visigoth kills his own son. Recaredus the first, becomes a Catholic, he was a
good Prince.

In the Church, Gregory is sent to the Emperor, to excuse the Election of
Pelagius. 11 Councels assembled this Decad. The Benedictines expelled out of
Mount Cassine by the Lombards* They build a Covent at Rome. Christ's seamlesse
Coat was found by a Jew. The Pope and Bishop of Constantinople differ about the
title of Universal Bishop.

Mauritius makes peace with Cosroes; the Huns invade Thrace. Piscus defeats the
Huns, and 590
expels the Sclavi out of Thrace; he is removed and then restored: he beats the
Huns again. Cosroes deposed by his Subjects, and restored by Mauritius, and
made his Guard of Christians. Edilwach 1 Christian king of the South Saxons; a
great famine in his time, so that people drowned themselves. Ethelfred defeated
the Britains, and slew 12000 Monks at Bangor. Ethelbert king of Kent converted
by Augustine; he built S. Paul's in London. Scots and Britains have war with the
Saxons and Picts. Childebert the French king, takes diverse towns in Italy.
Agilulphus the Lombard is baptized, and named Paul; he has diverse victories.
Chaganus the Hun, invades the Venetian territories: He abuses Tomilda the
widow, and then staketh her for her treachery.

In the Church, Gregory the great sat 13 years; he was elected against his
will: he styles himself, Servant of Gods servants; he added to the Liturgy
[Give peace in our time O Lord] and [Lord have mercy on us] and Hallelujah: He
confirmed Prayer to Saints, Purgatory, and sacrifices for the dead: He redeemed
many Captives, and kept daily 3000 Monks. 12 Synods held within this Decad.
Gregory, upon a great Plague, of which 800 died in an hour, instituted the
sevenfold Letany or Procession, called the Great, Roman, and Gregorian. 40
Virgins brake out of S. Radegunds Monastery, who expelled the Abbess, and beat
the Bishops and Monks. Gregory reproves John o^ Constaninople for assuming the
title of [Universal Bishop.] By Gregory the Britains and Lombards are converted.

Mauritius will not redeem the Captives taken by Chaganus, therefore they are
slain. Phoeas 600
is beaten for urging the Emperor against Commentiolus; this Commentiolus with
Priscus kill Chaganus his 2 sons, 12000 Huns, and took 13000, at which
Mauritius was offended: he was forewarned of his death: upon suspicion he
imprisoneth Philippicus, because his name began with Ph. but Phocas slew him
with his two sons, and so succeeded 8 years. Theodosius son to Mauritius is
slain, as he was going to Cosroes. Narses suffers him self to be beaten by
Cosroes, with whom he joins, then is reconciled to Phocas, and burnt at
Constantinople. Mauritius his widow and daughters put to death. Phocas
tyranniseth over the Nobility; attempts to kill his son in law Priscus; he is
at last cut in pieces and burnt. In France Pipin is brought to Clothayrs Court
by Caroloman his father. Liuba Prince of the Visigoths is slain by Victericus.
Padua burnt by the Lombards, upon which Venice increases by new comers.

In the Church, Sabinian was Pope 2 years: he hated Gregory and his writings.
Boniface 3. succeeded 1 year. He appropriated the name Pope, by Phocas his
means, to the Bishop of Rome. Boniface 4 succeeds: He instituted the Feasts of
All Souls, next day after All Saints: He consecrates the Pantheon to the Virgin
Mary and all Martyrs. 4 Councels this Decad. The Agnoetae held that Christ's
divinity was ignorant of the last day. The Trithets founded by Johannes
Grammaticus or Philoponus, made three Natures or Essences in God. The Iacobites
from Jacob the Syrian, were Eutychians. Armenii so called from their Country,
held a Quaternity in God; made God passible, and denied that Christ took his
humanity from Mary. Boniface called Universal-Bishop by Phocas. The Emperor is
in a dream accused of homicide, for not redeeming the Captives; therefore
grows penitent. Mahumet begins to broach his doctrines. The Bishop of Antioch
abused and burnt by the Jews, and the Christians persecuted by them.

In the East, Heraclius reigns 31 years: he makes his son Heraclius Emperor,
and newnames 610
him Constantine. The Sclavi plant themselves in Dalmatia and Istria, now
called Sclavonia from them. Palestine and Jerusalem won by the Persians, who
subdue Egypt, and take Damascus and Carthage. Cosroes refuses to make peace
with Heraclius, except he will reject Christ, and adore the Sun. The Emperor is
betrayed by Chaganus, and defeated in Thrace. Cosroes is adored as a God. Ebald
King of Kent becomes a Gentile, and marries his stepmother, but is reclaimed
by the Archbishop. Brunchild in France sets the Kings at variance; at last
being found guilty of the death of ten Kings, is tied by the hairs of her head
to a wild-horse and torn in pieces. Victericus the Visigoth is slain by his own
people at a feast. Sisebutus his successor and brother converted 90000 Jews:
Eleutherius the Exarch styles himself King of Italy; he is slain by his
soldiers, and his head sent to Constantinople.

In the Church, Deus-dedit sat Pope 3 years: He ordained, that none should
marry their godfathers or godmothers, and that none should answer for their own
children in baptism. Boniface 5. succeeded 8 years; He instituted Sanctuaries.
Six Councels gathered this Decad. Cosroes carries the Cross of Christ from
Jerusalem to Persia. The Jews fly out of Spain into France, where strict
laws are also made against them.

Heraelius robs the Churches, to pay the soldiers in his Persian expedition;
He leaves the care of the City, and of his son, to the Patriarch, and a
Patritian. Seventy Ambassadors 620
betrayed by Saes the Persian, and sent in chains to Cosroes. The Persians
defeated by the Emperor, and the Temple of the Sun overthrown. Ninive is taken,
and Cosroes driven to Seleucia. Sarbora with his forces revolteth to Heraclius,
who returns with the Cross and other spoils to Jerusalem, and drives the
Jews out of the City. Cosroes flaieth his General Saes, because he did not
catch Heraclius. Siroes the eldest son of Cosroes, kills all his brothers
first, and then his father. About this time the Faith was embraced in
Northumberland, and the Archbishopric of York founded. In Scotland, King
Ferquhard, for Pelagianisme, is imprisoned by his Nobles, and then kills
himself. In France, Pipin Caroloman's son is made by Clothaire the 1 Duke of
Brabant. Mahumet flies to Mecha from his enemies; from this flight the Turks
begin their Computation, called Hegira: He becomes of a Prophet a Robber, and
takes Mecha.

In the Church, Pope Honorius sat 13 years: He built and repaired diverse
Churches; he covered S. Peter's with brass, taken from the Temple of Romulus.
Heraclius the Emperor becomes a Monothelite; this heresy was condemned in the
6. General-Councel held at Constant. The feast of the Exaltation of the Cross,
instituted Sept. 14. being now regained from the Persian.

The Saracens being denied their pay, and called Dogs by the Emperors
Treasurer, they make war against Mauritius; they take Gaza and other places,
with Arabia, and defeat 630
the Emperor twice, whose garrison they drive out of Damascus; then they invade
Egypt, and take Jerusalem, which the Emperor fearing, plundered it before: It
was held by the Saracens; till Godfrey of Bulloign's time, 463 years. The
Saracens take Antioch, Edessa, Daras, and all Mesopotamia. Erpenwald King of
the East Angles, slain by his people for being a Christian. Dagobert becomes
sole Monarch of France; he founded a College for Fair women, and beautifieth
S. Dennis; he has diverse victories. Rotharis the Lombard gave liberty of
conscience to Catholics and Arians. Isaacius the Exarch robs the Popes
treasure. Mahumet dies. The Persians subdued by the Saracens.

In the Church, Severinus, John 4. Theodorus Popes, succeeded each other in a
short time, Martin sat Pope 6 years. Six Councels were held within this Decad:
in the 6. of Toledo, the Kings of Spain are ordered to swear, that none but
Christians should be suffered to live within their Kingdoms; hereupon the
Jews are banished. Amandus Bishop of Uiricht converts Gaunt to the faith. The
Christians are permited to exercise their Religion at Jerusalem. About this
time, England was divided into Parishes.

In the East, Constanine 2. Heraclius his son, reigned 4 months, and is
poisoned by his stepmother Martina, who with her son Heracleon reigned 4
months; she lost her tongue, 640
and he his nose, for the murder of Constantine, whose son Constans reigned 27
years. Winceste^-Church in England, and Malmesbhury-Abbey, founded by Kenwalk.
Frequbard 2. King of Scotland, ravisheth his Daughter, and killed his Queen.
Dagobert of France repairs Utrieht, and bestows it on the Bishop of Colen. The
Saracens take Caesarea in Palestine after 7 years siege; they subdue all Asia,
839 years after Antiochus the Great lost it. Haumar builds a Temple in
Jerusalem for his Superstition, in which he was murdered. Hothman his
successor makes Africa tributary, and conquereth Cyprus.

In the Church, Pope Martin for opposing the Monothelites, is sent by the
Exarch to Constantinople, where he is imprisoned, and then banished to Pontus.
6 Councels held this Decad. The Emperor sets out an Edict, forbidding
Disputations about one or two Wills in Christ. Pyrrhus the Monothelite,
Patriarch of Constantinople, recanteth and relapseth.

The Emperor buys two years peace of the Saracens for a great sum; they take
Rhodes, and defeat the Emperor in a Sea Fight, he escaped in a disguise, then
he beats the Selavi. 650
Muhavias the Saracen makes peace with the Emperor, and promises a daily
tribute. The Emperor kills his brother, and is affrighted in his sleep about
him. Peada of Mercia the first Christian king there, laid the foundation of
Medhamstead, now Peterburgh, but was slain before he finished it. Sigebert of
France adopteth Hildebert son of Grimoald, but afterward having a son Dagobert,
him Grimoald shut up in a Monastery in Scotland, and makes his son Hildebert
King, whom Clodoveius imprisoneth, and makes his son Childerick King. The
Saracens Fleet burnt by the Christians.

In the Church, Eugenius 4. supplieth Martins place being absent, he appointed
Bishops to have prisons of their own for Clergy-delinquents. Pope Vitalianus
succeeds 14 years; he brought Organs into the Church. Four Councels held this
Decad. The Roman Clergy solicited by the Emperor to subscribe to the Type or
Edict, but in vain. Maximus the Abbot, for refusing is scourged, his tongue cut
out, and his right hand cut off, and then banished. Caesara. 9. of Persia, or
Parthia rather, is baptized at Constantinople; and by her means, her husband
and people.

The Saracens make peace among themselves, and refuse to pay the Emperor his
Tribute; 660
he is defeated by the Lombards, and transporteth from Rome to Sicily all the
brasse-monuments; He intended to make Syracuse the seat of the Empire. Sapores
governor of Armenia rebelleth; but is killed by his horse. The Emperor stays
at Syracuse, and is slain. Constantine his son succeeds 17 years, who slew
Mezentius his Competitor, and cuts off his two Brothers noses, that they might
not rule with him. Wulphere king of Mercia kills his 2 sons with his own hands,
for being baptized, but repents, and finisheth Peterborough-Church, which his
brother began. Clovis of France opens S. Dennis Tomb, and upon this false mad.
Gundebert and Pertharit two brothers, strive for Lombardy, but both are
expelled by Grimoald D. of Benevent. The Saracens depopulate Afric.

In the Church Adeodatus sat Pope 7 years. 5 Councels this Decad; one was held
in England, about the difference between the English and Scots for observing
the Feast of Easter. The Emperor robs the Church of Rome, and gives her
priviledeges.

The Saracens take Syracuse, and carry thence to Alexandria the
brasse-monuments, which Consrans had taken out of Rome: they befiege Byzantium
7 years together. 30000 Saracens 670
slain, their Fleet fired by Callinicus with wildfire. Peace granted to them
for 30 years paying a tribute of Gold, Captives and Horses. The Bulgars seat
themselves in the lower Mesia called from them Bulgaria. The Emperor is forced
to peace with them. Bamba the Visigoth overcommeth his Rebels: he is poisoned.
Childeric the French king, for causing a Gentleman to be whipped, is slain by
him, with his Queen great with child. The Saracens invade Spain, and loose to
Bamba 270 ships.

In the Church, Donnus the first sat Pope 2 years; he subjected the Church of
Ravenna to Rome. Agatho succeeded 4 years. 5 Councels this Decad. Christ's
Napkin, 8 foot long, found by the Jews, taken from them by the Saracens, and
given to the Christians.

Constantine being dead, his son Justinian succeeds 10 years. Diverse countries
taken from the Saracens, who are forced to pay a yearly tribute of 1000 Crowns,
with a horse 680
and servant daily for 10 years. Justinian defeats the Selavi, and is defeated
by the Bulgarians. Cadwallader the last King of the Britams, becomes a Monk in
Rome. K. Maldwyn of Scotland is strangled by his wife, and she is burnt. In
King Eugenius the 6. his time, it rained blood through all Britain for seven
days. In France, Theodoric of a Monk is made King; he persecutes his Bishops.
The Maronites take from the Saracens all from Taurus to Libanus. The Saracens
have civil-war among themselves.

In the Church, Leo 2. was Pope; He ordered the kissing of the Pax. To him
succeeded Bennet 2. The Emperor gives way, that the Popes election stand good,
without his or successors approbation. John 5. succeeds; After him is the 8.
Schism between Peter and Theadore, the one being chosen by the Exarch, the
other by the people; a third is chosen, Conon by name; then follows the 9.
Schism between Theodore and Paschal. at last Sergius succeeds 14 years. 7
Councels held this Decad. All the Manichees in Armenia burnt by Justinian.
Sergius appointed to be sung at the Communion, [O Lamb of God, which take
away the sins of the World!]

The Saracens offer satisfaction to the Emperor for wrongs done by them, which
is rejected, 690
and the peace broken; He hireth the Sclavi, and by them beats the Saracens,
but 20000. of them revolt, the Emperor is thereby defeated, and kills the rest
of them: upon this loss, Sabatius governor of Armenia delivers up the Country
to the Saracens. Leontius being delivered by the Emperor out of prison, and
made governor of Greece, takes Justinian, cuts off his nose, and banisheth him
into Pontus. This Leontius reigned 3 years; He expels by his brother John the
Saracens out of Africa, and he again expelled by them; He sets up Tiberius
Absimarus 7 years; he cuts off Leontius his nose, and thrusts him into a
Monastery. The Saracens in Syria defeated by the Romans. Pipin is made Major of
the Palace over all France; he had Charles Martel by his Concubine. Ina King of
the West Saxons built S. Andrews College in Wells, beautified Glassenbury, and
was the first that paid Peter Pence. The Jews conspire against the King of
Visigoths in Spain; they are upon this made slaves. The Venetians choose them a
Duke called Paulus Lucius, upon the Lombards incursions into their territories.

In the Church, Pope Sergius rejects the Council of Trullus, for adding 103
Canons to the 6. General Council; He is accused of whoredom, and strangely
acquitted by the Bastards at 19 days old. 6 Councels called within this Decad.
It was decreed that Easter-week, called Septimana in albis, should be kept
holy; the Virgin Mary's Nativity is made a Feast.

The Saracens killed in Armenia. Mahumet reduces again the Country into
obedience 700
12000 Saracens killed in Cilicia. Philippicus is banished, for dreaming he
should be Emperor. Justinian is restored again to the Empire by the Bulgarians,
8 years; He hangs Abismarus, Heraclius, and Leontius; He breaks league with
the Bulgarians, and is beaten by them. Offa King of the East Saxons, enlarged
Westminster-Church; He with Kenred King of Mercia, went to Rome and became
Monks. Eugenius the 7. of Scotland lost his Queen by two Rebels who entered his
chamber, and missing him, killed her great with child. The Normans make the
first onset upon France, and do much mischief on the Coast. Aripert invades
Lombardy, and does many cruel acts; the Saracens invade Spain, and do much
hurt. C^acus Prince of Poland expels the Franconians out of his dominion,
builds Cracovia, and makes it his chief residence: He destroyed a mischievous
Monster, by flinging into its cave a Calfs-skin stufft with brimstone, pitch
and nitre, which he devoured, and so dyed.

In the Church sat John the 6. 3 years; He repaired Churches, and redeemed
Captives; upon his entreaty, Gisulphus D. of Benevent gave off plundring of
Campania. Aripert the Lombard bestows the Cottian Alps on the Church: This
was the first Province the Pope possessed. John the 7. succeeds 3 years; He
built our Ladies Chapel in St. Peter's Church: Zozimus succeeded 20 days, then
Constantine 7 years; the Emperor met him at Nice, and kissed his feet.
Callinicus, Patriarch of Constantinople, had his eyes put out, and banished to
Rome: The Emperor could not procure the Pope to confirm the Council of
Trullus. Faelix Bishop of Ravenna, lost his eyes, and is banished to Pontus for
refusing to pay his tax due to the Pope at his Consecration: The Pope freeth
Papia from Millans jurisdiction.

Justinian sends an Army against Chersonesus, which killed multitudes, roasted
the Nobles upon spits, and 73000. children were drowned: The Chersonesians at
this proclaim Philippicus 710
Emperor 1 year, who beheaded Justinian, and cut the throat of his son
Tiberius. Thrace is wasted by the Bulgarians: Philippicus is taken, and his
eyes put out: Anastasius Artemius succeeds 2 years. The Saracens send a Fleet
against Constantinople. A mutiny in Phaenicia in the Emperors Army, in which
the General is killed, and one Theodosius chosen, who besieges Constantinople,
takes Anastasius, and thrusts him into a Monastery; his General Leo Isaurus is
chosen 24 years. Theodosius, to redeem his son, resigneth and becomes a Priest.
Solomon besieges Constantinople, where he dies, with most of his Army. Omar
renews the siege, and departs with loss. Constantine Copronymus born. The
Archbishop of Thessalonica and the Bulgars set up Anastasius again, but the
Authors are executed. The French beat the Goths quite out of France. Charles
Martel, heir to Pipin, does great feats. The Danes waste Herefordshire.
Ethelbald King of Mereia builds Crowland Abbey. Mordacus King of Scots, built
many Churches and Abbeys. Roderick the Visigoth, is killed with his Army by the
Saracens, who makes Corduba the seat of their Kingdom. The Goths retire into
Cantabria. Pelagius defeateth the Moors, and is made King of Oviedo. Aripert of
Lombardy is drowned with his Treasure in the River Papia. A great dissension
falls out between the Bishops of Aquilaeia and Grada. The Saracens waste and
take much of the Empire.

In the Church, Gregory the 2. sat Pope 17 years; He redeems Cumae from the
Duke of Benevent: Two Councels held this Decad. Omar persecuteth the
Christians. Germany converted by Boniface. Radboldus D. of Frisia will rather
go to Hell with many, then to Heaven with a few. John, a blind Monk, made
Patriarch of Constatinople, because he foretold that Philippicus should be
Emperor.

Leo makes his son Constantine Emperor; from him all the West falls off, for
prohibiting Images; His Army also rebels. Nice in Bitinia besieged by the
Saracens. Charles Martel 720
has great Victories against the Germans, Bavarians, Frisians, and Moors.
Luitprand the Lombard, takes Ravenna from the Exarch, and loses it. Pane the
Exarch, and his son, are slain at Rome, for intending to kill the Pope.
Eutychius the Eunuch was the last Exarch, for he was expelled afterward by
Luitprand: The Exarchs had ruled in Italy under the Emperor 182 years.
Chaganus defeats Musalmas and his Saracens.

In the Church, Pope Gregory sits, and is oftentimes attempted to be slain by
the Emperors emissaries; At last he excommunicates the Emperor. The Jews are
seduced by a false Messiah. 3 Councels held this Decad all at Rome. The Jews
great enemies to Images. Leo, upon hope of long life, pulls down Images, he was
called therefore Iconomachus; His Edict against Images causes much trouble; He
burns a great Library, and 12 Library-keepers in it; His Statues are
overthrown, and Constantinople besieged by the Greeks. The Frisians are
converted. St. Austins bones redeemed from the Saracens, and translated to
Papia. Franconia and Hassia converted by Winifred. Tiberius the Usurpers head
is sent by the Exarch from Italy to Constantinople. The Saracens plunder Asia.
One Philippicus scourged for absolving Witches, who had killed some 730
Infants. Solomon the Saracen General, takes many Towns and Captives from Leo.
In France, Charles is victorious over the Moors and Goths. In Spain, Alphonsus
King of Leon assumes the title of Catholic. Rittogarus, a German Prince, for
being beaten by Venda daughter to Cracus of Poland, kills himself. The
Venetians kill Orso their Duke, and choose annual Magistrates. Luitprand the
Lombard, and the Exarch, make league against the Pope.

In the Church, Gregory the 3. sat 11 years; His Revenues in Sicily and
Calabria amounting yearly to 8000 l. are detained by the Emperor. Luitprand
besieges Rome, and takes four Cities from the Pope; the Emperor will not be
persuaded by the Pope and Italians to restore Images. One Council held at Rome
this Decad. Boniface founded the Bishoprics of Ratisbone and Saltzburg.

Copronimus succeeds Leo 34 years; he takes Ardavastus the Usurper with his two
sons, and puts out their eyes, and causes Anastasius the Patriarch to be led
back upon an Ass through Constantinople, for aiding him. A great earthquake
in Syria, and a Plague in 740
Constantinople. The Emperors Fleet beats the Egyptian Moors, and the
Saracens of Cyprus. Charles dies in France, and leaves four sons; the two
elder Caroloman and Pipin subdue the Gascoins, Almains and Saxons. Pipin
becomes Major of the Palace alone. Luitprand the Lombard recovers Spoletum and
Benevent by the Popes aid; therefore restores him four Cities, with the
Patrimony of Ancona, Sabina, and Narne. Rachisius the Lombard breaks the peace
made with the Pope; upon which he with his Queen enters a Monastery. The
Polonians choose Palatius again: Venda drowns her self out of superstition. The
Huns or Hungarians transplant themselves out of Scythia into Panonia. Soloman
the Saracen rebelleth, and is executed. The Venetian choose Dukes again.
Theodat Orso's son is elected.

In the Church, Zachary sat 10 years; He composeth the distractions of Italy.
7 Councels were called in this Decad. The Christians of Antioch are permitted
by the Saracens to choose them a Patriarch after 40 years vacancy. Peter Bishop
of Damascus has his tongue cut out by the Saracens, for refuting Infidels. The
Pope would not have the Child in Bavaria baptized with false Latin, to be
rebaptised, being no heresy. Gervilius Bishop of Mentz, for murder, hawking,
and hunting, is deposed. The Pater Noster and Creed ordered to be read in
English, at Cliffe-Councel.

Constantine makes his son Leo Emperor: the Exarchat falls to the Lombards
possession. 750
Constantinople repeopled by Armenians. Constantine sends Organs and other
Presents to Pipin. He expells the Sclavi out Macedonia, but is beaten by the
Bulgarians. Chilperick the French King, and last of the Merovinges, is thrust
by Pipin into a Monastery, who reigns alone 17 years: he with his sons
Caroloman and Charles are anointed by the Pope at Paris. Pipin forces
Aistulphus the Lombard to make restitution to the Pope, and to buy his own
Peace: He subdueth Saxony: Vaifarius Duke of Aquitain forced to make peace with
Pipin. Alphonsus of Spain recovers Navar, and much of Portugal, and rooteth out
Arianisme. Aistulphus the Lombard having taken Ravenna claims jurisdiction
over Rome; but Pipin helps the Pope. Aistulphus breaks his neck in hunting.
Desiderius made King who bestows Ferrara and other places on the Pope. Poland
is invaded by the Moravians and Panonians. The Venetians to curb the Dukes
power, join two Tribunes to govern with him. Seleucia is repaired by the
Saracens, and called Bagdet. Habdel the Saracen oppresses the Christians, the
Turks waste Armenia and Persia.

In the Church, Stephen 2. was Pope but 8 days. Stephen 3. succeeded 5 years.
He was the first Pope that was carried on men's shoulders. Pipin bestows on him
the Exarch, and the Country about Luna, with Corsica, Soranum, Parma, Rhegium,
Mantua, Spoletum and Benneventium. Paul succeeded 10 years; he is opposed by
Theophilact Antipope, which made the tenth schism. Paul built a Monastery in
Rome, where the Greek-Psalms were to be sung. In this Decad were held two
Councels. Boniface is slain by the Frisians who were revolted from Christ. The
Turks receive Mahumets Alcaron. Constantine defeats the Bulgarians diverse
times, but lost his Fleet: He beheaded the Patriarch: he makes Nicephorus and
Christopher his sons Caesar's. Leo marries Irene the Athenian. Fergusius of
Scotland strangled by the Queen, which fact she confessed, because he preferred
Concubines to her, and so stabs her self before the people. Pipin subdueth all
Aquitain, and instituteth the Parliament of Paris. Charles the Great succeeded
in France, Burgundy, and Aquitain. Soyssons left to Caraloman. The Danes
descended of the Cimbri, being expelled Scythia, place themselves in that
Chersonese called Cimbrick from them. The Venetians depose their Duke
Monegario, and put out his eyes for tyrannising.

In the Church, a schism which is the 11. is made by Philip a Priest, but he
is cast out of the Lateran the fifth day, and Stephen the 4. chosen, who sat 4
years. This Decad produced 3 Councels: The Emperor assembleth all the Asian
Monks at Ephesus, commanding them either to marry, or lose their eyes, and to
be banished into Cyprus: He expels the Monks, and sels their Monasteries.

The Saracens invade the Empire, and defeat the Emperors army in Isauria. The
Bulgarians break the peace, which cost the lives of 12000 of their men. Leo the
4. succeeds 770
Emperor 5 years: His brother Nicephorus for aspiring is banished. Telerick
king of Bulgaria expelled by his subjects; is baptized in Constantinople, and
made a Patritian. five of the Saracens Amira's killed in Syria by Leo's army.
By putting the cold Crown kept in the Temple on his head, he sickned and died.
Constantine 7 succeeds with Irene 17 years. Mac-Donald seiseth on the
Aebudes; he with the other rebels are killed by Argiles forces. Charles takes
Defiderius the Lombard, brings him into France, and restores all except
Lombardy to the Pope. Charles beats the Saxons, and forces them to be
Christians. He expells the Westphalians out of his Kingdom, and takes Navarre,
kills two Saracen Kings, instituteth the 12 Peers of France. Godfrey King of
Denmark subdueth the Saxons, who are enjoined to present every new King with
100 white-horses. The Spaniards are forced by the Saracens to pay a yearly
tribute of Christian Virgins. Lescus 2. chosen King of Poland, for detecting
the fraud of one Lescus, who used sinistrous means to be Prince.

In the Church, Adrian was Pope 24 years; he first sealed with Lead. Desiderius
makes a layman ArchBishop of Ravenna, whom the Pope expels. Desiderius for
oppressing the Pope, is subdued by Charles. The title of Patritians in Rome
abolished by Pope Adrian. 9 Councels assembled this Decad. Habdalla the
Saracen, commands all Christians and Jews to be marked in their hands: The Pope
and Council gave full power to Charles and his successors to choose the Pope.

A Sedition raised at Constantinople, in behalf of Nicephorus. Charles is sent
to by Irene, for a match between his daughter and her son: She recovereth the
booty from the 780
Selavi. Irenes forces defeated in Italy by the French, and break off the
marriage of her son, whom she married to a mean Armenian called Mary. The Danes
invade England; a League made between France and Scotland. The Scots and Irish
make war upon each other. Pipin son to King Charles is crowned at Rome, King of
Italy. The Saxons rebel, and are subdued: they are transplanted into Brabant
and Flanders. The Dukes of Benevent and Bavaria rebel, and are subdued. Charles
subdueth the Sclavonians. Ethelburga daughter to Offa the Saxon, poisoned her
husband unwittingly, and fled into France, where she is thrust into a
Monastery. Irene forced by the Saracens to pay tribute; her Fleet is surprised
by them.

In the Church, Pope Adrian is godfather to Pipin Charles his son: he repairs
Churches, and feeds 100 people daily in the Lateran. In this Decad were 5
Councels; one whereof was the 2. of Nice, or 8. General of 350 Bishops, for
restoring Images. In Thrace, was dug out of a wall a stone-Coffin, with this
inscription, Christ shall be born of the Virgin Mary, etc. Charles founded the
Bishopric of Breme. A Council at Constantinople, disturbed by the people,
about Images.

Constantine undertakes the government, and deposes his mother, and admits her
again upon entreaty; he is defeated by the Bulgarians: he puts out the eyes of
Nicephorus, 790
Christopher, and his Uncle Nicetas: Upon this, the Armenian Legions rebel: He
put away his wife, and marries her maid: he overcomes the Saracens, and
spoils the Bulgarian Country. Irene puts out his eyes, the same day he so
served his Uncle. He dies shortly after, and she reigns alone: She
extinguished the line of Leo Isauricus, (About this time, the Sun darkened 17
days together) She makes peace with Charles, and puts out the eyes of
Copronymus his son. Intercourse prohibited between Charles and Offa's subjects.
The Danes waste England again. Egbert King of the West Saxons becomes sole
Monarch of England. Charles defeats the Hungarians and Saxons again; His son
Pipin rebelleth, and is put into a Monastery. Charles builds a Bridge at Mentz
over the Rhine; he kills 4000 rebellious Saxons. Alphonsus in Spain kills 70000
Moors, and frees the Land of the tribute of Virgins: He takes Lisbon from them,
and makes a League with Charles. S. James is made Patron of Spain, whose Body
was now found, and a Church built by Alphonsus for it. He sends rich Presents
to Charles, who takes Buda in Hungary.

In the Church, Adrian is yet Pope: He repairs the walls of Rome ruined by the
Tiber. To him succeeds Leo 3. 21 years. 4 Synods held within this Decad. The
Council of Frankfort condemns the 2. Council of Nice. Charles founded the
Archbishopric of Hamburgh, which afterward was translated to Breme. The
Patriarch of Constantinople is excommunicated by the Abbot, for consenting to
the Emperors second marriage, his first wife yet living.

In the East, Irene and Charles treat about a marriage; mean while Nicephorus
banisheth her, 800
and reigns 8 years, he makes peace with Charles; Sicily and a part of Italy
are reserved for the Greek Empire. Bardanes is proclaimed Emperor, but he waves
it, and enters into a Covent: Nicephorus puts out his eyes, and makes his own
son Stauratius Emperor; He is beat by the Saracens, and forced to pay an annual
tribute; He tyranniseth, and loses Sardis with much treasure, and 6000 Greeks
to the Bulgarians. In the West, Charlemain is crowned Emperor by Pope Leo; He
reigned 14 years; He repaireth Florence, punishes the plotters against the
Pope, takes Nuceria and other places from the Greeks, transplants the Saxons
into France, and gives their lands to the Vandals, he wastes Bohemia, kills
Lescus the Polonian; he builds Dresda and Numberg; then by will leaves Italy to
Pipin, France to Lewis, Saxony and the rest to Charles. The Spanish Moors waste
Sardinia and Corsica. Egbert the English Monarch expels Balred of Kent, which
he makes a Province, and calls the whole Island by the name of England. The
Scots begin to wear S. Andrews Cross in their Banners, upon the Victory they
had against Athelstane of Northumberland, which S. Andrew appearing promised to
them. Frisia is subdued by the Danes. The Earldome of Arragon by marriage falls
to Garzias King of Navarre. Mauritius Duke of Venice, flung the Bishop of Grada
from an high tower, for reproving him of his lusts; upon this flies with his
father. Quarrels between the Herocleans and Aquileians. The Venetians side with
the Moors against Pipin. The Saracens divide themselves into six Principalities.

In the Church, Pope Leo sits again, after he had been beaten and imprisoned
upon false crimes, of which he cleares himself in a Synod at Rome. 4 Councels
were held in this Decad. Paulus Diaconus was the first that composed Postils
for the year, at the command of Charles.

In the East, Nicephorus and most of the Nobility slain by Crumnus the
Bulgarian. Stauratius after two months is thrust into a Covent by Michael
Curopulata. Thrace and Macedon 810
wasted by the Bulgarians; the Saracens defeated by Leo the Generell, who
succeeded Emperor 7 years, Michael being retired into a Monastery, whose sons
were gelded by Leo, and banished with their mother; He beats the Bulgarians
into a peace. Michael is condemned to be burnt for conspiring against Leo, but
is repriev^d till after Christmasse, in the interim Leo is killed in the
Temple. In the West, Pipin dies at Ravenna, he left one son; his eldest
brother Charles dies issuelesse. Pipins son Bernard is made King of Italy.
Charlemain, a little before his death, crowns his son Lewis Emperor; then dies
aged 72 years. His son Lewis, called the Pious, succeeded 27 years; He makes
Lotharius King of France, and his Colleague. Pipin is made King of Aquitain,
and Lewis King of Bavaria. Bernard Pipin's son rebelleth, with diverse Bishops.
Bernard dies, and leaves three sons. The Bridge at Mentz burnt in three
hours, which was not built in ten years. Lewis subdueth the Vandals. In Spain,
the Moors rebel, and are slain by Alphonso. Popielus Prince of Poland had one
of his sons devoured by Rats, as he used in his anger to wish. Siward and Ringo
striving for the Kingdom of Denmark are both slain in battle. The Norwegians
infest the Danish coast. Gaunt-Monastery burnt by accident.

In the Church, Steven 5. sat 7 months: To him succeeded Paschalis 1. 7
years; he redeemed Captives, and built Churches. 10 Councels were held in this
Decad. Herbert a Bishop is sent to the King of Swevia; to convert his people.
St. James of Compostella began about this time to be famous for miracles Leo an
enemy to Images. The Romans are permitted by the Emperor to choose their own
Popes.

In the East, Michael Balbus is released, and reigns 8 years: He geldeth
Leo's sons. One 820
Thomas aspires at the Empire, besieges Constantinople, but is defeated, taken
and executed, with his son. The Moors do much hurt by sea; they build Candy in
Crete; they are there overcome by the Imperialists, who shortly after in their
security are slain by the Moors. Euthemius Governor of Sicily revolteth to the
Moors, but he is killed at Syracuse. To Michael succeeded his son Theophilus 12
years: He puts to death the murderers of Leo; He makes his subjects to wear
short hair, because his were thin. In the West, Lewis warreth against Hungary;
Lotharius is crowned Emperor at Rome; Afric wasted by the Imperial forces; A
new plot detected against the Emperor. About this time it rained Corn in
Gascoign. In Spain, the Moors are beacen; The country is wasted by the Normans.
The Danes commit pyracies, at far as Constantinople. Harold King of Denmark,
being expelled, is baptized with his brother Ericus, at Mentz. St. Marks Body
is brought from Alexandria to Venice, which is laid in the Castle-chappel, and
a Church erected to it. The Saracens invade Palestine, and waste Sicily. The
Monastery of Gaunt rebuilt by the Abbot.

In the Church, Eugenius 2. sat 3 years. A 12. Schism is made by Zifinius the
Antipope. Valentine succeeded 40 days. Then Gregory 4. 17 years. 8 Councels
held in this Decad. The Greek Emperor gives way to erect Images without the
City, but not within. Ebbo Bishop of Rhemes sent by the Pope to convert the
Danes. At Acon Organs are used, the first in the Western Church. Denmark and
Swedeland converted.

In the East, Theophilus defeats the Saracens; His son-in-law Alexius fights
successefully against the Lombards. The Emperor was almost surprised by the
Saracens, who take 830
many Cities from the Empire; they are beaten out of Asia by Manuel the
Emperors General. In the West, Lewis pardons the Conspirators; his Empress
falsely accused is restored to his bed. Pipin upon his second rebellion is
committed to Trevers, whence he escapes. The Emperors sons take arms against
him. The Pope with his Bishops banish the Empress, and imprison the Emperor;
who again by the German Peers is restored, his wife recalled, and his sons
pardoned. Frisia invaded by the Normans, and Antwerp burnt by them. Lotharius
takes some places in Italy from the Pope. Lewis makes his son Charles King of
Normandy. Pipin dies, and the Kingdom of Aquitain is divided between
Lotharius and Charles. Lewis of Bavaria rebels against his father. The Danes
defeat Egbert King of England, and are defeated by him; At Portsmouth they
beat, at Southampton are beaten. About this time ended the Picts Kingdom, being
utterly destroyed by the Scots. The Bishops of Lions and Vienne excommunicate
Lewis for marrying his Kinswoman: The Bishop of Utricht slain by her command,
for threatening to excommunicate Lewis. Ordonius the Spanish King takes Cauria
and Salmantica, and kills the Moors, who in battle slew Sancho King of Navar.
Regmer the Dane taken by Hella King of Ireland, and stung to death with
serpents. Ericus King of Denmark, of a Persecutor becomes a Convert. John Duke
of Venice forced to fly into France, from whence returning is put into a
Monastery.

In the Church, Pope Gregory 4. instituteth the Feast of the Holy-Trinity; he
calls the Feast of All-Martyrs, All Saints. 4 Councels held within this Decad.
The Feast of All Saints translated from the 12. of May to the 1. of November.
S. Bartholmew's Bones drowned in the Indian sea, are brought from Lipara to
Benevent.

In the East, Theophilus takes Sosopetra the Saracens chief City. The
Persians, for want of pay, salute Theophilus Emperor, who is taken and
imprisoned, and at last executed. 840
To Theophilus succeeds his son Michael 25 years. The Bulgarian King is
expelled by his subjects, for being a Christian: the Emperor gives him another
country. In the West, Lewis dies; Lotharius succeeds 15 years. Pipin obtains
Normandy. Lotharius is twice defeated by his brothers: The difference is
referred to 120 Noblemen, who award to Lotharius, Italy, a part of France,
Burgundy, and Austria, which from him was called Lotharingia. Lewis King of
Germany beats the Vandals. Bononia rased by the Emperor, for abusing his Son.
The Bohemians rebel, and are subdued by the Emperor, whose forces are at last
mastered by them. The English defeat the Danes. Kenneth the Scots King, removes
the Marble-stone (brought from Spain to Ireland, and thence to Scotland) out of
Argile into Scone, which he enclosed in a Woodden-Chair, wherein the Scots
Kings were crowned. In France, Charles the Bald reigns. The Normans enter
France as far as Paris. Alphonsus 3. of Spain, called the Great, makes S.
Iames-Church of stone, which before was earth; He wastes the Moors Country.
The Normans loose 70 ships at Gallecia. Toledo taken by the Moors. Popielus
Prince of Poland, with his wife and children devoured by Rats, which grew out
of the Bodies they had murdered. The Venetian ships taken and sunk by the
Saracens, who waste Dalmatia, and take Ancona; They fire also the Suburbs of
Rome, and rob the Churches of St. Peter and St. Paul.

In the Church, Sergius 2 was Pope 3 years: He is opposed by John a Deacon,
which made the 13. Schism. Sergius (at first) was called Os Porci. He built
the Castle of S. Angelo. Leo 4. succeeded 8 years; He built a new City begun by
Sergius, and calls it Leonina; He with the Neapolitans beats the Saracens at
sea. 7 Councels assembled this Decad. The Romans refuse to confirm Leo Pope,
without the Emperor. John the Patriarch deposed, for opposing Images.

In the East, Bardas the Emperors Uncle made him kill his Tutor Theodictus,
because he 850
was not advanced. Michael sends his mother and sisters into a Monastery: He is
beaten by the Saracens at Samosata, and beaten again by Amer the Saracen in the
West. The Saracens are expelled Benevent by Lewis, who is made Emperor by
Lotharius, and he enters a Monastery. Lewis reigned 18 years: He makes the
Dalmatians pay Tribute; He warreth against the Selavi, Vandals, and Sarab. He
wins most of France. The Danes enter the Thames, plunder Canterbury and London,
but are defeated in Surry. The Scots beat the English, and are beaten by them.
The Picts pass into Denmark and Norway. In France, Pipin escaping out of his
Monastery, is taken and imprisoned. The Normans take Tours and Anjou, and upon
civil-wars at home, return. In Spain, Toledo and Corduba rebel. Alphonsus
raises the Moors from the siege of Conimbria. The Danes invade Holland.
Lotharius confirms the Venetian privileges.

In the Church, Leo made many Collects. He builds Centum-cellae, or
Civita-Vecchia, spoiled by the Saracens, and calls it Leopolis. To him
succeeded John 8. who, some say, was a woman, others deny it. Bennet 3.
succeeded 2 years; opposed by Anastasius, in the 14. Schism. Nicholaus 1.
succeeds 9 years: He hid himself, that he might not be chosen. This Decad
afforded 9 Councels. The Manichees are punished by Theodora in the East.

In the East, Constantinople is besieged by the Russians. Bardas, by Michaels
negligence, made Caesar: he favored Learning. The Church of Sophia burnt.
Bardas killed by Basilius, 860
who is made Caesar; he kills Michael, and reigns 19 years; he caused
restitution to be made of half, which Michael had spent on his Flatterers; he
raises the Saracens from Racusa, and takes Samosata from them, and helps
Lewis against them. In the West, Caroloman rebels against his father Lewis the
Emperor, forces the Sclavi to peace; he expels the Saracens out of Campania
into Calabria; he is reconciled to his brother Charles. Lotharius forsakes his
Concubine, and takes his Wife again. Lambert Duke of Spoletum loses his Duchy
for plundring Rome. The Saracens lose many places to the Western Princes. Bari
is taken, and in it the Saracen-Sultan. Ethelred the English King defeated the
Danes nine times; slew nine of their Earls, and one of their Kings. The Danes
challenge Pictland, and commit great outrages in Fife. Thierry son to Sigebert
Duke of Aquitaine is made the first Earl of Holland by the French King
Charles. The Normans waste Anjou and other places. Charles invadeth Lotharius
his kingdom, and is crowned at Mentz, and divides the Kingdom with Lewis King
of Germany: the Saracens are expelled Grada, by the Venetians. Baldwin of
Flanders reconciled to Charles the Bald. Thierry of Holland, subdueth his
rebellious people, and the Frislanders; obtains Zealand, and drives the Danes
out of Holland.

In the Church, Nicolaus sits yet; he opposed the Synod of Constantinople, and
excommunicates Photius the Patriarch, and is excommunicated by him; and forces
Lotharius to take his wife again. Hadrian succeeds 4 years: He threatueth
Charles and Lewis for invading the kingdom of Lorrain. 16 Councels held this
Decad; one whereof was the eighth General Council of Constantinople, against
Photius. The Sclavi in Moravia receive the Gospel: the Archbishop of Colen and
Trevers deposed for causing Lotharius to repudiate his wife. Lotharius denies
the Popes power in Temporals. The King of Bulgaria becomes a Monk, and puts out
the eyes of his Apostate son. The Huns and Russians converted: The Pope in the
Synod of Constantinople obtains jurisdiction over the Bulgarians; but they
fell afterward to the Greek Church.

In the East, Basilius refuses to acknowledge Lewis Emperor: therefore the
match between Constantine his son and Lewis his daughter is broken off.
Basilius takes Caesarea in 870
Cappadocia, with much booty. The Saracens invade the Empire, but are expelled:
They of Tharsus and Cilicia are beaten at Sea. In the West, Lewis is crowned
King of Lorrain at Rome, and is taken prisoner by Aldegisus D. of Benevent.
Lewis warreth against the Bohemians, who are forced to pay Tribute. The
Emperor dies at Millan; and Charles the Bald crowned at Rome. 2 years after,
Lewis of Germany dies; his three sons divide his lands. The Emperor is
defeated for incroaching on them: he makes Boso King of Arles, and is poisoned
by a Jew. Lewis the Stammerer succeeds 18 months; he dies. Caroloman the next
heir resigns (being paralitick) to Charles the Gross 8 years, so the Empire is
translated from the Western French to the Eastern. Edmunds-bury in England
built to the memory of Edmund the Martyr. Peace made between the Danes and
English. Denewolf of a Cow-heard is made Bishop of Winchester, for entertaining
King Elfred in his flight from the Danes: the Scots beat the Danes, and are
beaten by them. In France, Caralomans eyes are put out for rebelling: a great
Plague of Locusts, and Dearth ensues. Peace in Spain between Alphonsus and the
Moors. Most part of England subdued by the Danes. Canutus their king is
baptized in England: the Normans defeated in Frisia: the Saracens are beaten by
the Persians; they force the Pope to pay tribute, they take Syracusa.

In the Church, John 8. sat ten years; he pays to the Saracens 25000 crowns,
to leave his territories: He is imprisoned by the D. of Spoletum, whom upon his
escape to France, he excommunicated. 7 Councels held this Decad. Bells first
used in the Greek Church; upon the sending of twelve Bells to Basilius the
Emperor, by Urso D. of Venice. Photius the Patriarch is restored by a Synod of
Constantinople.

In the East, Basilius imprisoneth his son Leo, for wearing a Dagger; but is
freed by some 880
words uttered by a Parrot: Basilius being wounded by a Stag, dies. Leo 6
succedeth 25 years; he loses much by the Lombards, and his forces in Macedonia
are defeated by the Bulgarians, who desire peace, upon the coming of the
Hungarians to aid the Emperor. In the West, Charles the Emperor, with Lewis
king of Germany, besiege Vienna, and drive Boso out of France. Lewis robs the
Church of Mentz, to pay the Normans, who had invaded his Territories; upon his
death Charles seiseth on his lands: the Normans burn Constance and Trevers.
Guido E. of Tuscany aids the Saracens against the Emperor, who are afterward
reconciled. Bavaria and Austria spoiled by the Sclavi: the Emperor is deposed
for giving away Normandy, and being unsit for government. Arnulph succeeds 12
years. England about this time was divided into Shires, Hundreds and Tythings,
under King Elfred. The Danes are forced into France. The Scots beat the Irish,
and take Dublin. Boso makes himself King of Burgundy. Paris besieged by the
Normans; of them Caraloman buys his peace, after he had taken Vienna: they
waste France, and besiege Paris again; the Emperor to quiet them gives them
Neustria, now called Normandy. Odo of Saxony, of whom came the Capets, defeats
the Normans in Flanders. Gallecia in Spain is made a kingdom, and Ordogno
Alphonsus second son King thereof. Alphonsus is forced by his son Garzia to
resign Leon to him, who died childelesse: so Leon falls to his brother
Ordogno, who beat the Moors. The Hungarians being deluded by Leo, invade the
Western Empire, chiefly France, to be eased of their Tribute laid on them by
Charlemain.

In the Church, to John (whose brains were beaten out with a hammer) Martin 2.
succeeded 1 year; then Adrian 3. 1 year; then Steven 5. 6 years. 3 Councels
were held in this Decad. Godfrey King of the Normans baptized. The Monastery of
Mount Cassin burnt by the Saracens. Photius the Patriarch deposed.

In the East, Simeon the Bulgarian, upon the departure of the Hungarians, vexed
Leo again; who to quiet them, restores their prisoners. The Saracens take
Lemnos and Tauromenium 890
in Sicily. The Lombards lose Benevent to the Marquis of Tuscany, after 330
years possession. Thessalonica taken by the Saracens. In the West, Arnulph
makes the Duke of Moravia King of Bohemia. Guido is crowned Emperor by the
Pope. Arnulph is aided by the Hungarians against Zuindebold the Moravian, whom
he had made King of Bohemia; He takes diverse Towns in Italy; Rome is taken by
means of a Hare: his wife is convicted of adultery; he falls into a Palsy, and
dies of the Lousie-disease; His son Lewis 4. succeeds 12 years. The Danes do
much hurt in England; the Scots help the English against them. The Normans are
beaten in Britany. Charles the Simple of France and Odo have great wars,
Ordogno of Spain, and Garzias King of Navar, are defeated by the Moors.
Possessions are given to the Hungarians, for their service to Arnulph the
Emperor.

In the Church, Formosus is Pope 4 years: He is opposed by Sergius the
Antipope, which made the 15. Schism. Boniface 6. succeeds, who was expelled
within a month for his lewd life. His successor was Steven 6. 3 years: He
abused and mutilated the dead body of Formosus, which he caused to be dug
up; he is taken by Aldebert Marquis of Tuscany, and strangled in prison.
Romanus succeeded 3 months. 5 Synods held within this Decad.

In the East, the Saracens invade Greece, and are defeated, and then defeat
Himerius the Emperors General. Constantine son to Leo is crowned Emperor. The
Saracens defeat the 900
Emperors Fleet. In the West, Lewis is beaten by the Hungarians, who waste all
Germany. The rebellious Frislanders are subdued by Thyerry the Hollander; who
in sign of subjection enjoined them to make low-doors, that they might stoop
as they entered. Berengarius in Italy is defeated by the Hungarians, and their
departure is procured with money. In Spain, Alphonso defeats the Saracens, then
entered a Monastery, which shortly after he forsook, then he was imprisoned and
lost his eyes. Ramirus of Spain invades Toledo, takes Madrid, and defeats the
Moors. Roan in France with other places taken by Rollo D. of Normandy, who
besiege Paris and beat the French.

In the Church, Theodorus 2. sits 20 days: John 9. succeeded 4 years: He
confirmed the Acts of Formosus, which caused a sedition, so that he fled from
Ravenna. Benet 4. succeeded 2 years. The 16 Schism, in which Leo 5. after 40
days, is imprisoned by Christopher, aided by the Marquis of Tuscany, and after
7 months, is sent unto a Covent by Sergius 3. Theodora, the Marquises
Concubine, rules in Rome, Sergius makes her daughter Marosia his Concubine, of
whom he begot John the 11 or 12. This Decad produced 5 Councels. The Bohemians
and Normans converted to the Faith. Leo the Emperor takes a fourth wife,
against the Custom of the Greek Church, therefore he is Excommunicated by the
Patriarh of Constantinople, whom for this, Leo banished.

In the East, to Leo succeeds his son Constantine 8. 50 years, who ruled with
his mother Zoe. Constantinople besieged by Simeon Prince of Bulgaria, who is
hired to return home. 910
He breaks the peace, and takes Adrianople. The Italian Princes crave help
against the Saracens, who had invaded Calabria and Apulia. The Greeks beat the
Bulgarians, and are beat by them. Zoe is sent into a Monastery, and Romanus
rules with the Emperor his son-in-law. In the West, the Emperor buys his peace
of the Hungarians: he dies of grief, and in him ends the race of Charlemain
in Germany. Conradus Duke of Franconia succeeds 7 years. Henricus Auceps
aspires. The Dukes of Suevia disturb the peace. The Emperor is beaten by the
Duke of Merspurg. Ratisbone taken from the Emperor by Arnulph Duke of Bavaria,
and lost again. Conradus sickneth, and commends Henry Duke of Saxony to the
Empire: This Henry reigned 17 years; He was surnamed the Falconer. In France,
William Earl of Aquitain founded the Monastery of Clugny. Robert Earl of Paris
rebels against the King for his insufficiency, who is surprised and imprisoned
by Robert Earl of Vermendois. In Spain, the Moors are beaten again, and the
Rebels suppressed. The Navarrois are defeated by the Castilians. The Venetians
obtain leave of the Emperor to coin money. The Hungarians invade Italy.

In the Church, Anastasius sat 2 years. John 10. succeeded 16 years: He falls
out with Albericus Marquis of Tuscia, and is expelled the City; whereupon he
calls in the Hungarians, who commit many outrages. Albericus is slain by his
people. One Council was held this Decad at Constans, inhibiting marriage in the
7. Degree.

In the East, Romanus crowns his wife and son, and subscribes before the
Emperor; he is 920
overcome by the Bulgarians, who take Hadrianople, but are expelled by Romanus.
The Saracens at Lemnos are defeated by the Emperors fleet. Romanus makes two of
his sons Caesar's, and another a Churchman. In the West, Burchard D. of Sweve
is forced to acknowledge Henry Emperor, who gets Lorrain from Charles of France.
Arnulph is forced to obedience. The Hungarians being defeated by the Emperor,
make peace for nine years, after which time they are expelled Germany. The
Vandals subdued, and Brandeburgh taken by the Emperor; multitudes of Vandals
killed near the Baltic sea. In France, Robert Earl of Paris is chosen King,
whom Charles assisted by the Normans slew: then Raoul Duke of Burgundy is
chosen, who leagueth with the Normans. Charles is released, and again
imprisoned, then dies. In Spain, the rebellions of Castile, Navar and Gallecia
are suppressed by Ordonius 3. who dies in his expedition against the Moors.
Elfred, an English Nobleman, who had conspired to put out King Athelstans eyes,
abjured himself at Rome, fell down and dyed 3 days after. Athelstan overcomes
the Welsh, and beats the Scots. Venice burnt by the Hungarians. Siffrid the
Dane having wasted Flanders, and ravished the Earls daughter, hanged himself.

In the Church Anastasius sits, who consecrated a Boy of 5 years old Bishop of
Rhemes. Raoul King of Burgundy is made King of Italy, to cross Berengarius, who
is expelled Italy, who therefore called in the Hungarians, that burn Papia. The
Pope makes Hugh, Earl of Arles, King against Raoul, who returned to France.
Guy, this Hugh's brother, imprisoneth, and strangleth the Pope, after he had
killed his brother Peter. Leo 6. succeeds, whom Guy after 7 months imprisoned;
he dyed, and Stephen 8. succeeded two years. Marozia the strumpet, was the
death of these two Popes. 3 Councels kept this Decad. Raoul King of Burgundy,
bestows on the Emperor the Spear that wounded Christ.

In the East, the Russians waste the country about Constantinople: diverse
Greeks gelded by the Beneventines. In the West, the Hungarians being denied
their tribute of the Emperor, 930
spoil Germany, but are at last defeated and expelled. Misna made a Marquisat,
and Guelders an Earldom: Henry dies, to him succeeds Otho the first his son 42
years. The Palatine for rebelling, is banished, who being pardoned, conspires
with Henry the Emperors brother. In England, King Athelstan drives the
Britains out of Devonshire into the remote parts of Cornwall; he takes
Westmerland and Cumberland from the Scots; to him was sent out of France,
Constantine the Great his sword, in the hilt of which was one of the nails of
the Cross. In France, Lewis son to Charles returns out of England, and reigns
18 years. In Spain, Sancho King of Leon recovers his Kingdom, to whom Ferdinand
of Castile sells a horse and a hawk, conditionally to double the payment
everyday, after it should become due: This Ferdinand is taken prisoner by the
Navarrois, and released; so was the King of Navar taken and released: Ferdinand
escapes out of prison by his wises means, who exchanged apparel with him.
Sancho makes Castile a Kingdom, in satisfaction for his horse and hawke. About
this time some Bishoprics were founded in Denmark. The Istrians by surprising
some Venetian Virgins, as they presented themselves after their custom, in our
Lady Church, (the memorial whereof is kept at Candlemasse) are forced to pay a
yearly tribute to Venice. Comaculum refusing to pay, is taken and annexed to
the Venetian Territories. The Saracens are beaten in Castile and Germany: Genua
is taken by them, and cruelly used.

In the Church, John 11. sat 6 years; Marozia delivers Rome to Hugh, who
imprisoneth the Pope; whom Albericus freed, and expelled Hugh with Marozia. Leo
7. succeeds 4 years. Two Councels held this Decad. The Audean Heretics obtain
now the name of Anthropomorphites. Romanus makes his son at 16 years, Patriarch
of Constantinople, to whom he procures a Pall from the Pope.

In the East, Romanus hires the Turks to leave Thrace: he is sent to a Covent
by his son 940
Steven. Romanus having lost two of his other sons, dies. Constantine reigned
12 years; he inviteth Scholars into Greece. In the West, the Emperor and
French King are reconciled. Henry the Emperors Brother obtains pardon for his
Rebellion. Otho being wounded in hunting, makes his son Ludolphus his Colleague
and successor, but afterward changed his mind: He makes his Brother Henry, Duke
of Bavaria; who expelled thence the Hungarians. Otho defeates the Danes. In
Italy, Hugh made a league with the Saracens: his people upon this revolt; he
flies into France, and becomes a Monk. The Saracens beaten out of Calabria by
the Greeks. Otho invades Flanders, and is opposed by the Gauntois. Aquileia
taken by Henry the Emperors Brother. St. Wenceslaus is made King in Bohemia by
the Emperor; he refused the Title, not the Government: he is murdered by his
brother in the Church; and his wicked mother the cause of this murder, was
swallowed quick in the Earth. Otho beats the Danes, and wastes their Country.
In Spain, Zancho is poisoned with an Apple by Gonsalvus the Rebel, whom he had
pardoned. Ferdinand loses many places in Castile to the Moors, and dies for
grief. Ramire defeats the Moors in Leon. In France, the D. of Normandy is
reconciled to the King, who takes Rohan, and makes Robert Earl of Paris. Hugh
Major of the Palace, takes the King in England. Analph of Ireland intrudes into
Northumberland, who is banished by King Edmund, and Cumberland bestowed on the
Scots. King Edmund is slain treacherously at a feast. Analph is recalled by the
Northumbrians, and made King there.

In the Church, Steven being dead of a wound received in a tumult, Martine the
3. sat 3 years; to him succeeded Agapetus the 2. 9 years. In this Decad were
called 5 Councels. The Russians persecute the Christians. Otho spreads
Christianity in Denmark, Swethland and other northern parts.

In the East, the Emperors Fleet is defeated by the Saracens at Candy. Bardus
the Emperors 950
General, takes much from them. Romanus poisoned his Father, who died not in
two years after, some of the poison being spilt. In the West, Otho forces
Boleslaus the Bohemian to submit: he adds Belgium and Burgundy to the Empire:
diverse rebel against Otho, who at last submit. The Bishop of Saltzburg's eyes
are put out for calling the Bavarians into Bavaria, where they were all slain.
Otho subdueth the Vandals; Otho by marrying Adelheida becoms King of Italy,
which he leaves to Berengarius except Verona and Aquileia, which he gave to
Henry his brother. Berengarius plays the tyrant, and wars with the Pope for
the Duchy of Spoletum. Piedro of Venice is banished, and turns Pyrat against
the Venetian ships, the report of which killed the Duke his father with grief:
he is notwithstanding recalled by the State. The Church of Grada is made
Metropolis of Venia and Istria. Harold the Dane holds of the Emperor, and
receives the Faith. Five of the Hungarian Kings hanged in Bavaria. In Spain,
Garzias of Castile, invad^th Leon: he pursues his wife with her Adulterer, and
kills them both in bed. The Moors mean while invade his Territories. In France,
Lewis is killed by a fall from his horse; His son Lotharius succeeds 32 years:
Hugh by his death, leaves his Duchy of Paris to Hugh Capet, who is declared
Duke of France and Earl of Poitou. The Northumbrians and Mercians revolt from
Edwy king of England, for his evil life, and s^tup his brother Edgar against
him: The King hereupon dies for grief. Edgar reigned 56 years; He rigs out a
great Fleet to guard the Coasts. Malcolme King of Scotland is murdered in
Murrey.

In the Church, John 12. sat 8 years, he was the first Pope (say some) that
changed his name from Octavian to John. 3 Councels held this Decad. St.
Matthews relics translated from Ethiopia to Sulernum. Helena Queen of Russia
is baptized at Constantinople; she sends to Otho for Priests to convert her
Subjects.

In the East, Romanus 2. reigned 3 years; he beat the Saracens in Crete, by
Nicephorus Phocas; he was forbidden to return to Constantinople, because there
was a prophecy, that the Conqueror of Crete should be Emperor: which fell
out true; for he succeeded 6 960
years: he beats the Saracens out of Cilicia: He is sorry that his forces took
Antioch; because he was told, that if it were taken he should miscarry; he
becomes covetous and odious; he kills Otho's Ambassadors, who by his own order
came to treat with him about a match, between young Otho, and his daughter
Theophania: He is killed by John Zimisces, and his own Empress. This John
succeeded 6 years; he thrusts the Empress into a Monastery, and sends
Theophania to Otho: In the We^, Otho's aid is entreated by the Pope against
Berengarius, whom Otho defeats, and causes his son Otho to be crowned: He
sends the wife of Berengarius to him; he setleth Lombardy, and deposes the
Pope for adhering to his enemy: He banisheth Bereus with his wife and children
into Bavaria. Adelbert his enemy being defeated, the Pope is by him restored:
then to revenge the death of his Ambassadors, he cut off the Noses of diverse
Calabrian and Apulian Greeks, and sends them to Constantinople. The Saracens
lose Crete, Cyprus, with 100 Cities, Cilicia, Tripolis in Phenicia, Antioch,
Calabria, and Apulia, all this within this Decad. Harold of Norway, by
sacrificing his two sons, obtained a Tempest which dispersed the Danish Fleet,
that came to demand tribute. Mecislaus King of Poland is Baptized; he builds
many Churches, and erects two Archbishopricks. Edgar King of England, imposes
a yearly tribute of 300 Wolves upon the Welsh: He is cheated of his wife by his
favorite Ethelwolde, whom he slew, and then married her. The Danes land in
Scotland, and are forced to fly to their ships.

In the Church, Pope John is deposed for diverse crimes. Leo the 8. is chosen,
but upon the Emperors departure John is restored again; Leo flies to Otho; he
is slain in the act of Adultery by the woman's husband. Bennet the 5. is chosen.
Otho returns and setles Leo; so Bennet is banished to Hamburg. This makes the
17 Schism. John 13 succeeds 6 years; he is imprisoned 11 months, and restored
by the Emperor; he was the first that consecrated Bells, and gave them names. 6
Councels held this Decad. Miesco King of Poland orders, that every Knight at
the reading of the Gospel should draw his sword in defense thereof, and at the
naming of it, to say, [Glory be to thee, O Lord.] Hungary is converted.

In the East, Bardas overcomes the Rebels in Asia: the Rossi expelled out of
Bulgaria. Zimisces 970
is murdered by an Eunuch for complaining against the wealth of the Eunuchs.
Basilius and Constantine sons of Romanus succeed 50 years. Bardas rebelleth,
and joyneth with the Saracens. The Imperialists beaten by the Bulgarians. In
the West, Otho marries with Theophania: Otho the father dies, and Otho the
son succeeds 10 years. Henry Duke of Bavaria opposes him a while, then
desisteth; Henry afterward rebelleth, and flies into Bohemia, which is wasted
by the Emperor, and Henry with his son banished: Otho makes peace with
Lotharius. Elcain the Saracen Prince makes Alcair in Egypt his Seat: they lose
Fraxinetum, and recover Consentia. The Venetians drive them from Capua. Piedro
Duke of Venice, for his tyrannies is killed with his son: he set his Palace, S.
Marks Church, and 300 houses on fire: His successor Pietro Ursulo repaired all
again, and bestowed a Table of Gold on the High-Altar. The Isle of Sembia in
Russia is subdued by Aquinus the King of Denmarks eldest son: his youngest son
Sueno rebelleth against him; at last, this Harold the father is slain, and
Sueno succeeds. A part of Lorrain is given by Otho to the Bishops of Liege,
Trevers, and Colen. S. James of Compostella overthrown by the Moors; they are
defeated by king Pharemund. In England, king Edgar built 47 Monasteries,
besides Rumsey-Abby for Nuns; he is murdered by his mother in law: she in
penance built the Monastery of Malmesbury and Wharwell. Duffus the Scots king
is bewitched and murdered: Culenus his successor, for his wicked life, is also
slain by a Thane whose daughter he had ravished.

In the Church, Domnus 2. sat 3 months; Bennet 6. succceded: he is strangled
in the Castle of St. Angelo, by means of Boniface 7. which makes the 18
Schism: he seeing the City bent against him, flies to Constantinople with all
the Jewels of the Vatican. To him succeeds Bennet the 7. 9 years. This Decad
produced 5 Councels. The Patriarch of Constantinople prohibits Zimisces to
enter the Church, for murdering Nicephorus; he lays the fault on the
Empress, who is made a Nun, and he an Emperor. A Wheele-wrights son is made
Archbishop of Mentz: hence a Cart-wheel was added to the Arms of that See.

In the East, Basilius by the Saracens help recovereth Calabria and Apulia from
Otho, whom they put to flight, and took him in Merchants Cloths, but he
redeemed himself, and s^seth 980
on Benevent. Larissa is taken from the Greeks by Samuel King of Bulgaria. The
Army proclaims Barias Phocas Emperor, who laid siege to Constantinople; but he
died suddenly: Upon this, the Greeks submit to the Emperor. In the West, the
Greeks are expelled out of Illyricum and Dalmatia by Otho: in his abscence,
Germany is wasted by the Selavi, and Brandenburg taken. Otho having defeated
the Saracens of Italy, is wounded by a poysonable arrow, and dies: he is
interred at Rome. His son Otho 3. succeeds 17 years. Henry of Bavaria proclaims
himself Emperor, seiseth on Otho, but is forced to restore him to the
Bishopric of Mentz: Otho subjugates Bohemia, and institutes the Palatinat of
the Rhene. In France, Lotharius invadeth Lorraine, takes Verdun with the Earl,
and then restores them: to him succeeded his son Lewis 5. who is poisoned by
his wife. Hugh Capel is chosen, and Charles of Lorrain the heir rejected; he
takes Leon and drives Hugh from it. In England, the Danes do much mischief,
but are beaten in the West. Richard Earl of Normandy having invaded England, is
perswad^d by the Pope to return. Hay a plough-man in Scotland, put the Danes to
flight, after they had defeated the Kings forces. Great troubles between the
Countries of Anguse and Mernes. In Spain, to Pharemund succeeds Alphonsus 5.
King of Leon 28 years. In Denmark King Sueno Apostatiseth; he is taken three
times by the Iutians, and redeems himself, 1 for his weight in Gold, 2. and
twice his weight in Silver: the last time he is redeemed by the Danish Ladies,
who sold their Jewels to free him; therefore he made women capable to inherit:
He is at last expelled his kingdom by Ericus King of Swedland. Otho
prohibiteth all Italy from commercing with Venice: wherefore the houses of the
Caloprini are rased, their wives and children imprisoned, for incensing Otho
against Venice: the Duke becomes a Monk.

In the Church, John the 13 sat 8 months; and is starved by Boniface the 7.
who after 9 years returns to Constantinople, and after 4 months died
suddenly: his body was dragged through the streets: succeeded John 14. 11
years; he was expelled by Crescentius the Consul, and is by him again recalled.
Two Synods held this Decad. Adelbert B. of Prague, preaches to the Hungarians,
and leaves Bohemia.

In the East, Samuel Prince of Bulgaria takes many Greek Commanders prisoners,
whom the Emperors army redeemeth by seizing on his Tents. In the West, Otho is
crowned 990
at Rome; he puts Crescentius to death for rebelling, and restores the Pope: he
makes Crescentius his widow his Concubine, whom he burned, for causing him
execute an Earl whom she falsely accused. In France, Charles takes Rhemes: he is
betrayed and dies in prison. Hugh discharges the office of Major of the
Palace, and erecteth a Constableship: he excluded Bastards from inheriting the
Crown. To him succeeds Robert his son. In Spain, Sancho poisoned his mother
with that poison she had provided for him: Hence the custom of Spain is for
the women to drink first. Barcelona spoiled by the Moors, and the Earl killed;
70000 Moors are slain, and all recovered from them. In England the Danes are
hired by Etheldred to depart; they enter the land again with diverse fleets, and
waste many parts of the kingdom. Kenneth in Scotland poisoned the Prince of
Cumberland, that his own son might succeed; whom he declares heir: he is
affrighted in a Vision for this murder; visits the Shrine of Palladius, and is
murdered by a woman. Constantine the Bald, assumeth the crown: Malcolme,
Kenneth's son opposes him in vain: Kenneth, Malcolme's base brother, and
Constantine are slain in a battle. Grime, Nephew to Duffus makes himself King.
Adelbert B. of Prague laboring to convert Borussia, is slain there. In Hungary
King Stephen establishes Christianity. In Denmark, Sueno by the Scots help,
recovereth his kingdom. Olaus king of Norway is defeated at Sea, and drowned by
Sueno, who thereupon possessed that kingdom. The Venetians take Corcyra, and
destroy Pharos: they obtain of Otho, jurisdiction over their own Churches: It
is ordered that the Duke of Venice should be also styled Duke of Dalmatia; they
take 40 Pyrat ships.

In the Church, John 15 sat 4 months; Gregory 5. 3 years; the 19 schism
follows: for Crescentius expels him, and sets up John Bishop of Placentia;
but Gregory is restored, John whipped, exoculated and slain; and Crescentius
after the loss of his members hanged. Silvester 2. succeeded 4 years; this
Decad produced 7 Synods.

In the East, the Bulgarians are beaten by the Emperor, who recovers most of
his Cities: he sends forces against the Saracens, now before Capua. In the
West, Otho visits the body 1000
of Adelbert in Polonia: He is taken at Rome, and released; at last is poisoned
with a pair of gloves, which Crescentius his widow gave him. Henry 2. succeeded
23 years, he defeats all his opposers: he being in danger at Papia, leapeth
down from a Wall, and dis-joynts his thigh, whence he halted, and from this was
nicknamed, The lame. He had wars and peace with Flanders, and quarrels with the
D. of Bavaria. Robert the French King makes his son Robert Duke of Burgundy,
being escheated to the Crown. Alphonso of Spain corrects the Gothic Laws.
Sancho King of Navar styles himself King of Spain: His son Garzia is
dis-inherited for accusing his mother of Adultery, and Ramire made King of
Arragon. Alphonso besieging Viscum in Portugal is shot dead with an arrow. The
Danes are burnt in a Church at Oxford: they raze Excester, spoil Norwich, take
the Isle of Wight; the Canterburians redeem their peace with money. In Scotland
it is agreed that Grime should remain King, and Malcolm with his heirs should
succeed. Grime tyrannizeth, he is taken by Malcolm in Atholl, and his eyes put
out: To him succeeds Malcolm 2. 13 years. Boleslaus is made King of Poland by
the Emperor, who gives the spear of St. Maurice, and a nail of the Cross for
the Arms of that Kingdom. Cracovia is taken by the Bohemians, and Prague by
the Polanders, with the Vice-grave and King, whose eyes are put out. Boleslaus
subdueth Moravia. Giula Governor of Transylvania invades Hungary. King Stephen
takes Giulas wife and children, and treasure enough to build a Church in Alba.
Giula is baptized with his Family, and dismissed. The Earl of Flanders, and the
Emperor differ about Lorrain: the EarI takes Valenciens, and restores it to
the Emperor, who bestows it upon the Earl, with the Isles in Zealand, which
occasioned a long War between the Flemmins and Hollanders. Jerusalem taken by
the Saracens.

In the Church, John the 16. sat 5 months: John the 7. succeeded 6 years,
then Sergius 4. 3 years. In this Decad were held 3 Councels. The Greek Church
is united to the Latin. The feast of Mary's Nativity observed by Fulbert B. of
Charters. The Temple of the Sepulcher overthrown by the Prince of Babylon, upon
the Jews importunity; but they are banished, and the Temple rebuilt by Mary the
Princes mother.

In the East, the Bulgarians are defeated, and there eyes put out, except their
Commanders, 1010
who lost but one eye. The Emperor defeateth the Saracens, and subdueth all
Bulgaria, Prince John being slain. The Normans are expelled Apulia. In the
west, Brem and Hamburg spoiled by the Saxons and Vandals. The Emperor is
worsted by the Bohemians. The King of Burgundy makes the Emperor his Heir;
hereupon the Burgundians rebel. In Spain, Pharemund the 3. King of Leon
repaireth the Churches ruined by the Saracens. The Earldom of Castile falls to
the King of Navar. Mahumet is the last King of the Moors in Corduba: Pharemund
is slain in battle by Ferdinand of Castile, the first of that name, King of
Castile and Leon 37 years. The Danes invade Canterbury again, kill the
Archbishop, Monks and multitudes of People: Sueno kills the Bishop of London,
takes it, and expels Ethelred. His son Canutus is expelled, and returns; and
Ethelred being dead, the Kingdom is divided between Edmund Ironside and
Canutus: Edmund is slain, and Canutus Crowned. The Danes in Scotland are
overthrown at Aberden, in memory thereof a Bishopric is erected there by
Malcolme. The Polanders invade Pomerania and are defeated by the Emperor: The
Normans waste Frisia, and burn Utricht. The Saracens take Sardinia from the
Pisans, and lose it again: they are expelled Italy by the Popes Army.

In the Church, Benet the 8. sat 12 years. Gregory is set up by another
faction, and Bennet expelled, which makes the 20. Schism. Benet is restored by
the Emperor. 5 Councels assembled this Decad. Jews executed at Rome for
whipping Christ's Picture. 13 Manichees burnt at Orleance. It was decreed in the
Council of Nimigen, that the Bread should stand on the right side of the Altar,
and the Chalice on the left.

In the East, Bas^lius being dead, his brother Constantine reigned alone 3
years, he takes 12 1020
Saracen ships which had invaded the Cyclaves. The Greeks recover Capua: To
Constantine succeeds Romanus Argyrus 5 years, whose eyes were preserved by his
wifes entering into a Monastery. In the West, the plague rages through Germany,
and out of the dead bodies grew Serpents. The Emperor recovers Capua, Apulia
and Calabria from the Greeks. The Marquis beat out of Brandeburg by the
Vandals, and he forced to live upon a Canons place in Magdeburg. To Henry
succeeds Conrade 15 years* he Crowns his son King of the Romans, and goes into
Italy: he is crowned at Rome, and orders that the Emperors should be crowned
Kings of Italy by the Bishops of Milan, and to wait on them at their Imperial
Coronation. He has Wars with Sieven King of Bavaria. Rudolph King of Burgundy
revoketh the Act which he made to the Emperor. Boleslaus of Poland forces his
Gentry to pay Tithes, he makes Russia pay Tribute. Olaus of Norway is slain by
Canutus his faction, and Canonized: Sueno Canutus's son is beaten in Scotland.
Boleslaus of Bohemia built 20 Churches: His successor Boleslaus 2. lost
Cracovia, he lost his eyes, and resigneth to Iaromire, whose eyes were also put
out by Udalric. Otho Duke of Venice is shaved and banished by Flabenico. Otho's
brother Urso Bishop of Grada procures Flabenico to be banished. The Bishop
governs the State till his brother Otho's return, who died before the message
came. The Earl of Holland has War with Frisia. Edward and Edmund, the sons of
Ironside, are sent to Sweden to be murdered; but Olaus King of Sweden pitied
them, and sent them to Steven King of Hungary, who used them kindly.

In the Church, John the 19. sat 9. years: A Saracen King is baptized at Rome.
3 Councels held this Decad. The Polonians will rather serve the Devil, then be
Christians and pay Tithes, therefore they rebel, but are suppressed: The Greek
Church falls off again from the Latin, because the Pope would not give way
that the Patriarch o^ Constantnople should be styled General Patriarch. The
Gospel preachin Norway by the English.

In the East, Argirus is beaten in Syria: He takes Tribute of the Saracens.
Mysia and Illyria wasted by the Pazinaz^. The Saracen Fleet beaten by
Nicephorus. Zoe the wife of 1030
Argirus falls in love with one Michael, who strangle Argirus in the Bath. This
Michael succeeded 7 years, he married Zoe. The Saracens waste Thrace. Michael
slighteth the Empress: The Greeks are called into Sicily, where the Emperor
recovers 13 Cities. Maniaces the Sicilian Governor called home, and one sent
thither who loses all. In the West, Rudolph King of Burgundy sends his Crown
to Conrade, who expels Odo Prince of Champaign, out of Burgundy. Conrade takes
Milan, and banisheth the seditious Bishops: He takes Capua from Pandulphus. He
gives Burgundy and Suevia to his son Henry, who succeeded 17 years.
Hardi-Canute King of England and Denmark: In his absence Harold Harefoot, base
son to Canutus, invades the Kingdom: He banisheth Emme his mother in law. Her
son Elfred is betrayed in England, and his eyes put out in Scotland. King
Malcolme is murdered. Civil Wars in France between the Kings children. Robert
Duke of Normandy dies at Nice in Bithynia; William his bastard son succeeded.
In Spain, Ferdinand takes diverse places from the Moors, and expels them. The
Queen of Poland flies with her young son, the treasure, and two Crowns of the
Kingdom, to the Emperor* who sends the young King Casimire to Paris, who
enters the Monastery of Clugney. Poland being full of troubles sends to
Casimire, who being a Deacon was unwilling to return, till he was absolved by
the Pope, upon the Polanders promise to pay yearly, by the Pole, a halfpenny
to St. Peter, and to cut round the hairs of their head; the Nobles and Clergy
were exempted from the pay: so he returns, and the Emperor restores him his
two Crowns, and aides him against the Bohemians in Hungary. King Stephen and
Conrade make peace, upon a Divine warning to Conrades soldiers to return home.
Stephen names Vasul for his successor, but the Queen puts out his eyes, and
makes Peter King, who reigned 3 years, and commits all places of trust to the
Germans. Canutus of Denmark, makes war against the Duke of Normandy for
repudiating his sister. An Agreement is made between Hardi-Canute of Denmark,
and Magnus of Norway, that the survivour should enjoy both Kingdoms. Bretislaus
of Bohemia, takes Cracovia and other places, with a Crucifix of 300. l.
Flabenico is called home to Venice and made Duke; he banisheth the family of
the Urseoli.

In the Church, sat Benet the 9. 12 years; he was but 12 years old. This Decad
afforded 3 Councels. The Saracen King of Carthage is baptized at Rome.
Berengarius Archdeacon of Aniou condemned for affirming that Christ's body was
not in the Eucharist.

In the East, the Emperors forces revolt to the Bulgarians. The Emperor
repenting the murder of Romanus, enters into a Monastery and dies. The
Normans drive the Greeks out of Apulia. Michael Calaphates is forced to revoke
Zoe whom he had 1040
banished, and then having lost his eyes, is thrust into a Covent. After 4
months Constantine Monumachus succeeds 12 years: he marries Zoe: Maniaces
rebelleth, and is slain. The Emperor like to be stoned for keeping a
Concubine, but Zoe pacified them, being she consented to the keeping of a
Concubine. Caicius in Iberia rebelleth, and submits. One Leo is saluted
Emperor, but his eyes are put out. The Pacinazae return to Muscovia. In the
West, great differences between the Emperor and Bretslaus the Polander: The
Empress purges her self of Adultery by fire, and then enters a Monastery. The
Emperor bestows a part of Hungaria on Albert of Bavaria, and calls it Austria;
he deserts the Russians, imprisoneth the Duke of Lorain for rebelling, and then
releaseth him, he setles also Peter in Hungaria: He is crowned with his Empress
at Rome. His Palace at Nimigen is burnt by the Duke of Lorain and Earl of
Flanders, but they submit and are reconciled to him. William Duke of Normandy
expelled by his Subjects, and restored by the Emperor, Ferdinand in Spain,
makes the Moors his Tributaries, he recovers from them the body of Isidore.
Casimire in Poland subdueth the rebels and Russians; the Arch-rebel Mislaus is
by the Prussians flei'd and hanged; and so they make their peace with Poland,
on promise of tribute. In Hungary, Peter for tyrannizing is deposed; he flies
to the Emperor. The Hungarians waste Germany. Peter ^s restored, and
tyrannizeth again. Andrew and Bela, sons of Ladislaus the B^ld, are invited by
the Nobles, they restore Paganism: Peter flies, and is restored again by the
Emperor; at last his eyes are put out, and he dies. Andrew succeeds, who
restores Christianity: He gives the 3. part of Hungaria to his brother Bela.
Sueno the Dane is overcome twice by Magnus King of Norway, who was killed with
a fall from his horse. A great inundation in Flanders. Baldwyn the Gentle, Earl
of Holland, has great troubles with the Germans. The Turks are defeated by the
Greeks. In England, Harolds body is by Hardi-Canute cast into the Thames; he
died of an Apoplexy, and in him ended the Danes reign. St. Edward, son to
Ethelred, succeeded 20 years: he remits the Dane-gilt. Severn infested by the
Irish and Welsh, and Kent by the Danes. Emme, the Kings mother, clears her self
of Adultery, by passing barefoot and blindfold between 9 Plow-shares red hot:
the Lord Coventry's Lady rides naked, to free the City of their Tax. King
Duncan of Scotland much molested by the Island-rebels. Sueno the Dane defeated
by Macbeth. Witches foretell Macbeth's reign, who thereupon kills the King,
and usurpeth 17 years: He tyrannizeth over the Thanes.

In the Church is the 21. Schism. Benet is deposed, and Sylvester 3. comes in
by Symonie, and is expelled by Benet, and he by the People. He resigneth to
Gregory the 6* so now 3 Popes live in Rome; they are all deposed at Sutrium,
and Clement 2. chosen, who flies into Germany, and is poisoned. Benet 9. again
8 months: then Leo 9. succeeds 5 years. This Decad had 8 Councels.

In the East, the troublesome Pacinazae have peace granted them for 30 years:
The frontier 1050
Provinces are so taxed by the Emperor, that they let in the Turks, Zoe and
Constantine die: Theodora Zoe's sister reigned 1 year; she banished Nicephorus
whom Constantine named his successor, and makes Michael Stranoticus her
successor. He is thrust into a Covent by Isaacius Comnenus, who after 4 years,
being affrighted with lightning, became a Monk. In the West, the Pope makes
peace between Germany and Hungary. The Duke of Bavaria is expelled and flies
to Hungary. Turn and Seven taken from the Earl of Flanders by the Emperor.
Henry 4. succeeds 50 years; his reign was full of troubles by the Saxons
rebellions, and Pope Hildebrand's fury against him. In England, Goodwyn is
choked with a piece of bread, for so he wished if he knew of Elfred's death.
William the Norman comes into England, and is promised to succeed, if the King
die issueless. King Edward was the first King that healed the King's Evil.
Macbeth in Scotland tyrannizeth over the Lords. In France, Henry crowns his
son Philip at 7 years of age. Wars between Navar and Arragon. Ferdinand of
Spain assumes the title of Emperor, which angered the German Emperor: He kills
Garzia of Navar. Sanctius, son to Ferdinand of Castile, invadeth Leon, and
forces Alphonsus to fly to the Moors of Toledo, where he was well used.
Andrew of Hungary killed by Bela, who obtains the crown 4 years; he maintains
Christianity. In Poland, Boleslaus the Bald was King, who reigned 24 years.
Spitigenius King of Bohemia expels all the Germans. Uratislaus succeeded 36
years; he invaded Polonia. The Earl of Flanders, Baldwyn, recovers the Islands
of Zeland from the Hollanders; he is reconciled to the Emperor. The Earl of
Holland at Dort, in Pit-falls, drowned the forces of the Bishop of Colen and
Liege, kills the Bishop of Liege, and takes many prisoners. The Persian-Turks
invade Media, Syria, and take Jerusalem.

In the Church, Leo 9. sits, he imprisoneth Richard the Norman. Victor the 2.
succeeded 3 years: Steven 9. succeeds 7 months. The 22 Schism, by choosing
Cassin brother to the Duke of Lorrain, and Nicholas 2. who sat 3 years; he
gives Sicily, Apulia and Calabria to the Normans, conditionally that they
should hold them of the Church, and pay tribute yearly for them. This Decad
produced 13 Councels. The Patriarch of Grada is translated to Venice. At Mentz,
the Pope and Bishop quarrel about a Deacon that read the Gospel. The Whippers
about this time, delighted so much in whipping-chear, that in one Covent 3000.
brooms were worn in this exercise. The Patriarch of Constantinople is banished,
for assuming power to throne and un-throne Emperors. Berengarius acknowledges
Christ's Body in the Eucharist, but denies his passing through the doors shut.

In the East, Constantinus Ducas reigns 7 years: in his time St. Sophia's
Temple was overthrown 1060
with earthquake: the Scythians waste Greece, and are consumed by the Plague:
his son Michael Ducas with his mother succeeds 7 months. Romanus Diogenes
aspireth, is condemned, then married to Eudocia the Empress, and so becomes
Emperor 3 years; he slighteth his wife, and beats the Turks in the West:
Richard the Norman strives to be Emperor. The Emperor is hindered by the Pope
from repudiating his wise. The Earl of Flanders is made Regent to King Philip
1. of France; he subdueth the Rebels of Gascoin. Garzias of Gallecia,
imprisoned by Sanctius of Castile: Sanctius is slain at the siege of Zamora.
His brother Alphonsus reigns 43 years. Garzias King of Navar succeeds in
Arragon. Boleslaus of Poland subdueth the Russians in Hungary, Bela is killed
by the fall of some Hourses; Solomon the son of Andrew succeeds 12 years:
Bela's sons fly into Polonia; but these are reconciled: St. Peter's Church in
which Solomon was crowned, was burnt the next night. Edward of England,
enlarges and enricheth Westminster Church. To Edward succeeded Harold son of
Godwyn 9 months, and is slain by William of Normandy, who reigned 20 years.
Kent keeps its privileges. Edgar flies into Scotland; he should have been
heir. Coverfeu is instituted. William is much opposed by Edgar and the Scots,
who waste all, and burn York. In Scotland, Thanes are altered to Earls and
Barons: Macduff is made Earl of Fife, who is honored with diverse privileges:
Malcolm son to Duncan reigns 36 years; he is opposed by Macbeth's son. Dunbar
for his service is made Earl of March. In Holland, the Earl is killed by the
Earl of Guyck, and his forces defeated.

In the Church is the 23 Schism, between Pope Alexander 2. chosen by the
Cardinals, and Honorius 2. by the Emperor; he is forced from Rome, he holds
Leonina and the Lateran 2 years: He opposes Richard the Norman, in his claim
to the Empire. This Decad yields 11 Councels. The Christians at Jerusalem
suffered by the Caliph to inhabit a fourth part of the City, and to have a
Patriarch. The Christians persecuted by the Sclavi, who killed their Prince.
The Bishop of Bamberg with others make an expedition into Palestina: The
Patriarch absolves Eudocia from her oath of not marrying. The Virgins Feast of
Conception, instituted in England.

In the East, Manuel Comnenus is taken by the Turks, and the Empress put into a
Covent. Romanus 1070
taken by the Turks, released, and his eyes put out. Michael Ducas reigns 6
years; he is defeated by the Turks. Michael is deposed, he with his wife and
son are put in a Monastery. Nicephorus Botoniates succeeds 3 years. In the
West, Otho of Bavaria is proscribed and his Country wasted by the Emperor, is
reconciled with the loss of his Dukedom. The Saxons and Thuringers rebel, they
are defeated. The Princes and Bishops complain to the Pope against the
Emperor: He and the Pope depose each other. Rodulph of Suevia chosen by the
Germans, whom Henry being absolved defeateth. Henry is deposed again. Rodulph
after 9 battles, loses his right hand and dies. Burgundy is divided into four
parts. Lewis son to Philip of France falls out at Chess with the King of
England's two sons, which occasioned long Wars. William of England imposes
hard Laws on the English; appoints 4 Terms: he swears the observance of King
Edward's Laws, upon the setting up of Edgar, who flies again into Scotland.
Roy-Cross erected on the borders. He setleth Normandy, and uses Edgar
honorably: He takes the Isle of Ely, forces Wales to do homage: Hereford
imprisoned, and Northampton beheaded for Rebellion. His son Robert rebels in
Normandy, unhorseth his father, and is pardoned. The Tower of London begun. He
makes a Forest of 36 parishes. The Scots waste Northumberland. Solomon of
Hungary has diverse Victories, and is at last defeated. Ladislaus is chosen K.
The Venetians are beaten by the Normans. Thyerrie of Holland defeats the Bishop
of Utricht, and recovers Holland. Godfrey of Lorrain builded Delf. Rhodes and
Cyprus taken by the Turks. The Bishop of Cracovia slain and quartered by the K.
of Poland, for reproving his vicious life.

In the Church, Gregory the seventh sits 12 years. He persecutes the
Emperor, is imprisoned, sends a Crown to Rodulph. Twelve Synods held this
Decad. Canterbury is made Primate of England. The Emperor robs the Church
of her Tithes, which causes much trouble between the Pope and him. Bolestaus
King of Poland excommunicated for murdering the Bishop Stanislaus.

In the East, Constantinople is taken by Comnenus. Nicephorus is sent to a
Covent. Alexius 1080
Comnenus, Isaac's son, succeeds, 37 years. The Normans strive to restore
Michael. In the West, Pope Gregory is besieged in Rome by the Emperor; who
takes Rome, and is Crowned by Clement. Gregory hides himself in S. Angelo.
Herman D. of Lorrain being Crowned by the Saxons, is expelled by the Emperor,
who again is defeated by the Saxons. Herman at last yields, and is pardoned;
and rebelling again, is stoned by a woman, and brained. The Saxons submit.
Normandy is invaded by the French, and France by the English. Alphonsus in
Spain gets Toledo, with other places. The Archbishop of Toledo made Primate
of Spain. Alphonsus gives to Henry of Lorrain his daughter, with Portugal, to
hold of Leon. Spain invaded by the African Moors. William King of England built
two Monasteries in England, and one in Normandy: he dies, and is denied burial
at Caen. Succeeded William Rufus 12 years. Robert Duke of Normandy attempteth
England. The King compounds with Odo his Uncle. Malcolm King of Scotland
rebuildeth the Church of Durham, builds Dumfermling Church, and makes it the
Sepulcher of the Kings of Scotland: he erected the Bishoprics of Murrey and
Cathnes. Solomon of Hungary built Varadinum, and makes it a Bishopric.
Boleslaus of Poland falls mad: his Brother Uladislaus reigned 20 years, but
would not be called King. Canutus of Denmark falls out with his people, and is
slain with his brother in a Church. His brother Olaus succeeded 7 years.
Uratislaus made King of Bohemia, Moravia, Lusatia, and Silesia, by the
Emperor. In Flanders there was some difference between Robert and Baldwin
about St. Omars. Robert goes to Jerusalem, but is miraculously kept out of the
Temple till he had promised restitution to Baldwin. The disease called
Erysipelas, or Ignis sacer, followed upon the sight of a fiery Dragon in the
Air. Friezland bestowed upon the Bishop of Utricht by the Emperor.

In the Church, Against Pope Gregory is set up Clement the third, 21 years;
which made up the four and twentieth Schism. Rome taken by Henry, and burnt by
Robert the Norman, who carried Gregory to Salernum, where he dyed. His faction
the next year chose Victor the third, who sat two years. He is driven by
Clement to S. Angelo. Clement flies to Ravenna.' Victor is poisoned. Urban the
second succeeded 11 years. This Decad produces fourteen Councils. The
Bohemians are inhibited by the Pope to Preach publicly in their own tongue.
Bruno instituted the Carthusian Order. A Sect of the Messalian heretics appear
under the new name of Bogomili. Urban the second makes Pisa an Archbishopric.

In the East, Alexius builds a School and Hospital. He sends to the Pope for
help against the Infidels. 1090
An expedition is undertaken into Palestina. The Christian Armies meet at
Constantinople. They promise to restore to the Empire all they did win, except
Jerusalem. Alexius keeps not promise with them. They restore to him Nice, and
tender Antioch; which he refuses. In the West, Henry makes peace with
Strasburg and other places. 12000 Jews killed by the Croysadoers in Germany.
Conrade is proscribed by Henry, who besieges and takes Mantua, with some other
places. Conrade is made King of Italy. Godfrey of Bullen made Duke of Lorrain.
Henry repudiates and imprisoneth his wife. Philip of France repudiates his
wife, and is excommunicate for marrying the wife of Fulk Earl of Anjou. He
forsakes her, and is absolved from two Excommunications. Upon the death of
Urban, he takes her again, and is excommunicated again. In Spain, Alphonsus
changes the Gothic characters into Latin. Ramire slain by the Moors, and they
by D. Piedro in Navar and Aragon. The Moo^s invade Toledo, and kill Sancho heir
to Alphonsus, with many Christians. William of England invades Normandy, is
reconciled to Robert: they both besiege Henry. They are all three reconciled.
The roof of Bow-Church, with six hundred houses in London, overturned with the
wind. William and Robert are reconciled to Malcolm, who is slain at Alnwick
Castle. The French King aideth Robert against William. Peace is made, and
Robert morgageth Normandy to William. The King drives the Welsh into the Woods
and Hills. A Well springs with blood fifteen days. Robert goes to Palestina.
The Earls of Chester and Shrewsbury oppress the Welsh. Shrewsbury slain in
Anglesey by the Norwayers. William builds Westminster Hall, and the Tower-wall.
In Scotland, Donald is restored by Magnus of Norway. The People rebel upon the
Norwayers claim of the West-ne Isles. Edgar, Malcolmes son, is called in, and
aided by William Rufus. Donald is taken, imprisoned, and dies. The Polander
subdueth the Prussians and Pomeranians. Civil wars in Poland. The Pomeranians
are again subdued by the Polander. The Hungarians resist the Princes in their
expedition into Syria. They are beaten by the Russians, with Coloman their
King. Ericus King of Denmark with his Queen, go into the Holy Land. The Duke of
Venice repairs Lauretta, and makes it a City. Two hundred Venetian ships sent
to Syria: they take eighteen of the Pisan Galleys at Rhodes. They sail into
Smyrna, and take Askalon. Robert of Flanders hinders the Clergy from making
Wills meaning he should be their Heir; but he is forced by the Pope to revoke
his Decree. The Christians in the Holy expedition under Godfrey of Bou^llon,
made Boemund Duke of Apulia King of Antioch; and Godfrey is King of Jerusalem.
He kills 100000 Infidels at Askalon.

In the Church, Urban sits. Clement takes the Castle of S. Angelo. Urban
flies, end is restored. Clement flies. Urban dies. Paschal the second
succeeds 18 years. Thirteen Councils held this Decad. About this time were
instituted the Feasts of Simon and Jude, Saint James, Matthias, and Mark. Some
Italian Merchants begin the Order of Hospitallers in Syria. Three days at
Easter and Witsontide in the Council of Constans appointed to be kept Holy.
This expedition into Syria produced praying by Beads. The Cistersian Order
founded. Six hundred thousand Croysodoers.

In the East. Alexius betrayeth Vrspergensis and his forces going to Syria. ^He
betrayeth the Croysadoers. Again restores Nice to the Turk, and hinders our
expedition both by Sea 1100
and Land. Boemund in revenge takes Dyrrachium, and forces him to promise his
aid. In the West, Brandeburg is recovered from the Vandals. The Emperor is
taken and imprisoned by his son. The Bishops of Mentz, Colen, and Worms, divest
him of his Robes. He dies, and lay unburyed 5 years. His son Henry the fifth
succeeded 18 years. He invades Hungary for their treachery to the Croysadoers.
He has wars with Poland and the Flemings. Lewis the Gross reigns in France 28
years. Against him diverse of his Nobility join with the English. The Russians
are beaten by the Polanders. Boleslaus the Polander, with Hungary, league
against the Emperor. Boleslaus craveth Peace. The Danish King and Queen die in
Cyprus. Magnus King of Norway slain in Ireland. Venice make a league with
Hungary, and take Brandescum from the Normans. The Venetians send a hundred
ships to Syria: for their good service at Sidon and Ptolemais, they obtain of
Baldwin, a Street, a Church, a Market, and other privileges. Robert of
Flanders swears Fealty to the Emperor, and is reconciled to him. The Haven
of Staven in Frisia stopped by Corn flung over-boord by a rich Widow there. The
Frieslanders rebel, and are subdued by the Earl of Holland. In Zealand the
Hollanders are beaten by the Flemings. Godfrey of Jerusalem dies of the
Plague; his brother Baldwin succeeds 18 years. Boemund is taken by the Turks.
Tancred his Deputy takes Apamea, and is taken and kept five years. B^emund is
ransomed, and Baldwin wounded. Hugh Earl of Tiberias slain by a dart. Bertrand
made Earl of Tripoli. Tancred beats the Turks. William of England slain in the
New Forest. Henry the first succeeds 35 years. He drives the Earl of
Shrewsbury into Normandy. Great dissension between the King, and Ansel Arch
Bishop of Canterbury. The King and Robert of Normandy differ. Robert is taken,
and Normandy subdued by the King. Robert imprisoned at Cardiff, and his eyes put
out. Flemings plant in Wales. The Emperor is espoused to Maud the Kings
daughter at six years old. The martyed Priests are persecuted. In Scotland
Donald dies in prison. Edgar, Malcolms son, reigned 8 years. The first
anointed King there. He built Coldingham-Monastery, and enricheth the Church of
Durham. His brother Alexander succeeds 15 years. He defeateth the robbers of
Ross, and executes the ringleaders.

In the Church: Paschal was the first Pope that subscribed the year of his
Papacy. Clement dies, and Allectus is chosen; but he gives over. Theodoricus
chosen and deposed. Sylvester is elected and banished. So the Schism of 21
years ends. Paschal suspends the Liegroirs from the Sacrament, till they had
dug up the Emperors body, and laid it in a profane place. He raises the
Normans of Apulia against the Emperor. Fourteen Synods this Decad. Fluentius
Bishop of Florence deposed, for saying Antichrist was then born. Differences
between the Pope and the Princes about investitures. Pomerania converted. The
Bishopric of Ely founded. The Order of Regular Canons instituted. Bethlem made
a Bishopric under the Patriarch of Jerusalem.

In the East, Alexius profers to assist the Pope against Henry, if he will
bestow on him the Latin Empire. To Alexius succeeds Comnenus, or
Calo-Iohannes, 24 years. He takes 1110
Sosopolis from the Turks. In the West, Henry the fifth burieth his father at
Spire: he forces the Pope to crown him, and to confirm to him the
Investitures. Diverse in Italy and Germany revolt. The Bishop of Mentz
excommunicates him. He beats the Saxons, and wastes the Bishop of Colens
territories. He is beaten by the Saxons, and forced to deliver the Bishop of
Mentz. The Popes Legate excommunicates the Emperor. He wastes the Popes
territories, and sets up Gregory an Antipope, and invades France. The French
invade Normandy. Alphonsus Duke of Portugal is saluted King by the Army, after
he had deseated four Saracen Kings, whose heads are born by the Portugal Kings
in their A^ms. Saragosse is recovered from the Moors. Boleslaus of Poland beats
the Prussians and Pomeranians: he wastes Bohemia, and puts out the Palatine of
Cracovia his eyes. Poland is plundered by the Hungarians. Pomerania subdued
again. Dalmatia revolteth from the Venetians to the Hungarians; but the Duke
recovers it again, and subdueth Croatia. Dalmatia revolteth again. The Duke
goes against them, and is slain: so truce is made for five years. In Hungary,
order is given to geld Bela the son of Almus: but he was presented with Cats
stones in stead of his. Steven the second reigns in Hungary 17 years: he wastes
Polonia. Canutus of Denmark is killed by Magnus. The people rebel; and Magnus
is banished into Gothland. The Suevians choose a King of their own; whom the
Goths expel. Baldwyn is beaten by the Turks in Coelo-Syria. The Saracens
repulsed from Ioppe. Baldwyn dies. His cosen succeeds, called Baldwyn the
second. Antioch is annexed to the Kingdom of Jerusalem; Roger being slain by
the Turks. Constance taken by the Earl of Anjou, is recovered by the King of
England; who subdueth Wales: he oppresses both Church and State. The Thames
almost dry for two days. The first foundation of Parliaments. William the son
of Robert set up in Normandy by the French and Flemings: he will not admit the
Popes Legate. Henry beats the French and Flemings in Normandy, where Earl
Baldwyn of Flanders is slain. Northumberland and Huntingdon are by Marriage
annexed to the Crown of Scotland. The King sees the Earl of Merne's son hanged
for murder: he was set upon by thieves, and kills them: he built some Churches
and Abbeys.

In the Church: Pascal fits; he raises Forces against the Emperor. Maud,
Princess of Hetruria makes the Church her heir. The Emperor strives to recover
her lands. Upon Pascal's death arises the five and twentieth Schism; Gelasius
the second, and Gregory the eighth, being both chosen. Gelasius dies; and
Calixtus the second succeeds 5 years. This Decad affords twelve Councils.
Knights of S. John of Jerusalem instituted. S. Bernard founded the Monastery of
Clareval; who was Abbot there 36 years. The Premonstrants instituted. The
Templers are also founded, to secure the highways.

In the East, the Emperor beats the Scythians in Thrace: he invades the
Venetian territories. The Duke of Venice takes many Islands from the Greeks. In
the West, the Emperor resigneth 1120
the Investitures. The Bishop of Mentz forced to disclaim tithes in Thuringe.
Lotharius of Saxony proscribed. The Emperor helps the English against the
French: He dies issueless. Lotharius Duke of Saxony succeeds 12 years. Conrad
Duke of Suevia is crowned at Milan King of Lombardy. The Pope excommunicates
him with the Bishop of Milan. Spire and Ulme taken by the Emperor. The Bishop
of Mentz his eyes put out. Lewis of France beats the Emperor: he crowns his
son Philip at two years old; who died by a fall from his horse. In Spain, S.
James of Compostella is made an Archbishopric. Calatrava won from the Moor by
Alphonsus of Castile: he makes himself Emperor of Spain. Alphonsus of Arragon
is slain. Boleslaus defeats the Rebels in Poland, and rebuilds Cracovia, being
burnt. Steven of Hungary being childless, has blind Bela preferred for his
successor by the Pope: he is adopted by Steven. In Denmark, the People set up
Ericus, and depose Harold. Ericus escapes a danger. One Harold invades the
Kingdom of Norway, and puts out the eyes of Magnus, and geldeth him. The
Venetians beat the Infidels at Ioppa: to them is allotted a third part of Tire.
The Turks invade Syria. The King, with diverse Nobles, are taken. Fulk Earl of
Anjou leaves his Earldome, and returns to Syria. Tire is taken, and the King
ransomed; who leaves his daughter in pledge, and redeems her with the Sara^en
spoils. The Hollanders rebel, and are subdued by the Emperor. Charles the good
of Flanders, with his Almoner, distribute in one day to the poor 78000 loaves.
He is killed in the Church of Bruges for his charity, by the family of the
Stratenses. William, Robert's son of Normandy, made Earl by the French King. He
oppressed the people, and is killed at the siege of Alost. Prince William of
England, with 150, is drowned in the sea. Normandy rebels, and is subdued. King
Henry invadeth France, for aiding William Earl of Flanders. David King of
Scotland punishes severely unjust Judges: he built Holy-Roodhouse, and founded
fifteen Abbeys.

In the Church: Calixtus sits yet. Gregory the Antipope is carried about the
streets of Rome on horseback with his face to the tail, and then imprisoned.
To Calixtus succeeds Honorius the second, five years: he resists Roger in the
Kingdom of Apulia. There were seven Synods held this Decad. At Rome, the
Archbishop of Lions slain, for slandering the Clergy.

In the East, it is agreed that Antioch should hold of the Empire. John, son to
Isaac the Emperors 1130
brother, revolts to the Sultan of Iconium. The Emperor both commends and
beats his son, for setting rashly upon the Turks. In the West, the Emperor is
crowned by the Pope at Liege. Lotharius crowned at Rome. The Civil Laws are
revived. The Emperor subdueth Lombardy, except Milan and Verona: He expels
Roger King of Sicily out of Italy, and gives Apulia to one Raynulf. To him
succeeded Conrad 3. fourteen years. He proscribes Henry Duke of Saxony. The
Guelphs and Gibelines begin now to quarrel, under these names. King Lewis the
sixth of France dies; to whom succeeded his son Lewis the seventh. 44 years.
In Hungary, diverse Lords rebel against King Bela, and call in the Polonians and
Russians, who are defeated. In Denmark, Ericus kills Harold, and two of his
sons: Olaus the third escapes in woman's apparel, unto Norway. Harold of Norway
is killed by Syward, and he by Harold's sons. The Emperor takes Frisia from
the Bishop of Utricht, and gives it to Thierry Earl of Holland; who wastes the
Bishops country, and expels him. To Baldwyn in Jerusalem, succeeds Fulk Earl of
Anjou, 11 years: He takes Caesarea-Philippi, and builds two Castles near
Ascalon. In England, Steven, nephew to Henry, reigns 18 years: He is opposed
by his Peers, and defeats the Scots: He takes diverse Castles from his Lords,
and drives the Earl of Gloucester into France. Peace between England and
Scotland.

In the Church, Innocent the second sat 13 years: Anastasius his Antipope
makes the 26 Schism. Innocent flees into France, and is by the French
restored. The Towns that held with Innocent are taken by Roger, who spoils the
Popes territories. He takes Innocent, and compels him to crown him King of
Italy. This Decad produced ten Councils. The Pope makes Genoa an
Archbishopric. The Feasts of S. Thomas, S. Luke, and S. Bartholomew, were
instituted about this time.

In the East, the Emperor died of a wound by a poisoned arrow, and makes his
youngest son, Emanuel Comnenus, successor, 38 years. His coasts are infested by
Pirates. He discovers 1140
Conrad's counsels to the Turks, and sells Meal mingled with Lyme to his Army.
Roger King of Sicily takes diverse places from him; who is defeated in Sicily by
the Emperor's army. Servia and Hungary wasted by the Emperor. In the West,
the Emperor takes Winsburge; where the women, in stead of their goods, carried
out their husbands. Henry the Lion restored to the Dukedom of Saxony. The new
Senate at Rome incense the Emperor against the Pope. The Emperor raises
200000 men for the Holy Land, under Conrad; whose projects at Constant are
discovered by Emanuel: upon which, he returns, having lost the most of his men.
He makes Frederic Barbarossa, his brother's son, successor; passing by his own
son. The French King undertakes an Expedition unto Syria, to expiate his
burning of a Church with three hundred people in it. King Lewis, in his return
from Syria, is taken prisoner by the Greeks, and rescued by the Sicilian Fleet.
Alphonsus makes Portugal tributary to the Pope. Alphonsus the Emperor takes
Cordub^ and other places from the Moors. The Arragonians worsted by the
Navarrois. The Moors lose Lisbon. Peter, an Earl of Poland, loses his tongue
and eyes, for reproving the King. He is deposed by the people, and sleeth to
the Emperor; who would have testored him, but could not. Boleslaus his brother
succeeds 27 years. The Hungarians put the Imperialists (who had invaded
Hungary) to flight. Olaus Harold's son, claims Denmark; but is defeated by
Ericus, and driven into Holland, where he was drowned. Ericus goes into Syria;
returns, and becomes a Monk, and resignes his Crown. His son Sueno is chosen by
the Silanders; and Canutus, son to Magnus, by the Iutians. This bred Civil
Wars. Ericus of Suevia is slain by Henry, Sueno's son of Denmark. Venice aideth
Emanuel against King Roger of Sicily. S. Mark's tower built. The Pirates
defeated by the Venetians. Fulk King of Jerusalem is brained with a fall from
his horse. Baldwyn the third succeeds, with his mother, 20 years. Edessa
taken by the Sultan; who, for his cruelty, is slain. The Christian Princes fall
out at Damascus. Antioch taken by Noradin the Sultan; and Prince Raymund
killed. The Earl of Flanders goes into Syria. In England, Maud landeth, and is
crowned: Steven taken, and-imprisoned. She flees to Oxford, and is carried
thence in a Cossin to Gloucester. King Steven is released: he besieges Maud in
Oxford; who escapes in a snowie night. Diverse places yield to Steven. Maud
goes into Normandy. Henry lands in England with an Army, and goes into
Scotland; where he is knighted. King David of Scotland erecteth four
Bishoprics.

In the Church: Innocent sits yet: he takes Tybur: he opposeteth the Roman
Government by two Consuls, and three hundred Senators: he is reconciled by S.
Bernard with France. Celestinus the second succeeded five months: then Socius
the second, eleven months: He was slain in a sedition. The Senate challenge the
Pope's revenues. Eugenius the third succeeds seven years. He, by Lewis of
France his Forces going for Syria, reduces Rome to her old Government. He
flees into France. Ten Synods this Decad. The Carmelites Order founded on
Mount Carmel. Petrobrusianus denies Baptism to Infants. The Alcoran translated
into Latin by Peter Abbot of Clugney.

In the East, the Emperor being beaten by Roger twice, makes peace with him.
The Greek 1150
Fleet overcome by William King of Sicily. The Emperor makes an Expedition
against the Armenians in Cilicia. Baldwyn King of Jerusalem defeats the
Egyptians, and kills 5000 of them. He gives Ascalon to the Earl of Ioppa. The
Bishops complain to the Pope against the Templers, for refusing to pay tithes.
Baldwyn beats the Turks, and defeats Noradin near Jordan. In the West, the
Emperor takes Placentia, and some other places: He holds the Pope's stirrup at
Sutrium: He is crowned at Rome, and overthrows Spoletum. Frederic the Emperor
quarrels with the Pope, and is reconciled. The Pope quarrels again with
Frederic, and excommunicates him. In Denmark, Canutus obtains the Government of
Iutia: he makes himself King. Sueno flees into Germany. The Kingdom is divided
between Sueno and Canutus. Sueno kills Canutus at a feast; and Sueno is killed
not long after. Waldemur, son of Canutus that was slain by Magnus, reigns
alone. Ingo King of Norway with most of his Nobles, pursuing their enemies on
the ice, are drowned. The Danes invade Suevia, and are driven back with cold.
King Charles of Suevia is slain by Canutus son S. Ericus. The Venetians make
Pole tributary. In Holland, the people of Harlem kill 900 Frisons, who had
invaded the Country. Henry returns into England: thirty Castles revolt to him:
he is adopted by Steven; who succeeded King 34 years. He reforms the Laws, and
raseth diverse Castles. He takes Cumberland and Northumberland from Malcolm, and
gives him Huntington. He does homage in France for Normandy. He is beaten by
the Welsh. Peace between France and England, by the marriage of Henry's eldest
son Richard to Margaret the French King's daughter. Malcolm of Scotland forced
to accompany Henry into France; for which he was troubled at home, when he
returned.

In the Church: Anastasius the fourth sat 4 months: then Adrian the fourth, an
English man, 4 years. He is forced to crown William King of Sicily. He
excommunicates Frederick, and is choked with a fly in his drink. This Decad
affords three Councils. Gratian collecteth the books of Decretals. The
Eremites of S. Austins Rule set up by William Duke of Aquitane. Christianity
planted in Livonia. Petrus Waldo, a Merchant of Lions, father of the Waldenses.
The Templers prevail at Rome against the Bishops.

In the East, Emanuel the Emperor persecutes the Venetians, upon a Prophecy
that they should 1160
be masters of Constant. He desires of the Pope to be Emperor of Italy, and
thereupon promises to reconcile the Greek and Latin Churches. He besieges
Damiata, and returns with much plunder. He is forced from Damiata the second
time by rain. The Prince of Antioch taken by the Governor of Damascus.
Almaricus, Baldwyn's brother, is King of Jerusalem twelve years. He aideth the
Egyptian against the Persian: then, against promise, aideth the Greeks against
the Egyptian. He implores the Turks aid. Syraconus the Turk, having killed the
Egyptian Sultan, makes himself Caliph. In the West, Frederick burns Cromona,
raseth Milan, and sows it with salt; subdueth Lombardy, and plundereth Mentz,
for killing their Bishops. The Lombards and Venetians join against him, and
repair Milan. He is crowned at Rome. Boleslaus of Poland, by gifts, winketh at
the Prussians Idolatry; who rebel twice. The Polanders, in pursuing them into
the marshes, are drowned. The Hungarians win Dalmatia, invade the Venetian
Lands, and stir the Greeks against them. Bohemia is invaded by the Emperor.
Waldemare King of Denmark submits his Kingdom to the Emperor. The Danes have
Wars, then Peace with the Rugians. They are forced to Christianity. Absalon
Bishop of Roschild beats the Vandals in their own Country. Ladislans, Vicar of
the Empire and King of Hungary, aids the Emperor against Milan; whereupon, his
Arms are changed from an Eagle to a Lion Argent. The King enters into a
Monastery, and makes Vogislaus Governor; whom the King's son wounds. The
Venetian Merchants treacherously killed by the Greek Emperor: they take Clios.
Thierry of Flanders makes his fourth Expedition into Syria. Philip his son
succeeds 25 years: he obtains Doway from the Earl of Heinalt. The Hollanders
and Frieslanders, at variance. In England, the King and Becket differ: Becket
flees into Flanders; his goods are confiscated; and appeals to Rome forbid.
The Welsh are subdued. Becket is restored by the French King's means. Malcolm
King of Scotland builds the Abbey of S. Andrews. His brother William succeeds
49 years: to him is restored a part of Northumberland by Henry who repents of
his grant, and quarrels with Malcolm: hereupon, the English invade Cumberland.

In the Church: Alexander the third sits 21 years: his Antipope was Victor the
fourth; which makes the seven and twentieth Schism. Victor and the Emperor are
excommunicated by Alexander. Victor dies; and the Emperors faction chooses
Paschal the third. Alexander flees to Benevent, and fortifieth Tusculum.
Paschal dies, and Calixtus the third chosen. Seven Synods held this Decad. The
bodies of the three Wisemen are translated from Milan to Colen. Paschal
canonizeth Charles the Great. The Order of Humiliantes began now in Lombardy:
these were poor people who in white clothes had restitution of their
possessions from the Emperor: these habits they retained still.

In the East, the Emperor gives in Dowry with his daughter the kingdom of
Thessaly, to Reyner son to the Marquess of Montferrat: he is beaten by the
Venetians, and by the Sultan of Iconium: 1170
he marries his son to the French King's daughter. Emanuel dies. In
Jerusalem, to Almaricus succeeds Baldwyn the fourth. The Count of Tripolis is
his tutor. He wastes the Country of Damascus. Baldwyn becomes leprous. In the
West, the Emperor takes diverse places in Italy. Diverse places in Germany taken
by the Bishop of Mentz, for the Emperor. At Venice, peace is made between the
Pope and the Emperor. Henry the Lion being returned from Syria, where he was
opposed by the Templers, is proscribed by the Emperor, and condemned of
treason. In Poland, Miceslaus is deposed, and Casimire his brother chosen; to
whom Miceslans submits. In Denmark are diverse rebellions. In Bohemia, Frederic
son to Ladislaus, is aided by the Emperor to recover his kingdom: he incurreth
the peoples hatred, for oppression, and preferring a Germane to prime places.
Vitalis Michael, the Duke of Venice, is slain for suffering the Greeks to abuse
the State. Two great Pillars erected at Venice by a Lombard, who desired that
Cheaters might play at Dice between them unpunished. The Bank is here first
erected. The Pope bestows a Ring on the Duke, to cast into the Sea, in sign of
its marriage and subjection to them: a Custom yet observed yearly. The Pope
priviledgeth the Duke and his successors to have a Canopie over them, and eight
silver trumpets to be sounded before them. The Earls of Flanders and Heinalt
make War upon the Earl of Avignon, for murdering the Bishop of Cambrey. The
Earl bestows West- Flanders on Philip the French King with his Niece. In
England, Becket is killed in Canterbury-Church. Ireland is mastered. Becket's
murderers condemned to serve all their days in Syria. The King is enjoined
Penance, and to maintain 200 men in Palestine for one year. The King overcomes
those that would have deposed him. He goes barefoot, and is whipped. The
Scots King taken prisoner: then a peace is made. Itinerant Justices appointed.
Prince Arthur's body dug out of Glastenbury Churchyard. The Scots aid
Prince Henry of England against his father. King William of Scotland ransomed,
upon the payment of a great sum, and rendering of diverse Castles. The Abbeys of
Arbroth and Hadington built.

In the Church: Pope Alexander yet sits, but is kept out of Rome. Peace between
the Pope and Emperor: so the Schism ends. The Pope is recalled to Rome. Four
Councils held this Decad. The Order of Crossed Friars instituted. The Pope
erecteth a Bishopric at his own City Alexandria in Italy, for their good
service against the Emperor. The Albingenses driven out of Tholose, infect
Bohemia. In a Synod of Rome of three hundred Bishops, Peter Lombard is declared
an Heretic, but 36 after he was justified by Pope Innocent the third.

In the East, Emanuel being dead, his son Alexius succeeds, under his Mothers
tuition, 2 years. Andronicus, Emanuels cousin, kills the Tutors, strangles the
Emperors mother, poysoneth 1180
his sister, murders Alexius, and ^ings his body into the Sea; and so sets up
himself 2 years. Isaac Angelus plotteth against him. Andronicus murders
Isaac's brethren. Isaac being in danger, flees to the Temple, and is
proclaimed Emperor. Andronicus is tortured to death. Isaac Angelus reigns 9
years. The Pirates takes seventy of his Ships. His General Brana aspireth,
besieges Constantinople, and is killed. He makes a wicked League with
Saladine; who takes all the Cities of Mesopotamia and Aleppo by treason. He
invaded Palestina, and is driven back by the Earl of Tripolis. King Baldwin
dies. Baldwin the fifth succeeded, who after 7 months was poisoned by his
mother, that her husband Guy of Lusignan night succeed, who reigned 10 years.
The Apostate Christians called Mamelucks, are instituted by Saladine. The Earl
of Tripolis calls in Saladine against Guy, whom he takes prisoner, and subdues
all Syria, except Tire and Tripolis. Guy abjureth the kingdom, and is released.
Barbarossa coming toward Syria defeats the Turks three times. He is drowned in
the River. In the West, Otho of Bavaria does much mischief in Germany. He is
expelled. Henry is maintained in Normandy by the English. Peace with Lombardy.
At Erford Diet, six Earls with many others, slain by the falling of the room.
The Emperor and Pope at odds about the Bishopric of Triers. The Pope denies
to part with the inheritance of (...), to Crown the Emperors son, and to admit
his Bishop to Triers. The Bishop of Mentz deposed for adhering to the Pope.
Frederick hasteneth for Syria with an hundred and fifty thousand men, and is
ill used by Isaac. Henry the Lion returns, takes Lubec and other places. In
France, Philip the second reigns 42 years. The Jews are expelled France. The
French have wars with Flanders and Burgundy. The Flemings forced to Peace.
Richard and John of England besieged by the French, who make wars against
England. King Philip and Richard undertake an expedition into Syria. Wars in
Spain between Ferdinand and Alphonsus of Portugal. The Moors defeated, and
their King slain. Sanctius regns in Portugal 26 years. He is aided by the
Hollanders against the Moors. The Polander recovers much of Russia and
Lituania. The Polonians and Hungarians invade each other. Peace for 2 years.
Miceslaus the Kings brother, is received as King into Cracovia. Casimire takes
the City, and pardons his brother. Canutus of Denmark defeats Harold the
usurper. He denies fealty to the Emperor. The Danes beat Bugislaus the
Vandal. The Emperor returns the Kings sister for not paying the rest of her
Dowry. The Bohemians are proscribed by the Emperor: whom they slight. Great
troubles in Bohemia between King Frederick and his rebellious subjects.
subjects. Philip leaves the Government of Flanders to his wife, and goes into
Syria with eighty seven Netherland Ships. In England, the King makes his son
John King of Ireland. The Welsh swear fealty to the King. Richard joyneth with
the French against his Father. Ieffery the Kings son trodden to death at Paris.
King Henry dies cursing his children. Richard the first succeeded 9 years. He
releaseth his mother, and makes the Bishop of Ely his Deputy. The Pope sends
to the Scots King a Rose of gold. He pays part of his ransom, and Edinburgh
Castle is restored.

In the Church: Pope Alexander persuades a new expedition into Syria. To him
succeeds Lucius the third 4 years. He is expelled the City. The Emperor sends
an Army, many of which die with poisoned waters. He refuses to Crown the
Emperors son. Urban the third succeeded 1 year. He dies upon the loss of
Jerusalem. Gregory the eighth succeeds 1 month. Then Clement the third 3
years. This Decad produced eight Synods. The Maronites forsake the Heresy of
the Monothelites. The Temple-Church in London dedicated by Horaclius Patriarch
of Jerusalem. Livonia converted, and Riga made a Bishopric.

In the East: Isaac is blinded and put into a Covent by his brother Alexius
Angelus, whom he 1190
had ransomed, This Alexius reigned ten years. He pacifieth Henry with seventy
talents. Alexius son to Isaac the Emperor, goes for aid to the Latin Princes.
Acon taken by the French and English. Ioppa taken by Richard. He exchangeth
Cyprus for Acon with Guy. Saladine dies, and commands his shirt to be carried
before him. Guy is killed with a fall from his window. His wife married with
Almerick, who became King of Jerusalem and Cyprus. Earl Montfort defeats the
Infidels. In the West: Henry the sixth reigns Emperor 9 years: he is Crowned
at Rome: his Empress is taken by Tancred, and restored. He subdueth Salern,
Calabria, Apulia, and Sicily. He makes Tancreds son Earl of Tarentum. He
forces Alexius to satisfy the wrongs done to the Latin Princes. To him
succeeds Philip his brother, and Otho Duke of Saxony, chosen by opposite
factions. Philip the French King arriveth in Sicily, and quarrelleth with
Richard. He leaves his Army with the Duke of Burgundy, and returns. He invades
Richards territories, and solicites the Emperor to detain him. He surpriseth
Eureux, and recovers Main in Spain. Portugal, Navar, and Arragon, league with
Alphonsus the ninth of Leon, against Castile. Alphonsus of Castile is wounded
by the Moors. Castile and Arragon invade Leon and Navarr. In Sicily, William
rebelleth; his eyes are put out, and he is sent into Germany. The Sicilians
choose another King, whom the Emperor Crowned with an iron Crown red hot, and
nailed it to his head. In Hungary, Rela dies; his son Emerio succeeds 9 years.
His brother rebelleth, and is pardoned. The Polander subdues the Prussians, and
makes a perpetual Peace with Hungary. The King dies, his son Lescus succeeded
6 years. Miceslaus the usurper defeated, and his son slain. The Queen resignes
the Government to him. The Danes enter Vandalia. Waldemare Bishop of Sleswic
invades the kingdom, is taken and imprisoned. Adolph Earl of Holstein makes
great troubles in Denmark. In Bohemia, Wenceslaus is expelled by Primislaus. He
with Ladislaus, make great troubles there. The Pisans are beaten by the
Venetians. The Duke retireth into a Monastery. Flanders, upon the Earls death,
is divided between Baldwin of Henalt, Lewis the French Kings son, and Maud the
Earls widow. Baldwin leagueth with England, and helps Otho against Philip the
Emperor. The Hollanders overcome the Flemings. Thyerry of Holland defeats the
Earl of Guelders. Friesland is held of Holland. Richard of England is cast upon
Cyprus. He takes Isa the Tyrant, and the Island. He is in his return from Syria
taken by Leopold Duke of Austria, who sells him to the Emperor. He is
released; he recalls his Queen, is Crowned, and expels the French out of
Normandy. John aspireth and is pardoned. The Bishop of Beuvoye taken, and his
Arms sent by the King to the Pope, with these words of Jacob's son^, See if
this be thy sons coat or not. The French King is thrice beaten. The King is
slain by a poisoned Arrow. His brother John succeeded 17 years. The King of
Scotland pays the rest of his ransom, and sends his brother David into Syria.
The Church of Scotland exempted by the Pope from the jurisdiction of York.
David is taken by the Egyptians, and redeemed by the Venetians. He returns, and
builds the Church of Dundee, with some Monasteries. He with the King visit King
Richard, and present him with 2000 Marks. The King puts out the eyes of Harold
Earl of Catness, then hangs him, and geldeth all his male-children, because
the Earl had deprived the Bishop of his eyes and tongue.

In the Church, Clement the third sits. He aided Tancred against Henry.
Celestine the third succeeded 6 years: he gets Tusculum from the Emperor: he
makes Viterbium a Bishopric: by his Legate into Germany, he solicites for a new
expedition into Syria. Innocent the third succeeded 18 years: he resists
Philip the Emperors Election. Two Synods held this Decad. The Jews in a Castle
in Yorkshire kill themselves. S. Dominic of Spain instituted the Iacobit or
Predicant Friars.

In the East, Thrace is wasted by the Persians. Isaac is restored by the Latin
Princes. Alexius flees. Isaac and his son are slain by Alexius Ducas. The
Latins take Constantinople, of 1200
which Baldwin Earl of Flanders is chosen Emperor. Ducas is cast down from a
Tower. Baldwins hands and feet are cut off, and he slain. His brother Henry
succeeds 11 years: he recovers many places from the Valachians. Theodorus
Lascaris makes Adrianople his seat; who kills the Sultan, and takes Alexius.
Henry aideth Lascaris against David and Alexius Comnenus. The Tartars sit down
in the Fens of Maeotis. The Pope takes the titulary kingdom of Jerusalem from
Almericus King of Cyprus, and gives it to John Bren a French Earl, who marries
the Marquess of Monferrat's daughter. In the West, Philip seiseth upon high
Germany: he is excommunicated by the Pope. Philip is Crowned again at Acon, by
the Bishop of Colen; whom therefore the Pope excommunicateth, and places
another Bishop. Philip besieges Colen, and takes it. Otho flees into England,
and then compounds with Philip to succeed him. Philip is slain by Otho the
Palsgrave, who is therefore proscribed. To Philip succeeds Otho, and is Crowned
at Rome, and expelled thence. He takes Acona from the Pope by force, with
Apulia and Calabria from Frederick Duke of Suevia. There is long war with the
King of Arragon and Raymund Earl of Tholose, for favoring the Albingenses.
Philip of France recovers Normandy, having been out of the French possession
316 years: he helps Arthur against King John, and puts him out of his
possessions in France. Peace made between Arragon and Navarr. In Poland, great
contestation between Lescus and Miceslaus about the kingdom. Lescus is three
times deposed and restored. The Polanders are beaten out of Russia, and so are
the Hungarians. Lubeck yields to the Danes; it is burnt: the King forgives
the people their taxes, to rebuild it. The Venetians obtain Crete and the
Aegaean Islands, at the taking of Constantinople: they are assisted by the
Western Princes to recover Istria. Crete is taken by the Genoans, and retaken
by the Venetians. The Earl of Flanders excommunicated by the Pope, for helping
Venice against Hungary. The Earl of Holland, and Earl of Gelders, war against
the Duke of Brabant, and Bishop of Utricht. William Earl of Holland and
Friesland goes into Scotland to claim the kingdom. In his absence, Count Leos
invadeth Holland; who flees upon the Earls return. In England, King John
seiseth the Archbishop of Yorks temporalties. The Barons refuse to aid King
John: he makes his Peace with the Scots by marriages: he takes Mount-Alban in
France. Peace for two years. The Pope interdicteth England, and excommunicates
the King: he takes homage of Wales, and money of the Jews. King William of
Scotland refuses to aid King John against the French. The Pope sends him a
rich Sword and Helmet, with the title of Defender of the Faith. King John's
Castle at Barwick rased by King William: he erecteth the Bishopric of Argile.
John King Williams youngest son, with fourteen more, drowned by an inundation
at Bertha. The King builds Perth.

In the Church, Pope Innocent sits. He sets out his Decretals. He
excommunicates Philip the Emperor, and Raymond Earl of Tholose. Two Councils
held this Decad. The Heretics Almaricans, under show of Chastity, committed
all Uncleanness. The Greek Churches receive the Latin Ceremonies. The Order of
women called Begines from Bege the Foundress. Saint Francis, Author of the
Franciscans, or Friars minors.

In the East, Peter of Constantinople is Crowned at Rome, and in his return
imprisoned by Lascaris; 1210
during which time Iolanta governs. At last, Peter is slain at a Feast, by
Lascaris of Adrianople. The Latin Princes besiege Damiata, and take it, after
nineteen months. The Sultan proffered Jerusalem, with the Cross, and much money,
which the Popes Legate refused. In the West, the Emperor is denied Ancona, and
is expelled Rome; but not long after, he takes Acona, with Apulia, and
Calabria. Against him, Frederick the second is set up by the Bishop of Mentz
and others, 38 years. Otho troubles Germany, and aydeth the English against
the French, but with ill success. At last, being forsaken by all his friends,
he dies. Frederick takes in diverse places, and is Crowned at Rome. Philip the
French King obtains England of the Pope. He warreth against the Earl of
Flanders, for not ayding him against King John of England; and is defeated at
Scluse. Simon Earl of Montfort in battle kills the Earl of Tholose, and Peter
King of Arragon. The French beat the English and Flemings at the battle of
Bovines. The King of Castile wins Calatrava. The battle of Maradel, in
which two hundred thousand Moors are slain, and many places recovered in
Spain. Henry King of Castile, as he was at play, was slain with a Tile.
Ferdinand succeeded, in whom Leon and Castile are perpetually united. Poland
appoints a Governor for Pomerania, and takes a hundred Marks yearly thence.
Married Priests forced to leave their wives, in Poland. In Hungary, the Queen
is murdered by Count Peter. The Danes take Stetin in Pomerania, and overcome
the Livonians. King John of England subdueth the Rebels in Ireland. London is
appointed to be governed by a Major and two Sheriffs. The King resignes his
kingdom to the Pope. Hence the French are forbid to invade England. The English
and Flemings take 300 ships from Philip at the Sluice. The Barons rebel, and are
excommunicated. The King subdues them by the help of the Flemings, Lewis of
France is called in by the Barons. The King poisoned by a Monk. His son Henry
the third succeeded 56 years. Lewis is forced to abjure the Land, and to
restore Normandy and Poictou. Alexander of Scotland aideth Lewis, and takes
Carlisle. A Peace is made: Alexander restores Carlisle; and Henry, Berwick.

In the Church, Innocent sits yet, who excommunicates Philip the Emperor three
times. To him succeeded Honorius the third 10 years: he made John de Columna
General of the Syrian wars. This Decad produced two Councils; one at Rome, for
the deposing of Otho; the other was the Lateran, of 400 Bishops, against the
Albigenses. Pope Innocent instituted the Order of the Holy Trinity, for the
redeeming of Captives. The word Transubstantiation, first used in this Lateran
Council. The Feast called Triumphus Crucis, was instituted in Spain, in
remembrance of a great victory over the Moors. The Order of poor women
instituted by S. Francis and S. Clare.

In the East, Robert of Constantinople cuts off his wifes nose, and slings her
mother into the Sea: he loses many Towns. To him, succeeded Baldwin the second
34 years: whose tuition was undertaken by John Bren K, of Jerusalem. In
Adrianople, to Lascaris succeeded John Ducas 1220
his son 33 years: he defeated Isaac and Alexius, and Robert of Constantinople,
who aided them. Theodorus Angelus takes Thessalonica, and makes himself K.
there: he is taken and exoculated by the Bulgarians. Ducas takes diverse Islands
in the Aegaean Sea. The Christians that besieged Cayre, are forced by the
overflowing of Nilus, to rise thence, and to restore Damiata. Palestina is
recovered by Frederick the Emp. He makes a Peace with the Sultan for 10 years,
against the Popes will: ^e is crowned at Jerusalem, and makes Raynold D. of
Bavaria his Lieut. of Syria. In the West, Frederick expels the Saracens out
of Sicily, and punishes Pope Innocents two brethren: he renews a League with
France. The Bish. of Colen murdered by Count Isenberg; for which he was broken
on the wheel. Lombardy rebelleth by the Popes instigation, who excommunicates
the Emp. for feigning himself sick in his Syrian expedition: the Emp. goes
notwithstanding, and the Pope is angry thereat: having recovered Jerusalem, he
is forced to return; to recover his own right at home. Avergne is forfeited to
the Crown of France. The French K. dies, and by his will bequeatheth 60000
Crowns to the Syrian wars. His son Lewis the 8 succeeded 3 years: he
compoundeth for Languedoc with Simon Montforts heir: his son S. Lewis succeeded
46 years: his mother is Regent; which place is usurped by his uncle Philip,
whom the Barons assisted, and the D. of Britain; who are beaten by the Q. Army.
The Moors lose much in Adalusia. and Majorca also. The K. of Sevil is made
tributary to Castile. In Poland, the Teutonicks being driven out of Syria, have
possessions allotted them by Conrade the Kings uncle, to defend his Lands
against the Prussians. The K. is murdered by Suentoplucus Governor of
Pomerania, who makes himself Pr. thereof. Boleslaus is K. 51 years. Conrade
puts the K. and his mother into a Monastery. The K. of Denmark is ransomed,
with his son. Lubeck revolteth from the Danes. The Dithmarks, who had revolted
to Holst, submit to the K. Wenceslaus the K. of Bohemia's son wastes Austria.
Candia revolts from the Venetians, who recover it again. The rebels there kill
Rayner their Governor. The Venetians being beaten by the Greeks, make Peace
with them. Many people perish in Frisia by inundations. The Bish. of Utricht is
taken by his vassals, and beheaded. Ferdinand of Flanders takes Henry D. of
Brabant prisoner. In England, four years Truce is made with France. Some
rebellions in Wales and Lincolnshire, and a Sedition in London. Lewis of
France takes Rochel from the English. The Gascoins rebel, and are reduced by
Rich. E. of Cornwall. The kings brother sideth with the Barons against the K. he
makes a dishonorable Peace with the rebellious Welsh. In Scotland, the Bish.
of Catness is burnt in his house by the people for exaction. Ennerness taken by
the rebels. Upon the death of Alan of Galloway, high-Constable, his possessions
are invaded by his base son, which caused great troubles.

In the Church, Honorius sits yet; he leagueth with Lombardy against the Emp.
To him succeeded Gregory the ninth 14 years: he excommunicates the Romans, for
expelling him: he instigates John Bren to invade Sicily. By the overflowing of
Tyber, 7000 people are drowned. Three Synods held this Decad. The Gray Friars
about this time appear in England. The Pope demands two Prebends in every
Bishopric, which K. John denies.

In the East, John Bren sends Baldwin of Constantinople for aid against the
Greeks. Theodorus Angelus loses his eyes by the Bulgarians. The Latins being
besieged in Constantinople, are relieved 1230
by the Venetians, who obtained from Baldwin a piece of the Cross, with the
Sponge and Lance which pierced our Savior. Ducas of Adrianople takes Cyprus.
The Sultan takes Gaza and Askalon, and defaceth Jerusalem, with the Sepulcher.
Thebald K. of Navar, with some French troops, return from Syria without acting.
In the West, the Emperor is absolved for a great sum: he receives from the
Sultan of Babylon, a rich Tent, wherein the Sun and Moon by their motion showed
the hours of the day and night. Messana in Sicily rebelleth. The Emp. subdues
Milan, and most of Italy; and refufeth to restore Sardinia to the Pope:
wherefore he is excommunicated. The Popes Croysodoers defeated by him. Baldwin
of Constantinople leaves with the French K. the Crown of thorns. The Moors in
Spain lose the kingdom of Certuba after 260 years possession. They flee to
Granada, and make it their kingdom: they lose Valentia to the Arragonian. The
K. of Poland and his mother escape to Henry the kings old Tutor, and recover
Cracovia: he is chosen Governor again. Elizabeth the K. of Hungaries daughter
is Canonized. Bela 4th reigns 35 years: he protects the Cumanians against the
Tartars. The K. of Denmark receives by resignation some Towns from the
Teutonicks Mr. Wars in Bohemia between K. Winceslaus and his son Primislaus.
The Venetians quiet Candy: they take Rhodes; join with the Pope against the
Emp. and burn his best ship. Floris 4 E. of Holland slain by the E. of
Clermont, and he by the Earl of Cleve. William the second succeeded Earl of
Holland 20 years. In England, the K. makes a League with the D. of Britain: he
subdues the Irish. The E. of Kent imprisoned. Pembroke and others rebel. The
Welsh invade England. The Pope is denied aid. The K. reconciled to the Earl of
Kent. The B. of Winchester causes great troubles. The Welsh Prince submits to
England. The E. of Kent degraded. A traitor drawn in pieces for attempting to
kill the K. The Popes Legates brother is killed by the Oxford-Scholars. The
Scots make peace with the English. The Popes Legate is denied entrance into
Scotland, by K. Alexander.

In the Church: Gregory sits yet: he raises Italy against the Emp. for denying
to restore Sardinia. This Decad affords two Synods. Prussia receives the
Faith. The King of England erecteth the house of Converts, now the Rolls. The
Greek Church falls off from the Pope.

In the East, Will. of Verona is made King of Thessalonica by Baldwin. Ducas of
Adrianople grew so rich with selling of eggs to the Turks in a famine, that he
made a Crown of the profits 1240
of eggs; which he therefore called Ovata: he suffered no apparel but of the
manufactures of his kingdom to be worn. The Turks are expelled out of
Cappadocia by the Tartars. The Saracens beaten and killed by the Templers: they
prosecute the Teutonicks for siding with the Emperor. The Sultan prevails in
Palestine. The French K. and his two brothers are taken in Egypt. In the West,
the Emp. prevails in Italy, and there stampeth leather money. Leopold of
Austria takes the title of Archduke. Diverse Cardinals taken by the Emperor,
and released. Diverse towns in Italy revolt from him: he is deposed by the Pope.
The Gibellines are for him, Guelphs for the Pope. Henry Land-grave of Thuring,
set up against Frederick: he defeats Conrad the Emp. son. Henry besieges Ulm,
where he is killed. Much of Florence burnt by the two factions. Will. Earl of
Holland set up against Frederic; who is defeated by Conrad Frederick's son.
Lewis of France will not invade England, though the Pope requested him. Murzia
and Granada made tributary to Castile. Poland is wasted by the Tartars and
Civil Wars. Hungary is wasted by the Cumans. The K. flees to Frederic Duke of
Austria, to whom he pawns three Provinces: but by the aid of the Knights of
Rhodes, he recovers his kingdom. Civil wars in Denmark, between K. Ericus and
his brothers. A peace concluded. Ottocar K. of Bohemia, to enlarge his kingdom,
buyeth Carintha and other places adjacent, toward the Adriatic Sea. Apulia is
taken by the Venetians. Margaret of Flanders has two sons, by two husbands,
both which claim the Earldom. The French K. and Pope order, that to her William
her younger son should succeed in Flanders, and John the elder should have
Henalt. William goes into Syria: John invadeth Henalt, and forces his mother
to buy her peace in England; banisheth the Italian usurers, and sends away the
Popes Legate: he is forced to return from Poictou dishonorably. Griffeth Prince
of Wales broke his neck from the Tower. The Welsh invade England. The King
sells his Plate and Jewels to the Londoners for want of money, and stampeth a
new Coin called sterling-money. In Scotland, Argile rebelleth, and is overcome
and pardoned.

In the Church: Coelestine the fourth sat 17 days. To him succeeded Innocent
the fourth 11 years: he excommunicates the Emperor, makes ten Cardinals, and
gives them red hats: he deposes Frederick; and demands the fifth of Benefices
through Europe: he aideth Henry with money against Frederick. Two Synods this
Decad. At Lions, the Pope accuses the Emperor of heresy; and he the Pope of
exactions. The Cham of Tartary converted. Pet. de Vineis loses his eyes for
accusing the Pope, being hired thereto by the Emperor; and dasheth out his own
brains.

In the East, Baldwyn despairing to hold Constant, goes into Italy to
Frederick, with the treasure which he took out of the Temple. Ducas Emperor of
Adrianople, makes Michael 1250
Angelus and his son Despots. After him succeeded Theodorus Ducas, or Lascaris
the younger, 4 years. He forces Michael and the Bulgarians to submit. Michael
Paleologus sideth with the Turks; is called home, and made high-Constable. To
Theodorus succeeded his son John Ducas, 6 years old. His Tutor was Michael
Paleologus, and then Emperor, conditionally to resign when John was 24 years
of age. Damiata restored upon the restitution of the French King. Sidon taken
by the Sultan of Egypt, and recovered by Lewis, who returns into France. Bela
King of Hungary sends Forces into Syria. The Tartars subdue Mesopotamia for the
Christians: they take also Babylon and Aleppo, and subdue Syria. In the West,
Frederick the Emperor dies. The Empirestood long void. Conrad his son,
murthereth his brother Henry; spoileth Naples and Capua: he is poisoned by
Manfred his bastard-brother. Richard Earl of Cornwall, and Alphonsus King of
Castile, in competition for the Empire. John Earl of Britain is the first Duke
thereof. King Lewis gives Gwyen to King Henry, conditionally he renounce his
interest to all other lands in France. At this time lived the great Astronomer
Alphonsus the tenth, King of Leon and Castile. Theobald of Navar becomes vassal
to Castile; who expels five Moorish Kings out of Spain. Alphonsus elected
Emperor; but he neglects it. The Duke of Lituanid becomes apostate. The King
of Hungary invades Austria and kills Frederick in battle. In Denmark, Abel the
King's brother causes the King to be beheaded and cast into the Sea: he
succeeds King; is defeated by his subjects, and slain by the Frisians. The
Bohemians convert Prussia. The Venetians take Padua. Venice taken by the
Genoeses, and are expelled. The Dean of S. Marks privileged by the Pope to
wear a Mitre and Crosier-staff, at solemn times: they quarrel with the Genoans
about a Church in Acon. William of Flanders returns from Syria, and is killed
in a Turnament. Margaret loses Nemours: she is fain to part with Henault to
her son John who dies. Margaret's sons are taken; and released, conditionally
that she bestow her daughter Beatrice on Floris Earl of Holland, and should
have for her Dowry the Islands of Zealand. The Earl of Holland is crowned at
Aken: he builds the Palace at the Hague: he helps John against Margaret of
Flanders: he is wounded at Utricht, and is slain by the Frisians. His son
Floris the fifth succeeded young: his Protector Floris is slain. Henry Duke of
Brabant made Protector, and is expelled. The Nobles choose Otho; but the people,
Alice the Countess. Henry the third of England exacteth money of the Jews: he
confirms Magna Charta and reduces Aquitain: his son Edmund invested in
Sicily by a Ring which the Pope sent: his eldest son made first Prince of
Wales, and Governor of Ireland and Aquitain. Richard the King's brother chosen
Emperor: he is forced to swear the expulsion of strangers. The Pope dispenses
with his Oath. He resignes Normandy. Main and Anjou for money. Alexander the
third of Scotland marries King Henry's daughter of England: he is oppressed by
the Commons, and carried to Sterling. They restore him, and are pardoned: the
chief of their faction, Menteith, is poisoned by his wife. Alexander is by King
Henry made Earl of Huntingdon.

In the Church: Innocent sits yet: he proferred Sicily to Richard Earl of
Cornwall. Alexander the fourth succeeds 6 years: he takes diverse places from
Ecceline of Padua: against whom, Lombardy arises in Arms. The Pope, upon a
sedition of the Romans, flees to Viterbium. The Pontificians are driven out
of Apulia by Manfred, who poisoned Conrad of Sicily, and got himself to be
crowned. In this Decad there was but one Council held, at Uratislavia in
Poland; where the Pope demands the fifth part of all Benefices for three years.
About this time the Bible was distinguished into Chapters, and the Era of
Alphonsus begins. Robert Sorbonius erecteth the Sorbonists Coliedge at Paris.
The Books of W. de S. A^ore, written against the Mendicants burnt by the Pope.
The Carthusians renounce flesh-eating. Richard Earl of Cornwall sets the Order
of Saccatori, or Bon hommes.

In the East, the Greeks set up forts against Constantine; which are taken by
Alexius Strategopulus. 1260
Baldwin dies in France. Michael puts out the eyes of the young Emperor.
Thrace invaded by the Turks and Bulgarians. The Tartars expelled out of Syria
by the Sultan of Egypt. Tire taken by the Venctians. Hugh Lusignan, Viceroy of
Naples, arrvies at Acon besieged by the Sultan, who kills 500 Citizens: he
takes also Ioppa and Antioch, to the loss of many Christians. Lusignan is
crowned at Acon. Prince Edw. returns from Syria into Sicily, where he is
wounded by an Infidel. In the West, a sedition at Colen; the B. is imprisoned
by the E. of Iuliers. Charles K. of Sicily made Vicar of the Empire. Ottocar K.
of Bohemia refuses to be Emperor. Rodulph Earl of Habspurg chosen 17 years:
he refuses to go into Italy. Florence is taken by Manfred of Sicily, who
expels the Guelphs. Charles the French Kings brother is made K. of Sicily and
Jerusalem at Rome, for a tribute of 40000 crowns: he kills Manfred, and
beheadeth Conradin D. of Austria, and the Marq. Baden. K. Lewis of France takes
Carthage from the Moors, and besieges Tunis: his Army weakened by the Plague.
The African Moors invade Castile: peace between them. Alphonso is molested by
his Nobles for releasing the homage of Portugal. The Russians are defeated by
the Palatine of Cracovia. The E. of Cracovia's wife delivered of 36 boys at a
birth. The K. of Denmark and his mother taken in battle by the Duke of Holst.
Albert D. of Luneburg made tutor to the K. He is expelled by the people, and
the Land interdicted by the Pope. The K. of Bohemia finding his wife barren,
begets his maid with child, upon his wives permission, whom he at last
divorceth. The Genuans take Can^a in Candy, and a rich ship from the Venetians,
who send another Fleet into Acon. In England, the Barons rise against the King,
who takes London-tower, with Dover and Rochester-Castles. Oxford Acts made
void. Great Civil wars between the K. and his Barons: he is taken, with his
brother Richard. Leicester is slain. 500 Jews killed at London. Diverse Bishops
excommunicated by the Pope for siding with Leicester. London taken by
Gloucester. The Prince of Wales reconciled to the King. Alan de la Zouch
killed. Aquin of Norway expelled out of the Isles by the K. of Scotland. Olaus,
Aquin's successor, quits his claim for a sum of 4000 marks, and 100 marks
yearly.

In the Church; Urban 4 sat 3 years: he excommunicated Manfred, and instituted
the feast of Corpus Christi, by Tho. Aquinas his persuasion. Clement 4
succeeded 3 years. This Decad were held five Councils. The whipping sect now
begin. The Order of redemption of Captives instituted. The Lituanians fall off
from Christ, and persecute his members. An hundred thousand Albigenses defeated
by eight thousand Catholics, under Simon Earl of Montfort. S. Austin's
Eremites are reduced to one habit.

In the East, the Emp. Michael acklowledgeth the Pope's Supremacy in the
Council of Lions, 1270
consisting of 500 Bishops, and 1000 Abbots. Alexius is Emp. of Trapezund. The
Greeks beaten out of Asia minor by the Turks. Michael dies, and is
dishonourably buried. The Pirates come to the Ports of Constant. Acon is again
besieged by the Sultan. Hugh concludes a peace with him. Henry Prince of
Meckleburg is imprisoned 26 years at Caire, and then returns home. Charles of
Sicily claims title to Jerusalem from Maria Dominilla a pretender: his Viceroy
is received by the Templers. The Hospitallers waste the Saracens Country and
take from them Margath Castle; which they besiege, and are beaten off. The
Sultan of Babylon defeated by the Tartars and Armenians. In the West, the Emp.
takes Austria, and besieges Vienna. Ottacar not able to relieve it,
submits, and rebelleth again. The Emp. bestows the Exarchat and Hetruria on
the Pope, to maintain the Syrian war. Ottacar, with 14000 Bohemians, cut off by
the Emp. who bestows on Wenceslaus his daughter and the kingdom. In France,
Philip 3. reigns 15 years: his Q. dies at Tunis: his son Lewis is poisoned
by Peter la Broch: the Q. is suspected, and poisoned with her son. Peter of
Arragon drowneth his brother by the advice of his father. Henry of Navar being
dead, the government of that Kingdom is undertaken by Philip of France, in
right of his son, who had married the Infanta. Peter 3 of Arragon is K. of
Sicily, in right of his wife. His brother James made king of Majorca and
Minorca. Steven 5 of Hungary recovereth Buda from Ottocar, and subdueth the
Bulgarians. Ladislaus his successor kills Ottacar in battle, in defense of the
Emperor. Dansk, which was morgaged to the Marquess of Brandenburg is recovered
by the king of Poland; who defeated the rebels that conspired his death, for
naming Lesco his successor without the peoples consent. Poland troubled with
the Prussians and Lituanians. In Denmark there is war with the D. of Sleswick.
Olaus Magnus of Norway inhibits trading with strangers in his Country, till his
Ports were shut up by their shipping. The king of Suevia being overcome by
Magnus his brother, and the Danes, resignes up his Crown. Ottacar of Rohemia
being disgraced by the Emperor, rebelleth, and is slain. Venice is distressed
by the Genuans and Paduans: a peace with them for 5 years: and they renew their
League with the Greeks. The Istrians revolt, and are subdued. The Ancomans
incense the Pope against Venice. Troubles between Flanders and England; between
Flanders and Liege. Margaret Countess of Henneburg in Holland, died: she had at
one birth 365 children, baptized by the Bishop of Utricht. In England, Edw. 1.
reigns 34 years: he finished the Church of Westminster. Leolin Prince of
Wales refuses to be present at his Coronation; against whom the king marches,
and forces him to submit. The King of Scots sends men and money into Syria:
he, with his Q. are present at K. Edward's Coronation. Ferquard made Earl of
Ross, for overthrowing a strong bragging Norman in the English Court.

In the Church: Gregory 10 sits 4 years. He interdicteth the Florentines for
banishing thence the Gibelliues. To him succeeded Innocent 5. five months: then
Adrian 5. one month: then John 20. eight months. He was killed by the fall of a
room at Viterbium. Nicholas 3 succeeded 3 years: he alters the Government of
Rome, and takes from Charles the title of Vicar of the Empire. One Synod held
this Decad. At Saltzhurg, the Order of Celestines founded by Peter de Murcone.
Michael the Greek Emperor despised at home, for acknowledging the Pope. At
Lions, in that Synod the Conclave is erected, and geniculation at the naming of
JESUS, and the tenths of Benefices granted toward the holy war.

In the East, Andronicus the Emperor imprisoneth his brother John for his
popularity. Asia minor 1280
divided by the Turks into Satrapies. The Christians persecuted by the apostate
Cham of Tartary. John, son to Hugh K. of Jerusalem, succeeds in Cyprus: then
Henry, who is crowned at Tire. Tripolis taken, with the loss of 7000
Christians. Henry and the Sultan make peace. In the West, the Switzers,
hitherto subject to Savoy, are subdued by the Emperor, who enlarges the
privileges of Luca and Florence for money: he demolisheth 60 Castles in
Thuring, which harbored thieves. Peter of Arragon, who married Manfred's
daughter, is called in by the Sicilians, who kill all the French in two hours,
when the bell rung to the Vespers. Peter's General defeats Charles his Fleet.
Charles recovereth Naples; where the French are beaten by James, Peter's son.
Wars between France and Arragon; in which Peter dies of a wound. Philip the
fourth raigns in France 28 years. Peter of Arragon dies; whose two sons
succeeded; to wit, James in Sicily, and Alphonsus in Arragon, who took Majorca
from James. The Moors expelled Minorca. Great troubles in Castile. Lescus the
Polonian spoileth Russia, and expels the Lituanians out of Poland. Lescus
forced by his people into Hungary; who returns, and expels his competitor
Conrad. The Tartars carry away out of Poland twenty thousand Virgins. Great
troubles there, between Lescus and Conrad, and their brothers. Ladislaus of
Hungary defeateth Oldamire King of the Cumanians; who return with the Tartars,
and spoil Hungary and kill the King, whom the Pope a little before had cursed
for his Concubines. Ericus King of Denmark killed with 56 wounds: the Rebels
flee to Norway. The Norwegians and banished Lords invade Denmark. The Venetians
make war upon the Patriarch of Aquileia for helping the Istrians. The Pope
makes peace between them. In Flanders, there is a rebellion at Bruges. War
between Brabant and Guelders, about the Earldom of Nemours. Floris of Holland
subdueth the Frisians, and transports his fathers bones thence to Middleburg.
Many people perish in Frisia by Inundations. In England, Leolin of Wales is
slain, and his head set upon the Tower: his brother David hanged and quartered.
King Edward sits as a Peer in the French Parliament: he ransoms Charles king of
Sicily's son: he makes the competitors of Scotland swear to stand to his
arbitration. The Scots king dies without issue, being slain with a fall from
his horse. Six Governors appointed. Great troubles between Bruce and Baliol
about the Crown.

In the Church, sat Martin the fourth, 4 years: he excommunicates and deposes
Peter of Arragon, and bestows it on Charles Valois the French king's youngest
son. Honorius the fifth succeeds 2 years: he is opposed by the Germans in a
tax. Nicholas the fourth succeeded 4 years. This Decad yields four Synods.
Seven rich Merchants of Florence instituted the Order of servants of Mary. The
Order of Chaplains also and Anchorites set up. The Pope excommunicates the
Greek Emperor, for breaking his promise made at Lions. At Wesel, the Jews
crucify a young man.

In the East, the Turks invade the Empire. Michael Strategoplus imprisoned by
Andronicus. 1290
The Emperors forces defeated by the Turk. Ronzerius a Pirate made Caesar: he
oppresses Asia, and is slain by the Army of Michael the young Emperor. The
Saracens take Syria, after 192 years possession by the Christians, since
Godfrey recovered Jerusalem. Thirty thousand Saracens killed by Cassan the
Cham, who recovers Damascus; but loses all again, being called home by
domestic troubles. Ottoman the first, son to Erthogul, takes the title of
Sultan. In the West, Wenceslaus king of Bohemia is confirmed in the Electorate,
and chief Imperial Butlership. Adolph Earl of Nassau named Emperor by the
Bishop of Mentz, who had got the other Electors to assent. The Styrians submit
to Otho Duke of Bavaria, who is forced to flee. The Emperor takes pay of the
king of England, for his aid against the French; with the which he buyeth
Thuring for his stipend; and for sacrilege and adultery he is deposed, and is
killed by Albert Duke of Austria, who succeeds 9 years. At his Coronation, the
Duke of Saxony is smothered in the preass of people. France makes peace with
Arragon, and war with England and Flanders. The Parliament of Paris is set up.
Philip of France obtains Sicily by marrying with the sister of Charles the
lame. King Lewis is canonized. Flanders united to the Crown of France. James of
Arragon made king of Sardinia by the Pope. The Bohemians seize upon Cracovia.
Ladislaus, who had escaped in a Monks habit, returns, and beats the Bohemians
in Cracovia. The Tartars waste Poland. Primislaus Duke of great Polonia is
crowned king, that title having been omitted 215 years: he is murdered by the
Marquess of Brandenburg. Locticus succeeded, who refused the title of king: he
is deposed, and Wenceslaus king of Bohemia chosen. Whilst Andrew king of
Hungary is wasting Austria, the Peers, by the Pope's persuasion, choose Charles,
son to Charles Martel, for their king. The king of Denmark falls out with his
Archbishop; wherefore the king is censured at Rome to pay to the Archbishop
49000 marks; and the Land is interdicted. The Frisons having put themselves
into the king's protection, murder his Governor. Lubec craves protection of
the Dane. In Rohemia, the Lords rebel, and make the Duke of Uratislavia king;
who was shortly after poisoned. Pera by Constantinople is taken by the
Venetians, whose Fleet is taken by the Genuans at Corfu, who also take Cydon in
Crete. The Genuans attempt Venice to no purpose. Great executions at Venice,
for plots against the State. The Paduans build a Fort in the Venetians
territories, which they demolished. They make the Greek Emperor pay his debts.
John D. of Brabant is killed. The Earl of Flanders, and his wife, the Prince of
Wales daughter, are invited to France, and imprisoned at Paris: he sides with
the English against France. Charles Valois invadeth Flanders, take Guy, and
many of his Nobility prisoners. The Earl of Holland claims Scotland in right of
Ada his grandmother; but is dissuaded from it by the King of England: he is
slain for Adultery. His son John the first succeeded, who subdued the Frisons,
and proscribed Dort for rebelling: he died childless, the Earldom having lasted
in that line 437 years. Friesland torn with factions. King Edward of England
banisheth the Jews. The French and English take each others ships at Sea.
Aquitain seized on by the French King, because Edward came not upon his
citation. Baliol does homage for Scotland, and aids the French against the
English. The king takes diverse strong holds in Scotland, with the Regalities,
and Marble Chair. The English expelled by William Wallace. The Scots and
Wallace beaten in the battle of Fawkirk. The King of of Norway claims
Scotland in right of his daughter deceased. Baliol is named king of Scotland by
king Edward. Baliol took it so ill, that he was forced to plead at the bar
against Macduffs brother, that he fell off from the English to the French.
Baliol is sent to the Tower: he is released, and goes into France.

In the Church* Celestine the fifth called before Petrus de Murcome, sits 5
months? he was an ignorant Eremite. To him succeeded Boniface the eighth, 8
years. He deluded Celestine by the sound of a Cane, and made him resign: he
persecuted the family of Columna, and opposes Alberts Election: he causes
James to forsake Sicily, whose brother Frederick is chosen by the people in
hatred of the French. Eight Synods held this Decad. The heretics Pataren^ and
Gazareni, about this time appeared, and held that married men could not be
saved. Fratricelli a kind of Anabaptists. Boniface sets out the sixth book of
Decretals. The Church of Loretta enlarged, for reception of Pilgrims.

In the East, Andronicus is excommunicated by the Pope, and the K. of Rascia
set up against him. Ottoman keeps his residence at Neapolis, which he called
Despotopolis, 20 miles from Nice: he 1300
beats the Christian Armies. In the West, the Emperor wastes the Lands of the
Bishop of Trevers. The Helvetians begin to make head against the Emperors
Officers. The Emperor is murdered by his brothers son, for keeping his
Patrimony from him. To him succeeds Henry the seventh. Earl of Lutzenburg 4
years: he is crowned at Millan, and loses many places in Italy. Philip of
France excommunicated; he burns the Popes Bulls. The French are beaten by the
Flemings in the battle at Cowtray. Philip is reconciled to the Pope: he defeats
the Flemings, and makes Peace with them: he banisheth the Jews out of France.
The Moors driven from Gibralter by the Castilians. Ferdinand of Castile wrongs
his brothers, who summon him to Christ's Tribunal within thirty days; he dies
within that time. In Hungary, three Kings are chosen by three Factions, viz.
Wenceslaus of Bohemia (who is carried thence into Bohemia, with the Crown of
Hungary, by his father Ladislaus) Charles and Otho Dukes of Bavaria, to whom
Wenceslaus resigneth the Crown. Otho is taken by the Vayvod of Transylvania: he
is cursed by Cardinal Gentilis, for detaining the Crown from Charles. Otho
resigneth, and is set free. In Poland, Wenceslaus King of Bohemia, is chosen;
who leaves Bohemian Governors, and returns home. To him succeeded Ladislaus 29
years. Dansk besieged by Brandeburg. Ladislaus employeth the Teutonicks to
defend it, who seize on it to their own use. The troubles of Denmark composed,
by the payment of 10000 marks to the Archbishop by the king. The Norwayans
invade Denmark but are repulsed. The king of Suevia imprisoned by his brethren.
Wenceslaus of Bohemia sells Misnia to the Marquess of Brandeburg: he is
killed by a Russian: in him ends the male line. Henry Prince of Carinthia
claims the kingdom in right of his wife: they are both driven by the Emperor
into Bavaria. Frederick the Emperors son striving for that kingdom is slain.
Henry returns, and carries thence much wealth into Carinthia: he is expelled
by John the Emperors son, who reigned 36 years. The Venetians excommunicated
by the Pope, for taking Ferrara; and all their goods confiscated in France.
Zara besieged, and submits to the Venetians: they aid Charles Valois against
the Greek Emperor. Many of the French faction killed in Gaunt and Brugis. Guy
of Flanders dies a prisoner in France: his son Robert succeeds 18 years: he
has wars with Holland, because the Earl neglected to do his homage for
Zealand. Peace between Robert and the French. In Holland, William the good
rules 32 years. In England, the King confirms Magna Charta, releaseth
Baliol, and sends the Lord Segrave into Scotland; who is beaten there: the king
marches with his Army three hundred miles into Scotland, without opposition.
The Prince is sent thither with an Army. Wallas is taken and executed. The king
in his journey to Scotland dies. His son Edward the second succeeded 19 years:
he imprisoneth the Bishop of Chester in the cause of Gaveston. In Scotland,
Robert Bruce having escaped out of England, kills Cumyn for betraying his plot
to king Edward. Robert Reigned there 24 years: he is forced into the Woods and
Isles a while: he recovers diverse Castles.

In the Church, Boniface yet sits: he gives away France to the Emperor: he
sleeth with his treasure to Anagnia, and is taken by the Columnii, and dies of
grief. To him succeeded Bennet the ninth 8 months: he was poisoned. Clement
the fifth succeeded 8 years: he removes his seat to Avignion, where it
continued 72 years: at his Coronation, he lost a stone out of his Mytre, worth
6000 Crowns; the French king was hurt, and the Duke of Britain slain; with
twelve more. The Pope being recovered of a great sickness, bestows Mentz on
his Physician: he makes Robert, son of Charles, king of Sicily, by paying eight
thousand pound fealty, and the annual profits of Benevent. This Decad produced
two Councils; one at Rome, against the French king; the other at Paris, against
Pope Boniface. The first Jubilee is instituted by Boniface. The Templars
condemned in France, and James their chief Master burnt, with fifty more of
that Order at Paris.

In the East, the Turks are expelled by the Christians out of Thrace. In the
West, the Emperor rages with fire and sword in Italy. He is crowned at Pisa
and Rome. The Bishop of 1310
Liege, and two thousand, slain there: he burns many places, and is poisoned by
a Monk in the Eucharist. Lewis of Bavaria, and Frederick of Austria, strive for
the succession. Lewis is crowned at Acon by four Electors, and Frederick at
Bonna by the rest. Three Cantons of Switzers enter into an offensive and
defensive league. The Guelphs in Italy, the Emperors enemies, are slain, about
a hundred thousand. The French king in hunting is killed with a fall from his
horse. His son Lewis the tenth succeeded two years: he hanged his Treasurer,
and died suddenly: his brother Philip the fifth succeeds 12 years. The
Salique Law is confirmed, and Lewis his daughter omitted. The League with
Scotland is renewed. The Shepherds rebellion in France. In Castile, Alphonsus
the eleventh is King 40 years. The Teutonicks subdue Pomerania, and take Riga.
Ladislaus of Poland recovers Cracovia from the Duke of Opolium, and takes away
the Cities Liberties, for betraying it. Charles, son to Charles Martel, is King
of Hungary 32 years. Christopher reigns in Denmark 14 years. The King of Suevia
imprisoneth his brothers in a Castle, where they die. The people rebel: he
flees: his son Magnus is taken, and he is slain. John the Emperors son reigns
in Bohemia 36 years: he is made Lieutenant of the Empire: he aideth his father;
and, after his death, Lewis against Frederick. Pr. Pandulo the Venetian, to
pacify the Pope, suffers himself to be tied like a dog with a chain under the
Popes table. The Genuans war against the Venetians by Sea and Land: they
besiege Pera. Crete rebelleth; so does Gaunt. The French and Hollanders invade
Flanders. Upon restitution of Doway and some other places, and a marriage
between Philip's daughter and Robert's grandchild, peace is concluded. At
Middleburg a College is erected, with a Dean and four Canons. In England,
Gaveston is made Earl of Cornwall; is banished, and made General of Ireland: he
is recalled, banished, returns, and is made Secretary: the Lords strike off
his head. The King is overthrown by the Scots at Bannocksburn. The Earl of
Lancaster, chief of the Barons faction, is reconciled to the King. Edward
Bruce, King Robert's brother, is crowned King of Ireland, and slain three years
after. The Scots take Berwick, and many other places. King Robert invadeth
England. Diverse put to death in Scotland, for endeavoring to betray the
kingdom to the English. Robert King of Sicily proscribed by the Emperor; which
the Pope makes void. Frederick Prince of Trinacry, calls himself King of
Sicily. Robert is reconciled to Frederick: they fall at odds again.

In the Church: Clement yet sits, who wrote the Clementine or seventh of the
Decretals. The Emperor denies fealty to the Pope. Succeeded John 21, who sat
18 years. His tenent concerning deposing of Kings, is opposed by Occam. He
besieges Genoa, and sets out the extravagants. This Decad were held seven
Synods. The Templers suppressed at Vienna. Rhodes is bestowed upon the Knights
Hospitallers. The Works of Lullius are condemned. Begwins and Beguards
Heretics, with the Armenian Heretics, were busy about this time. Three
Gentlemen of Siena set up the Order of White Monks of Olivet.

In the East, Andronicus, the Emperors grandchild, besieges Constantinople;
so that the Grandfather is forced to give him Thrace and Macedonia.
Constantine son of Andronicus sent against the young Emperor; he is taken and
imprisoned, they are reconcil^d: young Andronicus joins with the Despot of
Bulgaria against his Grandfather, and takes Constantinople; he attempts to
relieve Nice, and is beaten by the Turks, who take Nice. The old Emperor is
made a Monk, and called Antony; the Turks take Philadelphia. Prusa the
Metropolis of Bithynia is taken, and made the seat of the Ottoman-Empire. To
Ottoman succeeds his son Orchanes 31 years: the Christians recover Nice with
diverse Forts. In the West, Germany is vexed between the two Emperors.
Ferdinand is taken, and after three years imprisonment, is restored to Austria,
but renounceth the Empire. The Pope and Em^erour quarrel; the Bishop of
Magdeburg's brains are beaten out by the Citizens. The Emperor is crowned at
Rome, and sets up an Antipope. Reynold Earl of Gelders is made Duke; Iuliers
made a Marquisate: The Emperor besieges Millan. In France, to Philip
succeeded his brother Charles King of Navar 6 years; he forced the Flemmings to
submit; to him succeeded Philip of Valois, brothers son to Philip the fair, 22
years. In Spain, Arragon, Catalonia and Valentia unit^d: Arragon subdueth
Sardinia. Silesia falls off from the Polander to the Bohemians, with whom the
Teutonicks side: 130 towns burnt in Massovia by the Lituanians. Upon a marriage
between the Kings son Casimire and the Dukes daughter, a peace is made with the
Lituanians: the Massovians and Teutonicks defeated by the Posacs and
Lituanians. Ladislaus beats the Bohemians and Prussians. In Denmark a great
Rebellion, in which Waldemar Duke of Sleswick is chosen King; but two years
after the King is reestablished, and Waldemar gives up his title of King. Henry
of Austria is released for 30000 Crowns. The Bohemians rebel, upon the Kings
attempting to exchange Bohemia for Bavaria: he invadeth Poland, and loses one
of his eyes with the moisture of the Lituanian air. At Brugis a great sedition
between the people and Magistrates: they detain their Earl, a prisoner 6
months; a peace is made, and they rebel again: the Earl is restored, and
22000 of the Rebels killed. Holland enjoys Zeland upon a peace with Flanders:
Many towns drowned in Holland with 5000 people: A civil War in Sicily. The
Emperor attempteth King Robert in vain. The Spencers in England are banished:
the King wastes Durham, Preston and Lancaster. The Scots beat the English:
they renew their league with France. The Lords defeated at Bur^owbridge:
Lancaster and other Lords executed. The Mortimers sent to the Tower. Peace with
Scotland 13 years. The Queen and Mortimer proclaimed Traitors; the Queen
landeth, the Spencers executed: the King resigneth, and is murdered. Edward 3
his son succeeded 50 years: the King returns dishonourably from Scotland.
Mortimer hanged. Baliol resignes Scotland; Hamilton's begin.

In the Church, Pope John sits yet; he sides with Robert against Frederick
king of Sicily; he quarrels with the Emperor: against him is set up Nicholas
5. which makes the 28 Schism. The Emperor excommunicated again: Nicholas is
carried into France, where he gives up his title. Three Synods held this
Decad. The Poore-men of Lions called Fratricelli condemned by the Pope: the
French King maintains the Clergies temporalities against the Advocate, and is
therefore styled (Catholic).

In the East, the Bulgarians are defeated, and do defeat the Emperor, who sets
out a fleet, and enters into league with the Latin Princes against the Turk.
Thrace is wasted by 1330
the Scythians and Turks; the Emperor takes 14 of their ships, and beats the^
out of Acarnania and Aetolia. Nice is taken by Orchanes, and so is Abydus: the
Emperor is wounded in the foot: the Turks are driven from the siege of
Philadephia: The Turks waste diverse Islands: They are beaten at sea by
Andronicus. In the West, the King of Bohemia takes diverse Cities for the Pope,
Parma and Padua taken by the Scaligers, and other towns of Italy by others: the
Pope dares not absolve the Emperor; for fear of the French: He makes Edward of
England Lieutenant of the Empire; and then displaceth him: the Emperor
appealeth from the Pope to a General Synod. It was concluded in a Diet of
Frankfort, that any Bishop may Crown the Emperor, as well as the Pope. Robert
of Artois is defeated of his Earldome by the French King, who proclaims him
traitor, for soliciting the King of England to claim his right in France.
Philip aideth the Scots: Edward for this, and for seizing upon Aquitain,
proclaims war against him: he quartereth the Arms of France and England. At the
siege of Lisle, the English are defeated; and the French at Sluice. Diverse
discontented Lords in Spain side with the Moors against Castile; The Castilians
de^eat the forces of Arragon and Navar. Peter of Arragon does homage to the
Pope for Sardinia and Corsica. Wars between Castile and Portugal. The
Teutonicks waste Polonia, and at last by the King defeated; Peace made between
them; the Lituanians burn themselves, wives, children and goods, that they
might not fall into the hands of the Teutonicks. King Casimire ^ettleth the
succession of Hungary upon Charles, who had married his sister. Russia taken by
the Lituanians: Casimire takes Leopolis, where he found two crowns, and a piece
of the Cross, now kept at Cracovia. In Hungary was a great plague of Locusts;
the Nobles of Denmark send to Valdemar Christophers son, being now in Germany,
to recover the kingdom, which was now in competition. Wenceslaus of Bohemia,
who in the French Court was named Charles, defeats the Lombards, and is made
Marquess of Moravia. John of Bohemia releaseth his title to Poland for 10000
Marks: A Jew puts out his eye, having lost the other before. The Venetians join
with Florence against Mastin Tyrant of Escalla. 60 several Ambassadors arrives
at Venice to reconcile them and Mastin; Peace is granted to him, and he is made
a Patritian of Venice. Lewis of Flanders buyeth Melchyn of the Bishop of Liege,
and the Duke of Geldres; the Duke of Brabant challenges it; but they are
reconciled by marriages. The Flemmings defeated by the English: the Earl is
against the Flemmings league with England: he flies to Philip of France: The
Earl of Holland does notable justice on the Bailiffe of South-Holland, for
forcing a Cow from a poor woman. William 4. of Holland rules ten years, he
spoileth Prussia. The king of England does homage in France for Aquitain, and
returns discontented: he aideth Edward Baliol, because David King of Scotland
refused to do homage. In the battle of Halydown-hill, the English are
victorious and recover Barwick; he enters Scotland, and returns with Baliol:
He enters Scotland again, and setleth Baliol, who contents himself with a
Pension. The first Duke in England, is Prince Edward made Duke of Cornwall. The
King sends to demand his Holds in Aquitain: he leagueth with the Emperor and
Dutch; he is made Vicar of the Empire. Southampton burnt by the French: they
besiege Bordeaux and are all killed. King Robert of Scotland having vowed an
expedition into Syria, desired on his deathbed, Robert Douglasse to carry his
heart to Jerusalem: Douglasse in his journey thither was slain, in siding with
Arragon against the Saracens; that Family ever since bear an Heart in their
Coat: This Robert had won 70 battles. Earl Murry Regent, during King David's
minority, was poisoned by a Monk: The King and Queen are driven into France.
Edward Baliol crowned; Aberden burnt by the English. David's faction grows to
strong for Baliol. Salisbury and Arundel forced from the siege of
Dumbar-Castle. At Blackburn the Scots are beaten; Perth and Sterling taken by
the Regent. Baliol flies into England.

In the Church, the Schism continues, till Nicholas the Antipope was carried
into France, where he resigneth: the Bononians rebel against the Pope, who
dies and left behind him a treasure of 1700000 Florens; to him succeeded
Bennet 12. 7 years; One Synod held this Decad, at Toledo. Pope John believed
that the souls slept till the Resurrection. The Greek Church dissenteth from
the Latin. In a Diet at Mentz it was concluded, that the Council was above the
Pope, and that the Emperor held immediately from God.

In the East, Nicomenia in Bithynia is taken by the Turks. John son to
Andronicus is Emperor 1340
41 years; he is as yet under the tuition of John Cantacuzenus father-in-law to
Orchanes; the Patriarch excommunicates him; upon this the Patriarch is deposed.
The Turks are beaten out of Smyrna by the Venetians: they defeat the Venetians
with those of Cyprus and Rhodes. In the West, the Pope takes Ferrara; Mantua
and Verona from the Emperor, and denies to absolve him, till he resign his
Empire to him. Lewis is deposed and dies. Charles 4. elected, he was son to
John King of Bohemia. Some of the Electors prefer the Empire to King Edward of
England; he refuses it: then they choose Ferdinand Marquess of Misnia, whom
Charles bought out with 10000 Marks. Gunther also being elected by some,
compoundeth with Charles, and is poisoned. In France, John Montfort loses
Britany; King Edward assisted him: he is taken and imprisoned. The Gabal of
Salt now imposed. At Crescy the French lost 30000 with the King of Bohemia, and
11 Princes, 80 Barrons, and 1200 Knights. Calice lost, and the French who would
have bought it, cheated of their money, and slain. The Dolphinate of Vienna
sold to the French, on condition that the eldest son of France should be called
the Dolphin. In the battle of Salcados 450000 Moors flame, and but twenty
Castilians. The Alcavale, that is the Tenths of things sold, raised for the
maintaining of the Moors war. Alphonsus of Castile obtains of the Pope the
Canaries, conditionally that he plant Christianity there. James of Majorea
killed in battle by the Arragonians: The Tartars and Bohemians driven out of
Poland, by Casimire: He is excommunicate for his Concubines, and adultery: he
totally subdueth Russia, and names Lewis of Hungary his heir. To Charles of
Hungary succeeds his son Lewis 1. 41 years; he subdueth the Saxons in
Transylvania: Andrew his brother and King of Naples, sels his possessions to
the King, who aideth the Polander against Lituania and Bohemia. Zara falls off
to Hungary, and is recovered again by Venice: they make peace for 10 years.
Lewis to revenge his brothers death, whom his wife strangled, marches into
Italy and takes the Kingdom of Naples: She flies to the Pope with her new
Husband, who for reconciling them has Avignion. In Denmark, Waldemar reigns
35 years; he leagueth with the Swedes, invadeth Brandeburg, and goes to
Jerusalem. Prague in Bohemia is now freed from Mentz, and made an
Archbishopric. King John being slain at Crescy, his son Charles succeeded, who
also was Emperor, who built new Prague. The Venetians troubled with an
Earthquake, Plague and Famine: they invite strangers to come and inhabit their
City. A great faction at Gaunt against the French, in which Artweld the chief
man of the faction is slain, and E. Lewis is killed at Crescy; to whom
succeeded Lewis of Male 38 years; he promised to marry the King of Englands
daughter, but marries the daughter of Brabant. William of Holland is slain in
the battle he fought against Utricht; his Sister Margaret succeeded 8 years:
she makes her son William Governor, reserving 10000 crowns yearly; but when
the Emperor died, she assumeth Holland, and bestows Henault on William. Now
began there the faction of Cabillaucks and Hoecks, which held 150 years; the
Cabillaucks call in William against his Mother. Tourney besieged by King
Edward, and truce granted for one year: He quarrels with the Pope, for denying
him the making of a Cardinal. The order of the Garter instituted; and the
Round-Table at Windsor erected. Diverse of King Edwards friends put to death in
France. He takes Caen in Normandy; with 10000 English he defeats 60000 French.
King David of Scotland taken by Copland, who is rewarded with 500l. and made a
Banoret. The English quite driven out of Scotland. King David and his Queen
return. Great emulation between Douglasse and Ramsey: David upon the French
score invades England thrice, and wastes all as far as Durham: he is defeated
and taken; Percy and Baliol spoil Lothian. Robert of Sicily being dead, Andrew
the King of Hungary's son, whom he had adopted, succeeds in Apulia, for which
he paid a great sum to the Pope: he is strangled by his wife, who married
with Lewis Prince of Tarentium.

In the Church, Bennet sits yet, he confirmed Verona to Scaliger, Mantua to
Gonzaga, and Ferrara to Este. Clement 6. succeeded 10 years: he reduced the
Jubilee to 50 years; he makes some of the Electors choose a new Emperor.
Nicholas a Tribune of Rome aspireth, and is confined to Avignion. This Decad
had but one Synod, at Toledo. One Picard a Walloon began the Heresy of the
Adamites. Popish Provisions put down in England. The Pope suppresseth the
Whippers. Many Jews executed for poisoning the waters.

In the East, Paleologus helps the Venetians, and Cantacuz: the Genuans.
Losbos is given to Catelusius for his service against the Greeks, after almost
100 years possession by his 1350
posterity, it was lost to the Turks. Cantacuz: made a Monk, and his son
suppressed. Solomon son to Orchanes breaks into Europe; and takes diverse
Castles with Callipolis the chief City of Chersonesus: as he was Hawking he is
drowned in a Ditch; whereupon Orchanes dies with grief. To him succeeded
Amurath the first, his son, 30 years. The Janisaries now begin. In the West,
Cleve for want of Heirs-male, falls to the Empire. Wenceslaus fouleth the Font,
when he was Christened. The Pisans punished for carrying the Empress and her
daughter into the Stews. The Emperor is crowned at Millan and Rome: he
publishes the Golden Bull, and annexeth Brandeburg to Bohemia. Iuliers made a
Duchy; he helps the Pope against Millan, and has wars with Philip of Austria,
who put him to flight, by corrupting some about Charles. To Philip of France
succeeded John his son 15 years: Charles grandchild to the King of Castile, and
Constable of France, is killed by the K. of Navar. Charles of Navar imprisoned
for favoring the English; who beat the French at Poyctiers. Charles being
released, makes new troubles. The Provost of Paris murdered. The King and his
son transported into England. France spoiled by King Edward. Upon a Peace, King
John is released to get money. The Jews are again admitted. He returns into
England, and dies. Peter King of Portugal banisheth Lawyers out of his Kingdom.
Peter King of Castile puts his brother with many Nobles to death; he murthereth
two more brothers, and poysoneth his wife. Lewis of Hungary makes peace with
Padua and Austria; he invadeth Dalmatia, and takes diverse Towns; he restores
Tarvisium and Istria. The Russians rebel against Poland. Casimire is absolved,
and builds many Churches. Prussia is spoiled by the Lituanians. Hungary
disclaimeth all tribute from Polonia: The King of Denmark imprisoneth his Queen
upon suspicion of Adultery; he afterward begot Margaret of her, who became
Queen of 3 Kingdoms. Ericus rebelleth against his Father the King of Sweden.
Istria spoiled by the Prince of Croatia, who makes restitution. The Venetians
beaten by the Germans at Bosphorus. The Germans are defeated, and put
themselves under the protection of Millan: At last a peace is made. The
Venetians make a dishonorable peace with Lewis of Hungary. Lewis of Flanders
subdueth Brabant; he restores all again except Antwerp, which he retains for
his wifes Dowry. William's forces in Holland are defeated by his mother the
Empress, who was at last defeated by him, and is contented with Henault, and
leaves Holland with him, who invaded Utricht, and fell mad: His wife is chosen
Regent by the Cabillaucks, and his brother Albert by the Hoecks, who besieged
Delf and took it. The Spanish Fleet at Winchelsey defeated by the English. Sir
Walter Bently beats the French in Britain. Groats first coined. The King
wastes France, and removes the Staple of Wool out of Flanders into England.
The battle of Poyctiers, where the French King with many Lords, Knights and
Esquires are taken and slain. The French aid the Scots; they take Barwick and
dismantle it, they burn Northam. King David ransomed for 100000. marks. Peace
for 14 years: The King cuts off Robert Stuarts succession to the crown, and
appoints Alexander of Sutherland his younger sisters son for his successor,
upon whose death Robert is reconciled to the King and to his hopes. The Pope
makes Lewis of Tarentum King of Sicily, against the King of Hungary.

In the Church, Clement keeps the 2. Jubilee: To him succeeds Innocent 6. 9
years. new troubles in Rome. Nicholas is sent home and restored to his
Tribunat, and is slain by the Columni. The Popes Legate is sent to Rome, who
recovers all in 5. years that was lost from the Church. One Council held this
Decad, at Toledo again. The Pope strives with Cantacuz, to unite the Greek and
Latin Churches.

In the East, the Turks take many places, and make Paleologus tributary, who
craveth help against them from the Pope and Queen of Sicily. The Turks
transport 60000. 1360
into Europe by the help of the Genuans. Amurath makes his seat at Adrianople,
he circumciseth his sons. In the West, The Imperial Cities league against the
Princes. In France, Charles 5* reigns 16 years. Montfort kills Charles of
Bloys, and recovereth Britain. King Charles makes his guard of 100. Scots
Archers: He gives the Kingdom of Arles to Lewis Duke of Anjou. Peter of Castile
treacherously killed the Moorish King. War between Castile and Arragon. Peter
is driven out of Castile by the French; he flies to Prince Edward, and is
restored, and abjureth his Religion. He is at last taken and beheaded. The
Polander subdueth the Russian. Bosna and Bulgaria reduced to the obedience of
Hungary. About this time the Hanse-Towns being 77. begin to set up. Hamburg
submits to the Duke of Holst. Magnus of Suevia taken, and imprisoned. Venice
forces the Paduans to buy their peace for 15 years. The Earldom of Burgundy
falls to Margaret mother of Lewis by the death of Philip. The Duke of Burgundy
marries the Earls daughter. King Edward of England affrighted with thunder,
makes peace with France. King John is released for 300000 crowns. The King
being 50 years old, keeps a Jubilee: he turns all the Records out of French
into Latin or English. The Staple at Calice. King John came to England to
release his hostages, and dies at the Savoy. Prince Edward ill rewarded for
his aid, by Peter of Castile. The Highlanders in Scotland are permitted by the
King to destroy each other.

In the Church, Urban 5. sat 8 years. The Viscount of Millan begs peace of the
Popes Legate. The Pope comes to Rome, and sends for the Emperor to suppress the
Gibellins. This Decad affords no Council. John Columbinus begins at Sena the
order of Jesuits. Paleologus submits to the Roman Church, on promise of
help against the Turks. St. Bridgets Order confirmed by the Pope.

In the East, Paleologus being expelled by Andronicus his son, is restored by
the Venetians: 1370
he takes Tenedos from the Genuans, and gives it to the Venetians. At the
Marriage feast of Bajazet, a Nobleman sent 100. Boys, and so many Virgins in
rich apparel, with two Cups in each hand, the one filled with jewels, the other
with gold: the Despot of Servia loses Nissa to the Turk, and becomes his
Tributary Aladin the Turks son in law rebelleth, and forced to sue for peace.
The Servians fall from Amurath, and join with the king of Bosna. 20000 Turks
killed in Bosna by the Christians. In the West, the Emperor promises more to
the Electors to choose his son Caesar, then he was able to pay. War between
Saxony and Brunswick, for the Duchy of Luneburg. To Charles succeeded his
ill-conditioned son Wenceslaus 22 years. Charles of Navar indicted for
attempting to kill the French King: he forfeiteth his estate, and is reconciled
to the King. Navars eldest son imprisoned, and his Officers executed for
intelligence with the English. The French invade the Isle of Wight: Montpelier
rebelleth, and is reduced. The King leaves the Government to his 3 brothers,
and dies rich. His son Charles 6. succeeded 42 years. The Kings of Aragon, Fez
and Granado league against Castile, which makes peace with Portugal. The Duke
of Lancaster claims Castile in right of his wife. Henry of Castile poisoned
by a Monk. Casimire of Poland being dead, Lewis King of Hungary succeeds,
Casimir's sisters son, 13 years: he returns to Hungary, and leaves his mother
Regent of Polonia: the Hungarians kill the Governor of Cracovia, for which 160
Hungarians are killed by the Polacks. King Lewis persuades the Polacks to admit
one of his daughters to the succession, which they do assent to, conditionally
they might be eased of their Taxes. He subdueth the Valachians, and adopteth
his daughters husband. Magnus of Suevia is released for 12000. Marks.
Wenceslaus of Bohemia drowneth his wifes Confessor, for not revealing her
confession. The Venetians and Genuans at War for Tenedos; They are reconciled
by the Duke of Savoy. In Flanders, 17 Towns are drowned, and 5000 houses burnt
in Gaunt. The French and Flemmings quarrel, for receiving John Duke of Britain.
The Earls heavy Taxes cause a civil War in Flanders. Wars between Holland and
Utricht. Limoges taken by the English. Rochel besieged by the French: Peace
between England and France. The English defeated in Garnsey. The French lose
Aquitain. Richard 2. reigns in England 22 years. The French burn Rye, and the
Scots Roxburg. Barwick taken and lost by the Scots in 9 days. In Scotland,
Robert Stuart is king 20 years; he renews the League with France.

In the Church, sat Gregory 11. 7 years. The Florentines quarrel with the
Popes Legates, and deny corn to Rome. They assist the Bononians and Pisans
against the Pope, who curses, and then absolveth them: He removes from Avignon
to Rome. To him succeeded Urban 6. 11 years: against him Clement 7. is chosen
by the French Cardinals, which makes the 29 Schism, which continued 50 years:
Urban sits at Rome, Clement at Avignon: Urban drowned seven Cardinals of
Clement, being bound in sacks. S. Katherines Nuns founded by Katherine of Sena.
The Cynique-heretiques, called Turelupini, went naked, and were given to the
flesh. Wickliffs Doctrine condemned at Oxford. England, Hungary, and Germany
declare for Pope Urban; France, Scotland, Arragon, and Sicily for Clement.

In the East, Andronicus is settled in the Empire by Bajazet, for which he
swears fealty 1380
to the Turk, and imprisoneth his father; who escapes, and causes the Turk to
set up his son Manuel, who reigned 30 years. Andronicus flies into Asia, and
shelters himsele in the Turks Court. The Turks subdue and destroy the
Christians in Bosna, Croatia, and the adjacent places. Tamerlan makes an
expedition into Babylon, and Sultan Achumel flies to Alcayre. One of Amurath's
sons loses his eyes, for plotting against his father. Lazarus Despot of
Servia, with five hundred thousand Christians, slain in the Plains of
Cassovia. One Cobelets a Christian, kills Amurath, as he was viewing the dead.
To him succeeds his son Bajazet, 11 years: He strangled his brother Iacup,
to prevent competition; so this strangling of the Sultans brethren grew
customary. In the West, Civil wars in Germany among the Princes. The Duke of
Austria killed by the Switzers in battle; after much bloodshed, a peace there
is concluded. In France, Charles 6. reigned 42 years; he contents himself with
the three Flowers-de-luce for his Arms. The Parisians and Rohaners are
punished for mutinying. The French invade England. Lewis of Anjou removed from
his Regency, the Dukes of Burgundy and Berry put in his place. The English take
100 French and Flemish ships. The King assumeth the Government. His Brother
made Duke of Orleans: Great faction between the Constable and Duke of Britain.
The English help Portugal against Castile. The King of Castile expelled by John
base son to Peter. Navar attempteth to poison the Dukes of Burgundy and Berry;
He grows leprous. John, Peter's base son chosen King of Portugal. The Duke of
Lancaster marries in Spain, one daughter to the Infant of Castile, the other
to the King of Portugal. In Poland, the Bishop of Cracovia falls down dead, as
he was going to deflowre a Country-maid. King Lewis dies, and Hedwigis the
Queens daughter is chosen. Iagello Duke of Lituania christened in Poland, and
named Ladislaus; by marrying Hedwigis, he unites Lituania to Poland, and
converts the Lituanians in Hungary. King Lewis being dead, his daughter Mary
succeeds 10 years. Charles King Andrews son of Sicily is received King by
some, and is murdered by the Queens mother, who is drowned by the Governor of
Croatia, and Mary imprisoned. Sigismund, Charles the fourths son marries Mary,
is crowned, and persecuteth the Governor of Croatia; upon this the Lords
rebel, and some of them are executed by Sigismund. He subdueth Bosna and
Dalmatia. Truce between Denmark and Sweden. Margaret reigns alone 24 years: she
has War with Albert of Suevia, and takes him, with his son prisoners, and so
she becomes Queen of all the three Kingdoms. The Venetians take Verona and
Padua, and recover Treviso. The League with other States against Galeas
Viscount of Millan. The Earl of Flanders forced by his people to hide himself:
He expels the English for siding with Gaunt against him: they take Dam and
Greveling. John the French Kings son stabs the Earl, quarrelling for Bononia:
to him succeeded his daughter Margaret. The French recover Dam. The English
beat the Flemmings at Sea, and take many of their Ships. John the Earl of
Hollands son is made Bishop of Liege at 16 years old. The Earl of
Northumberland is sent against the Scots, and recalled. Jack Straw rebelleth,
and is slain. Barwick recovered from the Scots. The Duke of Lancaster having
made peace in France, goes against Scotland, but does nothing: he is
reconciled to the King: the Duke claims Castile. Flanders put themselves
under the Kings protection. The first Marquis in England, was Robert de Vere
the Kings Minion, made Marquis of Ireland. Many Ships taken by Arundel and
Nottingham: The Lords quarrel with the King about his favorites: the
Chief Justice and others executed. Peace with France and Scotland for three
years: Warwick and Gloucester are displaced. Edinburgh burned by King Richard:
The Scots invade England, and do much hurt in Ireland, and in the Isle of Man.
Cockermouth taken by the Scots and French. The battle of Otterburn between
Douglas and Piercy: Robert Earl of Fife the Kings younger son made Regent; his
brother Alexander burned the Church of Murray, for which he was imprisoned.
Ione of Sicily is strangled, and her sister Mary beheaded by Charles of
Dyrrachium. Lewis of Anjou poisoned, whose son Lewis is made King of Naples by
the Pope.

In the Church, Boniface the 9. sits 14 years. This Decad produced one Synod.
The Order of St. Peter of Pisa founded by a Pisan. The Archbishop of Magdeburg,
dancing all night with a woman, both fell down and broke their necks. The feast
of our Ladies conception instituted. The Dominicans free the Virgin Mary from
Original sin, and are opposed by the Parisians. Annates or First Fruits granted
against the Turks.

In the East, Constantinople is besieged 8 years by Bajazet. Manuel goes into
Italy for aid against the Turk. Philadelphia taken by the Turk, with other
places: Caria submits. 1390
Sigismund in Hungary beaten by the Turks, and so are the Latin Princes who
came to raise the siege from Constantinople. Bajazet hangs the King of
Caramania, and subdueth his Country. He is defeated at Mount Stella by
Tamerlan, fettered with gold, and incaged. His son Solomon is kinged at
Adrianople, Bajazet beats out his own brains, civil Wars among his sons 15
years: Tamerlan restores to the Christians the Countries taken by Bajazet. In
the West, the Jews are expelled Germany, and peace concluded there: the
Emperor is imprisoned, and escapes. The Bishop of Magdeburg, and Saxony
quarrel. John Galeas of Milan made Duke for 100000 crowns. Savoy made a
Duchy. The Electors d^pose Wenceslaus, and choose Frederick Duke of
Brunswick, who is slain by the Bishop of Mentz procurement, and Robert
Palsgrave succeeds 10 years. In France the Duke of Britain invades the
Constables possessions: the King marching against him, falls mad. Burgundy made
chief Regent, he banisheth the Constable: the King recovereth, and relapseth at
a Masque: The Regent incenseth the Queen against the Duke of Orleans, as if he
aimed at the Kings death and his chi^drens. The French reduce the Millanois to
the obedience of the Duchess, the Kings brothers wife. John of Castile killed
by a fall from his horse, to whom succeeded Henry 3. his son 17 years. The
Rebels of Russia subdued by the Polander. The King of Poland Ladislaus,
claims Hungary, but is opposed: his brother Vitondus made great Duke of
Lituania; he invadeth Scythia and is overthrown by Tamerlan. Sigismund of
Hungary makes peace with the Polander for 16 years: he puts to death 32 Lords.
Margaret of Denmark makes a League with the Prince of Rugia, and with the Earl
of Holst, and Duke of Scleswick. Stockholm stands out against the Queens
decree, it is besieged. Albert promises to deliver it in 3 years, in
performance whereof, Lubec, Dansk, and some other Hance-towns are pledged.
Stockholm surrendered. Copper-Mines adjudged to the Crown. Ericus, Margarets
sisters son, is associated; he recovereth Gothland, paying to the Teutonicks
9000 Nobles. Wenceslaus of Bohemia escapes 3 times out of prison: He knighted
the Fisherma^ that helped him. The Earl of Holland reconciled to the Lords,
whom he suspect^d to have slain his Steward and Concubine: His son is disgraced
at Table in the French Court, because William the second's body was not
recovered from the Frisons; whereupon the Frisons are beaten, and the body
brought thence to Valenciens, and there buried. Martin King of Aragon setleth
Sicily on his son. In England, the King quarrels with London, for not lending
him 1000 l. The Irish rebel, and are beaten: Warwick banished, and Arundel
beheaded; Gloucester smothered at Calis by Moubray; Hereford and Moubray
banished. Mortimer next heir to the Crown slain by the Irish; the King to be
revenged goes thither: At his return he is taken, and resigneth to the Duke of
Hereford. In Scotland, Robert 3. reigns 17 years. Great troubles raised by
Duncan Earl of Buchan. 600 Highlanders decide their quarrel before the King.
The Earl of March falls off to the English, and with Hotspur wastes the
borders. Wark-Castle taken by the Scots.

In the Church, to Clement the Antipope succeeds Bennet 13. Boniface, upon
the entreaty of the Princes, is willing to resign, but Bennet denies: He is
imprisoned at Avignon by the French king, and escapes. One Synod held this
Decad at Westminster, where Appeals to Rome are inhibited, and First Fruits
opposed. Because Christ began to preach at thirty years, therefore the Jubilee
is reduced to thirty years. John Hus appears; diverse of his Disciples burnt
at Auspurg. The Order of White-coats in Italy now began; they professed
extraordinary sanctimony. Greek being forgot in Italy 700 years, is brought
thither again by Chrysolorus.

In the East, Isa being expelled by his brother Mahomet from Prusa, flies to
Constantinople. 1400
Solomon makes his brother Isa General against Mahomet, who rules at Amasia,
and kills Cardaules whom Tamerlan had placed there. Mahomet received as King by
Prusa, Nice, and Nicapolis; He refused to marry Tamerlans daughter; He expels
his brother Isa into Carmania, where he died obscurely. Solomon takes Prusa,
against whom Musa another brother is employed by Mahomet; who having married
the Prince of Valachia's daughter, is received King at Adrianople in Solyman's
absence: But the Greek Emperor helps Solomon, and expels Musa, who suddenly
assaulting Solomon in his riot, strangles him and possesses his kingdom, and
besieges the Greek Emperor in Constantinople for aiding Solomon. In the
Isthmus of Peloponnesus, a Wall is built near to Corinth against incursions. In
the West, Prague is besieged, because Wenceslaus will not release the Imperial
Cities from their Oath made to him. Erfort wasted. A sedition in Mentz. In
France, the Regent dies, and Orleance is made Regent. Nemours is bestowed on
the King of Navar by the French King. The Duke of Burgundy opposes the Regent
in his Taxes. The Duke raises an Army, and is in show made friends with the
Regent* who crosses the Dukes intent in besieging Calice: He murders the
Regent, flies into Flanders, and returns with an Army, justifies his fact, is
absolved, and reconciled to the sons of Orleans; his daughter is married to the
Dolphin. The Teutonicks are called into Poland by the Kings brother, who
rebelleth, but is beaten by Vitondus. Ladislaus kills 50000. Teutonicks in
Lituania, and takes the Master, with many prisoners. Ladislaus son to Andrew is
sent for by the Hungarian Lords. Sigismund flies into Moravia, and by the
Bohemian help recovers Hungary. Ladislaus returne^h into Italy. Steven the
Vaivod executed for rebellion, and intelligence with the Turks, who defeat
Sigismund. He quarrels with the Venetians. Gothland is redeemed from the
Teutonicks; the Danes defeated in Frisia. The Holsatians pawned Flensburg and
News to the King of Denmark. The Genuans beaten at sea by the Venetians, who
protect the Vicenzans. Escalla of Verona poisoned by Novello, who kills his
sons, and takes the City. Novello cuts off the ears and noses of the Venetian
Ambassadors; but he being taken and his three children, with Verona and Padua,
are all strangled at Venice. They buy Zara from Ladislaus for 100000 Crowns.
John Bishop of Liege is expelled for refusing to take Orders; he is aided by
the Duke of Burgundy, who burned the City and slew 36000. Parvis helps the
Liegeois, who makes his son Bishop; both are killed by John's friends, with
40000 people; the Bishop is restored, and the City fined at 200000 Crowns. In
England, Henry 4. reigns 13 years. Exeter, Surry, and Aumarle executed for
striving to restore Richard, who is starved at Pomfret. The Queen returns into
France. At Hallydown-hill the Scots are beaten; the English defeated in Wales.
A Battle at Shrewsbury between the King and some Lords. A rebellion raised by
Mowbray and the Archbishop of York. Barwick and other Castles taken by the
King. The Earl of Northumberland flees into Wales. Glendower spoileth the
Marches; he is aided by the French with 140 sail. The Prince invadeth Scotland.
Northumberland and the Lord Bardolf overcome and slain. A false Richard
entertained in Scotland. Wark-Castle taken by the Scots. Prince David starved
by the Duke of Albany the Kings brother. Douglasse kills many at Shrewsbury.
Prince James going into France, is taken by the English; his father at the news
thereof dies with grief. Robert Duke of Albany Regent. The Scots enter
England. The Earl of March is reconciled to the Regent.

In the Church, Boniface 9. yet sits. Bononia with some other places
recovered from Galeas by the Pope. To him succeeded Innocent 4. 2 years: He
removes into Viterbium, upon a sedition raised by Ladislaus of Sicily against
him. Gregory 12. succeeds: He swears to resign for the peace of the Church:
He forbids all union between his Cardinals and those of France. A Pasquil set
up in Rome against him: The Devil discharging him of his oath, his forces beat
Ladislaus out of Rome. Lewis Duke of Anjou, confirmed King of Naples. 2 Synods
in this Decad; one at Aquilcia, the other at Pisa, where Gregory and Bennet are
deposed, and Alexander 5. chosen. The Order of the White-coats is condemned. A
Church at Luca built to the Crucifix.

In the East, Musa is taken and strangled by Mahomet, who reigns 8 years.
Orchanes, Solymans son, is taken, and his eyes are put out. Carmania subdued,
and the Varachian 1410
Princes made Tributaries. In the West, Sigismund King of Hungary, son to
Charles 4. reigns Emperor 26 years: He meets the Pope in Italy about
appointing the Council of Constance; He labors with France and England for a
peace. Cleve made a Dukedom. Sigismund, after his Brothers death, obtains
Bohemia. Zisca rebelleth, and becomes Captain of the Hussites. In France, the
Duke of Berry with the sons of Orleans make a faction against the Duke of
Burgundy, whom the Dolphin also opposes. Burgundy plots the death of Berry,
Burbon, and Orleans. The Dolphin is Regent, and Burgundy proclaimed Traitor; he
makes his peace. Agincourt-Battel. Burgundy leagueth with England. The Dolphin
dies, and the Queen is Regent. Normandy invaded by the English; The Queen
confined to Tours; Burgundy does all; The Constable, Chancellor, and 1600
murdered. The English get the Isle of France and Normandy. The Dolphin
murthereth the Burgundian. In Spain, 15000 Moors are slain: Arragon united to
Sicily: Ferdinand Perez King of Sevil, buys the Canaries from the King
thereof. (...) of Poland subdueth much of Prusia, and defeateth the Teutonicks,
and brings 5^ of their Colors into Cracovia. Sigismund pawneth Sepus^n to
Ladislaus; He grants peace to the Teutonicks for 2 years. Upon the Popes
request. Pipus the Florentine takes many places from the Venetians for
Sigismund of Hungary; but being corrupted by Venetian gold, is by Sigismund
choked with molten gold. 5 years peace between Hungary and Venice. The Danes
are defeated in Frisia. Margaret of Denmark dies, and Ericus reigns alone 25
years: wars between him and the Dukes of Holst about the Duchy of Scleswick.
Wickliffs books are burnt in Prague, which made a sedition. Moravia is united
to Bohemia: 7 Senators at Prague cast out at the windows. Sigismund the
Emperor, upon his brothers death, reigns in Bohemia 20 years. 40000 rebel
with Zisca. The Venetians recover diverse places taken by Pipus: A part of St.
Marks Church the Palace burnt; a Decree made against the building of a new
Palace. The Duke reverseth the Decree of paying 1000 Ducats: the Turks claim
Ionia from them; They take Lampsacum. In Flanders, Philip the Good rules 44
years; he sideth with the English. The Frisons revolt from Holland: the Earl
dies, being bitten by a mad dog. Iaquelin his daughter succeeds 18 years. The
Bishop of Liege resigneth his Bishopric, and obtains of the Emperor the
Earldom of Holland, being escheated for want of heirsmale. In England, Henry
the 5. reigned 9 years, he banisheth the French: some French executed for
Treason. At Agincourt 10000 French slain, and as many taken by the English. The
Emperor comes into England; he with Burgundy fide with the English: Harfleu
besieged, and relieved: the English take Caen, and other places. The Genuans,
French and Scots defeated: Queen Joan suspected of Sorcery, and commit^ed.
Peace with France and Burgundy. Donald of the Isles, recovers his Earldom of
Rosse: Wars between him and the Earl of Mar. Barwick and Roxburg besieged by
Albany and Douglas.

In the Church, sits Alexander 5. 11 months, then John 22. He removes to
Ariminum. Gregory stays at Rome, and Benet goes out of France into Aragon.
John goes to the Council at Constance, he with Benet are deposed. Gregory
resigneth, and is made chief Cardinal. John in a disguise is taken and
imprisoned. Martin 5. is chosen 7 years, and so this Schism ends. The Pope
goes from Constance against the will of the Emperor, and so the Council
ends. The Pope loses some Towns. In this Decad was held the Council of
Constance, where were 4 Patriarchs, 29 Cardinals, 346 Bishops, 564 Abbots and
Doctors, besides multitudes of fecular Princes. In this Council were found of
the Benedictines 15107 houses in Europe. Huss is first Excommunicated; his
books, and then himself, burnt. Wickliffs Doctrine is condemned, and his books
burnt. Jerome of Prague is also burnt: their ashes cast into the river. Sir
John Oldcastle hanged and burnt for Religion. Gerson persecuted by the Pope,
for speaking against the Roman Church. Zisca's followers are called Thaborites.

In the East, John 7. son to Andronicus, reigned 5 years; then John 8. 20
years. To Mahomet 1420
the Turk succeeded Amurath 2. his son 38 years. The false Mustapha set up by
the Greeks, is strangled. Constantinople is besieged: Mustapha the Sultans
brother takes Nice, and is strangled. Servia, and much of Natolia subdued by
the Turk: Smyrna annexed to the Turks Empire, the Prince and his son being
taken. The Turks take Thessalonica from the Venetlans, and subdue Aetolia,
whilst three Princes strive for it. In the West, Zisca is beaten by the
Imperialists, and loses his only eye: He overthrows the Imperialists.
Frederick Marquis of Misna, made Duke of Saxony and Elector, for money. Zisca
dies of the Plague, and orders a Drum to be made of his skin. The Elector is
defeated by the Hussites, and flies: they burn Aldenburg. In France, the
Dolphin is cited for murdering Burgundy, and for nonappearance is
dis-inherited. The King dies, and his son Charles 7. reigns 38 years. The
English are beaten by the Bastard of Orleans: they take Pontarson, and the
French Tournay. The battle of Harrings. Alphonsus of Arragon first adopted by
Joan of Naples, and then Lewis of Anjou. Arragon and Navar join against
Castile. Vitondus accepts Bohemia, which the King of Poland refused. The
Teutons set against the Polander by the Emperor: the King breaks his leg in
hunting. King Ericus of Denmark being returned from Syria, freeth all that
should build timberhouses in Elsenore from Taxes for 10 years, and for 20 those
that built of stone. The League renewed between Scotland and Denmark. Vandalia
forbid Traffic in the Danish Seas. Henry Duke of Scleswick slain in scaling
the walls of Flensburg. The Pope raises forces against the Hussites. 3 Armies
of Franks, Bavarians, and Saxons fall upon Bohemia: they all flee away without
fight. The Venetians denounce War against Philip of Milan, for oppressing the
Florentines. Philip takes Brescia, which again revolted. Philip of Flanders
aideth the Duke of Brabant against the Duke of Gloucester, and makes War against
Iaquelin of Holland, whose heir he got himself to be after her death. He
instituted the Order of the Golden-fleece. The Lords of Holland dislike John of
Brabant, and call in his brother the Earl of St. Pol, but the Duke is received,
and the faction of the Countess banished. Iaquelin divorced from the Duke, and
married to the Duke of Gloucester, who also forsakes her. King Henry of England
is declared heir of France, and Regent during the life of Charles. The Duke of
Clarence slain; the King pawneth his Crown to Cardinal Beaufort, for 20000 l.
The Duke of Bedford Regent of France. Henry 6. reigns in England 38 years; he
is crowned King of France. The French beaten at Vernol; Great-Ordnance now
first used in England. Warwick left Lieutenant in France. Talbot does good
service in France; Salisbury slain at the siege of Orleans, which is relieved
by Joan of Ark. Suffolk and Talbot taken; S. Dennis and other places lost by
the English: the Scots aid the French; the Earl of Buchan Constable of France:
King James carried by King Henry into France, he is ransomed; Buchan and
Douglasse slain at Vernol; Mordo with his two sons, and Lenox, executed in
Scotland for oppression; Alexander Lord of the Isles, rebelleth and is taken;
his brother kills the Earl of Cathnesse, and defeats the Earl of Mar. Alexanders
brother is driven into Ireland, his head is sent thence to the King.

In the Church, Clement 8. is chosen Antipope, by means of Alphonsus of Aragon,
he sat 8 years; he is forced to resign, and become Bishop of Majorca. Pope
Martin who refused to give the title of Sicily to Alphonsus, is reconciled to
him. Julian the Cardinal sent by the Pope against Bohemia, and to treat with
the Emperor about a Synod at Basil: Rene King of Sicily, striving for Lorrain,
is taken. Alphonsus seiseth on Naples. At Papia was a Synod held, which because
of the Plague, was removed to Sena, and dissolved by the Pope, for fear of
Aragon. The Adamites revive in Bohemia; and the Eremites at Rome: one Sect of
the Thaborites, call themselves Orphans, for the loss of Zisca. Wickliff's
body after 41 years, is dug up and burnt.

In the East, the Prince of Epirus is forced to send his three sons to the
Turk, Scanderbeg was one of them: The Turks takes many places from the
Christians; he exoculateth 1430
and geldeth Gregory son to the Despot of Sinderovia: the Greek Emperor with
Demetrius Prince of Peloponesus repair to Italy for help, and are present at
the Council of Florence. In the West, Sigismund is crowned at Millan and at
Rome; he makes Fran. Gonzaga Prince of Millan, and his son Lewis Marquess of
Mantua: the Empress imprisoned upon suspicion, and released: the Emperor died
of a surfeit of Melons: his son in law Albert Duke of Austria, is made King of
Bohemia. The English lose Chartres, are defeated at Vivaine, and subdue the
Normans. Paris falls off to the French, the Duke of Burbon sets up the Dolphin,
who are reconciled to the King. The Marshal of France burnt for Witchcraft.
Peace made between Castile and Portugal. The Moors are beaten. The Genuans
take Arragon, Navar, with 100 Princes, and 200 Knights at Cajetta; they are
sent to the Duke of Millan, and by him released. The Castilians and Portugals
beaten by the Moors. Alphonsus 5. obtains many victories against theMoors;
great troubles in Castile about the Constable. A sedition of Rusticks in
Hungary. Ladislaus of Poland, has fealty sworn to him by the Vayvod of
Valachia. The Swedes rebel against the Danes; the King hardly escapes with
his treasure into Gothland. Christopher Duke of Bavaria, sisters son to Ericus,
is sent to, to be King. Julian the Cardinal flies out of Bohemia. The
Thaborites take diverse towns. The Cup is allowed to the Bohemians in the
Council of Basil. Bohemia much distracted upon the death of Sigismund. The
Venetians defeat Philip of Millans forces by sea; they fight with him near
Cremona. Millan invaded by the Duke of Savoy and Montferrat. Philip loses many
places, and his General is taken. Flanders spoiled by the Duke of Gloucester,
who carries away many captive Children. The Hollanders for scouring the Seas
from the Easterlings, have carried a Broom ever since on their main-top.
Iaquelin surrendreth her Countries for the ransom of her husband. Ione of Ark
is burnt for a Witch. The Treaty of Arras, where the Burgundian sideth with the
French against the English: He is raised by the Protector of England from the
siege of Callis. Warwick the Regent spoileth Picardy. The French twice beaten
in Normandy. In Scotland the Earl of March made Earl of Buchan. Roxburg
besieged by the Scots King, who is murdered by the Earl of Athol. His son
James 2. succeeds 23 years: the Chancellor and Regent at odds, and are
reconciled. Douglasse troubles the State; the Queen takes the young King from
the Chancellor.

In the Church, Eugenius 4. sits 15 years; the Columnii rebel, and he flies in
a disguised habit to Florence; the people fortify the Popes Castle against
him; they are at last reconciled: he helps Rene against Alphonsus; he
attempteth to adjourn the Synod of Basil to Ferrara; but is opposed and
suspended by the Synod: It is decreed, that the Council is above the Pope. The
Greek Emperor acknowledges the Popes Supremacy; nevertheless he is deposed by
the Council of Basil. Queen Joan of Sicily dies, and names Rene her heir,
who now was a Prisoner in Burdy. Alphonsus is taken, as he was going to take
possession. The Aragonians defeated by Rene; the Council of Basil continued
there, at Ferrara and Florence, 15 years. The Bohemians are declared sons of
the Church by the Emperor and Bishop of Constance; this was engraven on
Marble, in golden letters at Prague; their pragmatical Sanction published at
Paris, but condemned by the Pope as heretical.

In the East, Theodore the Emperors brother, and the Turk besiege
Constantinople: The 1440
other brother Constantine recovered Peloponnesus, and rebuilds the wall: He
succeeds to his brother in the Empire 8 years. Peloponnesus divided between the
other two brothers; they pay tribute to Mahumet. The Turks are beaten out of
Hungary by John Huniades. Woldavia won by the Hungarians. Huniades defeates the
Turk twice, and kills two Bassas. Scanderbeg escapes into Epirus, and
possesses it. Bulgaria lost by the Turks, whereof 30000 were slain: Peace for
10 years between the Turks and Hungarians; these break the peace and are
defeated by the Turks at Varna. Scanderbeg refuses to make peace with the
Turk. Peloponnesus taken by Amurath. Huniades defeateth the Turks in Rascia,
and is defeated by them in the Plains of Cassovia. Scanderbeg overcomes
Mustopha twice; Amurath dies at the siege of Croja: To him succeeded Mahomet
the great, his son 32 years; he begins with the murder of his Brothers. In the
West, Frederick Archduke of Austria reigns 53 years: Wars in Bavaria between
Lewis the father, and the son. Lucelburg sold by the Emperor to the Duke of
Saxony, causes war: The Emperor refuses the Crown of Bohemia. Huniadies
makes war on the Emperor for not restoring the King, and Crown of Hungary. The
Imperial Cities and Earl of Wiritzburg fall out. The Norimbergers defeated 8
times by Albert of Brandeburg. The Duke of Burgundy ransometh the Duke of
Orleans, for 300000 Crowns. The Parliament of Tholose set up for Languedoc.
Diepe besieged by Talbot, and relieved by the Dolphin. 5 years Truce with
England: the Duke of Britain starveth his brother, for intelligence with the
English. Pont L' Arch taken from the English by the Duke of Britain, who with
French help, recovereth also Normandy. War between Castile and Navar. Ladislaus
of Poland is chosen King of Hungary. Casimire the Kings brother made Duke of
Lituania, the Prince thereof being slain. Silesia wasted by the Polanders. The
Turks exoculate the Despot of Rascia and his sons, who fled to Ladislaus; war
between Massovia and Lituania. The King is killed: Casimire refuses to be
King: Boleslaus Duke of Massovia was chosen; then Casimire accepted it, and
reigned 45 years: He neglects Polonia, and resides in Lituania; he refuses his
Coronation Oath, till the Polanders began to reject him, then he took it.
Ladislaus being chosen King of Hungary; the Queen carries her son and crown of
Hungary to the Emperor. Julian the Cardinal persuades the Hungarians to break
the 10 years peace with the Turks; whereupon the King is defeated and slain at
Varna. Ladislaus Posthumus succeeded 14 years: he was son to Albert. Huniades
kills the Vaivod of Valachia, who detained him, after the battle of Varna.
Huniades and the Polander fight for Valachia. Christopher of Bavaria reigns in
Suevia 8 years; he restores to Adolphus the Dukedom of Scleswick; the Rebels
in Iutia defeated, and the chief of them executed: He is crowned first in
Suevia, then in Norway and Denmark, he lost much treasure by shipwreck; to him
succeeded Christiernus Earl of Oldenburg 30 years; Adolphus Duke of Scleswick
was named, but he refused the Crowns. The Swedes chose Charles son to Canutus
for their King. In Bohemia, Ladislaus Posthumus Alberts son reigns 19 years:
Menard the governor is imprisoned, and Prague taken by the Thaborites. A great
loss of goods in Venice, by an inundation. The Venetians take all from Sforza,
which they had given him, for aiding Philip of Millan, whom they defeat, and
take Laudum with Placentia. Laudum recovered by Sforza. Saint Marks Church
robbed by a Cretan of two Millions of Gold; the Venetian Ambassador murdered
by Sforza. Philip of Flanders restores the Duchess of Luxelburg: he
pacifieth the factions of Hoecks and Cabillaucks. An inundation at Dort
destroyed 100000 people. Philip and the Gauntois make war, because they refuse
to pay his customs of Salt. The Duke of Orleans who had been prisoner in
England 25 years, is ransomed by Philip Duke of Burgundy; who was therefore
called the Good. The Duke of Glocesters wife imprisoned for Sorcery: Paul's
steeple fired by lightning; Whittington builds Newgate and a College. The
King has with Renes daughter, whom he married, Awou and Main. Thomas Air
built Leaden Hall: The Duke of Sommerset made Regent of France: the Duke of
Gloucester, and the Cardinal of Winchester die suddenly, within fifteen d^yes of
each other. The English surprise Fo^geres, and in three years lose Normandy and
Gascoine. The Irish suppressed: the Duke of Suffolk beheaded at Sea. Douglasse
and his brother executed at Edenburg: William son to James Douglasse, the
Kings favorite, displaceth the Chancellor and Regent, which caused much
mischief:, Sir James Stuart who had married the Kings mother banished: the
English beaten back from invading Scotland; 3 years peace concluded. Rene
expelled out of Naples by Alphonsus, who promises to pay to the Pope yearly
8000 ounces of Gold.

In the Church, Eugenius sits yet, in whose time the 30 Schism breaks out:
Amadeus Duke of Savoy being chosen; he was called Foelix 5. and sat 9 years,
having been Duke 40 years, he became an Heremite: Eugenius dies, to whom
succeeds Nicolas 5. 8 years; he erected the Vatican Library: Foelix
resigneth, and is made Cardinal and Legate. 4 Synods held this Decad; one of
them at Lateran; to nullify the Council of Basil. The Feast of our Lady's
Visitation instituted at Basil. Palmerius the Chronologer burnt for heresies.

In the East, Constantinople is taken, the Emperor slain, and 60000 people
carried away captives. Scanderbeg beats the Turks many times. Mahomet
strikes off the head of his 1450
fair Concubine Irene, at a public meeting: He recovers Servia; he loses an
eye. Huniades beats him off from the siege of Belgrad, 40000 Turks slain, he be
siegeth Rhodes, but is beat back by the Pope and Genuans: he loses Lemnos,
takes Corinth, dismantleth Athens; he marries the daughter of Demetrius
Prince of Peloponesus, whom he expelled, and gives him the town Oenum, and the
Custom of Salt for his maintenance. In the West, the Emperor restores the
Crown of Hungary; the Duke of Brunswick taken by the Bishop of Colen in fight.
A sedition in Austria of ten years continuance. The Pope displaceth the Bishop
of Mentz for refusing to pay his First Fruits, which caused much trouble: the
Emperor is taken by the Citizens in Vienna, and released. Aquitain revolteth
to the French: A Parliament set up at Grenoble in Dauphiny. Talbot is slain,
the Dolphin rebelleth, and flies into Burgundy. The French burn Sandwich; the
Duke of Alenson imprisoned for intelligence with the English. The King being
forewarned of poison, abstained so long from meat, that he starved himself and
died. The Moors in Andalusia defeated. By the death of Charles, Navar fell to
Blanch the repudiated wife of Henry; and Arragon to Ferdinand son to King John.
To Alphonsus of Arragon succeeded his brother John King of Navar, Father to
Ferdinand the Catholic, 21 years, Casimire of Poland refuses to restore
Prussia to the Teutonick: at last he is defeated by them. Pedolia invaded by
the Tartars. A league between Poland and Bohemia. Huniades made Regent of
Hungary: his death plotted by the Earl of Cilia. Ulric slain by Ladistaus, son
to Huniades; he is executed, and his brother Matthias imprisoned; the king
dies, and the same Matthias is chosen, 32 years: he was forced to promise to
his keeper Podiebral, who was Regent of Bohemia, to marry his daughter, and to
pay him 60000 Crowns. Charles of Suevia is forced for his tyranny to fly to
Dansk with his treasure. Christiern is chosen King of Suevia; the King seiseth
upon Scleswick and Holst, being escheated by the death of Adolphus: Hamburgh
submits to Denmark. Ulrick Earl of Cilia, Governor of Austria, and of the king
of Bohemia's person; he is removed and restored; the King dies. Pediebard
crowned, he reigned 13 years; he is opposed by Silesia for being a Thaborite.
The Venetians expel the Florentines out of their territories. Cosmo aideth
Sforza against them, who takes Millan, and is honored by the Pope with a rich
Sword. A peace is made between Venice, Florence, and Sforza. The French king
offended for the peace made between England and the Flemmings. Jack Cade
rebelleth in Kent, and is executed. The Duke of York takes arms against the
King; he submits, and swears Fealty. He accuses Sommerset, and is accused by
him; Sommerset sent to the Tower, released, and made Captain of Calice. York,
Warwick and Salisbury take arms; the battle of S. Albans; The King hurt and
taken, York made Protector, and displaced. 9 years peace with Burgundy. Warwick
goes to Calice: the King forces beaten at Blore-heath, by the Earl of
Salisbury: At Ludlow the Yorkshire men take arms. Douglasse returning from Rome
is pardoned, and made Viceroy; He is slain at Sterling, for plotting against
the King: His brother James besieges it, and is forced thence by Huntly: His
forces forsake him, he flies into England: The Family of the Douglasses put to
the Horn. Archbishop of S. Andrews made Chancellor. Douglasse with the English
invade Scotland: the King at the siege of Roxburg is slain by the breaking of a
Cannon.

In the Church, Calixtus 3. sits 3 years; he procured a war between the
Persian and Turk, he left behind him 500000 crowns. Pius 2. succeeds 5
years; He was Aenaeas Sylvius, and Scribe in the Council of Basil; he will have
no appeals from the Pope to a Council; he thought otherwise at Basil. Calixtus
3. instituted the Feast of Christ's transfiguration, upon the defeating of the
Turks in Hungary.

In the East, Ussum Cassanes the Persian makes war against Mahomet. Mytilene
and other places taken by the Turks. Trapezund taken. David the Emperor and his
two sons killed. Mahomet takes Chalci^ from the Venetians. The Governor of
Mysia flei'd. 1460
Scanderbeg dies. Epirus taken again, and Scanderbeg's sons driven out.
Mahomets Fleet spoiled, bound for Trapezund: The Turks waste Hungary. In the
West, the Emperor tenders his Daughter to Mahomet, if he will alter his
Religion; but Albert of Bavaria stole her away. The King of Bohemia freed the
Emperor from those of Vienna. Brunswick makes war against the Hans-towns. The
Emperor entertained at Rome by the Pope. The Turks enter Germany. In France,
Lewis 11 reigns 22 years: His covetousness causes a Civil war: He redeems
the Towns morgaged to the Duke of Burgundy at the Treaty of Arras: The Duke
with the Lords besiege Paris; the King disperseth the Lords by fair promises.
He takes the Duchy of Normandy from his brother, and flies to the Duke of
Burgundy. The King makes the Duke of Britain to renounce the League with
Burgundy, and causes Liege to rebel against the Duke. The Duchy of Guyen
bestowed on the Kings brother. Diverse Lord of Castile league against Henry
their King; they force him to put away his supposed daughter, and to declare
his brother Alphonsus heir. Alphonsus is crowned, and Henry deposed; but at
last Henry prevails, and Alphonsus dies. Peace settled in Castile, and Isabel
the Kings sister is declared heir, she marries Ferdinand of Arragon. Marieburg
yields to the King of Poland. Pomerania after 180 years united to Polonia.
Peace with the Teutonicks. Ladislaus the Kings son is designed King of Bohemia,
after the death of George. The Tartars defeated by the Vaivod of Moldavia.
Matthias is crowned King of Hungary at Alba; Venice allows him 60000 Crowns
yearly, and the Pope 50000 against the Turks: his Uncle is beheaded at
Constantinople by the Turks. Transylvania reduced by Matthias; he is beaten and
wounded in Valachia, by the Vayvods treachery. War with Bohemia. 10000 Captives
carried away by the Turk out of Hungary. The Swed s rebel against the Danes:
the King forced to fly. Charles is sent for, but quickly forsakes them again.
A rebellion in Holst by Gerard the Kings brother, who is imprisoned. The Danes
take two English ships: Their goods and persons attached in England. Gerard
expelled out of Holst. King George of Bohemia condemned by the Pope of heresy;
Matthias of Hungary set up against him. The Venetians lose Negropont to the
Turk. Charles of Burgundy helps the Pope against the Turk; he falls out with
his father, and is reconciled again. Arnold Duke of Guelders imprisoned a year
by his son. Liege submits and is pardoned. Philip dies: His son Charles
succeeds 10 years; he demolisheth Liege for rebelling. Gaunt submits and is
pardoned. In England, York is attainted, and the King taken. York confirmed
Heir to the Crown; he is slain by the Queen: his son Edward defeats the Queens
forces, and she his. Edward 4. reigns 22 years. Henry and the Queen are
overcome, and fly into Scotland. The Queen enters Northumberland with French
forces, and is beaten: the King flies into Wales; he is taken disguised, and
sent to the Tower. Sheep transported into Spain. The King marries the Lady
Elizabeth Gray. Warwick plotteth against King Edward, who is defeated, and
committed to the Archbishop of York; he escapes to London; He defeats the
Lincolnshir-men. Warwick and Clarence fly into France; Edward flies to
Burgundy. Henry released, and the Crown entailed upon Clarence; Warwick is made
Regent. In Scotland, James 3. reigns 28 years; Roxburg and Wark-Castles
taken; Donald of the Isles rebelleth, and is killed. King Henry resigns Barwick
to the Scots; Peace with England 15 years. The Lords of Barcellone call in Rene
to be King of Castile; the French assist.

In the Church sits Paul 2. 6 years: He was a Dunce; therefore hated Scholars.
He imprisoned Platina and Pomponius Leans; He spent upon the Emperors
entertainment in 17 days 18000l. Cardinals are privileged to ride on Mules.
Diverse bribe the Turk, to be Patriarch of Constantinople.

In the East, the Turks are twice beaten by the Persians. Dalmatia, Austria,
Mysia, Bosna, 1470
Styria, and Carinthia wasted by the Turks; they win Taurica Chersonesus, and
are beaten in Valachia. Ali-Beg defeated in Hungary. The Turks do much hurt in
Hungary, Dacia, and Venetian territories; 30000 Turks killed in Transylvania;
diverse Islands taken by the Turk. In the West, war between the Palatine and
Bavare about Mentz: The Grisons league with the Helvetians: The Archbishop of
Strigonium flies to the Emperor with much treasure; he is made Archbishop of
Saltzburgh. Matthias of Hungary subdueth much of Austria: Peace with Hungary.
The French King takes Amiens and S. Quintins from the Duke of Burgundy, who
recovereth S. Quintins; he hireth one to kill the King. The Constable seeks
to corrupt Burbon. Peace with France and England; peace also between Burgundy
and Britain; The Constable is executed. Orange made a Principality subject to
France. At Digion in Burgundy, a Parliament is erected: The King takes diverse
Towns from the Duchess of Burgundy. The Switzers begin to serve the French:
The Archers are put down, which were instituted by Charles 7. The Bishop of
Pampelone killed by the Constable, upon suspicion of adultery with the Queen.
Ferdinand the Catholic reigns 41 years; He and Isabel claim Portugal, and
seize on it; she is declared heir of Castile. The first Voyage of Spanlards to
Guiny. In hatred to Matthias, Casimir is made King of Poland; but he is
reconciled to the people, and Casimir returns. Poland invaded by the
Hungarian's, and Russia by the Tartars. The Teutonicks renew the war with
Poland, and then submit: the Tartars waste Podolia, and the Turks Carinthia. It
was agreed, that Matthias of Hungary should enjoy Moravia and Silesia for his
lifetime, and should be styled King of Bohemia; but after his death, these
Provinces should return to Bohemia on payment of 600000 Crowns, and the rest of
Bohemia should fall to Matthias, if he survived Ladislaus. Much mischief done
by the Turks in Hungary, during the Nuptials of the King with the Daughter of
Arragon. Matthias recovers from the Turks 30000 Captives, and wastes their
Country 30 miles: He takes also diverse Towns in Styria, because the Emperor
kept not promise. The King of Denmark enters Suevia, without acting any thing;
He is honorably entertained at Rome. George of Bohemia dies with grief, that
the Prince was taken by Matthias. Ladislaus the son of Casimir is elected 46
years. Matthias being rejected, invadeth Bohemia. Sicily and Venice league
against the Turks; they spoil diverse Turkish places. The King of Cyprus does
bequeath his Wife and Kingdom to the Venetians: they settle her in it. The
Turks are driven from the siege of Lepanto; Peace is made with them. S.
Quintins taken by the French, they invade Burgundy. The Burgundian sideth with
King Edward against King Henry. The Frisons refuse to pay the Chimney-penny
demanded by the Duke: he prevailed in France. The Duke of Guelders being angry
with his Son, sells his Duchy to the Burgundian for 92000 Florens, and an
annual pension. The Emperor refuses to make the Duke King of Burgundy; and he
denies to match his Daughter with his Son Maximilian. The Duke of Burgundy,
and Rene Duke of Lorain, invade each others territories. Nancy, which Rene had
taken, is besieged by Duke Charles, who is slain there: his daughter Mary
succeeded: the French seize on some places of the Duchy: Maximilian is
espoused to her, and the Dolphin rejected. Henault recovered from the French;
Guelders revolteth; the French lose Tournay; the Lord of Montigny is made
Governor of Holland. In England King Henry is taken by Edward, and committed;
Warwick killed in Barnet-Fight; the Queen is taken; Gloucester murders the King
and Prince; Pembrook and Richmond escape into Britany; Oxford sent prisoner
into Normandy; the Laws of Henry cancelled: the Burgundian animateth the King
against the French, but fails him; therefore he makes peace with France, upon
a match between the Dolphin and his daughter Elizabeth. The King bribes the
Duke of Britany to have the Earl of Richmond, but fails: George Duke of
Clarence condemned of treason; he is drowned in a But of Malmsey in the Tower:
the King hated for his covetousness. The king of Denmark relinquisheth his
Title to the Orcades, upon the matching of his daughter Margaret to the King of
Scotland. S. Andrews made an Archbishopric: the King persecutes the
Archbishop, gives himself to magic and oppression; he makes one Cockram a
Mason his favorite: John Earl of Mar the Kings brother, for treason, has his
veins opened, so that he bleedeth to death.

In the Church sat Sixtus 4. 13 years: He sets out a Fleet against the Turks;
A Jubilee at Rome, the Jubilee now reduced to 25 years: He erecteth Glascow and
S. Andrews into Archbishopricks in Scotland; in Castile he instituteth the
Inquisition against the Jews and Moors. Weselius a Preacher at Worms, burnt
for speaking against Indulgences.

In the East, to Mahomet succeeded his son Bajazet 2. 32 years: Zemes another
son aspireth 1480 --
and flies into Egypt and Rhodes. Epirus recovered by John son to Scanderbeg;
the Turks lose Bosna; they take Valachia, and invade Moldavia. Bajazet
attempted to destroy the Janissaries, but failing, temporiseth with them: He
bestows other lands on the King of Caramania for his kingdom. The two Bassa's
sent against Egypt for receiving of Zemes, are defeated and taken. Ba^azet sues
to the Egyptian Sultan for peace: Zemes is sent to the Pope: The Despot of
Servia takes 7000 Turks with their plunder, and rescueth 10000 Captives. In the
West, Matthias takes Vienna with other places. Maximilian chosen King of the
Romans: the Duke of Saxony helps the Emperor against Matthias, and peace is
made: Maximilian invades Picardy, takes Artois, Arras, and Burgundy; he brings
back his daughter that was betrothed to the French king; he takes Belgrad upon
the death of Matthias. In France, Charles 8. reigns 14 years: The Duke of
Orleans leagueth with diverse Lords against the Kings sister who was Regent;
they submit, and league again: the King prevails against the Britains: Orleans
committed to the Castle of Bourges, and afterward released: The Duke of Britain
being dead, king Charles takes diverse places from his daughter and heir Anne;
the difference is referred to Maximilian, he takes her part. Francis of Navar
poisoned; his sister Katherine succeeds. The Castilians take the Canaries.
The Duke of Braganza executed, for intelligence with Castile. Many Towns taken
in Granado. Castile takes Malaga from the Moors: the Portugals begin to fail to
the East: the Friars of Jerusalem receive an annual pension of 1000 Ducats from
the king of Castile. Charles of Anjou dies; he was Titular king of Naples and
Sicily, from him the French kings claim their titles to those kingdoms.
Novograd in Lituania is taken by the Muscovites. Casimir the King of Poland's
son, will rather die, then lie with a Woman to recover his health. The Tartars
spoil Moldavia. The Vayvod swears fealty to the King of Poland, who thereupon
drives the Turks thence. Casimir's youngest son Bishop of Cracovia. The
Polander beats the Tartars in Russia and Podolia. Matthias of Hungary warreth
successfully against the Turks and Germans, and takes many Towns; he makes
peace with the Emperor. To Christiern of Denmark succeeds his son John; he
has some controversies with the English. Steno Sture made Governor of
Swedeland. Venice and Florence join against the Pope. Ferrara ungrateful to
the Venetians, who had got him his Estate; most of the Italian Princes league
against Venice; at last a peace is made: The Venetians have war in Austria and
Rhetia; they are beaten near Trent. Katherine the Queen of Cyprus resigneth her
kingdom to Venice, to whom they allow 50. l. weight of gold yearly, and the
Castle of Azola. In Holland, the Cabillaucks take Dort, and the Hoecks Leyden:
War between Holland and Utricht. Mary of Burgundy is killed by a fall from her
horse; Maximilian is received Governor of Holland, but rejected in Flanders;
Her daughter Margaret betrothed to the Dolphin; Prince Philip is received.
Troubles between Antwerp and Bruges. Egmo^ mad^ Governor of Holland; then
Euglebert Earl of Nassau. Troubles in Frisia. As Maximilian endeavored to
reconcile Bruges with Antwerp, he is imprisoned, and some of his servants
killed: Upon resignation of the government to his son, he is set free. The
Emperor makes Albert of Saxony Governor of the Low Countries; he is opposed by
the Flemings, who take Rotterdam, and lose it again to Maximilian. The Scots
invade England, and the English Scotland; Barwick taken from the Scots. The
French will pay no Tribute to England. Edward 5. succeeds his father one
month: Gloucester made Protector, then King; his name was Richard 3. he
reigned 3 years: the Queens kindred cut off, the Princes are murdered, and
Buckingham beheaded. Morton Bishop of Ely, attempteth to advance the Earl of
Richmond, who landeth, and kills King Richard; this was Henry 7. who reigned
23 years; the Kingdom is entailed to his heirs; He instituted the Guard. The
Lord Lovel rebelleth; and Lambert a Counterfeit set up, who was crowned at
Dublin, and overthrown at Stoke, he is made a Skullion in the Privy-kitchin.
Peace with Scotland. England sides with Britany against France. The Northern
Rebels overthrown, and the chief executed. In Scotland, Cockram the Mason is
made Earl of Mar: The Kings brother Alexander Duke of Albany flies into
England; he is reconciled, and Cockram hanged: Albany made Regent, but out of
fear escapes into France; he died by a splint in Tilting with Lewis of
Orleans. The Lords rebel against the King, and make his son James their
Captain: the Kings forces beaten, and he slain: His son James 4. succeeded 26
years; he always wore an Iron-chain in stead of a girdle, as a penance for his
rebellion. A double-bodied Monster from the navel upward, born in Scotland.

In the Church, sits Innocent 8. 7 years: He was the first Pope that advanced
his Bastards. Zemez, Bajazets brother, delivered to him by the Master of
Rhodes, for which he is made a Cardinal: this Pope died of an Apoplexy.

In the East, the Turks aid the Rebels in Hungary against the King, whom they
defeat, and took his General in Croatia. The Turks are beaten by Ericus Duke of
Brunswick. -- 1490
Zemez poisoned by the Pope. The Turks do much mischief in the Venetian
Territories. They take Lepanto, Modene, and other places; 60000 of them slain
in Russia. In the West, the Emperor being dead, his son Maximilian succeeds
25 years: he drives the Turks out of Croatia. Basil falls off from the Emperor
to the Switzers: the Emperor is defeated by them, and grants them peace.
Maximilian marries Anne of Britany by Deputy; but the French King marries
her, and casts off Maximilians daughter. Charles besieges Naples, where the
French malady breaks out. He takes Naples and loses it again: He dies, to
whom succeeded Lewis 2. Duke of Orleans, 18 years: he divorceth his wife, and
takes Anne the former Kings widow: he takes Milan in his mothers right, and
puts the Grandchilde of Gabeas into a Covent. Alphonso of Portugal killed with
a fall from his horse. Granado conquered by Ferdinand and Isabel. America
discovered by Columbus; he brought home the Venerial Pox. Jews and Moors
banished. The French King resignes to Ferdinand Roussillon, that he might not
cross him in the Conquest of Naples. The Pope limiteth the discoveries of
Castile and Portugal: The Moors of Castile compelled to embrace the Faith. The
French invade Roussillon, because Ferdinand assisted Naples. Columbus makes a
third voyage to America. Casimire of Poland dies, and John Albert his son
succeeded: 10 years he makes a League with Bohemia, and peace with the Turk.
The Polacks defeated in Podolia by the Tartars: the King invades Moldavia, and
is beaten. The Valachians carry many away captives out of Russia and Podolia:
The Turks defeated in Russia. Ladislaus of Bohemia is made King of Hungary 26
years: he recovers Alba Regalis. The Hungarians plunder Mysia. The Turks beaten
from Belgrad: the King spoileth the Turks lands for 100 miles. Hungary, Pole
and Russia league against the Turk. The Norwegians are dispensed to receive the
Sacrament without wine. John King of Denmark subdueth the Swedes: he takes the
Lubec ships, and they his: He is chosen King of Swedeland, and Steno deposed.
The Venetians protect Pisa against Florence, they are Neuters to France and
Naples. Sforza strives to get Pisa from the Venetians: they League with France
against him; he calls in the Turk. Milan loses Cremona. Eug. of Nassau subdueth
the Brugeois, who built him an house, yet belonging to the Prince of Orange.
Nassau and Guelders taken by the French King: The Boors of Holland do great
insolences. The Duchy of Guelders escheated to the Emperor, who makes the
Duke of Saxony hereditary Governor of Frisia, against whom the Frisons league:
they rebel against his son: The Duke is slain at the siege of Gro^nengen. The
King of England helps Maximilian against the French; he besieges Bolen: the
French King pays the charges of the War, and an annual sum, and so obtains
Peace. Perkin Werbe^ set up against King Henry by the Duchess of Burgundy: he
pretends he was the younger son to the Duke of York: he goes into Scotland,
and makes the Scots invade England: he marryeth the Earl of Huntly's daughter.
The Cornish Rebels defeated at Black Heath: The Scots are resisted by the
Bishop of Durham, and Earl of Surrey: Perkin defeated and taken, and sent to
the Tower; he is hanged at Tyburn, and the Earl of Warwick beheaded on the
Tower Hill. Truce made by the Scots with England.

In the Church, Alexander 6. sat 11 years; he makes one of his bastards Prince
of Sicily, the 2. a Cardinal, and the 3. a Duke of Spain. Caesar the Cardinal,
leaves his Hat, and marries the French Kings Cousin: he is made Duke of
Valentinois, Valentia is made an Archbishopric. At Paris begins the Order of
Penitent women, converted from the Stews. Savanor^la hanged and burnt at
Florence for his opinions.

In the East, the Spanish, French, and Venetian Fleets against the Turk are
dispersed. Dyrrachium taken by Bajazet: Peace made with Venice. He is wounded
by a Dervisar, whose 1500 --
body was torn, his brains dashed out, and the Order banished. 3 Bassa's
defeated in a Rebellion. Constantinople ruined by earthquake, and repaired by
Bajazet, by setting at work 80000 men. In the West, the Norinbergers are
worsted by Brandeburgs forces: the Boors in the Diocese of Spire rebel. At
Lions, the Emperor makes a League with France and Spain: the Emperor has War
with the Palatine of Bavaria, for some part of that Country, and with Venice.
The Swedes, in favor of Denmark, proscribed by the Emperor, they slight his
Act. The Bohemians having wasted Germany, are driven out. Presburg or Possonium
in Hungary, taken by the Emperor: he is not suffered to pass armed through the
Venetian Lands. A League at Cambray between the Emperor, Pope and French
against Venice. The Imperial Chamber is translated from Worms to Ratisbone.
Verona, Padua and Vicenza taken by the Emperor. Milan is subdued again by the
French. Sforza and his brother carried into France. At Roan and Aix Parliaments
are set up. The French and Spaniard having expelled the Emperor from Naples,
they agree that the French should have Naples, and the Spaniard Magna Graecia
with Apulia. The Spanish General Gonsalvus expels the French out of Naples. The
Genuans rebel, and are subdued by Lewis: The Portugals sail to Calecut. Philip
is acknowledged heir of Castile, and succeeds with Ione his wife. Philip
dies, the title of Catholic made Hereditary by the Pope to the Kings of
Spain: The Portugals overcome at Cambaia. Ormus in the Persian gulf taken: the
King of Cambaia made tributary to Portugal: The Venetians are stripped of
Tarentum and Brundusium by the Spaniards. The Polander makes peace with the
Muscovite and Turk. The King of Poland dies: His brother Alexander succeeds
5 years. Lituania united again to Poland: the Tartars expelled Russia and
Podolia: the King dies, to him succeeded his brother Sigismund 41 years: he
gains much from Basil Duke of Muscovia; he beats the Tartars and Valachians.
Christiern of Denmark subdueth the rebellious Norwegians: He makes peace with
Lubec; they make War against him, for not performing Articles. The Queen of
Sweden taken in the Castle of Stockholm, and freed by the Popes means. The
Venetians take diverse ships and places from the Turks. The French take diverse
places in Italy, and lose them again to the Pope and Spaniard. Philip and Ione
of Flanders go into Spain; he dies at Bourges, his heart buried at Jerusalem.
Guelders invadeth Brabant. The Emperor becomes Guardian to Charles, and his
other Nephews. Margaret of Saxony named Regent of the Low Countries. King
Philip of Spain, and his Queen, cast by storms on the English coast, land at
Falmouth, they are Royally entertained. The Earl of Suffolk practices with the
Duchess of Burgundy against the King; he is sent by King Philip into England,
and is committed to the Tower. Henry 7. his Chapel finished, and so is the
Savoy; the King dies: to him succeeds his son Henry 8. 37 years. Empson and
Dudley, who were employed in the former Kings time about the Penal-Laws, are
now executed: He makes a League with the Emperor and Spaniard. The King of
Denmark having fallen out with his Lords, comes into Scotland, and is restored
by the Scots. The Hollanders for robbing the Kings Merchants, are taken, and
their heads cut off, and sent to the King in barrels. The King is declared
Protector of the Faith, by the Pope.

In the Church, Pope Alexander sits yet. Sforza regains Milan from the Pope.
Borgias takes the Duchy of Urbin and Camerinum. The Pope, by the Butlers
mistake, is poisoned, with that cup which he had provided for some Cardinals.
Pius 3. succeeded 26 days, then Julius 2. 10 years; he was a better Soldier
then Scholar; he is assisted by the French against Bentivolo an usurper in
Bononia, who resignes it to the Pope. Borgia escapes prison in Spain; he is
slain after he was made General by the King of Navar. The Pope, by the Emperors
and French help, recovereth diverse places from the Venetians. In Germany
appeared bloody Crosses upon peoples garments. The Boors of Spire rise against
the Monasteries and Clergy, refusing to pay Tithes. The Kingdom of Congo
converted to Christianity.

In the East, Bajazet intended to make Achmet his eldest son successor; but the
Bassas set up -- 1510
Selymus: Bajazet retireth himself, and is poisoned by Selymus; he slew two
Pages for lamenting the death of Bajazet their Lord, and his father. Selymus
reigned 8 years: he murdered five of Achmets children, and strangleth his
brother. The Plague at Constantinople sweeps away 160000 people. Selymus takes
diverse places from the Persian, and makes War upon Hungary, and Egypt also,
because Campson Gaure the Sultan, took part with the Persian: In the taking of
Aleppo, the Sultan is trodden to death. Syria submits. Selymus with
reverence enters Jerusalem, and gives to the Christian Priests 6 months
allowance. Tonembeius the Sultan is overthrown at Cayre, and hanged. Gazelles
made Lieutenant of Syria. As Selymus was preparing against the Christians, he
is struck with a Canker in his back, which rots his flesh, and so he died. In
the West, there are troubles between the Duke of Saxony and Bishop of Mentz.
Germany divided into 10 Provinces in a Diet at Triers. The Synods of Pisa and
Toures called against the Pope, are nullified by the Emperor in a Diet at
Colen. The Emperor expels the Venetians out of Lombardy: the Emperor meets the
Kings of Poland and Bohemia at Vienna, about the succession of these Kingdoms,
if Ladislaus should die without issue. The Emperors Army for want of pay
forsake him: he therefore makes peace with France. Upon Maximilians death,
Charles of Spain carries the Empire from Francis of France. He reigned 38
years. The French besiege the Pope and Cardinals in Bologna, but are forced to
give off for want of food. The French kill the Switzers Ambassador going for
Rome; therefore they denounce War against them: they refuse to compound, and
invade Milan. The French lose all in Italy, by withdrawing their forces thence
against the English. Lewis cannot recover Milan. He makes peace with the Pope,
and with England, and then dies. The Switzers invade Burgundy. To Lewis
succeeds Francis the first 33 years. He regains Milan, and meets the Pope at
Bologna. The French and Switzers League against the Spaniards, take Tripolis.
Ferdinand uniteth Navar to Castile by expelling John Albert. The Moluccos taken
by the Portugals, and the river Plata discovered. Ferdinand languisheth and
dies of a Love-potion: Charles son to Philip succeeds 43 years. Joan and her
husband die, having attempted in vain to recover Navar. The Tartars invade
Russia, and are beaten back. Smolensco taken by the Muscovites; they are
defeated by the Polander at Borysthenes. The King of Poland makes War against
the Marquis of Brandeburg Master of the Teutonicks, for not swearing homage to
him. The Hungarians and Turks invade each others Lands. The King of Hungary
dies, his son a child succeeds 11 years. The Lubeckers spoil Denmark and
assist the Swedes: the Hollander helps the King: a peace at last with him is
concluded, and the Swedes excluded. The King dies; his son Christiern succeeds
10 years: He with the Bishop of Upsale plot to reduce the Swedes, therefore he
besieges Stockholm, but gives off, for want of necessaries; He takes the Town
at last, spoils it, exercises strange cruelties, and returns to Denmark. Steno
Sture the younger made Governor of Swedeland; he deposes the Bishop of Upsale,
who was restored upon the death of Steno, and taking of Stockholm. In Bohemia,
Lewis an Infant-King is brought up by George Marquis of Brandeburg. The
Venetians league with the Pope and Aragon against France. Venice recovereth
Brixia. The Switzers join with them against the French: The Emperor beats them
at Vicenza: they league with the French, and quarrel with the Pope, and relieve
Vicenza. The French restore Verona to them. The Duke of Guelders takes diverse
places from the Burgundians, and makes War against Utricht: by the quarrelling
of Saxony with the Earls of Embden, for Groaning, Frisia is wasted. The Duke of
Saxony resigneth Frisland for money. Charles takes possession of Belgium, and
goes into Spain. Peter a notable Pyrate, surpriseth Horn. King Henry sits
down before Turwyn; the Emperor takes pay of him. The Lord Darcy sent with
forces to Ferdinand the Kings Father in Law, against the Moors. Marquis Dorset
invadeth Aquitaine, but the Flux in his Army drives him back again. Turwyn and
Tournay taken; the French defeated in the battle of Spurs, which were then much
employed in the horses sides when they fled. King James of Scotland defeated
and slain at Flowden. The French by the Rhodians invade Sussex, and Sir John
Wallop Normandy: peace with France. Mary the Kings sister, and Queen of France,
upon the death of King Lewis, returns, and marries Charles Brandon. Peace
for 3 years with Scotland. Cardinal Wolsey erecteth the Star Chamber, and Court
of Requests: the Apprentices rise against Strangers: the Sweating sickness.
Tournay restored to the French. The Emperor, and Cardinal Campeius arrive in
England. Barton the Scots Pyrate takes 13 English Ships. James 5. reigns in
Scotland 30 years: the Queen widow is Regent whilst a widow, and the Duke of
Albany Tutor: by marrying Archibald Douglas, she loses her Regency; she is
delivered of a daughter in England, afterward married to the Earl of Lenox:
Douglas and Hume disturb the Kingdom: Arran and Hume committed. Dunbar burnt by
the Humes; the Rebels are pardoned: The Regent leaves seven Deputies, and
saileth into France. Angus and Arran differ.

In the Church, Pope Julius sits yet: He Excommunicates the Kings of France and
Navar: In a Battle on Easter day, he loses 16000 men, and Ravenna to the
French. He begins St. Peter's Church in the Vatican. Leo the 10. succeeds 8
years: he continues the Lateran Council: He bought Mutina of the Emperor for
30000 crowns. He helps Sforza against France; He gives Urbin to his Nephew,
who the next year lost it. He made 31 Cardinals; he strangled Cardinal Petrucci
for conspiring: He recovers Parma and Placentia: The Council at Tours decrees,
that the Pope should be forced to call a General Council, if he will not
hearken to Peace. The Lateran Council rejects that of Pisa, called by the
Emperor and French against the Pope. The Pisan removed to Millan. Luther
disputes against Indulgences, sent abroad by the Archbishop of Mentz to pay for
his Pall. The Pope and French King strive to abolish the Pragmatical Sanction.
The Complutensian Bible set out by Cardinal Ximenes, containing the Hebrew,
Chaldee, Greek and Latin. Luther sets abroad Theses against Indulgences.
Luther confers with Cajetan at Auspurg. Eccius disputes with Carolostadius at
Lipsic about Free Will; and with Luther, about the Popes Supremacy, and
Purgatory.

In the East, Solomon the Magnificent reigns 47 years: Gazelles the Rebel is
killed in battle. Solomon takes diverse Towns from the Hungarians: he attempteth
Chior in vain: after 6 months assault, he takes Rhodes, and dismisseth with
honor Viliers the Governor: -- 1520
A mutiny at Constantinople among the Janisaries. Als Beg a King in Armenia,
with his four sons are killed by Solomon, who possessed his Kingdom: He beats
Lewis of Hungary, and takes Buda: he denounces war against Ferdinando King of
Bohemia, and protects John Sepusius: he kills the cowardly Soldiers in the
Castle of Buda, but freed the Captain for his valor: He gives off the siege of
Vienna, having lost 80000 men. In the West, the Emperor invadeth Picardy. The
Pope, Emperor, English, Italy and Austria league against France: The
Imperialists beat the French and Switzers near Milan. The Boors of Germany,
whereof 50000 were slain, rose against the Nobility. Marseiles besieged by
Bourbon, who sided with Charles. Mantua made a Duchy. King Francis taken at
the siege of Papia. The French King released. The Emperor abrogates the Popes
power in Spain, and takes Milan from Sforza. Rome taken and plundered by
Bourbon. Naples besieged by the French. The Bishop of Utricht resignes his
temporalities to Charles. War made on the Papists by Saxony and Hesse. Sforza
recovers Milan for 50000 Crowns: He makes peace with Venice. The French take
some places from Charles: the Castle of Milan yields to the French, and a great
part of Lombardy. Bourbon raised from Marseiles by the French: The King is
forced to promise that he will renounce his right in Naples, Milan and other
places, to restore Burgundy, and to pay 200000 crowns. The holy League between
France, England, Venice, Milan and the Pope against Charles. Lascaris and
Budaeus cause the Library at Fountainbleau to be set up. The Kings ransom paid
at Cambray and the hostages restored. The Spaniards take Mexico. Henry of Navar
who sided with the French, beaten by the Castilians. Brandeburg swears fealty
to the Polander, and is made Duke of Russia. Massovia escheated to the Crown of
Poland. The Polanders beat the Tartars, and take their Prince, Dansk rebelleth.
The King of Hungary drowned in a ditch, and his Nobility slain in the battle at
Mohats. Sepusius Vayvod of Dacia expelled by Ferdinand: Solomon protects him,
and invadeth Hungary with 150000 Turks. The King of Denmark expelled, and
flies into Germany and England: Frederick Duke of Holst, Christiern's Uncle,
is chosen King; he leagueth with the Swedes: their Governor Gustavus, Nephew to
Steno the elder, embraces Lutheranism, and is crowned King. Ferdinand of
Austria chosen King of Bohemia. Venice helps Hungary which money against the
Turk: A peace concluded at Cambray between the Emperor, Venetians, French, and
Milanois. The Gueldrois take Newport, and oppress Frisia: Charles send^th
forces against them. The Gueldrois spoil Holland; they force Bosleduc to pay
Taxes: The women of Hague mutiny against the Customers. The Duke of Gueldres
makes a League with the Burgundian. Utricht expels the Bishop, and calls in the
Duke of Gueldres: the Hague taken by his forces: they are expelled by the
Emperor, who re-established the Bishop: the Mutineers executed, and peace
between the Duke and Bishop. In England, Buckingham beheaded for Treason: the
French are imprisoned in England, for some wrongs done by them to the English.
The Pope styles the King, Defender of the Faith. The Lord Admiral takes
Morlays in Britany. The Emperor is in England affianced to the Lady Mary.
Scotland is invaded by the English, and France by the Duke of Suffolk: Surry
burns diverse Towns in Scotland: the King receives from the Pope a Rose of
gold. Greenwich-Castle built. Truce with France and Scotland: The king quarrels
with the Emperor, for not marrying his daughter. Kildare accused and
acquitted. The Pope dispenses with Wolsey to dissolve 4 Monasteries. The
sedition in Suffolk appeased: Cardinal Campeius comes into England about the
Kings divorce; Commissioners chosen for the Queen, who appealeth to the Pope;
the marriage made unlawful by some Universities. In Scotland, the Earl of
Angus, and his brother are banished by the Regent, who goes again into France
for aid against the English: He resigneth; the Queen, and some others made
Regents: the Queen casts off Angus, and marries Henry Stuart Earl of Metbwen;
who are both committed by the King, who now assumes the Government; Angus
flies into England; Bothwel convicted, and Archibald Douglas banished.

In the Church, Leo sits yet: he executes the Tyrant of Perugia, for aiding
the Duke of Urbin. To him succeeded the Emperors Tutor Hadrian 6. 8 months: he
took Parma and Placentia. Clement 7. succeeds 10 years; he had been a Knight of
St. John of Jerusalem: he is besieged in the Castle of St. Angelo by the
Columnii, who waste Rome and the Vatican. He warreth against Sema and Naples,
and is reconciled to Charles. Luther is Excommunicate, and his Books burnt, who
in requital burns the Popes Bull, and Canon Law, and writes the
Babylonian-Captivity.: He justifies his Doctrine before the Emperor at Worms.
King Henry writes against him, and is answered by him: Zuinglius and
Oecolampadius preach at Tigurum: Carolostadius joins with Luther; the Pope
complained against in the Diet of Norinberg: two Monks suffer at Bruxels for
changing their Religion. Lutheranism received in diverse places. The Capuchins
Order instituted by Balscay of Ancona. Anabaptists spread. Oecolampadius and
Zuinglius differ from Luther about the Sacrament: at Berne and there about, and
at Strasburg, and Basil, the Mass is abolished: the Elector and Landsgrave
protesting against the Edict, brought in the name of Protestants: Disputations
held in diverse places.

In the East, Solomon setleth John in Hungary as his Tributary; he assaults
Gunsium 13 times, and is repuised; at last upon the coming of the
Imperialists, he raises the siege: He 1530 --
invades Hungary again with a vast Army; his General is slain; he carries away
30000 Captives: he makes Barbarussa the Pyrat his Admiral: he takes Tunis, and
loses it to Charles: He takes many places from the Persian: upon the
instigation of Roxalana his mother, he cuts the throat of Ibrahim. The French
King draws the Turks into Apulia, who spoil it, and take diverse places: Auria
takes a part of their Fleet. Barbarussa's Fleet beaten at Crete by the
Venetians; in a storm he loses many Galleys and 20000 men: He recovers Castro
Novum. 700 prisoners burnt at Constantinople by a casual fire. In the West, the
Emperor is crowned King of Lombardy at Bononia, and takes Florence.
Ferdidinand the Emperors brother is crowned King of the Romans. In the war
between Tigurum and the Cantons, Zuinglius was killed. Charles restores
Muleasses to Tunis. Sforza dying without issue, Millan is escheated to the
Emperor; the French claim it, and so a war is occasioned. Truce between the
Emperor and French for 10 years. The war between Brandeburg and the
Norinbergers taken up. The Duchy of Britany united to the Crown of France. The
French Kings Ambassador put to death at Millan, because one of his company
slew a Citizen. The French was with Savoy: Francis the Dolphin poisoned by the
Earl of Mounte-Cucullo, who was therefore torn by wild horses: At Lisbon, an
Earthquake lasted 8 days, which overthrew 1500 houses and many Churches. Beru
is now found out. The King of Cambaia killed by the Portugals. The Turks and
Portugals have wars in the Indies. The Muscovites waste Lituania, and are
driven out. Grittus Solymans favorite setleth Hungary; he kills the Bishop of
Varradinum, and for this is killed himself by the Transilvanians. It is agreed
that in Hungary Ferdinand should succeed to John. Solomon subdueth Moldavia,
and restores the Vayvod; the King dies with too much joy that his Queen was
delivered of a son. Cristiern striving to recover Denmark, is imprisoned 27
years at Sunderberg. Fredericl dies, who leaves a young son. Count Oldenburg
undertakes the Regency, because Christiern Duke of Holst refused it; but at
last accepts it, takes Copenhagen, and setleth the Kingdom; he is crowned,
and called Christiern 3. he changes Bishops into Superintendents. Smolard
rebels against the Swedes; but is reduced by the Danes help. The Venetlans are
Neuters in the Turkish war against Hungary: they beat the Turks at Sea, and
take Assam Beg the Pyrate. Barbarussa takes from Corcyra 16000 Captives, who
are sold at Constantinople. Two Turkish Galleys burnt by Contarenus in the
Gulf, for not striking their Top-saile. They made peace with Solomon, because
the Spaniard refused to deliver Castro novum; they are forced to give up
Nauplum, and some other places to the Turk. By an inundation in the
Netherlands, 404 Parishes are drowned: Mary of Austria is Regent of Flanders:
Anabaptists executed at Amsterdam: Lubeck quarrels with Holland, for assisting
Christiern King of Denmark: At Delft 3300 houses, with two Churches, and diverse
Monasteries burnt. The Regent will not suffer the Emperor to resign Flanders
and Artois to the French. The Duke of Cleve succeeds in Guelders. The Gantois
behead their Magistrates. In England, Wolsey is out of favor, and dies. Saint
James built. The Clergy condemned in a Praemunire, and pay 100000 l. to the
King. Cromwell great with the King. Katherine divorced; the King marries Anne
Bullen: Peace with France: the holy Maid of Kent executed. The Popes power
abrogated: The King seiseth on the First Fruits and Tenths, and called, Head of
the Church; for denying this, Sir Thomas Moore, and Fisher Bishop of Rochester
beheaded; Religious Houses under 300 l. value, given to the King; Queen Anne
beheaded; and Jane Seymor married to the King; Rebellions in Lincolnshire, and
in the North. Kildare and his 5 Un^les executed; the Bible read in English;
Oneale repulsed by the Lord Gray; Anne of Cleve married to the King, and
divorced shortly after; The order of S. John of Jerusalem suppressed. In
Scotland, the Court of Sessions is instituted; John Scot fasteth 50 days
together; The Earl Bothwel committed for going into England; The King goes
into France, and marries Magdalen the Kings daughter; diverse executed for
treason; The King marries the Duke of Guize's daughter.

In the Church, Clement 7. yet sits; he excommunicated King Henry of England:
Paul 3 succeeds 15 years; he appoints a Synod at Mantua, and transfers it to
Vicenza; it came to nothing: the Protestant Confession made by Melancthon, is
presented to Charles in the Diet of Auspurg; therefore called Confessio
Augustana. Peace granted to the Protestants in Germany, upon news of the Turks
preparation: the Protestants are persecuted in Misna and France; the
Anabaptists raise seditions in Munster, who are taken and executed: Geneva
becomes Protestant and expels the Bishop. Ignatius Layola instituteth the
Jesuits order; the League of Smalcald for the Protestants: A Council at Colen
for Reformation. The Augustan Faith received in Denmark. Luther exhibites
Articles at Smalcald. At Norimberg is made an Anti-league; Antinomians now
appear.

In the East, Solomon takes diverse towns in Hungary; subdueth Transylvania, and
gives it to John: Barbarussa is sent to help the French; he takes Rhegium in
Italy, and Nice in Province, -- 1540
with some places in Tuscany, Ischia and Lippari. Solomon at the French Kings
request, breaks the 5 years Peace with Charles; he fails in his expedition
against the Persian. Charles his expedition into Algiers, unfortunate; his
forces sent to relieve Buda, are beaten by the Turks. The French Ambassadors
going to the Turk, are killed by the Imperialists, which makes a war. Charles
leagueth with England against France; Saxony and the Lantgrave are proscribed.
Henry of Brunswick taken by the Duke of Saxony. Lipsick besieged, and Breme
taken: the Lantgrave is imprisoned. Muleasses being exoculated by his son,
comes to the Emperor. Magdeburg proscribed; and Constance taken by the
Imperialists. In France, the Rochellers rebel against the King; the Admiral is
condemned: the Imperialists beaten by the French in Piedmont: the French invade
England, they lose Bolen. The King dies; his son Henry 2. succeeds 13 years;
Bourdeaux rebelleth, they are forced to burn their Privileges, by the
Constable, who appeaseth the Rebellion in Aquitain, raised upon the custom of
Salt. The Lt. Vevain executed for surrendering Bolen. The Duke of Lituania
translates the Bible into the Polanders tongue. Wars between Ferdinand of
Bohemia, and John of Hungary; that Country is plagued with Locusts. Gustaphus
of Suevia obtains that the succession may be established on his heirs.
Ferdinand unpriviledgeth Prague, for not helping him against the Elector. Gaunt
for rebellion loses her privileges and Castle: The Emperor sets a Garrison
there; he claims the Dukedom of Cleve: the Duke leagueth with the French,
they invade Brabant; the Prince of Orange is beaten: Antwerp attempted by the
Geldrians, in vain; they are beaten by the Scholars of Lovain. Iuliers won by
Charles. The Hollanders spoil and carry away the Kings ships out of the river of
Bordeaux. The Belgians present Charles with 15000 Florens of Gold, at his return
from Afric. The French Queen entertained by Charles at Brussels: Cleve is
reconciled to him: Mechlin burnt by lightning, which fell among Powder. Some
places recovered out of the Sea. In England, Cromwell is beheaded: The Court of
Wards and First Fruits erected: The Lady Katherine Howard married to the King,
and beheaded: The Act passed for Supremacy: The six bloody Articles: The King
marries Katherine Par, and calls himself King of Ireland. The Scots defeated by
the Duke of Norfolk; the Scots prisoners returned without ransom, upon the
death of King James. A match proposed between Mary Queen of Scotland and Prince
Edward; but crossed by the French. The English enter Scotland, burn Edenburg
and Leith. The French invade Sussex and the Isle of Wight. Peace with France.
Bolen restored for 800000 crowns; The Earl of Surry beheaded. To King Henry
succeeds his son Edward 6 years; The Duke of Sommerset Protector; The Scots are
defeated at Musselburgh; Chantries suppressed; The Protector and his brother
the Admiral, fall out about their wives; The Admiral executed, and the
Protector committed; Rebellions in Cornwall, Norfolk, and in the North; the
French attempt Iersey and Garnesey. In Scotland, the King dies of grief; His
daughter Mary was five days old; The Earls of Huntly, Murrey, and Argile made
Regents by Cardinal Beton; but the Earl of Arran by the Protestants: The
Cardinal of St. Andrews murdered for burning George Wischart; Civil wars
about Religion; The French besiege St. Andrews; Cadinal Beton burns
Sophocardin a Minister, and is killed shortly after: the English expelled
Scotland; the Scots refuse offers of Peace from England.

In the Church, Paul sits yet: his son Petrus Aloysius murdered at Placentia.
The City is taken by Gouzaga Governor of Millan. Eccius and Melancthon confer
about Original sin, at Worms and Ratisbone. Xaverius the Jesuit sent to
convert the Indians. The Palatinate becomes Protestant. Herman Archbishop of
Colen strives to reform Religion, but is crossed by the Clergy and deprived.
David George styles himself Christ: he flies from Delf to Basil. The Council
of Trent begins. The French King slaughtereth the Waldenses. The Protestants
assembled at Frankfort against the Council of Trent. The Inquisition causes a
sedition in Naples. Councels held at Auspurg, Colen, Mentz, and Trevers. A
Schism among the Protestants, by publishing the Emperors Interim concerning
observation of Indifferent matters, during the Council of Trent. Spira died
despairing. In France; the Protestants are persecuted. Diverse Conferences held.

In the East, the Turkish Pirates do much mischief; they take Tripolis in
Barbary. Solomon 1550 --
strangles his son Mustapha, by Roxalano's instigation, that her son Bajazet
might succeed. Haly Bassa attempteth Agria in vain. The Venetians sack
Dyrrachium, a Harbor of the Tunks. The Duke of Florence his lands spoiled by
the Turks; so is Corsica. Haly Bassa beaten from Zigeth. Bajazet sets up a
false Mustapha against his father; he is pardoned at the request of Roxalana.
Bajaz^t aspireth again, and flies to the Persian, who strangled him and his
four sons, Solomon consenting to it. In the West, Magdeburg is besieged by
Saxony, Brunswick, and Brandeburg. Charles and Ferdinand differ about the
succession of the Empire. Saxony and the Landsgrave released. The French take
Metz. Maurice killed by Brandeburg in battle. The French spoil Artois and
Henault. The Emperor resigns his kingdom to Philip his son, and enters into a
Monastery, where he died: In the Empire his brother Ferdinand succeeds 6
years; the Pope refuses to confirm him, because he gave peace to the
Protestants. The French king takes 22 ships of Zealand, with some places: the
Emperor and French king spoil each others territories; Casal taken by the
French; they are beaten at sea by the Flemings; S. Quintin^ taken. France makes
peace with Spain, and restores Savoy and Piemont to the Duke: the King killed
at Tilt by Montgomery; his son Francis 2. succeeded: great factions between
the Guises and the Constable: the King dies; to him Charles 9. his brother
succeeded 13 years; his mother made Regent. Iapan about this time discovered.
In Spain, King Philip causes 28 Gentlemen to be burned for Religion. The
Polander forces the Master of the Teutonicks to swear fealty to him. The
Muscovites invad^ Livonia. The Queen of Hungary resigneth Transylvania to
Ferdinand, who gives her Cassovia and 100000 Ducats yearly. Dobus for his
service against the Turks at Agria, is made Vayvod of Transylvania. To
Christiern 3. of Denmark succeeded his son Frederick 2. 29 years; he forced the
Diethmarsians (who made themselves members of the Church of Breme) to submit to
him. In an Assembly at Brussels, the Emperor resigneth the Collar of the
Golden-fleece to Philip, with the Low Countries, who makes the Duke of Savoy
General there; He is opposed in his Taxes. At Brussels there died of Famine
and Cold, 19000. The French take Calice, Dunkirk, and Guines; Dunkirk recovered
by Count Egmont, with the loss of 15000 French. In England, the Duke of
Somerset beheaded; Christs-Hospital in London founded: the King dies; by his
Will Jane daughter to the Duke of Suffolk should have succeeded, she is
proclaimed by Northumberland and others, who suffered for it; but Mary
succeeded 5 years, who put to death the Lady Jane, with her husband and
father; Wyat rebelleth; Cardinal Poole made Archbishop of Canterbury; the Queen
marries with King Philip; S. Quintins taken by the English. To Q. Mary
succeeded Elizabeth 44 years; Calice is demanded; the French aid the Scots
against the English; the Queen aideth the Scots Lords, Lies besieged by the
Lord Gray; the Queen-Dowager of Scotland entertained in England, she is made
Regent of Scotland, the old Regent Duke of Chastelrault; H^tly is committed:
the Scots invade England, and are repelled; Knox with the other Protestants put
to the Horn; they take Glascow and Blackness.

In the Church, Julius 3. sits 5 years: He keeps the Jubilee, and continues
the Council of Trent; he betrayeth Sena to the Emperor. To him succeeded
Marcellus 2. 21 days: then Paul 4. 4 years; to him the Romans erected a
Marble-statue, for enlarging their privileges; He refuses to confirm King
Philip of Naples: He dies, and the Romans cut off the head and right hand of
his statue, and fling it into Tyber. The Protestant-Ministers are expelled
Auspurg; Osiander and the Professors of Wittenberg differ about Justification.
Mary the Regent opposes the Inquisition in the Low Countries. The Protestants
differ about the Necessity of Good works. Servetus the Arian burnt at Geneva.
Protestants persecuted in England; Latimer, Ridley, and Cranmer burnt. The
Agreement at Passau confirmed. The body of David George taken out of his grave,
and burnt, 3 years after his burial. The Catholics and Protestants confer at
Worms, and so at Westminster: At Auspurg, peace confirmed to the Protestants.
Hugonots in France, so called from S. Hugo's Gate, where they used to assemble
in Tours.

In the East, Solomon yet reigns: some Christian Princes attempt Tripolis,
but Pial Bassa -- 1560
defeateth them: Malta besieged by the Turks in vain; they are forced to be
gone after 5 months, and the loss of 24000 men: Solomon makes peace with the
Emperor: Pial Bassa subdueth Chios for aiding Malta, after it had been
possessed by Genua 200 years. Zigeth is taken; at the siege thereof Solomon
died: His son Selymus 2. succeeded 8 years; he makes peace with Persia, Hungary
and Venice; he invadeth Scythia with loss; he demands Cyprus from the
Venetians, who refuse to part with it, so the peace is broken. In the West,
Ferdinand the Emperor dies: His son Maximilian 2. succeeds 12 years; he
makes 8 years peace with the Turk. In France, Conde who was condemned to die,
is released; the King of Navar forsakes the Protestants. The battle of Dreux in
Normandy, where the King of Navar is slain, with 9000 on both sides, and Conde
taken; the Duke of Guise slain at the siege of Orleans. The Holy-League with
Spain against the Protestants. Within this Decad were 3 Civil-wars for Religion
in France: The Prince of Conde is aided by Casimir with 3000 men; the King with
as many by the Duke of Saxony; After a battle, Liberty of Conscience is
granted: The Prince of Conde is taken, and slain with a pistol: The King takes
S. John de Angelo. King Philip of Spain gives 30000 Ducats toward the
Printing of the Complutens. Bible at Antwerp. In the Council of Trent, France
and Spain strive for precedencie. The Philippina's are discovered. The
Inquisitors question the Archbishop of Toledo. The Duke of Alva comes into
Flanders. Prince Charles accused by the Inquisitors, dies in prison. The
spaniards and Moors of Granado at war 2 years. The King of Poland leagueth with
Denmark against the Swedes. The Teutonick-Master submits to the Polander, and
is made Duke of Curland. The Muscovite is beaten by the Polacs and Livonians,
and loses 5000 laden wagons. The King recovereth Parnovia in Swedeland; he
overthrows the Swedes in Livonia, and abridgeth Dansk of diverse privileges.
Maximilian and Mary are crowned King and Queen of Hungary: the Tartars waste
the Country: the Turk besieges Zigeth, and takes diverse Towns there. Breme
adjudged by the Emperor to be under the government of Denmark and Holst. The
Hamburgers take some of the Kings ships in the Elve, for which they are forced
to pay 12000 crowns The King and Lubekers take the Castle, Town and Harbor of
Elsenburg in Swedeland. The Polander intercepteth some Danish ships; the King
hinders the Trade at Dansk, till they were fain to redeem it with 100000
Crowns. Ericus of Swed^land fortifieth Revalia, and hinders the Lubekers trade,
by which he made the Polander and Dane his enemies; He is beaten off from the
siege of Helmestadt in Denmark; he takes Drentham in Norway, and loses it
again; He imprisoneth his brother John and his son, upon suspicion that they
fomented these wars, by lending money to the Dane; he kills also many of his
best friends upon jealousy; he releaseth his brother, and is deposed and
imprisoned: His brother John 3. succeeds 23 years. Venice will not admit the
Popes Inquisition. The Arsenal burnt; whereupon Selymus invadeth Cyprus. 14
Bishoprics erected in the Low Countries, at which the people repine, for so
the Inquisition was brought in; Count Egmont sent with complaints to the King,
but no satisfactory answer; the King commands obedience to the Council of
Trent, aid to the Inquisition, and execution of former Edicts: The Nobles, upon
the execution of the Kings Letters, begin to stand upon their guard; Images are
defaced, and Protestants permitted at Antwerp to build Churches: Protestantisme
is again inhibited: the Regent takes arms. Valenciens taken, for favoring
Protestants. Alva commits the Earls of Egmont and Horn, and builds
Antwerp-Castle: Horn and Egmont, with others, executed. The Prince of Orange
his eldest son is sent into Spain: The Prince of Orange and his brother take
arms, and are driven into France by the Duke, who brings in the new Bishops,
and setleth the Inquisition: Multitudes of people forsake the Netherlands:
Traffic with England cease. The Scots Queen quartereth the English Arms,
and assumeth the Titles of England and Ireland, by the advice of the Guises.
The Queen of England seeks to reconcile the factions in France, and sends the
Earl of Bedford thither; she helps the Protestants, takes New Haven, Rohan,
and Deep, which were lost again. Shan-Oneal the Rebel is pardoned by the Queen;
but he returns and rebelleth again. Leicester designed by Queen Elizabeth, for
Queen Mary's Husband of Scotland. Oneal defeated by Sidney the Lord Deputy, and
slain by the wild Scots. Thornton committed, for making doubts about Queen
Mary's Title. Queen Elizabeth Godmother to the Prince of Scotland; Bedford is
the Deputy. She demands Calice, and is refused. Queen Mary cast upon the Coast
of England in her flight. Northumberland and Westmerland rebel, and are driven
into Scotland. The Duke of Norfolk committed, for intending to marry Queen
Mary. The French expelled Scotland. Queen Elizabeth refuses to declare Queen
Mary Heir. The Queens base-brother made Earl of Murray: Earl Huntly slain, and
his Son beheaded: Bothwel escapes: Archbishop of S. Andrews committed for
keeping Mass: The Queen falls in love with the Lord Dernly, and makes him
Earl of Rosse and Duke of Albany; He marries the Queen, and is proclaimed
King: diverse Lords fly into England, return, and are reconciled: Rizius the
Queens favorite murdered, whereupon Morton and others fly into England. The
King murdered by Bothwel, who marries the Queen; she is taken, and resigneth;
he flies into Denmark, and there dies in prison: Murray made Regent. James 6.
reigns 57 years. The Queens forces defeated; she flies toward France, but
is stopped in England.

In the Church, Pius 4. sits 5 years: he strangled Cardinal Caraffa with
some others for opposing him in the Conclave: He comes to the Council of Trent,
and dissolveth it: He cites the Queen of Navar, being a Protestant, to Rome;
the French king protecteth her. Pius 5. succeeded 6 years: He supplies the
Emperor with money toward the Turkish war: He sends to the Duke of Alva for
his service against the Protestants, a Consecrated Helmet, and a Pair of
Gantlets. The King of Mauritania is baptized. At Passau in France, is a
Conference between the Cardinal of Lorain and the Bishops, and Peter Martyr,
Marlorat, and Beza. The Protestants are murdered in a Church at Paris. The
Council of Trent ends. Religion in France is tolerated by the Kings
Proclamation. The Pope dispenses with the Bavarlans and Austrians to receive
in both kinds. At Antwerp, Lutherans and Catholics join against the
Calvinists. A Council is held at Milan; diverse Conferences in Germany between
the Lutherans and Zuinglians.

In the East, Pial Bassa takes Nicosia in Cyprus, with 250 Field-peeces, and
many Captives, 1570 --
which as he was conveying to Constantinople, the ship was fired by a Lady, and
they all were blown up. Famagusta is taken by Mustapha, who falsified his
promise to Bragadinus the Governor, whom he flayed alive. At Lepanto the Turks
lost 32000 men, 3200 prisoners, 161 galleys, with much wealth. Selymus by
treason takes Moldavia, and annexeth it to Valachia, he kills also the Vayvod;
He makes peace with Venice. To him succeeds his son Amurath 3. 21 years: He
looks upon the strangling of his five brothers: he invadeth Polonia, and burnt
200 Gentlemen's houses, with some Towns and Villages; then he makes a league
with the Polander: Hearing there were Civil wars in Persia, he invades the
Country with 110000 men, of which the Persian cut off 70000. Syrvan taken by
Mustapha, who loses 10000 of his forragers, and so returns disgracefully, and
dies. In the West, the Emperor appoints his son Rodolph to be King of
Hungary; he makes the Marquis of Montferrat Duke. Rodolphus is chosen King of
the Romans and of Bohemia, and succeeds in the Empire to his father
Maximilian 37 years. Salentinus Archbishop of Colen resigneth, and marries
Count Arnebergs daughter. In France, the Queen of Navar secures her self with
her son in Rochel; she dies, and her son marries the Kings sister, upon which
followed the 4. Civil war, the Massacre of Paris, and war with Rochel. Navar
and Conde renounce Protestanism: with Rochel and Mont-Alban a peace is
concluded. Henry the Kings brother elected King of Poland: Montgomery executed:
The King dies; to whom succeeded his brother Henry 3. 16 years, the
Queen Mother is Regent; Conde removes into Germany; the 5. Civil war followed,
D' Auvile takes the Protestants part; The Germans invade France by Condes
means; Navar escapes into Picardy; The Guises aim at the Crown; the Duke of
Alenson the Kings brother, head of the Protestants, is reconciled to the King.
A 6. Civil war was beginning, but the King was 100 millions in debt: Navar takes
arms; D'Auvile leaves the Protestants; peace is made with Conde. The Order of
the Holy Ghost was now instituted. Don Requiescens sent Governor into Belgium,
and after him Don John of Austria. Antwerp is taken by the Spaniard. Sebastian
of Portugal in his Africa expedition is killed, to whom succeeded Henry the
Cardinal. Sigismund King of Poland, and last of Iagello's line, dies; the
French kings brother Henry Duke of Bourbon is elected; He understanding his
brother was dead, gets away in the dark out of Cracovia. Maximilian the Emperor
is chosen-by the greater part, but at the Turks entreaty Steven Prince of
Transylvania is made King; he reigned 11 years: He takes Dansk, and uses it
hardly. Livonia spoiled by the Muscovite; the Dane and Swede make peace at
Stetin: six years war between the Danes and hamburgers, upon taking of one of
the Kings Ships by them; but upon the payment of a great sum they are
reconciled to the King. Venice makes a perpetual League with the Pope and
Spaniard. A Plague at Venice, which killed 70000. upon the ceasing whereof a
Church is built to the Redeemer, as the Senate and Duke had vowed before. The
Flemings refuse to pay new Taxes; a great destruction among them by an
inundation. Bergen taken by the Spaniard. Alva called home, and Medina Caeli
sent Governor; the Zelanders take much booty from him; he takes diverse Towns,
and returns to Spain; his successor Requiescens besieges Leyden twice, to no
purpose; he takes diverse Towns, and dies. The Spaniards mutiny for pay, and
are expelled the Country; John of Austria is made Governor; Antwerp is
plundered, and the Castle dismantled; John retireth to Luxenburg, being
proclaimed enemy to Belgium; a pacification is made, and Matthias Archduke of
Austria becomes Governor; upon the death of Don John, Alexander Farneses
Prince of Parma is made Governor; he takes Mastricht, and other places; the
Antwerpians drive out their Catholic Clergy; the Holland-Company, called the
Gueux, take the Brill: the Hollanders make William of Nassaw Prince of Orange
their Governor; he relieveth Leyden, and takes diverse Towns: A general pardon
to all the Belgians, except Nassaw and some others. Queen Elizabeth lends the
Hollanders 20000 pounds; they take Gaunt, Utricht, and many other Towns;
Matthias Archduke is Governor a while, and resigneth to Anjou; Amsterdam and
other Towns yield to the Hollanders. In England, Dacres that renewed the
Rebellion, is defeated by the Lord Hunsdon; Westmerland flees into Flanders,
Northumberland beheaded at York; The Royal Exchange built; Story executed for
Treason; the Duke of Norfolk beheaded; Sir Francis Drake saileth to the Indies;
the Queen is Godmother to the French Kings Daughter, her Deputy was the Earl of
Worcester; Alenson a suitor to the Queen; she refuses the protection of
Holland, but strives to make peace there; a Rebellion in Ireland; Frobishers
Voyage; Trade with Turkey and Muscovy; Alenson now Duke of Anjou comes over
hither; Desmond rebelleth. In Scotland, the Regent is slain; Matthew Earl of
Lenox succeeds; Huntley raises Forces in the North for the Queen; the Regent
takes Dunbritton Castle, and the Archbishop of Saint Andrews in it, whom he
hangs for consenting to the Kings murder; The Regent is killed, and the Earl
of Mar succeeds; Commissioners sent by Queen Elizabeth to examine Queen Mary
upon some Articles; Queen Elizabeth gets Earl Morton to be Regent; she helps
him; the Bishop of Rosse, Queen Mary's diligent Agent, is banished England;
Edenburg taken by the Protestants; John of Austria practices to marry Queen
Mary; the French King strives to get the young King into his custody; Morton
displaced, and 12 Peers ^ned to the King, whereof Morton was one; difference
between him and the re^, the Lord Aubigney made a Duke by the King.

In the Church sits Gregory 13. 13 years, he makes Cosmo di Medices Great-Duke
of Tuscany; he grants to the Portugals against the Moors a Croysado; his
Chapel in the Vatican which he built, stood him in 100000 Ducats. Pope Pius
his Bull against Queen Elizabeth is fastened to the Bishop of Londons gate. A
pacification in France published and revoked. The Palatine Divines and
Anabaptists have a Conference; the Duke of Batlen turns Protestant; Henault and
Artois exclude themselves from the peace of Gaunt, and are called the
Malcontents; a form of Concord drawn up by the Divines of Auspurg. Three
Councels held this Decad at Milan.

In the East, Sinan Bassa goes General against the Persian, and loses his
men: the like -- 1580
success had Mustapha: Ferat is made General, who returns without success.
The League with the Emperor renewed for 8 years, but the Turks brake the
League by invading Hungary, for which the Bassa of Buda is strangled: Sinan
recalled from his banishment, and made Bassa there. Amurath is troubled with
the Falling Sickness. Osman takes Tauris: Cicala his Successor loses 80000
Turks. Peace is made with the Polander and Persian. The Janisaries mutiny, and
15000 houses burnt in Constantinople. Sinan displaced, and Ferat sent in his
room. In the West, the Emperor sends Commissioners to Colen for settling peace
in the Low Countries, but in vain. The Germans that invaded France, are
defeated by the Guises: The Polander defeats Maximilian the Archduke, and takes
him: A peace is made, and he set free. In France, a league is made against the
King, for favoring the Protestants: upon which follows the 7. Civil War.
Diverse places taken by the Guises, who oppose the King, desirous of peace.
Navar and Conde excommunitated by the Pope; they prevail in Poictou: Navar gets
the day at Courtray, wherein Ioyeuse is slain. Navar excluded from succession,
and Conde poisoned. The Duke of Guise and the Cardinal his brother are slain
for aspiring. Navar helps the King, whom the Duke de Main was like to
surprise. Clement a Iacobin stabbeth the King. Philip of Spain expels Antony
Prior of Crato, whom the Portugals had made their King; he beats the French who
aided Antony. The Terceras taken by the Spaniard. The English and their ^ods
arrested in Spain: the English lose some Ships in Cadiz: the Armado defeated by
the English, who strive in vain to restore Antony. The Spaniard aideth the
Savoyen against Geneva. The Polander beats the Muscovite, who at last
surrenders Riga, and all Livonia to the Polander, and makes peace, and withal
kills his son for his bad success. Dansk is reconciled to the Queen. King Steven
dies: Maximilian Duke of Austria, is chosen by some, and Sigismund the King of
Swedes son by others. In Denmark, Christiern the 4. reigns. The Swedes take
diverse places from the Muscovite. The Persian sends to the State of Venice to
league with them against the Turk. The Malteses trouble the Turks in the
Venetian seas, for which Venice and the Knights fall out. Venice sends to
Amurath 400 slaves with 800000 Ducats, who was angry for the wrong done to the
Viceroys wife of Algiere, by Gabriel Heme, in her passage to Constantinople,
which Heme also they executed. The States totally reject King Philip's
Government. Anjou made Duke of Brabant, Marquess of the holy Empire, and Earl
of Flanders. The Prince of Orange shot. Diverse Towns taken by the States. The
Duke resignes the places he had taken, and returns to France. Orange is
murdered by one Gerard: Maurice his second son chosen Governor; the elder was
a prisoner in Spain. Queen Elizabeth becomes Protector of the Low Countries;
who for her money lent, receives some cautionary Towns. Leicester sent
Lieutenant Governor; he takes some places, and returns: the States dislike him.
The Hollanders take diverse places. Tournay taken by the Duke of Parma. The
Spaniards take diverse Towns, and recover Dunkirk, Gaunt, Brussels, Antwerp,
Grave and Venlo. Diverse Forts betrayed to the Duke, he is driven from the siege
of Bergen-up-Zoom. The Spaniards assist Desmond, and are driven out of Ireland.
The Lord Gray suppresseth the Rebels. A Proclamation in England against
Seminaries and Jesuits. Antonio of Portugal comes into England. Campian put
to death. The King of Denmark made Knight of the Garter. Guise plotteth Queen
Mary's delivery. Throgmorton executed. Desmond slain: Northumberland confined;
Arundel sent to the Tower: Northumberland found dead in the Tower, being shot:
14 executed for Treason. Drake takes some places from the Spaniard: Drake,
Norris and Essex sent to aid Antonio of Portugal: the Queen supplyeth Navar
with men and money. In Scotland, Morton is imprisoned being accused of Treason:
the Duke of Lenox unjustly accused by the Ministers: Morton beheaded for being
accessory to the Kings death. The Ruthens imprison the King, and force him to
recall Angus: the King is set free, confineth Angus: Gowry executed for
Treason. Arran and Fernihurst invade Ireland; Bingham subdueth their forces.
Queen Mary beheaded. The King marryeth the King of Denmarks daughter, and goes
thither himself.

In the Church, Gregory yet sits: He sets free the Master of Malta, whom the
King had imprisoned, and reformeth the Calendar; which occasioned some troubles
in Poland. To him succeeds Sixtus 5. 5 years, his father was a Swine-herd: He
removed the Obelisk into the Vatican, and there erected a new Library: he made
his young Nephew a Cardinal, and gives him 10000 crowns revenue: He left
behind him 10 Millions; he had a Statue erected to him. The new Calendar
rejected by the Duke of Saxony: it occasioneth troubles at Auspurg, and Riga in
Livonia: The Protestant Princes meet at Luneburg; the Churches of Poland,
Russia and Lituania agree in the points of Religion, wherein they had
heretofore disagreed.

In the East, The Turks break the league in Hungary; the Emperor complains:
Amurath pretends ignorance: The Bassa of Bosna takes Whitz, the chief City of
Croatia, 1590 --
and murthereth 65000 Christians in the hills. He intercepteth 150 Wagons and
money sent to relieve Croatia; at Siseg he is slain with 18000 Turks by the
Imperialists: the Turks take and lose many Towns, and villages. 30000 Tartars
taken by Christians, with many places: Valachia, and other places revolt from
the Turk. To Amurath succeeded his son Mahomet 3. 9 years: He strangleth 18 of
his brothers, and Ferat Bassa, for the loss of Strigon: he wins and loses
diverse places and men: the Turks kill 20000 Christians, being too eager in
loading themselves with the plunder of Karesta, where 60000 Turks were slain.
The Vayvod of Valachia having revolted from the Turk, burns Nicopolis.
Varadin in Transylvania relieved by Basta the Emperors Lieutenant. The Turks
and Valachians infest each others Territories. The Cardinal of Transylvania
leagueth with the Turk; the Bassa of Agria beaten, and of Buda taken. In the
West, the Germans league with Transylvania against the Turk; the Prince of
Transylvania resigneth to the Emperor for Silesia, but repents, and returns
home, where he resignes to his Uncle, the Cardinal, whom the Vayvod of Valachia
killed in fight, for leaguing with the Turk, and recovers Transylvania to the
Empire, and is made Governor thereof. In France, Henry 4. of Navar reigns 21
years, he defeats De Main; it is held Treason by the Parliament of Rohan to
side with the King, who takes Chartres and Noyon, defeats the Savoyen, and
besieges Rohan; the President of Paris strangled by the Tribunes; Duke Ioyeuse
drowned, and 300 of the League slain in Languidoc; the King becomes
Catholic, upon which many Leaguers fall off to him; he is Crowned, and most
places submit; Guise is reconciled to him; the Jesuits banished, for a stroke
given to the King by one of them; the King defeats the Spaniards in Picardy; De
Main and Nemours reconciled to him; Ioyeuse made Admiral; Marselles prised for
him; Amiens recovered; a League with England and Holland; Callais restored upon
peace with the Spaniard; Britain submits, and so the Civil War ends. At Nante,
the Edict of Pacification for exercise of the Protestant Religion; the King is
divorced from Queen Margaret, and marries Katherine de Medices; Duke Ioyeuse
becomes a Capuchin: Cardinal Albertus, the Emperors youngest son, is made
Governor o^ Portugal, and Archbishop of Toledo: Another Spanish Fleet
miscarrieth at the Cape of Saint Vincent: To King Philip succeeded his son
Philip 3. 24 years. Amiens taken by the Cardinal Albert, who married Isabella
the Infanta: Sigismund King of Poland swears to receive the Confession of
Auspurg, before he is admitted to the Swedish Crown; he conquereth Moldavia,
and is deposed in Swevia. In Hungary many Turks slain; At Alba Regalis, the
Governor of Rab executed for surrendering it to the Turk; many Towns lost and
won; Rab recovered, with some other Towns. The Swedes and Tartars beaten by
the Muscovite; peace made with him. Charles the King of Swedes Uncle is
Governor of Suevia. Sigismund comes with an Army against Charles, who takes
Calmaria, and subdueth Finland: The Usoques out of Dalmatia and Hungary notable
Pirates. To Parma in Flanders succeeded Peter Ernest Duke of Austria, brother to
Rodulph the Emperor; the States refuse his proffer of peace; to him succeeds
Archduke Albert, he takes Calais and Hulst, with Amiens; Grave Maurice defeats
him; the King bestows Belgium and Burgoin on Albert, with the Infanta his
wife; the Spaniard takes diverse places in Frisland and Cleve; Maurice made
Lieutenant-Generall of the united Provinces; he takes Breda, and other places;
A Council of Estate set up, wherein the Queen was to have two Counselors;
Prince of Orange released in Spain; the Grave takes 11 Towns in 3 months; one
Pan is executed for attempting to kill the Grave; the States prohibited from
trading in Spain; they trade into the East Indies. Queen Elizabeth furnishes
the French King with money, and procures peace of the Turk to Poland; Grevil
fights the Spanish Fleet: The Voyages of Cavendish to the Straits of
Magellain, and of Lancaster to the East Indies; Raleigh's Expedition into
America and Guiana; Tyr-Oens Rebellion; the Thames dry; Farnanbuc taken by
Lancaster; Cadiz taken by Essex; Mac Hugh the Irish-Rebel slain; the French
King made Knight of the Garter; the English Expedition to the Azores at
Black-water; the English defeated by Tyr-Oen; Essex parlieth with him; he is
committed to the Lord Keeper. In Scotland, Bothwel attempteth the Kings
chamber, he is proclaimed Traitor, and some of his Pages hanged; Huntley kills
Murry, for harboring Bothwel; he flees into England, returns and rebelleth
again.

In the Church sits Urban 7. 12 days, then Gregory 14. 10 months; he
excommunicates the French King; succeeded Innocent 9. 2 months, then Clement
8. 13 years; he absolves the French King: Ferrara being escheated to the Pope
for want of Heirs, a war ensues with Caesar Estensis about it, which shortly
after was taken up. Protestanism in Saxony is forsaken; the Protestants are
persecuted in Styria and Carinthia, but permitted in France. Hacket, for
blasphemy, is hanged.

In the East, the Turk and Persian quarrel; Alba Regalis lost; Hassan Bassa,
and his Army -- 1600
of 60000 overthrown; the Wines in Constantinople staved upon a sedition of the
Janisasaries, but some wine was allowed to the Christian Ambassadors: Basta
defeats the Valachians, and 2 Bassa's; Ali Bassa surprised with 200 Wagons and
70000 Ducats by the Heyducks; Alba recovered, and Pest lost; Mahomet strangleth
his son, and drowneth his mother for treason; his son Achmat succeeds 13
years; the Turks defeated twice in Asia by their Rebels; Pest and Hatwan lost
to the Turk; Tauris recovered by the Persian; some Towns taken in Hungary: the
Persian defeats two Bassa's: the Bassa of Aleppo rebelleth, he defeats two
Bassa's, takes Tripolis and Damascus, and leagueth with the Persian: The Turk
makes peace with the Emperor for 20 years: The Bassa's of Agria and Buda are
put to death, for striving to break the peace; the Turks are spoiled at Sea by
the Duke of Florence. In the West, Basta beats the Transylvanian, and kills the
Vayvod of Valachia, for intending to call in the Turk. Basta is thrust out by
the Prince, who at last submits to Basta, and swears fealty to the Emperor;
Basta subdueth the rebellious Transylvanians: The Emperor and Persian league
against the Turk. Botscay wins some part of Transylvania; he makes his peace
with the Emperor, and obtains Transylvania to him and his Heirs: The
Catholic Clergy wronged by Donaward a free City, therefore it is proscribed
and taken by the Duke of Bavaria. The Jesuits College and Library burnt at
Vienna. Transylvania rebelleth again, and makes Gabriel Battori their
Governor; upon the Duke of Iuliers death without Heirs, Brandeburg and Newburg
lay claim to it: The Bishop of Strasburg is sent thither by the Emperor, and
expels their Governors: The French subdue Savoy, because the Marquisat of
Salusses is not, according to promise, restored: The Dukes peace is made by
Cardinal Aldobrandin. The French Ambassadors doors broken open in Spain, and
his Nephew imprisoned, but he is released again. Byron executed for Treason:
League renewed with the Switzers: Traffic forbidden into Spain and Flanders,
upon a new Impost there. Father Cotton gets the Jesuits to be restored. Count
Avergne once pardoned, falls to new practices, and is imprisoned. Marselles
like to be betrayed to the Spaniard, whereupon the Governor of Provence is
executed. The revenues of Navar united to the Crown of France. At Bolloign the
Treaty of peace between France and Spain is broken off, for precedence: Spain
makes peace with England. Nottingham arriveth in Spain, to take the Kings Oath
to the peace: A peace also is made with the Hollander for 12 years. In Poland,
about some troubles raised by the Jesuits, the Lords meet at Lublyn about
Toleration of Religion, who are suddenly surprised by the King, and many of
them slain. Hungary is wasted by the Tartars; diverse Towns lost. The Turk
sends Botscay the Crown of Hungary, taken from Ladislaus. Botscay repents his
league with the Turk, and dies. The Turk takes diverse Towns in Hungary; the
Emperor resigneth Hungary to his brother Matthias. Exercise of Protestantism
granted to Austria. In Swethland, Charles is declared King, he attempteth
Livonia in vain; His Bastard-son is taken by the Polander; He besieges Riga in
vain, and loses 9000 men; he loses the Castle of Wessenstein, and recovers it
again. The King of Denmark comes to Hamburg, and takes the Oath of
Allegiance of them. Matthias is chosen King of Bohemia by the Lords: Liberty of
Conscience granted to the Bohemians and Silesians. The Venetians league with
the Grisons, and forbid building of more Monasteries and giving Lands to the
Clergy, which Act had been made An. 1337. and now revived; they are hated by
the Pope for this Act, and by the Spaniard for their League with the Grisons:
They make an Edict against the Jesuits, and are excommunicated, which they
slight, and raise an Army for their defense. Cardinal Ioyeuse is sent from
France to compose the difference, at last the prisoners are set free, and they
absolved; they protect and enrich such as had written in their defense: The
Archduke is defeated near to Newport: The Admiral of Arragon being taken, is
exchanged for the Hollanders imprisoned in Spain: Ostend besieged by Albert. 6
Galleys of Spinola sunk by the Hollanders and English; he is slain, and his 8
Galleys defeated: Ambrose Spinola, to revenge his brothers death, aideth Albert
at Ostend; after almost 4 years siege, and the loss of 72900 men in the Town,
and great numbers in the field, Ostend yields on composition: Spinola takes
diverse Towns, but fails of Bergen and Grave: The Netherlanders acknowledged
free States by Albert: Many Towns taken by the Hollander and Spaniard; The
States aid Embden against their Earl: Hertogenbush besieged by Maurice in
vain; Sluice taken from the Archduke; some Spaniards fall off to the States;
Maurice fails of his design against Antwerp; Embden and the Earl reconciled;
The Hollander beats the Spaniard in the Straits, and the Portugals in the
Indies. The Lord Montjoy does good service in Ireland; Essex beheaded;
difference between English and Danes about Trade; Commissioners sent into
Denmark; the Spaniards land in Ireland; Tyr-Oen submits: Queen Elizabeth
dies; King James succeeds 22 years: Tyr-Oen is restored by him; Raleigh,
Gray, and Cobham attainted for Treason; some Priests put to death; the
Gunpowder-Treason; the King of Denmark comes into England; an Insurrection
upon Enclosures; Virginia planted; the New-Exchange built.

In the Church, Leo 11. sits 26 days: then Paul 5. 16 years; He quarrels with
the Venetians. Du-Plessis disputes with the Bishop of Eureux. At Ratisbone the
Jesuits dispute with the Lutherans. The Duke of Savoy expels the Protestants:
the Poland-Jesuites burn a Protestant-Church. Marpurg reformed. Liberty of
Conscience in Hungary. An Archbishopric erected in the Philippina's.

In the East, the Persian invadeth Babylon, defeateth Nassus Bassa, and kills
20000 Turks. -- 1610
Achmats Fleet sent against Florence and Malta. 200000 die at Constantinople in
one year of the plague. 42 Turkish Galleys defeated by the Florentine, who took
one Gally with 300 slaves. A Dervisar flingeth a stone at the Turk, and is
executed. The Tartar invadeth Moldavia. Peace between the Turk and Persian. The
Jews expelled Pera. Holland trades with the Turk. The Florentine and Sicilian
takes some places and Galleys from the Turks. The Bassa of Sid^n flies to
Florence with 14000. l. weight of gold. A Rebellion in Asia and Arabia.
Nassuffe the Bassa executed for intelligence with Persia. Two rich Turkish
Galleys taken by the Florentine. Iacaia, Mahomet 3. his supposed son, joins
with the Asian Rebels. Mustapha, Achmets brother, rules two months; he sets
free the Persian Ambassador, and imprisoneth the French, upon the escape of
Coresky the Moldavian; he is thrust into a Cel, and Achmet his son rules; he
sets free the French Ambassador, and makes peace with Persia. Manfredonia in
Sicily lost to the Turk, with the Isle of Ivisa. In the West, Iuliers is given
by the Emperor to the Duke of Saxony; Iuliers taken by Grave-Maurice. To
Rodulph succeeded in the Empire his brother Matthias 8 years. Spinola takes
Aken and Wesel, and beats down the Fort of Mulheim. The Hollanders invade
Munster and Paderborn. The Jews expelled Worms, and their Synagogue burnt.
Francfort rebelleth against their Magistrates. A Luth^ran-Jubile kept. The
Emperor dies, to whom succeeds Ferdinand his brother. K. Henry of France slain
by Ravilliac; his son Lewis 13. succeeds, his mother Regent; the Kings heart
is interred by the Jesuits: Rohan seiseth on S. John de Angeli; Conde leaves
the Court; Vendosme imprisoned, and escapes; The Jews banished France; Rohan
and the Protestants take arms; Anchore made Master of the Horse, and Governor
of Normandy; Conde imprisoned; Anchore's house spoiled, and his treasure seized
on by the people; he is slain, and his wife executed. France helps Savoy
against Spain; Espernon joyneth forces with the Queen, they are reconciled to
the King, and Conde released. Peace between Spain and Savoy. 900000 Moors
expelled Spain, after 900 years possession. The Spaniard helps the Duke of
Mantua against Savoy, for the Marquisat of Montferrat. The Polander beats the
Muscovite, and takes Smolensco. The Dukedom of Borussia confirmed by the
Polander on Brandeburg and his heirs-male. The Polander beaten in Valachia and
Muscovy; Smolensco recovered by the Muscovite. A Rebellion in Poland. Podolia
wasted by the Tartars; who upon the outrages of the Cossakes, burn 4 Cities,
400 Villages in Podolia, and carry away much plunder. In Hungary, the Traitors
that conspired against Battori, are executed. Sigismund Battori dies, and the
Empress crowned Queen; Gabr. Battori slain, and Bethlem Gabor made Prince by
the Turk. Steven Vayvod of Moldavia tyranniseth, is taken and sent with Prince
Alexander, his mother and brother, to Constantinople, who for fear renounced
Christ. The Heyducks beat the Turks. Ferdinand is crowned King of Hungary, and
then Bethlem Gabor. The Dane takes Calmaria from the Swedes; they waste Norway.
The Lubekers beat the Danes at sea. Calmaria is restored, and peace with the
Swedes is made. New Impositions raised in the Sound. The Hollanders help Lubec.
The Swede leagueth with the Dane against Poland. To Charles of Swedeland
succeeded his son Gustavus Adolphus: He gains upon the Dane and Muscovite.
King James makes peace between the Swede and Muscovite. Great troubles in
Bohemia. A Protestant Church built in Prague. The Emperor and Archduke of
Austria crowned at Prague. The Protestants cast three of the Emperors
Counselors out of a window, and league with Moravia, Silesia, and Lusatia.
Bucquoy invadeth Bohemia. Frederick the Palsgrave chosen King. Venice aideth
Mantua against Savoy; they have war with Ferdinand of Austria, they are aided
by the Hollanders; they make peace with Ferdinand; Treason against them
discovered, and the Traitors executed. The Archduke stays the Turkish
Ambassador going to the States; and they arrest his money, sent to pay his
garrisons. The Spaniard and Hollander fight at the Cape of S. Vincent; the
Hollander lost their Admiral, and the Spaniard 3 ships and 1500 men.
Grave-Maurice made Knight of the Garter. 27 Spanish ships going to the Indies,
defeated by the Hollanders; they take the Castle of Mina in the South Sea; they
secure the passage on the River Ems, by building two Forts. Spilberg beats the
Spaniard and Portugal. The Cautionary Towns redeemed. Maurice succeeds to
Philip in the principality of Orange. A Synod at Dort. Bernevelt executed. King
James is visited by the Lantgrave of Hesse. The Lord Zanchir hanged. Queen
Mary's body removed from Peterburgh to Westminster. The Palsgrave married to
the Lady Elizabeth. The Londoners make a Plantation in Ireland. The English
plant in Bermudas. The King of Denmark's second coming hither.
Middleton's-Water brought into London. Sutton's-Hospital founded. Overbury
poisoned. Spalato comes hither. King James goes into Scotland. Raleigh
executed. Queen Anne dies.

In the Church, Paul sits yet: He sends the Emperor a golden Rose beset with
rich Gems. Bellarmine's and Marian's Books of the Popes power condemned at
Paris. Mulheim built by the Protestants, who were expelled Colen. Newburg
becomes a Papist. The Protestant Princes meet at Norimberg. Silesia petitioneth
the Emperor for continuance of Protestantism; the Bishop of Uratislavia
persecutes them; the Emperor intercedes for them. Arminius and Vorstius make
troubles in Holland. A Synod called at Dort.

In the East, the Turks take Vatz in Hungary, against the peace; Osman is
strangled by the 1620 --
Janisaries, whom he meant to extirpate; Prince Coresky strangled in prison;
Mustapha advanced again; peace with Poland; At Babylon a rebellion, and at
Arzirum, and in Mesopotamia: The Bassa of Arzirum threateneth Constantinople;
the Janisaries refuse to oppose him: Mustapha is removed, and Amurath 4. Osmans
son advanced: Babylon taken by the Persian: the Cossacks trouble the Black-sea
and Bosphorus: Abassa is pacified, having threatened Constantinople, and defeats
the Persians: 20000 Turks defeated at Babylon: the King of Tartaria expelled by
his brother: the Janisaries quarrel with the Grand-Signior. In the West, the
Duke of Bavaria defeateth the Bohemians; the Emperor nullifieth the election of
the Palatine to Bohemia; the Palatine with Brandeburg and others proscribed;
Spire wasted by Mansfield, and the Palatinate by Bavaria and the Spaniards;
Bucquoi killed; Mansfield proscribed; Westphalia, Pederborn, and Strasburg
wasted by the Duke of Brunswick, who loses an arm in battle; Manheim and
Heidelberg taken; Bavaria made Elector; Gabor invadeth Austria; Brunswick
beaten by Tilly; Frankendale submits; Saxon-Wymar and Anhalt made friends
with the Emperor; Tilly spoileth Brunswick; Mansfield defeated; the Boors of
Austria rebel; the Imperialists take many places; A Church and Monastery near
Prague begun by the Emperor; the Palsgraves eldest son drowned. In France, the
King takes many Towns from the Protestants, and makes war for the Valtoline;
250 houses burnt in Paris; Soubize defeated at sea by Montmorency; Vendosme and
the Great Prior of France, (Henry 4. his bastards) are imprisoned; Forts built
by the King against Rochel; the Isle of Ree lost, and regained; Nevers claims
the Duchy of Mantua, he is assisted by the French against the Spaniard; the
King takes Rochel, and sends his Army for Mantua. In Spain, Philip 4. reigns:
Troubles in Mexico settled; Brasil recovered by the Spaniard from the Hollander:
the Tartars do much hurt in Podolia: the Swedes beat the Polanders in Livonia,
but the Polanders defeat the Tartars in Borussia; peace between Poland and
Swethland: much of Hungary subdued by Gabor; he disclaimeth it, and makes
peace: The Cossacks take Newstadt: Buda almost burnt to the ground: Ferdinand
3. the Emperors son, crowned King of Hungary: Bergen in Norway almost consumed
with fire. The King of Denmark is General of the united Princes against the
Emperor; he is endangered by a fall from his horse; he defeateth, and is
defeated. Iutland and most of Holst subdued by the Duke of Fridland; Strals^nd
besieged by the Caesarians; Newstadt attempted in vain by the Danes; Livonia
and Curland submit to the Swede; the King of Swedes takes diverse Towns;
Swedeland settled on the Kings Daughter; he takes Strasburg, and besieges
Thorn, and makes peace with Poland. In Bohemia, the Jesuits are restored; many
of the Lords executed. Silesia submits to the Emperor; Ferdinand 3. is crowned
King of Bohemia; The Nobility commanded to forsake Religion, by a certain day.
The Venetians make a League offensive and defensive with the Turks. The
Spaniards besiege Sluice and Bergen. Breda taken, and diverse other Towns: the
Dunkirkers take many Holland and English ships; the Hollanders take
Hertogenbush; Bernevets sons in Holland degraded; Grotius escapes in a Trunk;
Bergen relieved; Antwerp attempted by Orange in vain; Mansfield takes Embden.
Prince Maurice dies; his brother Henric succcedeth. Baiae in Brasil lost and
taken. In Leyden and Amsterdam, a sedition by the Arminians and Calvinists. The
Hollanders rob the Spaniards in America, and take diverse of their ships. Peace
between England and France: The Bishop of Spalato returns: Prince Charles goes
into Spain: Mansfield comes into England. King James dies; His son
Charles succeeds: An Expedition to Cadiz: English ships arrested in France:
The Duke of Buckingham murdered: peace with France: New England planted.

In the Church, Gregory 15. sits 2 years. To him succeeded Urban 8. The
Archbishop of Spalato's Body burnt at Rome. At Tiran in the Valtolin, the
Protestants are massacred in the Church; they are banished Bohemia. The
Jesuits restored to Prague; The Protestant-Church there given to the
Carmelites. The Protestants driven out of Austria, and the Country of Henault
punished for receiving them. Amsterdam and Leyden persecute the Arminians. At
Vienna is instituted the Order of She-Jesuits. The Protestants banished out of
Iuliers. Heidelburg and Glogovia become Popish.

In the East, the Turks defeat the Christian Fleet at Neapolis, and carry away
800 captives: At Babylon they are beaten by the Persians, but shortly after
recover their losses: -- 1630
peace made between the Turk and Persian. At Constantinople, the Turk draws a
great sum of money from the Christians: the French Ambassador troubled about
his Chapel: A Venetian Merchant, for looking on the Seraglio through his
Perspective, is hanged. The Bassa of Aleppo beheaded; and war denounced against
Poland. The Turks take Babylon, with the loss of 40000 Persian horse. The
Sultan removes to Aleppo, because of the plague. A Fleet is sent against the
Cossacks. Sias Abas the Parthian King, husband to 800 wives, dies. A third
part of Constantinople burnt. The Turks waste Illyria: The Beglerbeg of Greece
rebelleth. In the West, Hanovia besieged by the Caesarians, and relieved: The
Swede invadeth the Isle Rugia: Magdeburg besieged: The Empress crowned at
Ratisbone: Tilly wastes Thuringia, and fights the Swedish King at Lipsic, where
9000 Caesarians were slain; Tilly being wounded, flies to Hall. Frederick
loses Bohemia. Wolstein Duke of Fridland takes Prague. The Swedes march into
Bavaria. Ratisbone besieged, and after 465 sallies is taken by Ferdinand 3. At
the Pacification of Prague, the Saxon, Brandeburg, Luneburg, and Vinarien join
with the Emperor. Ferdinand 3. chosen King of the Romans, and the year
following Emperor. Ramsey is taken by Count Nassau. At Hanovia diverse
encounters between the Imperialists and Swedes, and diverse Towns taken by both
parties. The French King and his brother the Duke of Orleans reconciled. A
League between France and Swethland. The French invade the Grisons; the French
aid the States: France is invaded; the Queen Mother flies to Amsterdam.
Isabella the Infanta dies at Brussels: The Spaniards have a great loss in
America: Ferdinand the Cardinal, Infant of Spain, prevails at Norlingen; He
is made Governor of Brabant. The Spaniards beaten by the Hollanders. The French
cut off at Fontaralie. The Spanish Fleet on the English shore, overthrown by
the Hollanders. Poland makes peace with the Turk: in the kingdom, Ladislaus 4.
succeeds to his father Sigismund. The Polanders and Muscovit^s defeated:
peace between Poland and Swethland. The King of Poland comes to Vienna; The
Queen of Swethland comes to Frankfort. Wars in Hungary. The Swedish King
killed, having left one Daughter Christina to succeed him. Spinola the Spanish
General dies. The Prince of Orange makes an Expedition into Flanders. Horn
takes Colberg; and the Swedish King, not long before his death, Francfort upon
the Oder. Tilly, after many Victories, dies at Ingolstadt. Fridland is
murdered. Germany wasted with the sword, plague and famine. The Hollanders
take some places in Brasil. Skenk-Sconce retaken by the States. Breda taken by
Orange. The Hollanders beaten near Antwerp. 60000 destroyed by an Earthquake in
Calabria. At Messina, 300 perished in a Church overthrown by an Earthquake. In
England, a peace is made with Spain: King Charles sends to the Emperor for
restitution of the Palatinate: Three Nuncio's sent by the Pope, are received
into the Queens Court honorably. The English Lyturgie sent into Scotland,
occasioned much mischief: The Scots Presbyterians enter into a Covenant, and
raise Arms: Preparation in England and Ireland against them, both by Sea and
Land.

In the Church, Pope Urban sits yet: He exhorts the Christian Princes to
peace, and falls out with the Venetians about their dominion in the Adriatic
sea. The Jesuits at Vienna keep a Jubilee. In Scotland, a Synod is held at
Glascow. At Rome, such a Storm brake out with Darkness, that at mid day they
were forced to light candles. Diverse meetings and Synods held this Decad in
Germany among the Protestants: But whilst the Princes were consulting at
Lipsic, Magdeburg is taken and destroyed by Tilly.

AND thus (Good Reader) in this History and Chronology, as in two small Maps,
thou may behold the Microcosme of Mankind, in so many Hundred years, acting
over and over again the same Tragi-Comedies: Thou see new Persons and
Visards, but the same Scene, and the same Things acted: Thou may behold from
hence, as Charon did from the top of Parnassus in Lucian, a Clod of Earth full
of Bee-hives, an Ant-hill full of Emmets, or a Pool full of Bubbles, some
bigger, some lesser, puffed with air, and tossed up and down with winds, till
they all break, and turn into their original Vapors. And what is it thou see
acted here? Nothing almost but Treacheries, Murders, Incests, Adulteries,
Thefts, Perjuries, Oppressions, Imprisonments, Cares, Watchings, Travelings,
Underminings of one another; Princes tyrannizing over their People, Subjects
rebelling against their Princes; one Prince thrusting out another, and People
quarrelling one with another: Thou see here Perigrinations, Navigations,
Toylings, Battles, Lawsuits, and a thousand such Vexations, all for an
Handful of Earth: In a word; we see here innumerable Nests of Wasps and
Hornets, destroying one another with their stings. And what is the cause of all
this mischief? Truly, Pride, Ambition, Covetousness, Sacrilege, Tyranny,
Drunkenness, Whoredoms, Whimsical opinions in Religion, Self-love, every one
thinking his own dreams to be oracles, and his conceited fancies to be
Inspirations; And above all things, Injustice, for which the World has
suffered so many changes: Justice is the Pillar on which States and Kingdoms
stand; Remove that, and down falls the Temple of all Government: Justice is the
Sun that illuminates all Societies; Extinguish that, and what will follow but
storms, clouds, and darkness? Justice is the Band that ties People to their
Governors, and every man to another; when this Band is broken, nothing follows
but Confusion: Justice is the Life of all States and Dominions, which live no
longer then they are just; Nothing discriminates Kingdoms and States from
Conventicles of Thieves and Robbers, but Justice; Remota Justicia, quid aliud
sunt Regna quam magna Latrocinia? Lastly, In this Chronology, a^ in an
Epitomie, you shall see all the Heretical Opinions which have been spued o^ in
so many Ages, now greedily licked up by the Fanatical spirits of this Age. GOD
open our eyes, that we may at length see the Truth, and may with one heart and
one mind embrace it; and that the Spirit of Truth, which our blessed Savior
promised to his Church, may lead us into all Truth.

Amen.
A Catalogue of the Universities of Christendom, and of the Time of their
Foundations.
Ann. Christ. 636 OF Cambridge, enlarged by Sigibert King of the East Angles
but erected long before. 640 Of Lindaffern in Northumberland, founded by
Oswald. 792 Of Paris, founded by Charles the Great, at the desire of Alcuin and
Bid; and shortly after, he founded the University of Papia. 809 Of Toulouse,
having the same privileges with the University of Paris. 830 Of Lions, founded
by the Greeks. 895 Of Oxford, founded by Elfred. 926 Of Lovain in Brabant,
founded by John Duke of Brabant. 1145 Of Rhemes, founded in the Council there;
it was enlarged afterward by Charles Guise Cardinal of Lorain, in the year 1560.
1196 Of Montpeler in France; It was first erected for the Law, now for Physic.
1209 Of Palenza, founded by Alphonsus of Castile, and removed to Salamanca by
Ferdinand of Castile, 1240. 1216 Of Naples, founded by Frederick 2. 1221 Of
Padua, by Frederick the Emperor, who removed that of Bononia thither. 1227 Of
Bourges, by S. Lewis. 1236 Of Vienna, founded by Frederick the Emperor. 1290 Of
Perusia, a City in Hetruria. 1306 Of Conimbria, by Dionysius King of Portugal.
1312 Of Orleans, founded by Philip the Fair, King of France. 1316 Of Ferara, by
Albert Duke of that place. 1310 Of Cadurzis, or Quercy in France, by John 22.
1339 Of Pisa, it was afterward enlarged an. 1487. by Laurence de Medices, and
then by Cosino, 1543. 1346 Of Heidelberg, by Robert the Red, Palsgrave. 1349 Of
Anjou, by Lewis Duke of Anjou and King of Sicily; it was afterward enlarged by
Charles 5. of France, an. 1364. 1360 Of Prague in Bohemia, by Charles 4.
Emperor and King of Bohemia. 1364 Of Cracovia by Casimir; Iagello enlarged it,
an. 1400. 1387 Of Sena in Etruria; Pope Pius 2. enlarged it. 1388 Of Colen, by
the Senate; Urban 6. confirmed it. 1389 Of Avignon, by the Popes that resided
there. 1390 Of Erford in Thuringia; it was founded before by Dagobert the
French King, Boniface 9. enlarged it. 1403 Of Wiritzburg, by John the Bishop;
his successor Julius enlarged it. 1404 Of Salamanca, where Pope Clement 5.
appointed the Hebrew, Chaldee, and Arabic to be read. 1409 Of Leipsic in
Misnia, by Frederick 1. Elector of Saxony. 1411 Of S. Andrews in Scotland, by
King Alexander and his sister Isabel. 1412 Of Turin in Savoy, by Duke Lewis.
1415 Of Rostock, by John and Albert Dukes of Meckelburg, and the Senate. 1418
Of Caen in Normandy, by king Henry 5. of England. 1426 Of Dola in Burgundy, by
Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy. 1431 Of Poyctiers, by Charles 7. 1438 Of
Florence, by Cosmo di Medices, who sent for learned men thither out of Greece
and other places, and erected a famous Library. 1454 Of Glascow in Scotland.
1456 Of Grypswald in Pomeran. begun by D. Uratislaus, and finished by D.
Philip, 1547. 1459 Of Basil, by Pope Pius 2. 1460 Of Friburg in Brisgovia, by
Albert Archduke of Austria. 1472 Of Ingolstadt in Bavaria, by Lewis, and his
son George Dukes of Bavare. 1475 Of Valenciens, by Lewis. 1477 Of Tubing in the
Dukedom of Wittenberg, by D. Eberard. 1480 Of Aberden in Scotland, by W.
Elphinston B. of Aberden, enlarged since by the E. Marshal of Scotland, and
Senate of Aberden. 1482 Of Mentz, by the Archbishop Dietherus. 1491 Of Munster
in Westphalia, by the Bishop there. 1498 Of Copenhagen in Denmark, by King John
there. 1500 Of Toledo, by the Archbishop. 1502 Of Wittenberg in Saxony, by
Frederick the Elector. 1506 Of Francfort upon Oder, by Ioachim Elector of
Brandeburg. 1517 Of Complutum, by Ximenes Archbishop of Toledo. 1517 Of Sevil,
by Roderick of Sancta Aelia. 1518 Of Granado, by Ferdinand of Calabria. 1526 Of
Marpurg in Hassia, by Philip the Lantgrave. 1538 Of Strasburg, by John
Sturmius. 1540 Of Bezancan in Burgundy, by Charles 5. 1541 Of Evera in Portugal,
by Henry the Archbishop. 1544 Of Reimont in Borussia, by Albert Marquess of
Brandeburg. 1548 Of Iene in Thuring, by John Elector of Saxony. 1562 Of Doway
in Artois, founded, by King Philip 2. 1564 Of Dillengen in Swedeland, by
Cardinal Otho Bishop of Auspurg. 1575 Of Leyden, by William Prince of Orange,
and the States of Holland. 1576 Of Helmestadt or Iulia, by Julius D. of
Brunswick. 1581 Of Franequer, by the Estates of Frisia. 1581 Of Altorf in
Bavaria, by the Norimbergers. 1591 Of Dublin in Ireland, by Queen Elizabeth.
1592 Of Venice, enriched with a Greek Library by Cardinal Bessarion, which cost
30000. crowns 5 yet I find that before this time, there were famous Professors
in Venice, as Emanuel Chrysolorus, Hermolaus Barbarus, Egnatius, Caelius
Secundus, and diverse others. 1607 Of Giessen, by Lewis Lantgrave of Hesse; it
was united to Marpurg, Ann. 1626. 1614 Of Groaning in Frisland. 1616 Of
Paderburn, by Theodore the Bishop. 1620 Of Renthen in the Principality of
Schaumberg, by Prince Ernest. 1629 Of Alba Iulia or Fayrwar in Transylvania, by
Bethlem Gabor.
A List of the different sorts of Knights in Christendom, and the Times of
their Institution.
Ann. Christ. 738 OF Gennetae or Jennettae in France, instituted by Charles
Martel, upon the driving out of the Moors, or in honor of his Wife Jean: The
Moors they called Gennets or Wesels. 930 Of S. Andrew or the Thistle in
Scotland. 1070 Of the Knights of the Dog in France, by Philip the First: 1090
Of S. John of Jerusalem, or Hospitallers for entertaining of Pilgrims. 1117 Of
Knights Templars in Syria, to suppress the robbing of Pilgrims. 1119 Of the
Knights of our Savior, by Alphonsus the First. 1134 Of Knights of the Lily in
Navar, by Garciaz. 1161 Of the Knights of Calatrava, by Sancho the Brave of
Castile. 1165 Of Montjoy, founded in Syria. 1170 Of S. James in Castile, by
Ferdinand son to Peter Albert. 1192 Of Knights Teutonicks, as an addition to
the Templars and Hospitallers, by Henry Walpot. 1203 Of Warfare of Christ, in
Livonia, by Albert Bishop of Riga. 1213 Of Portglaive in Livonia, by Innocent
3. 1213 Of the Knights of Avis in Portugal, by Alphonsus King there. 1218 Of
the Knights of Alcantara, by Ferdinand 3. King of Leon. 1233 Of the Knights of
the Virgin Mary, by Bartholomew of Vicenry. 1279 Of the Knights of S. George in
Carinthia, by Rodulph the Emperor. 1301 Of the Knights of the Annunciado in
Savoy, by Amadeus 6. 1317 Of Warfare of Christ, in Portugal, by Dionysius King
there; upon the destruction of the Templars. 1318 Of Monteca and S. George in
Arragon, by James King there. 1321 Of Christ Jesus, in Portugal, by King
Dionysius. 1322 Of Knights of La Calza in Venice. 1330 Of S. Mark in Venice,
which seems to be the same with La Calza. 1332 Of Knights of the Band in Spain,
by Alphonsus King of Castile. 1343 Of the Garter and Round-Table at Windsor, by
King Edward. 1350 Of the Star, by King John of France. 1381 Of Knights of the
Dove in Castile, by John 1. 1429 Of Knights De la Scama in Spain, by John 2.
King of Castile. 1430 Of the Golden-fleece, by Philip D. of Burgundy. 1450 Of
Knights of the Ear of Corn in Britain, by Francis 1. 1451 Of Knights of S.
Maurice in Savoy, by Pope Faelix 5. and D. of Savoy. 1469 Of S. Michael in
France, by Lewis 11. 1531 Of Knights of the Rhodes, transplanted to Malta by
the Pope and Emperor. 1534 Of Knights of the Burgundian- Cross, by Charles 5.
1561 Of Knights of S. Steven in Tuscany, by Cosmo di Medices. 1579 Of Knights
of the Holy Ghost in France, by King Henry 3. 1608 Of Knights of the Holy-Blood
of Christ, by Vincent Gonzaga D. of Mantua. Besides these, I find the Knights
of Montesio in the Province of Valentia: Of Redemption in Arragon: Of S. Mary
in Italy, called also there Fratri Gaudenti, because they lived at ease and
pleasure: Of S. Lazaro, who pledd great Antiquity, Pope Pius 4. of late revived
them, and the Dukes of Savoy do much respect them: The Knights of S. Steven,
erected by Cosmo Duke of Florence, who is great master of this Order, have
their chief residence in Pisa: to these may be added, Knights of the Sepulcher;
but I think they be the same with S. John of Jerusalem, now of Malta: We have
also in England Knights Banerets, Baronets, Batchilours, and of the Bath: The
Knights of the Ear of Corn were abolished, upon the union of Britany with
France, by the marriage of Charles 8. with Anne of Britany. 329 ANtony and Paul
the Eremite begin the first Monks. 402 The Order of Regulars instituted by S.
Austin. 524 Of Benedictine Monks by S. Bennet. 910 Of Clugny by Bernon an
Abbot; To this Order belong the Carthusians. 1009 Of Camaldulenses by S.
Romnaldus. 1081 Of the shady Valley by S. John Gualbert. 1106 Of the
Cisterciens by S. Robert. 1118 Of the Canons Regular. 1143 Of the
Praemonstratenses. 1180 Of the Carmelites, confirmed by Pope Alexander 3. 1197
Of the Crosse-bearers, confirmed by Caelestine the 3. 1209 Of the Minorites,
confirmed by Innocent the 3. 1216 Of the Redemption of Captives, confirmed by
Innocent the 3. 1227 Of the Praedicants, confirmed by Honorius the 3. 1227 Of
the Nuns of S. Clara, which observe the rule of the Minorites. 1241 Of the
Eremites of S. Austin. 1248 Of the Sylvestrines, confirmed by Innocent the 4.
1294 Of the Caelestines. 1299 Of the Servants of S. Mary. 1362 Of the Iesuati
by S. John Columbine of Seen. 1373 Of Mount Olivet. 1410 Of S. Jerome: Of the
Scopetini: Of S. George de Alga. 1480 Of the Minimes by S. Francis de Paula.
1530 Of the Capuchins, confirmed by Clement the 7. 1533 Of the Clerks of S.
Paul, by the same Pope. 1540 Of the Society of Jesus, by Ignatius Loyola, and
confirmed by Paul the 3. 1591 Of those that serve the sick, confirmed by
Gregory the 14.
A List of Heretics, and such as have been so reputed since Christ.
39 SImon Magus. 71 Menander, Saturnius, Basilides, Simons Disciples. 81
Nicholaus the Deacon, who allowed fornication. 103 Corinthus, and his scholar
Ebion, denied Christ's Divinity. 132 Papias Author of the Millinaries. 154
Carpocrates, and his Scholars the Gnostics, denied Works. 195 Cajanites,
deniers of the Resurrection. 203 Valentinians, Authors of many Fables. 213
Marcionites Authors of two Gods. 219 Germogines, who held the Eternity of the
Matter. 220 Montanus the Paraclete, and his Cataphrygians. 224 Originists, who
saved the Devils. 237 Helcheseits, dissemblers of their faith. 240 Donatists,
who held Rebaptisation. 254 Novatians, who denied pardon to the lapsed. 261
Sabellians, disciples of Noetus, who denied the Trinity. 269 Samosatenus who
denied Christ's divinity 278 Manes, father of the Manichees, who held two
principles. 336 Arians, who denied Christ's Divinity. 352 Photinus, who also
denied Christ's divinity 358 Macedonius, who denied the Divinity of the Holy
Ghost. 361 Aetius and Eunomius his Scholar, who held the Father God only;
denied Episcopacy, prayers, f^sting, and good works. 375 Apollinarius, who
denied Christ's Soul. 395 Vadius, father of the Anthropomorphites. 398
Helvidius, who held that Mary had other children. 408 Priscilianus, who held
the souls and God all one substance. 417 Iovinianus held all sins equal, and
despised Virginity. 425 Vigilantius, an enemy to Saints and Relics. 432
Pelagius denied original sin, and slighted Gods grace. 451 Nestorius held two
persons in Christ. 467 Eutyches held but one nature in Christ. 475 Pacificants,
who would reconcile the Catholics and Eutychians. 542 Julius Halicarnassaeus
made Christ's Body impassible. 566 Agnoits, scholars to Temistius, held Christ
ignorant of the last day. 607 Armenians in larged the Eutychian heresy. 630
Monothelites held but one will and operation in Christ. 821 Michael Balbus
Emperor, denied the Resurrection, etc. 1049 The Greeks denied the Procession
of the Holy Ghost. 1058 Berengarius was condemned of Heresy, for denying
Christ's Body in the Euchar. 1087 Bogomiles held the world was made by Devils.
1119 Petrus de Bruis and Henry denied Baptism to Infants. 1144 Petrus
Abailardus made the Divine persons unequal. 1153 Cathari or Patareni denied the
Sacram. 1170 Waldenses were condemned for their doctrines. 1241 Albigenses also
were condemned. 1276 Fratricelli held themselves the only true Church. 1299
Begardi and Beghinae denied prayers, Fasting, etc. 1309 Lollardus taught that
Lucifer was unjustly condemned. 1352 The Whippers who denied Sacraments and
good works, holding the Baptism of blood the only Baptism. After these times
sprung ^p some other Hetericks, as Servetus, David George, the Libertines, and
some others, who were quickly suppressed.
An Alphabeticall Table, containing the Persons, Places, and Principal Matters
in the Second Part of the History of the World.
A
ABassa Bassai the Revolted Turk. 483. Abbatiscella its History. 367. Abbot of
S. Gall defeated. 362. raises a Civil War. 365. Abbots of S. Gall, who 369.
Abdise, Patriarch of the East. 432. Aberdene, built. 142. Aberdene Divines,
their Queries to the Covenanting Ministers. 642, etc. Abismarus Emperor. 114.
117. Acephali, who 95. Achaeans subdued by the Romans, 5. their insolency. 4.
Achmet the Turk, and his Actions, 480. makes Peace with Caesar. ib. Acho, King
of Norway 243. Adalgisus, Prince of Salernum, 135. Adolphus, Emperor. 254.
Aenobarb sends the Turks two Barks, which are taken by Garcias. 395. Aetius the
General. 93, etc. Afric lost. 117. Agrippa, his Actions and death. 41.
Agrippina. 42, etc. Aistalphus, King of Lombardie. 121. Aix turns out their
Jesuits. 445. Aladolus, King of Armenia beheaded. 473. Alani, who 40. 90. 246.
Alanson, the French Kings brother. 436. Alaricus. 88, 90, 91. Sacks Rome. 92.
Duke of Albany, Regent of Scotland; and his Actions. 57^, etc. Alberts
Posterity, Marquisses of Austria. 141. Albert of Austria, Emperor. 254, etc.
his Lady. 255. Albert Emperor, his Title to Bohemia, and short life, 406.
Albert Arch Duke of Austria. 438. Albinus defeated by Severus. 62. Alboinus,
King of Lombardy 104. Alexander, the supposed son of Antiochus. 3 Alexander,
Ptolomies son in Law, 16. Alexander Zebina, King of Syria. 7. his sacrilege.
ib. is slain. ib. Alexander Janneus succeeds Aristobulus in Judaea, 10. he
murders his brother: his cruelties and death. 10, etc. Alexander Cleopatras
son; and his Actions. 11. Alexandra Reigns in Palestin. 17. Alexander
Aristobulus his son escapes out of prison, 21. is defeated by Gabinius, 23. is
beheaded, 29. Alexander Severus, a good Emperor, 65, etc. his end. 66.
Alexander, brother of Leo the Emperor. 140. Alexander, King of Scotland, 233,
etc. his death. ^44. Alexander King of Scotland his Actions. ^74. Pope
Alexander' s Actions against Barbarossa, and his gift to Venice, 178. his
Synod. ibid. Alexander, Lord of the Isles his Rebellion and submission. 537.
Alexander, King James the third's brother, escapes out of prison, 565. made
Regent. 566. Alexius, Greek Emperor, and his losses. 164. Strangled. 184.
Alexius Angelus, Greek Emperor. 186. 188. Alphonsus King of Asturia. 125.
Alphonsus King of Arragon. 235. Alphonsus the 11 of Spain. 276. Alphonsus
leaves Naples to his bastard son. 491. Amadeus Earl of Savoy, and his Actions.
283. Amadeus the 5 and 6. 284. etc. his Exploits. 285. Amedius the 7th 286.
Amadeus his Commendation of the private Life, 347. b^comes a Monk. 348. Amadeus
made Pope, and the Ceremonies of his Inauguration, 350. he resignes it, 352.
has diverse Honors and Privileges given him by the Synod of Lausanna. 352.
Amadeus 3d Duke of Savoy his Charity. 354. Amadeus the 8 of Savoy, and his
Actions, 345, etc. made Duke. 346. Amalasunta, the Gothish Queen. 101.
Ambassadors from France and Spain to the Electors, 420. and their Message.
ibid. Ambassadors questioned, and Merchants imprisoned at Constantinople 485
Ambrose Bishop. 86. 89 America subdued by the Spaniard. 431 Americus Vespusius
his Discovery. 503 Amurath the Turk, Invades Hungary, and is defeated by
Huniades. 406, etc. Amurath the second and his Actions. 463, etc. Amurath the
third and his Actions. 479 Amurath, Osmans brother Sultan. 482 Amurath his life
and death. 263 Anastasius Emperor, his good and bad Qualities. 98, etc. his
end. 100. Arastasius second, Emperor. 117 Anastatius the Patriarch. 120 Ancre
the French Favorit, and his end. 511 Andrew, King of Hungary. 224 Cardinal of
Saint Andrews Viceroy, complies with the Queen Mother, 577. his Pride. 579.
murdered. ib. his Castle taken and demolished: 580 Andronicus Greek Emperor,
his Actions and miserable end 188 Androniucs the elder, Emperor. 247 etc.
unhappie in his children. 249 Andronicus the younger. 249. vex eth his
Grandfather. ib. his life and death. 250 Andronicus the blind Emperor. 261
Angeli, their Dominion cease. 248 Anjou, Protector of France, 296. contests
with Burgundy, ib. tries all means to raise money. 297* his Coronation and
death. ib. Queen Ann beheaded, and Queen Jane dies, 458* Ann of Cleve, and
Catherin Howard. 559 Antiochus Epiphanes his wickedness and Tyranny p* 1* his
death* 2 Antiochus Soter, his kindness to Hyrcanus. 6. he beats the Pa^thians.
ib. at last is slain by them. ibid. Antiochus Lyzicenus. 11 Antiochus Gryphus.
ibid. Antiochus Eusebes. 11, etc. Antiochia overthrown by an Earth quake. 101.
shaken again. 108. Antipater his Actions. 20. made Governor. 29 Antipopes. 258.
277. cause great troubles. 334. 352 Antonius hates Octavius, and is hated of
the people; he flies into France. 29. is invited into Italy. 30. loses two
Legions, and is endangered* by the Parthians. 31. he crucifies and beheads
Antigonus. 32. is defeated by Octavius, and kills himself. 33. Antonie's widow
of Athens. 262 Antonius, why called Pius. 55. his Excellency and Government,
and Philosophy. 56. his excellent Government and Victories. 57 Antony of
Portugal. 435 Don Antono of Portugal assisted by the French. 606. by the
English. ibid. Apicius hanged himself. 37 Appius Claudius his Victory and
Triumph. 8 Aquila Ponticus. 55. Aquileia. 67 Arbogastus. 89 Arcadius Emperor.
90, etc. Archelaus accused and banished. 35 Aristobulus wears a Diadem: his
murders and bloody end. 10. Aristobulus, Alexanders son. 17. strives with his
brother, is defeated and carried to Rome. 20. escapes. 22. is poisoned. 29
Aristonicus seiseth on the Roman Towns. 9. is sent to Rome with the wealth of
Attalus. ib. and there is strangled. ibid. Arius, and Arians. 80, etc. Arms of
England used by Queen Mary of Scotland. 597 Armignac taken prisoner. 301
Arminius in Holland occasioneth much Debate. 443. suppressed at Utricht. 447
Arnulphus Emperor. 139 Arnulphus Duke of Bavaria. 142 Arragonians obtain Sicily
and Naples. 235 Kingdom of Arragon in debate. 303 Arragonian Fleet defeated by
the Genuois. 489 Arras Rebelleth. 499 Arteman the Gantois Captain. 300 Artenel,
Captain of the Gantois. 298, etc. Articles between King Charles of France, and
King Henry 5 of England. 522 Articles between the English and Scots. 551
Articles between Edw. 4. and the Fr. K. at which Burgundy storms. 558 King
Edward 4. kisseth an old widow for 20l. 558. is entertained in France. ibid.
Assembly of the 3 Estates of France at Blois, for settling of Peace. 607
Athanasius. 81. 83. 85. Athens destroyed by the Turk. 262 Walter Earl of Athol
his Punishment. 539 Attalus. 92. Attila, K. of the Hunns. 94, 95. 398 Atulphus.
92 Aubigney advanced by King James, and is accused falsely. 628 Avenion, the
Popes Seat. 255 bought by the Pope. 260 Augustine. 93 Aurelian Emperor. 72. his
end. 73 Aurelius Probus Emperor. ib. his end. 74 Auria, Admiral of Genua. 261.
271 Auriflamme the holy Standard. 299 Austrians quarrel with the Switzers. 357,
etc. Austrians make peace with the Tigurins. 361. make War upon the Cantons.
362. make Peace again. ib. which is shortly after broken. ibid.
B
BAbylon, the Seat of the Sarazens. 112 Bacchides his Actions. 2 Bada its
History. 372 Bajazet the Turk. 261. his Actions and death. 264. his sons. 265
Bajazet the Turk his Actions. 469, etc. Bajazets Rebellion against Solomon.
477. strangled with his four sons. ibid. Baldwin King of Jerusalem. 165 Baldwin
de Burgo* 166 Baldwin Earl of Flanders, Emperor of Byzantium. 186 Baldwin Earl
of Flanders. 227, etc. Baldwin the second. 228 Baliol King of Scots. 242. does
homage to King Edward. 244. flies out against him. ib. he submits, and is
imprisoned. 245 Edward Baliol King of Scots. 309 Baliol resignes his Right to
the Scotch Crown. 322 Baliol Invades Scotland. 324 Bannockbarn Battle. 320
Baras the Persian. 106. Bardas Caesar. 134. Barnabos afflicts Genua. 272, etc.
Barnabos quarrels with the Savoyen 286 Basil the Emperor, and Basil the Eunuch.
149. Basils Actions 150. his cruelty upon the Bulgarians, ibid. his Victories
and death. 150, etc. Basil its History. 365* Basilius, of an horse-courser,
made Emperor. 135. his Actions. 136. his death. ibid. George Basta forces
Religion. 404 Basta and Batorius strive for Transylvania. 439 Stephen Bathors
Valor. (399) Steven Bator, King of Poland. 436 Bator the Transilvanian. 438.
Andrew Bator. 439 Battle of Agencourt. 519. of Vernoyle. 524 Gabriel Bator
Halts between Caesar and the Turk. 404 Thomas Becket his life and death. 188,
etc. Belgae, their Army against Caesar. 22. Belisarius. 101, etc. his exploits.
102, etc. Bencozba. 54 Berengarius King of Italy. 139. saluted Emperor. 140.
Berengarius murdered. 143. Berengarius the younger. 144 Berengarius taken, and
set free by the Emperor. 145. taken again and imprisoned. ibid. Berenice, Queen
of Egypt. 21 Bern sides with the Switzers. 361. Bernevild and his Accomplices in
Holland. 449 Bienna makes a League with Bern, and other Cantons. 371 Blanca,
mother of Saint Lewis. 229 Blanca Maria Duchess of Savoy. 355, etc. Bocchus
King of Mauritania. 12 Bohemia troubled with their Kings, 255. Enriched and
divided by Charles the fourth 269 Bohemia troubled with Wars by the Hussits. 334
Bohemians have Liberty of Religion. 442 Bohemia Rebels against Caesar, 447, etc.
Boiebracius King of Bohemia, a Hussit. 409, etc. Borgias poisoned, and
recovers, 504 Borussians fall off from the Marian knights, 414. Ioyn with
Poland, ibid. Bothwels ill offices between Murry and the Hamiltons. 617
Bothwell restored to the discontent of Murry. 618 Bothwell accused of
murdering the King; and is made D. of Orkney. 620 Married, ibid Bothwell
proclaimed Traitor, 631 Surpriseth Leith ibid. Botoniates Greek Emperor. 164
Bourdeaux falls off, and once to the English. 490 Boyds, their greatness and
fall in Scotland. 563, etc. Brigerus the Tyrant of Swethland. 266 Britan
invaded by Caesar, 22. Base Britany in controversy. 290 Duke of Britany
reconciled to the King, 302. Duke of Orleans killed by Burgundy. 304 Duke of
Britany angry for the peace between Lewis and his Subjects. 493 Britany in
France troubled by the Dukes favorite, 501. Sues for peace, 502 Bruce King of
Scotland, 244. He consults with Cumin, who betrays him. 246. Escapes strangely
into Scotland, and kills Cumin. ibid. King Bruce his contestation with K.
Edward. 305 Bruce his good success. 306 Robert Bruce King of Scotland his
success. 320 Bruce and his Nobility differ. 322 Bruce king of Scots his
advice, will and death. 323 Bruciaus and Baliolaus have diverse encounters 324,
etc. Bruges rebelleth. 342 Bruges begs pardon of the Duke, 488 Brunchilde her
punishment. 111 Brunswig like to be betrayed. 440 Brunswicks outrages, 452. He
is defeated by Tilly, ibid. Lost his arm. 453 Brunswick beat again by Tilly,
ibid. With other passages that year. ib. etc. Brutus his death. 30 Duke of
Buckingham animated by Dr. Morton, against King Richard. 554 his bad success;
is betrayed and beheaded. ib. Bucquoi, Brunswick, Spinola, Tilly, and other
Commanders oppress Germany. 451 Bulgarius. 114. 116. 118. 120. 127. Converted
twice. 132. Their Battle with Leo. 143. Pillage Hadrianople. 141 Burdilex,
Governor of Piemont his Petition to the French King, and his Counsel about the
delivery of the Savoyen Towns. 397. Answer thereto. 397. etc. Burgundy of old
a Kingdom, now a Duchy, and County. 156. Burgundians Converted to Christ.
92. Burgundy annexed to France. 276 Burgundians 3 times defeated by the
Switzers. 363 Duke of Burgundy absolved by the French King, and then takes
Paris. 486 Is murdered by the Dolphin. 487. his son makes a League with
England. ib. Burgundy and Orleans reconciled. 489 Burning Glasses. 99 Byzantium
the Walls overthrown. 61. Rebuilt, and new named. 81. Fired. 96. Its Library
burnt. 97. a great Slaughter there. 101. Besieged by Fleets. 112. 118. Taken by
the Latins. 186. Lost by Baldwin the 2d. 228. taken by Palaeologus. 246.
Besieged and taken by Mahumet 2d. 466. its miserable Condition. ibid.
C
CAbades the Persian King. 100 Jack Cade's Rebellion. 530 Caesar's League with
Pompey. 21. he promotes the Agrarian Laws. 21. his Success against Auletes, the
Helvetians, and Ariovistus. 21, etc. the Belgae, Gauls, and Britans. 22, etc.
he envies Pompey. 24. subdues the Auverni, Hedui, and others. ib. refuses to
part with his Army, or lay down his Commission. 25. he passes Rubicon. ibid.
enters Rome, and seiseth on the Treasury. 26. attempts to Surprise Pompey, and
takes in diverse Towns. ibid. his sayings of Pompey. ibid. his Pharasian Army
and Fight. ib. etc. his courage in the Storm. ibid. his skill in Swimming. 27.
he overcomes Ptolomie's Army. ibid. and the African under Juba, Scipio, and
Cato, ibid. his 4 Triumphs, Feast, Magnificence and Clemency. 28. his fifth
Triumph, Titles, Pride, Death, and Commendations. ibid. 416, etc Caesar Borgias
cruelty. Caganus King of the Avares. 105, etc. Enters Lombardy. 109 Calender
Reformed. 437 Caligula, his good and bad qualities, his Tyranies and death. 40,
etc. Callis Besieged by Burgundy. 527 Callis left by the English. 596. Demanded
by Queen Elizabeth. 597. 599 Calojohannes Emperor, his Reign 172 Calypha. 119
Campobassus perfidious. 410 Campson Gaurius, King of Egypt 473. troad to
death. 474 Caire besieged and taken. 530 Cantacuzenus his life. ^61 Canton
Towns described. 373. Cantons beyond the Alps. 374 Car, Earl of Sommerset his
Story. 636, etc. Caracalla, his wicked Reign and end. 63 Carola, Queen of
Cyprus. 354 Carolus Martellus. 117, etc. Carolomannus. 137 Carrarius his
wickedness and end. 332 Carthaginian War the 3d. how occasioned. 3. Debated in
the Senate, whether Carthage should be overthrown. 4. The Carthaginian ships
burnt by the Romans, and their City taken and burned. 4. Their wrongs to
Masanissa. ibid. Carthage taken by Gensericus, then by Belisarius. 1^2 Carus
and Carinus his son emperors. 74 Cassius his death, 30. His Rebellion. 57
Catalani, who? 247 Cathibaius Sultan of Egypt. 469 Catalins conspiracy. 20 Cato
laid in Chains, 22. He kills himself. 27 Cazanus the Tartar beats the Sultan of
Egypt, 248. His error. 249 Prince Charles sent into Spain with Buckingham, 639.
Returns, ibid. The match broken. 640 Charles K. of great Britain, his actions
and end. 641, etc. K. Charles grants the Scots Presbyterians their demands. 644,
etc. Charles the Bellicous. 343 Charles of Burgundy his losses. 355 Charolois of
Burgundy quarrels with Lewis the eleventh, 492. etc. His hatred to him. 495
Charles of Burgundies ambition, 496 Full of troubles, ibid. His greatness. 498
Charles of Burgundy beats, and is beaten by the Switzers. 498. Beaten again,
and is killed, ibid. His daughter Mary sends to K. Lewis. 499 Charles the Great,
122, 125, etc. His death and commendations, 128. And famous works. ibid, etc.
Charles of Anjou. 234 Charles the balde. 136, etc. Charles de Blois. 290, etc.
Charles of Dyrrachium, 260. Murdered. ib. Charles the fair of France. 288 Charles
the Great's issue fails. 141 Charles the Gross. 137, etc. Charles of Moravia
Crowned Emperor at Bonna. 259 Charles King of Navarr. 292 Charles the simple. 143
Charles the fourth Emperor, 267. his Actions and death. 268, etc. Charles the
fifth of France. 293, etc. Charles the fifth ends the Venetian War. 419. The
manner of his Election. 420, etc. Reasons for the same. 421, etc. Is Elected.
423. And Crowned, 424 Charles the sixth of France. 296. 486 Charles the eighth of
France, and his Actions. 415 Charles the fifth Emperor his Pedigree. 344 Charles
the fifth his Actions. 425, etc. his end. 431 Charles 7 of France, his Message
to Duke Lewis of Savoy. 353. He makes War against Savoy. 355 Charles 7 his
Actions. 487, etc. Charles 7 his death. 491 Charles 8 of France, his Reign and
Actions. 500, etc. His death. 503 Charles 9 of France. 507 Charles King of Naples
murdered. 397 Charles 3d of Savoy loses most of his Country. 393. is accused
by King Francis. 394 Duke Charles of Savoy excused. 394 Dies. 396 Charles the
fifth Duke of Savoy. 356 Charles Canutus King of Sweden. 336 Charles, Sigismunds
Uncle, a Protestant made King of Sweden. 378. His Actions. 379 Charles taken by
a Stratagem. 488 Childebertus. 104 Childericus. 97. 114 Chilpericus King of
France. 121 Christ is born. 34. Disputes being 12 years old. 36. his Actions,
Pre^ching and Miracles. 38, etc. His Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and
sending of the Holy Ghost. 39 Christians persecuted. 45. 50. 53. Obtain Victory
by Prayer. 57. Live quietly under Commodus. 59. Falsely accused. 63. Quiet under
Caracalla. 64. Under Alexander Severus. 65, etc. Persecuted under Maximinus.
68. Under Decius. 69. Under Valerian. ib. quiet under Gallienus. 70. Persecuted
under Claudius. 72. Under Aurelian. 73. Under Dioclesian* 75. and Maximianus.
76. and Galerius Maximinus. ibid. Licinius. 79 Christians, their good success
against the Sarazens. 165. Win and lose Damiata. 224. Defeated at Ptolemais
225. They lose it. 236. Their success against the Mores and Tunis. 237.
Perfidious to the Turks. 248. Slain by the Egyptians. ib. Murdered by the
Turks in Hungary. 400. Defeated by Amurath. 408. Their loss in Africa under
Sebastian. 435. They lose Byzantium, and are invited thither again. 466, etc.
Christianus the third, King of Denmark. 340 Christian fourth of Denmark. 440
Christianus King of Sweden. 338, etc. Christiern a cruel Tyrant. 337.
Christiern the 2d. 339 Chrysostom. 90, etc. Cicero, see Tully. Cimbrians, their
Victories over the Romans. 12. Their Actions about the Alps in Spain, and in
France. 13. Their Women. ib. Cinna his Actions. 15 Clauda, Montfort's Wife.
290, etc Claudius Caesar, his Reign, good and bad qualities. 41. His Public
Works. 42. He banisheth the Jews, and is poisoned. 43. Flavius Claudius
Emperor. 71. Claudius Tacitus Emperor. 73 Clans, Turbulent Families in
Scotland. 537, etc. Cleander, Commodus his Favorit. 58 Cleopatra, Physcons
Queen, and her Actions. 11. Cleopatra made Queen by Caesar. 27. Defeated by
Octavius. 33. Poysoneth her self. 33 Clergy Revenues aimed at. 518 Clodius the
Tribun. 21. killed by Milo. 24 Clodoveus baptized by Remigius. 98. his actions.
99 Clodovejus his sacrilege. 113 Christopher Columbus his Discovery. 502
Columni and Ursini. 256 Columnii, their raging against the Clergy in Rome. 425
Isaacus Comnenus, Greek Emperor, is affrighted. 163 Comodus Emperor, his bad
qualities. 58. Escapes diverse dangers. ib. his vanities. 59. his end. ib.
Computation from the years of Christ, when begun. 138 Conolave ordained. 246.
revoked and renewed. ib. Conference at Hampton Court. 634. ib. Conradin Sultan
of Damascus. 224. Conradinus, son of Conradus. 234 Conradus, Emperor. 142
Conradus Salicus Emperor, his Actions. 155, etc. Conradus his expedition into
Syria. 183 Conradus, Fredericks son. 226. 234. Constable of France, his pride.
496, would have the King swear. 497 Constable of France imprisoned by the Duke
of Britany. ib. Constable of France his death plotted by the King and Duke.
497. delivered and beheaded. 498 Constantin. 77. he defeats Maxentius. 78. and
Licinius. 79. is confirmed by the sight of the Cross, and his victories
thereby. ibid. his excellent Government and Piety. 80. no friend to Rome. 81.
his wavering. ib. his goodness and death 82. his sons, Constantin, Constans,
and Constantius. ib. Constantin fifth. Emperor. 120. his actions. ib. his
death. 121 Constantin, Irenes son. 123 Constantin, Zoe's son. 141 Constantin,
Basils brother, his reign. 151 Constantin Monomachus Emperor. 158 Constantin
the last. 466 Constantinople much distempered. 482. 484. Constantinus
Pogonatus. 113 Constantius his actions and end. 83 Constantius a great
Commander, 92 Constans Emperor. 112. his actions and end. ib. Corinth destroyed
and burned by the Romans. 5. Corinthian brass. 5. Cornish men defeated. 548
Cosroes. 100. 102, etc. his death. 105. a Christian. 106. Cosroes the second.
106. his cruelty. ib. will make no peace with Heraclius. 109. urges
Nestorianisme. 110 Cossacks and Croats cruelty. 453 Cossacks molest the
Muscovit and Turk. 480. beat the Tartars. 482. Covenanters, their Forces and
demands from the King. 644. their insolenoies. 645 Council of Nice. 80. of
Tire. 81. of Sardica. 83. of Millan. 84. of Ariminum, of Seleucia. ib. of
Alexandria. 86 of Antioch. ib. of Constantinople. 88. of Ephesus. 94. of
Chalcedon. 95. of Constantinople. 103. of Toledo. 108. of Constantinople. 114.
of Trullus. 116. of Constantinople. 120. of Nice. 123. of Frankford. 124. of
Aix. 130. of Constantinople. 136. of Ravenna. 141. of Lateran. 223. of Lions.
226. 275. of Constance. 334. of Basil. ibid. 350. of Papia. 335. of Florens.
336. 350. of Pisae. 419. of Trent. 429. 432 etc. of Lateran. 172. 192. Conuela
of Sutrinum, deposes 3 Popes. 158 Craford falls off from Douglass. 544. Crassus
sent against Aristonicus, is defeated and killed. 9. Crassus robs the Temple,
is defeated, and he is killed by the Parthians. 23 Cremona burnt. 48
Crescentius rebels, and is hanged at Rome. 152 Cromwell, the Clergies great
enemy. 559. beheaded. ib. Crannus kills Niciphorus the Emperor. 427. and makes
a Cup of his Skull 129. subdued. ib. Cumin, Viceroy of Scotland. 325. Cyprus
subject to diverse changes. 166. etc. Cyprus* after diverse changes becomes the
Venetians Island. 414 Cyril of Alexandria. 94
D
DAlmatia subdued by the Romans. 3 Damiata taken. 224. and retaken ib. 229
Danes, and their Wars. 128. converted to the Faith. 130 Danes Massacred; they
subdue England, and are defeated in Scotland. 153. poisoned. 156. troubled by
their Kings. 230. 251 Danes and Hamburgers quarrel. 463 Daniel D. of. Russia
cheats the Pope. 246 Danish Ambassador to Queen Elizabeth 609 Darby the Queens
husband murdered 620 Darkness. 120. 124 David King of Scots conveyed into
France. 324 King David returns from France and invades England. 326. is beaten.
ib. taken prisoner, Ransomed and died. ib. David Prince of Scotland famished.
535 Decius his Reign and end. 69 Demetrius the Son of Seleucus, his actions.
2. why called Soter. 3. he is slain. ib. his son Demetrius overcome by
Ionathas. 3. Demetrius Nicanor. 5. he is overthrown. ib. overcomes the
Persians, and is taken. 6. he escapes and is retaken by Phraates. 6. regains
Syria, and loses it. 7. is overcome and slain. ib. Demetrius Euserus, K. of
Damascus, his Actions. 11. etc. Denholme stoutly resists the Enemy. 460
Denmark. 265 Denmark full of troubles. 171 Denmark's History. 338, etc.
Denmark's Army defeated by Tilly. 457. his Proceedings in Germany. 458, etc.
flies. 460 K. of Denmark entertained by. K. James Desiderius last King of the
Lombards. 122 Didius Julianus Emperor. 60. his end. 61 Dioclesian Emperor. 74.
78. Diodatus called Tryphon, murders Jonathas. 5 Dioscorus of Alexandria. 94.
97 Dithmars subdued by the Duke of Holst. 432 Dolphinat sold. 276. The Dolphus
quarrels with the Savoyen. 282 Dolphinat annexed to France. 292. The Dolphins
care in his fathers absence. 293 The Dolphin raises the Counsel of. Basil. 336
Dolphin flies from France to Burgundy. 491. his Zeal against the Turk. ib.
Dolphin's and King Henrie's Messages. 518 Dolphin murders Burgundy, and is
complained against. 522 Domitian, his good and bad qualities. 50. his
ridiculous actions and end. ib, etc. his murderers murdered 52 Donald and
Duncan, Kings of Scotland. 174 Donald of the Isles submits to the King 545. his
insolency and sacrilege 562, etc. Dort maintains her Privileges. 253 Dort
Synod against the Arminians 449 Douglass his expedition into Ireland 328
Douglass and Percie fight a Duel. 329. the effects thereof. ib Douglass his
greatness and ambition. 540. betrayed and beheaded. 541 Douglass persecutes the
Chancellor and Regent. 542. is persecuted and slain. 543 Douglasses insolences
against the K. 544. they are persecuted. ib. and proscribed. 545 Douglasses,
Hamiltons and Humes disturb Scotland. 571 etc. Douglasses proscribed, and
Tantallon Castle surrendered. 574 Douglass Earl of Morton, Regent. 627 is
removed. ibid. Drakes Navigation. 602 Constantin Ducas, Greek Emperor ^vercomes
his enemy by prayers. 163 Dunbar occasions a new War between the two Kingdoms.
330 Duncan Earl of Mar, Protector of Scotland. 324
E
EArls of Holland. 251. etc, 278, etc. Earl of Renessius 277. Earls of Savoy.
279, etc. Earl of Orkney beheaded, and his Castles taken. 637 Earthquakes. 94,
etc. 101, 103, 114, 120, 254, 462, 508. Edinburgh taken by the English, 578
Edinburgh Castle battered and surrendered. 646 Edward the Confessor Crowned: 159
Prince Edwards Actions. 212, etc. Edward Prince of England, marries with Elenor
the Spaniards sister. 240 His service in the Holy Land. 241 His Return, and
Actions at home, being King. 242 Quarrels with his Clergy, and does homage in
France. 242. His Expedition into Scotland. ibid. Into Flanders. 243. His
dealings with Bruce and Baliol. 244. He runs through Scotland, and brings away
their Monuments. 245 Edward Earl of Savoy. 284 Edward of England denied the
Regency of France. 288. Challenges the French to fight. 289. Makes a truce
with France. 290 Prince Edwards Victory at Poictiers. 292 Edward the first 's
Actions. 304 Edward the 2d of England, his Life and death. 305, etc. He and his
Queen at variance. 307 Edward the 2d resignes his Crown, and is murdered. 308
Edward the 3d does homage in France: His cruelty to Seaton. 309. Helps Baliol.
ibid. Edward the 3d his actions, ib. etc. His Death and Issue. 314 Edward King
of England sends a Monk to poison Randulph. 323 (...). Edwards preparation
against Scotland. 326 Edward the fourth King of England, and his Actions. 546,
etc. Edward the fourth furnished with shipping by the Duke of Burgundy: He is
received into York. 549. Is received into London. ibid. Defeats Warwick, and
takes king Henry prisoner. ibid. The Queen also and Prince. 558. Enters France,
and makes peace with the French K. ib. King Edward the fourth deluded by the
French and Scots. 551. Dies. ib. Edward the fifth ibid. Edward the sixth his
Reign, 586, etc. His charity and zeal. 590 Egypt falls off from the Empire. 117
Egyptians take Tripoli. 248. Prevail. 249 Egyptians defeated by the Turks 474
Electors of Germany meet about choosing the Emperor. 420 Elinor Qu. of
England, 242 Lady Elizabeth sent to the Tower, to Richmond, to Woodstock. 592
etc. Lady Elizabeth set at liberty by King Philip. 595 Queen Elizabeth her
Reign. 597, etc. Helps the Protestants, ibid. Declared an Heretic. 600. Many
Treasons against her. ibid. Sends aid into Scotland. ibid. Navigations in her
time. 601, etc. She protects the Netherlanders. 603. And why. ibid. Qu.
Elizabeth's preparations against the Spanish Invasion, 604. She thanks God for
Victory. 606 Qu. Elizabeth intercedes for Q. Mary, but is denied by the Scots.
623. Sends Sussex. 624 Qu. Elizabeth solicited by the Scots to name them a
Regent. ibid. Queen Elizabeth's Treaty with Queen Mary. 629. Her sorrow for her
death. 631 Qu. Elizabeth's death. 613 Bishop of Ely Protector of England in
the absence of King Richard: 189, etc. Emanuel Philbert Duke of Savoy, recovers
what his Father had lost. 396 Charles Emanuel. D. of Savoy takes the towns of
Carmaniola and Salusium. 398 Emanuel of Thessalonica with his seven sons. 262
Empire torn by the Barbarians. 86, 93. Translated. 125 Made Tributaries. 127
Empire at Trapezuntium. 233 Emperors Colleagues. 257 Emperors of Byzantium. 261
Empire proffered to K. Edward of England. 267 The Emperor sides with England,
against France. 289. and is taken off again. ibid.
Emperor complains to Wolsey against France. 553 Empson and Dudley beheaded fer
oppression. 550 England by whom called so. 129. has Wars with France. 230.
Troubled under King John. 231. Wars again with France. 232. Troubled with the
Barons Wars. 241. The English trouble Savoy. 285. Have Wars with France. 289.
They beat the French by Sea. 290. And by Land at Crescy. 291. Their Wars in
Britany and Normandy. 290. they take Callice. 291. Beat the French at
Poictiers. 292. Spoil and plunder France. 293. Are beat by the French at Sea
and at Land. 294. They complain against the French, and the French against
them. ib. and 295. Englands troubles under Henry the fourth. 515. etc. English
beat the French. 524 Englands troubles under Henry the sixth. 529, etc. Under
Edward the fourth. 547, etc. Englands troubles under Henry the 7. 546, etc.
English invade Scotland by Sea and Land. 324, etc. English lose all their Holds
in Scotland. 325, etc. England and Scotland wast each other. 327, etc. English
plot discovered. 328 English success in France under Edw. the 3d. 310, etc.
English massacred in Paris. 488 English lose Guyen and Normandy. 490 English
and French quarrel under Henry the 5th 518, etc. The English good success in
France. 519, etc. Their bad success. 523, 526, etc.
English Regents of France. 524, etc. Their various success in France. 527,
etc.
English Lords solicit king James for aid. 545. English aid the Britans
against the French. 546 English invade France under Henry the 8. 557 English
beaten by the Scots. 679 Beat the Scots. 580 Beaten by the Scots. 581
English Fleet spoiled upon the Orchades. 583 The English lose all they had
gotten in Scotland. 589 English Ambassadors their Conference with the French
Council about Callice. 599 English send a Fleet for Cadiz, which they take,
608, etc. For the Azores. 609 English Army against Q. Mary's faction in
Scotland. 624 Epiphanius Bishop. 91 Ericus K. of Denmark. 251 Ericus King of
Swedeland. 336, etc. Essex sent into Ireland to suppress the Rebels. 610
Returns discontented. 611
Essex counseled by the Lord Keeper to submit to the Queen, and his Answer
thereto. 612 Essex his Discontents and Rebellion. ibid. His apprehension and
Death. 613
Eudoxia brings Peter's chains. 93. Eudoxa mother to Childericus. 102
Eutiches the Heretic. 94. Euticheans divided. 97. Their mouths wittily
stopped. 100 Euxin Sea frosen. 121 Exceter besieged and relieved, 586, etc.
F
FAramund. 93 Fausta. 81 The Feast of All Saints Instituted: 132 Ferdinand
drives the Mores out of Spain, 234 Ferdinand King of Hungary and Bohemia. 400
Ferdinand has Wars with Solomon. 401 Ferdinand the Catholic King. 413
Ferdinand buys his place from Solomon. 431. Dies. 433 Ferdinand 2d Emperor.
448. Rejected by the Bohemians. ib. Ferdinand declares against Frederick King
of Bohemia. 449 Fetherstone whipped and hanged. 595 Flavianus Bishop. 94.
banished. 99 Flavius Constantius Chlorus, 75, etc. Flemins rebel against the
French, 238 and beat them, ibid. And are beaten by them, 239. are beaten again,
288 their outrage. 291 Florentii Earls of Holland, 251, etc. Florentius the
fifth claims the crown of Scotland. 253. Florentines make war against the
Pisans. 259 Florianus Emperor. 73 France raises a mighty Army against England.
317 Francis the French King complains against D. Charles of Savoy, 393 His
reasons. ib. Francis the French King blamed, 395 Complained against by the
Emperor. ibid. Francis King of France aims at the Empire, but misseth it,
420, 423. Quarrels with Charles the fifth. 428 His Reign and Actions. 505, etc.
Franks and Almains overthrown. 103 French subdued in Spain, 108. French kings
dissoluteness. 113. France its twelve Peers 129. The French Peers reject the
Grecian affinity. 228. Have Wars with England, 230, etc. Take Scicily, and are
destroyed in it, 234, etc. Massacred at Bruges. 238. Defeated in the battle at
Courtray. ib. They beat the Flemins, 239. They fall upon Flanders. 243. Driven
out of Byzantium. 247, French kings when Crowned. 277. French reconciled to
Flanders, 287. They make war upon England. 289. Beaten by the English. 290,
etc. They beat the English. 294. Make a League with Gustavus the King of
Sweden. 382 The French success in Savoy. 394 The French Ambassadors show
reasons, why the French king lays claim to some parts of Savoy. 397 French
quarrel with the Pope, and Venetians. 418. Driven out of Lombardy. ibid. In
France Civil War between the Papists and Protestants. 455. France much
troubled by the D. of Burgundy. 486 French overrun base Britany. 501 and
Naples, but lose it again; yet found a new Disease. 502, etc. beat by the
Switzers. 505. Their diverse actions. 506 France fights for Religion. 507
Pestered with Civil War. 508, etc. Consult about choosing a new King. ib.
More Civil Wars. 513, etc. Beaten by the English at Agenconrt. 519 French and
English have diverse conflicts. 523. Beaten by the English. 524 French hinder
the Union between England and Scotland. 560, 562 French send a Fleet against
the Isle of Wight. 561 French labor with the Scottish Regent to resign his
place to the Q. Mother. 582 French Kings Race. 150 Frasers cut off. 579
Frederick Barbarossa his Actions and end. 176, etc. his submission to the Pope.
178 Frederick Barbarossa's end. 181 Frederick of Bohemia quite defeated. 450.
interceded for. 453 Frederick the first king of Denmark. 340 Frederick the
second Emperor. 222, etc His contestation with the Pope, 223 His expedition
into Asia. ibid. Returns, and is reconciled to the Pope. 224, etc. He contests
again with the Pope. 255 Is cursed by him. 226 Builds Victoria; and is beat at
Parma. 226, etc. Is poisoned. 227 His parts, wives and children. ibid.
Frederick, Alberts son of Thuringia. 255 Frederick of Austria Emperor. 257
Taken prisoner. ib.
Frederick the third Emperor, and his Actions. 409, etc. Frederick the
Palsgrave dies. 391 Frederick Palatin sent Ambassador into Spain. 424 French
assist the Earl of Flanders against the Flemins. 299. prepare a Fleet against
England. 300 Plunder diverse English Towns. 315
French King Phrantic. 302. like to be burned in a mask. 303 French make diverse
Leagues with the Switzers. 376 French K. in a low condition. 488. and France
much distracted. ib. French make peace with England, and pay a Pension to Henry
the seventh. 547 French send aid to Scotland. 580. with the Scots besiege
Haddington. 581 French Ambassadors desire crossed by the Scots Parliament. 615
Friburg plundered by their Lord. 364. they confederat with the Cantons. 364 Duke
of Fridland Generalissimo. 388
G
JOhn Gabeas of Millan, his Actions and Death. 332 Gabinius accused, defended,
and condemned. 23 Bethleem Gabor swears Fealty to Caesar and the Turk. 404. his
other Actions. ib. etc. Bethleem Gabor defeats Batorius. 445. reconciled to
Caesar. 451 Gainas. 90 Galba his Reign and end. 47 Galeacius. 258. Galeacius a
lover of Learning. 268 Galerius Maximinus Emperor. 74. 76. Galileans sold and
murdered. 46 Gallia divided. 96 Gallienus Emperor. 69, etc. his neglect and
folly. 71. his end. ib. Gallus Emperor. 69. Gallus Caesar. 82, etc. Gambalot
Satrapa of Alepo, solicits the Pope and Caesar. 443 Gascony falls out with
Montfort. 240 Gaveston King Edwards Favorit. 305 Gauls overthrown by Q. Fab.
Max. 10. by Caesar. 22, etc. they rebel. 24. Gaunt full of troubles. 295.
rebels and submits. 295, etc. Gant rebels against their Earl. 298, etc makes a
league with France. 300 Gantois rebel and are beaten. 290 Gantois careful of
their Duchess. 499 Gazelles Governor of Syria, overthrown. 475 Geberd Bishop
of Colen, a Protestant 436 Gemes, Bajazets brother. 469 Geneva its History. 371
Geneva's Earls contest with the Savoyens. 280, etc. 284. Bishop of Geneva a
covetous man. 355, etc. imprisoned by Galeacius. 356. Geneva in danger. 440
Gensericus sacks Rome. 96 Genua and Venice contend for the mastery of the Sea.
167 Genua implores the French help against the Pirates. 301 Genuois defeat and
are defeated. 261. Their long War with Venice. 271. They reform their City,
make league with the Emperor, and beat the Venetian Fleet. 271, etc. take Saint
Nicholas Church, and the Town Clodia. 272. they beat the Robbers. 273. and the
Venetians. 274. their error and loss. ib. make peace with Venice. 275. besieged
by the Millanois. 287 Genuois take two Kings prisoners, and are angry they were
dismissed without ransom. 489. they make Rene King of Naples. ibid. Germany in
a bad condition. 381. 388 Germanie's miseries presaged. 392 Germany troubled
with Religions and rebellions. 426. 430. Germany in a woeful condition. 449,
etc. 458. Germanicus his victories and death. 36, etc. Germans defeated. 22,
etc. Germany made a Province. 35. they submit to Probus. 73. stain by
Constantius. 75 their Nobility killed. 141. their civil wars. 121, etc. their
divisions about the Emperor. 235. Germany divided under two Emperors. 257 Geta
murdered by his brother Caracalla. 63 Gilimer, King of the Vandals. 102
Glarona and other Towns join with the Switzers. 360 Archbishop of Glasco's
strange death. 542 Duke of Gloucester abuses the credulous Queen and Earl
Rivers, 551. murders the Lord Gray with others. ib. is made Protector. 552.
gets cunningly the young Duke of York from the Queen his mother. ibid. puts the
King and his brother in the Tower. ibid. his complying with Buckingham. ibid.
he accuses the Queen of Witchcraft. ibid. beheadeth Hastings and others. 553.
imploys Do^tor Shaa to Preach, and set forth his Title to the Crown. ibid.
cunningly got himself to be Crowned. ibid. causes the young King and his
brother to be murdered. ib. hinders the Earl of Richmonds marriage. 550.
raises an Army 556. is slain, and his carcass dishonorably buried. ib.
Godaliscus the Monk. 134 Godfride of Bullion. 164, etc. Gordianus Emperor. 67.
his end. ibid. Gordian the third his reign and end 68 Gordon and Forbese's
fight in the North. 626 Goths. 87. 89. murdered. 90, etc. Invade Italy. ib.
and Rome. 92. are driven thence. 102. grow stately. 106. driven into Biscay.
117 Gowrie seiseth on the King, and is beheaded. 628. etc. Grame, Archbishop of
Saint Andrews persecuted. 564 Gratianus Emperor. 86. 88. Greece made a
Province. 5. its miserable condition. 228. Greeks reconciled to the Latins,
233, etc. 247. Greek Church divided. 248. Greece torn in pieces. 262. Greek
Emperor ends. ib. Greek tongue brought back to Italy. 277 Greeks their
treacheries. 183 Gregory the great, King of Scotland. 142 Pope Gregory seventh
160 deposes the Emperor. ib. is imprisoned. ib. Grisons their History. 370
Grisons in great trouble. 451 Gryphus made King by his mother. 7. whom he
poysoneth, quarrels with his brother about the Kingdom of Syria, is slain. ib.
Guelfs and Gibellins. 225. 254. 256. 287 Guido, Marquess of Tuscia. 143 Guises
murdered by the French King. 608 Gunpowder treason. 634 Gustavus Adulphus King
of Sweden, and his Actions. 379, etc. enters Pomerania. 380. declares the
wrongs he sustained by the Emperor ib. he sends abroad his edict^ 381. his
Victories. 380. 381, etc. he defeats Tilly. 386. takes in many Towns. 387.
endangered at Ingolstad. 389. he hastneth to relieve Saxony. 391. is wounded
and dies. ib. his corpse sent home. 392. Gustavus makes peace with Poland 462.
he finds Germany in great distempers. 463 Guy, Earl of Flanders. 238. assisted
by King Edward. 242. taken prisoner. 278
H
HAbesburg released. 361 Hadrian his Government and Victories. 54. his good and
bad qualities. ib. etc. his sickness death and Tomb. ib. he vexed the Jews. ib.
Hadrianopolis, the Turks chief Seat. 263 Hagarius Sultan led in triumph. 136
Hali Bassa the Eunuch slain. 472 Hamiltons original. 322 James Hamilton, Earl
of Arran, Viceroy of Scotland. 576, etc. Hamiltons and other Lords storm at Q.
Mary's Match. 619. are driven from Edinburgh ib. are banished, and return. ib.
Hamilton is denied the Regency. 622. sent to Edinburgh Castle. 623 Hans-Towns
in Germany. 269 Hans-Towns persuaded to side with Caesar. 459 Hatto Bishop of
Mints. 142 Hatto Bishop of Mints, eat up by rats. 146 Hay defeats the Danes in
Scotl. 147 Helena. 81. 85 Henry Beauclerk King of England his Reign. 173, etc.
Henry second, King of England. 188. his troubles and Penance. 188, etc. Henry
Duke of Lancaster made King. 219. Henry King of England, Regent of France* 487
Henry third. 507, etc. Henry fourth. 508. etc. Henry fourth of England, and his
Reign. 515. Articled against. 516, etc. escapes and overcomes diverse Treasons.
515. etc. dies. 517
Henry fifth, King of England, his Reign and Actions. 518 Henry sixth, Crowned
at Paris. 487 Henry sixth of England, and his reign 524, etc. Crowned in
France. 526. Henry sixth his Marriage. 529. his losses, ib. etc. is taken
prisoner. 531. 533 546 King Henry restored to his Crown by Warwick. 548 Henry
sixth murdered. 558 Henry seventh King of England, and his Actions. 545, etc.
his death. 550 Henry eight, his Actions. ib. etc. grows weary of his Queen.
554 Henry eight, his eagerness to be divorced. 555, etc. quarrels with the
Church. 556 Henry the eight desires to meet James the fifth, which is denied.
575 Henry the eight desires to match his son with the Scots Queen, which is
denied. 576 King Henry the eight his Death, Will, Character, Wives and issue.
561, etc. Henry made Prince of Wales. 636 Henry the Fowler, Emperor. 142, etc.
Henry, Otho's brother. 144. Henry, son to Frederick the second. 223 Henry,
Lantgrave of Thuringia. 226 Henry, Baldwin's brother 228 Henry, King John's son
of England, 232. his Wars with France. ib. Henry the third, his exploits. 240.
he quarrels with his Peers. ib. Henry of Lucelburg, Emperor. 255. poisoned, 256
Henry second, Emperor, and his actions. 154. lamed by a leap; his death. ib.
Henry third, Emperor, his actions. 158, etc. his death. 159 Henry fourth,
Emperor, and his actions. ib. etc. his Penance to the Pope. 160. his end. 161
Henry fifth, Emperor, his actions. 169, etc. is vexed by the Popes. 170 Henry
sixth, called Asper, Emperor, his actions and end. 192 Henry of Juliers
offended, and reconciled with Brunswick. 446 Henry second, King of France and
his actions. 506, etc. Henry third of France, entertained at Turin. 398 Henry
the fourth of France, becomes Catholic. 509, is stabbed. 511 Henry of Navarr
excommunicated. 607 Proclaimed King, and assisted by Q. Elizabeth. 608
Heraclius, Emper. 109. he subdues his enemies, and recovers the Cross. 110.
dies. 111. his race ends. 116 Heresies. 51, etc. 55, etc. 58. 62, etc. 66.
68, etc. 71. 80. 84. 88. 92. 94 etc. 97. 103. 246. 433. Herman the Palatin
forced to carry a dog on his shoulders. 176 Hermaphrodites ominous to Rome. 8
Herod, his actions. 29. he is made King. 31. flatters Hircanus, and drowns
Aristobulus 32. bribes Antony. 33. he doats upon Cleopatra, his insolences, he
is defeated at Actium. ib. he puts Hircanus to death, and makes his peace with
Octavius. ib. he defeats the Arabians. ib. he murders Mariamne, Alexandra, and
the Sanhedrin. 34. his buildings, murders, and wives, his death. ib.
Hexamilium the wall in Peloponesus 464. 467 Hierom. 93 Hircanus succeeds his
Father Simon, in Judea. 6. his actions. ib. he overthrows the Temple of
Samaria. 7. and the City also. 10. he dies. ib. Hircanus, Alexander's son. 17.
quarrels with his brother 20. is established in the Pontificat. 29. lost his
cars. 31. delivered by Herod. 32, and put to death 33 Hollands History. 251.
ingreat troubles. 278 Hollands History, and their Earls. 341, etc. troubled
with civil war. 342 Hollanders infest the Spaniards. 442 Holland troubled about
their Excise, 446 Hollanders good success at sea and land. 461, etc. Homar.
113. Homar and Hali. 263. Honorius Emperor. 90 Hormisdas the Persian King. 106
Horn, the Swedish General. 392 Hospitalers succeed the Templers. 239 and take
Rhodes. ib. Hugo, Earl of Arles. 143 Humbert, first, second, third, Earls of
Savoy. 279, etc. Hungarian History. 398, etc. Hungarians. 140. beat the
Germans. 141. defeated. 143. troubled by their Kings. 250. Hungary in great
troubles. 333. their Victories in Germany and Italy. 398, etc. defeated by the
Germans. 399, etc. Hungary afflicted by the Turks. 398. 479. and by intestin
Factions. 399 Hungarys miserable condition. 401, etc Hungarians defeated by
Solomon, and Buda taken. 476 Hunns. 87. stain. 100. obtain Panonia. 104. 398
Huniades, John, and Matthew. 398, etc. 407, etc. Huntly's hatred to Murry. 617.
is deluded by Queen Mary. ib. defeated by Murry. 618. Huntly taken, and his son
John beheaded. ibid. Huntly and Argile favor the Queens side. 623 Huntly's
zeal for Queen Mary. 625. 627. assisted by the Spaniard. ib. Huntly defeats
Argile in the battle of Avinian. 631, etc. John Husse broacheth his doctrine.
331 John Husse and Hierom of Prague burnt. 335
I
JAcoba, Countess of Holland. 341, etc. Jagello, Prince of Lituania. 277 James
the Apostle. 46 James, Prince of Scotland, a prisoner in England. 535, etc.
carried into France. 536 James, King of Scotland, and his Reign. 537, etc. his
daughter conveyed into France. 538 James the first, his murder. 539. James the
second, his Reign. 539, etc. James the second, much troubled by Factions. 540.
his death. 545 James the third of Scotland, and his Reign. 562, etc. his
Governors. ib. married. 563. his supers^ion and tyranny. 565. his Courtiers
hanged up. James the third complained against for his misgovernment. ib.
persecuted by his Subjects, and slain. 566, etc. his death grumhled at. 567
James the fourth, his Reign. 567, etc. defends Warbeck. 568. his match. ib.
James the fourth, his prodigality and resolution for Syria. ibid. solicited to
quarrel with England. ib. his fleet. ib. his message to King Henry 569. he was
dissuaded from making war, in vain. 5^9. he lost the battle and his life. 570
James the fifth, his Reign. ib. etc. James the fifth, his Navigations,
marriages, strange dreams, and death. 575, etc. James, Queen Mary's brother,
hastneth into France. 614 James the sixth Crowned. 620 James the sixth strictly
guarded. 627. Governs with 12 Peers. ib. imprisoned. 628 King James
displeased for his mothers death; but appeased by Queen Elizabeth. 631 King
James proclaimed King of England, and his journey thither. 632, etc. makes
peace with Spain, pardons and executes some Traitors, sends presents to
Spain. 633. and receives from thence presents. 634. he detects the gunpowder
plot. ib. he is moderator at the Conference of Hampton Court. ib. etc. King of
Great Britan. 635. entertained at London. ib. diverse Occurrences. ib. etc.
Institutes Knights Baronets. 638. Ambassadors to him from Russia and Persia,
and goes into Scotland. 639. his death and happy Government. 640. some
strange accidents, and works of charity in his time.. ib. Jane the Duke of
Suffolks Daughter proclaimed Queen of England. 590 Is beheaded. 591 Janisaries
their Original 263 Janisaries their Institution. 465 Janisaries, their
insolences at Constantinople. 482, 484 Jerusalem befieged and stormed. 20, 32
Jerusalem its last Miseries, 47, etc. Rebuilt and new named. 54. Taken by
Cosroes. 109. By the Saracens. 111. By the Parthians. 229 Jerusalem lost by the
Christians. 166 Jesuits banished out of Turkey, 483, etc Jesuits banished out
of France, and why. 510. Restored again. 511 Jews infested with three Sects.
10. what these were. ib. they assist Cleopatra against Lathurus. 11. their
great Council destroyed. 29. they complain against Herod. 30. will not admit
his Government. 32. are murdered by Archilaus, against whom they complain. 35.
they rebel, and are suppressed by Varus. 36. rebel under Theudas. 42, etc. they
quarrel with the Samaritans. 43. they rebel, and are murdered. 46. their
miseries under Vespasian. 47. and Titus. 49. are murdered every where. ib.
their barbarous cruelties. 54. forbid to enter Jerusalem. ib. converted. 84.
deluded. 95. Jews found out their pricks. 98. their cruelty. 108, etc. forced
to embrace Christianity. 110. follow Mahomet ib. made slaves in Spain. 116
desperate. 118. banished out of England. 242. poison the waters, and are hanged
by each other. 287. wear yellow caps. 431 Images abolished. 118. 120. restored.
123 condemned. 124. 129. restored. 134. Imperialists lose Pomerania. 385. are
defeated. 391, etc. Indians, with Hunns and others, become Christians. 103
Joan, wife of Andrew of Hungary. 259. her murder, incest, and insatiable lust.
26^. 413 Johannes Maria, a bloody Tyrant. 332 John Baptist Preaches,
Baptizeth, is beheaded. 38. John the Apostle banished. 50. restored. 52. dies.
53. John de Bregna, King of Jerusalem. 223. John, King of England. ^30. his
contestation with, and submission to the Pope. 231. his death, wives, and
children. 232. John Cantacuzenus. 249. John, Duke of Brabant. 251. John, King
of Bohemia. 258. John, Emperor of Byzantium. 261. John, Earl Nivern, defeated
by the Turks, ordains the order of a Golden Fleece. 264. John. Wickliff. 276.
John Galeacius. 277. John, the Hanonian, Earl of Holland. ibid. John de
Montfort. 290. John, King of France. 291. John Hunades. 398. John Bassilides,
Duke of Muscovia. 422. knocks his son on the head. 437. John of Anjou, beats
Ferdinand. 491. John Scot, the great Fas^r. 574. John a Stampis. ^73 John,
otherwise called Robert, King of Scotland. 329 John, Duke of Burgundy, with.
Amadeus, vex Orleans and Burbon. 346 John, Governor of Croatia, his cruelty.
397 John of Leyden, his madness. 427 John, Prince of Swethland. 378 Iolanda of
Savoy imprisoned with her son. 355. dismissed by the French K. ib. Ionathas,
Governor of Iudaea, his actions. 2, 3. 5. his death. ib. Iovinian his life and
actions. 85. his end. 86 Irene, Emperess. 123 Ireland rebels. 598. 602.
assisted by the Pope and Spaniard. ib. Irish rebels with the Spaniards,
defeated by the Lord Montjoy. 611 Irish converted. 82 Isaacius Angellus; Greek
Emperor. 185 Issabel, Duchess of Anjou; prepares a Fleet for Naples. Ismael,
the Sophi of Persia. 470. his actions and victories. 471. wounded. 472 Italian
troubles. 15. subdued by the Romans. ib. being Invaded by Goths, Vandals,
Longobards, Hunns, and others is reduced again to the Empire of Justinian. 103.
miseries of Italy under the Guelphs and Gibellins. 225. Italian Cities change
their Governors. 256. are punished by the Emperor. ib. fall off from the Pope.
269. Italy disturbed with civil wars. 333. Italies devotion. 345. troubled
about Mantua. 462. Italy in troubles. 503, etc. Judas Macchabaeus, his actions
and death. 2 Judgments remarkable. 97, etc. 100. 102, 104. 108. 117, etc. 123,
etc. 131. 270. 563. 146. 154. Iuditha, Ludovic's wife. 130, etc. Jugurtha his
oruelty, cunning, and end. 12 Julicrs full of troubles. 443 Julianus. 83. His
Apostasy and wickedness, 84, 85. his end. ib. Julius Agricola's victories. 51
Julius Caesar. see Caesar. Pope Julius raises great troubles. 504 Overcom by
the French. 305 Nicholas Jurith a stout Hungarian: 401 Justinus Emperor. 100
Justinian Emperor. 101, 103. His Death. 104
Justinus the second, his Reign. ib. His end. 105 Justinian 2d Emperor. 115.
Imprisoned and escapes, ib. His cruelty and end. 116
K
KEnnedies blow the coals of sedition in Scotland. 563 Kenneth k. of Scotlands
stratagem, 134 Kent divided about Qu. Mary's match with Spain. 591 Kets
Rebellion and end. 587, etc. Kings of Asturia and Leon, of Navarr and Arragon.
119. of Galicia, ib. of Bulgaria, 120. Lombardie; 116 Saxons, ib. Ratchesius
and Aistulphus k. of Lombardy, 121. Kings of Spain. 122. kings of Navar, 123 of
Denmark, 128. of England and Scotl. 134. of Italy, 139. of Spain. 142. of
Denmark, 230. of Hungary 250. of Poland. ib. of Denm. 251 of Scicily, 254. of
Sweden, Denmark and Norway, 265. K. of Morocco defeated, 276. Four kings in the
French army. 289. The French and Scots K. taken prisoners, 292, etc K. of
Navarr troubles France. 293 of Denmark, Sweden and Norway. 336, etc. of
Hungary, 397, etc. of Arragon, Naples, Castile and Scicily, 413. Kings of
Arragon fail, 418. K. of Denmark endangered, 455. K. of Sweden invades
Livonia, Borussia, and Dantisk, 456. Of Jerusalem, 166. of France. 172 Kings,
their conditions dangerous and uncertain. 646, etc. Knox his preaching, and the
effects thereof. 584 Keyrie Eleison when begun. 94
L
LAdislaus first of Hungary. 398 Ladislaus the second. 399 Ladislaus king of
Hungary. 406, etc. Ladislaus king of Poland. 407 Ladislaus, son of Huniades
beheaded: 408 Duke of Lancaster enriched in Spain. 317 Lathurus called
Philometor, why, 11 his actions. ib. Peter Laudais the Du. of Britanie's
favorite, hanged. 501 Laws called Agrariae: what? 8 League between Hungary,
Bohemia, and Poland 419 holy-League in France. 509, etc. Leicester and
Hollander disagree. 603, etc. The English and Scots besiege Leith: 614 Matthew
Earl of Lenox made Regent, ib. Killed. 626 Leo Emperor. 96 Leontius Emperor.
115 Leo Isauricus. 118, etc. Leo the fourth Emperor. 122, etc. Leo the fifth
Emperor. 129. Killed in his Chapel. ib. Leo Bishop of Thessalonica. 134 Leo,
Basil's son, delivered by a Parrot. 138 Leo the Philosopher Emperor. 140. Is
cudgelled. ib. Leolin Pr. of Wales beheaded. 242 And his brother David
quartered: ibid. Lepidus his insolency and ruin. 31 Lewis the 7th of France.
187 Lewis the Ninth of France, his holy life and actions. 229. Is canonized,
ibid. His Ship. ibid. His Justice at home, and actions abroad. 237 Dies before
Tunis ibid. Lewis of Anjou poisoned. 260. Had Wars with Alphonsus of Arragon.
ib. Lewis Hutin King of France. 287 Lewis of France entertains his sister of
Savoy. 355 Lewis the eleventh of France, his reign 492, etc. he quarrels with
Burgundy and Brittany. ib. and with his Peers. 493. imprisoned by Duke Charles.
494 Lewis sows disord among the Princes 493. his double dealing with
Burgundy. 495. Lewis desires Mary of Burgundy to put her self under the French.
499 Lewis the twelfth of France, his reign and actions. 503 Lewis the 13th of
France. 512, etc. Lewis of Anjou takes Rome. 333 Lewis, Duke of Orleans
rejected from being Governor. 501 Lewis Duke of Savoy, his actions. 353, etc.
complains of his son Philip. 354
Lewis, Marquess of Salusses. 356 Lieinius Emperor. 77. his wickedness. 79. is
defeated, his end. ibid. Liege makes War against the Bishop. 345 Ligeois
beaten by Duke Charles. 494. rebel again. ibid. cut in pieces. 495 The Ligeois
defeated by the Duke of Burgandy. 486 Lipsick surrendered. 386 Lisbon assaulted
by the English. 607 Livonia wasted by the Muscovit. 432. Implores help from the
Dane and Polacks. 432 Loadstone found out. 275 Locusts infest Africa with
Famine and Plague. 9. and France. 137. Waste Thracia. 157
Longobards. 101. 104. change their Government. 107. their Kings. 1^6. Lorrain
in strife between Otho and the French. 148, etc. Duke of Lorrain leaves Naples,
and falls on Arragon. 494 Lotharius Caesar. 130, etc. Lotharius Emperor. 132,
quarrels and fights with his brothers. ib. etc. divides his Kingdoms and enters
into a Monastery. 133 Lotharius, Duke of Sexony, Emperor 171. opposed by
Conradus. ib. his life and end. ib. Lowden is imprisoned and r^sed. 64^, etc.
Lucerna like to be surprised. 358 Lucius Verus, his Government and death. 56,
etc. Lucullus his actions. 18, etc. Ludovic Emperor. 130. his rebellious sons.
131. he d^eth. ib. Ludovic the second, Emperor. 135 Ludovic the younger. 137
Ludovic the Stammerer. ib. Ludovic the fourth, Emperor. 140 Ludovic Transmarin.
144. Ludovic of Bavaria, Emperor. 257. condemned by the Pope. ib. complains of
the Pope. 258. Ioynes with England against France. ib. is deposed by the Pope.
259. Ludovic, King of Hungary. 260 Ludovic the second, King of Hungary. 400
Martin Luther begins to stir. 426, etc. Lysius his Army. 1. he Invades
Judaea. 2. is murdered. ib.
M
MAcedonius. 83 Magdeburg besieged and taken. 381. its ruin presaged. 381.
384. its misery. ib. Magdeburg again besieged. 461 Magnentius. 82 Mahomet his
original. 109. his death. 110. Mahumetans 127. Mahumetanisme prevails. 249.
Mahumet the first. 463 Mahumet the second, his cruelty. 465. actions and
victories. 466, etc. his aim at an Universal Monarchy, and his end and
character. 468 Mahomet the third, his victories and actions. 480. his
cruelties, ib. Maid of Norway. 244 Maid of Orleans. 487 Malcolme, King of
Scotland, his life. 190 Malcolme, King of Scotland, murdered, and the
murderers drowned. 154 Malta Assaulted by the Turk. 477 Mamalucks of Egypt.
175, etc. their Kings or Sultans. 176 Mamalucks, who. 469. 473. destroyed by
Selymus. 474 Manfrid the bastard stisles his Father. 227. his other wicked
acts. 234 George Maniaces, a great Commander. 157, etc. Manlius Torquatus puts
his son to death. 9 Mansfield violats his Faith. 451. refuses to fight. 453.
is defeated. 456. dies. 457 Mantua possessed by Nivern, which causes great
troubles. 462 Manuel Comnenus, Greek Emperor, his life and end. 183, etc. Earl
of Mar, made Regent. 626. dies. 627 Marcianus Emperor. 95. 96. Marcus Antonius
de Dominis, burned 455 Mardacus, his misgovernment of Scotland. 536. his end.
537 Margaret of Holland. 253 Margaret, Queen of Denmark. 266, etc. Margaret,
the Emperor Lodovics wife. 279 Marius overthrowes Jugurtha and Bocchus. 12. his
triumph. ib. his victory over the Teutons. 13. and Cimbrians. ib. raises a
civil war. 14. his victory over the Marsians. 15. his quarrel with Sylla. ib.
his troubles and death. ib. etc. Marquisats erected in Germany. 143 Marquess of
Brandeburg. 222. of Salusses. 285 Martina, her tongue cut out. 111 Martyrs. 55,
etc. 58. 63. 66. 68, etc. 71. 73, etc. 87. 98. Mary, last of the house of
Burgundy. 343 Marie, King Henry's daughter wooed by diverse Princes. 557, etc.
Mary of Scotland conveyed into France. 581. there married. 582 Mary, King
Henry's daughter, is proclaimed Queen. 590, etc. her Reign. 591, etc. Queen
Mary's persecutions. 595. with child. ib. her death. 597 Q. Marie returns
into Scotland. 615 she with her Lords, sends an Ambassador to Queen Elizabeth,
to declare her successor, which she refuses to do. 615, etc. Queen Mary and
the Ministers of Edinburgh differ. 616. she makes her brother James, Earl of
Murry, which discontents Huntley. ib. Queen Mary's progress into the North.
617, etc. She falls in love with young Lenox, and marries him. 618 Her
discontent with her husband. 619. escapes by Setons means. ib. persecutes the
murderers of David. ib. is delivered of James 6th. ib. Is abused by her
Subjects disgracefully. 620. and forced to resign her Crown. ib. With Bothwel
she escapes to Dunbar, they raise an Army. 621. she is brought disgracefully to
Edinburgh, and he escapes to Orkney. ib. his end. ib. she escapes to Hamilton,
raises an Army, and is defeated by Murry Regent. 622 Her plot with Norfolks
detected. 623 She complains to Queen Elizabeth; and her answer. 628, etc. is
removed to Paulet. 6^9 Suspected and accused of Treason, is condemned, her last
desires. 630. is interceded for by King James, and the French King: her death.
630 Massanissa's age, strength, and death. 4 Matthias the Machabee. 1 Matthias
Corvinus, his actions and death. 398, etc. Matthias Emperor. 444 Matthias, the
Emperor's Brother. 403 Maude the Emperess. 187 Prior of S. Maurice, his
excellent speech to Duke Amadeus. 349 Maurice, Governor of Holland. 437, etc.
Mauritius Emperor. 106. his covetousness. 107. his troubles and end. ib. all
his children slain. ib. Maximilian Emperor. 402 Maximilian and the French
quarrel. 411. Maximilian's actions. 415, etc. his end and Issue. 419 Maximilian
the second, Emperor. 433 he dies. 434 Maximilian defeated by Mahomet. 480
Maximinus his wicked Reign. 67 Is murdered with his Son. ib.
Maximianus Caesar. 74, 76 Maxentius a wicked Tyrant. 78 Maximinus his cruelty.
ib. Maxentius overthrown and drowned. ib Maximinus his end. 79 Maximus the
General. 88 A great Man. 95. Stoned to death. 96
Metellus banished and brought back. 14 His Actions. 18
Michael Curopabates Emperor. 127 Michael Balbus Emperor. 131 Michael son of
Theodora. 134 His Fooleries, Cruelties and death. 135 Michael Paleologus. 229.
His actions and end. 247 Michael Emperor of Constantinople. 157 Michael
Calaphates Emperor. 158 Michael Parapinacius Greek Emperor, suffers the Empire
to be ruined. 164 Milcolumbus Canmor k. of Scotland, His life and end. 169
Millan taken by the Goths. 102. Spared by Frederick, the overthrown. 177. Set
at liberty by Henry the Emperor. 256. Entertains Ludo. vic. 258. Governed by 24
men. ib. sold to John Galeacius. 270. quarrels with Savoy. 285 Its greatness
torn in pieces. 332. quarrels again with Savoy. 346 Struggles for liberty. 353
Laid claim to by diverse. 411. Taken by the French. 412. By Caesar. ibid. 414.
Taken by Francis Sforsa. 360 in great troubles. 499 Archbishop of Mintz his
speeches. 420, etc. Mithridates king of Pontus, his parts, actions and
languages. 14. Subdued by Scylla. 16. and Fimbria. ib. By Lucullus. 18. By
Pompey. 19. His end. 20 Monks drowned and killed. 99. a Monk invented Guns.
270. Monks called Jesuits, 277 Wicked Monks of Ambrunaya. 283. Franciscans and
Dominicans quarrel. 419 Monks of Saint Maurice in Savoy. 348 Monsters. 43;
etc. 46, 48, 51, 56, 108, 112, 38^, 439, 511, 534, 567. Monteths plot
discovered. 321 Montmorancie taken and Beheaded: 515 Moravia and Silesia in
question. 411 Its troubles. 457 Mores make peace with the Christians. 237.
Driven out of Spain. 444 Mortimers. 307. Mortimer hanged. 308 Morton's men, and
the Queens party fight. 626 Is beheaded notwithstanding Q. Elizabeth's
intercession. 628 Moscovites. 134. Miraculously converted. 138. Waste Livonia.
433 Beaten by the Polander. 436 Mouns lost and taken again by the English. 525
Muhavias the Saracen. 113, etc. Mulhouse unite with the Cantons: 371 Andrew
Murrey Viceroy of Scotland. 324 Murry the Regent goes to Qu. Elizabeth to
clear himself, 622. He returns and is opposed by Hamilton. ib. Is killed. 624
Mustapha, Solyman's son strangled. 477. His cruelty. ib. Mustapha of a three
months Emperor, became a prisoner. 481. Made Emperor again. ibid. And Deposed.
482
N
NAples in great troubles, 259, etc. In great troubles by Arragon and Anjou,
413, 416. Divided. 417 Taken by Arragon, and Anjou sent away. 489 Taken by the
French and lost again. 502 Changes Kings quickly. 503 Narses 103. deposed.
104. calls the Longobards into Italy. ib. defeats Baras 106 King of Navarr
burned with aqua vitae 301 Neochomum, or Neufchastel annexed to Bern. 372 Nero,
his good and bad conditions, his Tyrannies. 44, etc. his end. 46 Nerva, his
good Government and conditions. 52. and death. ib. Nestorius the heretic. 94.
Nestorianisme far spread. 111 Netherlands divided among diverse Princes. 268
Newburg and Brandeburg differ in Religion. 445 Newport Battle. 439 Nicephorus
Emperor. 126, etc. slain. 127 Nicephorus Phocas, Emperor of the East, his life
and death. 147. etc. Nicholaus the Scriv'ner seiseth on the Capitol. 260. is
defeated and imprisoned. ib. Nigar, Emperor. 61 Normans, their Victories. 133.
settle in Neustria. 137. rage in Germany ib. defeat, and are defeated. 139.
take Calabria from the Greeks. 161. Normandy recovered by the French. 222.
invaded by the English. 230 Norvegians. 265 Norwitch pestred by the Rebels. 587
Novatus. 69 Numantia's Delinquency and ruin. 9 Numerianus. 74
O
Octavius, Caesar's adopted son, is made Emperor against Antony 29. his age and
beginning of his Government ib. is slighted by the Senate, and is made Consul.
ib. etc. his battle at Phillippi with Brutus and Cassius. 30. he lost many of
his ships. 31. honored with Ovatio. ib. his victory at Actium. 33. obtains 3
triumphs. ib. his honors, happiness, and peace with all Nations. ib. etc. he
reforms all disorders, and is grieved for the loss of Varus. 34. his death, and
excellent parts described. 35 Odenatus, General. 70 Odoacer, King of Italy. 97
Offida, his strange punishment. 352 Oneals rebellion and tyranny in Ulster. 598
Opllius Macrinus his wicked Government. 64. by Martialis he murdered
Caracalla. ib. his end. ib. Prince of Orange defeated. 347. Murdered. 436
Orcanes the Turk. 250. 263 Order of the Anunciada. 285. of Calaturava, and of
Saint James. 182. of Carmalits. 183. 192. of Carthusians. 279. the Garter. 276.
310. of the Golden fleece. 264. 342. of Heremits. 182. of the holy Ghost, 508
of the Humiliati. 177. of Saint John of Jerusalem, of the Templars, of the
Tutonicks 166. of the Knights of Jesus Christ. 276. of Marinus. 414. of Saint
Michael. 285. of Mount Olivet. 277. of the Premonstratensis 172. of Predicants
and Minorits. 192. of the Star. 276. of Stephanits. 433. of Jesuits. 277
Origin. 63. 69 Duke of Orleans and Richlieu quarrel. 514. Orleans defeated. ib.
Osman made Sultan. 481. his actions. ib. strangled by Mustapha. ib. Ostend
Battle. 439 Otho, his reign and death. 47 Otho first bore the 3 Lillies. 139
Otho the first, German Emperor. 144 Otho the Emperor, his diverse exploits. 145.
he makes diverse journeys to Rome, and takes it. 145, etc. in a Synod he
deposes Pope John the twelfth. 146. punishes diverse of the Citizens. ib. he
wastes Calabria and Apulia, and marries Theophania to his son. ib erects diverse
Bishoprics, and dies. ib. Otho the second, Emperor of the West, and his
actions. 148, etc. Otho the third, Emperor, his reign. 151. etc. his agreement
with the Pope 152. his pilgrimage, justice on his wife: and death. 153 Ottacar,
King of Bohemia. 235 Otterburn battle, and the Scots Stratagem. 329 Otto, the
son of Henricus Leo. 221. Emperor, and his contestation with the Pope. 222.
resignes his Empire. ib. Ottoman Family appears. 247. Ottoman the first 248.
his actions and death. 249. 263 Overberry imprisoned and poisoned. 637
P
PAlatinat. all lost. 453 Pappenhem slain. 391 Paris troubled with mutinies.
297. Fined. 300. rebels against the Dolphin. 312 Parliaments at Edinburgh, two
at once 626 Parma defeats Fredericks Army. 227 Parthians defeated. 31. their
civil war. 42. subject Trajan. 53. defeated under Antoninus. 56. seize upon
Mesopotamia. 62. wronged by Caracalla. 63. subdued by the Persian King,
Artaxerxes. 66. by Gordian. 68. beat the Turks. 479 Paul Preaches the Gospel.
41, etc. 45. his Iourneys and Miracles. ib. his death. ib. Paul the Heremit. 69
Paulician Heretics. 132 Peace between Amurath and Ladislaus, made, and broke.
407 Peace between Frederick the Emperor, and Charles of Burgundy. 410 Between
Caesar and the Turk. 442. Between Spain and Holland, ib. Between Spain and
Holland expired. 452. Between the Danes and Swedes. 445 Between Caesar and the
Dane. 460. Swedland and Poland. 462 Between the Turk and Persian. 481. the Turk
and Polander. ib. Between Caesar and the Turk and Gabor. 483 Between England
and France. 293 Between France, England, and Burgundy. 497 Concluded in France.
510. and with Spain. ib. with England. 514 Dishonorably concluded with
Scotland. 308 Between France and England. 552. 558. Between England and
Scotland. 562 With the French broken, and why. 557 Concluded between the
English, Scots, and French. 614
Pelagius, the Popes Legate. 224 Perennius, Commodus his Favorit. 58 Perkin
Warbeck his Story. 547, etc. 567, etc. Persians subdued. 70. beat by Maximinus.
75. submit to Constantin. 81. Article with the Romans. 85. defeated by
Ardaburius. 92. converted. 100. defeated by Martianus. 105 and by Mauritius.
106. they subdue Phenicia, etc. 108. defeated by Mauritius. 109. subdued by the
Saracens 111. Baptized. 114. their Story under, Usumcassanes, Harduelles,
Ishmael, etc. 471. defeated by Solymus the Turk. 472. Prevail in Asia. 480.
their bloody battle with the Turks. 481. they take Babylon and other places
from the Turk. 482 Perth begins the Protestant reformation. 584 Pertinax
saluted Emperor. 60. his excellent Government and end. ib. his. murderers
banished. 61 Pestilence at Babylon and Rome. 56. 58. 70. at Picenum and
Constantinople. 102. at Rome. 108. 118. at Byzantium and else where. 120. in
the Camp at Tunis. 237. 260. at Rome. 438. at Constantinople. 481 at Rome 508
Peter the Apostle. 43. his Miracles and death. 45 Petrus de Vineis. 227 Petrus
Antisiodorensis. 228 Peter of Arragon obtains Sicily. 235 Peter de la Broch.
237 Peter of Arragon killed. 238 Peter of Savoy, his actions. 281. Peter of
Castile. 293, etc. Peter, King of Hungary killed. 158 Pharnases defeated and
murdered. 27 Phaselus beats out his own brains. 30 Philbert, Duke of Savoy.
355 poysonsoned. 356 Philbert the second. ib. Philip, King of Syria. 11, etc.
Philip the Apostle. 43 Philip the Emperor his Reign. 68 Philippicus Bardanes.
Emperor. 117. Philip the German Emperor. 221. slain. 222. his contestation with
the Pope 221 Philip, the Bold King of France. 237, etc. Philip the Fair. 238.
contests with the Pope. 234. like to be killed. ib. defeated of the Empire.
255. Philip, E. of Savoy. 282. Philip le Long. 287. Philip Valois declared K.
of France. 288. his actions. 298, etc. Philip of Burgundy. 342. Philip, Prince
of Belgium invited into Spain. 417. King Philip beats the Pope out of Latium.
431 Philip Augustus, King of France. 187 Philip Valois, King of France. 308.
Philip of Savoy imprisoned. 354 Philip Duke of Savoy. 356 Philip of Austria
entertained in England. 550 Philip of Spain, his marriage with Q. Mary, and
Articles thereupon. 594 King Philip deserts Queen Mary, possesses his fathers
Dominions, wars against France. 596 King Philip solicited by Queen Elizabeth,
in behalf of the Netherlanders. 602, etc. Phocas Emperor. 107. his wicked life
and end. 108 Phraates his actions and death. 6, 7. Pyemont joined to Savoy. 280
Pipinus. 117. made King. 121. his gift to the Pope. ib. Pipin, King of
Aquitania. 130 Physcon, King of Egppt, his actions. 5 Plantaginet. 230
Plantaginet the true and false. 545, etc. Plato's Coffin. 125. Plautianus, his
ambition and end. 62 Pliny excuses the Christians. 53 Poliman Knights, their
habit. 159 Poland in great troubles. 230. distracted by their Kings. 250. their
Crown translated. 277 Polanders massacred in Russia. 441. disagree at home. ib.
beat the Muscovit. 443 Poland proclaims war against the Turk. 451 Polands
Ambassador to Queen Elizabeth, and her Answer. 609 Pomerania in bad condition.
380, etc. Pompey destroys the Pirates. 19. his greatness and Command ib. his
actions. 20. takes Jerusalem and other places. ib. suspects Caesar. 24. is
supported by the Senate against Caesar. 25. he and they also fly to Brundusium.
ib. is Master of the Sea. 26. defeats Caesar's Army. ib. he chooses Epirus for
the seat of the war. ib. his Pharsalian Forces, his defeat, ^light and death.
ib. etc. his head presented to Caesar. 27. his son defeated and slain. 28
Cardinal Pool, his Story. 594, etc. Pope Damasus. 86. innocentius 91. Leo. 94,
etc. John the first. 100, etc. Gregory the first. 108. Boniface 3d. and fourth.
109. Martin. 112. Vitalianus. 11^, etc. Eugonius the first. 113. Agatho. 114.
Leo second. ibid. Sergius. 116. Constantin the seventh. 117. Gregory the
second 118 etc. Gregory third. 118. Stephen. 121. Zachary. ib. Adrian the
first. 125. Leo the third. ib. etc. Sergius the second. 133. Leo fourth. 134.
Formosus. 139, etc. Gregory the ninth. 223. Popes wanting 21 months 226.
Innocent fourth. ib. the Popes contestations with England. 231, etc Gregory the
ninth. 234. Clemens the fifth translates his seat to Avinion. 238. Boniface the
eight. 239. Clemens the fourth. 246. Popes chosen without the Conclave. ib.
Martin the fourth. ib. Celestin the fifth. ib. Boniface the eight. ib. John the
twenty two. 258. Clemens the fifth, his Coronation and Actions. 275. John the
22, his error and actions. 276. Benedict the eleventh. ib. Clemens sixth. ib.
Innocent the sixth. ib. Urban sixth. 277. Boniface ninth. ib. Martin the fifth.
334. Eugenius the fourth. Felix 5. 336. 350. Pope honors the Switzers. 366.
Pius the second. 410. Julius second. 412. Leo the tenth. 418. Clemens the
seventh 425. Julius the third. 429. Paul fourth, a great Antilutherian 431.
Pius fourth. 432. Gregory 13^ 437. Sixtus the fifth. ib. Paul the 5th 441.
Gregory the 15th. 452, etc. Urban the eighth. 454. Julius the second. Leo the
tenth. 504, etc. Clement seventh. 506 Popes, diverse in few years. 162 Pope
Paschalis. 169. Pope Adrian. 177. Vittor and Alexander Antipopes. ibid. Pierre
de Lalune, a Castilian Pope, removes from Avenion. 303 Pope Paul the fourth
506, etc. Popes power curbed by King Henry the eight. 558 Portugal Crown in
question. 277 Portugals take many places in the East Indies. 431 Portugal
seized on by the Spaniard 435 Presbytery curbed in Scotland. 629. their power.
631. force King James. 631, etc. Prodigies. 223. 276. 384. 386, etc. 392. 437.
447. 454. 460. 462. 504. 534. 593. 153. Protestants differ among themselves.
426. are gently used by Caesar. 428. Reject the Counsel of Trent, 432. are
persecuted. ib. massacred. 434. Their troubles and Doctrins. 429. they are
dispersed, and allowed. 430 435 Banished out of Styria, etc. 439. their
troubles in Germany. 442. Complain at the Diet of Ratisbon. 444 Their Iubilee
causes much trouble. 447. their proceedings in Bohemia. ib. Are massacred in
France. 507. persecuted there. 513 Persecuted also in Scotland. 575, etc. 579.
make stirrs in Edinburgh. 583 In Scotland quarrel with the Queen Regent. ib.
their Violencies. 584. Angry at Queen Mary's match. 594 and abuses offered.
ibid. In Scotland prevail, and shake off the French yoke. 613. Petition the
Queen Regent to dismiss the French. 614
Province falls to the French King. 500 Prusius, King of Bithynia, slain by his
son. 3 Prusia, the Turks Capital City. 248 Ptolomie Philometor, is restored and
reconciled to his brother. 2. his actions and death. 3. Ptolomi Euergetes 5
Ptolomi Philometor, his kindness to the Jews. 5. Ptolomie Lamyras, his
cruelties. 10. Ptolomie is driven out of Egypt. 21 Ptolomie Auletes dies. 25
Ptolomie Dionysius. 25. Ptolomies Library burnt. 27. he is stifled in the mud.
ib. Ptolomais taken by Sultan Melech. 236 Publicius Malleolus, his murder and
punishment. 13 Pulcheria. 59
Q
Queen Mother of France. 511, etc. Quintillus Emperor. 72
R
RAdbodus his wicked speech. 118 Sir Walter Rawleigh beheaded. 639 Randulph,
Earl of Murry, Protector of Scotland. 323 Ravenna, the Regal Seat of Italy, 97,
etc. the Exarchat. 104. the Bishopric. 114. ends. 121. Rebellion of
Yorkshire. 547. in the North. 545, etc. in Cornwall. 548, etc. In Lincolnshire,
and other Northern Parts. 559 In Cornwall and Devonshire about Religion. 586.
about enclosures in Norfolk. 587. the Rebels stoutness and strength. ib. etc.
North Rebellions. 588 In the North against Queen Elizabeth. 599, etc.
Regent, his absence from Scotland, occasioneth much mischief. 572, etc. His
actions with the Queen Mother 581. resignes his place to her. 582
Queen Regent of Scotland, and her actions. ib. She dies. 614 Rhodes and
Belgrad taken by Solomon. 475, etc. Ricaredus, King of Spain, is called
Catholic. 108 Richard cure de Lion, King of England, his actions abroad and at
home. 189, etc. Richard Earl of Cornwall. 235. 240, etc. Richard the second,
King of England. 315, etc. his misgovernment. 318, etc. is deposed. 319 Earl of
Richmond encouraged by Dr. Morton, against King Richard. 554. puts to Sea, and
returns into Britany. 550. where he was like to be betrayed. ib. he arrives at
Milford Haven. ib. Fights King Richard, gets the day, and is Crowned in the
field. 556 Earl of Richmond preserved in a Sanctuary. 558 David Riz, great with
Queen Mary. 618. His bad counsel and end. 619
Robert, the Conquerors son, rebels. 167 Agrees with his brother Henry. 173.
dies. ibid.
Robert, King of Apulia. 256 Robert de Vere, Duke of Ireland. 317 Robert King
of Scotland dies with grief. 536 Rodulphus, Duke of Suevia made Emperor, and
lost his Army. 160 Rodulphus the second, Emperor. 435 Rodulphus Emperor, dies.
444 Rogation, when instituted. 97 Roger, King of Sicily. 171 Rogerius Laurea,
the Spanish Admiral. 247 Rohan besieged and taken by the English. 521 Rollan,
called Rupert. 138 Roman victories. 4, 5. they degenerate. ibid. troubled by
the sedition of Gracchus. 8. by the slavs of Sicily and Cilicia. ib. Rome
infested with the plague. ib. the Romans severity against Matienus and
Mancinus. 9. their success, bad and good in Spain. ib. against Jugurtha. 12.
against the Cimbrians and Teutons. 12, 13. against the Thracians. ib. against
the slaves. ib. etc. against the Pisentes, Samnites, Marsians, and other
Italians. 14, 15. their bloody civil wars. ib. etc. their Sertorian, Spartic,
Sardanian, and Mithridatick wars. 18. their Pyratical war. ib. and German. 22.
their success in Gallia and Britan. 22, etc. their battle at Pharsalia. 26,
etc. the number of the Citizens. 28 they defeat the Parthians, by Ventidius.
31. their civil war at Actium. 33. their misery under Tiberius. 37, etc. under
Caligula. 40, etc. their number under Claudius. 42. their misery under Nero.
44. are murdered by the Britans. ib. their disasters under Commodus. 59. and
Caracalla. 64. their Victory over the Persians. 66. their miseries under
Gordianus. 67. the Roman Empire torn 69, etc. Romes misery under Nepotianus.
82. are defeated by the Hunns, Goths, and Vandals. 87. Rome taken by Alaricus.
92. Sacked by Gensericus. 96. taken by the Heruli and others. 97. ends in
Augustulus. ib. taken by Belisarius, then by Totilas. 102, etc. Rome surprised
by a hare. 139. overthrowes Fredericks Garrisons. 226. runs with blood under the
Columni and Ursini. 256 taken twice by Ladislaus. 260. Romans abuse Pope Paul's
Statue. 4^2. in Rome, strife about the Popes Election. 440. taken by the Duke
of Burbon. 506 Romans storm at the Inquisition. 507
Romanus the Admiral. 141 Romanus the younger, Emperor of Constantinople. 147
Romanus Argyropolus, Emperor, his life and death. 157 Romanus Diogines, how
used by the Turks. 163. and how by Ducas. 164 Rome taken, and the Walls
overthrown 333 Romilda and her daughters. 109 Rosimunda, her revenge. 104
Bishop of Ross, Agent for Queen Mary. 627 Rotchell Besieged. 513. and taken.
514 Rotvil, the place of Judicature. 371 Rudolphus of Burgundy. 143 Rudolphus
of Haspurg, Emperor. 235 his Victories and actions. 236. his death. ib.
Ruffinus. 90 Rupert of Bavaria, Emperor. 331. his actions. 332 Rupert the
Palatin occasioneth a War. 417 Russians defeated. 144. of the Greek-Communion.
246 Russia deluded by Demetrius, the Counterfeit Prince. 440 Russia Molested by
the Polander. 446
S
SAlador, its History. 364 Salique Law. 287. in Savoy. 394 Sapores, the Persian
King. 68, etc. 81. 85 Saracens subdue the East. 111. attempt Byzantium, and
take Rhodes. 112, etc. fall out about their profit. 113. Waste Afric, and are
defeated by Constantin. ibid. etc. Subdue the Persians. 115. defeat Justinian.
ibid. Are killed in France. 119. And in Spain. 125. Overrun Cyprus. 127.
Defeated in Spain, 130. They Defy Christ and Basil the Emperor. 136. Their
Rites and Prayers changed. 138. Beat by the Tartars. 248 Sarmatians. 87
Saturninus torn in pieces. 14 Savoy, and its Earls. 279, etc. Savoyen History
prosecuted. 345. 392, etc. Savoy made a Prey to strangers. 393 Savoy denies
passage to the French. 491 Duke of Saxonies complaint, and resolution. 386
Saxony much troubled, and their Duke taken. 429 Saxons called into Brittan. 93.
Drive out the Brittans. 95. Erect their Kingdom. 98. Kept off from landing.
102. Take the Isle of VVight. ibid. quarrel with the Suevi. 107. Their
Plantations. 129 Saxons quarrel with Henry the seventh Emperor. 160, etc.
Saxons and Caesarians at variance. 429, etc. Saxony the seat of war. 455
Scaliger, Cajus and Mastinus. 259 Scanderbeg revolts from Amurath, 464. with
Huniades, spoils Amurath. 465 Scanderbeg is beat, and dies. 468. His strength
and courage. ib. Scaphusa, it is History. 366 Schisms. 86. 277. 295. 251 Scipio
Aemilianus. 4. Opposes Gracchus, and is poisoned. 8. Scipio is sent against
Numantia. 9. Scipio, Pompeys Father in law kills himself. 27 Bardas Sclerus his
actions. 149, etc. Scotland troubled with intestin wars. 325 Scotland shelters
the English King and his adherents. 534 Scotlands friendship sought for by the
English and French. 538 Scotland disturbed by the Chancellor and Regent. 539.
By Douglasse. 544 Troubled by Courtiers, and Factions, 563, etc. In great
troubles in James the fifth's Minority. 570. etc. Troubled with civil wars
between Queen Marie's Party and the Regents. 624, etc. Raises tumults about
the new Service Book. 642
Bishops of Scotland protest against the Covenanters. 643 Scots Presbyterians
expel the Bishops, and raise great Armies against the King. ibid. Invade
England. 646. Take Newcastle. ib.
Scots receive the Christian Faith, when 79 Converted by Palladius. 93 Destroy
the Picts. 134 Have Wars with England, and troubles at home. 233 They beat the
Danes and Norvegians. 243 Take the Isle of Man, and aid King Henry against the
Barons. 243
Scots Clergy contest with the Nobility; 243. they slight the Popes Legate. ib.
divided by the factions of Baliol and Bruce. 244. they overthrow the English
Fleet. ibid. They lose Barwick, Edinburgh, and Sterling. 245. They invade
England. ib. Are beat by King Edward. ib.
They defeat three English Armies in one day. ib. Scots overthrow the English
at Bannock. 306 Invade England and Wales. 317. are angry with the French. ibid.
Their success at home and in Ireland 321 Slight the Popes Legates. 322 Invade
England again with. 20000 horse. ib. Beaten by Baliol. 324. invade Engl.
without their Kings consent. 328
Scotch and English bickerings in France. 536. Scots defeated at Floden. 551.
Their civil Wars. 536 Scots waste the English borders. 579. Their miseries in
Queen Mary's Minority. 577, etc. Will not hearken to a match with England. 580.
are defeated by the English. ib. Send Commissioners into France about the
match. 582. are poisoned there. 583
Scots Crown demanded by the French. but refused. ib. Scots Protest ants make a
League with England against France. 585 Scots beaten by Sommerset, Protector of
England. 586 Scots beat the French into Leith. 614 Will not be induced to admit
Queen Mary. 625 Scylla, his victories and quarrels with Marius. 15, etc. his
cruel acts and success. 16, etc. his Dictatorship and death. 17 Sejanus, his
wickedness and cruelties. 37 etc. his Tragical end. 39 Seleucus, son of
Antiochns Gryphus. 11 Selymus the Turk. 472. his actions and victories. ib.
etc. his end. 474 Selymus the second, his victories. 478 Seneca. 44. etc.
Seriphas the Egyptian. 248 Sertorius his actions and death. 18 Severus
Emperor. 61. he defeats Niger. ib. his other actions. 62. his rigid Government
and end. ib. Severus the Eutychean. 99, etc. Sextus Pompeius seiseth upon
Sicily, 30 is reconciled to Octavius and Antony, 31. is beat at sea, and slain.
ibid Maximilian Sforsa's gift to the Switzers. 374 Francis Sfortia invades
Millan. 411 his actions and end. 412. his son recovers it. ib. 416 Sfortia
defeated by the Switzers. 504 English Ships, two in number, fight with 30
Turkish Galleys. 485 English Ships taken by the Scots 567 Sicily quickly won
and lost. 157 Sicilian cruelty against the French. 235 Sigismund of Austria.
375 Sigismund of Swethland deposed. 377, etc. Sigismund Emperor. 333. his
actions. ibid. etc. Sigismund, King of Hungary. 270. 397, etc. Sigismund King
of Hungary imprisoned, and set free. 303 Silesia subdued. 257 Simon succeeds
Jonathas. 6. his actions; is murdered. ib. Simon Magus. 43. 45 Sinan the Turk
dies with grief. 403 Siroes the Persian King. 110 Slaves trouble the Romans.
8. are overthrown in Sicily by Lucullus and Aquilius. 13. etc. Slavi, or
Slavonians. 101. 168. 115. Solomon invades Hungary. 400. forced to leave
Vienna. ib. Solomon his actions and victories. 475, etc. his end and Character.
478 Spain possessed by the Saracens. 117. under Mozarabes and Almod, Arabians.
119 Overrun by the Mores. 192 Spain defeats the Affrican Kings. 290 troubled
with civil Wars. 344. Obtains all Naples. 417. beats out the Moors. 413.
Spanish Fleet beat by Solomon. 433. Spanish harshness in Belgium. ib. Spaniards
beaten out of Africa. 434. rejected by the Netherlanders. 435 Spain has diverse
disasters. 503 Spain prepares a Feet against England. 604. The greatness
thereof. ib. Spanish Fleet encountered with, and defeated by the English. 605,
etc. Spain invaded by the English. 606 Spaniards beaten by the French. 607
Spaniards beat and are beaten. 452. Spaniards beat the French out of Italy 504
Spaniards in Ireland article with the Deputy and are sent home. 611 Spanish
Fleet defeated by the Hollanders. 644 Archbishop of Spalato entertained and
sent away. 640 Spartacus his actions and death. 18 Spencer. 306, etc. Spinola
and Maurice, their actions. 454 Spier Diocese mutinies. 419 Stauratius the
Patrician. 123, etc. his son. 127. wounded. ib. Stephen the Patriarch. 144
Stephen, King of England. 187 Stilico. 90 Michael Stratioticus Greek Emperor.
162 Robert Stuart, King of Scotland. 327 Stuarts and Douglasses strive for the
young King. 573 Matthew Stuart, Earl of Lenox, deluded. 577. beaten, and flies
into England. 578, etc. Charles Suderman. 440 Suffolk accused of high Treason.
530. his end. ib. Sultan, his expedition into Persia. 485. he sends home the
French Ambassador, and bribes the Janisaries. ib. etc. Duke of Sommerset
accused, and slain. 531 Duke of Sommerset, protector of England, executes his
brother, and is accused of Treason. 588. is executed. 589 Swedish History. 377,
etc. Swedes make Laws for establishing their Kingdom. 379. have wars with the
Danes. ib. Swethland and its Kings. 265, etc. Swethlands History. 336, etc.
Switzers subdued by Rodulphus. 246. Cantonize. themselves. 253. their valor in
the Romans time, and their Service against the Sarazens. 357. they rebel
against their Nobles. ib. divided into two Religions. ib. their League. 358.
they had much bickering with the Austrians. 357, etc. their History. ib. etc.
they have diverse enemies. 361. they war amongst themselves, and with the French
362. they defeat and kill Charles of Burgundy. 363. they increas their Canton
Towns. ib. they quarrel with Millan. ib. their last war for their Liberty. 365.
are worsted at Naples. 366. they aid the French and the Pope. ib. and
Maximilian. 367. their amity sought for. 366. make peace with the French. 368.
then fall out with them. ibid. then make a perpetual League with France. ib.
etc. their stipendiary Towns. 372. other of their Towns. 373. their 9
Bailiages. 374. their free Provinces. ib. their diverse Confederacies. 375, etc.
they defeat and kill Charles of Burgundy. 410. dissuade the election of King
Francis. 421 Synod, see Council.
T
TAmerlan and his Conquests. 264. Tartarians, what kind of people. 182 Tartars
overrun many Countries. 230. are converted ib. send to the Pope. 239. become
Mahumetans. 247, etc. Precopit Tartars made slaves to the Turks. 479 Taurinum
strangely released. 281 Techelles the Persian Commander. 471 etc. Telerichus
the Bulgarian. 120. 122 Temple at Delphos. 85. at Jerusalem. 49. 84. of Apollo
at Rome. 85. of S. Sophia. 103. of S. Mark. 104. of the Holy Sepulcher taken.
229 Templars destroyed. 238, etc. Tenedos occasion of much war. 271: slighted
and forsaken. 275. Terza beats the Turk, 247 Thalmud. 100 Theodiscus corrupts
Isiodor. 113 Theodosius the Emperor. 88. hi^ excellencies. ib. etc. his death.
89 Theodosius the younger. 91, etc. Theodosius of Adramyttum* 117. etc.
Theophilus Emperor. 132 Theodora Emperess. 134 Theodoricus the Goth. 94. his
actions and death. 98. Theodorus Lascalis. 228. Theodorici Earls of Holland.
251 Thomas, surnamed Constantin, his life and death. 132. Thomas Earl of Savoy.
280. Thracians Rebellion. 13 Tiberius his victories. 35. his government and
qualities described. 36. his reformation and cruel nature. 37. is persuaded by
Sejanus to remove from the City. ib. he lives eleven years at Capreae, and why.
38. his inhumanitie to his mother. ib. he destroys Sejanus, and why 39. his
death and burial. 40. Tiberius, Emperor of Byzantium, his actions. 105. dies.
106 Tiberius Apismarus, Emperor. 115 Tigranes and his actions. 17. 19, etc.
Tigurum changes its Government. 358. like to be surprised, and quarrels with
Habespurg. 359. and with Rapersvil. ib. they waste Marchia. ib. desire peace
with Austria, which is denied them. 360. they submit to the Queen of Hungaries
verdict. ib. make war with the Austrian. 360, etc. Tigurins will make no League
with France, and their reasons. 368. Tilly, the Caesarian Generalissimo. 382
takes Magdeburg. 383. his other actions. 384, etc. Tilly Defeated and wounded,
386. wounded again. 388. dies at Ingolstad. 389 Tillies and Fridlands
proceedings. 456 etc. 460 Tir-Oen rebels in Ulster. 609, etc. his
underhand-dealing. 610. he beats the English. ib. he parlies with Essex. ib.
spoils Ireland, and is beat by Montjoy. 611. submits and is pardoned. ibid.
Titus the Emperor. 46. subdues Jerusalem. 49. and Triumphs with his Father.
ib. his sweet nature and conditions. 50 Tomumbeius, King of Egypt, hanged by
Selymus. 474. Totilas. 102. killed. 103 Tournay taken by a French Barbar. 499
Trajan. 52. his good Government and victories. 53. endangered at Antioch ib.
his losses and death. ib. his burial and Pillar. 54 Traitors and Treasons
against Queen Elizabeth detected. 600, etc. Transylvania pestred with civil
war. 439 Treaties between England, Naples and Persia, with the Turk. 483
Elector of Trevers Speech. 422, etc. Troubles between the Queen Regent of
Scotland and the Protestants. 584, etc. Tryphon obtains Syria. 5. which he
loses again, and is slain. 6. Tryphon the Patriarch. 144 Tully is questor. 19.
Consul. 20. is banished and plundered. 21. returns, and is called Transfuga.
23. and Imperator. ib. pleads for Milo. 24. inveighs against Antony. 29. is
banished, murdered, and after death, abused. 30 Tunis besieged, which makes
peace with the Christians. 302 Turks. 105. revolt from Heraclius. 110 break out
of the Caspian Straits. 121 Turks employed by Mahomet. 150. whom they subdue
with his Saracens. 151. they desire peace with Constantin. 158. beaten by
Theod. Lascaris. 228. Invade the Greek Empire. 246 defeat the Alani. 247. waste
the Eastern Empire. 248. take diverse Towns. 250. their original and increase.
262 etc. their Tetrarches. 263 called in by Francis the French king, they
besiege Nicaea. 395. waste Hungary. 400. they defeat Ferdinand, and are
defeated by him. 401. their cruelties in Hungary 403. assault Malta, and take
Chios. 433. 477. take Cyprus and Golet, 434. 478. take Constantinople. 466.
take diverse places from the Venetian. 467, etc. they take Rhodes. 476. defeated
at Lepanto. 478. their bad success against the Persians. 479. their
perfidiousness to Hungary. ib. their bad success in the Mediterranean sea. 481
Wat Tylers Rebellion. 315
V
VAlentinian and Valens, their Government. 86. and end. 87. Valentinian the
second. 88. etc Valentinian the third. 93. 95 Valerianus his reign and end. 69
Valesians their History. 370 Vandals invade Africa. 93 Varius Antoninus
Heliogabalus, why so called. 64. his wicked, tyrannical, and ridiculous
Government. 64, etc. his end. 65 Varus is defeated in Germany. 35. he defeats
the Jews. 36 John Vayvod of Transylvania. 400 Confirmed k. of Hungary by the
Turk, ib. Vayvods treachery. 402 Venice founded. 95. her first Duke. 117
Venetians expel the Duke, 127. Besiege Byzantium. 186. Make a League with the
Comnins against the Lascarins. 228. take Candie. 233. quarrel with the Genuois
about a Church, 236. they fight the Genuois. 261. quarrel again. 269. their
long war with Genua for the Isle of Tenedos. 271. are beaten, and sue for
peace. 272, etc. beat off from the walls of Clodia. 273. defeated at Sea by the
Genuois again. 274. obtain a victory. ib. recover all their losses. ib. etc.
are reconciled with the Genuois. 275 are deluded by Fr. Sfortia. 412. enter
into a League against him. 416. their greatness envied. 417. their losses.
418. fall out with the Jesuits and Pope. 441. and reconciled. ibid. their
ships infested by the Croats. 446 are reconciled to Ferdinand the Archduke.
ib. lose diverse places. 467, etc. make peace with Mahomet. 468. they quarrel
with Bajazet. 470. make peace with him. ib. lose Cyprus. 478 Vespasian's
actions in Judea. 46, etc. his reign. 48. his good parts and end 49, etc.
Vesuvius breaks out. 50, 97 Victor Bishop of Rome. 59 Villiers D. of
Buckingham. 638 Viriatus a Robber beats the Romans. 8 is betrayed and slain.
ib. Virius the Captain. 345 Visigoths. 93. subdue Cantabria. 105 Vitalianus
Mustermaster. 99, etc. Vitellius his reign and death. 47, etc. Vitiges the
Goth. 102. Uladomirus Pr. of Russia defeated. 158 Ulphilas Bishop. 86 Ulricus
Earl of Cilia. 408 Union of England and Scotland hindered. 572 Universities of
Cambridge. 111. Of Paris. 125. Of Papla, Ticinum Osnaburg, and Bononia. 125. Of
Oxford. 136. Of Bononia translated to Padua. 226. Of Naples. 227 Of Salmatica.
234. Of Prague. 268 Of Lovain. ib. Of Orleans. 276. Of Cracovia. 277. Of
Lipsia. 334 Of Tubinga. 414. Of Witteberg, of Franckfort. 415. Of Sena. 431 Of
Leyden. 434. Of Helmestad. ib. Of Saint Andrews in Scotland. 536 Of Lovan in
Brabant. 146 John Archbishop of Upsalia, 339 Usumcassanes his message to
Mahomet 467. 470 Bishops of Utricht. 344
W
VVAldemar king of Denmark. 177 Waldemar 2d K. of Denmark. 224 Waldemar 3d 266
Waldenses what? 222. Beaten by Philip, Lewis the 8. and Lewis 9. 229 Wales
subdued. 242. Prince of Wales in France complained against. 294 Wall of
Peloponesus built and demolished. 262 holy-War undertaken. 164. etc. 181 War
begun between Denmark and Tilly 454. In the Valtelin. 455 Wars between England
and France, 291, etc. In Flanders, 295. Wars denounced at the Diet of Spire.
against K. Francis. 396 Wars of the Netherlands begun, 433, etc. 436 Wars
between Engl. and France. 551 Between England and Scotland. 327 Between England
and Scotland again, 542, 560, 578, etc. In Flanders by the Gauntois. 298.
Between Lewis 11. and his people. 492, etc. Between Mantua and Savoy, 446 In
Germany and Bohemia. 448. Between Poland and the Turk. 481, 482. 485 Warwicks
proceedings against K. Edward. 547, etc. Wenceslaus Emperor, his flagitious
life and death. 269, etc. John Wickliffe occasions tumults in London. 314 A
Wild-man in Sardinia. 182 William the Conqueror. 167, etc. his actions and end.
168. William 2d his life and end. 168, etc. William, King of Scotland, his
actions and death. 191, etc. William, Ea. of Holland, against Frederick. 226.
is driven back into Holland. 227 William Wallas, a valiant Scot. 243. he
recovers the lost towns, and beats out the English. 245. invades England ib. is
betrayed and slain. ib. William, Bishop of Utricht. 252 William, Earl of
Holland, sails into Scotland. ib. William, K. of the Romans, his life and
death. 253. William, third and fourth, Earls of Holland. 278, etc. Wolfardus
the Favorit hanged. 253 Wolsey, his greatness and pride. 552, etc. his
oppressions and sacrilege. 553 etc. his entertainment abroad. 552, 554.
accused and articled against. 555 his downfall. 556 Wyats Rebellion. 591, etc.
he is taken. and beheaded. 592
Y
ARehbishop of York defeated by the Scots. 321 Battles between the Yorkshire
and Lancashire Factions. 531, etc. D. of York raises an Army, and is made
Protector. 531. is removed, and raises an Army. 532. flies into Ireland,
returns and claims the Crown. 533. is slain. 534. young Duke of York fights,
and is victorious. ib.
Z
ZEbina, King of Syria. 7 George Zeck, the factions Hungarian tortured. 399
Zeland united to Holland. 253. troubled. 278 Zelots of Judaea. 36 Zeno, an
Eutychian. 97. starved in his Tomb. 98 Zenobia. 71, etc. Zimisces, Emperor of
the East. 148 Zirizaea Besieged. 278 Zoe, Constantine his mother. 141. Zoe, the
wife of Romanus. 157, etc.
FINIS.
Good Reader,
Though care was used to prevent literal or verbal Errors, yet by reason the
Book was under Three several Presses, some Errata's have escaped the Eyes of
the Correctors, which are here set down, and may be mended with thy Pen.

In the TREFACE; p. 5, l. 12; r. Historians.

PAge 7. line 22. read one; p. 8. l. 49. dele the; p. 12. l. 53. r. Tigurins;
p. 13. l 27. r. Tublicius; p. 17 l 10. r. Legions; Ib. Cap. 5 Contents, r.
Catalins conspiracy; p 19. l 17. r. Eunuch; p. 20. l. 39. r. Arears; p 21.
insert and; p. 23. l 43. r. ffings; Ib l. 31 r. Castea^uf; p. 26. l. 48. dele
were knights; p. 29. l. 57. r. Antonius, Mareeks brother; p. 41. l. 41. r.
Manumissed; p. 43. l 44 r. de Marso; p. 51. l. 13. r. Visards; p. 53. l. 29. r.
Walachia; p. 55. l. 15, and 17, r. Antoninus; p. 59. l. 39. r. Pantenus; p 63.
l. 4. r. Leonides; p. 68. l. 2. r. Busiris; l. 30. r. Conqueror; p. 72. l. 17.
r. boughs; p 87. l. 3. add, the; p. 96. l. 57. r. People; p. 106. l. 7. dele,
in; p. 111. l. 3. r. Heraclius; l. 37 r. Aquitania; l. 48. r. Artois; p. 115.
l. 1. r. sat a while; p. 121, l. 37. r. Aemilia; p. 131. l. 21. r. by his
followers; p. 138 l. 20. r. Gallic Ocean; p. 149. l. 48. dele, the; p. 156. l.
36 r. Legio; p. 171. l. 35. r. Apenins; p. 181. l. 21. r. Henry; p. 229. l. 26
r. Calyphs forces; p. 230. l. 48. for place, r. peace; p. 233. l. 55. r.
Trapezuntinum; p. 235. l. 30. r Sancius; p. 247. l. 55. r. B^olld; p. 255. l.
53. r. sets himself forward; p 256. l. 21. r. Placenza; p. 257. l. 12. r.
Benna; p. 262. l. 55. dele, by; p. 269. l. 28, r. Famagusta; p. 271. l. 38, r.
Frioli; l 46, r. against them; p. 272. l. 51. r. Colodia Fossa; p. 273. l. 6,
for, it, r. in; l. 19, r Hamiscar; p. 277. l. 26, dele, he; l. 43, r. Annates;
p. 279. l. 29, r. Sabaudia; l. 45, r. Caudaius; p. 288 l. 33, r. the Flemings;
p. 315. l. 11, r. the Drawbridg; p. 321. l. 17, r. he had hidden; p 332. l. 34,
r. Forum-Iulii; p. 335. l. 7. r. desired; l. 28, r. the Papacy; p. 347. l 13,
r. Vandemontium; p. 361. l. 22, r. Bern, ib. etc. p. 383. l. 13, r.
Monticuculus; l. 27. r. neither; p. 385. l. 33, dele, an; l. 50, r. but to no
purpose; p. 386. l. 12, r. of Wittenberg, p. 397. l. 20, dele, he; p. 399. l.
51, r. defeats them, one; p. (397) l. 28. r. Vayvodia; p. (398) l. 5^, r.
Scutati; p. (399) l 13, r. Walachia; ib. l. 49.

P 404, for Bohemia, r. Hungaria; p. 407. l. 32, r. Amurath; ib. 35, etc. p.
409, l. 34. r. Leonora and Scnae; ib. 47, Exarch; p. 413. l. 46, r. Consalvus;
ib. 53. p. 417. l. 40. r. Bononia; p. 418 l. 37, r. Bentivoli; p 419. l. 33, r
Boruscan; p. 431. l. 4 r. Leptis; l. 13, r. Genuois; p. 433 l. 35, r. Chios; p.
437. l 8, for 17, r. 13. p. 439. l. 8, r Wasinburg; p. 440 l. 5, r. Grave
Maurice took the Sluice; p. 451. l. 15, Vallelionis; p. 455. l 12, r. Sebrize;
p. 462 l. 23, r. Casall; p. 463. l. 47, r. Adriannopolis; p. 464. l. 7, r.
Towns; l. 10. r. Acarnavia; l. 18, r. Bosna; p. 467. l. 38, r. Comueni; l. 47,
Bosna; 49, Asiatick; p. 468. l. 17, r. Taurica Chersonesus; p. 469. l. 49 r.
Saladins; p. 471. l. (...), r. Innovation; p. 472. l 18, r. the incitation; p.
483. l. 35, r. defeat by the Caesarians; l. 50, for, Tarta Han, r. Tartarian;
p. 485. l. 29, r. convented; p. 488. l. 32, r. in at all; l. 48, dele, is
wished; p. 491. l. 44, r. zeal; p. 493 l. 12, r. Towers; p. 496. l. 46, r.
Rhene; p. 499. l. 52, r. Galeas; p. 500, Contents Cap. r. Prosecution of the
French History; l* 28, r. Capitt; p. 502, l. 42, r. Angelo; p. 504, l 31. for
3, r. 2. p. 511, l. 8 for accused, r. informed; p. 513. l. 44, r. Soubize; ib.
etc. p. 519. l. 23, r. Marle; p. 537. l. 7, r. Mordacus; p. 542. l. 10, r.
Argile; p (548) l. 19, r of France; p. 558. l. 24, r. curb^ p. 573. l. 11, and
12, r. returning; p 583. l. 49, r. Ruuen; p. 597. l. 42, r Parker; p. 625. l.
13, dele, him; p. 633. l. 8, r. Ambassadors; p. 640. l. 22, for Abbot, r.
Whitguift; p. 641 l. 38, r. upon. p. 642. l. 25, after Parliament a period.

Faults escaped in the CHRONOLOGY.

178 year before Christ; l. 2, r, Aul^es; l. 4, Cizieenus; 70 Y. after Chr. in
the C: l. 4, r. Aehia; 80 C: l. 2, and 5, r. Cerinthus; 100 S: l. (...)* r.
refuses the Consulship; 160 C: l. 5, r. Encratites; 170 S: l. 3, r. Marcomant;
180 C: l. 8. r. Artatyritae; 200 C: l. 4, r Zephirinus; 210 C. l. 3, r.
Eclesaitae; 260 S: r. Galien; 380 C: l. 10, r. Armorica; 400 C: l. 6, r.
Metangismonitae; l 7, r. Pelagius; 420 C: l. 3. r. Constantinople; 440 S: l. 5,
r. Anthenius; 470 C: l. 1, Acatius; 530 S: l. 3, r. Constantinople; 540 C: l.
(...), r. Virgilius; 550 l. 7. dele, it; 740 S: l. 10, r. Palatins; 750 S: l.
3, r. out of Macedonia; 950 S: l. 6, r. Hungarians; l. 12, r. Venice; 1020 S:
l. 2, r. Cyclades; ib. C: l. 5, r. preached; 1040 S: l. 5, r. Monomac^us; 1050
S: l. 4, r. Stratioticus; l. 7, r. Loveyn; 1100 S: l. ^3, r. Anselm; C: l 4, r.
Ligeois; 1110 S: l. 16, add, by K. Coloman; 1^50 S: l. 14, add, to; 1170 C: l.
6, add, years; 1240 S: l. 22, after peace, a period; l: 23, add, the K. 1270 S:
l. 6. r. Domicella; l: 28, r. Anconians; 1320 S: l. 20, r. Pvlacs; 1340 S: l.
1. r. Nicomedia; 1350 l (...), r. Lesbos; ^380. l. 6, r. Achmet; 1410 S: l. 2,
r. Valathian; 1430 C: l. 10, r. and the Bishop; 1440 S: l. 5, r. Moldavia; 1460
C: l. 2, r. Laetus; 1520 C: l. 5, r. Sena.

The Reader is to take notice that (C) stands for to direct to matters of the
Church; and (S) for the State.

The Printers to the Reader.
SInce it is rather Ingenuity, then otherwise, to confess. The Errata's which
have escaped us, will be our charge; though we could say, and it often falls out,
That the best Authors write not always the best Hands; which (as Mr. Fuller in
his Preface to a Posthume Book of Dr. Holdsworth.
one Observes) has rendered the Writings of a late Reverend and Learned Author,
useless to the world; but we cannot apply that to our Author: Besides, he is
not only living, but active, and did often visit us, or we him. That there are
some Errors in a Book of this Bulk, is no wonder; That there were not more, we
attribute to the Authors Care and Pains, and to the more then ordinary sedulity
of the Bookseller to prevent them, The most are but litteral, scarce any that
do alter the Sense in any place, but what with a Comma (,) Point (.) or
Parenthesis () thy Pen may rectify: Possibly thou mai'st find some of them
mended to thy hand, as they were, happily discovered at the Press.

So wishing thee to Correct and Read, then our opinions and hopes are, that you
will like.

R. Cotes T. Newcomb T. Mab and A Coals.


The Bookseller to the Buyer.
THis Book could not have been published (though intended for a general good)
in a more censorious Age; the Test whereof I dare adventure. That which gave
encouragement to Print it, is, That our Author in the course of his History,
has comprehended much in a few lines. I shall confidently affirm, it was
neither his Design or Work, to Confront his The ever Renowned Sir WALTER RALEIGH
Leader (as some pretend) but that the world should have the benefit of who
wrote the first Part of the History of the World.
His History, completed so far, as he might deliver himself freely and
impartially without prejudice. Should he have often digressed, or fraught it with
the impertinencies which these later Years would have afforded, it would have
swollen into too many Volums, either to burden the Stationer, or overcharge the
Reader, besides the vast (and peradventure unprofitable) expense of precious
Time. If Marrow be better to digest then the Bone, or the Kernel then the Shel;
then (instead of a Prolix History) this Epitome may gain thy acceptance; in
confidence whereof I shall presume to subscribe my self (at least intentionally)

Thy Friend, JOHN SAYWELL.

Courteous READER (having the advantage of a blank Page before me) I thought
good to mind thee, That (besides this History, etc.) there are extant a few
useful Books, as they may suit the Genius of thy reading.

For PRINCIPLES.

I. THat excellent Book (of John Wollebius, D. D. and ordinary Professor of
Divinity in the University of Basil) compendiously containing the whole Body of
Christian Divinity, both in the Speculative and Practique Parts thereof,
whereof so many thousands have bin sold in Latin, lately (for Britains good)
Englished, and in some obscure places cleared and enlarged by Alexander Ross;
revised and amended in those misquoted Texts wherewith the Latin Copies do
abound.

For PRACTICE.

II. That experienced Piece of Richard Sibbs, D. D. Entitled The Returning
Backslider (and the Saints Privilege, etc.) or a Commentary on the whole 14.
Chapter of Hosea: the third time Reprinted, being one of the Legitimate Pieces
of that truly pious Author, there being added in this, an useful Table,
wanting in former Editions, together with an account of all the works of the
said Learned Author, as yet extant, By one piously affected with his Writings.

For NOTION.

III. Those Seraphical Sermons of Dr. Done late Dean of S. Paul's, London,
being fourscore in number and usually called his First Volume, containing the
Quintessence of Piety and Parts, and dedicated to his late Majesty.

Which are all in the Vendition of John Saywell, at the Greyhound in Little
Britain. 1652.

A REGISTER for the help of the BOOK-BINDER, whereby he may be ascertained of
the Perfection of this Book.
The Order of the HISTORY.

THe Title. (a) (a 2) (b) (b 2) (b 3) A. A 2. (a) B. B 2. B 3. etc. R 3. ends.
Aa. A a 2. etc. Z z 2. ends: Aaa, Aaa 2. etc. P p p. P p p 2. P p p 3. etc. R r
r 3. ends. S s s. S s s 2. etc. Z z z 2 ends. Aaaa. Aaaa 2. etc. Hhhh 2. ends.

The Order of the CHRONOLOGY.

I i i i. K k k k. K k k k 2. etc. X x x x ends.

The Order of the ALPHABETICAL-TABLE.

a a a a a. a a a a a 2. etc. d d d d d. d d d d d 2. e e e e e. ends.

Take notice, that in some Copies the Signiture is (b2) for (b3) C 2. for D 2.
E 5. for E 3.

K k k k to be added.

FINIS.

