THE New PLANET no PLANET: OR, The EARTH no wandering STAR; Except in the
wandering heads of GALILEANS.

HERE Out of the Principles of Divinity, Philosophy, Astronomy, Reason, and
Sense, the Earth's immobility is asserted; the true sense of Scripture in this
point, cleared the Fathers and Philosophers vindicated; diverse Theological and
Philosophical points handled, AND COPERNICUS his Opinion, as erroneous,
ridiculous, and impious, fully refuted.

By ALEXANDER ROSSE.

In answer to a Discourse, that the Earth may be a PLANET.

LACTANT. do falsa Sapientia lib. 3. cap. 24. Quid dicam de iis nescio, qui cum
semel aberraverint, constanter in stultitia perseverant, and vanis vana
defendunt, nisi quod eos interdum puto, aut joci causa philosophari, aut
prudentes and scios mendacia defendenda suscipere, quasi ut ingenia sua in
malis rebus exerceant vel ostentent.

LONDON. Printed by I. Young, and are to be sold by Mercy Meighen, and Gabriel
Bedell, next to the middle-Templegate. 1646.

To the Right honorable GEORGE Lord BERKLEY, Baron of Berkley, etc.
My Lord,
THey who have been long at sea, when they come on shore, think that the Earth
moves as the Sea did, till their brains be settled; even so these men who have
been lately traveling in the new found world of the Moon, which swiftly moves
about the Earth, think when they come down hither, that it is the Earth which
moves: This false imagination I have endeavored to remove in this Book, which
now comes abroad under your Lordships Name; the reason of my dedication is,
because I understand by your Lordship, that the Gentleman, who came down a
while ago from the Moon, with news of a late discovery there, is of this
opinion; and one who has relation to your Lordship, which indeed I knew not
till now, that the Book is almost printed: my other reason is, for that I am
bound in a dutiful recognition of your Lordships respects to scholars in
general, and to me in particular; which shows that not only are you noble by
extraction, but by your affection also and disposition to learning, which is
now so much slighted, yea vilified, by such as are either ignorant, or wicked;
the one slight learning, because they know it not, -- ignoti nulla cupido; and
like the Fox in the Fable, disparage the grapes, because he could not reach
them; the other rail against learning, as the mad Africans do against the Sun;
and how can Owls and Bats love the light, which manifest their deformity? Can
thieves and cutthroats, whilst they are penetrating the works of darkness,
abide the light of a torch? The infernal ghosts tremble to see any light, --
trepdiant immisso lumine manes: But your Lordship, being de meliore luto, --
knows the worth of learning, and therefore loves it; which that you may long
know, love, and live, shall be the wish of

Your Honors most humble servant to command, ALEXANDER ROSS.

To the READER.
GOod Reader, there is a namelesse man come down from the Moon, who brings us
strange news of a late discovery; to wit, of a world found there; This man of
the Moon goes about to persuade us, in a book which he has set out, come
lately to my hands; that the world, ever since Adam, has been in a dream, in
thinking that the heavens move, and the earth rests: He tells us another tale,
to wit, that it is the earth that moves, and the heavens stand still: He lies
in ambush, and from his dark lurking place, shoots abroad his arrows; so that
we can no more see him, then if he were in the Moon still; but it is a
cowardly part to hide himself; and from the cloud, in which he is wrapped, to
let fly his darts against me, and that Book which a few years ago I wrote in
Latin, in confutation of this new fantastical Chimaera. My case is like that
of Volscus in the Poet, who knew not whence those darts came that killed Sulmo
and Tagus, Saevit atrox Volscus, nec teli conspicit usquam
Authorem, nec quo se ardens immittere possit.
I might be thought, luctari cum larvis, to fight against shadows, as AEneas
did going down to hell.

If I should make any reply to a namelesse disputer, but I am advised however
to answer him, least he should sing ( io triumph;) and not to suffer by
silence my reputation to be wounded, the truth prejudiced, and the Scriptures
abused, with his idle glosses. Therefore here I present to thee the weakness
and vanities of this man's conceits, as far as the shortness of time, and my
other studies and affairs would permit me; which I pray thee accept in good
part, and so farewell.

The PREFACE.
THe title of this new book is a may be (that the Earth may be a Planet) but I
say that may not be: For a Planet is a wandering star, and the Earth is not a
star in its essence, nor a wanderer in its motion. And indeed you wrong our
common mother, who so many thousand years has been so quiet and stable, that
now she should become a wonderer in her old age; but if she may be a Planet,
tell us whether she may be one of the seven Planets, who are called Errones in
Latin, (not for that they have an erroneous, but because they have a various
motion) or whether she may be an eighth Planet, that so we may make up our
week of eight days; for why should not mother Earth have one day of the week,
as well as the other Planets, to carry her name? And so let there be dies
terrae, as well as dies Solis, and Lunae, Earth day, as well as Sunday, or
Moonday; and whereas the Planets are moved according to the motion of the
spheres, you had done us a pleasure, if you had told us the sphere in which
the Earth moves: Again, if the Earth be a Planet, and each Planet has its
period of time for finishing its course: Saturn 30. years, Jupiter 12. Mars
2, etc. What is the time which you will allot to the Earth for the
accomplishing of her annual motion? If it be true, that the lower the Planet
is, the swifter it is in its annual motion; as the Moon in 27. days, and 8.
hours, does finish her course, which Saturn ends not but in 30. years space;
doubtless, this Earth-planet, being the lowest of all, must in a very short
time expire its annual race. Moreover, if the Earth be the eight Planet, Sol,
who is the King of this planeticall Commonwealth, cannot have his throne in
the middle, as Antiquity, and Truth too have placed hiw; for he shall have
three on his one hand, and four on the other, and so cannot impart his light
equally to all. And whereas every one of the Planets has his office in this
Reipublick; to wit, Saturn the Counceller, Jupiter the Judge, Mars the
Captain, Venus the Steward, Mercury the Scribe or Chancellor, and the Moon
the Messenger: We must needs find out some office for the Earth, otherwise
she will be counted idle, and none of the Planets. But that the Earth may be a
Planet, is as true as that the Sun may be a burning stone, that there may be a
man in the Moon, that there may be an infinite number of Suns and worlds, that
the Stars and Planets may have had their first original and being from the
Earth, which have been the extravagant conceits of giddy headed Philosophers:
But I remember what Aristotle says of some may-bees or possibilities; l.g.
Meta. 5.4.
(...) that which may be, may not be, and never shall be, and so the Earth may
be a Planet; that is, it neither is, not ever shall be a Planet. But now let us
leave your title, and examine the substance of your following Discourse.

The CONTENTS of this Book.
CHAPT. I.
IN the Preface, and first Chapter, is showed. 1. The vanity and falsehood of
this new opinion. 2. The Fathers concerning their judgment of the Antipodes
cleared and vindicated, and the Philosophers condemned. 3. Job defended and
explained. 4. Pythagoras deciphered, and his opinions condemned. 5. Some
Pythgoreans touched and censured. Numa was not of this new opinion, nor
Pythagorean. 6. This opinion has few followers, and how condemned by the
College of Cardinals. 7. What is to be thought of those who have revolted from
the truth of our opinion. 8. The Church, the Scripture, sense, and reason must
be believed in this point of the earths stabilitie, etc. 9. This new opinion
how and when an heresy.
CHAP. II.
1. We must believe the Scripture, not our own phansies. 2. The Scripture
never patronizeth a lie or an error, nor does it apply it self to our
capacity in natural things, though it does in supernatural mysteries. 3. We
must stick to the literal sense, when the Scripture speaks of natural
things. 4. Some particular Scriptures vindicated from our adversaries false
glosses, as namely, Psalm. 19 of the Suns motion like a Giant and Bridegroom,
of the ends of heaven, and of his heat. Eccles. 1. of the Suns rising and
setting. Jos. 12. of the Suns standing still, of the midst of heaven; how over
Gibeon, and how no day like that. Isa. 38. of the Suns returning ten degrees,
of the greatness and meaning of this miracle; neither known to the Gentiles.
The testimony of Herodotus concerning this.
CHAP. III.
1. The Scripture does not speak according to vulgar opinion, when it calls
the Moon a great light, for so it is. 2. Nor when it speaks of waters above
the Heavens, for such there are. 3. Nor when it calls the Stars innumerable,
for so they are. 4. Nor when it mentions the circumference of the b^as^n Sea to
be thirty cubits, and the diameter ten, for so it was. Why the lesser number
is sometime omitted. 5. Nor in saying the earth is founded on the waters, which
is true. 6. The right and left side of heaven how understood, and how the
heaven is (...), and of the Intelligences. 7. The Scripture speaks properly
in attributing understanding to the heart. The Galenists opinion discussed. 8.
Of ova aspidum, and the Vipers eggs, how understood. 9. The Aspe or Adder how
he stops his ear. 10. Of the North and South wind in Scripture. 11. The Sun
shall be truly darkened, the Moon turned to blood, and the stars shall fall,
etc. 12. Of the winds whence they come, etc. 13. The sea the only cause of
springs. 14. The thunder is truly Gods voice. 15. The 7. Stars.
CHAP. IIII.
1. Many Philosophical points are handled in Scripture. 2. The heavens how
round in the opinion of the Fathers. 3. We must have a reverend esteem of the
Fathers 4. How the seas not overflowing the land may be esteemed a miracle. 5.
The works of Nature may be called miracles.
CHAP. V.
Diverse Scriptures vindicated from false glosses: as, Eccles. 1. 4. by which is
proved the earths immobility, and heavens motion. 2. How the earth is eternal
and renewed. 3. The Scripture speaks not plainly and ambiguously in the same
place. 4. The Scripture uses Metaphors. 5 How the earth stands out of the
water, 2 Pet. 3. 5. by which its immobilitie is proved 6. What is meant, 1 Chronicles. 16. 30. etc. by these words, The world is established, etc. 7. What is
meant Psalm. 90. 2. by the earth and the world. 8. How the heavens Prove. 3. 19.
are established: and the Moon and Stars, Psalm. 89. 37. etc. 9. How the
heavens 2 Samuel 22. 8. bath foundations. 10. What are the pillars of heaven in
Job 10. of the ends, sides, and corners of the earth in Scripture. 11. What is
meant Isa. 51. 6. by the planting of the heavens. 12. How the earth is
established. 13. What Job means by the earth moved out of its place.
CHAP. VI.
1. The earth is in the middle and center of the world, and why. 2. Hell is in
the center or middle of the earth. 3. The earth lowest and basest, how. 4.
Every thing is made questionable by some. 5. Aristotle defended. 6. The earth
is in the center, because in the midst of the equinoctial Horizon, etc. 7. The
imagination must be conformable to the things, not these to it; the vanity of
imagininary circles. 8. Astronomers reproved, and their vanity showed, chiefly
about the bigness of the stars. 9. The earth is the least cirle: therefore the
center, how understood.
CHAP. VII.
1. The Stars have not their light because the Sun is in the center, nor has
the Sun less light being out of it. 2. Why the Earth in the center. 3. The Sun
is not the center, because the Planets move about him. 4. The center is not the
most excellent place, neither are the best things next it or in it. 5. There is
an harmony amongst the Stars, though the Sun be not in the center.
CHAP. VIII.
1. How the eye is deceived, and how not; and that if the earth moved, we
should see it. 2. Motion and rest how the objects of the eye, and of the common
sense. 3. If the earth moved, the clouds would but seem to move as well as the
sun. 4. How the eye can be deceived in the motion of a lucid body. 5. The
natural motion of the foundation cannot keep buildings from falling. 6. The
heavens fitter for motion then the earth. 7. Rugged bodies not fittest for
motion. 8. The sight hindered by the motion of the subject, medium, and object.
9. One simple body has but one natural motion, proved. 10. Essential
properties more chiefly in the whole then in the parts, the earth is heavy in
its own place how, bigness how a hinderance to motion, of the earths
ineptitude to a swift motion. 11. The magneticall qualities of the earth, a
fiction. 12. Similitudes no prooses; the seas ebbing and flowing, what. 13. The
whole earth moves not, because the parts move not round. 14. Absurd phrases;
and the spots about the sun, censured. 15. That the earth turns about the
moon is ridiculous. 16. Some observations to prove that the earth turns about
the clouds refuted. 17. Of a mixed motion, of the place, medium, and space. 18.
Of the motion of comets. 19. My nine arguments defended. 1. That the earths
motion would make it hot. 2. The air purer. 3. A sound. 4. Heaven has all
things fit for motion. 5. Of similar parts and the whole. 6. The sun is the
heart of the world. 7. It works by motion. 8. The earth is the firm
foundation. 9. The authority of Divises; the heaven called Ether; the earth
has not two distinct motions.

CHAP. IX.
1. The earth cannot be the cause of its own motion. 2. The vastness and
thickness of the heaven no hinderance to its motion. 3. The matter of the
heavens and their smoothness no binderance to their motion. 4. Bigness helps
motion. 5. The heavens swistnesse illustrated by other motions. 6. The earth
neither the final nor efficient cause of its motion, the heaven sitter for
motion, because greater, and more constant; nature works not still the most
compendious way, some idle similitudes refuted. 7. Bodies having the same
properties have not always the same motion; motion belongs to the noblest
creatures. 8. The smoothness, subtilty, and purity of bodies no hinderance to
their motion; the air moves the water, the circular motion of the fire
natural how. 9. Of Intelligences how and why they move the heavens. 10.
Magneticke virtue an idle conceit.
CHAP. X.
1. The idle and uncertain conceits of Astronomers concerning the celestial
bodies. 2. The appearances of the Sun, and other Planets cannot be so well
discerned by the earth if it did move. 3. The excellency of Divinity above
Astronomy, and an exhorlation to the study of it.
The new PLANET no PLANET.
The CONTENTS.
1. The vanity and falsehood of this new opinion. 2. The Fathers concerning
their judgment of the Antipodes cleared and vindicated, and the Philosophers
condemned. 4. Pythagoras deciphered, and his opinions condemned. 5. Some
Pythagoreans touched and censured. Numa was not of this now opinion nor
Pythagorean. 6. This opinion has few followers, and how condemned by the
College of Cardinals. 7. What is to be thought of those who have revolted from
the truth of our opinion. 8. The Church the Scripture, sense, and reason must
be believed in this point of the earths stabilitie, etc. This new opinion how
and when an heresy.
CHAPT. I.
I Had showed how unreasonable it was, that an upstart novelty concerning the
Earth's motion, Cont. Lansbergium, l.tsect. 1. c. 20.
should thrust out a truth of so long continuance and universality, as this of
the Earth's immobility. You answer, That we must not so dote upon antiquity,
as to count that Canonical, which is approved by the consent of the Ancients.
To this I answer: 1. Make it appear that your opinion of the Earth's motion is
true, and ours false; and we will prefer yours, though new. 2. If you can make
it appear that your opinion is any ways useful or advantageous, we will
admit it. 3. Suppose that both your and our opinion were but conjecturall, and
that there were but an equal probability in both; yet you must not prefer, nor
equal your opinion to ours, because we have antiquity and consent of all
times, of all nations, of so many holy, wise, and learned men for us, which you
want; in this respect then, if both our opinions were put in the balance, yours
will be found too light, though you should add to the scale that heavy
Prussian Copernicus. 4. Though there were no hurt in your opinion, yet we may
not entertain it; for the world is pestered with too many opinions already;
and a great many might be well spared. 5. But whereas your opinion is false,
absurd, and dangerous, as we have partly showed, and will show afterward, we
were mad to receive it; having neither truth, reason, sense, consent,
antiquity, or universality to countenance it. 6. That which you call the
preserving of Philosophical liberty, is indeed the loosing of the reins to
exorbitant wits, to run headlong into every kind of absurdity. 7. We do not
inslave our selves to the opinion of any one man, (as you suppose we do) but
we are of the opinion of all men, of all times, and nations. You inslave your
self to one man, and is guilty of that which you accuse in us: Quis tulerit
Gracchos? 8. We condemn not your opinion because it is new, but because not
true. A new falsehood, a false novelty; and such a new deformed brat is to be
choked in the infancy: Principiis obsta; kill the Cockatrice in the egg. 9.
You say it is but a novelty in Philosophy, but I say it intrencheth upon
Divinity: for Divinity tells us, that the standing of the sun, and moving of
the earth are the miraculous works of Gods supernatural power: your new
Philosophy tells us, that they are the ordinary works of Nature; and so this
scope being granted, you may turn Divinity into natural Philosophy, and
confound the works of God, and of Nature. 10. You tell us, That Antiquity
consists in the old age of the world, not in the youth of it. What Antiquity?
Of the world? then you speak not properly, as you say you do, but
tautologically; the worlds old age consists in its old age. If you mean that
your opinion is not new, but old, because the world is old, you speak absurdly:
for old opinions are so called, not because they were found out in the youth,
or in the old age of the world, but because they have continued a long time in
the world; and so new opinions are new, though found out in the old age of the
world. Opinions have no relation to the ages of the world, but to their own
continuance: Are you older then your great Grandfather, because the world is
older now, than it was when he lived? 11. You are the fathers (you say) in
such learning as may be increased by experiments and discoveries, and of more
authority then former ages. Why do you not tell us plainly, that you are
fathers of learning, as well as in learning? but indeed you are not the fathers
of learning, you are only fathers of your new discoveries and fresh
experiments; that is, of new, fond, and savourlesse phansies: and why you must
be of more authority then former ages, I see no reason. Shall not Iuball, and
Tuball-Cain, the inventors and fathers of their Arts, be of as great authority,
as you that are the fathers of such misshapen monsters, though they lived in the
infancy, and you in the old age of the world? Why should I rather credit you in
telling us of a world in the Moon, and of the Earth, that it is a planet, then
those wise men of former ages, who never dreamt of such idle and ridiculous
conceits? You say, Truth is the daughter of time; so say I, but errors,
heresies, falsehoods, are times daughters too. We see how fruitful this later
age of the world is of new and frivolous opinions. But how much are you
beholding to old mother Time, who has bestowed her eldest daughter, Truth,
upon you, having past by so many worthy Suitors in all ages? this is a
transcendent favor, you are homo perpaucorum hominum, and have been wrapped in
your mothers smock. 12. In leaving us to our liberty, to accept or reject your
opinion; I perceive you have no great confidence in your new married wife,
Times daughter: you mistrust your cause, and the validity of your arguments;
and that you have employed your pen more to show your wit, then to evince our
understanding.

2. You will not have this Philosophical doubt decided by common people, for
they judge by their senses, nor yet by the holy Fathers, for they were ignorant
(you say) in this part of learning. Aristotle you have already disabled, for
his works are not necessarily true; and, I say, it is not fit that you should
be Judges in your own cause. Whom then will you name for Judges, seeing
Scriptures, Fathers, senses, Peripateticks, are rejected; reasons and arguments
you have none: I think you must be feign to call for some of your people out of
the Moon. Juno Lucina. fer opem. But in calling of the Fathers ignorants in
this part of learning, you do them wrong; for they were neither ignorant of
Philosophy, nor of Astronomy; they condemned the idle opinions of both; amongst
the rest, that of the Antipodes. For although I deny not the Antipodes, yet the
Plin. li. 2. cap.65. August. de civit. li. 16. cap. 9. Macrob. in some.
Scipionis li. 2. c. 5. Lactanti. de falsa Sapien. li. 3. cap. 24.
Philosophers opinions concerning them were vain: as, That they inhabited that
Region to which the sun rises, when it sets with us. 2. In that they could not
tell how these people came thither, seeing the vast ocean, beyond the straight
of Gibraltar, was not navigable; and they confessed that it could not be
passed. 3. The reasons which they alleged to prove Antipodes were not
demonstrative, nor experimental, but merely conjecturall; so that the Fathers
could receive no satisfaction from their reasons. 4. They held that those
Antipodes were another race of men, then these of this hemisphere, and that
they had been there perpetually; and that they neither could, nor ever should
know what kind of men they were. 5. They did waver in their opinion, sometimes
saying that the western people were Antipodes to us; sometimes the Southern
people; sometime confounding Antipodes and Antichthones. 6. They would
necessarily infer from the roundnesse of the earth, that the lower hemisphere
was dry earth, and inhabitated with people: the consequence of which S. Austine
denies. 7. They held that the opposite earth to ours had an opposite motion. Of
these, and other vain opinions concerning Antipodes, you may see in Pliny,
Austine, Macrobius, Lactantius, etc. It was not then out of ignorance, or
peevishness, but upon good grounds and reasons, that they denied Antipodes, l.
Categ. c. 10.
as the Philosophers esteemed of them. Otherwise S. Austin knew and
acknowledged there might be Antipodes. 2. What though the Fathers or Aristotle
had been ignorant in this point, must therefore their authority in other points
be slighted? must their failing in one or two points of Philosophy, lessen
their credit in all Philosophical truths? What if they had been ignorant in
some one point of Divinity, must we therefore reject their authority in other
points? The Apostles were ignorant of the day of Judgment, and of some other
points; yet we believe them never a whit the less in all other points. 3.
There is odds between denying of Antipodes, and denying the motion of the
Earth, and standing of the Sun: For the reasons which Philosophers brought to
prove Antipodes, were neither experimental, nor demonstrative, nor any ways
satisfactory; but for the stability of the earth, and motion of heaven, we
have both sense, reason, authority, divine and humane, consent, antiquity, and
universality, as is said; and what can be wanting to confirm a truth, which
we have not to confirm this? 4. You say, That Solomon was strangely gifted
with all kind of knowledge: then would I feign know why he did not plainly
tell us, (being so great a Philosopher) that the Earth moved, and that the Sun
stood still; but quite contrary proves the transient vanity of humane affairs,
from the earth's stability, and constant motion of the sun.

3. Job, (you say) for all his humane learning, could not answer these natural
questions which God proposes to him: as, Why the sea should be so bounded from
overflowing the land. What is the breadth of the earth? What is the reason of
snow or hail, rain or dew, ye or frost? which any ordinary Philosopher in
these days might have resolved. Answ. You would make Job, who was both a King
and a Priest, a very simple man, if we would believe you. But how know you
that Job could not answer God? Mary, because he says of himself, That he
uttered that, he understood not: things too wonderful for him which he knew
not. Job. 42.3.
But, Good Sir, these words are spoken of the secret ways of Gods providence,
and of his hid and unsearchable judgments, which are these wonderful things
that Job knew not nor understood; for his judgments are a bottomless depth,
his ways are past finding out; and they are not spoken of natural causes of
meteors. I pray, were there not hail and snow, rain and dew, ice and frost,
in those days, and did not he know that these meteors were generated of
vapors, as well as you? or what should be the cause of his stupidity, and of
your quickness of apprehension? Alas! how do we please our selves in the
conceits of our supposed knowledge, whereas indeed we have but a glimmering
insight in Natures works, a bare superficial and conjecturall knowledge of
natural causes? Doubtless Job was not ignorant but modest, in acknowledging
the insufficiency of Philosophical reasons, and therefore thought it better to
be silent, then to show his folly in superficial and vain answers: For both
Astronomy, and natural Philosophy, are arts of Diviners, rather then
Disputers; and Philosophy is but opinion, says Lactantius; Lactan. de falls. i
Sapi. lib. 3. cap. 3.
and even in those things which Philosophers brag that they found out, they
are opinantes, potius quam scientes; carried with opinion, rather then
knowledge, says S. Austine; Aug. ad Lau. li. 1. cap. 10.
which I have found by long experience. Job knew that though humane and
Philosophical reasons would seem plausible enough to man, yet that God, to
whom only truth is known, would check him, and account his wisdom but folly,
to speak with Lactantius. Lact. li. 3. ca. 3. defal. Sap.
If he had answered God that the sea is bounded from overflowing the land,
because the drienesse of the earth resists the moisture of the sea, which is
the reason of Philosophers; God would have showed him the folly of his reason,
by the daily flowing of the sea, on the dry lands; and by the many inundations
of the sea over whole couutries. I doubt not but if God had asked you the
causes of clouds and rain, you would have answered him, that they were
generated of moist vapors elevated into the air, and there dissolved or
squized by heat or cold; but then why be there no clouds nor rain in Egypt,
seeing the Sun elevates vapors out of Nilus? So you will tell me that hail or
snow are generated of moist vapors, condensate by cold into that form: but
then why in the hottest countries, even under the line, are the greatest
showers and biggest hail? So might I reason with you of the other Meteors; but
that I will hasten to be rid of this task, having other employments.

Cont. Carpentar. Sect 2. c. 10.
4. I had said that there was no credit to be given to Pythagoras, whom you make
a patron of your opinion; because he was both a sorcerer, as Saint Austin
shows, and the father of many monstrous absurdities, Aug. l. 7. de Civit. c.
35.
as I have showed out of Theodoret. Theod. ser. ad Grac. infid.
You would salve his credit by telling us, that all men are subject to errors;
and I deny it not: but it is one thing for a man to fall into an error
accidentally, and an other thing to broach a multitude of errors. A man may
speak a lie by chance, and that shall not derogate from his credit; but if he
use to lie, I will scarce believe him when he speaks truth. That Pythagoras
was a witch, his name shows from (...) and (...); either because he spoke as
Apollo Pythius did, falsely and obscurely; or because he was possessed with the
Pythian Spirit, or the Devil who deluded the Gentiles; who appearing and
deceiving them in the form of the Serpent Python, which he was said to kill,
was called Pythius. His causing of an Eagle to fly to him by certain
conjuring words, and being at the same time in two several places, at Thurii
and Metapontii, with many other such like conjuring tricks, show what he was.
Pliny says, Plin.l. 30. c. 1.
that he went to Egypt, and many other places to learn Magic: the
Pythagoreans would kill no Serpents, so highly they honored them. Saint Austin
says out of Varro, Decivit. Dei, l. 7. c. 35.
that Pythagoras was much addicted to Hydromancie and Necromancie, and to
consult the infernal Spirits by blood. And Tertullian deciphers him to be a
notable impostor, Tertul.l. de Anim.c. 28, 29.
who to make people believe his doctrine of transanimation, hid himself seven
years under ground; macerating his body with hunger, thirst, nastinesse:
hazarding his health and life with damps and filth, to confirm a gross lie.
Quomodo credam non mentiri Pythagoram, qui mentitur ut credam? He that will
with swearing, lying, and deceiving tricks, persuade us that he was in Hell,
and that he had been Aethalides, Euphorbus, Pyrrhus, and Hermotimus, Vide
Laertum, l. 8. de viit. Phil.
would make small bones to broach such monstrous opinions, as of the motion of
the Earth, and immobilitie of the heavens, out of ambition to get him a name.
And this is the goodly Patron of your opinion. Dignum patella operculum. The
man of eminent note and learning as you call him; highly esteemed for his
divine wit and rare inventions. Again when you say, that many of his absard
sayings are to be understood in a mystical sense: why will you in a literal
sense understand his sayings of the Earths motion, and Heavens immobilitie?

5. I had said that indeed Pythagoras was not the Author of this opinion, for
no ancient writer ascribes it to him; you reply, that many ancient Authors
ascribe it to the Pythagorean Sect. For proof whereof, in stead of many
authors, you bring one, as if one were a multitude; and that one is Aristotle.
Answ. There is a difference between Pythagoras, and Pythagoreans; between the
Scholar and the Master: I spoke of Pythagoras; Aristotle, of the Pythagoreans.
The Scholars oftentimes broach opinions which the Masters never knew; it is
ordinary in all Heretics and Sectaries to father opinions on the first
founders, and on other learned men, which they never knew nor dreamed of. That
impure sect of the Nicolaitans, fathered their opinions on Nicolas the Deacon.
The Arians would have made the world believe that Origin, Dionysius of
Alexandria and Lucian the Martyr, had been the authors of their impieties. The
Donatists allege Saint Cyprian for the author of their separation from the
Catholic Church: and the mad-headed Circumcellions called themselves
Donatists. Therefore, when you say that it appears by Aristotle's testimony,
that Pythagoras thought the Earth to be one of the Planets, you are deceived;
for he speaks not of Pythagoras, but of the Pythagoreans, of which number you
are one; not only for affirming the Earth to be a Planet, but also in holding
transanimation; for you make no difference between Pythagoras and his
disciples: thinking (as it seems) that the soul of Pythagoras which had been
in so many bodies before, was now entered into the bodies of the Pythagoreans.
2. I said that Pythagoras held, that the heavens by their motions made a
musical harmony, which could not consist with the earths motion; you say it
may consist, but you do not prove how it may; tell me, for what end does the
Heaven move? Is it not for the benefit of the Earth? But if the earth move to
receive its benefit from the Heaven, surely the Heaven moves to no end or
purpose. Again, you would feign escape by telling us, That Pythagoras meant by
the musical concent, i. the proportion and harmony that is in the bigness and
distance of the Orbs. You tell us so, but how shall we believe you? This
saying of his is not reckoned amongst his symbolicall speeches; and if it be
symbolicall, why not that saying of the Earths motion? Is not that also
mystical?

6. You set down seven or eight men of special note (as you say) for their
extraordinary learning, and for this opinion. Answ. If this opinion makes men
to be of special note, then you must needs be a noted man, or shall be
hereafter, when you are come down from the Moon, or freed from the cloud that
inwraps you, for you are of this opinion; but you might have spared your
labor, for these men were Pythagoreans; and I told you before, that
Pythagoreans were of this opinion; but few of these were noted men for their
extraordinary learning: they were obscure men, and very little spoken of in old
Histories. Aristarchus the Tyrant, Aristarchus the Poet, and that rigid
Aristarchus the Grammarian, and censurer of Homer, were noted men; but not your
Aristarchus the Mathematician. So Philolaus, Nicetas Syracusanus, Ecphantus and
Lysippus have little said of them: as for Heraclides Ponticus, he was a man
noted more for his ambition, then for his learning; in that he affected to be a
god, causing his friends to convey his dying body out of the way, and a dragon
to be laid in his bed: that the world might think he was now a dragon; and
that he should be worshipped in that form: and indeed he showed himself to be
that, which he desired to be; to wit, a beast, and not a man. (...), O. 5.
as Diogenes Laertius speaks of him. As for Plato it is not certain if he
were of your opinion, and if he had been, the matter is not great. And as for
Numa Pompilius, he was not Pythagoras his scholar, for he lived about a hundred
years before Pythagoras; Solin c. 16.
who live about the time that Brutus was Consul, who drove out the Kings, as
Solinus witnesses, and Tullie. Cic. 4. Tuscul.
Livie says, Litius Dec. 1. l. 1.
that he flourished in the time of Servius Tullus. Neither does Plutarch
affirm that Numa was scholar to Pythagoras, Plutarch. in Numa.
but because their institutions were much alike, it was supposed by some (says
he) that Numa had familiarity with Pythagoras. It is true that Numa built a
round Temple, not in reference to this opinion of the Earths motion, as you
dream; for he was not of this opinion; but in reference to the roundnesse of
the world, as Plutarch says: And he placed the Vestall fire in the middle, not
to represent the Sun in the center of the world, (that is your gloss,) but
to represent the site of the elementary fire, which he conceived to be in the
midst of the world.

7. Sure, Brag is a good dog with you; for you tell us that there is scarce any
of note or skill, who are not Copernicus his followers; and more there are of
his opinion, then all the rest put together; and yet you tell us but of one
Cardinal Cusanus, and six more, to avoid tediousness. But in this you
speak by the figure Antiphrasis, by contraries: You name but one Cardinal on
your side, and within three leaves after, you tell us of two Sessions of
Cardinals on our side who condemned this opinion: are not twelve more then
one? and shall not the judgment of so many be preferred to one? How many more
can you pick out of the whole College of Cardinals, that were of your
opinion, beside Cusanus, who was known to be a man that affected singularity?
But I think you looked through a multiplying glass, when you concluded from
the induction of five Copernicits, that there were more of his opinion, then
all the rest put together. Are you not like him who thought that all the ships
and goods that came into the Pyreum were his own? And yet of these five which
you muster up for your defense, there was one, even the chiefest, and of
longest experience, to wit, Galileus, who fell off from you; being both
ashamed, and sorry that he had been so long bewitched with so ridiculous an
opinion; which was proved to him both by Cardinal Bellarmine, and by other
grave and learned men; that it was contrary both to Scripture, Divinity, and
Philosophy: therefore Galilie on his knees did abjure, execrate, and detest,
Mercure Francois An. 1633.
both by word and writ, his error which you maintain; and promised with his
hand on the holy Evangil, never to maintain it again: the other five, are men
of no great note, except in your Books.

8. You advise us out of Aristotle and Ptolemy, to speak that which is most
likely; to entertain that which is most agreeable to reason; to frame such
suppositions of Heaven as be most simple: and you tell us that Rheticus and
Keplar wish that Aristotle were alive again. But your advice is superfluous,
and their wish is ridiculous: for we speak and intertain that which is most
reasonable; if we do not, prove it, that we may amend our error. Our
suppositions of Heaven are not so simple as could be wished; but we were better
content our selves with them, then move the earth with you: for that is, ex
fumo in flammam, to leap out of the drying pan into the fire. Now to wish
Aristotle alive, or to think that he or Clavius would ever be of your opinion,
are mere dreams and phancies. And though Clavius had found that Ptolomies
Hypotheses had not been so exact as should be; yet he would not have been so
mad, as to believe the Earths motion, and the Suns rest. And though some have
fallen off from Aristotle's and Ptolomies opinion, to Copernicus, that will but
little help your cause: for in all professions there have ever been some
unconstant and giddy-headed men; many have fallen off from Christianity to
Mahumetisme; from Calvinisme to Anabaptisme; will you condemn therefore their
former professions? so some have revolted from Copernicus to Ptolomie. You
challenge then too great a privilege, when you say that none who having bin
once settled with any strong assent on your side, that have afterward revolted
from it: besides that it is false, there was never any profession that could
brag of such a privilege: not Christianity the best of all professions. And
though some men reject that opinion in which they were nursed, and have
approved for truth, and now embrace your absurd Paradox, which is condemned in
the Schools; yet it will not follow that yours is the righter side: for will
you say that because many Christians become Turks and Jews; many Orthodox men
have become Arians, Nestorians, Eutychians, Macedonians; that therefore these
Heretics were in the right? There are too many wavering Spirits shaken like
reeds, and carried about like clouds with every wind of doctrine, unsettled and
instable in all their ways.

You tell us, that most of those opposers of your opinion, have been stirred
thereunto, either by a partial conceit of their own inventions, for every one
is affected to his own brood: or by a servile fear, in derogating from the
ancients authority; or opposing of Scripture Phrases; or by judging of things
by sense rather then by reason. Answ. The first of these reasons will be
retorted upon your self; for the partial conceit of your own inventions, and
the affection you carry to your own brood, have made you fall off from that
ancient and universal truth, to embrace an error: and this was it that moved
Copernicus to oppose Ptolomie, Alphonsus, and the other famous Astronomers.
Therefore, Tycho did not oppose Copernicus to make way for his own Hypothesis
as you say, but to maintain that truth which had so long continued in the
world. As for your second reason, I answer, that we should not without
extraordinary and urgent cause, derogate from the authority of the ancients;
much less, from the meaning of Scripture phrase; which the Church of God from
the beginning hitherto has delivered to us: neither do we adhere to the
meaning of Scripture phrase, out of a superstitious fear of the supposed
infallible Church, as you say; but out of a filial fear to the true Church,
our Mother, the ground and pillar of truth: If we hear not the voice of this
Mother, we cannot have God for our Father. A wise son honors his father, but
he is a fool that will despise his mother. Why should we think that you or
Copernicus can better understand the Scripture phrase, then the Church of God
from time to time has done? this was the proud conceit of Nestorius, that he
only understood the Scripture phrase, as Vincentius complains of him.
Vincent. Lyr. adver. Hares.
That which you call the new Creed of Pius the Fourth, that no man should
assent unto any interpretatione of Scripture, which is not approved by the
ancient Fathers; is indeed the old Creed of the Church, as Vincentius shows:
Vincent. ibid.
let us no ways no ways (says he) depart from that sense which our holy
Fathers and predecessors have maintained. And again, whatsoever (says he)
the Catholic Church has of old retained, that only shall a true Catholic
maintain and believe: therefore he shows that it is the trick of Heretics
to delight in novelties; and to reject and despise old doctrines. Us profanis
novitat bus gaudeant, antiquitatis scit a fastidiant. If then the Jesuits, in
reverence to the Churches authority, and to the ancient Fathers do oppose this
opinion they deserve commendation: and so did these Cardinals that called it
in, and punished the defenders of it. Thirdly, you say that we judge of things
by sense, rather then by reason; but indeed you have no reason to say so: for
although that sensitive things, such as the Earths stability, and Suns
motion, are to be judged by sense; Cont. Lansbergum.
yet we have many reasons for us, whereby we judge it must be so as I have
showed heretofore. But I confess we judge not by your reasons, because they
are but shadows of reason, and no way satisfactory: neither do we so tie the
meaning of Scripture to the letter of it (as you say,) but that we give
freedom to raise other senses, whether allegorical, tropologicall, or
anagogicall; so they be not repugnant to faith and good manners. But in
historical things, Saint Austin tells us, that we must chiefly adhere to the
literal sense; L. 8. De Genes. ad lit. c. 1 etc. 2.
and it is a Maxim in the Schools, that we must not reject the literal
sense, which is not contrary, agendis aut credendis, to the Creed or the Law:
neither is it unlawful to conclude Philosophical points from the letter of
Gods word, seeing there is but one truth in Divinity and Philosophy. But to
conclude Philosophical points flat contrary to the letter of divine Scripture,
as you do, is too much boldness: therefore, I will speak to you in the words
of Saint Austin, L. 1. De Genesi ad liter. c. 21.
writing of the Philosophers of his time; Quicquid de tuis voluminibus his
nostris literis contrarium protuleris, ant aliqua facultate oftendamus, aut
nulla dubitatione credamus esse falsissimum. Your assertion of the Earths
motion, is contrary to the letter of the Scripture; therefore we doubt not to
say, is it most false. As for our ignorance of your Astronomicall grounds, it
is excusable, seeing your own ignorance is the cause of it: how can the
Scholar know, if the Master be ignorant himself of these Principles which he
undertakes to teach; or knows not which way to make them intelligible? How can
the blind lead the blind? Non obtusa adeo gestamus pectora. We are not so
dull but we can understand other Principles: but yours being Chimaera's,
fictions, non entities; having no other ground but your own fancy, cannot
inform our understandings which have entities for their objects.

9. No council hitherto (say you) have censured this opinion for an Heresy.
Answ. The Church by her counsels does not presently censure Heresies; she
knows best her own times and seasons, and reasons too. The Physician does not
always in the beginning of a disease, prescribe purging physic. 2. From the
Churches forbearance to censure an Heresy, you must not conclude the nullitie
of an Heresy: for the Heresies of Arius, Macedonius, Euryches, and Nestorius,
were Heresies, before they were censured by the four general Counsels. And
the Church, says Saint Lib. quast. E. vang. in Mat. 4. 12.
Austin, suffers and bears with many Heretics, so long as they do not
pertinaciously maintain, nor maliciously (to the disturbance of the Church)
spread abroad their falsehoods; Quod si fecerint, tune pollantur. Many are
Heretics in sore Coeli, which are not in foro Ecclesie: and he is not only
an Heretic which denies an Article of the Creed, but he also that
gain-sayeth any plain place of Scripture. The broacher or maintainer of any
false and new opinion, is an Heretic says Saint Lib. de. utilit. s^edend. c.
1.
Austin. 3. Either you have not read, or have not observed the censure of
Galilies opinion by the council of Cardinals; who not only call it a false
opinion, erroneous in the faith, a doctrine contrary to the holy Scripture: Le
Mercure Franc. an. 1633.
but also in plain terms they call it Heresy. 4. When you say that
Fromundus calls it a rash opinion, bordering upon Heresy, that Paul the Third
was not so much offended at Copernicus, when he dedicated his book to him;
that the Fathers of Trent call Epycicles and Eccentrickes, but fictions: these
are such weak helps to support your cause, that if you lean on them, they
will prove no stronger then reeds or cob-webs: if I should insist on them, I
should but discover your weakness, in alleging of them. And likewise, your
instancing of Shonbergius, who importunately begged the Commentaries of
Copernicus: was is not rather out of curiosity to see how he could defend such
an absurd Paradox, then out of true affection to embrace it? So Herod desired
to see Christ; I doubt not but many will desire to see your book of this
subject, which (I dare presume) will never be of your opinion. Lastly, where as
you say, It is absurd not to assent to any thing in natural questions, but
what authority shall allow of. I say, it were both absurd and dangerous for
men's souls, and the peace of the Church, if men were suffered to assent to any
absurdity, against Scripture, sense, reason, and the Churches authority.

CHAP. II.
1. We must believe the Scripture, not our own phansies. 2. The Scripture
never patronizeth a lie or an error, nor does it apply it self to our capacity
in natural things, though it does in supernatural mysteries. 3. We must
stick to the literal sense, when the Scripture speaks of natural things. 4.
Some particular Scriptures vindicated from our adversaries false glosses: as
namely, Psalm. 19 of the Suns motion like a Giant and Bridegroom, to the ends
of heaven: And of his heat, Eccles. 1. Of the Suns rising and setting. Josh.
12. Of the Sun standing still, of the midst of braven; how over Gibeon, and
how no day like that. Esaias 38. Of the Suns returning ten degrees; of the
greatness and meaning of this miracle: whether known to the Gentiles. The
testimony of Herodotus concerning this:
IT were happy for us (say you) if we could exempt Scripture from Phisophicall
controversies. And I say, It were happy for us, if all Philosophical
controversies could be decided by Scripture; or if men would be so modest, as
to rest contented with Scripture phrases, and expressions of such
Philosophical points, as are mentioned there: But what hope is there to end
controversies, when many are so wedded to their own phansies, that neither will
they yield to Scripture, except they may have leave to interpret them; nor to
reasons, except they may have leave to form them; nor will they trust their
own senses, but will captivate and enslave them also to their groundless
imaginations? The Scripture tells us in plain terms, the Earth is
immovable: our senses do assure us, and many reasons which I have heretofore
alleged, induce us to believe the truth of this assertion: and yet you
spurning at Scripture, sense, and reason, as if your fancy were instar
omnium, would have our judgments, senses, Scripture, Church, and all regulated
by your absurd dictates; therefore it is an unreasonable thing in you, to
desire that the holy Ghost should not be Judge of his own assertions in
natural truths; and that there should be more credit given to your conceits,
(which you call industry and experience) then to Gods own words. Indeed this
travel has God left to the sons of men, to be exercised with, as a
punishment for their sins; to toil and labor all their days about shadows,
imaginations, and indeed mere nothing; groping at the door of knowledge (like
blind Sodomites) all their days, and cannot find it; so that they who have
spent their whole life in Astronomy, may with Saint Peter, say on their death
bed; Master We have labored all night, but have caught nothing. Thus with
Martha, they are busy about many things, and neglect that one thing which is
only necessary.

2. It is but a conceit of yours to say, That the Scripture accommodates it
self to the vulgars conceit, in saying, the Sun rises and falls, etc. I
warrant you, if the vulgar should conceive that the heavens were made of water,
as the Gnostickes held; or that the Sun and Moon were two ships, with the
Manichees; or that the world was made of the sweat of the AEones, with the
Valentinians: or whatsoever other absurd opinion they should hold, you would
make the Scripture say so, and to accommodate it self to their conceits. The
stability of the Earth, and motion of the Heaven, are absurd and false opinions
in your conceit; and yet the Scripture affirms them. You are as unapt I know
to believe that the Sun moves, as others are that it stands still; therefore
it is a wonder you do not begin to call the Scripture authority in question,
that affirms the Suns motion: seeing you say men would be apt to do so, if
the Scripture had said, the Sun stands, etc. How shall the Scripture please
both parties? if it say the Sun moves, your side will except against it: if it
say the Sun stands, ours will be offended at it. Why should the Scripture be
more loath to offend us then you, except it be because we are the stronger
side; and we have our senses to witness with us, which you have not? I wish
you would conceive a more reverend opinion of the Spirit of truth, who cannot
lie; nor will affirm a falsehood upon any pretense whatsoever; neither will he
countenance a lie, to confirm a truth; or speak false in one thing, that we
may conceive his meaning the better in another thing. He needs not such weak
and wicked helps as falsehoods, to make us understand his will; his word is
strong and mighty in operation; it is the power of God unto salvation; a sharp
two edged sword; his hammer, his scepter, etc. As it stands not with his truth
to affirm a lie, so does it no ways consist with the power of his Word and
Spirit, to help our understanding by a lie.

3. You say, That if the Scripture had said, the Earth rises and sets, and
the Sun stands still; the people being unacquainted with that secret, would
not have understood the meaning of it. Answ. What matter is it whether they had
understood it or not? For you tell us that these things are not necessary in
themselves; and that it is besides the scope of these places, to instruct us in
Philosophical points. Will you have the holy Ghost then speak a falsehood? for
fear lest we should not understand the meaning of a secret, which is not
necessary for us to know: if it be not needful for us to know whether the
Earth stands or not; so it was less needful for the Scripture to say the
Earth stands, when it does not stand. But you do well to call the motion of
the Earth a secret, for so it is a great secret, hid from the wise and prudent
of this world, and revealed only to such babes as your self. But why is this
a secret? If it be a natural effect, it is no secret; for though natural
causes do not incur into our senses, yet the effects do; and if this be a
secret effect and not sensible, it cannot be an effect of nature; but I think
it be such another secret as the Philosophers stone, which never was, and never
shall be.

Though it be beside the chief scope of Scripture to instruct us in
Philosophical points: yet it will not follow, that these Philosophical
terms are to be otherwise understood, then as they are expressed. There be
many Geographicall, Historical, and Chronologicall passages in Scripture,
mentioned incidently, and not chiefly to instruct us in such points: shall we
therefore understand them otherwise then they are set down, or rather the
clean contrary way? But when you say the Earths motion is beyond our reach; I
grant it: because we cannot reach that which is not made manifest to us, either
by sense or reason, or divine authority; If you can either of these ways make
it appear, I doubt not but our understanding will reach it: and if you cannot
one of these ways make it appear to us, we will account it a mere nothing.
For idem est non esse, and non videri: and indeed you say well out of the
Gloss, that God does not teach curiosities which are not apprehended easily;
for your motion of the Earth is an incomprehensible curiosity. And it is well
said by you again, that the Scriptures authority might be questioned, if it
did teach natural things contrary to our senses; and therefore if any book of
Scripture should affirm, as you do; that the earth moves naturally and
circularly, I should verily believe that that book had never been indicted by
the holy Spirit, but rather by a Pythagorean spirit, or by the spirit of Dutch
beer.

You condemn Tertullians Heretics for retching Scripture a wrong way, and
forcing it to some other sense agreeable to their false imagination; and rather
then they would forgo their tenants, yielded the Scripture to be erroneous. De
te fabula narretur. You retch the Scripture a wrong way, forcing it to your
false imaginations; you do not indeed call the Scripture erroneous, but you
make it to speak one thing, and mean the clean contrary; therefore, you
shall do well to apply Saint Austins counsel to your self, and do not
settle your opinion rashly on that dark and obscure conceit of the Earths
motion. It is true also what you allege out of Saint Austin, that the holy
Ghost being to deliver more necessary truths, In Genesis ad Fteram.
left out to speak of the form or figure of Heaven, etc. because he would
not have us spend too much time in these things, and neglect the means of
salvation; but you should have done well to have subjoined the following words
of that same Father, to wit; That is true which is affirmed by divine
authority, rather then that which is guessed at by humane infirmity. For there
he speaks of Philosophical points, which seem to be contrary to Scripture:
but you are mistaken when you say, that God descends to our capacity in
natural things; and conformes his expressions to the mistake of our
judgments, as he does apply himself to our apprehensions, by being
represented like a man. There is infinite odds between God and natural
things; we that are corporal cannot understand spiritual things, much less
that infinite Spirit, but by familiar expressions; yet such as do in some sort
represent his attributes to us: as he is said to have eyes, hands, etc. by
which are signified his knowledge, operations, etc. But for natural things
there was no such necessity, because natural men, by natures light are able to
understand natural things: so we know what a circular motion is; and if the
Earth did truly move, we should as soon apprehend the motion of it, as we do
the Suns motion: therefore, there was no need why God should descend to our
capacity in affirming an untruth, because we cannot understand the Earths
motion. God then does not conform his expressions to the error of our
judgments; for our judgments do not err in this; but he speaks according
to the truth of the thing, which we judge and apprehend as it is. We apprehend
the fire to be hot; if you were of an opinion that it were cold, (which you may
as well maintain as the Earths motion) you would doubtless tell us, that the
Scripture in saying the fire is hot, applies it self to the vulgar error or
mistake of our judgments; thus you may make the Scripture to serve you for
defense of any absurdity, by using such a subterfuge, and running into such a
starting hole.

4. You examine those particular Scriptures which are urged to prove the Suns
motion, and you tell us that they are spoken in reference to the appearance of
things, and the false opinions of the vulgar; and in the 75. page of your
Book, you say it is a frequent custom for the holy Ghost to speak of
natural things, rather according to appearance and common opinion, then the
truth it self. I would 1. know if this consequence be Logic; the holy Ghost
speaks of natural things according to appearance, frequently, and of some,
ergo continually, and of all; or particularly of this; to wit, the Earths
immobility. The Scripture oftentimes speaks of God according to men's opinion
and capacity; as, that he is angry, that he repents, etc. Ergo, the Scripture
speaks still of God thus: and so, when the Scripture says, that God is a
Spirit, or just, or infinite, or eternal; that may be understood (if your
Logic be good) according to opinion or appearance; this will prove a
dangerous kind of reasoning. 2. Why does not the holy Ghost tell us in plain
terms, that the Earth moves, if it does move? what end has he to tell us
that it is immovable? Is it because we are not capable to understand such a
high mystery? that is ridiculous. For is it a greater mystery then Christ's
Incarnation, Resurrection, Ascension, etc. which are set down in plain
terms? but indeed it is no mystery; it is easy to understand the Earths
motion, if it did move. Or is it because the holy Ghost would not give offense
to the world, in telling them plainly that the Earth moved, being an opinion so
repugnant to sense and reason? Then doubtless he would not have told us, that
the Sun and Moon stood still at Joshua's command; or that the Sea was divided
by Moses Rod; and those other miracles of holy Writ, as much repugnant to sense
and natural reason, as the Earths motion is: the holy Ghost uses not to hide
or mince the truth, for fear of offending men. 3. There is great odds
between asseverations and allusions; between the affirmation of a truth, and
an allusion to a fiction The Scripture speaking of perverse men that will not
hear Gods word, alludes to the fiction (as you call it,) of the adder stopping
his ear; ergo, when the Scripture speaks of the Earths immobility, it speaks
according to common opinion. A goodly consequence; as if you would say, the
Scripture speaks figuratively of Christ, when it calls him a Lamb, a Door, a
Vine: ergo, when the Scripture speaks of the beheading of John Baptist, it
speaks according to common opinion: if there be no better Logic taught in
the Universities of the Moon, we will never send our Sons thither. 3. It is a
rule in Saint Austin, that we should expound Scripture as the Saints have
expounded it before us; De verbis Domini, Ser. 18.
Quomodo bac verba intellexerunt Sancti, sic utique intelligenda sunt: But name
me that Saint that ever expounded these Scriptures, which speak of the Heavens
motion and of the Earths immobilitie, according to appearance and common
opinion. Of St. Austins mind was the sixth general Council, prohibiting any
man to interpret Scripture, otherwise then the Lights and Doctors of the
Church, have hitherto expounded them by their writings; which Canon is
confirmed in the eleventh Session of the third Lateran Council. 5. The ancient
Fathers warn us, that we do not deviate or depart from the literal sense of
Scripture, so long as no absurdity does follow thereupon: now, no absurdity
does follow upon the literal sense of the Earths immobilitie; but upon your
sense and exposition many absurdities follow; therefore we must not depart from
the literal sense. 6. Where the holy Ghost speaks obscurely and figuratively
in one place, he does in another place open himself in plain terms, as
Saint In Isai.c. 19.
Hierome observes: but speaking of the Earths immobilitie, he uses still the
same phrases; neither does he explain himself otherwise in any one place;
which doubtless he would have done, if he had meant otherwise then he
spoake. 7. I absolutely deny that the holy Ghost speaks of natural things,
otherwise then in truth and reality; and not (as you say,) according to common
opinions. As for your expositions of these Scriptures which are for us, and
your instances against our opinion; they are wrested, and false, and
impertinent, and of no soliditie, as we will show by our answer or reply to
each of them severally.

1. It is usual with you to cut your throat with your own sword, and to
bring passages against your self; for you would prove that the Scripture
speaks of the Heavens motion, in reference only to the Vulgars false opinion;
because, Psalm. 19.
The Sun is in his glory like a Bridegroom; and in his motion like a Giant.
I answer, if the Sun be in his motion like a Giant, then sure the Sun has
motion; for how can that which is not, be compared to that which is?
Similitudes cannot illustrate non entities. 2. If the Sun were not a glorious
creature, David had not compared his glory to without motion, he had not
compared his motion, to the motion of a Giant: if there be no motion in the
wind and thunder, it had been idle to give wings to the one, or arrows to the
other, as David does. 3. Will you make the Scripture not only ass^er^ a
falsehood in positive terms, but also bring similitudes to illustrate it? this
is to make the holy Ghost a cherither, fomenter, and maintainer of untruths;
for so it must be, if the Sun move not, the Scripture showing it does move,
and declaring by similies how it does move. 4. What consequence is this? The
Scripture compares the Sun to a Bridegroom, and a Giant; ergo, the Scripture
speaking of the Suns motion, speaks in reference to the false opinion of the
Vulgar? it is all one with this: The Gospel compares Christ to a Bridegroom;
ergo, the Gospel speaking of Christ's humanity, speaks in reference to the
false opinion of the Vulgar. 5. There is ods between positive speeches and
comparisons; the Sun is never called a Bridegroom in Scripture, but is said to
be like a Bridegroom: Simile non est idem. But in Scripture still, the Sun is
said to move, and the earth to be stable, in positive terms. 6. That David in
this comparison did allude to the fancy of ignorant people, supposing the Sun
by night to rest in a chamber, is but your groundless conceit: you might say
rather that he alluded to the fiction of Poets, describing Aurora to go to bed
every night with Tythonus; Tythous croceum ^^^ quens Aurora cubile: or to that
golden bed which Vulcan made him; in which he is carried through the Sea.
(...). But neither to this pleasant bed, nor to that of Tythonus, nor to the
Vulgar conceit does David allude; but simply sets out Gods Majesty in the glory
of the Sun, by a familiar example, taken from the glory of a Bridegroom
coming out of his chamber. 7. This former part of the Psalm is interpreted by
the Fathers mystically of Christ, whose motion and alacrity to run his race
from the womb to the grave, from heaven to earth, and from earth to heaven; I
hope you will not say, are to be understood in reference to the false opinion
of the Vulgar. 8. He is not compared to a Giant, in respect of his bigness in
the morning, (as you say) no more then he is to a dwarf, in respect of his
littleness at noone; but in respect of the indefatigable swiftness of his
motion, he is compared to a mighty runner: for there is no mention made of a
Giant in the Hebrew text, neither was it fit to compare him to a Giant. 9. Nor
does David allude to the Vulgar opinion, when he speaks of the ends of Heaven;
for in a round globe or circle there are no ends: but he speaks with relation
to the Hemisphere, which you must needs yield has ends; for it terminates and
ends in the Horizon, called therefore Finitor. Besides, in the Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin texts, it is not said, the ends; but the remotest parts of Heaven:
and so you cannot deny but some parts are remoter from us then other parts. 10.
Neither has the Scripture any reference to the common mistake, as if the Sun
were actually hot, when it says, ( nothing is hid from the heat thereof:)
these Philosophers who deny any actual heat in the Sun, yet say the Sun is
hot: and I doubt not but you have said so many a time, and yet you have no
reference to any actual heat in the Sun. Do not you use to call
cinnamon water, and such like distilled waters, hot waters? and yet they are
actually cold. Philosophers tell us that Saturn is cold, and yet they do not
think that he is the subject of cold, but the cause only. The Scripture
says, That none can avoid the anger of God; and yet you will not say that this
passion is in God. The Sun then is hot, not by any heat in him, but by
calefaction from him.

2. When the Scripture says, Eccles. 1.
The Sun rises and goes down; this is not spoken in relation to the
circumference which is equally distant from the Center; but in reference to the
Horizon as you confess, or rather to the situation of Judea; and so of other
Countries: and in this respect, the Sun does not only seem, but does in
very deed rise and fall to the Inhabitants. For does not the Sun truly
ascend when he comes to your meridian, and truly descend, when he removes from
it? Does he not truly ascend and descend, to those who have him for their
Zenith in their meridian? Astronomers tell us that there is a true and real
rising and falling of the Stars, as well as an apparent; and then are they
not truly said to rise and fall, when they do truly ascend above, and
descend beneath the Horizon? If the Sun does not truly ascend and descend,
then the shadows do not truly increase and decrease; and so our Sun-dialls
do not truly show us the hours of the day, but in show only, and in
appearance; but we see that the shadow still decreaseth, as the luminous body
ascends, and increases as that descends. Virgils Tytirus can tell you so
much: Majoresque cadunt altis de montibus umbrae,
Et Sol discadens crescentes duplicat umbras.


3. Josh. 12. 14.
Joshua says, That the Sun stood still in the midst of heaven: Now, Heaven
(you say) has no midst but the Center, and so this is also spoken in reference
to the Vulgar opinion. Answ. By the Center, either you must understand the
Earth, or the Sun; the Earth indeed is in the midst of the world, but not in
the midst of Heaven; for it is not there at all: if it were, Christ needed not
to ascend to Heaven, being in the midst of it, when he was on the earth. Wicked
men then would have the best of it; for as they have the largest possessions on
earth, so should they have the largest shares in heaven. If by the Center you
mean the Sun, then you speak in reference to the Vulgar opinion; for the
Center is in the midst of Heaven, the Sun is the Center; therefore the Sun is
in the midst of Heaven, and so Joshua says. 2. By the Heaven he does not
understand the whole celestial Globe, but the Hemisphere; and so this having
its Horizon or outmost limits and extremes, must also have its middle: and
what can that else be, but the Meridian passing through the Zenith? Thus then
it is demonstrable that whatsoever is equally distant from the extremes is in
the midsts; but the Sun being in the Zenith or Meridian, is equally distant
from the extremes: therefore the Sun being in the Zenith, is in the midst of
Heaven. 3. The Hebrew Doctors tell us, that when the Sun stood still, he was
then in the Summers solstice, being the Tropicke of Cancer; from which Judea is
not far distant: and so in that regard also Joshua might truly say, that the
Sun was in the midst of Heaven, being then over their heads. 4. If it be a
vulgar opinion to say, that the Sun is in the midst of Heaven; then all the
chief learned both in Divinity, Philosophy, and Poetry, speak as the
Vulgar do; for they use the same phrase: hence came the word Meridian,
Meridies, Midday, Midnight. If the Sun were not every day in the midst of
Heaven; how should the Artificial day be divided into equal parts? Therefore
Clavins tells us, that the Meridian is called by Astronomers, In cap. 2.
Spharajaero B^se.
the midst of Heaven; the line of the midst of Heaven, etc. And the Prince of
Poets speaks both of the Sun and Moon in the midst of Heaven: Iam medium
Phoebus conscenderat igneus orbem. Geor. 4.

Phoebe -- AEn. 10.

Noctivago curra medium pulsabat Olympum.


5. I would know of you if all Vulgar opinions be false. That (I hope) you will
not say: If then the Vulgar speak sometime truth, why may not the Scripture
speak truth with the Vulgar? or why should truth be of less esteem, because
vulgar? it should be otherwise, for, Bonum quo communius eo melius.

It is ridiculous to think with you, that the Sun was over Gibeon only in
appearance and vulgar conceit: For indeed the Sun was truly over Gibeon,
although he was no more over that then over other places. Suppose you were in
Paul's Church, and diverse others were there too; is the roof of that Church
over your head only in appearance and vulgar conceit, because it is over other
heads as well as yours; or because it is much larger then your head? Or must
that phrase be thought improper, the roof is over your head? 2. The figure
Eclipsis is frequent in Scripture, when there some words wanting in a phrase
which are to be supplied: as, 2 Samuel 6. 6. Vzza put forth to the Arc, is
understood, his hand. So 2 Chro. 10. 11. I with Scorpions, is understood, will
chastise you. So here, Sun stand still in Gibeon, is understood, while we are
fighting? and so the words must be rendered: Stand still whilst we are
fighting in Gibeon; for not only the city, but its territories where Joshua's
army was, are called by the same name. So, Moon in the valley of Ajalon, is
understood, go not down.

These words, ( There was no day like that before it, or after it) you say, are
not to be understood absolutely, but in respect of the vulgar opinion; because
there be longer days under the Pole. Answ. Joshua spoke not this with any
reference to vulgar opinions, but to the Climate in which he lived, and where
the miracle was showed; it was the longest day that ever was in those parts;
and what reason had he to except the days under the Poles, being nothing to
his purpose? When Christ says, There be twelve hours in the day, his words
cannot be understood absolutely; for there be more hours where the Horizon
has any obliquity; and the higher the Pole is elevated above the Horizon, the
more hours have the days in Summer; yet his words are true, in sphera recta,
and in those Countries that are under and near the Line. And what will you
conclude from this? that because these and such like phrases, are not to be
understood absolutely; therefore this phrase (the Sun moves,) is not to be
understood absolutely? But I will reply. These phrases are true in respect of
the Climate they were spoken of; ergo this phrase also, (the Sun moves) is
true, in regard of the Climate it is spoken of. If then Judea be the place
where the Earth is stable, and the Sun moves, your opinion is quite overthrown
by the force of your own instance: for if the Earth be immovable in any
Climate, and the Sun moveable, we have that which we desire: it lies on you to
show how, and why the Sun should move there, and not elsewhere; why and how the
earth moves here and not there. 2. These words of Joshua's, perhaps have no
reference to the length of the day, although the vulgar Translation read it so;
but rather to the greatness of the miracle, the Heavens hearkening to the
voice of a mortal man. Joshua acknowledges, That never any such day was
before or since; that the Lord hearkened to the voice of a man: Esaias 38. 8.
For so the Hebrew and Greek read it.

4. The Scripture says, That the Sun returned ten degrees in the dyall of
Achaz; this you will have to be understood of the shadow only: 2 King. 20. 11.
So I perceive the Sun and the shadow, light and darkness, is all one with
you. Take heed of the woe denounced against them that call light darkness, and
darkness light: Why may you not in other places, as well as in this, by the Sun
understand the shadow: as, At Joshua's command the Sun stood still; that is,
the shadow stood. We shall shine as the Sun, that is, we shall be dark as the
shadow? 2. You mince the miracle, and the power of God too much; for, is it not
as easy for him to make the Sun go back, as to make the shadow return?
Wherein is his absolute Sovereignty seen, and his transcendent puissance, but
in the obedience of all creatures, even of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, to his
commands? St. De Civit. lib. 21. c. 8.
Austin, disputing against the Gentiles, shows them, That Nature is not the
supreme guider of all things; and he instanceth in the standing, and going
back of the Sun. His Argument had bin of no force, had not the Sun moved at
all, as you think. 3. If the shadow moved only without the Sun, then either
that shadow moved it self, which is ridiculous to think; or it was moved by the
motion of the dyall, or of the gnomon and index of the dyall: Now, if the dyall
or gnomon was moved by God or an Angel, tell us where you read it. Why might it
not as well be turned about with a man's hand, or by some engine, and so this
would have bin a suspected miracle; or else the shadow returned according to
the motion of some other luminous body, and so this were to multiply miracles
needlessly; for 1. that light must be created for that purpose. 2. It must have
a particular motion of its own. 3. It must be a greater light then that of the
Sun, otherwise the shadow had not been discernible. 4. It must either be
united to some other light, or else vanish; all which was needless: is it not
safer then to adhere to Gods word? from which when we wander, we fall into many
by-ways. And whereas you tell us, That the miracle is proposed only
concerning the shadow: I answer, we are not to consider so much what is
proposed, as what was effected. God uses to effect more, then he proposes,
and to perform more then he promises. 2. You say, There would have been some
intimation of the extraordinary length of the day, as it is in that of Joshua:
I answer, there was no such reason, why the length of this day should be
mentioned; because this day was much shorter then Joshua's, in respect it fell
out in the winter solstice; whereas that of Vide in Iosuam Munster. Lyram, etc.
Joshua was in the summer solstice, as the Hebrew Doctors observe. 3. Had the
Sun returned, This had been (you say) a greater miracle then those which were
done on more solemn occasions. Answ. God regards not the solemnity of
occasions, in showing of his miracles; if he had, Christ had never wrought his
miracles in obscure and remote places, as hills and deserts: He would rather
have showed his transfiguration in Jerusalem, to all the world, then upon Mount
Tabor, only to three Disciples. He uses his miracles, as he did the loaves;
he bestowed seven loaves on four thousand men, and but five loaves upon five
thousand: on small occasions God sometimes produces great miracles, and upon
great occasions sometimes he shows none. 2. We must look rather to the
fitness of the miracle, then to the solemnity of the occasion: the Sun
represented the King, who was the life and glory of his kingdom. God would let
him and all men see, that as he only has power to rule, and alter the course
of the Sun; so it is he only, that rules and turns the hearts of Kings: the
Sun was obedient to Gods command, so should the King be. As the Sun moves to
and fro, so does the shadow; and as the King is affected, so is the people. The
going down of the Sun brings sadness on the earth, so does the death of a
King. 3. The occasion of this miracle was not so small as you take it; the
sickness, prayers and tears of a good King; the prayers of a great Prophet,
the affection that God would show his people, in delivering them from the hand
of Assyria; and the love that he carried to such a King, that rather then his
faith shall fail, the Sun shall change his course; and the lesson that he
would teach us, that we should honor Kings, whom God does so much honor; as
to make the King of Planets stand still at the request of one, to go back at
the petition of another: these I say were the occasions of this miracle. 4. The
going back of the Sun is not a greater miracle (as you say) then his
standing still; for the standing of the Red Sea, was as great a miracle, as the
going back of Jordan. 5. The shadow in the history of the Kings is only
mentioned, because the shadows moving was more visible then the Suns. 6. This
sign (you say) appeared not in the Sun, because the wonder was done in the
land. Answ. The sign was in the Sun, and that the Babylonians saw; they sent
to know the wonder, that is, what strange effect it had done in the land of
Judea. There be oftentimes strange Prodigies in the Air, which cause strange
effects on the Earth. If I should send to Italy or Germany, to know of some
strange Prodigies seen there in the Air; and if I should enquire what wonder
or effect these had wrought in the land, or in these countries; would you
conclude that there was no prodigious sign at all in the Air? The Wisemen saw
a new Star, which showed to them the miraculous birth of a new King; because
they came to Judea, to see the wonder done in the land: you will therehence
conclude, that there was no sign at all in the Heaven, neither Star, nor
motion of a Star. 7. You doubt of the truth of the Suns going back,
because no mention of it in ancient Writers: But if you will doubt or deny all
passages and miracles of Scripture, which are not mentioned by the Heathen
writers, our Bible will be reduced to a small handful: they mention not the
standing of the Sun, will you deny that too? But you reply, That they had
some light of it, by alluding to it in the Fable of Phaeton, when the Sun was
so irregular in his course, that he burned some part of the world: but indeed,
this seems rather to allude to the Suns going back, then to his standing; for
an irregular course is more like a retrograde motion, then a standing still.
But it is most likely that this Fable alludes to the conflagration of Sodom,
and the other cities of the plain: 2 Chr. 32. 31
but however the Gentiles were not ignorant of this miracle, as may be seen by
that message sent to Ezechias by the Babylonians, who were then the only
Astronomers. And Saint Austin proves, that this miracle was known to the
Heathen, by that Verse in Virgil: Sistere aquam fluviis, and vertere sidera
retro: Ascribing both the standing of the Red Sea, De civit. Dei l. 21. c. 8.
and of Jordan; and the going back of the Sun, to Art, Magic, which the
Scripture attributes to the power of God. But Ioseph's in his first book
against Apion, will tell you the reasons, why the Gentile writers made little
mention of the Jewish affairs and miracles; partly out of ignorance; as knowing
little or nothing of the Jews; because they were not a people given to
travel, or merchandising, and dwelt not in maritime towns: and partly out of
malice to that Nation, they concealed Gods love to them, and the wonders done
amongst them; and indeed most of the ancient Records by injury of time, fury of
fire and waters, and neglect of those that should have kept them are lost; both
amongst the Gentiles and the Jews, as those Books of the Kings of Judah and
Israel, which are only named in Scripture.

You reject the testimony of L. 2.
Herodotus concerning the returning of the Sun, (which he calls the rising of
the Sun in the West;) because he exceeds in the computation of years: but by
this means you will wrong all Historians, if you question the substance of the
story for an error in the circumstance: an error in the computation of time
takes not away the truth of the thing it self. The China people reck on an
incredible number of years from the Creation of the world; yet you will not
deny but that they had some knowledge of the Creation, and that their relation
of it is true. The Chaldeans and Egyptians reckon 432. thousand years before
the Flood; will you therefore say, they had no knowledge of the Flood? The
Septuagints reckon from Adam to the Flood, 2262. years; whereas the Hebrews
number only 1656. years; and yet the Fathers reject not the Septuagints
testimony concerning the Flood; but most of them also follow their supputation.
And how do you know but that Herodotus number of years may agree well enough
with ours; seeing diverse Countries did reckon their years diversely. The
Arcadian year consisted but of three months; the Acarnanian of six: the Roman
at first but of ten. The Egyptian year was various; for sometime it consisted
of thirteen months, sometime but of four, and sometime of three only, and of
two, and of one only sometime. Therefore doubtless Herodotus years were
either Arcadian, or Egyptian; and so compare them with our years, you will
find that there is no such odds as you make: and that in speaking of the
Suns retrogradation, he has not reference to the times that never were. And
whereas you say that this miracle happened when Hesiod flourished, you fail in
your Chronology; for Hesiod was above a hundred years before this miracle was
effected, if you will believe Gentbrard and the other Chronologers. Chron. l. 1.


You are a wise Philosopher to tell us, that the shadow (as well as the heat
and beams) is the effect of the Sun. Can darkness be the effect of light? a
privation is a defect, not an effect: if the shadow were an effect at all, it
should be the effect of the dark and condensate body, but not of the luminous.
Take heed that the light which is in you be not darkness, for then how great
will that darkness be?

CHAP. III.
1. The Scripture does not speak according to vulgar opinion, when it calls
the Moon a great light, for so it is. 2. Not when it speaks of waters above
the Heavens, for such there are. 3. Nor when it calls the Stars innumerable,
for so they are. 4. Nor when it mentions by circumference of the brasin Sea to
be thirty cubits, and the diameter ten, for so it was. Why the lesser number
is sometime omitted. 5. Nor in saying the earth is founded on the waters, which
is true. 6. The right and left side of heaven how understood, and how the
heaven is (...), and of the Intelligences. 7. The Scripture speaks properly
in attributing understanding to the heart.The Galenists opinion discussed. 8.
Of ova aspidum, and the Vipers eggs, how understood. 9. The Aspe or Adler how
he stops his ear. 10. Of the North and South wind in Scripture. 11. The Sun
shall be truly darkened, the Moon turned to blood, and the stars shall fall,
amp;c. 12. Of the Winds whence they come, etc. 13. The sea the only cause of
springs. 14. The thunder is truly Gods voice. 15. The 7. Stars.
IN this Proposition you go about to show us, That the Scripture in natural
things conformes it self to our conceived errors, and that it speaks of
things not as they are in themselves, but as they appear. And yet the
testimony of Vallesius which you bring to help you, overthrowes you; for,
Prooem. Philes sacr.
Whatsoever (says he) is in Scripture concerning Nature, is most true, as
proceeding from the God of Nature, from whom nothing could be hid. If the
Scripture expressions of natural things be most true, then they cannot agree
with our erroneous conceits; for truth and error agree like light and
darkness: and you confess your self that all natural points in Scripture
are certain and infallible; but in that sense (say you) wherein they were first
intended, and that is the sense that you give; for you only are acquainted with
the first intended sense of the holy Ghost, and so we must take it upon your
bare word that that only is the true sense which your side delivers: and I
pray you what heresy may not be maintained by Scripture this way? for
heretics will also say, That all things in Scripture are true, certain, and
evident, in that sense which was at first intended; but when it comes to the
point, it is the sense which they themselves have invented obtruded.

The first instance which you bring for proof of your assertion, is from the
Moon, which is called in Scripture, One of the great lights; and yet by
infallible observation (say you) may be proved to be less then any visible
star. Answ. Other Astronomers will prove as strongly as you can, that Mercury
is the least of all stars; shall we believe you, or them? 2. Though I should
yield that the Moon were a small star in bulk, will it follow that therefore
it is a lesser light? Must the light be intended, as the body is extended? I
have seen a fire yield less light then a candle; Mercury, which you say is
bigger then the Moon, has not the hundredth part of that light which is in the
Moon: so that if Mercury and the Moon should change places, yet the light of
the Moon would not appear much lesser, nor the light of Mercury much bigger:
the eye which is the light of the body, is not the clearer because the bigger;
there is not so much light in an Ox eye, as in an Eagle's: Divines hold, That
the light which was created the first day, was no other then the light of the
Sun diffused over the hemispheare; the whole hemispheare is much bigger, I
hope, then the body of the Sun; and yet the world, I think, was not more
enlightened the first day, then the fourth, when that diffused light was
contracted and compacted in a narrower compass. 3. To what end should there be
so much light in each star exceeding the light of the Moon? They received
their light not for themselves, but for us; (except you will say there be
innumerable worlds, which must be enlightened as well as ours) but we receive
by many degrees more light from one half of the Moon, then we do from all
the stars together. Surely God made nothing in vain; but in vain has the
stars so much light, if man, for whom they were made, receive no sight nor
benefit from this light. 4. Astronomicall positions concerning the magnitude
and height of each star, on which they ground their dark conjecture of
light, are toys and fictions of their own heads: they make false Maxims, and
on these they build confused Babels of their own conceits: yield to them that
they have the semidiameter of the earth, and then Graeculus esuriens ad Coelum
jusseris ibit; Every smatterer will exactly tell you the height and bigness of
each star, Haud secus ac si oculo rubricam dirigat uno. 5. I will tell you
what St. Austine says of this Question, and of the Astronomers of his time: De
Genes.ad liter. l. 2. cap. 16.
Let them (says he) talk of heaven, who have but small interest in heaven;
we confidently believe that these lights are greater then others, which the
Scripture commends to be such. Let them give us leave to trust our own eyes;
it is manifest that they give more light to the earth then all the rest do,
etc. The Scripture then, and our own senses assure us that these are the great
lights. If you say that each star is a bigger light in it self then the
Moon, I will believe it when I see it; or have talked with one of your world in
the Moon, who perhaps can inform us better, then any reason you can bring to
evince us.

2. We grant that Moses tells us of waters above the firmament, but we deny
that this is in reference to an erroneous conceit (as you say)but rather we
hold, That it is an erroneous conceit to forsake the true fountains of
knowledge, to dig cracked cisternes; to prefer any opinion to the plain
text of Scripture. What a forced exposition is it, to call clouds and rain
below in the air, and which are oftentimes lower then the tops of hills, to
call these I say, Psalm. 148.
waters above the heaven, of which the Psalmist speaks; whereas these waters
are so far below the heaven? And how can any conceive, that the second day
there was rain below in the air, and that God by the Firmament did separate
that rain from the waters of the sea? And though I should yield that the air
is called heaven sometime Synecdochically; and that rain or clouds being in
the air, may be said to be in heaven: yet I cannot yield, that therefore they
are above the heaven, for to be above, and to be in, differ much: therefore I
hold with the ancient Doctors of the Church, That there be waters above the
heaven, which is no more incredible (says St. Austine) that there may be
waters in the upper part of the great world, De civitat. l. 11. cap. 34.
then that there may be waters in a man's head, which is the upper part of the
little world. If we look (says St. Ambrose) 1. On the greatness and
omnipotency of God in creating the world. Hexam. l. 2. cap. 3.
2. On his ordinary power in preserving the world, sustaining all things by the
word of his might, by which he holds up the sea that it may not drown the low
land. 3. On his miraculous power in causing the waters of the Red Sea to stand
upon an heap, and Jordan to go back: which miracle he made visible, that thou
may believe these things which are invisible; then why should we doubt of
these waters which be above the heavens? If any ask me what is the nature,
use, or end of those waters, and how they are there; St. Austine shall answer
for me: De Genes. ad lit. l. 2. cap. 6.
Quomodo, aut quales ibi aquae sint, etc. how, or what kind of waters these be,
is uncertain; Genesis 15. 5.
but that there be waters there we doubt not, because greater is the authority
of this Scripture, then the capacity of all humane wit.

3. When the Scripture speaks of innumerable stars, you say, Psalm. 147. 4.
that is to be understood according to the vulgar opinion: Ier. 35. 22.
but I say, that it is the opinion of the best Learned, Inc. 1. sphae.
that they cannot be mumbred, even Clavius, whom you cite for you, confesses,
That though Astronomers have reduced the most conspicuous stars to the number
of 1022. yet that there are multitudes of stars, besides these, that cannot
be told, Hoc nunquam negabo, (says he) I will never deny this: and he says
also, That God so enlarged Abraham's sight, that he made him see all the
stars of heaven. If then you look in a clear winters night toward the
North; if you look on the milkie way, if you consider the Stars toward the
South pole, not discernable by us; De civit. Dei l. 16. c. 23.
you must confess that the Scripture speaks properly, and not according to
vulgar opinion, when it says, That the Stars are innumerable: therefore
says Saint Austin, Whosoever brags that he has comprehended and set down the
whole number of the Stars, as Aratus and Eudoxus did; Eos libri hujus
contemnit authoritas; the authority of Scripture contemnes them. But when you
tell us, That the Israelites did far execed the number of the Stars; that
is nothing to our purpose: besides we can easily answer, that God did not
compare Abraham's carnal seed to the Stars, but his spiritual seed. His
carnal seed is compared to the sand and dust; and so writes Saint Austin.
Again, when you have found out the true number of all the Stars, August.
ibid.
then tell us, whether they or Abraham's seed be greatest in number.

4. You prove that the holy Ghost speaks not exactly of natural secrets; for
he sets not down the exact measure or proportion of Solomon's brazen sea. Answ.
I had thought that a brazen vessel had been the work of art, and not a secret
of nature: that Geometrical proportions are secrets of nature, is a maxim
only in your Philosophy. 2. I had said that Josephus held this sea not to be
perfectly round; You reply, That then the disproportion will be greater, and
that Scripture which calls it round, is to be believed before Josephus. I
answer, that I alleged not Josephus to prefer him in my belief to the
Scripture, but to show that there could not be an exact proportion, between
the diameter and the circumference, in a vessel not exactly round; and yet the
Scripture does not say, it was exactly round, but only round. Every thing that
is called round is not of an exact round figure; Rev. 4.
an egg is called round; Psalm. 125.
The Rainbow is said to be round about the Throne. And the hills to be round
about Jerusalem. And children to sit round about the table etc. Which you will
not say are to be understood of an exact round figure. But indeed I know not
how to please you; if I allege Scripture, you answer, that Scripture speaks
not exactly of natural secrets; that it accomodates it self to the errors of
our conceits; that it speaks according to the opinion of the vulgar, etc. If I
allege Josephus or any other Author, then you tell us, that Scripture is to be
believed before Josephus; so that you are more slippery then any eele. 3. I had
said, that the Scripture for brevities sake in numbering, used only to mention
the greater number, and to omit the letter; as Jacobs family were seaventy
souls, which indeed were seaventy five; and many other such passages I
alleged. You answer, that this confirms your Argument; For the Scripture is
so far from speaking exactly of Philosophical secrets, that in ordinary
numbering, it does conform to common customs. Answ. 1. Show us that this kind
of numbering, was the common custom. 2. Will it follow: The Scripture does not
exactly number, sometimes for brevities sake; ergo, it never speaks exactly of
Philosophical points? 3. If this consequence be good, then it will follow,
that you never speak exactly of Philosophical points: for you sometimes in
mentioning of numbers, omit the lesser number; as when you say seaventy
Interpreters, whereas there were seaventy two. Lastly, I answer, that there is
great odds between an historical narration of the measure of a vessel, as
it was taken by the workmen, who are not still exact Geometricians: and a
plain and constant affirmation of a Philosophical truth. He that wrote the
Books of the Kings, sets down the circumference of the brazen sea to be thirty
cubits, and the diameter to be ten; for so doubtless the measure was taken
by the workmen: but when the Scripture says, The earth is immovable; it
records this as a Philosophical or Theological maxim; and not as an
historical passage. Concerning the ends and sides of the earth, and of heaven
we will speak anon.

5. That the earth is founded on the waters, is not the opinion of common
people, but rather the contrary; for they are led by sense as you use to say:
and their sense shows them, that the seas are above the earth; and reason will
teach them, That a lighter body cannot be the foundation of a heavier. But you
bring a ridiculous reason, why some think the earth to be upon the water:
Because when they have traveled as far as they can, they are stopped by the
sea: By the same reason, if you were traveling and stopped by a river, or lake;
you will conclude that the earth is upon that river or lake. But your opinion
is true in some sense; for when we are stopped by the sea, lake or river, we get
up into a boat or ship, and then indeed earth is above water: but I think you
was asleep when this watrish reason dropped from your pen. I have already showed
how the earth is said to be upon the sea; Cons. Lansberg. l. ^. sect. 1. 6. 9.
that is, (by the Hebrew phrase which wants comparatives) that it is higher
then the sea; and that it is in some parts of it above the seas, floods, and
rivers, that are in the concavities of the earth.

6. You speak much of the right and left side of Heaven, and dextro Mercurio;
you have conveyed a great part of your discourse out of Clavius, without
acknowledgement: but quorsum perditio bac? This waste of words might have been
better spared, as being impertinent. For that place of Job 23.8, 9.
Job speaks indeed of the right and lest hand, but not a word of heaven:
neither is there any right or lest sidein heaven, nor needs there to be. For
the left side is more imperfect and weak then the right, which cannot be said
of heaven, being an uniforme, and every way perfect body. And how can there be
a right and left side, where there is neither sense nor life, nor distinction
of organicall parts? Therefore, in trees and plants, there is no right or left
side, though they have life; much less can this be Aristotle's opinion in this
point is delivered upon wrong grounds, supposing the Orbs to be living
creatures, and assisted with Intelligences: I confess that he calls the heaven
(...), as having a soul or spirit, which he calls Intelligence, we Angel, by
which the heaven is moved: but he does not hereby suppose the heaven to be a
living creature; for the Angels are not informing sormes of their Orbs, but
assisting. When the Angel was in the poole of Bethesda, and moved the water,
you will not infer upon this, that the poole was a living creature:
whatsoever is (...), animatum, that is, has a soul or spirit in it; is not
therefore a living creature: for so you may say a pair of bellows, or wind
instruments of music, are living creatures; for wind, breath and air, are
called sometimes souls: (...) or anima, or animus, is common to them all.
Quicquid ignes, animaeque valent: Phrygias audire animas, are spoken of
bellows, and musical instruments; so, Phrygius cornus liquida canit anima:
And yet I will not deny, but metonymically, heaven may be called a living
creature; as being that which gives life to living creatures: or by Analogy,
it may be said to live, in respect of the Angel which supplies the room of a
soul, not in Aristotle to say, that the heavens were assisted with
Intelligences, seeing they cannot move themselves being simple substances;
neither can natural form give such multiplicitie of motions, as are in the
heavens; neither are they moved by other bodies; for these bodies at last must
be moved by spirits; neither do natural bodies move naturally in their place,
but, to their place: now the heavens are in their place. Of this opinion were
not only the Philosophers, but also the Christian Doctors: De cognit. ver.
vitae.c. 6.
heavenly bodies are moved by the ministry of Angels, says Saint Austin.
Origin says, that the Angels have the charge of all things, of earth, and
water, air, and fire: and perhaps Saint Hom. 8. in Ierem. Epist. 59. ad
Aritum. Sect. 1. c. 6. Sect. 1. c. 1,4,5.
Hierome mistook his meaning, when he attributes to Origin this error, of
assisting reasonable souls to the heavens; he meant the Angels. And Thomas, by
that Spirit, that compasses the world by its motion, Eccles. 1. 6.
understands an Angel. It were strange to think that so many Angels should be
assigned by God for the earth; and for inferior officers toward men, and none
should have the moving of the heavens: but of the Angels moving their spheres,
I have spoken already against Mr. Carpenter.

7. The Spirit (you say) Prove. 8.5. 10.8.
applies himself to the common tenent generally received heretofore, in
attributing wisdom and understanding to the heart; whereas reason and
discursive faculties, have the chief residence in the head. Answ. 1. Eccles.
1.13, 16, 17. and 8. 5.
How know you that this was the general tenent in Solomon's days? From what
stories of these times have you had this? The word ( heretofore) must signify
the time before Solomon: I doubt me, if you should be put to it, you could not
prove that the opinion of the understandings residence in the heart, was the
common tenent in the world before Solomon; but I perceive you would have it to
be so, because Solomon places understanding in the heart: as if the Scripture
set down no positive Doctrines, but what were common tenants, whether true or
false. 2. The word ( heart) here may signify the soul or mind; Homer, (...),
eating their souls, that is, their hearts with cares. Odyss. 1.
And in Plutarch, (...), is to be without reason or understanding: vecordes and
excordes, are men whose minds are distempered. So in Saint 1 Pet. 3.4.
Peter, By the hidden man of the heart, is meant, the renovation of the mind.
If then by the heart is understood the mind or soul, you must needs grant,
that it is a tenent no less true then common, that the understanding is in the
heart, whether you take it for a part, or for a power, or for a faculty of the
soul. 3. This was not a common tenent many years after Solomon; Empedocles,
nor the Epicures, nor the Egyptian Philosophers, nor the Arabians, nor the
Academicks, held the understanding to be in the heart; but some in the head,
some in the breast, some in all the body. Herodotus affirmed it to be in the
ears; Blemor in the eyes; Strato in the eyebrows: only the Peripatetickes
and Stoics, placed it in the heart. 4. The holy Ghost attributes understanding
to the heart; not because it was a common, but because a true tenent: for
howsoever Galen and his Sectaries hold the contrary, yet it is certain, that
the heart is the true seat of the understanding. For 1. The will is in the
heart, therefore the understanding is there also; such is the dependency of
these two faculties, the one from the other, that the will is never without the
understanding; and indeed these two are but one in essence; for the will is
nothing else, but the understanding dilated, extended, enlarged to the desire
and fruition of that object which it apprehends. 2. The Apostle says, That we
believe with the heart, (except you will have this also to be spoken according
to opinion, and not according to truth) but without understanding, we cannot
believe; Secund. Sec. 9.4. artic. 2.
For to believe (says Thomas) is the act of understanding, moved by the will
to assent. 3. The heart is the original subject of sense and motion, and
consequently of understanding; which cannot be in us without sense and motion.
Oportet intelligentem speculari phantasmata. Arist.
4. Understanding is in the soul, the soul in the spirits, the spirits in the
blond, and the blood is originally in the heart; which though it be in the
liver as in a cisterne, and in the veins as conduit-pipes, yet it is in the
heart, as in the fountain. 5. The animal spirits in the brain, in which they
say the understanding is, are both generated of, and preserved by the vital
spirits of the heart, being conveyed thither by certain arteries, small
strings, or fibrae. 6. In a sudden fear, which is the passion of the heart,
the understanding is much darkened and disturbed. 7. Lib.d cord.
Hippocrates every way a better man then Galen affirms this truth: (...):
Men's, mind or understanding is in the left ventricle of the heart. That Book,
De morbo sacro, which goes under the name of Hippocrates, which contradicts
this truth, is justly affirmed by Galen to be none of his. 8. Though I should
yield to the Galenists, that the understanding is in the brain; yet I will
yield that it is there only instrumentally and secondarily, and in respect of
its act or exercise; for originally, principally, and in respect of its
faculty, it is in the heart only: neither would there be any exercise of
understanding in the brain, if it were not from the influence which it
receives from the heart. Neither is this strange, that the act should be in
one part, and the faculty in another; for the faculty of seeing is in the
brain, and yet the act of seeing is in the eye: so that though the eye were
lost, yet the faculty would remain still in the brain. As for any thing that
the Galenists can say against this, it is of no moment; for although the brain
be hurt, wounded, or inflamed, yet the faculty of understanding is not lost,
though the act or exercise be hindered. Besides, there is a frenzy or
alienation of the mind, upon a hurt or inflammation of the Diaphragma, as well
as of the brain; therefore, the ancient Physicians called this muscule, (...),
because it being hurt, the mind was hurt: the remedies applied to the head by
which the brain is cured, do not argue that the understanding is there; but
that there it does exercise it self: and yet remedies are applied sometimes to
those parts where the disease is not, but in some other place; but this I leave
to Physicians. I remember that Philo will have the understanding which he
compares to a King, to be in the head; because there be all the senses, as the
Kings guard: but he is deceived, for the guard may be in the same house with
the King, but not in his bedchamber. The guard or outward senses are in the
outward court, the inward senses are in the privy chamber, but the King
himself is in the heart, as in his bedchamber. If any reply that the head is
uppermost, and therefore the worthiest part of the body, and fittest for the
King to be there; I answer no; for the garret or upper part of the house is for
the servants to lodge in; the King ought to be in the most inward and safest
part of his palace. It is evident then by what we have said, that the holy
Ghost by placing the understanding in the heart, did speak according to truth,
and not to common opinion; and therefore to write that the spirit of truth who
leads us into all truth, speaks rather according to opinion then truth; is
a note blacker then your ink, unfit to fall from the pen of a Christian. For
even allegories, tropes, figures and parables, are truths: but I impute this
slip rather to negligence in you, then malice.

8. The vipers eggs will not help you: Esaias 59. 5.
Ova aspidum ruperunt, they have broken the vipers eggs, as you translate it:
but 1. The viper has no eggs; for whereas other Serpents lay eggs, the viper
excludes young vipers and not eggs: therefore called vipera, quasi vivipara:
Vipers eggs are such chimera's, as your world in the Moon. 2. The aspis and
the viper are of different kinds; to say AElian, Pliny, and others who have
written the stories of these creatures, and Physicians who make treakle of
vipers, not of aspes; if you will not believe me. It was a viper, not an aspe,
that leaped upon Saint Paul's hand: they were aspes, not vipers, Cleopatra
applied to her breasts. 3. This Scripture does not allude to that common
fabulous story of the viper, as you say, breaking his passage through the
females bowels: but it compares the counsels and plots of wicked men to the eggs
of the aspes, which being white and fair to the eye, are venomous within, and
cannot be broken without the indangering and poisoning of him that breaks
them: so wicked men's smooth counsels and plots, howsoever specious in their
pretenses, are notwithstanding venomous and deadly in their

Aristotle, Theophrastus, Herodotus, AElian, Plutarch, Horapollus, Pliny, Saint
Basil, Exercit. 201
Saint Hierome, Isiodor, and diverse others. Scaliger indeed writes, that he saw
a viper bring forth her young ones without hurt; and perhaps Angelus, Brodaeus,
and some others have seen the like: but what though we have seen some unhurt?
it is a hard skirmish where none scapes. To infer that no vipers are killed
by their young ones, because some are not, is as much as if you would say, no
women are sick or pained in their childe-birth, because some are not. Thus you
see that you can make no treakle or antidote of your viper for the
strengthening of your opinion; the very names which are given by the Greeks
and Latins to this creature, show that this is no fiction; for (...) quasi
(...), having much pain in bringing forth; and vipera, quasi vi pari^ns. But
we will shake off this viper from our pen, as Saint Paul did that viper in
Malta from his hand; and if your viper has bit us, let us see if your aspe
(for so naturalists do write) will cure us.

9. The aspe (which you translate the adder) stops his ears, (says the
Psalmist) Psa. 58.4,5.
against the voice of the charmer. This you say is fabulous, if we may believe
many naturalists, yet the holy Ghost alludes to it because it was the general
opinion of those days. Answ. You are a great Antiquary, for you know the
common opinions that were in David's days, and you tell us not out of what
records or manuscripts you have this; but indeed I will not believe you, nor
your many naturalists, whom you, should have named, and showed us their
reasons, why they think this to be fabulous. 2. You will not (I think) hold
Irenaeus, Austin and Epiphanius of heresies, you shall find how that sect of
the Valentinians or Gnostickes called (from worshipping of the Serpents)
Ophits, did teame and teach their Serpents to come out of their holes or boxes
where they were kept, to crawle on their altars; eo lick their oblations, to
wrap themselves about their eucharist, and so return to their holes: the like
is recorded by Virgil of a Serpent on the altar which AEntas erected on his
fathers tomb: Tandem inter pateras and levia pocula Serpent, AEn. 5.

Libavitque dapes, etc.
I will not speak of Olympias her Serpent, and of many others. 5. May not
Satan who has still abused the Serpent to superstition, Eva. I could tell you
strange stories of the Serpent Epidaurius at Rome; of that Serpent that barked
at the ejection of Tarquinius, and of others recorded by grave Historians,
which I will not account fabulous, though you perhaps will; because I know that
Satan by permission can do strange things. 6. It is manifest that beasts,
birds, and fishes, are diversely 7. In Psalm. 57. and 67.
yet (as St. Austin says) the Spirit of God knows better then all men do; who
had not recorded this had it not been true; so that what is by men accounted an
opinion, in Scripture it is truth, says the same Father: by all this you may
see that the holy Ghost speaks not according to men's opinions, but according
to truth; and though you should erect your two Serpents over your door, Pinge
duos angues.
as the Gentiles used to do over their temples, yet they will not privilege
your opinion.

10. The North wind which the Scripture calls cold and dry, the Southwinde
which is hot and moist, are phrases as you say which do not contain any
absolute general truth: for though the North-winde to us on this side of the
line be cold and dry, yet to those beyond the other tropicke it is hot and
moist. Answ. There is no absolute general truth in most of the sublunarie
works of nature, for they are subject to much change; and especially the winds
which are the emblemes of unconstancy. So that even here in this Island I have
known northern winds warm and moist, and southern cold and dry; and if you
read Acosta he will tell you, that ordinarily beyond the line, the North-winde
is cold and dry, Histor. Indicar. l. 3. c. 3.
as it is in this side; and not hot and moist (as you say) though it blow from
the line. The winds do vary according to the climate they blow through, and
yet they keep not the same tenure still in the same climate: the North-winde is
ordinarily cold and dry in that climate, where these Scriptures of Job and
Proverbs were penned; and the Scripture speaks only of that climate: Job
37.9. and 22.17. Pro. 25.29.
and yet if you will believe Acosta's own experience, these Scriptures are
true also of the North-winde beyond the line. But what will you infer upon
this? marry that this proposition, the earth is immovable, contains not a
general truth, because the North-winde is not generally cold and dry; as if
you would say, this proposition, the sea ebbes and flows, contains not a
general truth; ergo, this proposition, man is a reasonable creature, is not
generally true; who will not laugh petulants spleen, to hear such Logic? But
you give a reason why this phrase of the coldness and dryness of the
North-winde is not generally true, because in some places it is hot and moist:
prove unto us that the earth in some places moves circularly, and then we will
yield that this phrase of the earths immobility is not generally true. 2. These
Scriptures which you allege for the coldness of the North Wind may be
diversely understood: for Job 37.9. there is mention made of dispersers or
scatterers, but not of the North Wind: and this quality is in every wind to
disperse the clouds, as well as to bring them. In the Pro. 25. 23. it is said,
that the North-winde brings forth rain; for so the Hebrew word (...)
signifies, as well as to drive away; and so Iunius and Tremelius translate it,
gignit; and instead of Aquilo, they have Caecias, which is the
North-East-winde, though some think it to be the North-West: so the seaventy
Translatours have (...) to excite and stir up: so Job 37. 21. where some
translate, fair weather; in Hebrew, Greek, and in the old Latin Translation,
it is, Gold comes out of the North. Thus upon tottering and uncertain
foundations, you raise the structure of your wild fantasies.

11. The darkning of the Sun, the turning of the Moon into blood, and the
falling of the Stars will not help you; for these are not natural effects, but
miraculous works of God to be done before Christ second coming: and to say that
these things shall be but in show or appearance, is to make us think that God
will affright the world, as we do little children with hobgoblins. How will
the truth of his miracles, the terror of his judgments, the greatness of his
majesty be seen, if these things shall not truly and really be effected? you
may as well say, that all former miracles were but in show or appearance: as
Christ's turning of water into wine; his walking on the Sea; his raising of the
dead; curing of diseases; appeasing of the storm, etc. Is it a thing more
incredible for the Sun to be miraculously darkened at Christ's second coming,
then it was at his passion, when the Sun lost his light, the Moon being at
full? Which miracle was acknowledged by that learned Areopagite, being then in
Egypt. Or is it more incredible that the Moon shall be turned into blood, then
for clouds to rain blood? of which bloody showers, you may read in the Roman
and French stories, and in our own Chronicles at home, of blood that rained
seven days together in this Island, so that the milk was turned into blood.
What say you of all the waters of Egypt which were turned into blood? and if
we may believe the Church stories, when Felix the Martyr suffered, for not
delivering up the Bible to be burned, about the year of Christ, 302. the Moon
was turned into blood: thus God is able to make your world in the Moon
Aceldama. And why shall we not as well believe that the Stars shall fall, as
that they sought against Sisera, or that a new Star conducted the Wisemen to
Christ? God is as able to shake the Heavens, and the Stars from them, as a
wind is to shake a fig tree and spoil it of leaves: he that settled the Stars
may remove them. And to tell us that these Meteors which we call falling
Stars, are meant; is a childish conceit, seeing such do fall almost every
night, and are the mere works of nature, no ways fit to express Gods
judgments, and the terror of that day.

12. Christ says to John 3. 8.
Nicodemus, that he knew not whence the wind comes, nor whether it goes. You
infer that none knows this as the vulgar think; and therefore this, and such
like phrases are to be understood in relation to their ignorance; and the
Scripture (you say) speaks of some natural effects, as if their causes were
not to be found out, because they were generally so esteemed by the vulgar. I
perceive you are none of the vulgar, but, de meliore luto; for it seems you
know these causes which the vulgar know not: you are gallinae filius albae; a
happy man that knows the hid cauises of things: Foelix qui poteris rerum
cognoscere causas. I confess my ignorance in the most of these natural
causes; Philosophers reasons are not satisfactory to me: Obstat cui gelidus
circum praecordia sanguis. But if the wiser sort know from whence the wind
comes, which the vulgar do not; so likewise must the ways of the Spirit in
our regeneration be known to them also, though not to the vulgar: but sure that
is not Christ's meaning; for he means that the way and manner of our
regeneration are as hid and secret to men without divine revelation, as the
ways of the wind are: and as none knows the one, so none the other. 2. If you
know from whence the wind comes, and whither it goes, I pray tell us, and
hide not your light under a bushel: perhaps you will say that it comes from
North, or South, East, or West; if you can say no more, you were as good lay
your finger on your lip with Harpocrates, and say nothing. For tell us, out of
what part of the earth or sea does the North-winde arise, when it blows over
our Island; and how far does it go, or where does it end? Whence came the
great South-West-winde, which the 27. of December last sunk so many ships,
overturned so many trees, overthrew so many barnes and dwelling houses? and
where did this wind end? Can you tell us whence the Brises or trade-windes
under the line which blow continually from East to West, do proceed? or do
you know whence the Aniversarie winds in Egypt, called Etesiae, do come?
These begin to blow when the dog-starre arises, and continue forty days
together; such winds blow in Spain and Asia, but from the East; in Pontus
from the North. I think that though you should ask of the Finlanders who used
to sell winds, (if you will believe Olaus) they cannot inform you. 3. How can
Philosophers tell us from whence the wind comes, when they know not as yet
what the wind is, whether an exhalation, or the air moved, whether it arises
out of the sea, as Homer thinks, or out of the bowels and caves of the earth,
as others suppose. Pliny will tell you of Caves where the wind blows
continually; and Neptune, in Virgil, will show you, that AEolus has no power
in his kingdom, but in the hollow caves and rocks of the earth: -- tenet ille
immania saxa,
-- Illa se jactet in aula
AEolus and caeco, etc. --
4. St. Austine was no vulgar man, In Psalm. 134
and yet he confesses his ignorance, that he knows not out of what treasure
God brings forth his winds, and his clouds; indeed we may all acknowledge
with Seneca, that our knowledge is but ignorance; and because of the
uncertainty of humane conjectures, it is best to content our selves with the
knowledge of that supreme cause of all natural effects revealed to us in
Scripture.

13. Solomon (you say) does only mention the sea being obvious, Eccles. 1.7.
and easily apprehended by the vulgar, to be the cause of springs and rivers,
though in nature there be many other causes of them. I answer, Solomon does
mention the sea only, not because the vulgar apprehends it so, but because
indeed and verily it is so; to wit, the only prime cause of springs and
rivers: If you should tell me that rain and vapors are other causes, you
would say nothing, for these are subordinate to the sea; he that names the
prime and superior cause of any effect, does not exclude, but include all
subordinate and inferior causes. If, I say, the sea is the cause of springs, I
say inclusively, that rain and vapors (which have their original from the
sea) are the causes also. When the Jews said they were the sons of 1 Cor. 15.
Abraham, they excluded not Isaac and Jacob. When Saint Paul says that God
gives to every seed its body, he excludes not the Sun, Rain, Earth, and the
formative power of the seed, which are subordinate causes to God. 2. Solomon's
drift was not to make a Philosophical discourse about the causes of rivers,
but to show the vanity of things by the continual issuing and returning of
rivers from and to the sea, as he had done before by the Suns motion.

14. For the thunder, which David calls the voice of God; we say that this
phrase is not to be understood with relation to some men's ignorance, as you
fondly conceit, but to Gods omnipotency and providence; who by his thunder, as
by a voice, speaks unto the world: and a powerful voice it is to shake the
hearts of the proudest Atheists, even of Caligula himself; and to teach the
most perverse Epicures, that there is a God in heaven who rules and judges
the earth. No eloquence prevailed so much with Horace as this, lib. 1. Od. 34.
when he was parcus Deorum cultor, an Epicure: it made him renounce his
error, -- and retro vela dare; by which the Gentiles acknowledged there was a
supreme God, whom they called Jupiter, and that he had the power of thunder,
-- qui fulmine concutit orbem.
-- qui foedera fulmine sancit.
So the same Virgil acknowledges that the thunder made the people to stand in
awe of God: -- an te Genitor cum fulmina torques,
Nec quicquam horremus, etc. Act. 4.

By this, God moved the hearts of the Romans to use the Christians kindly,
when by thunder he overthrew the Marcomans; and the Christian Legion from
thence was called, The thundering Legion. It is his weapon with which he
fights against wicked men, and which he flings (...), against perjurers, as
Aristophanes says: all the thundering disputations of Philosophers, and the
small sparks of light or knowledge which they have of natural causes, are but
toys; they are no better then glow-wormes. What is the croaking of frogs, to
the cracking of thunder, or the light of rotten wood, to lightning in the air?
Therefore, in spite of all Naturalists, Psalm. 29.
let us acknowledge with David, that it is the Lord that makes the thunder,
that this voice of the Lord breaks the Cedars, and divides the flames of
fire, and shakes the wilderness, etc. Besides, the thunder is called Gods
voice, as the wind Gods breath, by an Hebraisme: as tall Cedars and high
mountains are called the Cedars and Mountains of God: the voice of God is as
much as if you would say, an excellent voice. Then whatsoever Naturalists
affirm peremptorily of the thunder, I will with Job and David, acknowledge God
to be the only cause; and will ask with Job, The thunder of his power who can
understand? Quis tonitrus sonum, aut quemadmedum oriatur explicandis rationibus
assequi possit? Job 26.14.
says Symmachus, on these words of Job.

15. The constellation called the 7. Stars, are found (you say) by later
discoveries, to be but six: What if I should grant you this, and more too then
you desire; to wit, that of old they were accounted but six of some: lib 4.
Fast. in Apparen.
So Ovid, Dicuntur septeno, sex tamen esse solent.
So Aratus,
(...)
And generally the Poets held, that though Atlas had seven daughters, called
Atlantides from him; yet one of them, to wit, Merope, or as others say,
Electra, hides her face: but diverse others hold there be seven to be seen. And
S. Basil tells us in plain terms, that there are seven stars of these, and not
six, as some think: but let there be seven, In Caten. Comitoli in Job 9.
or but six, what is this to your purpose? Mary, that the Scripture, Amos 5.8.
speaks of seven stars, according to common opinion, being but six in
Galilies glass; but indeed the Scripture speaks neither of six nor seven, but
of a certain constellation, which the Seventy Interpreters leave out, as a
thing unknown to them. Symmacbru, and Theodotion interpret (...) the old
Latin has it Arcturus, which is a star in Boots behind the tail of the
great Bear; in English we call them Seven stars, and to mine eyes they seem
to be so many: But if in Galilies glass there be but six; it is no wonder, for
you tell us elsewhere, That the better the glass is, the less will the
stars appear. It is not like then, that so small a star can be seen
through it: Let therefore the number of 7. remain, it is a sacred nnmber; --
numero Deus impare gaudet.

CHAPT. IIII.
1. Many Philosophical points are handled in Scripture. 2. The heavens how
round in the opinion of the Fathers. 3. Wre must have a reverend esteem of the
Fathers. 4. How the seas not overflowing the land may be esteemed a miracle. 5.
The works of Nature may be called miracles.
HEre you tell us of Learned men which have fallen into great absurdities,
whilst they have looked for the grounds of Philosophy out of Scripture, which
you show by the Jewish Rabbines, and some Christian Doctors. Ans. As it is
vanity to seek for all Philosophical grounds in the Scripture, so it is
stupidity to say there be no Philosophical grounds or truths to be found in
Scripture: whereas Moses, Job, David, Solomon, Cont. Lan the. l 1. sc. 1. c. 7.
Rerum divinarum humanarumque, cognitio.
and other Penmen of the holy Ghost, have diverse passages of Philosophy in
their writings, as I have showed heretofore of diverse constellations out of
Job: and why may not Philosophical truths be sought for out of Scripture,
seeing Philosophy is the contemplation or knowledge of divine and natural
things; both which are handled in Scripture, divine things principally,
natural things in the second place; that by natural things we may come to the
knowledge of Divinity, and by this to the attainment of eternal felicity.
Therefore in Scripture is recorded the creation, the cause, qualities, and
effects of the creature, that by these we may come to the knowledge of the
Creator. If the Gentile Philosophers had not found much Philosophy in
Scripture, they had never conveyed so much out of it, (as they did) into
their Philosophical books, Sermon. 2. ad Grac. infid.
as Theodore shows. The idle opinions of many Philosophers, which are
grounded neither on sense, nor reason, (as yours of the Earth's motion) are not
to be sought for in Scripture, but Philosophical truths which are grounded on
either, or both, may be sought and found there: and whatsoever idle conceits
the Jews have had of Scripture, or their idle fables which they have grounded
on it, concern us not: they were a giddy headed people, given over to a
reprobate sense, groping at noone day; having their hearts fat, and their eyes
blinded, that they may not see: their seeking for Philosophical truths in
Scripture was not the cause of their foolishness, (for few or none of them
were addicted to the study of Philosophy) but their own voluntary blindness,
pride, stubbornness, and contempt of Christ the internal and essential Word
of God, are the causes of their ignorance in the external Word; so that they
(having forsaken the truth) follow lies. But as for the Christian Doctors, they
have not exposed themselves to errors, by adhering to the words of Scripture,
but you are fallen into gross errors by rejecting the words of Scripture:
These which you count errors, are truths; as, That the Sun and Moon are the
greatest lights, That there are waters above the firmament, That the stars
are innumerable, as we have already showed. As for the roundnesse of the
heaven, though the Fathers doubt of it, yet they do not absolutely deny it.
Iustine Martyr does but ask the question, Whether their opinion may not be
true, Resp. ad Qu. 93. Hexamer. li. 1. cap. 6.
which hold the roundnesse of the heaven. St. Ambrose says, that it is
sufficient for us to know that God has placed the heaven over us like a vault,
and stretched it out like a curtain or skin. St. Chrysostom (whom Theodoret
and Theophylact do follow) deny the roundnesse of heaven, as it has relation
to our climate or habitation; for so the heaven is indeed, Psalm. 104.2. Isa.
40.22.
as the Scripture says, a vault or skin; so that albeit the whole heaven being
considered with the whole earth, be round, yet being considered with reference
to parts or climates of the earth, it is not round: De Genes. ad liter. l. 2.
c. 9.
Or we may with St. Austine so understand the word [ vaults] or [ curtaine] or
[ skin] that these terms may stand well enough with the roundnesse of heaven;
si sphaera est, undique camera est: if it be sphericall, it is a round vault;
pellis in rotundum sinum extenditur, a skin may be made round or sphericall:
for a round bladder (says he) is a skin; so then neither the word vault,
skin, canopy, or tabernacle, are words repugnant to the roundnesse of heaven,
neither have you such reason to insult over the Fathers, as if absolutely and
peremptorily they had denied the roundnes thereof: August. In Psalm. 104.
For S. Austine shows, that the stretching out of heaven like a skin, is
mentioned only to show the power of God, and with what facility he made the
heavens, with more ease then we should extend a skin: and St. Hierome says,
that the opinion of the earths roundnesse is the most common opinion, agreeing
with Ecclesiastes. Hier c. 3. ad Ephesians.
So when the Fathers say that the earth is founded on the seas, etc. they do
but follow the Scripture phrase, which how to be understood we have already
showed, and will touch it again anon.

3. Suppose these were errors; yet you must not take advantage from some
errors in the Fathers, to lessen their credit in other things; they were but
men, and had not the perfection of knowledge which is in Angels, called
therefore Daemones and Intelligentiae. St. Bernard saw not all things; we
should be sparing in raking into their errors, in uncovering of their shame;
and like flies, delighting in their soars. But yet you cannot obtain your
purpose in ripping up of their errors; for it will not follow: the Fathers
erred in denying the sphericall figure of the heaven, etc. therefore they erred
in denying the motion of the earth: must it follow, that because S. Cyprian
erred in the point of rebaptization, therefore no credit must be given to him
in affirming Christ's incarnation? and, I pray, what great error was this in
them, to conclude from manifest places of Scripture, Job 8.8.
that the seas not overflowing the land is a miracle, Prove. 8.29.
and that they are restrained by the special power of God? Ier. 5.22.
I grant that all seas are not higher, nor so high as some lands; Psalm. 104.
but it is manifest, that the sea in some places is much higher then the land,
as the Hollanders and Zelanders know; and that their lands are not overwhelmed
with the sea in a storm, is a miracle; and the finger of God is to be seen in
restraining of them: which seas, when he is angry with the inhabitants, he
lets loose sometimes, to the overthrow of towns and villages: -- Camposque per
omnes,
Cum stabulis armenta trahunt --
In the days of Sesostris King of Egypt, it was by measure and observation
known, that the Red Sea was much higher then the land; but we need not go so
far, the coast of our own Island in diverse places being lower then the sea,
will prove this to be true; where we may daily see Gods power, in curbing the
violence of that furious creature: Du Eartas 3. Day.
-- For the Eternal knowing
The Seas commotive, and unconstant flowing,
Thus curbed her, and against her envious rage,
For ever fenced our flowery mantled stage:
So that we often see those rolling hills,
With roaring noise, threatening the neighbors fields;
Through their own spite to split upon the shore,
Foaming for fury that they dare no more.


5. Why then may not this be called a miracle, whereas many strange, yea
ordinary effects of nature are called miracles? (...). Barbara Pyramidum sileat
miracula Memphis Martial. Perseverantia consisetuimis amisit admirationem. De
Trin l. 3. c. 2. c. 5. etc. 6.
Plato called man the miracle of miracles: and David says, that fearfully and
miraculously he was made. Do not you know that Diana's Temple, the Egyptian
Pyramides, and the rest of those stupendous buildings, were called the seven
miracles of the world? not only Gods extraordinary works above nature, but also
his ordinary works in nature, are miracles, though they be not so accounted
(says Saint Austin) because we are so used to them. For as it was a miracle to
turn water into wine in Cana of Galilee, so (he says) that miracle is seen
daily: for who draws the moisture or water from the earth by the root into the
grape, and makes wine, but God? That Gods finger is to be seen in every work
of nature, the Poet does acknowledge: Virgil. l. 4. Geor.
-- Deum namque ire per omnes Terrasque tractusque maris, coelumque profundum.
A miracle is so called because it excites admiration; and do we not admire
Gods power in earthquakes, prodigious births, thunders, lightnings, and in the
Eclipses of the great Luminaries? therefore Saint Austin checks the vanity of
Philosophers who went no higher in the contemplation of these natural effects,
then to natural causes; not looking unto God the supreme cause of all. Hence
then it appears that the Fathers are not mistaken, in attributing the not
overflowing of the sea to a miracle: howsoever (as your figure shows) the
sea may seem to be, and yet is not higher then some lands. Neither is there any
contradiction in Scripture, though sometime it make the sea higher then the
land, and sometime lower; for so it is according to the diversity of coasts;
and because of much moisture and water found in the bowels of the earth, and in
that it is encompassed with the sea, it may be said, that the earth is founded
on the waters: therefore no man can be deceived in concluding points of
Philosophy from expressions of Scriptures (as you say) but from the
misunderstanding of Scripture; for what is true in Philosophy cannot be false
in Divinity; for in subalternall sciences there can be no repugnancy.

CHAP. V.
Diverse Scriptures vindicated from false glosses; as, Eccles. 1. 4. by which is
proved the earths immobility, and heavens motion. 2. How the earth is eternal
and renewed. 3. The Scripture speaks not plainly and ambiguously in the same
place. 4. The Scripture uses Metaphors. 5. How the earth stands out of the
water, 2 Pet. 3. 5. by which its immobilitie is proved. 6. What is meant, 1 Chronicles. 16. 30. etc. by these words, The world is established, etc. 7. What is
meant Psalm. 90. 2. by the earth and the world. 8. How the heavens Prove. 3. 19.
are established: and the Moon and Stars, Psalm. 89. 37. etc. 9. How the
heavens 2 Samuel 22. 8. has foundations. 10. What are the pillars of heaven in
Job 10. of the ends, sides, and corners of the earth in Scripture. 11. What is
meant Isa. 51. 6. by the planting of the heavens. 12. How the earth is
established. 13. What Job means by the earth moved out of its place.
YOu would feign here overthrow those Scriptures which show the immobilitie of
the earth. Eccles. 1.4.
1. That place of Ecclesiastes, ( one generation comes, and another passes,
but the earth stands for ever.) You say, That it is not the purpose of this
place to deny all kind of motion to the whole earth; but that of generation
and corruption. But I say, that it is neither the purpose of this place to deny
the motition of the earth, nor to affirm the motion of the sun: for why
should he either deny the one, or affirm the other, which no man doubted of,
or called in question? his drift is to prove the vanity of mankind, from the
stability of the earth, and motion of the sun, winds and waters; thus man is
inferior to the earth, because the earth is firm, stable, and immovable;
whereas man abides not in one stay, but comes forth like a flower, and is cut
down, he flies like a shadow, and continues not. Or (as it is here) he
comes and goes; so that coming and going are motions, to which man is
subject, and are opposite to the immobilitie of the earth. The Antithesis then
or opposition here is not between the substance of man and of the earth; for
man in respect of his substance is permanent as well as the earth, if either we
consider his soul, or his body, according to the first matter; but the
opposition is between the qualities, outward estate, and life of man, and the
immobilitie of the earth, so that the standing of the earth must be meant
either of its permanency, or immutabilitie, or immobilitie: not the first, for
man (as I said) is not inferior to the earth in permancie; not the second, for
the earth is subject (as all sublunary things are) to mutability and changes;
therefore the third, which is the earths immobility, must needs be understood.
And if Solomon had thought otherwise, to wit, that the earth moved, and the sun
stood still; he would have said, The sun stands for ever, the earth
arises, and the earth goes down, etc. But, for all his knowledge, he was
ignorant of this quaint piece of Philosophy. Again, he proves man's vanity
from the motion of the sun, winds, and waters, though they move and are gone
for a while, yet they return again; but man being gone returns no more: so
that man has neither the stability of the earth, but passes away, and being
past, has not the power to return again, as the sun, wind, and waters
do. It is plain then, that the standing of the earth is opposed to its local
motion, and to the motion of men coming and going; but it were ridiculous, as
you say, to infer that the earth is immovable, because permanent; for the
mill and ship may be permanent, and yet move; this illation is none of ours, we
say it is immovable because Solomon here says so; for he says it stands;
and if standing be motion, then the earth moves. It is more safe for us to say,
That the earth is immovable, because Solomon says it stands; then to say it
is moveable, because the word standing may signify permanency, or abiding. As
for the motions (as you call them) of generation and corruption, from which you
free the earth, they are not indeed motions, but mutations: Metus est a termino
positivo, ad terminum poserivum.

You check the Jews for collecting the earths eternity from the word (
Legnolam:) albeit I know that this word does not always signify eternity, but a
long continuance of time; yet that the earth is eternal, a posteriori, I
think you will not deny, except you will tread in some new way of your own
different from that both of ancient and modern Divines, who affirm with the
Scripture, That there shall be a new earth; but new in qualities, not in
substance; a change of the figure, not of the nature; of the form, not of the
substance; a renovation of that beauty which is lost by man, but no creation of
a new Essence; so that the Jews might justly infer from Solomon's words, that
the earth is eternal, or stablished for ever.

You snap at Mr Fuller for urging that these words of Solomon must be all
understood literally, and not some of them in reference to appearance, but
without cause; for can the same Scripture with one breath blow hot and cold? At
the same time speak plainly and ambiguously; in the same sentence have a
double meaning? The Scripture which is plain and simple, is far from double
dealing. Will any think that when Solomon says, There be three moveable
bodies, the Sun, Winds, and Rivers that there are indeed but two; and that the
Sun moves not but in appearance, that is, moves not at all? This is to make the
Scripture indeed a nose of wax; for what may I not interpret this way? Christ
fed the people with five barley loaves, that is, with four loaves, for one was
a loaf but in appearance. Three Wisemen came from Persia to worship Christ,
that is, two came indeed, but the third came only in appearance. You would
laugh at me, if I should tell you, that of any three ships or mills, which move
really, one did move apparently; whereas both you and I see them move really.
Now, if the Sun does not move, why does the Scripture say it does? What danger
would arise if it spoke plain in this point? You say, That the Scripture
speaks of some natural things, as they are esteemed by man's false conceit:
But this is a false conceit of yours; the Scripture does not cherish or
patronise the falsehood of our conceits; the end of it is to rectify our
erroneous conceits. It is true that in high and obscure points of Divinity,
the Scripture condescending to our capacity, uses the terms of familiar and
earthly things; that by them we may by degrees ascend to the love and knowledge
of spiritual things; for the natural man understands not the things of God:
but in natural things which are obvious to our senses, we need no such helps.
If the Sun stood still, it were as easy for us to understand his standing,
as his moving.

What you talk of the ends of a staff, and of the ends of the earth, is
impertinent and frivolous; for the Scripture for want of proper words uses
metaphorical: and because there is no other word to express the remote bounds
of the earth, then the word End, therefore the Scripture uses it. But you
infer that because the ends of a staff, and the ends of the earth cannot be
taken in the same sense; that therefore the motion of the sun, and of the winds
must be understood in diverse senses: make an Enthymeme and see the consequence;
the Scripture says, That a staff has ends, and that the earth has ends,
which cannot be understood properly, and in the same sense; ergo, when the
Scripture says, The sun moves, and the wind moves, both cannot be
understood properly and in the same sense: as if you would say, The Scripture
affirms that Angels are the sons of God, and that Judges are the sons of God,
but not in the same sense: ergo, when the Scripture says, That the raven flew
out of the Arc, and the dove flew out of the Arc: both must not be understood
in the same sense, but the one properly, the other in appearance.

2 Pet. 3.5.
Our second proof out of Scripture which you go about to undermine, is that of
Saint Peter: The heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the water,
and in the water. You say, That the word (...), is equivalent to ( fuit,) but I
say, that this were to confound two predicaments, to make the essence and
accident all one: the site or immobility of the earth, and the essence or
existence thereof cannot be one or equivalent. 2. This were to commit a plain
tantology, for so the words must run; The earth was, was out of the water; if
these two words ( was) and ( standing) be equivalent. 3. The Apostles scope is
not only to show that God made all the earth, (as you say) but that he made it
thus; that is, standing or immovable: that he is the author not only of its
being and essence, but also of that inseparable accident of immobilitie. 4. We
collect not the rest and immobilitie of the earth from the bare expression of
its being or creation, but from its being thus made; for so we may reason; What
God has made to stand fast out of, and in the water, is immovable; but God
has made the earth thus: ergo, it is immovable. 5. It were ridiculous to
conclude the immobility of a ship or a mill-wheele, because a part of them was
made to stand above, and another part under the water for they were not made
for that end to stand, but to move: But if you had brought your Simile from the
rocks of the sea, you had done well; for God made these rocks to stand partly
above, and partly under the water; and he made them not to fleet with the
Isles of the lake Lommond, therefore they are not moveable, for God has made
them immovable; and so he has made the earth: therefore, both the old and
new Latin translations, do use the word consistere, which signifies
constanter stare.

1 Chr. 16.30 Psalm. 93.1. and 96.10.
Our third Argument is taken from these words, The world is established that it
cannot be moved; which words you will have to be spoken of the world in
general, or the whole fabric of heaven and earth; but you are widely
mistaken; for in the Hebrew text, the word [ holam] which signifies the whole
universe of heaven and earth, is not used in any of these places; but the word
[ Tebel] which signifies the round globe of the earth, or the habitable world,
as Pagnine has it. So the Greek Interpreters in all these places use the word
(...), and not (...), which signifies the whole bulk of the world, so called
from its beauty: (...), habitor, (...), habito.
Now (...) is always used for the habitable earth, so that (...), is a Synod
of men dwelling upon earth, and not of Angels or stars: And when the Patriarch
of Constantinople assumed the title of Oecumenicus Episcopus, he did not
purpose (for all his pride) to bring the Angels and stars within the verge of
his Diocese or Episcopacy. So the old Latin translation never uses the word
mundus, but orbis, and orbis terrae; and Iunius with Tremelius, use the words
orbis habitabilis, that is, the earth; so that orbis is not used for mundus in
any classick Author in prose, but for the earth, or regions and dominions of
the earth: as, Orbis Asiae, Europae, orbis Romanus, etc. Besides, in the 96.
Psalm, the heavens and the world (as we translate it) are distiuguished in
the 5. ver. God made the heavens: in the 10. ver. he established the world, or
earth. We need not then to have recourse to a Synecdoche iu the three original
Tongues.

But you tell us, Psalm. 90.2.
That David (you would have said Moses) seems to make a difference between the
earth and the world, when he says, Before thou had formed the earth and the
world: he does but seem to make a difference, but indeed he makes none; for
the copulative [ and] is put exepetice, for the disjunctive [ or] here, and
elsewhere in Scripture: as in Exodus, He that smites his Father; in the
Hebrew it is Abiu ve Immo, his father and his mother: and in the 17. ver. of
the same Chapter, He that curses his father and his mother, which the
Evangelist St. Matthew rendereth, (...), father or mother: so among profane
Authors the same kind of speech is used: as, Natus annos 60. and senex. Here
then God made the earth and the world, that is, he made the earth, or the
habitable world. 2. We may explain Moses his words here thus: God made the
earth the first day, and then it was (...), earth; but it was not made
habitable till the third day, and then it became (...), a habitable world; and
so in this respect there is some difference between the earth and the world,
that is, between the earth mingled with the water, and separated from it.

Because Solomon says, That God has founded the earth, Prove. 3.19.
and established the heavens, you infer, That the places of Scripture can no
more prove an immebility in the earth, then in the heavens. But here also your
speak at random; for the Hebrew word (...) Conen here, which Arias Montanus
and the old Latin translate, stabilivit, does properly signify, to dispose,
or order; and so we translate the word Conenu, Ps.37.23. a good man's steps are
ordered by the Lord. This word also signifies to prepare: 2. Chro. 1.4.
as, David prepared a place for the Ark. Therefore the LXX. Interpreters
explain this word here by (...), he has prepared the heavens; and Iunius,
with Tremelius, by [ statuit] he has appointed, [or disposed] the heavens.
But what though we should yield that the word may signify to establish, will
it therefore follow that the heavens are immovable, because established? No:
for there is the stability of nature, and natural qualites, which is opposite
to mutability, and so the heavens are established; and there is the stability
of rest, and so it is opposite to mobility: thus the earth is established. But,
you will say, seeing the same word [ establish] is spoken of both the heaven,
and of the earth, how shall you know that it implies immobility in the earth,
and not in the heaven? I answer, well enough; because the Scripture, speaking
of the earth, says, It is established that it cannot be moved: but the
Scripture never speaks so of the heavens, but only that they are established;
not a word to show any rest or immobility in them.

Now you urge us with those places that speak of establishing of the Moon,
Ps.89.37. of the stars, Psa.8.3. of the heavens, Pro. 8.27. Why (say you)
should these be counted sufficient expressions to take away motion from the
earth? I answer, we do not count this word [ establish] of it self a sufficient
expression; for the original word is ambiguous, and diversely interpreted, both
by the Greek and Latin; and moveable things may be established; the moving
Tabernacle, as well as the immovable Temple. But if I should tell you, that
though the Tabernacle be fastened or established, yet it is moveable, and the
Temple is so stablished that it cannot be moved: You cannot but say, that my
expression is sufficient to show the difference of stability in the one, Ps.
119.90.
in and the other. So speaks the Scripture in plain terms of the Earth's
stability, Ps. 104.5.
Thou have founded, [or established] the earth, and it shall stand: Thou have
laid the foundations of the earth, that it shall not be moved for ever; so it
is in the Hebrew. When a thing then is said to be so established, as that it
stands fast on a sure foundation, and cannot be moved, we must needs
acknowledge, that this is a full expression of its immobility; which phrases
are never spoken of the heaven, or any star; we read that the Sun stood
once, but that was by miracle: of any other standing in Scripture we never
read. So we read of the moving of the earth by earthquakes, but not else, Isa.
13.13. and of removing of Islands, Rev.6.14. but never of a circular motion of
the earth: for in that respect he has made the earth that it shall not be
moved. And to tell us, as you do, that the earth is established so only that
it shall not be removed, is both to mince the Scripture, and the power of God;
for as it is more easy to move an heavy body then to remove it, so is the
power of God so much the greater, in that he has made a body of such
solidity, weight, and bigness, that it cannot be so much as moved, far less
removed: and if the Scripture be so careful and punctual in setting forth
Gods greatness and power on so small a matter, as is the moving of a little
part of the earth by earthquakes; doubtless it would not have been silent in a
matter of such admiration and power, as is the moving of the whole body of the
earth, if ever he had moved it, either by himself, or by his Angels, or by
Nature his handmaid.

Whereas you say, That fundavit cannot be taken properly, as if the earth, like
other artificial buildings, did need any bottoms to uphold it. I answer, that
fundare terram is not to settle the earth upon a foundation or bottom, but to
make it the foundation of all heavy bodies; and therefore it is called (...),
fundum, the bottom, and fundus, the foundation; so that nothing has any
foundation but on and by the earth. Ships floating on the water, have not any
foundation, till they be tied by anchors to the earth; which the Poet knew,
when he said, Anchora fundabat naves: therefore not metaphorically, but
properly, does the Scripture speak, in saying, God has founded the earth; but
whereas the heavens are said to have foundations, 2 Samuel.22.8. by heavens there
are understood the mountains, and so the vulgar Latin reads it: and so in
Psalm. 18.8 the text has mountains, and not heavens. Mountains are called
heavens metonymically, because they are in that part of heaven which we call
the air; therefore by the Poets they are called, Aerel montes; and so all the
space from the superficies of the earth upward, is called heaven both in sacred
and profane writings; even this upper part of the earth wherein we live is
called heaven by the Poet: Sed falsa ad Coelum mittunt insomnia Manes; and the
Inhabitants of the earth are called Superi by the same Poet, Quae quis apud
Superos surto laetat us inani. And as hills are called heaven, so heaven is
called hills by David, when he says, I will look unto the bills, from whence
comes my salvation. By the foundation of the heavens then, is meant nothing
else but the foundation of the hills. Now why you should call the earth an
artificial building, I know not: it was neither built by an artificer, nor by
the rules and tools of Art; your earth in the Moon may rather be called
artificial, as being the work, not of God, nor Nature, but of Copernicus the
master carpenter, and his workmen, of which number you are one; but you should
do better, if with that wise master builder St. Paul, you would build upon the
corner stone, and the foundation Christ Jesus, according to the grace of God
which is given to you.

You say well, That the pillars of heaven mentioned by Job will not prove them
to be immovable; for we know that heavenly pillars are moveable as the
heavens are: so were these two pillars that conducted Israel through the
desert, and those night meteors, called fiery pillars. 2. By heaven may be
meant the Church called oftentimes heaven in Scripture, and by pillars the
eminent Doctors of it: So Peter, and Paul, were called pillars, and every good
man shall be made a pillar in Gods Temple. 3. By the pillars of heaven may be
understood the Angels, called also the powers of heaven, in the Gospel. 4.
High hills may be called pillars of heaven, not because they uphold heaven, as
the Poets write of Atlas, but because they are high in the air, which is
called heaven, -- caput inter nubila coxdunt. 5. The only true pillar by which
both heaven and earth is sustained, is the power of God; which power cannot be
shaken in it self, but in its effects. 6. Which way soever you take the
pillars of heaven they are moveable; but now it will not follow that the
pillars of earth are moveable also: though the pillars of the Tabernacle were
moveable, the pillars of the Temple were not so. Such as the earth is, such be
its pillars; its self is immovable, and so are its pillars; except when that
great Sampson shakes them being grieved for the many wrongs that he suffers by
our sins; then hills, rocks, houses, and cities tumble down, and multitudes are
buried before they be dead. If then we should prove the immobility of the
earth, from the stability of its pillars, we should have reason for it; but to
infer that the heavens were immovable, because they have pillars, were
ridiculous.

We read (say you) of ends, sides, and corners of the earth, and yet these will
not prove it to be of a long or square form. Answ. Yes it will: for the
Scripture does not describe the earth to us as a smooth and uniforme globe, but
as a great body consisting of diverse unequal parts; as hills and valleys, and
as a body broken by the irruption of many seas, as the Mediterran, etc.
Consisting also of lakes and rivers, not to speak of Isles and Isthmus: has
not then the earth in this respect many ends, corners, and sides? If you did
sail along the coasts of the earth, you should find it so. 2. The earth of it
self is not round, for without the water it does not make a globe. 3. Though
it were perfectly round, yet it must have its longitude and latitude. 4. By the
earth the Scripture oftentimes means the land of Judea, with the neighboring
countries: as, his dominion shall be from the river to the ends of the earth;
which words were spoken of Solomon literally. All the ends of the earth have
seen the salvation of God; Psalm. 98.3.
which was not seen by the Americans in David's days. So all the world was
taxed under Augustus, that is, the Roman world. 5. Luke 2.
Whatsoever is finite has bounds and ends, but such is the earth; ergo, it
has ends. Therefore as the Scripture by the ends, sides, and corners of the
earth, does show that it is not round; so does it also by the stable
foundations thereof, show, that it does not move.

Isaiah speaks of the planting of the heavens, which you say, 51.6.
May as well prove them to be immovable, as that which follows in that Verse
concerning the foundation of the earth. Answ. I perceive your case is
desperate, for like a man that is sinking in the water, you catch hold of every
thing that is next you, though it be weeds and such as cannot help you. For 1.
by heavens here may be meant the Church, which is that Vine, that God has
planted with his own right hand. 2. Though this word heaven were taken in its
proper signification, yet the planting of heaven is a metaphor, out of which
you can conclude nothing, but must spoil your Syllogism with quatuor termini.
3. Nothing is properly planted but what has motion in it, as trees, herbs,
and such like vegetables. This word then may intimate, that there is motion in
the heavens, as the word ( foundation) shows, that there is no motion in the
earth; for it is very improper and dangerous for a foundation to move.

When the Scripture says, The earth is established: by this word you answer)
is means only the keeping of it up in the air, without falling to any other
place. Answ. If the earth be established only so, that it may not fall or be
removed to any other place; what singular thing has the earth, that is not in
other bodies? for so are the heavens established, and every star, that they
shall not be removed out of that place or station which is appointed for them;
so is the sea confined within its bounds, which it cannot pass. But there is
something else in the earth whereby it differs from other bodies, and wherein
Gods power is the more admired; to wit, That it is so established, that it
cannot be removed: Nay, more then so, it cannot be stirred or wagged at all.
Thus as Gods glory is admired in the perpetual motion of other bodies, so is
it in the perpetual immobilitie of this. 2. The earth (you say) is kept up
from falling. I pray you whither would the earth fall, being in its own place,
and sowest of all the Elements? if it fall any where, it must fall upward, and
that is as proper a phrase, as if I should tell you, the heaven must mount
downward: therefore, Mute hauc de poctore euram; never fear the falling of
the earth. The Gentiles were afraid that the heavens might fall being held up
by the shoulders of Hercules; therefore Artemon it seems was afraid of this,
who never durst venture abroad, but under a brazen target, carried over his
head. And one Phaenaces in Plutarch was sore afraid, that the moon would fall
down, and therefore pitied the Ethiopians and others that were under the
moon; but if he had known what you know, That there is a world in the moon,
his fear had been just. It may be the great shower of stones that fell
heretofore in agro Piceno, were the stones of some buildings that had fallen
down in the moon. We need not fear the falling of our earth, which God has
so established, that it cannot be moved.

Job.9.6.
You see no reason, but that we may prove the natural motion of the earth from
that place in Job, Who moves or shakes the earth out of her place; that is to
say, We may prove a natural motion out of a violent, or one contrary out of
another; we may prove the fire to be cold, because it is hot; or that the earth
may move naturally, becanse it moves violently. The motion that Job speaks of,
is an earthquake extraordinary, which is a violent and temporary motion, and
of some part only; and a concussion rather then a motion; the motion that you
would infer from thence, is a natural, perpetual, total, regular, and a
circular motion. Will you infer that because the mill-wheele is turned about
violently, that therefore the whole mill is turned about naturally. I have seen
a Church-tower shake when the bells have been rung; but if I should infer
that the whole Church therefore may move circularly, I should fear, Ne manus
auriculas imitetur mobilis albas: lest I should be thought a creature of
Arcadia. And I hope you are not so simple as to think that God did ever shake
the whole earth out of its place, or if he had, that therefore it may move
naturally and circularly.

CHAP. VI.
1. The earth is in the middle and center of the world, and why. 2. Hell is in
the center or middle of the earth. 3. The earth lowest and basest, how. 4.
Every thing is made questionable by some. 5. Aristotle defended. 6. The earth
is in the center, because in the midst of the equinoctial Horizon, etc. 7. The
imagination must be conformable to the things, not these to it; the vanity of
imagining circles. 8. Astronomers reproved, and their vanity showed, chiefly
about the bigness of the stars. 9. The earth is the least circle: therefore
the center, how understood.
HEre you will not upon any terms admit, that the earth is the center of the
Universe, because our arguments (you say) are insufficient. Answ. Our arguments
may be insufficient to you, who has an overweening conceit of your self, and
a prejudicial opinion of other men. But our arguments have been hitherto
accounted sufficient, by moderate, wise, and learned men; but to your
sublimated understanding they give no satisfaction; there are some men that are
never content, and nothing to them is sufficient, no not Gods own word: but
what though our arguments were insufficient? will you therefore reject them?
You may by this means reject all humane learning, for it has not that
sufficiency which perhaps you require. We know here but in part, the
sufficiency of knowledge is reserved for a better life. -- Si quid tamen aptius
exit: But if you have more sufficient arguments for your opinion, impart them
to us, and we will embrace them; if you have not, his utere mecum; content your
self with these till you know better. But you promise that you will clearly
manifest the insufficiency of our arguments in this Chapter. Let us see if you
will be as good as your word, which we have not yet found in you; only, large
promises without performance.

Larga quidena semper Drance tibi copia fandi. 1. We say that the earth is the
center, not the sun; because the earth is lowermost, and under the sun. To
this you answer, That since the sun is so remote from the center of our earth,
it may be properly affirmed that we are under it, though that be in the center
of the world. Answ. That the sun cannot be the center of the world, and that
the earth must needs be the center; c. 1. sec. 2.
we have proved against Lansbergius, for neither could there be Eclipses of the
Moon, nor could we discern the medietie of heaven, nor of the Zodiac, if the
earth were not the center. And whereas the center is the middle of the globe
equally distant from all the parts of the circumference; the wise God placed
the earth in the midst of this great systeme of the world, not only for man's
sake, who being the Lord of this universe, and the most honorable of all the
creatures, deserved to have the most honorable place, which is the middle: but
chiefly that man with all other animal and vegetable creatures, might by an
equal distance from all parts of heaven have an equal comfort and influence.
For imagine there were two earths, this which is in the center, and another out
of the center; the influence and powers of heaven must needs more equally
concur and be united in this, then in that: and if the place be it which
conserves the creatures, what place more fit for conservation, then that which
is in the midst of the world? Having an equal relation to all parts of heaven,
and all the powers of the universe uniting themselves together in the earth, as
in a small epitome. Therefore nature which is the handmaid and imitatour of
God, lays up the seed in the middle of the fruits, as being not only the
safest part, but also because in the middle as in the center, all the powers of
the plant meet together in the forming of the seed, wherein it does perpetuate
it self. How unconvenient and unhealthy were man's habitation, if it were nearer
the heaven then it is? for the air would be too pure and unproportionable to
our gross bodies, for they that travel overhigh hills find their bodies much
distempered. Acosta witnesses, that they who travel over the high hills of
Peru, fall into vomiting, and become desperately sick, and many lose their
lives, by reason of the subtilty and pureness of the air. But your words would
be a little corrected; For since the sun (you say) is so remote from the center
of the earth, we are under it. Indeed we are under it, in that it is above us;
but not for that it is remote from us or from the earth. Under and above are
relative terms, so are neerenes and remotenes.

2. You slight the constant and perpetual doctrine of the Church from the
beginning, concerning the site of hell, which is in the center or bowels of the
earth; and you call it an uncertainty; but so you may call any doctrine in
Scripture, for where will you have hell to be, but either in heaven or in the
earth? These are the two integrall parts of this universe; in heaven I hope you
will not place it, except you will have it to be in the moon. But if there be
any hell there, it is for the wicked of that world: as for the wicked of this
world, they are not said to ascend to hell in the moon, but to descend to hell
in the earth, as Core and his fellows. Therefore it is called a lake, burning
with fire and brimstone; Abyssus, Apol. c. 47.
a deep gulf; Gehenna, the valley of Hinnon. By Tertullian, Thesaurus
subterraneus ignis arcant, The treasure of hid fire under ground. Philip. 2.
The Apostle speaks of (...) of those that bow to Christ under the earth.
Horrende voragines, fearful gulfes they are, L. 7. Inslie. c. 7.
says Lactantius. And that which you call uncertainty, is called certa fides,
a sure faith, an undeniable truth by Prudentius: Certa fides rabidos sub terra
nocte caminos, etc. And as this has been the constant opinion of the Church,
De hamartigenia.
as may be seen both in the Greek and Latin Fathers, so has it been believed
by the Gentiles, as I could instance out of Greek and Latin Poets of (...),
Tartarus, Phlegerbon, Cocytus, Styx, Acheron: which they show to be in the
center or bowels of the earth; therefore I hope you are none of those that
Iuvenal speaks of, who would not believe there was any hell under ground: Esse
aliquos manes, and subterranea regna, etc. Satyr. 2.

Nec pueri credunt. --
For whosoever denied hell to be below, denied that there was any such place at
all: as, Pythagoras, Epicurus, Lucretius, Tully, Seneca, Lucian, Pliny, and
some others; to whom I may add the Gnostickes, who held there was no other
hell, but this world, whom Irenaeus resutes. Irenaeus l. 5. c. 31.
2. As hell must needs be in the earth below, so must heaven the place of the
blessed, be above all these visible heavens; which is called, The third heaven,
and the heaven of heavens. Therefore, it is no uncertainty (as you say) that it
is concentricall to the stars: for if it be not, tell us where you will have
it? in the moon, or in the Elysian fields, or in Mahomets paradise? I wish you
would think the dictates of Gods word to be more certain then your
groundless phansies, and that the Scripture is a more stable foundation to
build upon, then the Moon. 3. It is not an uncertainty that places must be as
far distant in situation as in use: Therefore Abraham says, That there
(...), a great gulf, or gap between Lazarus and Dives. So David distinguished
between the height of heaven, Psalm. 139.
and the deep of hell; so does Amos, and Esaias: Amos 9.
and it is fitting that heaven and hell, Esaias. 14,13, 14,15.
the saints and the wicked, the joys of the one, and torments of the other, be
as remote as may be; which the Poet knew: -- Tartarus ipse,
Bis patet in praeceps tantum, tenditque sub umbras, An.6.

Quantus ad aethereum coeli suspectus Olympum.


3. These things also you will have to be uncertain. 1. That bodies must be as
far distant in place as in nobility. 2. That the earth is of a baser matter
than other Planets. 3. That the center is the worst place. Answ. These are not
uncertainties to men that have sense and reason; for sense tells us, that the
grosser simple bodies are, the lower place have they in this Universe: the
heaven being a quintessence and of the purest matter, is uppermost; next is the
fire, then the air, then the water, and lowest of all, the earth, as being the
grossest; and reason tells us, that God is the God of order; and what a
disordered world should we have, if gross and heavy bodies were uppermost, the
light and purest bodies beneath? We see in our own bodies, that the grosser
the spirits are, the lower they are: the animal having their residence in the
head, the vital in the heart, the natural in the liver. 2. Nor is it
uncertain that the earth is of a baser matter then the Planets; the obscurity
and dullness of the one; the beauty, light, and swiftness of the other, do
show what odds there is in the matter. How are all Divines deceived who put
men in mind of the base materials of their body; and teach that God made men
of the basest element to humble him? Animalium superbissimi origo vilissima;
Pliny.
and I think you are Planet-struck, or have a planeticall head, who think the
earth to be a Planet. 3. That the center is the worst place, is not held by us;
for though we say the earth to be the ignoblest and basest element, in respect
of its matter, and therefore the lowest; yet as it is the center and habitation
of the noblest creature, it is placed in the middle, as being the noblest place.

4. Our second argument is grounded (you say) upon two foolish foundations. 1.
That the whole frame of nature moves round, excepting only the earth. 2. That
the whole earth is heavy, and more unfit for motion then the Planets: These you
reject, because they are (you say) the thing in question. Answ. You are
doubtless that third Cato that fell from heaven; or octavus Sapientum. Our
foundations of the earths stability, and gravity, are foolishness with you; so
was the Gospel foolishness to the Gentiles; but you do well to observe
Solomon's rule: Prove. 26. 4.
Answer not a fool according to his folly; which is the reason that you answer
not at all to these foolish foundations of ours; but only with this; they are
the thing in question. But if you question the stability and gravity of the
earth, is not your question as foolish as our foundation? but seeing you may
question every thing, every thing may be a foolish answer, or position to you.
And what do you think of the Scripture when it says; The earth stands
fast, and the stars move? does the Scripture in this speak foolishly? Surely
we are content to prefer the foolishness of Scripture to the wisdom of your
scribbling; because such conceited wisdom is but foolishness with God. What
foundation either in Divinity or Philosophy, what Article of the Creed has not
been questioned? shall they be counted foolish foundations, or unfit to
discuss controversies, because they have been questioned by pernicious
Heretics? If you were as wise a man as you pretend your self to be, you
should have with solid arguments refelled our foundations, which are so fully
demonstrated by so many Philosophers, and then you should have shot your fools
bolt. The truth of these foundations I have showed already, to which you answer
nothing, Contra Lansberg.
therefore here I will not actum agere.

5. Our third Argument is, That our earth, must be in the center, because it is
in the lowest place, or midst of the world; this Aristotle proves by the
descending of all heavy to the center, and the ascending of light bodies from
it: But you reject Aristotle as being a master of Syllogismes, and being
deceived whilst be supposes that, which he pretends to prove. But indeed you
are much deceived your self, whilst you reject this master of Syllogismes, who
does not suppose what he pretends to prove, but substantially proves, what you
think he supposes. He says the earth is the center, and thus
syllogistically out of him it is proved; To what place heavy bodies descend,
that place is the center; But to the earth, heavy bodies descend; ergo, the
earth is the center. You see now that this master of Syllogismes does not
suppose that which he brings unto the conclusion, but proves the earth to be
the center by a medium, which you cannot answer: so that being put to your
shifts, you know not how to elude the force of this and other arguments; but by
falling to your art of multiplying centers and circumferences, which is not
difficult to you, that can multiply worlds. And because cause you cannot be so
impudent as to deny the ascending of light bodies; you say, That they ascend to
some circumference which we cannot reasonably affirm to be concentricall with
that of the world. But I would know of you, how you can reasonably affirm that
circle to be eccentricall, which we sensibly perceive to be concentricall to
the world? If neither you nor we can perceive that circumference to which light
bodies ascend eccentricall to the world, what reason have you to affirm it? or
how do you prove what you affirm? May you not as well tell us, that there are
more suns then this one which we see? For you will say that we cannot
reasonably affirm there is but one sun. But you say, We cannot prove the
descent of heavy bodies to the center, nor the ascent of light bodies to the
circumference of the world; because all our experience in this kind, extends
but to things that are on earth, or in the air above it. I pray you good Sir,
how far does your experience reach beyond ours, that you should deny this our
assertion? Have you been in the moon, and observed that which we cannot find
here below? We see quantum acie possunt oculi servare, as far as our eyes
will give us leave; to wit, light bodies mounting from the center toward the
circumference; do you see otherwise? I know you do not, and cannot though you
had as many eyes as Argus: therefore keep your wild opinions to your self,
for so long as you can neither by sense nor reason persuade us, your bare word
will be too weak an argument to work upon our belief. You conclude, That it
were a senseless thing, from our experience of so little a part, to pronounce
any thing infallibly concerning the situation of the whole. I grant our
experience to be little, but yours is less, or none at all: a little is better
then none, and we may more boldly infer, that there is but one center, and
one circumference; (because all light things ascend to one circumference, and
all heavy things descend to one center) then you can infer two centers, and
two circumferences; whereas you never knew any light thing ascend, or heavy
thing descend to any other circumference and center, then to these which we
maintain: are not you therefore much more senseless then we? for we follow the
direction both of our sense and reason; so do not you.

6. Our Astonomicall reasons you refell as wisely as you have done the rest:
for you grant us, That the earth is in the midst of the equinoctial, horizon,
and other circles; but you deny that from hence can be concluded that it is in
the center of the world. It seems then that the equinoctial, etc. are not
concentricall to the world, and that the earth may be in the midst of the
horizon and equator, though never so much distant from the center; and what is
this but to make another world? consisting of another heaven and earth? For if
this earth be under any other equinoctial besides that of the primum mobile,
or any other horizon, it cannot have the heaven equally on all sides of it, and
so cannot be in the lowest place which is the center, though it be the heaviest
body; and so against its nature must be higher then that body which is in the
center. This is to take away that order which God has placed in the creatures,
to multiply worlds, and to bring in a strange confusion. And what a wise reason
do you give us why the earth would remain in the midst of these circles, that
is, the equinoctial, etc. though distant from the center; because it is the
eye that imagins them to be described about it? So then the earth does not go
out of the midst of these circles, because the eye imagines them, etc. You have
a strange fascinating eye, that can keep the earth within its circles; if you
should wink; or if you lose your eyes with your great patron ` Democritus,
would not the earth give you the slip and fall out of your circles into the
center of the world? Besides, I had thought that the action of the eye had been
to see, not to imagine. As you have made a confused Chaos in the great world,
so you do in the little world too, confounding the inward and outward senses,
the sight and the imagination: I think you were begot of Chaos and caligo.
Again, what a reaching eye have you, that can describe circles about the
earth? If you had spoken of an artificial Globe, you had said something; but
if your eye were as big as that of Polyphemus, Argolici clypei, aut Phoebaeae
lampadis instar, yet you could not describe with your eye a circle about the
earth: your imagination may describe it, but not your eye: your imagination
cannot be the cause why the earth remains within its circles; your imagination
must be conformable to the reality of things, and not they to your imagination:
for though you imagine that there is a world in the moon, that the earth
moves, etc. yet there is no such thing, because the earth is in the center: we
imagine it to be so, and believe it also; but our imagination or belief do not
make it to be so; therefore, our collection is not weak when we infer that
the earth is in the center, because it is in the midst of these circles which
are concentricall to the world; or because the parts and degrees of the earth
do answer in proportion to the parts and degrees of heaven, which they could
not well do if the earth were eccentricall.

7. Now I think you go about to conjure us with your figures, circles, and
characters, and to hem us in with a circle made by your pen, as Popilius the
Roman Legate did enclose King Antiochius within a circle made with his rod: you
remove the earth from one center to another, with more facility, then
Archimedes could have done with his engine: you transfer the stars from one
circle to another at your pleasure; you can do I think as she in the Poet,
Sistere aquam fluviis and vertere sidera ritro; and all this stir is to
inform us, that though the earth be never so far distant from the center of
the world; yet the parts and degrees of your imaginary sphere about it will be
always proportionable to the parts and degrees of the earth. And what of all
this? You may imagine what spheres you will, and in your imagination place the
earth as you will, yet the earth stands fast for ever in this great fabric
of the world as the center, though in your head it move to and fro. You may
place the earth upon the top of the primum mobile, and imagine a sphere about
it, with proportionable degrees, and parts to those of the earth; we may
retort these words upon the sun your center, that though it be never so far
distant from the center of the world, yet the parts of an imaginary sphere
about it will be proportionable to the parts of the sun: but though in your
imaginary circle there be a proportion of parts and degrees to the earth
removed from the center, I would know if the earth therefore is removed from
the center: Or if you should remove the earth ten or twenty degrees nearer the
pole Articke, or to the Zenith of the Meridian from the center; is there, or
can there be any proportion between the two hemispheares? Will not the one be
so much the less, by how much the other is enlarged? Or can the true sphere
of heaven be divided equally into twelve parts, or signs, so that six be
always above the earth, and six below? Or can the stars in both hemispheares
appear of the same bigness? Doubtless though you make a proportion in your
imaginary sphere, to your imaginary earth, in your imaginary center; yet there
can be no proportion between the real sphere of heaven, and the real earth,
which is the real center of the world: if it should be removed from its place
where it is, your imaginations then are but the images, phansies, and toys of
your head, without ground or solidity; therefore they are neither so strong,
nor we so weak, as that they should make any impression upon our belief, as
the mothers imagination does upon the tender Embryo in her womb.

When you are pressed with the manifest absurdities and inconveniences which
arise from removing of the earth from the center of the universe, you have no
other way to escape, but like a hedgehog, to shrink back into your imaginary
globe or circle: for you grant that the earth must needs be placed both in the
axis and equator, but that must be in the center of the sphere which you
imagine about it, and not in the midst of this universe. But why must the earth
be removed from being the center of the universe, which by sense, reason, daily
experience, and continual observation of Astronomers, is known to be the
center? Why I say must it be removed from its own real circle, to your
imaginary circle? What inconvenience will follow in the world, if it remain
the center of the universe? Or wherein shall the world be bettered, if it be
removed to your supposed circle? Nay, what absurdities will not follow upon
this removal, which you will never be able to avoid for all your starting
hole? for whereas you say, That though the earth were as far distant from the
center, as we conceive the sun to be, yet it may be still situated in the
very concourse of the axis and equator. Truly, though we should conceive it to
be so far distant, yet it would not be still in the concourse of these two
lines; for if either the sun or the earth were there still, there would be a
perpetual equinox through the world, neither would there ever be any increase
or decrease of days and nights.

Now you present unto us a Scenography or plat-forme of your imaginary world,
in which, like another Joshua, you make the sun to stand still, so that here
is a perpetual solstice; if that American (who would not acknowledge the sun
for a god, because it never rested) had seen your sun, or had known of him what
you know, he would have recanted his opinion. What fools were the Poets to
bestow so rich a chariot, and four prancing horses on the sun, who could
make no use of them? they should have bestowed this gift upon the earth, for
she it is that undertakes all the toil, and rejoices as a Giant to run her
course. Ovid's second book of Metamorphosis must be mended, and Phaeton must
prefer his petition to the Earth his mother, and not to the Sun his father;
except perhaps in those days the Sun did travel about the Earth, but now
being weary to go about so often, and to take such pains for her thanklesse
inhabitants, has given over this toil, and has left the earth to shift for
her self and children. The reason why you present this figure to us, is to let
us see, That though the sun be in the center, and the earth in the suns orb,
yet that there can be no Eclipse, but when the sun and moon are
diametrically opposite. But here your opinion is diametrically opposite to the
truth, for the line from the center to the circumference, is but a
semidiameter; and indeed the sun is distant from the moon in your figure,
nothing near a semidiameter, and yet your moon is eclipsed. But what a
misshapen world have you made us? in which you have placed the sun lowermost,
and the earth above the sun, and has made such a vast circuit for the earth,
and such a little circle for the moon. You told us before, that the earth
draws about the moon, but in your figure it cannot be so; for you have made
the earth to compass the sun round; but the moon to fetch a compass of her
own aside off from the sun: so that whereas you have placed the earth in
Aries, she is between the sun and the moon, but when she comes about to
Libra the opposite sign, then the sun will be between the moon and her. This
is indeed a strange world, and doubtless none of Gods making; I wish I were
out of it, for I am weary and sorry to spend time in refuting of such toys.

You do well to confess the uncertainty of finding out the exact distance of
the firmament, which is but conjecturall according to men's fancies, and so
indeed are the motions, and magnitudes, and number, and order of the spheres,
and stars; about which Astronomers have so many digladiations and
oppositions, which were tedious but to name. From their conjectures and
uncertainties have proceeded such a number of conjuring words: as,
Trepidations, Retrogradations, Excentricities, concentricities, Epicyles,
Accessions, Recessions, and I cannot tell what; so that as Cato said of
Soothsayers, I may say of Astronomers, It is a wonder that they do not laugh
at one another. The best of them all are but Cu va in terris animae, and
coelestium inanes: They gaze and stare on the stars, and dispute, and assever
with great boldness, that each star is of such and such a bigness and
altitude, and that they move thus and thus; and that there be so many of each
magnitude: and so expert they are, and quick-sighted in these things that are
so remote, and yet cannot perceive the things that be hard at hand: therefore
Anaximines gazing on the stars, fell in the ditch, and was checked by his maid
for his curiosity in things beyond his reach, and neglecting that which most
concerned him. Saint Ambrose complained of the Astronomers of his time, that
they were busy in measuring of the heaven, in numbering of the stars, but
careless of their salvation; that was indeed, Relinquers causans salutis,
error is quaerere. Even like the Pharisees whom Christ reproves, That they
could discern the face of the sky, and of the earth, but could not discern
the time. Luke 12.56
Saint Austin preferres that man who is conscious of his own infirmities, to
him that is curious in the speculation and serutiny of the stars: Laudabilior
est animus cui nota est infirmitas sua, etc. Even in the opinion of Socrates,
L. 4. De trin. In Prooem. in Xenoph.
it is (...), to be mad, to inquire curiously into these celestial things,
which are (...), not to be found outby us; Furiosi dementesque sunt judicandi,
they are furious and mad men, etc. says Lactantius. L. 3.c.c. De falls. sapiens.
I will not condemn the good uses that may be made of Astronomy in calculation
of times, observation of seasons, prediction of eclipses, and such things as
have their immediate dependence from the opposition and conjunction of stars;
and the uses that may be made of it in physic, and in the camp: but that
which I reprove, is the vain curiosity of men, who cannot be content to know
with sobriety things revealed, must needs with Phaeton and Icarns meddle with
these heavenly bodies, in vain and curious speculations; the knowledge whereof
in this life is denied us, as being a part of Adams punishment for his affected
knowledge, and being a means for us to have recourse to Christ, in whom are
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Therefore, for their needless
pains, and presumptuous curiosity, God does punish them with multitudes of
contradictory opinions. Who can sufficiently laugh to hear their jars and
dissentions, Serns, 1. De side.
says Theodoret? for their difference is not about the measuring of an acre of
ground, but of the whole world. Now (says the same Father) who can measure the
whole earth! (...) God himself asks Job, Job 38.5.
Who is it that has laid the measures of the earth, and who has stretched the
line upon it? and he asks him, whether he has perceived the breadth of the
earth, Ver. 18. intimating hereby, the impossibility thereof, and showing what
difference there is between Gods knowledge and man's: says Saint Chrysostom on
that place; (...). For God (says the same Father) will let Job see how much
man is inferior to him, in that not only he cannot do the works that God
has done, but also that he has not the knowledge of them. As it was Gods
proper work to make the earth, so it is proper to him alone to know the
measure of it: if then we know not the earths measure which is but a point in
comparison of heaven, what madness is it to measure the heavens, or to define
the motions, scituations, altitude, densitie, or other accidents of them
unknown to us? This is, coelum ipsum petere stulritia. Know thou the
ordinances, (or as some translations have it) the conversions of heaven? Verse
22.
says God to Job. The Psalmist tells us, that it is only he that numbereth the
stars, and calls them all by their names. He bids Abraham tell the stars if
he could, showing that indeed he could not.

8. From hence appears the vanity of your side, who think, That the stars
would seem no bigger to us then they now are, though our earth were nearer to
them by 2000000. Germane miles, which is granted to be the diameter of that or
be wherein the earth is supposed to move. I pray how come you to know this? by
relation, or revelation, or reason, or experience? or have you dreamed it? Qui
amant ipsi sibi somnia singunt. Or do you know it by the help of a
perspective? You tell us, that the better the perspective is, the lesser it
makes the stars to appear; if my spectacles were of that quality, I could
fling them away, and trust to my own eyes: I wish you could tell us, how many
Germane miles would suffice to find out the true bigness of the stars; or in
how many years will the bodies of the Saints be in ascending to heaven; you
must pardon us if we believe not what you say, such an infinite disproportion
do you make both between the bigness and distance of our earth and the fixed
stars. And though we will not think elephants and whales to be fictions and
chimaera's, because they are bigger then mice; yet if you should tell us of a
whale that were as big as the I Will of Saint Laurence, or of great Britain; and
of an elephant that were able to overturne the Alps with his trunk; or of a
Camel that had a bunch on his back as high as the cape or top of Tenarisf, we
would laugh sooner then believe such monstrous absurdities. And yet the
disproportion of these supposed creatures to mice is nothing, to that of the
earth and fixed stars. And the like credit do we give to that incredible
celerity of the eighth sphere, of which Astronomers write, and to the rest of
their conceits concerning the reaching of the suns orb to the pole star; and
that the circle of the pole star is above four times bigger then the orb of
the sun; and that the semidiameter of the earth, makes little or no
difference in the appearance of the sun; as if the observations from the
center and surface, were of the same exactness. Whereas, never any man has
been in the center to know this, neither do the Astronomers agree amongst
themselves about the compass and diameter of the Earth; Aristotle, Hipparchus,
Eratosthenes, Ptolomy, Alphragan, Fernelius, and the later Professors of that
faculty, being all of different opinions; so that many Astronomicall principles
are grounded upon mere uncertainties.

2. We do not ground our argument (as you say) upon this supposition, That
every body must necessarily be of an equal extension to that distance from
whence there does not appear any sensible difference in its quantity, as you
instance in a Bird, and a Tree: as that the Tree should be accounted by us
forty paces thick because we approaching nearer to it by forty paces, do not
find any sensible difference. This is a crotchet hammered in your own head,
but never supposed by us.

3. We grant with you, That it is presumption to conclude that to be
superfluous, whose use we understand not; but yet we must needs say, That
what is not useful at all, is superfluous; as that immense and stupendous
bigness, and incredible distance of some stars, seeing they were made for
the use of man only; (for to what other end should they be made?) whereas if
they had been nearer and lesser, they might have been more effectual:
Therefore we cannot believe you that they are of that bigness and distance
you speak of. And as for other inhabitants, beside those that are upon this
earth, by whom (as you say) these lesser stars may be discerned, I have nothing
now to say to them; I think you mean your men in the Moon, of whom perhaps I
will speak hereafter: and as for these small stars, which you say are lately
discovered; I grant that they were made for man's use, though they be scarce
discernable; for their influence may be great though their light be small: and
we have by them occasion to see how one star differs from another star in
glory, and we may admire Gods greatness in the least, as well as in the biggest;
therefore he has made Flies as well as Eagles, and Mice as well as Elephants.

9. You chase as if you had been slung with nettles at an argument of mine
against Lansbergius, who held, as you do, that the Sun was the center: my
argument is this; That which is least in a circle ought to be the center of it;
but the earth is far less then the Sun, and the terrestrial Equinoctial (
secundum te) according to your own words, is the least of all the circles,
etc. This (you say) is so simple, that every fresh man would laugh at it, and
it would make one suspect, that he who should urge such an argument, did
scarce understand any thing in Astronomy. Answ. 1. For any great skill that
either you or I have in Astronomy, we may shake hands: Astronomy is not my
profession, yet so much I have as is convenient for a Divine, and enough to
discover your vain and ridiculous conceits; and I have not the less because
of your suspicion: I understand so much as that I dare say there be many absurd
and foolish fancies taught by Astronomers, though the science it self be
useful in many things. 2. If you, or your fresh men laugh at this argument,
you will show that you have little salt in you, especially that salt whereof
the Apostle speaks. 3. You showed more malice then knowledge, more ill will
then skill, in repeating my argument; for you left out ( secundum te) that is,
according to your own words; which shows that these were the words of
Lansbergius, not mine; to wit, The terrestrial Equinoctial is the least of
all circles: So that you cunningly would derive the ignorance and simplicity of
your Champion upon me, whereas I spoke in his own terms. 4. I did not speak
of the earth, as it had relation to the Moon, or Mercury, but in reference to
the Sun; for I say that the earth is lesser then the Sun, and therefore fitter
to be the center then the Sun, as Lansbergius would have it. 5. There is no
certainty amongst Astronomers, whether the Earth, Moon, or Mercury, be the
least sphere. 6. I said, minimum in circulo, not circuli; that which is least
within the circle, not that which is the least part of the circle. The Moon,
and the rest of the Planets, are the thicker parts of the spheres, so is not
the Earth, it is no part at all of any sphere, but it is within the spears;
therefore the Earth, not the Moon, is fittest to be the center. Thus you have
made me say more now, then I did before. You had no reason then to put so much
vinegar in your ink; but you are a namelesse Moon-man wrapped in a cloud: Cernere
ne quis te, ne quis contingere possit. But be not so high conceited of your
self; though your habitation be in the Moon, yet learn humility; Tecum habita,
and noris quam sit tibi curta supellex. As for the other Objections, which you
say are not worth the eiting, are indeed such as you know not how to answer
them; therefore you slight them, as the Fox did the grapes, which he could not
reach.

CHAP. VII.
1. The Stars have not their fight because the Sun is in the center, nor has
the Sun less light being out of it. 2. Why the Earth is in the center. 3. The
Sun is not the center, because the Planets move about him. 4. The center is not
the most excellent place, neither are the best things next it or in it. 5.
There is an harmony amongst the Stars, though the Sun be not in the center.
IN this Proposition you say, That the Sun may be the center; and you tell us
of deformities, wheels, and screws, as if Nature in framing of the world had
been put to such hard shifts by Ptolomie's and Tycho's Hypothesis: But indeed
the wheels, and screwes you speak of, are the whirle-gigs of your own head;
and I hope your Creed is, that not Nature, but the God of Nature, framed the
world: but let us consider the weight of your arguments, by which you would
prove Copernicus his Assertion.

1. You say, That the light which is diffused in the stars, is contracted in
the center, which can only be by placing the Sun there: so then it seems by
you, that if the Sun were not in the center, the light of the stars could not
be so eminently contained and contracted in the Sun: either you must mean that
the stars could not receive so much light as they do from the Sun, or else
that the Sun could not have in himself so much light as he has, if he were
not in the center: But both these are frivolous whimsies; for neither has any
star its light, because the Sun is in the center, (as you would have) nor
would the Sun lose any of his light, if he were out of the center, no more then
a candle can lose its light, though it be not placed in the midst of the room.
Now, whether the light of the stars be all one with that of the Sun, or any
parcel of it, is not yet fully resolved. In your next Edition tell us more
plainly what you mean by the light in the stars contracted in the center,
and we will give you a more satisfactory answer.

2. Because Clavius and others say, That the Sun was placed in the midst of the
Planets, that he might the more conveniently distribute his beat and light
amongst them; the force of this reason (you say) may more properly prove him to
be in the center. I answer, that it will rather prove the Earth to be in the
center thus: The Sun is in the midst of the Planets, that they may the more
participate of his light; so is the Earth placed in the midst and center of the
world, that the Sun might the more conveniently distribute his light and heat
to it: for the Sun was made chiefly for the Earth's sake, and the inhabitants
thereof; neither do the stars so much need his light and heat as we, without
which we can neither live, nor procreate: and as it is questionable whether the
stars receive their light from the Sun, (though the Moon does) so is it much to
be doubted that they receive no heat from the Sun, seeing Saturn is cold; and
the Suns heat comes by reflection, which cannot be in the stars.

3. You say, That the Planets move about the center of the world, and that I
grant you; but Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, move about the body of
the Sun; ergo, the Sun is in the midst of the world. Answ. If you had been
better acquainted with the master of Syllogismes, you had not framed such a
lame Syllogism as this; for thus it runs in briefer terms; some Planets
move about the center of the world, some Planets move about the Sun; ergo, the
Sun is the center of the world. Besides, that it consists all of particulars,
the conclusion is falsely inferred against the laws of the third figure; for it
should be formed in the first figure thus: What moves about the Sun, moves
about the center of the world: the Planets move about the Sun, ergo, they move
about the center of the world; and all this I grant you, that the Planets move
about the earth which is the center: now then I hope you will not say that the
Sun is the center of the world, because the Planets move about him; no more
then Jericho was the center of Canaan, because the Priests went about it.

4. When you tell us that the revolution of Venus and Mercury is about the Sun,
because they are never at any great distance from him, you allege a cause fit
to be laughed at; for is the vicinity of one star to another, the cause of
its revolution about that star? because the mill-wheele is not far distant
from the miller, does it therefore go about the miller?

5. The reason which you allege from Pythagoras is also weak, for though the
sun in respect of his light were the most excellent body, and the center the
most excellent place, yet it will not follow that he is there; for we see that
the most excellent creatures are not placed still next the center or in it, but
farthest from it: as man is placed in the superficies or circumference of the
earth, and not in the center of it the heart is not in the midst of the body;
if the middle or center were always the sit place for a luminous body, God
would have commanded Moses to set the candlestick with the lamps in the midst
of the tabernacle, and not in the side of it: our eyes had been placed in our
navels, not in our heads. And albeit Plato say, that the soul of the world
resides in the innermost place of it, yet I hope you do not by this understand
the sun; and you did well to allege Macrobius against your self, in
comparing the sun in the world, to the heart in a living creature; for as the
heart is not in the center of the body, neither is the sun in the center of the
world. But you give us a profound reason why in living creatures the chiefest
part is not always placed in the midst, because they are not of an orbicular
form as the world is; then it seems that the outward figure is the cause why
the best part is not placed in the midst. What think you of a Hedge hog when
he wraps himself up in his prickles as round as a bowl, is the best part then
more in the middle of his body then it was before? Or has the earth which is
of a round form better things in the center then in the superficies? What
difference is there between the middle and outside of a round stone? Again,
you say, the center is not the worst place, although Aristotle proves it from
the dignity of the thing containing over that which is contained; and your
reason is, That though the center be contained, yet it is one of the termini or
limits of a round body, as well as the circumference: but I reply, that though
it be one of the limits, yet it is contained, and therefore more ignoble then
that which contains it; so you have but offered to answer this argument, and
indeed you know not how to answer it.

6. If we suppose the sun to be in the center (say you) we may conceive an
excellent harmony, both in the number and distance of the Planets. For my part
I give you leave to conceive what you will, so that you do not obtrude your
conceits on us as oracles, but will keep them to your self; if you continue to
divulge them, we will conceit that your conceits are but idle phansies, if you
cannot set them forth with better proofs then as yet you have done. We are
confident the earth is in the center, and do conceive that there is an
excellent harmony in the Planets, though the sun be not in the center; and
therefore to say that the harmony would be disturbed if the sun were amongst
the planets, you wrong both Pythagoras your master, whose conceit of the
musical harmony in heaven was grounded on the motion of the Planets; and
injurious to Apollo himself the author of musical harmony, and the continual
companion of the Muses, without whom there can be no consort.

CHAP. VIII.
1. How the eye is deceived, and how not; and that if the earth moved, we
should see it. 2. Motion and rest how the objects of the eye, and of the common
sense. 3. If the earth moved, the clouds would but sceme to move as well as the
sun. 4. How the eye can be deceived in the motion of a lucid body. 5. The
natural motion of the foundation cannot keep buildings from falling. 6. The
heavens sitter for motion then the earth. 7. Rugged bodies not fittest for
motion. 8. The sight hindered by the motion of the subject, medium, and object.
9. One simple body has but one natural motion, proved. 10. Essential
properties more chiefly in the whole then in the parts, the earth is heavy in
its own place how, bigness how a hinderance to motion, of the earths
ineptitude to a swist motion. 11. The magneticall qualities of the earth, a
fiction. 12. Similitudes no prooses; the seas ebbing and flowing, what. 13. The
whole earth moves not, because the parts move not round. 14. Absurd phrases;
and the spots about the sun, censured. 15. That the earth turns about the
moon is ridiculous. 16. Some observations to prove that the earth turns about
the clouds, refused. 17. Of a mixed motion, of the place, medium, and space.
18. Of the motion of comets. 19. My nine arguments desended. 1. That the earths
motion would make it hot. 2. The air purer. 3. A sound. 4. Heaven has all
things sit for motion. 5. Of similar parts and the whole. 6. The sun is the
heart of the world. 7. It works by motion. 8. The earth is the firm
foundation. 9. The authority of Divines; the heaven called Ether; the earth
has not two distinct motions.

THe chief business of this Chapter (you say) is to desend the earths
diurnall motion. Indeed you are too busy; Non amo nimium diligentes: neither
is this business of yours anything else then idleness, otiosi negotium. And
because you cannot answer our objections, you are as busy here as you can be
to illude them, and to delude the world with your great brags and
Rhodomontado's; but let us see with what dexterity you dissipate the strength
of our arguments; you do as Cacus did to Hercules, Cacus being too weak to
resist that invincible champion, labored to escape his hands by darkning the
cave, and Hercules his eyes with smoke and ashes which he belched out against
him: the like stratagem you use with intricate words and smoakie phrases to
darken the understanding of the Reader.

1. We objected, that if the earth did move we should perceive it; you answer
(but in many intricate and ambiguous terms which were tedious to relate) That
the sight judges of motion deceitfully; your reason is, because motion is not
the proper object of the sight, nor belonging to any other peculiar sense: and
that the common sense apprehends the eye it self to rest immovable, as when a
man is carried in a ship. Ans The sight is oftentimes deceived, either in
respect of the distance of the object, so the stars appear less then they
are; or in respect of the agitation of the object, so a square thing seems
round being swiftly turned about. 2. In respect of the indisposition of the
medium, and so the Planets rising and falling seem biggest, the air being
thickened. 3. In respect of the organ, when the eye, optic nerves, or visive
spirits are disturbed, vitiated, indisposed, or agitated, and so things that
rest seem to move, because the eye moves; for that apparent motion is not the
object of the eye, as a true motion is, but as it were the effect of the eye
moved. So then, tell us the cause why we cannot perceive the earth move, seeing
it moves with such a stupendous swiftness? You cannot say that the distance
of it, nor the indisposition of the medium are the causes; the eye then must be
the cause. But are all men's eyes from the creation till now so disturbed, or
agitate with an insensible motion, that they cannot perceive the earth nor any
part of it to move, and yet do perceive the sun to move? What? will you make
God so defective in his work of man's body, as to give him such eyes which shall
continually delude him; neither shall they ever apprehend their object, though
never so near; or the medium, though never so well disposed? Or will you make
him so envious, as to give us such eyes, by which we should receive the
knowledge of visible objects, and yet cannot see them when they are so near
us? This is the curse of the Sodomites, who could not see Lot's door though
they were close by it. Your simile of the ship will not hold; for though it be
true that the shore apparently moves when the ship removes, yet we see and
feel the true motion of the ship, as well as we see, or rather seem to see
the apparent motion of the shore. When I have been in a ship, I have observed
by looking on the mast how swiftly it is moved from the shore; but being on the
shore, and looking upon trees, I see no other motion in them then what is
caused by the wind. When I am in a ship, I perceive the motion of the other
ship that saileth by me, though the motion of both be equal and uniforme: but
when I am in an Island, I can neither perceive the motion of it, nor the motion
of the other Island that is by it. And although the motion of the eye makes a
thing seem to move which does not move, yet it does not make the thing seem
to move which does really move, if it be within distance: for being in a ship I
have discerned the running of horses and carts upon the shore really, though
the shore it self moved apparently; therefore, though I should yield that the
earth did move, yet that motion could not make me think that the sun did not
move really, no more then the motion of the ship can hinder me from discerning
the true motion of a horse or wheel on the shore; and albeit, motion be not
the proper object of the eye, yet it is an object; neither is the eye more
deceived in apprehending or receiving the species of motion, then it is in
receiving the species of colors, caeteris paribus: the action of the eye, or
passion which you will, being no other toward the motion of a colored object,
then toward the color of a moving object. Again, it would be considered,
whether the natural motion of the earth (as you call it) and the violent
motion of a ship produce the same effect in our eye; as because the moving of a
ship makes the shore seem to move, therefore the moving of the earth makes the
sun seem to move.

2. Your words seem to be contradictory when you say, That motion is not the
proper object of the sight, nor belonging to any other peculiar sense. We say
that colors are the proper object of the sight, because they belong not to any
other peculiar sense, and that motion is not the proper object of the eye,
because it does belong to other peculiar senses: but your other words are
false, when you say, That the common sense apprehends the eye it self to rest
immovable. For when the eye is moved, the common sense apprehends it to be
moved; and so when it rests, the common sense apprehends it to rest; otherwise,
it and the imagination should be still deceived. But when you say, That the eye
is an ill judge of natural secrets, you should have said, That it is no judge
of natural secrets; for the visible works of nature are no secrets; natures
secrets are invisible, and therefore are judged by reason, not by sense. Now,
though this be a good consequence, the earth does not move, because it does not
appear so to us, yet this consequence will not hold, the earth does move,
because it appears to move: for an object that is immovable may seem to
move, because the eye is moved; but when we see a great body near us, (to
stand still, we justly infer that it moves not, because we see it not. For
the apparent motion of the shore, there is a manifest cause, but for the
apparent rest of the earth there can be no cause; for if it did move it would
not seem to rest, being there is no cause, not so much as imaginable of this
supposed rest, but rather the contrary; for if it did move, it and all things
else would seem to move: as for the apparent bigness of the sun and moon,
I have already told you a reason, but you have not, nor can you tell me a
reason for the apparent rest of the earth.

L. 1. sec. 1. c. 1.
2. I objected, That if the motions of the heavens be only apparent, that then
the motion of the clouds would be so too: your answer is, That I might as well
infer, that the sense is mistaken in every thing, because it is so in one
thing. Answ. You should have rather inferred, that as the sense is mistaken in
one thing, so it might be in any other thing; but I will stand to your
illation, the sense is mistaken sometimes in every thing, when it is mistaken
in one thing of the same kind: the eye is mistaken in the bigness of one
star, and so it is in the bigness of every star, because the reason or cause
of the mistake is alike in all, to wit, the distance. The eye is mistaken in
the motion of one tree or house upon the shore, and so it is in all the trees
and houses it sees on the shore; for the reason of this mistake is alike in
all, to wit, the agitation of the eye: even so if the heavens move apparently,
the clouds also move apparently; L. 1. sec. 1. c. 1.
Nam in horum motu potest decipi visus, non minus quam in motu coelorum: these
are my words which you cunningly left out. The eye is deceivable in the one as
well as in the other, therefore, my eye being alike disposed (in respect of its
agitation, by the supposed motion of the earth) to the heavens, and to the
clouds, it will follow, that as it is mistaken in the one, so it is in the
other; and consequently we must no more trust our eyes in the motion of the
clouds, then in the motion of the heavens, if the earth did move. Therefore,
what you speak of Anaxagoras his opinion concerning the blackness of the
snow, is fit for your self: for to hold the snow to be black, and the earth
to move, are both alike absurd and ridiculous; but this opinion is more
dangerous then that. As for your conceit of the common sense, conceiving the
eye to be immovable, I have said already that it is false, and indeed the
opinion of one that seems to want common sense; and as boldly without proof
do you affirm, that the clouds, though they seem not to move, are carried
about with our earth by a swift revolution; for so you make the inferior
bodies against that order that God has placed in the world, to move the
superior: as if you should say, The foot originally moves the head, and not
the head the foot. But this is no hinderance (you say) why we may not judge
aright of the other particular motions. It is true, I judge aright of the
particular motions of the clouds, when I see them carried to and fro by the
wind, and so I judge aright of the motion of the sun; but when I see the sun
and a cloud moving from East to West, and you should tell me that the sun
does not move, though the cloud does move, I would know the reason why my eye
should be more deluded in the one then in the other; seeing the motion of the
earth, and so of my eye, is alike disposed to both. It is as much as if you
would tell me, when I see a horse and a man run both on the shore, that the man
runs, but not the horse, whereas my eye is alike disposed to both. As for your
similies of a man walking in the ship, and of the moving of the oars, they
will not hold: for it is true, that though the banks seem to move, yet it will
not follow that my friend does but seem to walk, or the oars seem to move,
when as they move truly; the reason is, because the motion of the ship is no
hinderance to the sight of that motion of my friend, or of the oars, being so
near to my eye; although that same motion of the ship is a hinderance both to
the sight of the earths stability, as also of the motion of such things as be
afar off: for a horse a great way off on the shore running, will seem to me a
bush moving with the trees and banks; even so the motion of the earth may as
well delude my eye in the moving of the clouds, as of the sun.

3. I said that the eye could not be still deceived in its sight or judgment
of a lucid body, which is its prime and proper object; Your answer is, That the
deceit is not concerning the light or color of these bodies, but concerning
their motion, which is neither the primary nor proper object of the eye. Answ.
The motion of the sun as you take it, is no ways the object of the eye; for
it is non ens in your opinion: What is apparent, is not, quod videtur non est;
a seeming motion is no motion, and therefore no object. 2. I said that a lucid
body was the eyes object, the light it self, objectum quo, or the cause that
bodies are discernable by the eye: now what probability is there, that the eyes
which were made to look upon these lucid bodies, should be still deluded, or
can be, seeing their motion is rather the object of the eye, then their light,
as is said? albeit motion be a common object, I see their motion, I see their
lucid bodies, but their light I see not properly: their light is the cause or
means by which, but not the objectum quod, or thing that I see.

4. We say that our high buildings would be hurled down if the earth did move:
You answer, That this motion is natural, and therefore regular, and tending to
conservation. Answ. Earthquakes are natural motions, which neither are
regular, nor tend to conservation: the motion of winds, hail, rain, thunder,
etc. are natural, and yet do much hurt; therefore, the naturality of the
earths motion cannot preserve our buildings from falling. But you say, If a
glass of beer may stand firmly in a ship, moving swiftly, much less will
the natural and equal motion of the earth cause any danger in our buildings.
Answ. There is no proportion between a glass of beer and a high building, nor
is there between the motion of a ship and of the earth; for the ship moves upon
the plain superficies of the water, being carried by the wind or tide: the
earth moves circularly and with an incredible celerity, as your side say. You
should compare the earths motion, to the motion of a wheel or great globe, and
then set your glass of beer upon it whilst it is whirling about: but you need
not fear the fall of your high buildings though the heaven whirle about,
except you mean to build castles in the air, or to raise your house as high
as the tower of Babell; I think your buildings in the moon cannot stand upon
such a whirling foundation.

5. I perceive by your Interjection ha, ha, he, that you are a merry gentleman,
indeed you cannot answer for laughing; but, Per resum multum, etc. I doubt me
you are troubled with a hypochondriacke melancholy, or with the spirit of
blind Democritus: take heed of risus Sardonius. But let us see what it is that
tickles you. I had said, that though this circular motion of the earth were
natural to it, yet it was not natural to towns and buildings, for these are
artificial: To this you answer not but by your interjection of laughter, which
is a very easy way to solve arguments, and so fools will prove the best
disputants. I hope you do not think that towns and buildings are natural
bodies, or that the motion of the earth is natural to them; and if you think
that artificial things are privileged from falling, by the natural motion of
a natural foundation, you speak against reason and experience; for a ship is
not privileged from sinking, because the foundation on which it is carried
moves naturally; and high buildings must needs be weakened by motion, let it be
never so equal and regular; he that thinks otherwise deserves to be laughed
at. I have read of moving Islands, but without buildings, you were best go
build there.

6. I said, that the air could never be quiet about us, but that there would
be a continual and forcible motion of it from East to West, if the earth did
move with that celerity you speak of; to this you answer, That the air is
carried along with the same motion of the earth: But this will not help you,
for the carrying of the air about with the earth, cannot hinder the forcible
motion of it, nor can we be so senseless as not to feel it. Does not the
whirling about of a great wheel move the air about it? and if you stood by,
you should feel it. But you are very witty in your words following, If the
motion of the heaven (say you) which is a smooth body be able to carry with it
a great part of the three elements, etc. much more may our earth which is a
rugged body be able to turn the air next to it. You should rather say, If the
earth which is but a small, dull, low, and heavy body, can carry the air about
with it, much more may the heavens do this, which are vast, agil, active, and
high bodies: for we find that the superior bodies are more apt to work upon,
and to move the inferior, then to be moved by the inferior: as the inferior
parts of the little world of man's body are moved by the head, so it is in the
great world. Again, the heavens in respect of their agility, activity,
subtlety, come nearer to the nature of spirits, then the earth, which is a
dull, heavy, lumpish body, not apt to be moved, much less to move. Is it the
earth that moves the air, or the air that moves the earth in earthquakes? Is
it the earthy and heavy part of man's body that moves these aereall substances
in the nerves, which we call animal spirits? Or are not these rather the
movers of our gross bodies? Your argument is just such another as this; if the
wind or air be able to move about the weather-cocke, much more may the tower
or steeple which is a rugged body move it: But that rugged bodies are more apt
to move, or to be moved, then smooth bodies, I never heard before. I have
observed that the smoother the bowl is, the swifter it runs; why did David
choose five smooth stones to sling, if rugged ones were apter for motion? When
you would have your maid make you some mustard, give her a rugged dish, and a
rugged bullet, and tell her that these are apter for motion; she will presently
entertain this new Philosophy with your interjection, ha ha he: so when you
say that a rugged body carries more air with it then a smooth; you meant
perhaps the bodies of Satyrs, or of the wild Irish in their rugges. But now
distrusting your rugged conceit, you fly to the earths magneticall virtue,
whereby it can make all things near unto it, to observe the same revolution:
this is a far fetched shift, and a strange property of the magnes; did you
ever know a loadstone move any thing except iron or steel, or to move it self
circularly, and to make all things near to it, to observe the same revolution;
that these conceits are, Non sani hominis, non sanus juret Orestes.

7. I said, L. 1. Sec. 1. c. 5
That when the man or subject, the medium, and the object were all moved, the
sight was hindered that the eye could not exactly judge of any thing. You
answer, That it is true where be seveverall motions, but when the subject,
medium, and object, are all carried with the same equal motion, there is no
impediment in the act of sieing. But this is a mere shift of yours; for though
the motion be equal in all, yet the sight will be hindered. Sit down in a
turning chair, or on a turning table, take a book in your hand, and
spectacles on your nose, and let me turn you about, the motion shall be equal
in all three, but I doubt me you will read ill-favouredly your instance of
reading in a ship is nothing; for the ship moves sometimes so slowly that it is
scarce discernable: but let a ship or coach move swiftly, and you shall not
read distinctly. If a ship should move four miles in a minute as you say the
earth does, you should scarce see the book in which you read, much less the
letters.

8. I said out of Aristotle, That one simple body had but one natural motion,
as the earth to descend, the air to ascend, and therefore could not have a
circular motion. You answer, That these right motions belong only to parts of
the elements, and that too when they are out of their proper places. Indeed you
show your self a weak Philosopher, for from whence have the parts of the
earth their motion of descent, but from the whole? Do you not know that old
and trivial maxim: Propter quod unumquodque est tale, illud ipsum est magis
tale? If your hand be heavy, much more heavy is your whole body; if a part of
the sea be salt, much more salt is the whole. 2. When you say that the elements
have these motions, only when they are out of their own places; if you mean
of the act of ascending and descending, you say true; but if you mean of the
power or natural possibility, you are deceived: for though they be in their
proper places, yet this natural power of these motions is not taken from them.
3. When you say that a lodestone, in respect of its matter and condensity
naturally tends downward; you do again bewray your ignorance in Philosophy,
for gravity is the cause of descent, not matter and condensity; for the stars
have matter and condensity, and yet they neither can, nor do descend. 4. When
you say, that the lodestone which is a heavy body, and naturally tends
downward, may naturally move upward, you show your self more and more absurd;
for besides that it is repugnant to the Maxim above said, for a simple body to
have two contrary motions, so it overturns the natural properties of the
elements: for if heavy bodies may naturally ascend, then light bodies may
naturally descend; and so we shall not know how one element differs essentially
from another; and consequently the descending of fire of old upon the
sacrifices, and the ascending of Elias his body into heaven, were not miracles,
but natural motions. 5. That desire of union and coition which one lodestone
has with another, by which it breaks the laws of Nature, is but your conceit:
if one lodestone draw another, or if it draw iron upward, that ascent is no
natural motion, but in some sort is a violent attraction: therefore
Aristotle's Maxim remains firm, that one simple body has but one natural
motion, and consequently the earth does not naturally moved round.

9. We hold, that the gravity and magnitude of the Earth makes it unfit for so
swift a motion. Your answer is, That heaviness can only be applied to those
bodies which are out of their proper places, or to such parts as are severed
from the whole. To this we have partly answered already, that the essential
properties of simple bodies are in the whole principally, and in the parts by
reason of the whole. 2. It is false that heavy bodies are not heavy in their
proper places; for they lose not their essential qualities by being in their
places. Is a millstone less heavy when it is on or in the ground, then when
it is raised from the ground? Put to your hand, and try if you can with more
ease wagge it upon the ground, then when it is raised some paces above it. 3.
When you say, That the globe of the Earth in its right place cannot truly be
called heavy: I say the contrary, that it can never be more truly called heavy,
then when it is there; for if it were not heavy there, it would not be there:
it is in its own place because it is heavy, if it were possible to remove it
from its place, it would never rest till it returned thither, because its
heaviness would not suffer it to rest in any other place but in its own,
which is the lowest place fit for so heavy a body. 4. When you say, That in it,
and in the rest of the Planets there is an ineptitude to motion by reason of
the matter, and condensity of their bodies; you know not what you say: For if
there be no natural aptitude to motion in the Planets, and in the earth, that
motion must be violent or preternaturall. Why is the motion of the fire
downward, and of the earth upward, violent motions, but because these elements
have no aptitude to such motions? 5. When you make the matter the cause of this
ineptitude, you know not the grounds of natural Philosophy; for it is the
matter that gives the aptitude, as the form gives the act. 6. You say, That
Nature may endow the earth with a motive faculty, proportionable to its
greatness, as she bestows spirits upon other creatures (for instance, an
Eagle and a Fly,) proportionable to their several bodies. Sic parvis
componere magna selebas: There is indeed so me proportion between an Eagle and
a Fly; but between an Eagle, and the vast body of the earth, there is none at
all. If you had compared the motion of the Eagle, to the motion of the great
bird Ruc, you had spoke within compass: If one should say that a little
wheel, and a great millstone may be moved according to the proportion of
their bodies: so likewise may the hill Athos or Atlas be turned about, he would
be counted ridiculous: and yet there is a far greater proportion between a
millstone and those hills, then between an Eagle and the Earth. 7. Though the
magnitude of the earth make it incapable of so swift a motion, yet this does
not make the heaven much more incapable, as you say: For it is the magnitude
joined with the heaviness of the earth, that makes it incapable of such a
motion: but the heavens are not heavy, though great. A cloud which may be a
mile or two about, has a greater magnitude then a pebble small stone; and yet
you see with what facility the cloud is carried, whereas the stone is not
moved, (though it were high in the air) but with the motion of descent. 8. As
for the swiftness of the earth's course, which exceeds not (you say) the
celerity of clouds driven by a tempestuous wind; of a cannon bullet which in a
minute flies four miles, etc. These (I say) are the phansies of a crasie
brain in a dream: you are the only darling and favorite of Nature, who both
knows the Earth's motion, and how much it can run in a minute. It seems
this incredible swiftness of the earth has made your head giddy, that you
know not what you write: and how can it be otherwise? for if you be carried
240. miles in an hour, and your pen whilst it is forming almost every letter
four miles in a minute, your brains fly as fast as the bullet out of the
cannon: If this be true, I do not think that either you know what you write,
or where you are, nay you could not write at all; nor were it possible for you
to live, or for your lungs and heart to move, or draw breath.

Your subsequent discourse of the Earths magneticall property is grounded (as
indeed all your Book) upon ridiculous suppositions; and on such grounds do you
raise the structure of your Babel or bables. 1. You suppose that the lower
parts of the Earth do not consist of such a soft fructifying soil as in the
surface, because there is no use for it. But what if I should suppose the
contrary, that it does consist of a fructifying soil, and that there be people
there, as well as in your Moon? I doubt not but I could prove it with as good
reasons as you do your world in the Moon. 2. You suppose it consists of a hard
rock is substance, because these lower parts are pressed close together by the
weight of the heavy bodies above them. What if I should suppose the contrary,
that the softest ground is in the lowest parts, as being farthest from the Sun
which hardneth the earth; therefore they that dig deep into to the bowels of
the earth, find it still softer and softer the deeper they go: And we know
that many fruits and heavy bodies are hard and stony without, but soft within;
the earth then is not like a cheese that by pressing grows hard. 3. You
suppose that this rockie substance is a lodestone. But what if I should
suppose it to be a diamond, which is more likely; both because it is the more
precious stone, and Nature commonly lays up the most precious things within
her most inward parts; and because it is harder, for according to your
doctrine, the pressing close of heavy bodies is the cause of hardness. 4. It Is
probable (you say) that this rockie substance is a lodestone, because the
earth and lodestone agree in so many properties. What if I should say that
they disagree in many more properties, and that therefore this cannot be the
lodestone? But what an Argument is this? the earth and loadstone agree in many
properties, therefore the lower part of the earth consists of load-stones: as
if you would say, A man and an horse agree in many properties, therefore the
lower part of a man consists, or is made up of a horse: or thus, The elementary
and our culinary fire agree in many properties, therefore the inmost or lower
part of the one consists of the other. 5. You say well that what has all the
properties of the lodestone, must needs be of that nature; but because you are
not well read in the Master of syllogismes you infer that the inward parts of
the earth consist of a magneticall substance, which is the conclusion without
an assumption, which should have been this: but the lower parts of the earth
have all the properties of the lodestone, which we deny. Now let us hear how
you prove it; The difference (you say) of declination and variation in the
mariners needle cannot proceed from it self, being the same every where; nor
from the heavens, for then the variation would not be still alike in the same
place, but diverse according to the several parts of heaven, which at several
times happen to be over it; therefore it proceeds from the earth, which being
endowed with magneticall affections, diversely disposes the motions of the
needle. I answer, the Earth may have a disponent virtue to alter the needle,
and yet not be a lodestone; so the heavens are the causes of generation,
corruption, alterations, etc. in the world, and yet they are not capable of
these qualities: the Moon causes the sea to ebb and flow, does she therefore
partake of the like affections? or has she the properties of the sea? The
lodestone disposes the motions of the iron, will you therefore infer that
the lodestone has the properties of iron? 2. If the variation, as you say, of
the needle be diverse, according to the several parts of heaven passing over
it; it must follow, that the needle must vary every minute and scruple of an
hour, even here where we live; seeing every scruple or minute diverse parts of
the heaven are still passing over it. 3. If the Inclination or motion of the
needle toward the North, is caused by the heaven, not by the earth; why should
not the variation and declination of it be caused by the heaven likewise?

You are driven to hard shifts, when you are forced to fly to similitudes for
want of proofs, to strengthen your weak and absurd assertions; for similitudes
may illustrate, they cannot prove. 2. Because you cannot show any similitude of
the earth's motion with such things as you are acquainted, you are forced to
borrow similitudes from those things with which you are not acquainted, rather
then you will seem to say nothing. You fly beyond the Moon, Saturn and
Jupiter must serve you at a dead life, but I know not upon what acquaintance.
This is your conceit: A bullet, or any part of the earth, being severed from
the whole, observes no less the same motions, then if they were united to the
whole: whereas Jupiter, Saturn, etc. do constantly and regularly move on in
their courses, hanging in the etheriall air. But first tell us if Jupiter and
the rest are separated from the whole; if they be, what is it that moves them
with contrary motions? If they be not, then your simile has never a foot.
Again, does this follow: Jupiter, Saturn, etc. have such and such motions;
therefore bullets and parts of the earth being separated, observe the motion of
the whole? You had been better to have brought your simile from the sea, which
is nearer to the earth in place and nature then the heavens are; thus: The sea
ebbs and flows, therefore parts of the earth being separated, may observe the
motion of the whole. Does not this hang well together like a rope of sand? If
you had told us that parts of the sea being separated, observe the motion of
the whole in ebbing and flowing; therefore parts of the earth separated,
observe also the motion of the whole, you had said something; but you know the
contrary of the Antecedent to be true; for you tell us that a bucket of sea
water does not ebb and flow, though this motion be (as you said) natural to
the sea: But here you are deceived; for if this motion were a natural property
flowing from the essence of the sea, the whole sea, and every part of it should
ebb and flow; but it is not so, for the Adriatic sea has this motion; the
Tyrrhene, Baltic, and some other seas have it not; so some parts of the sea
ebb and flow more and longer then others; but essential properties are not
capable of more and less; some think that this is no pure motion, but an
alteration rather in the sea: but be it what it will be, it proceeds not from
the nature of the sea, but from external causes; partly from the force and
motion of the stars, chiefly of the moon; and partly from vapors and
exhalations in the sea.

12. You say, The whole earth may moveround, though the several parts thereof
have no such revolution particular of their stone; for there be many things
agreeing to the whole frame, which are not discernable in the diverse parts of
it, which you instance in the sea water, and in the blood and humors of our
body, which ascend in the body, but descend, being separated from it. Answ.
There is nothing proper and essential to the whole, but is also proper and
essential to the parts separated or not separated; thus if circular motions
were natural to the whole earth as you say, the parts of it would retain
their nature still though separated: therefore every part of the earth
descends, because the whole does, but no part thereof moves circularly, because
the whole does not. As for the parts of the sea water in a bucket, there is not
ebbing and flowing as in the whole; because that motion is not natural to it,
nor does it proceed from the active form, but from its passive, whereby it is
apt to receive such a motion from external agents: that motion which is
essential and natural to it, is not lost in the parts, being separated; for
every bucket, yea, every drop of sea water descends, because that motion is
natural, therefore not separable. As for the blood and humors in our body,
which you say ascend naturally to the head, I say, they ascend not naturally,
for naturally they descend, because heavy; but they are carried upward by the
spirits in them, and drawn up by the attractive faculty, for each part draws
its aliment: now this blood and humors being separated from the body, lose
their heat and spirits, and so descend. Your instances then will not evert our
maxim, to wit, that if the whole earth move circularly, the separated parts
would retain the same motion: but you say that this motion is not discernable
in the parts; I grant it, neither is it discernable in the whole; and seeing it
is neither discernable by the sense, nor demonstrable by reason, how come you
to know it? if you can perceive in the swift violent course of a bullet, the
magneticall revolution of the whole earth, you are more quick-sighted then Lynx.

You have certain phrases like riddles, which stand in need of some Oedipus to
explain them. 1. You call the earth a great magnet; What Is that? A great
lodestone? If there be great store of iron in your moon world, this great
magnet in time may draw down the moon upon us. 2. You say, That parts of the
earth may according to their matter be severed from the whole: perhaps you
mean they may be severed in respect of place, not of matter; for if they have
not the same matter with the whole, they cannot be parts, nor can they be the
subject of these common magneticall qualities you speak of. 3. You say, That
Jupiter and Saturn hang in the etheriall air: you love to confound what our
wise forefathers have distinguished, because you have an etheriall earth in
the moon, you would fain have an etheriall air to: God has separated the
heaven or etheriall region from this aereall, so must we. I have read once of
aura aetherea in Virgil, but there the Poet divinely means our breath which
we have originally from heaven; I know no other etheriall air but this. 4.
You say, That the flesh, bones, etc. tend downward as being of a condensate
matter: but gravity is the proper cause of descent, and not density; for the
fire and air may be condensate, and yet tend upward. 5. You say, That Saturn,
Jupiter, and the Sun, are magneticall bodies: If you mean that these stars
have the essential properties of the magnes to draw iron, then you will make
the earth and Planets to be of the same kind and species: if Mahomeis iron
chest were hanged between the sun and the earth, it is a question whether it
should be drawn more forcibly upward or downward. 6. You ask a reason, Why
the earth should not move about its center as the Planets do: I may rather
ask you why it should, seeing it was made for rest, and they for motion;
neither is there any thing wherein they agree, but that they are corporeal
substances, in all things else they differ: why then should we infer the
earths motion from their motion? 7. You that prove nothing, but boldly says
any thing, as if men were bound to receive your dictates though never so
unreasonable and ridiculous, as if they were oracles; you I say tell us, Of
spots about the sun, thought to be clouds or evaporations from his body: If
your eagle eyes can see spots about the sun, then the heavens are not pure in
your sight; but who has spotted them which God has made clear and pure
without spot or wrinkle? are not the spots in your glass, or in your eye
rather? I have heard of one who with his spectacles, reading in a book, beat
the book three or four times, thinking he had seen a fly on the paper, when
it was a spot in his glass. If you had read the absurd opinion of the
Manichees, who held with as great confidence as you do your conceits, That the
sun was a great ship sailing about the world: perhaps you would have told us,
that these spots are great whales playing about the sides of the ship; and we
should as soon believe you in this as in the other: but now you cannot
certainly tell us, Whether these spots may not be clouds or evaporations from
the body of the sun. But I would know what use is there for clouds there;
except it be to shadow now and then, and to refresh with rain your world in
the moon: and if there be any such watery meteors about the sun, they must needs
be extracted out of the sea, lakes, and rivers, that are in your upper world.
And seeing these vapors cannot be condensate into clouds without cold, it
confirms my opinion, that the sun is not hot formally; and that the heaven was
nicknamed when it was called ether, ab ardore: but I much muse what these
evaporations should be from the body of the sun? What, does the sun pant and
sweat with his daily labor? Evaporations are hot and moist exhalations, is
there any moisture in the sun? Do not these clouds and evaporations proceed
rather from his horses nostrils? But the prince of Poets tells us that they blow
light out of their nostrils; AEn. 11.
-- Lucem que elatis naribus efflaus. thus you afford us matter of sport.

But you go on in your absurdities; for having once plunged your self in this
mire, the more you strive and struggle to get out, the faster you stick, and
the deeper you sink in. You tell us, That the moon is turned about by our
earth: why do you not tell us also that the sun is turned about by the
moon, and the firmament by the sun, and the primum mobile by the firmament,
and the first mover by the primum mobile? and so the world shall be turned
topsie turvie. For is not any of these turnings as probable as the moon to be
turned about by the earth? persuade me this, and then you shall easily assure
me that the cart draws the horse, the crab courses the hare, and the ship
turns about the wind? You would make the commonwealth of heaven like many
disordered commonwealths here on earth, where the inferior and meaner sort of
people will take upon them to rule and guide their superiors, Princes and
Magistrates, and then all comes to confusion; the horses run away with the
coach and coachman: -- Frustra retinacula tendens,
Fortur equis auriga, neque audit currus habenas.
Is it not reasonable that the inferior bodies should receive their motion
from the superior, as they have from them their beauty, perfection, and
conservation?

But you give the moon many turners; The earth by her magneticall motion;
Jupiter (who turns the four lesser Planets) by his body; the Sun by his
revolution. So here be three several ways of turning; motion, body, and
revolution: but is not revolution, motion? And when Jupiter turns by his body,
is there no revolution? Or when the Sun turns by his revolution, does he not
turn by his body? It seems that he that turns by his body, touches, and so
Jupiter touches the lesser Planets. He touched indeed Venus in the Poet when
he kissed her: AEn. 1.
Oscula libavit natae: -- But how he touches and turns these Planets by his
body, you do not instruct us; but your drift in all this, is to show that if
the Sun carry about his spots or clouds; the earth carry about the Moon,
etc. much more may the earth carry about an arrow or bullet: as if you would
say, If the water carry about the millwheel, and the wheel carry about the
millstones, much more may the mill carry about the miller and his horse.

Concerning other men's observations of the flame of a candle carried equally in
a ship; of an equal force, casting an heavy body but at an equal distance
with and against the motion of the ship; of a heavy body in a ship falling down
in a straight line; of a man leaping up in a ship, and abiding in the air, one
second scruple of an hour, and yet the ship not withdraw it self fifteen
foot: Of these I will say but little, because I have already said something of
them elsewhere; De teros motu L. 1. c. 3. 4, 5, etc.
yet I must tell you, that though the smoke and flame of a candle within the
ship are carried with the ship, it will not follow that the clouds which are
without the earth are turned about by the earth. If you could thrust the clouds
within the bowels of the earth, they should be carried about with the earth if
it did move; but take the same candle which you talk, and place it in a calm
night on the top of the mast, when the ship is carried with the tide, then you
shall see that though the candle is carried along with the ship, yet the smoke
being separated from the candle does not follow the ship, but remains mounting
upward in the air. If the ship then carry not along with it the smoke of the
candle which is in it, how shall we think that the earth can carry about the
clouds which are so far above it? Now to salve this, you tell us, That the
air is as well limited in bounds, as that which is included in a room. But
then I answer, that it is one thing to be included, and another thing to be
limited; every thing that is included in a room is limited, but not every
thing limited is included; what is included must needs partake of the motion of
that which includes it: the air within the ship is moved by and with the ship,
because it is included; but the air without the ship though it be limited, yet
moves not by or with the ship because it is not included.

You ask where the bounds of the air are terminated, and you answer your self
by the sphere of vaporous air; or which is all one, by the orb of
magneticall vigor; so you distinguish between the air, and vaporous air: but
you tell us not how far this sphere of vaporous air, or this orb of
magneticall vigor reaches; so that we are not satisfied with your answer,
except you mean that it reaches to the moon; for you told us before that the
moon is turned about by the earth, but then you contradict your self, for you
say here, that these bounds are not terminated by the concavity of the moone's
orb; so where to find you, and the bounds of your sphere of vaporous air, I
cannot tell; neither do I understand how vaporous air being a substance, can
be all one with magneticall vigor which is an accident: and how this accident
can have its orb, this is a new piece of Philosophy which would be
illustrated, and so do the words following; That all earthly bodies are
contained within these limits, as things are in a close room, and as parts in
that whole to which they belong.

Though a heavy by equal force be cast at an equal distance, whether it move
with or against the motion of the ship, yet will it not follow that a bullet
being shot toward East or West shall pass the same distance; for though you
cast your bullet against the motion of the ship, it is not hindered nor
furthered by its motion: so if the earth did move, that motion were no more to
the bullets motion then if it stood still; but it is the motion of the air
that furthers or hinders the bullets motion, whether in the ship, or out of it.
The earth then turning about the air with great violence from East to West,
must hinder the motion of the bullet or arrow flying to the East, and further
that which comes from the East; but it is not so in a ship, for the ship does
not carry the air before it, but divides the air whilst it moves, so that the
air gives place, as the water also does to the ship, that there may not be
penetration of dimensions. How then can the bullets motion be hindered or
furthered by the motion of the ship, seeing the air in which it moves, is
neither with it, nor against it? Of the wind here I do not speak.

You grant that in a ship under sail, a stone being let fall from the mast
will not descend to the same point, as if the ship stood still; but you say,
the motion of a ship is accidental, and it is otherwise in these motions that
are supposed to be natural. I have showed against Lansbergius, that there is
no natural motion in the earth, but though there were, what is that to the
furtherance or hinderance of the stones motion to the same point; suppose that
not nature but an Angel turned about the earth, the motion notwithstanding is
circular, be the mover what it will be, external or internal, Nature or
Angel: therefore, it is true still, that as the stone falling from the mast
will not descend to the same point when the ship saileth, as if it stood still;
so likewise a stone falling from an high tower, will not descend
perpendicularly to the same point, the earth moving, as it would do, if it
stood still. Now, how far the ship will withdraw it self in its greatest
swiftness, from him that leaps up and stays in the air a second scruple of
an hour: and how far the earth in that space will go from him in that
certain, neither is it material; it is sufficient that it will remove a
certain space, and that he shall not fall upon the same place from which he
leaped up.

What you granted but now you recall, and tell us of Galilaus, That the stone
would still descend unto the very same place, whether the ship moved or not. So
far I yield, that if a heavy stone be let fall from a short mast whilst the
ship moves slowly, it is scarce discernable that the stone has fallen or
varied any thing from the perpendicular line: but if a small stone be let fall
from a high mast whilst the ship moves swiftly, then it is plain to any man
that has sense, that the stone does not fall upon the same point on which it
would have fallen, if the ship had stood still. Now to say that the motion of
the ship is impressed in the stone, is a toy; for how can one body impresse a
motion in the other whilst they are separated, as the stone and ship are
before it fall? of magneticall bodies I speak not.

Being weary a shipboard you come on shore, and so having taken horse, you put
spurs to his sides, and in your full cariere, you let a bullet drop out of your
hand, which you say, Has a transverse motion, besides the motion of the
descent. But how should it have the transverse motion of the horse, seeing the
hand does but unfold it self to let it fall; the arm indeed is carried by the
swiftness of the horse, and so is the bullet whilst it is in the hand, but
being let fall, how can it have a transverse motion, seeing the hand did not
express any such motion in it? for to let fall is not to give a transverse
motion: and though you would make it all one to cast a thing from us, and to
let drop a thing when we are on horseback, yet the contrary of this is so
clear, that any man may see it without the help of spectacles. And sure if
there were any transverse motion in the descent of the bullet, it is rather to
be ascribed to the motion of the air, then to the opening of the hand;
therefore this is but a crotchet, as likewise your conceit of a bullet shot out
of a cannon set on end; you spend your powder, and bullets, and paper too, to
no purpose; for you shall never persuade me (for all your two printed canons)
that the bullet shot out and being in the air can partake of the earths
circular motion, till first you prove that the earth does move, and then bring
me better reasons then as yet you have done, for the circular motion of the
bullet in the air; it is not the picture (which is the expression of your
conceit and idea only) that can evince my understanding, when sense and reason
are on my fide; for what may not men set forth in pictures; Chimaera's,
Centaures, Gorgons, etc. and what not? Pictoribus atque Poetis, -- you know
what follows.

Now you go a birding; for what is a gentleman but his pleasure? and you
discharge your piece with that dexterity that you hit the poor bird flying, as
surely as if he were sitting upon a tree: and what follows upon this? Namely,
That the motion of the piece as in aiming it is made to follow the bird in its
flight, is communicated to the bullet in the air. But I see that though you
have killed the bird, yet you are no good birder; for at the instant whilst the
piece is discharged, it is held steadie, so there is no motion of the piece
imparted to the bullet in the air; but though the piece did move, will it
follow therefore that the earth turns about bullets in the air? if your
powder and shot be not better then your arguments, you will never kill birds.

But what a monstrous absurdity do you tell us, That if a violent wind be
able to drive ships, throw down towers, turn up trees, much more may the
diurnall motion of the air (which does so far exceed in swiftness the most
tempestuous wind) be able to carry with it the bodies of birds? If the
diurnall motion of the air exceed the winds in impetuositie, how comes it,
that it does not the same effects that the wind does? why do we not feel its
force? surely, if the air did move with that violence from East to West, that
a tempestuous wind does, we should never have any ships come from the West
Eastward; nor ships bound Westward should stay for a wind, seeing the motion
of the air at all times would carry them with a witness. If we should have
occasion to sail to New England, we should be there quickly, but no hopes
ever to return thence; how should we be able to walk or sit on horseback,
traveling against the motion of the air, if it did move with that violence
you speak of? much less could birds in their flight resist such a force; not
the great bird Ruck (that I may fit you with a bird somewhat proportionable to
your conceits) whose wings are twelve paces long, and snatches up elephants (as
if they were but mice) in his talons a great way in the air: sometimes you
play the Painter, as in your circles and other figures; and sometimes the Poet,
as here: Admiranda sanis, sed non credenda. --

As for your distinction of the motion of heavy and light bodies, to wit, That
they being considered according to the space wherein they move, their motions
are not simple but mixed of a direct and circular; but according to the medium
wherein they move, they have properly right motions. This I say is such a
riddle, that Oedipus could scarce have solved it; for why should not the motion
be mixed as well in the medium as in the space? Is the air or medium a
hinderance to circular motions, so that these bodies can only move there in a
straight line? if so, you contradict your self, for you tell us still that
bodies are moved round by the air, and this by the earth. And how shall we
understand that a stone falling downward has a mixed motion of a direct and
circular according to the space wherein it moves, but a simple straight motion
according to the air wherein it moves? What mean you by this word ( space?)
you cannot mean the ubi of these bodies moving, for that is their rest in the
place to which they move: ultima perfectio corpor is mobilis. You do not
understand I think the intervall of the ancients which Aristotle has refuted,
as being neither a substance nor an accident; not a substance, because there
would be penetration; not an accident, for so an accident should be better then
the substance; for Locus est prior and nobilior locato. And if by space you
understand the air, then how will your distinction stand, the air or medium,
and the space being all one? the place it cannot signify, for the stone
descends not in its place, but to it; therefore what your space is, and how
distinguished from the medium, I think you do not know. If we should ask
you with what motion Christ's body ascended into heaven, you will answer that
according to the space wherein it moved, it ascended by a mixed motion of a
direct and circular, but according to the medium, it ascended by a simple
straight motion; and so we shall depart from you as wise as we came, like
those that consulted with Sibylla; Inconsulti ab^unt --

You say, That Aristotle would not deny but that fire may ascend, and yet
participate of a circular motion, so likewise must it be for the descent of any
thing. Aristotle is beholding to you, for if you will believe him that heavy
bodies must have a double motion, because he would not deny but that the fire
may have a double motion; then if he would not deny but that the heavens may
move round, and that the earth may stand still, you will believe him; much more
I hope you will credit him when by irrefragable reasons he proves the motion
of the one, and immobilitie of the other: but how ever, it is bad reasoning
from the possibility of one thing to the necessity of another; great odds
between may be, and must be; between fire and earth; because Croesus may be
poor, must therefore Irus be rich? Because Aristotle says the fire may
descend, must the earth therefore ascend? there is no consequence a posse ad
esse; much less a posse ad necesse.

I will suppose with you, That whilst the ship is in her swistest motion, a
ball of wax being let fall into a vessel full of water, may be slow in
sinking, and that the motion of the ship will not be discernable in it. But
that the wax should seem to the eye to descend in a straight line I will not
suppose, because I have found it otherwise; the wax will seem to have a
transverse motion in the water though it descend in a straight line: so an oar
seems to be broken in the water, which element is not a true medium for the
sight; now the reason why the motion of the ship in the way is not discernable,
is because the great disproportion between the bigness of the ship, and
smallness of the wax: and because that motion is not the waxes own, but the
ships: these two reasons concurring, make this motion in the wax indiscernable;
but suppose what you say were true in preternaturall motions, it will not
therefore follow, that is also true in motions natural.

If the air did move round with the earth, it is most certain that the comets
would seem always to stand still, being carried about by the revolution of
this air; but experience shows that they rise and set; to this you answer,
That most comets are above the sphere of the air which is turned round with
our earth. Answ. You told us before that the earth turns about the moon,
therefore it must follow that the comets are above the moon, if they be above
that air which is turned about with our earth. 2. We have already showed that
the air sometimes moves the earth, but that the earth moves the air is
false and preposterous. 3. You tell us, That those comets which are within the
orb of our air seem to stand still, you instance that comet mentioned by
Josephus, De bello Iudaico. 7. c.12
which hung over Jerusalem. Answ. That was no ordinary comet or the work of
nature, but a miracle or work of supernatural power, as the rest of those
prodigies which happened about the same time; to wit, the sudden light which
appeared half an hour about the altar; the Cow that brought forth a Lamb in
the Temple; the flying open of the brazen gate of its own accord; the chariots
and armed men that were seen in theaire, etc. Now when you say, That this
comet being within the orb of our air, seemed to stand still; you are
deceived, for it was Gods work that it stood still over that place: and it did
not seem, but did truly stand still, by which it is plain that the earth
moves not; for if it did move, then the comets which are nearest to it would
move swiftest; but the contrary of this is true, for the higher the comet is,
the swister it moves, the lower, the slower; yea scarce at all; because it is
the heaven that moves the comets, and not the earth: so you falsify Natural.
quaest. 1.7. c.6
Seneca, for he does not say that these low comets seem to move, but the clean
contrary, that they are altogether immovable, undique immota.

You say, L. 1. sec. 1. c.6.
That you might justly pass over my nine arguments which I urged in one
Chapter, against your opinion; but because I proceed (say you) with such scorn
and triumph, you will examine my boastings. You do wisely, like the Romans,
who that their Generals might not be puffed up with the glory of their
triumphs, caused some to walk along by their chariots, using upbraiding words;
the like do you, calling my arguments cavills not worth the naming; yet you
are pleased to name them, to show doubtless their weakness, and your wit.

My first cavil (as you call it) is this; If the earth move, it will be hotter
then the water, because motion is the cause of heat: but that the earth should
be hotter then water, is repugnant to that principal in natural Philosophy
which affirms the earth to be colder; besides, the water would never freeze if
it were moved as swiftly as the earth. This argument because you cannot answer,
you pick (as you think) a contradiction out of it, which is this; The earth
by motion is hotter then the water, and yet the water moves along with it,
which water is made warm also by motion, that it is not capable of
congelation. Answ. Is this a contradiction think you: the earth is hotter then
the water, and yet the water is hot too; the fire is hotter then the air, and
yet the air is hot too? who ever heard that the degrees of comparison make a
contradiction? I should not contradict my self, if I should say, Keplar was a
cold disputant, but you are a colder. 2. Though I say that the water moves
along with the earth, yet the earth may be hotter then the water without any
contradiction; for of two bodies moving together, one may be hotter then the
other, especially, if they be of different natures; who knows not that dry
and solid bodies (such as the earth is) are more capable intensively of heat,
then thin and moist bodies, such as the water is? 3. Though the earth, water,
and air next to it, be not severed one from another, yet they are made hot by
such a violent motion: when you run, your clothes, skin, flesh, blood, etc.
are not severed one from the other, and yet your motion makes them all hot. 4.
If motion in fluid bodies were the cause of coldness (as you say some do
think) then it would follow, that the more you move, your blood should be the
colder. Scaliger shows, that they who water their horses being hot, use to
stir the water violently, that it may be brought to a warm temper, that the
horses may drink without danger. 5. I deny that all running waters are the
coldest, neither are they the colder because they run, but because the meet
still with fresh air: so shall you in a cold day (if you rise to walk) be
colder for a while, then when you sit still; not because you walk (for that in
time will warm you) but because you meet with fresh air, which you did not
vvhilest you sat; neither is there yet so much heat in you as to abate the
sense of the cold air, till your motion have caused it. 6. I deny that the
strongest winds are still the coldest, though they blow from the same coast at
the same time of the year, for I have observed that in one February, a gentle
easterly vvind has brought snow, and the next February a strong East vvinde
has brought rain. 7. If rest be the cause that in cold vveather water does
freeze, then all waters that rest would freeze, and no running waters would
freeze; but this is false, for some waters resting do not freeze, and
sometimes running waters do freeze, when the motion is not so strong as to
stir up the heat; therefore, it remains that the heat caused by the motion,
and not the motion it self, is the hinderance of the waters freezing. 8. If
this motion were true that the earth runs four miles in a minute, the heat
of the air would be more then moderate; even in winter you could not endure
the heat of it; we should need no fire to warm us; wood would be cheap enough.

2. My second argument was this: If the earth did move the air, then the air
which is next to the earth would be purer, as being more rarefied; but the
contrary is true, for the higher the air is, the purer it is. You answer never
a word to this argument, which shows you assent; Qui tacet consentire videiur.

3. My third argument: If the earth did move the air, it would cause a sound,
but this is no more audible then the Pythagoricall harmony of heaven. You
answer, That there is no reason why this motion should cause a sound, more then
the supposed motion of the heavens. But I say, there is a great deal of
reason, for if any solid body, be it never so small though an arrow, bullet, or
wand, moving the air, cause a sound; will not the vast body of the earth
turning the air with that violence cause a hideous noise, which would make us
all deaf? now, there is no reason why the motion of the heavens should make
any sound, for neither are they solid bodies themselves, nor do they move or
encounter any solid body, nor is there any air in heaven; which things are
required to make a sound.

4. I argued, that nature had in vain endowed the heavens with all conditions
requisite for motion, if they were not to move; for they have a round figure,
they have neither gravity nor levity, they are incorruptible, and they have no
contrary. This you say will prove the earth to move as well as the heavens; For
that has a round figure, it is not heavy in its proper place, and being
considered as whole, the other two conditions you reject as being untrue, and
not conducing to motion. Answ. Though I should grant you that the earth were
round, yet it is not so exactly round and smooth as the heaven; for it has
many mountains and valleys, and some hills higher, some lower: is a globe or
boule that has knobs and dents in it so fit for motion as that which is
smooth, and equally round? 2. I have showed already the folly of that conceit,
which holds the whole earth not to be heavy in, its own place; as if the
elements must loose their essential properties being in their own places,
whereas it is the place that preserves the propertiese and essenc of things.
Have the fire and air lost their levity because they are in their own places?
and is it not absurd to say (as I have already showed) that there should be
weight in a part of any thing, and not in the whole? as if a piece of an iron
bullet were heavy, but not the whole bullet: you were as good say, that totum
non est majus sua part. 3. Whereas you say that the heavens are corruptible,
you may say also that they are generable; and so being subject to generation
and corruption, they are of the same nature with sublunary bodies, and must
have the same matter; so that as there is a transmutation of the elements into
each other, even so the heavens may be changed into the elements, and these
into them: heaven may become earth, and earth heaven; this is your admirable
learning which passes all understanding. 4. Heaven (it seems by you) has a
contrary, but you tell us not what that is; they are not contrary to one
another, as fire and water; nor are they contrary to sublunary things, for they
cherish and preserve them; neither have they the same common matter. 5. Any
sensible man may easily conceive, that contrariety and corruption are
hindrances to a perpetual circular motion; and because (as is said) the
heaven is not capable of them, but the earth is, it will follow that I argued
upon good grounds, that the heavens only are endowed with all things requisite
for motion, and not the earth: and therefore God will have nothing idle, as he
made nothing in vain: he has made the heavens, and the three superior
elements to be exercised with motion, and the lowest element with generation
and corruption; but it were strange if the earth should be subject to all
three, and the heavens to none, but should stand still, and be perpetually
idle; this is not suitable to the wisdom of the Maker.

5. I reasoned that all similary parts are of the same nature with the whole,
but each part of the earth does rest in its place, therefore does the whole
also. You say this Argument would prove, That the sea does not ebb and flow,
because every drop of water has not this motion; or that the whole earth is
not sphericall, because each part has not the same form. Answ. I have showed
already that the ebbing and flowing of the sea are not essential to the sea,
for in many places the sea does not ebb and flow; therefore it is no wonder,
that parts of the sea, being severed from the whole, lose that motion, seeing
many parts being joined with the whole have it not. This motion then is caused
by external agents; but those qualities which are essential to the whole, are
not lost in the parts: Every drop of water is heavy, and moves downward,
because the whole does; every drop of sea water is salt, because the whole is.
2. I have said already that the earth is not exactly sphearicall, and though it
were, your conceit is nothing: for roundnesse belongs not to the earth, qua
talis, as it is earth, sed qua tota, as it is whole. When a thing cease to be
whole, it loses the figure of the whole, neither are external figures or
outward qualities essential to things, but common accidents only: Now, the
quality of resting in the lowest place is essential to the whole earth,
therefore to the parts also.

6. I said that the Sun in the world is as the heart in man's body, but the
motion of the heart ceasing,, none of the members stir; so neither would
there be motion in the world if the Sun stood still: This (you say) is rather
an illusturation, then a proof. I grant it; for I used it as an illustration to
discover with its light the weakness, and to dispell the darkness of your
opinion. And were it not an absurd thing to think that the arteries move, but
the heart stands still? So no less absurd is it to say, that the Earth
moves, but the Sun stands still. 2. Illustrations oftentimes are forcible
proofs, and used they are both by Divines and Philosophers.

7. I said that the Sun and heavens work upon these inferior bodies by their
light and motion. You say, That the Sun and Planets working upon the earth by
their own real, daily motion, is the thing in question, therefore must not be
taken for a common ground. Answ. If nothing shall be taken for a common ground
which is or has been in question, then there are no common grounds in Divinity
and Philosophy; for I know no fundamental doctrine in the one, or principal
in the other, which has not been questioned by wanton and unsettled spirits.
2. I said that the heavens work by motion; you infer, as if I had said, of a
real daily motion: I spoke neither of daily nor annual motion; if he does
not work by his daily, does he work by his annual revolution? 3. Tell me if
you can, from whence proceed the many motions and mutations that are in
sublunary things? from themselves they cannot; from a superior cause then they
must, and what is that but the heavens? and what other media or means are in
heaven by which they work, but light and motion? If you can tell us any other
besides these, we will be beholding to you.

8. I proved that the earth must be firm and stable, because it is the
foundation of buildings. You say, That it is firm from all jogging, and
uncertain motions. Answ. This is a jogging conceit of yours, and an uncertain
answer, as I have showed already; for motion, as it is motion, is an enemy to
buildings, be it never so uniforme; and a moving foundation can be no settled
foundation: If a foundation be stable, how can it move? if it move, how can it
be stable?

9. My ninth Argument was taken from the authority of Divines, grounded on
Scripture; Isa. 60.20.
Thy Sun shall no more go down, etc. In the Revelations the Angel swears
Rev. 10.6.
there shall be no more time; therefore the heavens must rest, whose motion is
the measurer of time; so S. Paul says, Romans 8.
The creature is subject to vanity; this is the vanity of motion of which
Solomon speaks: The Sun rises, and the Sun goes down, etc. This (you say) is
but a weak Argument; for it is granted that this opinion is a Paradoxe. Answ.
As it deviates from the opinion of other men, it is a Paradoxe, but as it is
repugnant to Scripture, it is a Cacodoxe. 2. When you say that Isaiah speaks
of that light which shall be in stead of the Sun and Moon, do you answer any
thing at all to his testimony? Thy Sun shall no more go down, etc. for he
distinguishes between that light which God shall give to his Saints, and the
light of the Sun which shall no more go down; so that he does not confound
these two lights which are in God and in the Sun, as you would have it. A part
of the Churches happiness shall be, that she shall both enjoy the light of
the Sun without intermission, and also that new inaccessible light of divine
vision. If then the Sun shall go down no more, it argues that the Sun uses
to go down: Now, if you will have these words understood mystically, yet the
thing to which they do allude must be understood properly; to wit, the going
down of the Sun. 3. You will have time to be measured by the motion of the
earth, not of the heaven; and this you prove out of Pererius, who says, That
time depends upon the motion and succession of any duration: But Pererius
explaines himself in another place: that that is only time properly and
principally, which is measured by the motion of the primum mobile: because the
motion of the heaven is the first, and the cause of all other motions; and
because it is the least, as being the swiftest; and it is most certain, and
uniforme, universal, and known to all: so that if the earth did move (which as
yet you have not proved) yet these conditions cannot agree with the earths
motion: time which is measured by other motions, is not properly and formally,
but materially and improperly so called,; so it is false that the earths motion
is the cause of time, which Pererius never affirmed or dreamed of. 4. You will
have the heavens subject to other vanities besides that of motion; as first
unto many changes, witness the comets seen amongst them; and then to that
general corruption in the last day, when they shall pass away with a noise,
etc. Answ. If changes be vanity, to how much vanity is your world in the Moon
subject, which so often changes? 2. Though the heavenly bodies were subject to
other vanities, as you say, yet these will not exempt them from the vanity of
motion. 3. How comets, which are Gods extraordinary works, and denouncers of
his judgments, are vanities, I understand not. 4. That the Apostle speaks of
comets in that place, is your part to prove either by reason or authority. 5.
That comets which are seen only by us in the air, are discerned by you
amongst the heavenly bodies, is no wonder, seeing you can discern a world in
the Moon. 6. St. Ambrose on that place shows, that the vanity to which the
heaven is subject, is the continual toil of their motion, and that it expects
rest, that it may be delivered from servile work. 7. If the heavens be subject
to the vanity of corruption, as you say, tell us whether you speak properly and
philosophically, or metaphorically? If philosophically, you are absurd; for
every fresh-man can tell you that heaven is not capable of generation and
corruption; if metaphorically, you speak impertinently; for by the passing away
of heaven, is meant only the abolition of imperfect qualities, and a
perfecting of it to a more glorious estate. 8. The heavens (you say) are
subject to that general corruption in which all creatures shall be involved in
the last day. But you cannot tell us what that corruption shall be, and so you
speak at random: you do not mean (I hope) that the heavens shall be involved
in the same corruption with snakes, rats, toads, and other such kind of
creatures.

You say that there is not such invincible strength in my arguments, as might
cause me triumph before hand. But I say there is so much vincible weakness in
your answers, that makes me think that the refutation of them deserves neither
triumph nor ovation; so that my strife with you is but -- pugna nullos habitura
triumphos: neither did I purpose to make you any reply, had not some friends
solicited me to vindicate the truth and my own credit, which seemed to be
somewhat eclipsed by the unwholesome fogs, and misty discourses of your Book.

I said that the heaven was called AEthera, ab (...), from its continual
motion; and the earth Vesta, quod vi sua stat, from its immobility. You say
they were so called because it was then the common opinion, that the heaven
moved, and the earth stood. But now because you are of another opinion, it is
fit that the names be changed as well as the nature; let the heaven now be
called Vesta, and the earth AEtherae; or let heaven be called Terra, quod
perenni cursu omnia terat, and the earth should be called coelum, a caelando;
so let all things and arts be confounded: Grammar, as well as your Logic,
Philosophy, and Astronomy. 2. If heaven and earth have their Etymology from
what they seem to be, not from what they are; then the like may be said of
other things. Fire is called focus, a fovendo, from cherishing; the sea is
called mare, quasi amarum, because it is salt or bitter; not that these things
are so, but because they seem to be so: the like may be said of other
Etymologies. 3. For your conceit of the Hebrew word Erets from Ruts, because it
runs, is but a running motion of your head. The Hebrews who were better skilled
in their own language, then you are, derive Erets from (...), because it
continually desires to bear fruit, as Munster shows in Genes. c. 1.

You object to your self, How are two distinct motions conceiveable in the
earth at the same time? and you answer you self, that it is easily
apprehended, considering how both these motions tend from West to East, as you
instance in a bowl. Answ. How the earth should have two distinct circular
motions, is not conceiveable by us, nor demostrable by you. Your similie of the
bowl is a poor demonstrastration, and indeed, false; for it running on the
superficies of the ground, has not two circular motions, as you should have
showed, but only one such motion or rolling; the other as it moves from your
hand to the mark, is the motion of projection; or rather the bowls motion, is
indeed but one, being a mixed or compounded motion; neither does it move with
two distinct circular motions in the same place the same time, as you will have
the earth to do: but it runs from one place to another; neither is it
natural, but violent: and though it were true that the bowl had two distinct
circular motions in the same place at the same time, yet it will not prove that
the earth is either capable, or we conceiveable of these two motions,
considering the disproportion that is between the vast and heavy earth, and a
small light bowl.

You conclude this Chapter, singing the triumph before the victory; for you say
that we may gather some satisfaction out of it, but indeed we can gather none:
neither are we a whit the wiser for it, but leave it with as great discontents,
and as little satisfaction, as they did Sibylla's cave, who came to consult
with her intricate Oracles;. Inconsulti abeunt, sedemque odere Sibyllae.

Chap. IX.
1. The earth cannot be the cause of its own motion. 2. The vasinesse and
thickness of the heavin no hinderance to its motion. 3. The matter of the
heavens and their smoothness no hinderance to their motion. 4. Bigness helps
motion. 5. The heavens swistnesse illustrated by other motions. 6. The earth
neither the final nor efficient cause of its motion, the heaven fitter for
motion, because greater, and more constant; nature works not still the most
compendious way, some idle similitudes refuted. 7. Bodies having the same
properties have not always the same motion; motion belongs to the noblest
creatures. 8. The smoothness, subtilty, and purity of bodies no hinderance to
their motion; the air moves the water, the circular motion of the fire
natural how. 9. Of Intelligences how and why they move the heavens. 10.
Magneticke virtue an idle conceit.
IN this Chapter, ampullas loqueris and sesquipedalia verba; you talk not like
a man of this world, but like one who has dwelt long in the Moon; Iovis
arcanis Minos admissus.
or as if you were Jupiters secretary with Minos, and had the honor with
AEolus. -- Epulis accumbere divum. You dispute of the magnitudes and distances
of the orbs, and of the swiftness of their motion with that exactness, as if
you had measured them with a line: but I wonder how you could stand steady to
take their measure, seeing the foundation on which you stand whirles you about
four miles every minute of an hour. I should think that your head was giddy
when you wrote this, and that indeed you can no more dispute of these things,
then a blind man can do of colors; neither can we give you any credit until
first you go thither, and bring us a certificate signed with the hands of
these Angels which turn about the orbs; otherwise you will but loose your
labor: -- Nec quidquam tibi prodest
Aereas tentasse domos, anintoque rotundum,
Percurrisse polum --.


1. You will have us suppose that the earth is the cause of this motion; but
this we may not suppose, for if there be any motion in the earth, the earth is
the subject of that motion, but not the cause; for nothing can move it self;
movens and mobile are distinct things: but what if we should suppose what you
desire, what will be gained thereby? to wit this, That the heavens shall be
freed from their inconceivable swiftness: and is not this a goodly reason. We
cannot conceive how the heavens move so swiftly as they say, ergo we must
suppose the earth to move? Shall we suppose the fire to be cold, because we
cannot tell how the sun is hot? If one cannot tell how the eye sees, will
you bid him suppose that the foot sees? This is, homines ex stultis insanos
facere: let the swiftness of heaven be never so great, we cannot suppose the
earth to move. For that they may be swifter then our thoughts, is not
impossible, if either we look on Gods power, or on the aptitude in these bodies
for such a motion: But you will not have us fly to Gods power what he can do:
I pray you then whither shall we fly? If we go up into heaven he is there, if
we go down to hell he is there also. etc. Whatsoever is done in heaven, and
in the earth, etc. he does it himself, says David. He sustaineth all things
by the word of his power; In him we live, move, and have our being: therefore
the Philosophers said well, that he was the first mover, and that the outmost
heaven was the first moveable. But if you will have us look unto the usual
way of providence what is most likely to be done, then we say that it is most
likely, that the heavens move, and the earth stands still, as is already proved.

2. You say, the heavens being vast, material, condensate substances, are not
capable of such a motion: I hear words but to no purpose, for you should tell
us, whether the matter of heaven, and the condensation thereof be like this of
the earth; and whether the mover be so weak as that he cannot turn about that
vast body. L. 2. sec. 1. c. 1.
I had told you heretofore that bodies move swifter or slower, not because they
are greater or lesser, but because they are heavier or lighter Motion which you
call a Geometrical thing (but you are in this decived) depends not from
quantity, lesser bodies move oftentimes flower then the greater; a snaile then
an elephant, a pebble stone then a great cloud: it is not then beyond the
fancy of a Poet, or madman, (as you madly speak) for the heaven to move
very swiftly; but if any man will take upon him to tell exactly how swiftly the
heaven moves, or that the earth moves at all; I must needs tell him that he
needs hellebor.

3. When we say that the heavens are bodies without gravitie, you answer us
with your recocted coleworts, or idle evasion of yours so often repeated, That
the whole earth in its own place is not heavy: which shift we have diverse
times already refuted: but when you say, That the heavens being of a material
substance, it is impossible but that there should be in them some ineptitude to
motion: you speak like one who is a stranger to Philosophy, for if it were
not for the matter, there would be no motion in the world. As the form moves,
so it is by reason of the matter that all things are moved, so that where there
is matter, there can be no ineptitude to motion in respect of the matter. But
it is a rugged conceit in you when you say, That it is not conceiveable how the
upper sphere should move the lower, unless their superficies were full of
rugged parts, or else they must lean one upon the other. Answ. What rugged
parts are there in the superficies of winds and clouds, when the winds move
the clouds? or what ruggedness is there in smooth waters, when in rivers the
foremost waters are moved forward by the hindermost? Or in the smoke when it
carries upward a piece of paper? But when you say, That the farther any
sphere is distant from the primum mobile, the less it is hindered by it, in
its proper course: It is true, and yet not repugnant to Ptolomies opinion, who
says, That in heaven there is no reluctancie; for his meaning is, that there
is no inferior sphere that hinders the swiftness of the primum mobile, and
that is the reason why it is so swift: because it has no resistance either
from the form, or from the matters; or thickness of the medium.

Now, In nova fert animus, -- you would feign play the Poet, and build
castles in the air, but indeed you have already played the Poet too much; for
your whole book is nothing else but a heap of fictions; your world in the
Moon, your moving earth, your standing heavens, your figures and characters,
what are they else but pleasant dreams, and idle phansies, fit enough to be
inserted into Ovids Metamorphosis, if you could digest them into good verses?
And you do not only play the Poet, but the Painter also in your figures, for
a fictitious Picture is a visible Poem, and a Poem is an audible Picture,
Painters and Poets have authority you know. But you wonder much why Poets have
not feigned a castle to be made of the same materials with the solid orbs.
Answ. I think the reason is, because they did not know that there were
people in the Moon; if they had known this, doubtless they would have
fitted them with enchanted castles, and other buildings; now what they have
omitted, do you, that posterity when you are dead may say; -- Nunc non cinis
ille Poetae
Faelix? now levior cippus nunc imprimit ossa?
But I will not now spend time in vievving the parts and materials of your
Poetical castle, till you have brought it to perfection; and then I will take
a survey of every particular.

4. I had said that a bigger body, as a millstone, will naturally descent
svvifter then a less, as a pebble stone; the cause of this, You will not have
to be ascribed to the bodies bigness, but to the strength of natural desire
which that big body has to such a motion. Answ. You make a show as if you did
answer our argument, but in effect you answer nothing: for if I should ask
you why a millstone falls faster then a pebble, you will answer, because it
has a stronger desire to fall; but if I ask again why it has a stronger
desire, you answer, because the bigger a thing is, the stronger is its desire,
etc. and is not your opinion now all one with mine in effect? that it is the
bigness that is the cause of this swiftness? now the same reason is appliable
to bodies moving circularly: for though they were in their proper scituations,
yet there is in them as great a desire to move about the center, as there is in
elementary bodies to move to and from the center; therefore, the greater the
body is, the greater desire it has to move according to your opinion. Again,
I said that the wind will sooner move a great ship then a little stone, you
answer, This is not because a ship is more easily moveable then a little stone,
but because a little stone is not so liable to the violence from whence its
motion proceeds. This answer is as wise as the former, for why is not the stone
as liable to the violent cause of its motion as the ship, but because it is not
so big, therefore the ship is more easily moveable then the stone; because by
reason of its bigness it is more liable to the violent cause of its motion. And
when you say, That I cannot throw a ship as far as a stone; I grant it, but
this will only argue want of strength in me, but not want of aptitude for a
swifter motion in the ship then in the stone, if I had strength to sling the
one as well as the other. A bigger bullet out of the same piece will fly
farther and swifter then a lesser.

5. I brought some instances to illustrate the possibility of the heavens
swiftness, as the sound of a cannon twenty miles off; of the sight of a star
in a moment, of the light passing suddenly from East to West; of the swiftness
of a bullet carried by the powder; to these you answer, That the passage of a
sound is but slow, compared to the heavens motion; that the species of sound or
sight are accidents, and so is the light; that the disproportion is great
betwixt the heavens motion and the swiftness of a bullet. Answ. Let the sound,
and light, and species be what they will be, they are moved; and if they be
accidents they cannot be moved alone, but with the subject in which they are
inherent: therefore, if there be such swiftness in the motion of these, what
need we doubt of the swiftness of the heavens? and if accidents can be so
swiftly moved with and in their subjects, much swifter must be these heavenly
substances having no resistance, whose matter is so pure, that it is a great
furtherance to their motion: and though there be great disproportion betwixt
the bullets motion and the heavens swiftness, yet the motion of the one serves
to illustrate the swiftness of the other. And yet I take not upon me as you
do, peremptorily to tell how swift the heavens are; and though I said that the
light was an accident, yet I said also that it was corpori simillimum, that it
comes very near to the nature of a body: neither did Aristotle prove the light
to be no body, because of its swiftness, as if no body were capable of that
swiftness, for then he should contradict himself as you use to do; but he
means that no sublunarie body had so swift a motion. It had been folly to
illustrate the swiftness of the bullets motion by the motion of the hand in
the watch; for there by many other motions far swifter then this to express
the bullets motion: but of sublunary motions there be none swifter then those I
alleged to illustrate the motion of heaven.

6. You would have the earth to be both the efficient and final cause of its
motion: But indeed it is neither the one nor the other, for if it move at all,
it must be moved by another mover then it self: and God made the heavens not
for the earth, but for man; so the diurnall and annual motions have man for
their final cause, and heavenly movers for their efficient. 2. You say, That
nature is never tedious in that which may be done an easier way: This I will
not grant you, for nature does not still work the easiest, but the most
convenient way; but I deny that the earths motion is either more easy or more
convenient then that of heaven; for a light body, such as heaven is, is more
easily moved then a heavy; and it is more convenient that the foundation of our
houses should remain firm and stable, then moveable, as I said. I could tell
you how laborious and tedious nature is in the perfecting of man's body, and of
many other things, therefore she does not take still the most compendious way.
3. You say, It is not likely that the heaven should undergo so great and
constant a work which might be saved by the circumvolution of the earths body.
How tender hearted are you? are you afraid that the heavens will grow weary?
and I pray you, is not heaven sitter to undergo a great and constant work
then the earth, so small, so dull, so heavy, so subject to change? a great
work is fit for a great body, and a constant work fit for that body that
knows no unconstancy. 4. You are deceived when you say, That the heaven
receives no perfection by its motion, but is made serviceable to this little
ball of earth. The perfection of heaven consists in its motion, as the earths
perfection in its rest; neither was heaven made to serve this ball, but to
serve him who was made Lord of this ball. 5. Your Similies of a mother warming
her child, of a Cook rosting his meat, of a man on a tower, of a Watch maker,
are all frivolous. For a mother turns her child, and a Cook his meat to the
fire, because the fire cannot turn it self to them; the motion is in them,
not in the fire: so he that is on a tower, turns himself round to see the
country, because the country cannot turn it self about him. If you had
proved to us that the heaven cannot move, but that it is the earth that moves,
then we should yield that the earth did foolishly to expect the celestial fire
to turn about her; but this you have not as yet proved, neither will you be
ever able to prove. The earth indeed is a mother, but as senseless and stupid
as Niobe, who would suffer her children to starve with cold, if that heavenly
fire did not move about her. As for your instance of a Watch-maker, I will use
it in your own words, but to our purpose: If a wise Watch-maker will not put
any superfluous motion in his instrument, shall we not think that nature is as
provident as any ordinary mechanicke? Therefore doubtless it had been
superfluous for the earth to move. And whereas you say, That the motion of the
stars is full of confusion and uncertainties: That is true in respect of your
ignorance; there is an heavenly order, and harmony amongst them, the confusion
is in your head, and the uncertainty in your knowledge.

7. You say, That motion is most agreeable to that which in kind and
properties is nearest to the bodies that are moved. But this I say is false,
for an immovable body is not made capable of motion, because it is near in
some properties to the body that is moved. A rock and a millstone which
perhaps was taken out of the same rock, agree in kind and properties, will it
therefore follow, that because the millstone moves round, the rock also moves
round? The seawater and well-water agree in kind and properties, does the
well-water therefore ebb and flow? But your drift is to show, That the earth
moves with the six Planets, because both Earth and Planets have a borrowed
light, whereas the Sun and fixed Stars have it of their own. Answ. A goodly
reason, the earth must move as well as the six Planets, because it has a
borrowed light as well as they; as if you would say, Saturn and the Moon have
a borrowed light, therefore they have the same motion and bigness: or thus,
the Planets have a borrowed light as well as the earth, therefore, they rest,
or be as heavy as the earth; but what if I should say, the Planets have some
light of their own, as may be seen by the Moon, which the earth has not; and
therefore they agree not in this property of light, and consequently the earth
moves not as they do. But when you say the fixed stars have light of their
own, you speak at random, for you can show no reason of this conceit, why
the fixed stars should have light of their own, and not the Planets; or why
the Planets borrow light, and not the fixed stars. Again, you think, That the
Sun and Stars should rest, because they are of a more excellent nature: As if
motion did belong to the ignoblest creatures; we know the contrary, Man is a
more noble creature then a rock, yet man moves, and the rock is immovable.
The heart in our bodies is more noble then the guts, yet that moves, they move
not. Is the body of man less excellent when it is moved by the soul, then
when it is at rest putrefying in the grave. When water rests from its motion it
loses its excellency, and stinketh, therefore, motion in many things is more
noble then rest: as for the rest which you say is ascribed to God, that is not
to our purpose, for it is transcendent and hyperphysicall; and as God is said
to rest, so he is said to move, therefore called (...). But why you should
think the fixed Stars of a more excellent nature then the Planets, I know
not, neither can you give any reason for it.

8. Aristotle you say tells us, De Coelo. l. 2. c. 10.
that the time of the revolution of each orb should be proportionable to its
bigness, which can only be you think, By making the earth a Planet. I answer,
that of two evils the less is to be chosen, and better it is that there
should be some disproportion between the bigness of the orbs, and the time of
their motion, then that the earth should move. 2. You cannot exactly tell what
disproportion there is in their motions, till first you find out the true
knowledge of their magnitudes.

That the Comets which move in the air are not moved by the heavens, but by
the earth, you prove; Because the concave superficies of the Moon is thought
to be smooth, so that the mere touch of it cannot turn about the fire with a
motion not natural to it; nor can the subtle fire move the thicker air, nor
this the waters. Answ. How the upper spheres move the lower, is neither known
to you nor me but by conjectures. 2. I have already showed that one smooth body
by its touch may move another, as the wind moves the clouds; so in the
Northern seas, one mountain of ice which is smooth, moves the other forward.
3. The subtlety and purity of the fire is no hinderance to its moving of the
thicker air, for do not our animal spirits which are pure and subtle, and
yet material, move our gross bodies? Does not the wind move gross
substances? 4. That the air does not move the water, is repugnant to
experience, for within the Tropickes, the sea is continually moved from East to
West by the air; and this by the heaven as I have showed elsewhere. 5. That
the circular motion of the fire is not natural, is false; for though this
motion proceed not from an inward principle, as the straight motion does, yet
it is natural, because the nature of the fire is preserved by it; for the fire
never gives off moving upward, till it begin to move circularly, and then is it
in its chief perfection when it has attained this motion.

Lansbergius you say concludes that the earth is easily moveable, from the
words of Archimedes, who said, that he could move the earth, if he knew where
to stand and fasten his instrument; it is a foolish conclusion, for so he might
as well conclude, that armed men may arise out of the ground, because Pompey
said, that if he did but stamp with his foot, the ground would yield him armed
men. So because Medaea said: Ego inter auras aliti curru vebar; That she would
fly in the air in a chariot drawn by dragons, that therefore she could do
as she said; this is to play the Poet.

9. The opinion of Intelligences, by which the heavens are moved (you say) has
its original from Aristotle's mistake, who held the heavens to be eternal. I
answer, that Aristotle was mistaken in holding the heavens to be eternal a
priori; but I deny that there is any error in holding them to be eternal a
posteriori, in respect of their substance. 2. Aristotle might have held the
opinion of Intelligences, without holding the heavens to be eternal; for the
eternity of the mover does not necessarily infer the eternity of the thing
moved: God is eternal, so is not the world, our souls are eternal, so are
not our bodies. 3. You prove, That Intelligences are superfluous, because a
natural power intrinsecall to these bodies will serve the turn as well: So
you might infer that our souls are superfluous, because a natural power
resulting from the matter of our bodies, and intrinsecall to them will serve
the turn as well. But indeed such excellent bodies as the heavens did require
a more excellent form then sublunary bodies do; for these are content with an
informing form, but the heavens stood in need of an assisting form: and how
can we conceive that out of such pure and simple materials as the heavens are,
there should result a natural power to move them circularly, orderly,
constantly, perpetually? If our gross and decaying bodies are moved with
reasonable souls, which though they be internal forms, result not from the
power of the matter; much more should the heavens be regulated by Intelligent
spirits, and not by any natural power. 4. This natural power of moving must
be either the form brought out of the matter, which is done by generation, but
in heaven there is no generation, because there is no privation of an other
form, or any appetite in the matter to it; or else this power must be a form
brought into the matter: but no form is introduced into the matter, except the
reasonable soul; therefore, there is no informing form in heaven, and
consequently there can be no other movers but Angels. This Argument I urged
against Carpenter, but you winked at it and said nothing. 5. You say, That
Intelligences being immaterials cannot immediately work upon a body. What is
this to the purpose? If they work upon bodies, it is no matter how they work;
we know that our souls work upon our gross bodies, and so do the
Intelligences upon the heavens: we know that spirits work upon muteriall
substances immediately, or else there would be no working at all; and it is
ridiculous in you to disable the Angels from working or moving, because they
have no instruments or hands to take hold of the heavens. What hands has your
soul when it works on your body? What hands has the wind when it moves the
clouds? 6. You have no reason to insult so over the Schoolmen, who affirm,
that the faculty whereby the Angels move their orbs, is their will; for what
faculty else can you imagine in them? Does not your soul work upon your body
by the will? so, that albeit there be many instruments by which the soul
moves the body, yet the prime faculty by which it moves is the will: so that
if you suspend your act of willing a motion, you must needs stand still; and on
the contrary, your only willing to move the hand or foot is sufficient as the
chief medium or faculty to move them. And so it is with the heavens, saving
only that there are no subordinate organs by which the Angelical will does
move the heavens: but when you say that there was no need of Angels, since this
might be as well done by the will of God: You speak idly, for so you may say
that there is no need of our souls to move our bodies, since this might be as
well done by the will of God: Angelical and humane wills are subordinate and
serviceable to the will of God, but not excluded by it; For in him we live and
move, and yet we live and move by our souls too. And as impertinent is your
other question, How the orbs are capable of perceiving this will in the
Intelligences, or what motive faculty have they of themselves to enable them to
obey? Answ. The orbs are as capable to perceive the will of the Angels, as
your body is to perceive your will, or as those bodies were which the Angels of
old assumed, and by them conversed with the Patriarchs: and as those bodies had
a motive faculty to obey the Angels will, so have the heavens much more.

Keplar's opinion that the Planets are moved round by the Sun, and that this
is done by sending forth a magneticke virtue, and that the Sunbeames are like
the teeth of a wheel, taking hold of the Planets, are senseless crotchets,
fitter for a wheeler or miller, then a Philosopher: This magneticke virtue is a
salve for all sores, a pin to stop every hole, for still when you are reduced
to a nonplus, magneticke virtue is your only subterfuge, like AEneas his
target, Unum omniae contra tela Latinorum: If you had told us that the North
star had a magneticke virtue, because the needle touched with the magnes
looks toward it, some silly people perhaps would have believed you, and yet
the magneticke virtue is in the needle, not in the star; but that in the Sun
there should be a magneticke virtue, it has no show of probability. This
virtue (you say) may hold out to as great a distance as light or heat: But if
this comparison hold, it will follow, that there is no such virtue in the
Sun, for that light which is in the air is not in the Sun, neither is that
heat which we feel caused by the Sun, in the Sun: but your following
words are admirable; That if the Moon may move the sea, why may not the Sun
move the earth? As if you would say, If the North-winde shake the woods, why
may not the South-winde shake the mountains? Or (according to your doctrine)
if the earth can move the Moon, why may not Venus or Mercury move the Sun?
or why may not the Sun move the Firmament?

You conclude well, That your Quare's are but conjectures, and that no man can
find out the works of God from the beginning to the end: and yet you have
found out that which God never made, to wit, a rolling Earth, a standing
Heaven, a world in the Moon; which indeed are not the works of God, but of
your own head: for his works are incomprehensible, his ways past finding
out. Trouble not then your self too much in these things, which in this life
you cannot understand; learn to know your self that we may know you too, and
by the knowledge of your self, strive to know God, the knowledge of whom is
life eternal. I will give you good counsel in the words of Lib. 1. de Anima.
Hugo: Nosce teipsum; melior es si te ipsum cognoscas, quaem si te neglecto
cursus siderum, vires herbarum, etc. Coelestium omnium and terrestrium
scientiam haberes; multi multa sciunt, seipsos nesciunt, quum summa Philosophia
sit cognitio sui.

CHAP. X.
1. The idle and uncertain concetes of Astronomers concerning the celestial
bodies. 2. The appearances of the Sun, and other Planets cannot be so well
discerned by the earth if it did move. 3. The excellency of Divinity above
Astronomy, and an exhortation to the study of it.
THis proposition is full of suppositions, fraughted with figures and
characters, which more affect the eye then satisfy the mind; neither do they
demonstrate the motions of the earth, but the motions of your head. The
pictures in Ovids Metamorphosis add not the more credit to his fictions,
neither do these figures to you phansies: we will believe no more then you
can demostrate by sense or reason; demonstrations are of things true and real,
not of dreams and imaginations: therefore, neither your pictures, nor bare
words, shall persuade us, that days, months, years, hours, weeks, etc. are
or can be caused by the earths motion, till first you have proved that the
earth moves; you that cannot abide Eccentrickes and Epicycles in the heavens,
are forced now to make use of them, both for the motion of the Moon, and of
the earth too; so that you have not mended but marred the matter, rejecting
Ptolomy because of Eccentrickes and Epicycles, and yet you admit Copernicus
with his new devised Moon Eccentricks, and Earth Eccentrickes, so that you
think by these fictions to solve the diverse illuminations, bigness, eclipses,
etc. of the Moon. A fantastical Astronomer might devise other ways besides
these of Ptolomy and Copernicus, to show the different appearances of the
Planets; for of things that are uncertain and beyond our reach, diverse men
will have diverse conceits and conjectures: many have held, and do at this day
yet maintain, that the stars have souls and are living creatures, and why may
not this be as true as your opinion, that there is a world of living creatures
in the Moon? What if I should hold that the eight sphere is a solid
substance, therefore called firmamentum, full of holes, some great and some
small; so that these lights which we call stars are but beams of that
bright and clear heaven above, called Empyreum, shining through these holes?
Or if I should say, that every star had its Angel moving it about the earth,
as we use in dark nights to carry lanternes: diverse Nations of Asia, Afric,
and America, have diverse opinions of the stars, and few or none true, all
which do argue our ignorance and foolishness; we are but Curvae in terris
animae, and coelestium inanes. But any of these conjectures mentioned, is as
probable as yours of the earths motion; therefore, I was not without sense and
reason when I concluded my Book with this Argument, That if the Sun stood
still, there could be no variation of the shadow in the Sun Dial: you will
say that may be altered by the earths motion, but I say to you as I said to Mr.
Carpenter, prove that, and what I proffered to him, I also profer to you: --
Phillida solus habeto. You will say this may be easily proved, if I will admit
the earth to move: but so you may say, that you will easily prove an Ass to
fly, if I should admit that he has wings; but I will not admit that upon a
false maxim of your devising, you shall infer what you please. What if I
should admit an absurd conceit of yours, that the Earth draws the Moon
about? can you prove me, that when the Moon shines there is any variation of
shadows, when both the luminous and opace body are moved with the same motion?

2. The difference (you say) between Summer and Winter, between the number and
length of days, and of the Suns motion from Sign to Sign, and all other
appearances of the Sun concerning the annual motion, may be seen by your
Figures; and easily solved by supposing the earth to move in an Eccentricall
orb about the Sun. Answ. Not the Suns appearances but your fantasies are
to be seen by your figures; the earth does not move because your figure
represents it: it is also an easy matter to suppose things that never were,
nor can be; you suppose the earth to move about the Sun, and not the Sun
about the earth: you may as well suppose the house to be carried about the
candle, and not the candle about the house, and so all appearances may be
solved as well this way as the other; for if the house did move about the
candle, the house shall be seen as well as if the candle did move about the
house: and why may we not suppose the house to move sometimes nearer to, and
sometimes farther from the candle, the nearer it moves, the more it is
illuminate, etc. But what Cato is so grave as to refrain from laughter at such
absurd and foolish suppositions?

You spend much paper to show how the Planets will appear direct, stationary,
retrograde, and yet still move regularly about their own centers. This is,
Magno conatu magnas nugas dicere; and who but Iudaeus apella will believe, that
one motion of the earth should cause so many different appearances in the
several Planets? howsoever you talk of Ptolomie's Wheele-worke, I prefer
his Wheel to your Whirlegig. It is more easy for many Planets to wheel
about, then for one rock or piece of earth to whirle about: but you are as
exact in placing the Planets, as if you had been upon the top of Jacobs ladder.
You place Mercury next to the Sun, hiding himself under his rays; you say
well, for thieves do use to hide themselves; but for one to hide himself in
the open light is not usual: darkness (one would think) were more proper
then that; But how Mercury has a more lively vigorous light then any of the
other, I understand not: I should rather think that there were a more lively
vigorous light in the Sun, Moon, and Venus. And whereas you say that Venus in
her conjunction with the Sun does not appear horned, is true; but if her
husband Vulcan had been as near the Sun, his horns doubtless had been
seen; do not you know how much ashamed Venus was, when the Sun looked upon
her, being in bed with Mars? Now, that the orb of Mars contains our earth
within it, I will not deny; but I am sure our earth contains Mars within it,
who is oftentimes too exorbitant: -- Toto saevit Mars impius orb. And that the
orb of the Moon comprehends the earth in it, because she is sometimes in
opposition to the Sun, is a feeble reason; as, though the opposition of two
round bodies should be the cause why that which is in the midst betwixt them,
should be within the circumference of either of their circles or orbs. Other
Planets have their oppositions, is therefore the earth within the orb of
either of them? Or why is the earth more within the orb of the Moon then of
the Sun, seeing the Moon is no more in opposition to the Sun, then the Sun is
to the Moon?

3. You conclude your Book with a large digression upon the commendations of
Astronomy, which has for its object the whole world you say, And therefore
far exceeds the barren speculation of universale, and materia prima. Answ. It
seems you have left nothing for the objects of other sciences, if Astronomy
must ingrosse the whole world for its object. 2. Vniversum, belike, exceeds
Universal with you, and the extent of the one is not so large, nor the
speculation so fruitful, as of the other; but surely your Vniversum or world
in the Moon is as barren a notion, as that of Universal. 3. The knowledge of
Philosophy and Logic, is but cobweb learning in your conceit; but we think
that these cobwebs are strong enough to catch such flies as you; and indeed
there is more substance in these cobwebs then in your Astronomicall dreams and
phansies. 4. What you say of other knowledge, That is depends upon conjectures
and uncertainty; is most true of your Astronomicall Book, wherein I have found
nothing but suppositions, may-bee's, conjectures, and uncertainties. 5. Whereas
you say, That man had os sublime, a face to look upward, that he might be an
Astronomer: You are deceived, it was that he might be a Divine; for the
stars were made, not that he should doat upon them in idle speculations and
niceties full of uncertainty, but that by their light and motion he might be
brought to the knowledge of Divinity, which your self in your subsequent
discourse is forced to acknowledge. But take heed you play not the Anatomist
upon these celestial bodies, (whose inward parts are hid from you) in the
curious and needless search of them; you may well lose your self, but this
way you shall never find God. 6. Whereas you say, That Astronomy serves to
confirm the truth of the holy Scripture: you are very preposterous, for you
will have the truth of Scripture confirmed by Astronomy, but you will not have
the truth of Astronomy confirmed by Scripture: sure one would think that
Astronomicall truths had more need of the Scripture confirmation, then the
Scripture of them. And indeed, all Learning beside the Scripture, is but Sermon.
1. De F. de.
(...), as Theodoret says; that is, mere contention and strife of words not
to be reconciled. Let us not then spend that time in vain and needless
speculations, which we should employ in knowing God, and in working out our
salvation with fear and trembling; For it is life eternal to know God in
Christ: in respect of which excellent knowledge, the Apostle accounted all
things but dross and loss. Moses was a great Astronomer, yet he reckoned the
knowledge of this, and of all the Egyptian wisdom, but L. 1. De Officus.
detrimentum and stultitiam, but loss and foolishness in respect of the
knowledge of holy Scripture, says Saint Ambrose. Astronomers with Martha, are
busy about many things, but the Divine with Mary, has chosen the better part
which shall never betaken from him. How small was the store of gold and silver
which the Hebrews brought out of Egypt, in comparison of that wealth which
under Solomon they had in Jerusalem? so small and mean is all humane knowledge
compared to the Scripture: for whatsoever learning is naught it is condemned
here, whatsoever is profitable it is to be found here; and more abundantly in
the wonderful height and depth of Scripture, De Doctrina Christian. L. 2.6.41.
then any where else, says Saint Austin. Let it then be our delight, Nocturna
versare manu, versare diurna: still to be meditating in this holy Law of God;
that like trees planted by the river side, we may fructify in due season. And
as Alexander did carry about him Homers Iliads in the rich cabinet of Darius,
even so let the holy Scripture be still our Vade mecum, and in the cabinet of
our heart let us lay it up, as Mary did the words that were spoken of Christ. I
may say of Scripture as the Apostle said of Christ, Whither shall we go from
thee? thou have the words of eternal life. Thus briefly and by snatches (being
with-drawne and distracted with many other businesses) have I answered your
Book, which I undertook partly out of the considence I have of the truth of
our side; partly to vindicate my own credit; partly to satisfy my friends;
and lastly, to excite others whose abilities exceed mine to maintain and
defend the truth of our opinion, and to explode the contrary as false, which in
time may prove dangerous and pernicious to Divinity.

FINIS.

