HAving with much delight, satisfaction, and content perused this Treatise,
entitled, The Philosophical Touchstone, I allow it to be printed and
published, and commend it to the learned and judicious Reader, as a work sound
and solid, and eminently acute and accurate.

John Downame.

THE PHILOSOPHICAL TOUCHSTONE: OR OBSERVATIONS UPON Sir Kenelm Digbie's
Discourses of the nature of BODIES, and of the reasonable SOUL.

In which his erroneous Paradoxes are refuted, the Truth, and Aristotelian
Philosophy vindicated, the immortality of man's Soul briefly, but sufficiently
proved.

And the weak Fortifications of a late Amsterdam Ingeneer, patronizing The
Souls mortality, briefly slighted.

By ALEXANDER ROSS.

Pers. Sat. 5. Non equidem hoc studeo, bullatis ut mihi nugis Pagina turgescat,
dare pondus idonea fumo. LONDON, Printed for James Young, and are to be sold by
Charles Green, at the sign of the Gun in Ivie-lane. 1645.

TO THE Right honorable, JOHN, Earl of RUTLAND, Lord Ross, etc.
My Lord,
WIth the same boldness that I have adventured to lap up in the folds of a few
paper sheets the rich Jewels of Philosophical truths, with the same have I
presumed to present them to your Lordships view; not that you can receive from
them any addition of honor, but that they, from your Name and Protection, may
partake a farther degree of irradiation and luster. Here you may see what odds
there are between natural gems, and counterfeit stones; between solid wholesome
meats, and a dish of Frogs or Mushroms, though made savoury with French sauce,
to which that ingenious rather then (in this Discourse) judicious Knight does
invite us: who, breathing now in a hotter climate, cannot digest the solid
meats of Peripatetick verities, which hitherto have been the proper and
wholesome food of our Universities; and therefore entertaines us with a French
dinner of his own dressing, or with an airie feast of Philosophical quelque
chooses: a banquet fitter for Grasshoppers and Camelions, who feed on dew and
air, then for men, who rise from his Table as little satisfied, as when they
sat down. We that have eat plentifully of the sound and wholesome viands which
are dressed in Aristotle's kitchen, are loath now to be fed, as the Indian gods
are, with the steem or smoke of meats; or, as those -- Umbrae tenues,
simulachraque luce carentum, those pale ghosts in Proserpine's Court, to champ
Leeks and Mallows.

My Lord, in this Dedication, I only aim at an expression of my gratefulness
and observance, which I owe to your goodness; and of those real sentiments I
have of your favors and opinion, which your self, and your truly noble and
religious Countess have been pleased to conceive of me. I heartily pray for
an accumulation of all happiness on you both, as likewise on the fruit of your
bodies, especially the tender plant, and hopeful pledge of your mutual loves,
my Lord Ross; which is the wish of

Your Honors humble servant, ALEXANDER ROSS.

The CONTENTS of the first part, containing 68. Sections.
WOrds express things as they are in their own nature. sect. 1. Divisibility
the effect of extension; this is not the essence of quantity. sect. 2. Rarity
the effect, not the cause of heat: rarefied bodies not the hottest. sec. 3. The
essence of local motion consists not in divisibility. sec. 4. Place is not a
body, but the superficies of a body. sec. 5. Not density, but gravity is the
cause of activity; and frigidity cause of both. sec. 6. Pressure and
penetration not parts, but effects of frigidity: heat is more piercing. sec. 7.
Though accidents be real entities, yet they exist not by themselves. sec. 8.
Heat is not the substance of the fire. sec. 9. Light no body, but a quality,
proved by twelve reasons: Nor can it be fire. sec. 10. Of the qualities of
light, and how it heats, and how it perishes. sec. 11, 12. The dilatatio^ and
motion of the light, and how seen by us. sec. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
The greatest bodies have not the greatest virtue. sec. 21. How natural bodies
move themselves. sec. 22. How the Sun causes motion. sec. 23. If the light
bears up the atoms, and if it be a part of them. sec. 24. There is in nature
positive gravity and levity, by which she works. sec. 25. Light descends through
dense bodies. sec. 26. Atoms do not press. sec. 27. Egyptian earth, why
heavy upon change of weather. How a vessel with snow and salt in it freezeth
by the fire. The vanity of atoms. sec. 28. Water is not actually heavy in its
own sphere. The sea moves naturally to the center. Water can divide water.
sec. 29 Heavy bodies tend naturally to the center. Gravity is not the cause of
violent motion. The effect sometimes exceeds the cause. Inanimate things,
without understanding, affect and dis-affect what is good or bad for them. sec.
30. The true cause of the motion of projection, and its properties. sec. 31.
The heavens void of generation, corruption, alteration: they are natural
bodies. sec. 32. Atoms are not the causes of heat, nor ofre-action. sec. 33.
How elementary forms remain in mixed bodies. sec. 34. There are in nature
four simple bodies. sec. 35. Wind is not the motion of atoms, but an
exhalation. sec. 36. Natural, Mathematical, and Diabolical magic. sec. 37.
The weapon-salve a mere imposture. sec. 38. The true causes of the temperament
under the line. sec. 39. The lodestone is not begot of atoms drawn from the
North Pole. sec. 40. Without qualities no operation in nature. sec. 41. Atoms
pierce not the earth. Odors decay by time. Salt how it grows heavy. sec. 42.
Natural agents at the same time work diversely. sec. 43. The heat of the marrow
is not the cause of the hardness of the bones, but the heat of the bones
themselves. sec. 44. God is not dishonored, by calling him the Creator of the
meanest things. sec. 45. The formative power of generation in the seed. sec.
46. Whether the heart or the liver first generated. sec. 47. Thin bodies, as
well as thick, the objects of touch. Rarity and density what kind of entities.
sec. 48. Objects work not materially, but intentionally on the sense. sec. 49.
Sound is not motion, proved. How perceived by deaf men. It shakes not houses.
sec. 50. Colors are not quantities nor substances, but qualities. s. 51. How
living creatures can move themselves. Of nature and properties. Of life: And
how the life of God differs from the life of the creature. sec. 52. Of sense
and sensation. How the sense works and suffers. sec. 53. Vision is not
caused by material atoms. Seven things required in sensation. sec. 54. Words
are not motion, nor are they the chief object of memory. sec. 55. The organ of
the memory. How the intellect and memory differ. sec. 56. Purging consists
not in liquefaction, but in attracting and expelling. sec. 57. Pleasure is not
the motion of a fume about the heart, but the apprehension of a convenient
object. sec. 58. Pain and pleasure move not the heart. Of systole and
diastole. sec. 59. Pain is not compression, but the effect of it. All hard
things breed not pain, nor soft things pleasure. The heart is more active then
passive, because hot. Fear, sorrow, and stupidity how they differ. Passion is
not the motion of the blood and spirits, but of the sensible appetite. Every
passion is not motion. The division of passions. Why birds more musical then
other creatures. sec. 60. There are sympathies and antipathies in nature, of
which we can give no reason, which is the punishment of Adams pride. sec. 61.
Of impressions made in the embryo, and of the formative power. sec. 62.
Substances could not be known, were it not for qualities. No action, passion,
and motion without qualities. Alterations from them. sec. 63. All bodies are
not merely passive. Rare and dense not the primary division of bodies. sec. 64.
Aristotle not the author of atoms, but Democritus. sec. 65. The necessity of
metaphysicall knowledge. Privations and negations conceived as positive
entities by Aristotelians, how. sec. 66. Qualities are not dispositions of
parts. Beauty is neither composition nor proportion. Health is not temper.
Agility is not proportion nor strength. Science is not ordered phantasmes. sec.
67. Sir Kenelme modestly reproved for mocking at Aristotelians. sec. 68. How,
and why accidents are in their subjects. Accidents are entities. Aristotelians
vindicated from tautologies. Nature aims at unity, why. Of similitudes, and
the ground thereof. How man is like to God, not God to man. sec. 69.
The CONTENTS of the second part, containing 28. Sections.
ARistotelians make not heat and cold indivisible qualities. Not they, but the
Mass Priests turn bodies into spirits. sec. 1. Not the nature, but the
similitude of the thing apprehended, is in the man apprehending; and therefore
the understanding is not the same with the thing understood, proved by ten
reasons. sec. 2. All relations are not notions, but real entities, proved by
ten reasons. sec. 3. Existence is not the property of man, but of entity, or
rather its formality; in God only it is one with essence. sec. 4. The soul is
more then an active force. She sleeps not in the grave, etc. sec. 5. Being
has no great affinity with the soul: it is neither the end, nor the Idea of
the soul. sec. 6. Things are understood rather by way of similitude, then of
respect or relation. sec. 7. Man's knowledge how finite and infinite. God only
absolutely infinite. How he is known by us here and hereafter. How infinity
can be known. sec. 8. Things lose not their being, by reason of quantity, but
by the privation of the form. sec. 9. Mathematicians consider not the natures
of things, but bare accidents abstracted from sensible matter. sec. 10. All
life consists not in motion. Life is not an action, but the act. How motions
come from without, how not. sec. 11. How the soul is perfect. In her no
privative, but negative imperfections. There are accidents in the soul. sec.
12. Place is not a body: it is neither form nor matter. Whatsoever has
existence has ubiety, even Angels and souls. How souls are in their bodies.
They are not nowhere, nor are they everywhere. sec. 13. How time is the
measure of motion. Time and motion different things. When the heavenly motions
shall cease, there will be time, how understood. Things below would move,
though the heavens stood still. sec. 14. What things are in time chiefly and
primarily. How spirits are not in time, and how in time. Tempus, aevum,
eternity. God only exempted from time. Discrete time. sec. 15. The soul is
no accident. She knows not all things. There is no exterior and interior
soul. Phantasmes are not bodies. All souls have not the same amplitude of
knowledge. Life is not motion. Neither the soul nor the life becomes to be a
spirit. sec. 16. Both Angels and souls stand in need of external and
internal helps of knowledge. Memory remains in separated souls. How the
species depend from the fantasy. Diverse habits left in the soul separated.
The souls in their understanding differ from the Angels. What things they know
not. God is not understood by species. sec. 17. The fantasy works not upon
the soul, but the active intellect upon the passive. How the fantasy helps
the understanding. The fantasy works in sleep. How the soul works upon
her self, by means of her diverse faculties. sec. 18. In Angels and departed
souls there are actions and perfective passions. The want of action argues
death rather then life. Some actions cease after death, not all. All actions
not corruptive. Sir Kenelm contradicts himself. sec. 19. The soul the subject
of memory, recordation, reminiscence, and of oblivion too. What habits are left
actually and potentially in the soul. It Is a happiness to be forgetful of
some things. sec. 20. Rhetorical flourishes useless, and hurtful in
Philosophical disputes. sec. 21. Perfection of knowledge makes not the
substance of the soul more perfect. The soul cease not to be a soul,
though she brings knowledge with her. False judgments and erroneous opinions
are a part of the punishment of damned souls in hell. sec. 22. All effects do
not immediately follow upon the working of the efficient. Opus and Operatio.
The act of entity and of causality are to be distinguished. The effect, which
is the property of the cause, follows immediately. God an eternal entity,
not an eternal cause. sec. 23. That the soul is not a material, but a
spiritual substance, infused, not traduced, proved by twenty arguments. Of the
operations, knowledge, and liberty of the soul in willing. Of her excellency
above the senses and corporeal substances: this is proved by Scripture. In
what sense the soul is called corporeal by some Fathers. She is no part of
the divine essence, as some heretics thought. sec. 24. The specificall
perfection or excellency of souls is alike in all. There may be some
difference in accidental perfections, in respect of the organs and fantasy.
sec. 25. The nearer the Intelligences are to God, the more they know. The
superior have a greater similitude with God then the inferior, and stand in
need of fewer intelligible species. All behold Gods essence, but not in the
same measure. Neither is their knowledge equal, nor infinitely unequal. sec.
26. The soul is not made complete in or by the body, but rather incomplete,
because she is then a part of the whole. sec. 27. Nature, reason, and knowledge
are but blind guides to heaven, without Christ, proved by Scripture and reason.
What we are by nature. How Christ may be called nature, reason, and knowledge.
sec. 28.
The CONTENTS of the Conclusion, containing 17. Sections.
THe immortality of the soul proved by Scripture. sec. 1. The same proved by
six reasons grounded on the Scripture. sec. 2. That the soul is immortal of
her own nature, proved by four reasons: and how this phrase is to be
understood. sec. 3. The souls immortality proved by thirteen natural and
moral reasons. The Gentiles, by natures light, were not ignorant of this
truth. Aristotle in this point cleared and vindicated. sec. 4. How Angels and
men's souls subject to annihilation or dissolution. sec. 5. The first Objection
against our doctrine answered, and is showed how the soul is immortal, both
by grace and nature. sec. 6. The second Objection answered. Solomon compares
not men's souls to beasts, but the death of men's bodies to that of beasts. sec.
7. The third Objection answered. Job denies not the resurrection, but shows
it cannot be effected by the power of nature. sec. 8. The fourth Objection
answered. Austin cleared. The way how the soul is infused, and original sin
propagated. sec. 9. The fifth Objection answered. How the soul in under
standing depends from the senses. sec. 10. The sixth Objection answered how the
soul suffers. sec. 11. The seventh Objection answered. How immateriall grace
is corrupted. sec. 12. The eighth Objection answered. Desire of immortality in
man only. sec. 13. The ninth Objection answered. The soul understands better
being separated, then now she does in the body. sec. 14. The many mischiefs
that Christian Religion suffers by this opinion of the souls corruptibility.
sec. 15. The late printed Pamphlet at Amsterdam, which undertakes to prove the
souls mortality, briefly refuted, and slighted as a frivolous and irreligious
rapsodie, having nothing in it but froth. Wherein he abuses Scripture. He is
refuted in four observations. The soul, after death, subsisteth naturally,
not violently, nor miraculously. sec. 16. A devout and comfortable meditation
upon the souls immortality, fit for all afflicted Christians. sec. 17.
THE PHILOSOPHICAL TOUCHSTONE.
NOble Sir KENELME, as I reverence your worth, so I admire your pains, who,
being a Gentleman of such eminency, thinks it no disparagement, but an honor,
to spend your time in good literature, which gives true Nobility: your
practice herein is exemplary, which I wish the Gentry of our Nation would
imitate, who think they are born merely for themselves and their pleasures;
whose time is spent either idly, wickedly, or impertinently, as Seneca
complains, Eorum vitam mortemque juxta existimo: but your mind, being of a
more noble extraction, semine ab aethereo, you know that you are not borne for
your self; and therefore, by your indefatigable pains, do both eternize your
fame, and enoble your Country: but because this life of ours cannot challenge
the privilege of perfection, and truth here is accompanied with error, as the
light with shades; therefore I find that this your Work, of the nature of
Bodies, and of the Souls immortality, has some passages in it Heterodoxall,
and not consonant to the principles of Divinity and Philosophy, which have
drawn from me these sudden Observations (for I have here neither time, books,
nor opportunity to enlarge my self) in which I promise both brevity and
modesty, suffering no other language to pass from me, but such as may beseem
both your worth, and my ingenuitie; for my end is not to wound your reputation,
but to vindicate the truth.

The first mistake I meet with is [ That words express Sect. 1. Page 2. cap. 1.
things only according to the pictures we make of them in our thoughts, and not
as the things are in their proper natures.] But if our words express not the
things which we conceive in our minds, as they are in their own natures, then
our conceptions are erroneous, and our words improper or false: and if there be
not an adequation of our conceptions with the things we conceive, there can be
no metaphysicall truth in us; which consists in the agreement of our thoughts
with the things, as ethicall truth does in the consent of our words to our
thoughts. Our conceptions are our internal words which represent real things,
and our external words represent these conceptions, and, by consequence, they
express things as they are in their natures: So Adam in Paradise gave names to
the creatures according to their natures, and so have wise men ever since. The
Latins call the sea mare, quasi amarum, from its saltness or bitterness, for
it is so in its own nature.

Secondly, [ You define quantity to be nothing else but the Sect. 2. Page 9.
cap. 2.
extension of a thing] and shortly after [ that quantity is nothing else but
divisibility.] Thus you confound extension and divisibility, which differ as
much, as in man rationality differs from risibility, the one being the effect
of the other; for therefore things are divisible, because they are extensive:
take away extension, divisibility fails; and therefore numbers are not
properly divisible, because they have no extension, but only in resemblance.
Secondly, extension is not the essence of quantity; for if it were, all that
have quantity must have also extension: but Angels have discrete quantity,
which we call number, and yet have no extension. Thirdly, there is a
quidditative or entitive extension, by which one part is not another in bodies,
though there were no quantitative extension at all: therefore not every
extension is the essence of quantity. There is also the extension of site,
which is no quantity.

Whereas [ you make heat a property of rare bodies, and Sect* 3. Page 28. cap.
4. Page 30.
that out of rarity arises heat, and that a body is made and constituted a
body by quantity] you speak paradoxically; for the rarest body is not still
the hottest: A burning coal is hotter then the flame, and scalding lead is
hotter then scalding water. Secondly, rarity is not the cause of heat, but heat
the cause of rarity; that which begets heat, is motion, and the influence and
light of the Stars: motion then begets heat, heat begets rarity. It Is true,
that rarefaction prepares the matter to receive heat, as heat prepares the
matter to receive the form of the hot element; but what prepares, is not the
cause. Thirdly, a body is not made and constituted by quantity, for this is
posteriour to a body, being a substance, and follows the body as its
accident; and therefore more ignoble. Every accident has a subjective
dependence from the substance; a body has or may have entitie without
quantity, so cannot quantity without the body.

The essence, or, as you call it [ the substance of local motion, Sect. 4. Page
34. cap. 5.
does not consist in division;] because whatsoever division there is in this
motion, it is either in respect of the thing moved, or in respect of the space
in which it is moved: but both these are external to motion, and not belonging
any ways to its essence; therefore in that divisibility which is in them,
cannot consist the essence of local motion. Besides, divisibility is a
property of quantity flowing from its essence, whereas local motion is
quantitative but by accident; and not, but by way of reduction, in the
predicament of quantity: therefore, except you be of Scotus his opinion, who
will have mobile and motus all one, division cannot be the essence of local
motion: And if you were a Scotist in this, yet you cannot prevail; for
division, being the accident of the thing moved, it cannot be of its essence;
for no accident can constitute the essence of a substance.

You speak not like a Philosopher, when you speak Sect. 5. Page 34 cap 5.
[ of uniting a body moved to that other body, which is called its place:] For
place is defined to be the superficies of the ambient body, but the body
quantitative is a different species from the superficies: the substantial
body is in another predicament; therefore place cannot be a body: for if it
were, it could not be equal to the thing contained; for every body that
contains, is bigger then the body contained: as the dish is bigger then the
water. The air then is not the place of our bodies, but the superficies or
terminus of the air, which is the accident of that subject.

[ In regard dense bodies (you say) are dividers, the earth Sect. 6. Page 36.
cap. 5.
in that respect must be the most active element, since it is the most dense.]
The earth is active in dividing, not because it is most dense, but because most
heavy; and, indeed, the cause both of density and gravity is frigidity; and
therefore this is the active quality, not density. Again, elements are called
active, in respect of the two active qualities, heat and cold; and, of these
two, heat is the more active; and consequently, the element of fire is simply
and absolutely most active.

[ The action of cold is composed of two parts, to wit, pressing, Sect. 7. Page
36. c. 5.
and penetration.] Pressure and penetration are not the parts, but the effects
of frigefaction. Pressure but a remote effect, for it is immediately caused by
gravity, and this by cold: And for penetration, it is rather the effect of heat
then of cold; for hot liquors pierce sooner then cold: and it is rather by
reason of the rarity of its substance, then of the coldness thereof, that it
pierces; for this cause air is more penetrating then water, and fire then
air.

[ A real entity necessarily has an existence of its own, and Sect. 8. Page
39. c. 6.
so becomes a substance.] By this you infer, that qualities must needs be
substances, seeing they are real entities distinct from the bodies they
accompany. But this consequence* is irrational; for accidents are real
entities, because they are not bare notions and conceptions of the mind, but
things existent, and distinct from their bodies; yet their entity is weak
compared with that of substances, so that sometimes they are called
non-entities by Philosophers: but if all real entities must needs be
substances, then in vain is it to make above one predicament, or to divide
entity into substance and accidents. Then qualities cannot be contrary one to
another, as heat to cold, nor can they admit of magis and minus, but are
subjects susceptible of contrariety without alteration of themselves, which are
the properties of substance: but although accidents be real entities, yet they
have no existence in or by themselves, but in or by their substances; for
Accidentis esse est inesse; and therefore ens is called [(...)] as respecting
principally substance; but accidents secundario, as they inhere in their
substance: which as they cannot subsist, so they cannot be defined without
their substance. The Papists themselves will not yield, that accidents in the
Eucharist can subsist without their proper subject, except by miracle, or
Divine power: and Scotus is so far from yielding In 1. Phys. quaest. 7.
any subsistence to accidents without their substance, that he will rather
believe, that the accidents in the bread, are turned by miracle into a
substance: to which opinion it seems you incline. Thomas tells us, that
whiteness 1. ^* q. 90. Art. 2.
and other accidents have no entity, but as they are in their subjects: And
Aristotle, that accidents are entis, 7 Metaphys.
rather then entia. You must first prove that accidents have any entity without
their subjects, and then, that to have real entity, and to subsist by it
self; or, that essence and self- existence is all one: when this is proved, we
will be of your opinion.

[ Heat is nothing else in the fire, but the very substance of Sect. 9. Page
41. c. 6.
it.] If heat be the substance of the fire, then it is either the matter, or
the form of it; not the matter, for heat is active, the matter passive; not
the form, for the form is the essence, and therefore incommunicable; but heat
is communicated by the fire to the water: Heat is not in the element the
principle of motion, but the form thereof is. One form is not contrary to
another: but heat is contrary to cold. Heat admits degrees, so does not the
substantial form. Heat and cold cannot be contraries, Contraria sunt sub
eodem genere.
seeing heat is a substance, say you, and cold a quality.

[ It cannot be imagined that light is any thing else but fire.] Sect. 10. Page
43. c. 6.
If it be so, then wherever fire is, there is light: but we read of a fire
without light. 2. Then wherever light is, there is fire: but there is light
in the Stars, in Cats eyes, in Glow-wormes, in Fish scales, yet no fire. 3. The
nature of fire is to ascend only, the nature of the light is to descend also.
4. Water is opposite to fire; but to light, darkness. 5. Fire heats by
degrees, and successively, light illuminates suddenly, and in an instant. 6.
Fire contains it self in a narrow place, as the chimney, light dilates it
self over all the room. 7. If light be fire, then it must be heat, for heat
you say is fire; but if light be heat, then it will follow that light is
tangible, and heat visible: but ask a blind man, if he can discern light by
touching, and ask him that has eyes, if by them he can see heat, which he must
needs do, if heat and light be the same thing. 8. There is heat in a dark Oven
that bakes your bread, when there is no light at all; and there is light in
Saturn, but no heat at all. 9. When the fire warmes the water, it makes a
change in the water, by expelling a positive quality, but when the Sun
illuminates the air, there is no change made in the air, because no positive
quality is expelled; darkness being a mere privation. 10. The light of the
Sun in the air and in the Sun, is the same light; but if it be fire in the
air, much more must it be fire in the Sun: No wonder then if Icarus his waxen
wings melted, flying so near the Sun. But the snowie mountains have the Suns
light more then the valleys, yet have they not thereby the more heat. Snow
enlightneth the air in the night, but warmes it not. The air is not warmer at
the full Moon, then at the change. 11. Iflight be fire, then it must be a
body, but a body it cannot be; for then when light is in the air, two bodies
must be at once in one place. 2. It must be the subject of motion. 3. It must
be compounded of matter and form. 4. It can never be annihilated, for the
matter remains still; but what becomes of the candlelight in your chamber,
when the candle is put out? does the matter of it assume some new form? and is
the corruption of light the generation of darkness? 5. If it were a body, it
must enter into the composition of things, and so make up a part of the mixed
body; but how absurd is the conceit of these things? 12. If light be fire, then
it must be a substance; and so it can subsist by it self, and is incapable of
degrees; not to speak of the instantaneall motion of light, of which
corporeal substances are not capable, nor of the immobility of it in the air,
when the air is moved with winds.

[ You see upon the paper which you held near the flame of a Sect. 11. Page 43.
candle, being a little removed, some part of that which you saw in the
candle.] The parts of the candle are, the wieke, the tallow, and the flame; Do
you see any of these on the paper? Indeed, you see no part of the candle on the
paper; but only by the light of the candle you see the paper; which will not
prove light to be a body, no more then [ the dilating of gold:] for though gold
dilated, and fire dilated, are gold, and fire; yet this will not prove that
light is fire dilated. As for your [ blind School-master] you speak of, he
might feel the heat of the fire in his brains, but not the light; for light is
not the object of touching. [ As for the breaking or reflecting of light] these
will prove it no more to be a body, then the breaking or motion of a shadow, can
prove a shadow to be a body: Nullum simile est idem. The motions of light and
shadows, are but like the motions of bodies. [ The uniting of light in a
burning-glasse] proves it no more to be a body, then the uniting or
re-inforcing of cold by antiperistasis, proves cold to be a body: And if you will
say that light is fire, because it begets heat in a burning-glasse; you may as
well say, that motion is fire, because that begets heat in two hard bodies
rubbed together.

[ There is no doubt but light heats as well as enlightneth.] Sect. 12. Page
46. c. 7.
All light, as is said, heats not, nor has all heat light annexed with it. But
if all light did heat, yet will it not from thence follow that light is fire;
for motion heats as well as light, and the Sun warmes us as well by the one, as
by the other; and both are but means, and the Suns instruments to procreate
heat by in this inferior world. [ As for the flame of the spirit of Wine,
which you say will not burn,] I grant it; but yet it will warm, which the
light does not: Nay, I am assured, that no light at all warms, except the
celestial, which it does (as they speak) effective, not formaliter: But the
fire heats by its form, not by its light: Therefore you are mistaken in all
your discourse, confounding the celestial light, with that of the fire or
candle; and attributing heat to the light of the fire, which heat proceeds
immediately from its form, not from its light. And though the Suns light in a
burning-glasse may inflame, yet no other light can do so; and so by calling
light fire, you confound the accident with the substance, as when you call [
The sent of odoriferous water, the water it self.]

When we ask you, What becomes of the light when Sect. 13. Page 49. c. 7.
the Sun is gone, or is intercepted by a cloud, or the Moons body? You ask
again, [ What becomes of the flame when it is extinguished?] I answer, the
flame, being a substance begot of smoke, returns again unto smoke, for the
smoke being elevated to that height of heat and dryness, presently becomes
flame; which when its nutriment fails, or violently by the wind is separated
from its grosser substance, encountering with the cold air, returns unto smoke
again: But for the light in the room, there is no such generation and
corruption; for when the flame is extinguished, and resolved into smoke, the
light quite perishes and vanishes into nothing, as being a bare accident, and
somewhat like to nothing. If it be a substance, and resolved into some other
matter, tell us into what.

[ You prove the light to be nothing else but the flame dilated, Sect. 14. Page
7. c. 8.
by bringing similes of a basin of water dilated unto vapors by heat, and of
perfumes dilated unto odoriferous smoke.] But these are no proofs at all: We
sensibly perceive the vapors generated of the water, and the smoke of the
perfume, and the diminution or total resolution of these named grosser bodies,
into thinner aereall; But we see no such thing in the light, for there is no
resolution at all of the flame into that diffused light, nor any diminution of
the flame, by the increase of the light; or any total abolishing of the flame
unto that imaginary substance of the light. When the water and perfume is quite
consumed, the steame and smoke remain a great while after; but does there
remain any light of the flame in the room after the flame is wasted and gone?
which must needs be, if the light be the flame dilated or resolved. It were
strange Philosophy to say, that the light of the Sun is nothing else but the
body of the Sun dilated: To how many inconveniences should that celestial body
be subject? To how many generations and corruptions?

[ Light is not in every place of the room really, which is illightned.] Sect.
15. Page 53. c. 8.
This is a pure co^tradiction; for, what is illightned has light in it. If
there be not light in any part of the room which is illightned, then some
illightned parts are dark: such mysterious Philosophy I understand not. As for
these Atoms in the Sun, [ Which you say hinder not our sight;] if they be but
few, it is true: but I have seen often times so many of them, and so thick
together near the ground, that they sensibly hinder the sight. And though
there be many Atoms in the air, yet there is no penetration of dimensions, as
there must needs be, if the light be a body. If there be a thousand lights in a
Church, so many bodies there must be, besides that of the air, penetrating one
another. What a strange body is the light, that can pass through the solid and
dense substance of a glass, and not break it? Sect. 16. Page 56. c. 8.


[ As for the circumaction of a lighted torch in the dark, and the swift motion
of the Sun,] though these may deceive our sight: this, by reason of its vast
distance; that, because the fiery end of it, being the only object of the eye
in the dark, sends the species of it unto the eye, and in the form of a fiery
wheel; because the beams of our eye are dissipated and broken, by the swift
motion of the lucid object: Yet these will not prove, that we are deceived in
the instantaneall motion of the light from East to West, or of a candle in the
room where we are; for if the eye be continually deceived in the motion of its
proper object, being within a convenient distance, then is the eye given to us
in vain, and so God is made imperfect in his work: And therefore our argument
is good, when we say, that the light can be no natural body, seeing it
illuminates the whole Hemisphere in an instant.

You give a reason why the light by its motion does Sect. 17. Page ^9. c. 8.
Page 60.
not shatter the air, or other bodies in pieces: [ Because in light there is
only celerity, but no bigness or density:] This is a strange body, that has
no dimensions; you were better call it a spirit, then a body; for if it be a
body, it must have matter and form: by the matter, it has quantity, which is
inseparable from it; by the form, that quantity has its determination and
limits: therefore if there be in the light celerity, there is motion; if
motion, then the principles of motion, which are two, to wit, the active form,
and the passive matter: and these cannot be without quantity, nor this without
dimensions; and what dimensions can be wanting in so vaste a body as the light
is, reaching from heaven to earth? You cannot allow less then the three
dimensions of longitude, latitude and profundity, and that (I think) is
bigness: and if it incorporate it self with the air, there must needs be a
condensation; two bodies, nay perhaps a thousand, in one Church (if there be so
many candles) being united in one.

[ No light is seen by us, but what is reflected from an opacous Sect. 18. Page
61. cap. 8.
body to our eye.] I pray, from what opacous body is the light of the Sun,
Moon and Stars reflected, when we look upon these luminaries? Do they not
immediately, without any such help, strike our eyes when we look on them? And
wherefore [ has the wind no power to shake the light, which strikes our eye in
a straight line?] Is the wind more restrained by a straight then a crooked
line? The wind shakes the air, and yet shakes not the light which is in it.
Sure, it is not the straight line that keeps the light from shaking, but
because it is an accident, and not a body, as the air is, and bodies only are
the objects and subjects of motion.

[ Our arguments (you say) against light being a body, are Sect. 19. Page 62.
cap. 8.
only negative.] All negative arguments are not to be rejected; there be
negative demonstrations as well as affirmative: and you which hold light to be
a body, how will you prove it to be no accident, but by negatives? and yet I
have urged already diverse affirmative arguments to prove that light is a
quality, as well as negative, to prove it is no body. And whereas you
conclude [ that if fire be light, then light must needs be fire,] Page 63.
it will not follow; for fire may be light or lucid in the concrete, and yet
not so in the abstract: and if it were so, yet light is not therefore fire; for
sure, the light of snow, or fish, or glow-wormes is not fire, nor indeed any
light, as I have proved.

[ By how much the quicker the motion is, by so much the Sect 20. Page 65. cap.
9.
agent is the perfecter.] The quickness of the motion argues not the
perfection of the agent, except you will have the Moon, which moves swifter, a
perfecter agent then the Sun, whose motion is much slower. Is Mercury a more
perfect agent then his father Jupiter? or is Tobias less perfect then his
dog, because he is not so nimble footed?

[ The nature of a body is, that greater quantity of the same Sect. 21. Page 65.
cap. 9.
thing has greater virtue then a less quantity has.] You confound the two
sorts of quantities, to wit, virtutis and molis; the greatest virtue is not
always in the greatest bulk: there was more spirit and courage in little
David, then in great Goliath. A little horse has oftentimes more metal then a
bigger; and a few drops of chymicall spirit have more virtue then an handful
of herbs: little women, for the most part, are fruitfuller then the tallest.
And there is more force in a little gunpowder within a musket, then in twenty
times so much in an open place.

[ You can see no principle to persuade you, that any body can Sect 22. Page
70. cap. 9.
move it self toward any place.] If your meaning be, that no body can move it
self totally, that is, that the whole, and every part in the whole be both
movers and moved, I assent to you; for one and the same thing cannot be in the
same respect actually and potentially in being, but the mover is still in actu,
the thing moved in potentia: nor can the same thing be more noble then it
self, which it must be, if the body thus move it self, seeing the mover is
more noble then the thing moved; but if your meaning be, that no body moves it
self, that is, that in the same body one part does not move the other, you
are mistaken: for every body is compounded of form and matter; the form is
the mover, the matter is moved: and so every body moves it self, as having
within it self the principle of its motion, which is the form. So heavy
bodies move themselves downward, light bodies upward; the one by gravitie, or
the form of gravitie, the other by the form of levitie: gravitie and levitie
being qualities proceeding from the form of these inanimate bodies; and this
power of moving themselves, these bodies had in their generation from their
generator, who gave them being and form, and the consequences of form; dans
formam, dat consequentia ad formam: therefore when a stone falls downward, that
motion is not from an external mover; for then the motion should not be
natural, but violent: now the motion is natural; for nature is the principle
and cause of it, and nature is intrinsecall, and the form is the chief
nature, which causes this motion; therefore the generator cannot be the cause
of this motion, as being gone and separated from it: nor is the removing of the
impediment or the impeller the cause of this motion, for these are causes only
by accident, which must be reduced to the self cause: Doubtless then all
bodies move themselves. Now [ if the quality be nothing else, (as you urge out
of Thomas) but the modification of the thing whose quality it is,] then you
must exclude all habits, natural faculties and passions, all colors, sounds,
sents, and many other qualities, from being real entities; which is absurd.

[ The Sun is a perpetual and constant cause, working upon Sect. 23. Page 76.
cap. 10.
inferior bodies, by his being sometime present, sometime absent.] You spend
much paper in showing that the Sun is the cause of the motion of inferior
bodies, which we deny not; but we are not satisfied with this cause: for the
Sun, as all other celestial bodies, is but an universal and remote cause of
inferior bodies and their motions; but such a cause begets no scientificall
knowledge: the cause, by which we must know scientifically, is particular and
immediate, to wit, the forms of bodies by their properties, gravity and
levity; these are the causes of motion, by which we know. The Sun is too remote
a cause, and I doubt whether he be a cause at all why the fire burns, and of
other such like effects. And though the Sun, being present, is the cause of
sublunary effects, yet, being absent, he cannot be a cause properly, but
accidentally, or causa deficiens, not efficiens.

[ The light carries up an atome with it,] and shortly after Sect. 24. Page
80. cap. 10.
you tell us [ that light is a part of the atome.] Is not the air strong
enough to bear atoms, except you add this new carrier or porter, light? What
becomes of these atoms when the light is gone? Are they not too heavy a
burden for the air to support, without its fellow-helper?

Hercule supposito sidera fulcit Atlas. This is much like their conceit, who
feared that Atlas was not strong enough to bear up the heavens, if Hercules
shoulder had not helped him; but how comes the light to be a part of its own
burden? an atome then, I see, is no atome, but may be cut in parts and
anatomized, and these parts are light: But is light an integrall, or an
essential part? Are there any atoms in candlelight? if there be, how shall
we know? if there be not, then is the light no part of atoms: And if atoms be
opake bodies, how can light be a part of such? is one opposite a part of
another? I think, your atoms sustained by the light, are like the dreams in
Virgil, supported by an elm; or like the shadows in the Elysian fields,
flying about the green meadows:

-- tenues sine corpore vitae
Cernuntur volitare cava sub imagine formae.
You have been too much conversant in the school of Democritus, who held the
world to be made of atoms. [ And to say, that the first and most general
operation of the Page 76.
Sun, is to raise and make atoms,] is to give the Sun a very poor, unworthy,
and fruitless employment. Caligula and his soldiers were better employed,
when they gathered shells and pebble-stones; and so was Dioclesian in catching
of flies.

[ There is no such thing among bodies, as positive gravity Sect. 25. Page 81.
cap. 10.
and levity, but that their course upwards or downwards happen to them by the
order of nature.] It seems you understand here by nature, the universal
nature, which is nothing else, but the dependencie of all inferior causes
orderly from the supreme cause. If this be your meaning, as it must needs be,
you commit a contradiction; for you deny the secondary causes, which you
suppose to depend from the supreme. If then I should ask you, why a stone
descends, you will answer, Not because of any positive gravity in it, but
because it so happens by the order of nature. But why has nature ordered a
stone to fall downward, and not to move upward, seeing there is no positive
gravitie in it? You answer me, [ Because it meets with the air or water,
bodies lighter and thinner then the stone.] Then you here acknowledge a
comparative gravitie in the stone; for, if the air be lighter then the stone,
the stone must be heavier then the air, and so comparatively it is heavy: but
every comparative includes a positive; for, if you be wiser then another, then
you are wise: but indeed, universal nature works not without the particular,
neither does God or the heaven move the stone downward, but by the stones
gravity; therefore gravitie is the immediate cause of its motion, which if you
deny, you may as well deny the fire to be hot; and if you say the fire burns
only, because it happens so by the order of nature, you were as good say
nothing.

[ Any body will descend, if it light among others more Sect. 26. Page 81. c. 10.
rare then it self; and will ascend, if it light among bodies more dense then
it.] What say you then to your light body of light, which you say is nothing
else but fire dilated? surely, meeting with air, a body heavier and denser,
it should never descend to us, who live here on the earth, but ascend rather;
how comes it that so light a body should descend so many miles from its
fountain, the Sun, to us, seeing the air is much more dense then it? Nay, it
descends through a denser body, the water; for, diverse find light in the
bottom of the sea. Again, what say you to a thick plank of timber, which
meeting with the water, a rarer body, notwithstanding descends not to the
bottom, but swims above? This is contrary to your doctrine.

You told us before, that light has no bigness or densitie, Sect. 27.
that the more dense the body is, the more active it is, that the light
carries up atoms; [ and (now you say) that these atoms, the subtilest
divisions of light, do press Page 86. c. 11.
down a leaden bullet, and penetrates or runs through it, as light through a
glass, water through a sponge, and sand through a sieve.] The light then carries
up these atoms, which press down a leaden bullet, and yet the light has not
densitie. These are riddles which Oedipus cannot unfold: for, how a quality
should be a body, how that body should want dimensions, how it should want
density, and yet bear up that which presses down with its weight a leaden
bullet, how there should be so much weight in atoms, as to press down such a
bullet, how these atoms should pierce so dense a body as lead, whereas light
cannot do it; yea, run through lead, as water through a sponge, or sand through a
sieve, are (I think) some of these second notions which Chimaera did eat. But
how do the atoms press down the lead? do they remain in their expansion
dispersed? then they cannot more press the lead, then the seawater presses
him down that dives in it; elementum in suo loco non gravitat. Or do the
atoms meet together in a body to help the lead downwards? if all the atoms
in the light were in one body, how big would that body be?

[ The clod of earth, which in Egypt is shut up in a close Sect. 28. Page 87.
c. 11.
room, and does show the change of weather by the increase of its weight,]
receives not this weight [ from the atoms of saltpeter, piercing the walls,
as you say;] but from the air it self, of which it is made up, as other mixed
bodies are, which therefore sympathise with the air, and its changings, as our
own bodies do, though we were never so close shut up in a room. When the
air is inclined to rain, bodies grow heavy, and in a close room we see the
water in weather-glasses ascend and descend, as the air changes abroad,
although the water in the glass has no commerce with the air abroad: and so
we feel aches upon change of weather in our bodies, and heaviness of our
heads after sunset, by reason of the heaviness or gloomy heat of the air,
caused not by your atoms, but by vapors, mists, or fumes in the air, which we
are continually sucking in by the lungs, by which the two principal parts of
our bodies are affected, to wit, the head and the heart, and by them the rest
of the body. And as for [ spirits or atoms of snow and Page 87.
saltpeter, which (you say) pass through a glasse-vessell,] I know no such
thing. It Is true, that the outside of a glass or pot, being made wet, will
freeze to the board, though near the fire, if you put snow and saltpeter in
the pot, because the cold snow, by antiperistasis, becomes much colder, in
having the hot salt joined with it, and so shunning its enemy, the salt,
fortifies it self, which causes the wet bottom to freeze. So in great frosts
the fire is most hot and scalding; wells and deep cellars in summer are most
cold, without any penetration of atoms at all, which were heretofore bodies,
and parts of light, now by you are called spirits. And as there is no concourse
of atoms to press down the falling bullet in the air [ neither is there of
water, to press down the stone Page 88.
falling in it, as you say] because both the air and the water meet only to
fill up the place which the bullet and stone had, that there may be no vacuity;
for lighter bodies press not downward the heavier, but support the lighter.
But it troubles me to waste so much time and paper in refelling your Paradoxes
of atoms, which are as void of soliditie, as the atoms themselves. Hence we
see how easy it is to deviate from the truth, and to lose our selves in the
winding labyrinths and intricate Meanders of error, when we fall off from
these known and generally received principles, which have had the approbation
of wise men for so many generations. Is it not a shorter way, and more
consonant to reason, to say, that cork sinks not, and iron does, because the
one is porous and full of air, the other dense, and more earthy; because the
one and the other are moved diversely, according to their diverse forms, and the
properties from them, to wit, gravity and levity; then to devise phantomes of
atoms, which involve within them so many absurdities?

[ The elements do weigh in their own spheres; for, a ballone Sect. 29. Page
95 c. 11.
stuffed hard with air, is heavier then an empty one. Secondly, more water
would not be heavier then less. Thirdly, if a hole were dug in the bottom
of the sea, the water would not run into it.] I answer, a stuffed ballone is
heavier, because the air, which is in it, is separated from its own sphere, in
which it does not weigh, according to our principles. Secondly, more water is
not in its own sphere actually heavier then less; for a man in the bottom of
the sea feels no more weight, then if he were but half a yard from the
superficies: but potentially it is, gravida est, sed non gravitat. Thirdly, the
sea would run down, and fill up the hole, because it moves naturally, as it is
heavy, toward the center; which weight appears not actually in its sphere,
till it remove toward the center. Nature in her actions is not to be seen in
all places, and at all times. There is life in seeds, and fruit in trees,
though not always actually seen: So there is gravitie in water, though not
always felt; as you seem afterward to confess, when you say [ that water in
a Page 97. cap. 11.
pale, because it is thereby hindered from spreading abroad, has the effect of
gravity predominating in it:] So one part of water in its own sphere does not
divide the other; Shall we then say, there is no power in water to divide
water? Yes, there is; for water powered out of an (...) into a basin, wherein is
water, will divide the water in the basin.

Your reason, to prove that there is no inclination in Sect. 30. Page 98. cap.
11.
heavy bodies to tend to the center [ because the center is as often changed,
as any dust lights unequally upon any one side of it,] is a weak one; for let
the center change never so often, every hour if you will, yet a center there
must be still; and to that center, in what place of the earth soever it be, the
heavy body has its inclination. And no less weakness is it, to confound
vis impressa, or a violent motion, with the natural motion of gravitie, as you
do; for gravitie is neither the mediate nor immediate cause of a violent, but
of a natural motion. [ Neither Page 99.
is it impossible for any cause (as you say) to produce an effect greater then
it self;] for the flame may produce a greater heat in iron, then is in it
self: May not a little man beget a tall man? Oftentimes the effect exceeds
the cause both in quantity and virtue: A blind man begets a son with eyes; the
heat of an Egyptian oven hatcheth chickens; and the Suns heat begets many
sensitive creatures of putrefied matter. Neither must you infer [ That Page
99.
gravity is no natural quality of earthy bodies, because a bullet can ascend
out of the bottom of the barrel of a gun, being sucked up by ones breath:]
for this infers the bullet to be naturally heavy, in that it does not
naturally ascend, but is forced by the violent motion of traction; which
traction were needless, if the bullet were not naturally heavy. Neither does
this motion show [ That gravity is an intellective entity, as you say;] for
though the natural properties of things have not understanding, yet they have
that appetite given to them by the God of nature, to preserve their own
unity, and the unity of the universe, and to shun their own destruction: and
this is no determining of the quality by it self, which is the act of an
intelligent creature, to wit, to determine it self; but it is a power given by
the God of nature to every thing, to preserve it self, and to shun its own
hurt. So the stomach, which has no understanding, receives and concocts
wholesome food: the meseraick veins suck the purest part thereof, prepare and
fit it for the second concoction, and send away the excrementitious and
superfluous parts to the guts; and the same stomach vomits out that which is
hurtful to it; and all this is nature, not understanding. What understanding
will you give to a lodestone, when it draws iron? or to those senseless
creatures, which by their sympathies and antipathies affect or hate each other?

Though your atoms be but little bodies, yet they Sect. 31.
are your great servants; for they help you still at a dead lift, and do you
much service in all your actions: they are your light-bearers, they make all
things move in their natural courses, upward and downward; they are also the
causes of violent motions: as of projection; for [ by their help the arrow
flies out of the bow (as you say) and Page 181. c. 12.
the ball from the racket:] So these atoms are your archers, slingers,
gunners, or canoneers, and they help you at your sports in the Tennis-courts.
Multitudo populorum sepidum, as Apuleius calls them, the Ants, did not so much
good service to Psyche, in that intricate labor of dividing all sorts of
grains, enjoined her by Venus, as these atoms do you: By them the arrow
flies out of the bow, the stone out of the sling, the bullet out of the gun or
canon; and if it were not for them, we could not kill our enemies in the wars:
for, the gunpowder could have no force to carry the heavy iron bullet so
far in the air, and to beat down stone walls of towns and castles, if
these atoms did not put to their shoulders. What Hercules is able to resist
such Pigmies? but we, who have been bred in the peripatetick schools, at the
feet of Aristotle, find the maine cause of projection to be the quality or
force of the projicient impressed upon the body projected; as, the force of
the gun-powder-fire impressed in the bullet, carries it through the air:
Neither is it more impossible for this impressed force and adventitious
quality, to carry a bullet violently, then for the intrinsecall qualities of
gravitie and levitie, to carry bodies to their own places naturally. The
generator impresseth a quality of gravitie in the stone, to move naturally to
its own place: the projicient impresseth the quality of projection in the
same stone, to move violently from its place. If you ask why the stone
returns at last to its own motion downward, and continues not flying in the
air; the reason is, because the air makes resistance, which at length weakens
the impressed force; so that this, growing weaker then the resistance, yields,
and the stone falls down. Neither is it reasonable, that an extrinsecall
quality should have that continuance, as a quality that is natural, which
cannot receive any mutation, except there be a change in the first qualities,
whose commixtion, gravitie and levitie naturally follows; but the force of the
projicient makes no such change in the first qualities of the body projected.
Neither does the stone lose its gravitie whilst it flies upward, but has it
only suspended, while the projicients impression lasts: when this is spent,
down falls the stone again, showing the same gravitie it had before. If any
say, that this impulse is contrary to the inclination of the body impelled, I
answer, It Is contrary to its inclination to local motion, but not to any
inclination the stone might have to the active quality of levity, which is not
in the stone; levity then expells gravity, but projection does not. This
impulse then is an accidental form, and, in respect of the impression, it is
in the third species of Quality; but as this impression inclines the stone to
motion, it is a natural faculty in the second species of Quality; I say
natural; not as being the natural form, or the property flowing from thence;
but because it moves like the natural form, though not to the same place; and
because the stone in which the impression is made, is a natural subject, and
the projicient is a natural agent. You see then that this doctrine of
impression is no shift, as you call it; but it is a shift to make Atoms carry
a Canon bullet so far in the air; for as the air it self is passive,
having no other motion in projection, but what it receives from the projicient,
even so be your Atoms (if any such were) which are dispersed by the wind and
force of the bullet.

[ Wheresoever there is variety of bodies, there must be the Sect. 32. Page 27.
c. 14.
four elements:] then belike in the Heavens there must be the four elements,
for there are variety of bodies, one star differing from another in glory:
But indeed, there be no elements, nor generation, nor corruption, nor
alteration, but such as belong to light, and local motion; and therefore the
heaven is but a natural body analogically, which proportion consists in
this, that as sublunary bodies have a nature, which is the inward principle of
motion, so has the heaven, though in a far different way; and for this cause,
we deny that the matter of the celestial bodies is univocall to that of
elementary, for then there should be mutual action and passion between them.
2 Then the celestial matter should have an appetite to being or not being. 3.
It should have an appetite to diverse forms. 4. It should be the subject of
corruption, and of transmutation into In comment. de terrae motu circulari.
sublunary bodies; all which are absurd, as I have showed elsewhere.

Why may we not as well say, that fire warmes the Sect. 33.
water, or burns the board, by its quality of heat, as to multiply entities to
no purpose, as you do, in your innumerable Atoms, which is your salve for all
diseases? for, as if these had not done you service enough already, you must
make them your Cooks to boil and roast your meat: You will have them to come
out of the fire, and pierce the bottom of the kettle, and so up unto the
water, and Cap. 15. c. 16.
being quickly weary there, ascend in smoke, and then descend in drops. But,
if these Atoms be the smallest parts of the substance of the fire, I wonder
how they escape drowning, when they are in the water, and that they are not
served, as the Persian god was by the Egyptian Priest, and so Canopus prove to
be the better god: Nay, you will not have any occult quality in the Lodestone
to draw the iron, but these Atoms must do it; and your reason is, [ because
otherwise the whole body of Page 139.
the agent must work, which it cannot do but by local motion.] But what need
is there to say, that the whole body must work, if the Atoms do not? It is
not the whole body that works, or at least not totally; for the fire heats by
its form, not by its matter; and so the Lodestone draws: but if we did yield
that the whole body did work, must it therefore work by local motion? Cannot
the fire warm you, being within a fit distance, except the fire come to you?
The Lodestone shall keep its distance from the iron, and yet shall draw it
without Atoms; but they are little beholding to you, in that after all their
good service they have done you, you set them together by the ears, and makes
all re-actions to be performed by them; you make an irreconcilable war
between the fiery and watery Atoms; like Homers Batrochomyamachia; or like that
battle in Ovids Chaos; where

Frigida pugnabant calidis, humentia siccis,
Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus.
When you hold ice in your hand, you will not have the ice by its coldness to
work on your hand, nor your hand by its heat to re-worke on the ice, but
Atoms to work one against another. When you saw wood, be there any Atoms that
come out of the teeth of the saw, which divide the wood? or Atoms out of the
wood, which blunt the saw? But, seeing you will not have re-action to consist
in qualities, I desire to know, whether in every re-action there is not an
alteration: this you cannot deny, for when you put hot iron in cold water, you
make an alteration from heat to cold, and from cold to heat; but alterations
consist in qualities, as augmentation does in quantity, and generation in
substances; therefore re-action must consist in quality, not in your Atoms
which are substances. Besides, substances are not contrary to each other, but
in re-actions there be contrarieties, which argues quality, in which properly
consists contrariety.

I know not what to make of your Atoms, for sometime Sect. 34. Page 142. c.
16. Page 143.
you call them substances, and [ here you will have them to be qualities:]
Again, you say [ these Atoms are the pure parts of the elements*] and by and
by, that [ they are accidental qualities:] It seems then, that accidents are
parts of substances, by your Logic. Besides, you say [ the elements remain
pure in every compound,] and yet you Ibid.
will not have [ their substantial forms to remain actually:] sure the
elements remain not if their forms are gone; for it is by their forms that
they are elements: and if they remain pure in the compound, then the compound
is not a physical mixed body. And if your Atoms be qualities, then there is
no mixture at all, for mixture is of substances, not of qualities; and the body
mixed differs specifically from the elements of which it is mixed. We hold
then, that the elementary forms remain in mixture, but refracte, remiss,
castigate, as they speak, and in some degree only, which degrees the
substantial forms admit, but not as the qualities do; for these admit
degrees, remaining the same they were before; so do not the forms, for as
soon as there is any remission of degree in them, the species is changed, and
so that which was the form of the element, becomes now the form of a mixed
body, being of another species then the element. Take any degree of the
substantial form from fire, and its no more fire. Sect. 35. Page 143. c. 16.


[ It does not appear to what purpose nature should place storehouses of
simples, seeing mixed bodies can be dissolved into other mixed bodies.] Into
what then shall these mixed bodies be dissolved? Into mixed still? Must there
not be a dissolution into simple bodies at last, as well as there was a
composition of them? Sure if there were not storehouses of these simples, the
world could not be perfect* for in this is its perfection, that it consists of
all sorts of bodies, to wit, as well simple, as mixed: and if there be four
prime qualities, where shall they have their residence, but in the four prime
simple bodies, which we call elements? hence the elements are eternal in the
whole, though they be perishing in their parts, when they enter into
composition.

[ The motion of Atoms we call a wind:] A wind is a Sect. 36. Page 152. c.
17.
substance, as afterward you confess, when you say, [ winds are made up of
bodies:] but motion is an accident, therefore wind cannot be a motion; I think
your meaning is, that winds are Atoms moved, or moving; but then you should
have told us whether these Atoms move themselves, or are they moved by some
other: these Atoms are unruly bodies, which if they were not curbed by Aeolus,

-- Maria ac terras, caelumque profundum,
Quippe ferent rapidi secum, verrantque per auras.
Who would think there should be such strength in Atoms, to over-turne trees
and strong houses, to move the Seas from the bottom, to sink ships, and to
move the earth it self? Was that a motion of Atoms which drove the Sea again
into its own place, and dried the earth from Noah's Flood? Are those Aetesii,
which blow continually under the Line, motions of Atoms? or those which blow
constantly in Egypt forty days together, in the summer solstice? It Is strange
there should be such strength in these bodies, which are so weak, that the
light, as you said before, can support them; and that there should be such
spite and courage in them, as to encounter in duels, and trouble the world with
their quarrels,

Saepe and ventorum concurrere praelia vidi. Were these Satan's soldiers, when
he by the winds overthrew the house where Jobs children were? Your best way
will be to leave your Atoms, and to acquiesce in the received opinion, that
the wind is an exhalation raised by the Sun out of moisture; which exhalation,
by reason of its lightness mounting upward, is repelled by the cold middle
region of the air, and so moves not directly downward, because it is light,
but athwart and sidlings. As for your Atoms, leave them for Aeolus to bind up
in a bag, who were so unruly before the took them to task, that they turned
the sea upon the land, and the land into the sea, dividing Italy from Sicily,
and Spain from Africa.

[ Is it not a wrong to God and his instruments, to impute to Sect. 37. Page
164 ca. 18.
the Devil the aides, which to some may seem supernatural?] True, for there
is a natural magic, by which you may do strange things, and anticipate the
time prefixed by nature, in producing of diverse effects, by applying activa
passivis: So you may produce a Rose in Winter, and raise Parsley out of the
ground within a few hours after the seed is sown. There is also a
Mathematical magic, by which strange things are done; as was that wooden
Pigeon, which Architas caused to fly; and that brazen head, which Albertus
Magnus made to speak. That worthy man Boethius was very skillful in this way.
Such things, and many more, may be done without witchcraft: but withal, there
is a Diabolical magic in working strange things by the power of Satan, by a
contract which Witches make with them, God permitting, in his secret judgment,
the affectors of such evil things to be deluded and abused by the evil
Angels. Says S. Austin, De doct. Christ. l. 2. cap. 22, 23.
It Is fit that he, who forsakes the fountain of living waters, dig to
himself fountains that will hold no water: Therefore in all our actions we
ought to aim at Gods glory, at the salvation of our own and others souls, at
the honor of the Church and State, in which we live, and to avoid scandal, to
submit our thoughts and actions to Gods Word, and not to practice such things
as have no cause or reason in nature: as, to cure diseases by spells or words,
characters and knots, which, being artificial, and quantities, cannot
naturally operate.

[ The weapon-salve must be conserved in an equal temper, Sect. 38. Page 164
c. 18.
and the weapon, which made the wound, must be orderly dressed.] Paracelsus,
the inventor of this salve, is ill reported of, to wit, to be a Magician:
Baptista Porta, Goclenius, Dr. Floid, and some others have bin too credulous to
believe him; for, if it be not magical, it is suspicious, considering the
author, the superstitious ceremonies in gathering of the moss from the dead
skull, with the other simples used in it, besides the unreasonablenesse of
their opinions, who think that a wound can be cured by such a way; whereas
nihil agit in distans, natural agents work not but within a proportionable
distance: as the fire will not heat, if the object be not within its reach:
neither will the lodestone draw, except the iron be near: But the patrons of
this salve will have it cure the wound, though many miles distant, and though
there be an interposition of many dense bodies; as of houses and hills. What
medium can carry this virtue so far, and through so many impediments, whereas
the Sun cannot conveigh his beams to us, if the Moon, or a thick cloud be
interposed? And what sympathy can we conceive to be between a sword, or a
clout, and a wound? except you will say, It is because the blood touched it; or,
as you say, [ Because the steem or spirits entered into the pores of the
weapon.] These are piercing spirits indeed, that can pass through steel, and
stay there so long after the blood is cold, whereas the blood, which in
phlebotomy is received into a dish, loses the spirits as soon as the blood is
cold; though many ounces of blood be there, yet never a spirit left, nor any
sympathy at all between the dish and the wound. Sure, by this reason, when the
sword that wounds is kept in the same room with the wounded man, it must cure,
whereas it cures so far off. But no such cure is to be found; for I was yet
never cured by the knife that cut my finger, though never so often dressed. If
any reply, that some cures have been done by this salve; I answer, that I have
heard so, and they that write of it, most of them write but upon report: and
suppose some cures had been done, yet I will not impute them to the salve, but
to the washing and keeping of the wound clean, in which case nature will help
it self. The imagination also is sometimes a help to cure; and sometime Satan
may concur, for his own ends, videlicet, to confirm superstition and
error. If any say, that there is a sympathy between the pole and the needle
touched with the lodestone, which are farther distant then the sword and the
wound; I grant it, because the influence of celestial bodies upon earthy, is
not hindered by distance; but we cannot say so of the actions of sublunary
bodies, whose matter is far different from that of the heavens. In a word,
the effects of this salve which you speak of, are much like the effects that
are said to be caused by images of wax made by Witches. The like credit is to
be given to those other reports you speak of, to wit, the curing of the kines
swelled soles by a turffe cut from under their sore feet, and hung upon an
hedge; the drying of which is the mending of the sore feet: And the running
over of the Cowes milk in boiling into the fire, will cause an inflammation in
the Cowes udder; and that this is cured by casting salt into the fi^e upon the
milk. I could tell you many such tales as those, which I have partly read, and
partly heard; but

-- credat Iudaus Apella. I will stick to that Philosophical principle, Ominis
actio (...) per (...)* but here is no contact; and I will as soon credit
Apuleius his Metamorphosis into an Ass, by the anointing of his body, as the
curing of a wound by an ointment, which is not at all applied to the body. If
any will say, that such cures are done by the influence of the Stars, let him
prove it; we may so salve all questions, and not trouble our selves to search
any further into the hidden causes of things: These influences are the
sanctuary of ignorance, but Stars are universal agents, whose operations are
fruitless, if they be not determined by the particular agents. Lastly, I like
your supposition well: [ If the steem of blood and spirits carry with it the
balsamic qualities of the powder into the wound, it will better it.] In this I
am of your opinion; for if Daedalus did fly in the air, wings doubtless
would help him: but there is great odds between the sents which the Dear, or
Hare, or Fox leave behind them, and this imaginary virtue of the weapon-salve;
this being altogether hid, these other being manifest qualities, quickly
apprehended by the sagacious hounds.

[You say, that the heat of the torrid Zone draws air to Sect. 39. Page 176.
c. 20.
it from the Poles, and rest of the world, otherwise, all would be turned into
fire.] The air about the Poles, you confess, is very cold, and the air under
the Line very hot. Now, that heat should draw cold to it, is to contradict a
sensible maxim; for, what is more plain and sensible, then that one contrary
drives out another, and like draws its like? The heat of the fire draws out
the heat of a burned finger, or the heat of the stomach, whereas the cold air
repells it. Hence it is, that we concoct better in Winter then in Summer. The
heat of the upper and lower region of the air does not draw to it the cold of
the middle region; but the cold fortifies, and unites it self against its
enemy. Secondly, the air under the Line, is carried about so fast by the
motion of the primum mobile from East to West, that there is a continual
trade-wind, and a strong tide to the West: So that the air there will not give
leave, by reason of its swift motion, for any other air to come thither.
Thirdly, the torrid Zone needs no refrigeration from the Poles; for there are
great lakes, rivers and seas, besides constant gales of wind, which refresh the
air, and make it no less temperate then Spain, if you will believe Hist.
Ameris.
Acosta. Not to speak of the equality of the night there with the day, so that
the Sun is not so long above their Horison, as he is above ours in Summer. And
if there were such extreme heat there, as is supposed, there would not be such
multitudes of all sorts of herbs, fruits, and trees green all the year, as
Lerius witnesses in his In Brasil.
navigation.

You have found out a pretty way for generation of Sect. 40.
the lodestone, [ which (you say) is begot of atoms, drawn Cap. 21.
from the North Pole, by the heat of the torrid Zone, and so sent down into
the bowels of the earth, where meeting with some condensate stuff, becomes
this stone.] This is the sum of your large discourse: But first, we would
know what these atoms are, whether parts of that cold air, or of the light.
Secondly, how the heat of the torrid Zone can draw cold atoms such a great
way, ninety degrees at least, whereas we have showed, that hot air expels
the cold, but draws it not. Thirdly, how it comes that load-stones are found
in Macedonia, Spain, Bohemia, Germany, and other Northern places. Did the
atoms in their Southern progress stay there, being weary of so long a
journie, and plant colonies near home? Or were they sent back by the heat which
brought them thence? Fourthly, how can such weak bodies pierce so deep into the
earth? Fifthly, when these atoms cast their spawne into the matrix of our
great Mother, whether she does feed upon iron when she is breeding, seeing the
stone, when it is come to maturitie, loves iron so well? Or did she not
surfeit upon garlic, which is such an enemy to the lodestone? Sixthly, of
what atoms is the stone Theamedes made, that so much hates the iron, which the
lodestone loves; and the Adamant, that hinders its operation? Though I honor
your worth and ingenuitie, in aiming at such abstruse causes, yet both you and
I, and all men must confess, that our science here is but ignorance: and we
see the natures of things, as that blind man, who saw men walk like trees. Who
can tell why Rhubarb purges choler; Agarick phlegm? How the Torpedo
stupefieth the hand through the cane, and the Remora stays the ship? Virgil.


Has ne possimus naturae accedere parts,
Frigidus en obstat circum praecordia sanguis.
[ The lodestone (you say) works by bodies: Ergo, not by Sect. 41. Page 18.
5. c. 21.
quabities.] I deny the consequence; for, bodies do not work upon bodies, but
by their qualities: take these away, and there will be no action in nature; for
actions have their original from qualities, and their properties too:
therefore actions are susceptible of contrarieties, of intension and remission,
because the qualities, from which they have their being, are capable of these:
And, as among substances, only the form; so among accidents, only the quality
is operative, because it is the accidental form of the subject in which it
is. It Is true, accidents work not by their own power, but in and by the power
of their substances: The hen by her heat, which is a quality, prepares the
matter of the egg for introduction of the form of a chick; for the same agent
that disposes the matter, introduces the form: The fire warmes by its heat.
What Is the reason that you can cut down a tree with an axe, which a child
cannot do with a wooden dagger? it is because you have the qualities of
strength and skill, which the child wants; and the axe has the qualities of
strength and sharpness, which are wanting in the wooden dagger. Your reasons,
by which you prove your assertion, are weak, viz. [Because a greater lodestone
has more effect then a lesser.] A greater fire heats more then a lesser; is
therefore heat no quality? Or must the same degree of heat be in a little fire
that is in a greater? The quality increases and decreaseth, according to the
quantity of the subject. Secondly, [ A lodestone gives less force to a long
iron then to a short one.] So the fire warmeth more at a near, then at a
remoter distance: Natural agents work not in distans. Will you deny your
faculty of seeing to be a quality, because you can see better near at hand,
then at too remote a distance? Thirdly, [ The longer an iron is in touching,
the greater virtue it gets.] Fourthly, [ An iron or lodestone may lose
their virtue, either by long lying, or by fire.] Will these reasons prove the
virtue of the lodestone to be a body? then virtue, I see, is a body with you,
and in the predicament of Substance. These your reasons prove the lodestone to
work by a quality, because it has degrees of more and less virtue, and
because it may be lost. Is cold no quality, because it may be lost in the
water? Or is the blackness of a man's hair no quality, because it may be
lost? Or does the fire consume nothing but bodies? Is whiteness an accident,
or a body? a quality it is, doubtless: Cast your paper in the fire; and what
becomes of its whiteness? Qui color albus erat, nunc est contrarius albo. Your
arguments are so weak, that they refute themselves, and so they will save me a
labor.

[ Atoms, which pierce iron, may penetrate any other body.] Sect. 42. Page 186.
I know the fire can pierce iron, and yet not pierce the dense body of the
earth; which your atoms must do, if they will beget a lodestone. And if the
fire could pierce the earth, yet this will not prove, that your magneticall
atoms can do the like, except you give them the same Page 186.
virtue. And [ though light pass through thick glasses,] as you say, yet there
is some hinderance; for the thicker the glass is, the less light you shall
have: Try if light can pass through a thick unpolished horn, as it does
through the thin horn of a lantern. If the thickness of a body makes no
opposition to the light, then you may see the Sun as well through a thick cloud,
or through the body of the Moon, as through the thin air. If then there be
opposition, though never so little, of the glass to the light, there must
needs be some tardity. As for odoriferous bodies, which, you say, [ continue
many years spending of themselves, and yet keep their odor in vigor,] is a
miracle; for, how can the odor be kept in vigor in those bodies that still
spend themselves? If odor be a quality, it must decay, as the body spends in
which it is: If odor be a body, it cannot continue in its vigor, and be
still spending of it self; this is a contradiction: Besides, 'its repugnant to
sense; for, as the flower decays, so does the smell: And though there be a
power in roots of vegetables, to change the advenient juice into their nature,
yet there is not the like power in loadstones, or salt, as you will have it,
except you will make these also vegetables, and so they must not be called
stones and mineralls, but plants rather. Salt does not change the air into its
substance, by lying in it, as you say, and would prove by the weight of it
increased; for, if it change the air into its substance, it feeds on it, and
so some parts of its matter must be still wasting, and there must be still a
repairing of the decayed matter by nutrition, and this must be done by natural
heat, and a vegetative soul; and what is this but to make salt a plant? As for
the weight of it, which you say increases, I doubt of it: but if it were so as
you say, yet that weight is not increased, by turning the air into its
substance, but rather by the loss and evaporation of the air, by its long
lying: So paper-books grow much heavier, by beating the air out of the paper.
But whereas you say, [ That the nature of the Lodestone proceeds from the Suns
operation Page 200. c. 22.
on the torrid Zone, which operation is contrary to the Lodestone, as being of
a fiery nature, and therefore the torrid lands are not so magneticall as the
polar,] is a riddle; for how can the nature of the Lodestone be contrary to
that which begets it? and how can the Sun beget magnetic virtue by that heat,
which by reason of its fiery nature hinders or destroys it? Sect. 43. Page 215.
c. 23.


You say, [ It Is as impossible for diversity of work in the seed to proceed at
one time, and in the same occasions, from one agent, as it is for multiplicity
to proceed immediately from unity.] I will not now tell with what arguments
Physicians prove, that the seed is the epitome of the whole body, and extracted
from every part thereof, and contains potentially all the parts of the body,
which the plastic or formative power of the seed educeth unto act, by degrees:
but this I must tell you, that natural agents can, at the same time, produce
diversity of works; for, does not the Sun, at the same time, produce multitudes
of diverse effects, according to the multitudes of bodies it works upon? does
not the fire, at the same time, rarifie, condense, soften, harden? does not the
same liver at the same time by its heat, produce blood, choler, melancholy, and
phlegm? even so may the same formative power of the seed, at the same time,
fabricate and distinguish all the parts of the body.

[ The marrow being very hot dries the bones, and yet with Sect. 44. Page 226.
c. 24.
its moisture humecteth.] How the same natural agent can, at the same time, on
the same object, work contrary effects, I know not: Can the fire at the same
time both harden and soften the wax? 2. The brain comparatively is colder then
any other of the soft parts of the body, and consequently the marrow which
grows from thence. 3. If heat be the cause of the bones dryness, then the
heart which is the hottest part of the body, should have the hardest bone about
it. 4. What the bones are in sensitive creatures, that the stones are in
vegetables: but the hottest fruits have not the hardest stones; for the stone
of a cold Peach is harder then the kernels or stones of the hot Grapes. 5. If
marrow were the cause of dryness, or hardness, it would follow, that where
there is most marrow, there should be the hardest and driest bones; but
Philosophers tell us, that those creatures whose bones are most solid and dry,
have least marrow. 6. That dryness then and hardness of the bones proceeds
not from the heat of the marrow, which is held to be less hot then the brain,
but from the innate heat of the bones themselves, wasting the aeriall and oily
substance thereof; which heat is not fiery, but temperate, as the natural heat
should be; yet it causes this hardness and dryness, because the matter on
which it works is gross and terrestrial, and because of the heats continual
working on the bones.

You will not have us [ too irreverently engage the Almighties Sect. 45. Page
227. c. 25.
immediate handy-worke in every particular effect of nature.] We offer no
irreverence to the Almighty, if we call him the Creator even of the meanest
creatures, being no less admirable in Creatione vermiculorum, quam Angelorum,
in the creation of worms, then of Angels, says S. Austine: and therefore
Basil thinks it no irreverence Homil. 7. in Genesis
to say, That God in the beginning did not only create Fishes in the sea, but
Frogs also in the pooles, nay Gnats, and vermin. Whose immediate handywork
were the Lice that were procreated of the Egyptian dust, at the stretching out
of Aarons and Moses his Rod? Did not the Sorcerers acknowledge, that the finger
of God was there? If it be no disparagement to the Almighty, that the
excrementitious hairs of our head, are the objects of his providence; neither
can it be any dishonor to him, if we say, the meanest creatures are the
effects of his omnipotence.

[ The work of generation (you say) is not effected by the Sect. 46. Page 231.
c. 25.
formative power, except we mean by it, the chain of all the causes, that
concur to produce this effect.] When we speak of the proximate or immediate
cause of things, we exclude not the remote causes; for, Causa causae est causa
causati: He that says that Isaac was begot of Abraham's seed, denies not that
Abraham's seed is begot of his blood; and he that says a man is a reasonable
creature, says also, that he is a sensitive, vegetative, corporeal substance:
but what ever the remote causes be, the formative faculty in the spirits of
the seed, effects the work of generation; which spirits are derived from all
parts of the body, otherwise how could they frame all the distinct parts and
members in the seed? but the gross or material part of the seed, is only
from the vessels.

[ You hold the heart to be first generated.] This is probable, Sect. 47. Page
225. c. 24.
but it may be doubted; because whatsoever lives must be nourished: but
nourishment is from the blood, and blood from the liver; therefore Galens
opinion was, that the liver is first generated; which he also proves by the
umbelicall vein: But indeed, Hippocrates his opinion is most likely to be
true, that all the parts are formed at the same time by the spirits in the
seed. However it be, this is certain, that fearfully and wonderfully are we
made.

[ The touch converseth with none, but with the most material Sect. 48. Page
244. c. 27.
and massy bodies.] What think you of the air, the wind, the flame? are
these masfie bodies? and yet they are the objects of our touch; the instrument
of which is not only in the hands and fingers, but diffused also through all
the skin: and if the flame touch your skin, you shall as soon feel it, though
it be no massy body, as you shall a stone. But whereas you call [ heat and
cold, wet and dryness, affections of quantity,] you confound entities, and the
predicaments, as you use to do. If by affections you mean properties, then
heat and cold are not the properties of quantities, but of elementary bodies,
which are substances: If by affections you mean effects, much less can these
be the affections of quantity, for quantity is not operative: Neither are
rarity and density (out of the degrees of which you will have cold and heat,
etc. to arise) quantities, but qualities; for rarity is nothing else but the
tenuity of parts, and that is a quality: but if you take rarity for the
distance of parts among themselves, as a sponge is called rare or thin, so it
is in the predicament of Site; but quantity you cannot make it by Logic.

Your argument by which you prove the object to Sect. 49*
work materially upon the sense, is, [ because it works so Page 245. c. 27.
upon inanimate things, as the heat or cold works alike upon a stone, and upon
a man's body:] but indeed these work not alike; for the fire that heats the
stone, heats also my body, and in that respect it works upon both materially,
that is, it produces the same form ( specifically, not numerically) of heat in
the matter of the stone, and of my body: yet besides this operation, it
produces another, which we call spiritual or intentionall, upon my sense,
which it does not upon the stone, to wit, the Image, Idea, or representation of
that heat which my sense apprehends, or receives, and, by means of the
sensitive soul in me, judges of it; which a stone, being inanimate, cannot do:
The heat then works on the stone only materially by heating, it works on my
body not only materially by heating; but spiritually also, by impressing the
species of the heat in my sense of feeling, by which the soul in the sense is
stirred up to judge of it, and to make use of it, so far as it may be
convenient for the body, otherwise to avoid it; therefore we need not labor
much to prove these intentionall species to be in nature, which you deny: for,
though their entity be weaker then of material forms, because their being is
not in the subject; that is, the intentionall heat by which my sense is
affected, is in the sense as in a subject; yet in its being and conservation it
depends not on the sense, but on the agent, the fire that produced it; whereas
the material form of heat is received into the body, and depends only in
fieri from the agent, but in its esse and conservation from the matter in which
it is received. Neither is it hard for us to prove, that your material actions
are not able to perform these effects, that our intentionall can; for if the
heat did work materially on your body, it must produce another heat, for a
material accident cannot pass from one subject to another, which it must do,
if the same numericall heat of the fire did pass out of the fire into your
body* and so you having another heat in your body then was in the fire, cannot
feel nor judge of that heat which was in the fire. Again, if the hardness of
the iron did work materially on your hand when you touch it, your hand must be
also hard. Besides, when you see a horse, is the same horse in your eye, that
is without? Or has he the same material being in the eye, that he has
without? This must needs be true, if he work materially on your eye. Moreover,
if the object work materially on the sense, the nearer it is to the sense, the
better it is perceived: but the contrary is true; for, sensibile positum supra
sensorium impedit sensum. Again, no material action is in an instant, being it
is a motion, and has resistance from a contrary quality; but the act of sense
is in an instant. Lastly, you must attribute action to quantities, if the
object work materially; for when you see a triangle, that must produce another
triangle in your eye, which is absurd; and may be avoided by saying, the
species or image of the triangle is in the eye.

[ That thing which we call sound, is purely motion.] If Sect. 50. Page 249. c.
28.
sound be motion, which is the mobile? for every motion is in a subject, and no
other subject can be given but a body. The air is the medium that conveyeth
the sound to us, but the subject thereof it is not; for the air being a light
body, its motion is to ascend, but sounds are carried to us by all sorts of
motions imaginable: The sound of the bell at the same instant ascends,
descends, spreads it self abroad through all the parts of the circumstant
air. Besides, no motion is performed in an instant; but the sound in an
instant fi^s thousands of ears, if they be near. Again, rest is opposite to
motion, but it is not opposite to sounds: By the motion of the air sound is
carried to us, but sound is not therefore motion; and so you do often times in
this Chapter distinguish sounds from the motion of the air. And whereas you
say, [ Great sounds do shake houses:] It is not the Page 251.
sound, but the wind of the Ordnance or Gunpowder that moves the air
violently, by which houses or towers may be shaken; and the same air which is
moved by the wind, and shakes the house, carries the sound to our ear; which
sound can no more be perceived by the eye (as you aver in this Chapter,
thereby confounding both the actions of the senses, and their objects) then
colors can be perceived by the ear. He that sees sounds, let him hear
colors too. It Is true, a blind man will discern light from darkness, when a
candle or the Sun beam is brought and let in to a room, not that he perceives
the light by his ears, but because* though the chrystalline humor of his eyes
be out, yet, the visive spirits in the optic nerves not being lost, can easily
discern light their proper object, though they cannot see visible objects by
it, the chrystalline humor which should receive the visible species being gone.
[ As for a Page 257.
deaf man's perceiving of music by a stick held in his teeth, whose other end
lies on a Violl:] I deny that he hears any sound at all, if he be deaf: he
may perceive a motion or trembling of the air, by means of his stick, but a
sound he cannot perceive, as wanting the organ of perception: And though I
should yield that he perceives the sound, yet that will not evince sound to be
a motion: for there be many motions without any sound; as the motions of the
heavens. The shooting of stars, and the light, which you will have a body, move
through the air without any sound: So the clouds move; and you may move your
hand, or any part of the body, without sound. Besides, there is a
sympatheticall and an antipatheticall power in sounds, to affect or dis-affect
the hearer, which is not in motion. Again, after the sound of the Ordnance is
past, the motion of the air continues a while. Lastly, lay any soft cloth or
silk upon a bell whilst it is sounding, the sound will be dulled or stayed, but
not the motion: therefore, doubtless, sounds and motions are different
entities; these being in diverse predicaments, and sounds only in the
predicament of Quality.

You conclude [ That color is nothing else but the power Sect. 51. Page 262.
which a body has of reflecting light into the eye.] Then immediately you say,
[ Light is nothing else but the superficies of it,] and shortly after, [
Colors are not qualities, but tractable bodies.] With the same breath you
contradict your self; for you deny color to be a quality, and yet you will
have it a power in the body, to reflect light. Are not natural powers or
faculties, qualities? Is not the power that water has to cool, a quality?
but in this you are also mistaken; for color is not such a quality as you
make it, to wit, in the second species, where only those powers are, which can
naturally produce their own acts: As, in the eye there is a power to see, a
power, I say, which it can produce into act, when occasion serves; for the eye
does not always actually see: but color is no such power; for it cannot
produce its own act primarily, as the former power did, but in the second
place: For first, it must affect the subject in which the color is, and
secondly, work upon the eye; and so color is in the third species of Quality.
Now, if color be a quality, how can it be a superficies, which is a
quantity? The essence of colors is not in extension, though they may be
extended according to the extension of the subject in which they are. Extension
is the essence only of quantity. If color then be not a quantity, but
quality, how can it be a tactable body? Colors cannot subsist of themselves:
they admit degrees; therefore cannot be substances.

You are angry [ with vulgar Philosophers, who force you Sect. 52. Page 275. c.
22.
to believe contradictions, in that they say, life consists in this, that the
same thing has power to work upon it self.] Aristotle then and his learned
Peripateticks are with you but vulgar Philosophers, who teach us, that those
which move themselves by an internal principle, have life in them; and so,
because quicksilver seems to move it self, and fountains or springs of
water seem also to move themselves, hence the Latins call the one argentum
vivum, the other, aquas vivas. And because these created entities, which we
call living, actuate themselves, either by perfecting themselves, or by
representing something within themselves by their knowledge, or by enclining
themselves to the things which they know by their appetite: hence it is, that
we attribute life unto God, in that he actuates himself, at least negatively,
so that he is not actuated by any other; and in that he understands and wills
himself, and all things in himself. But here is the difference between the
life of the Creator, and of the creature, that our life is (...), as Aristotle
says, the abode or mansion of the vegetive soul in the body, or natural
heat: Or, as Scaliger, another of these vulgar Philosophers, tells us, unio
animae cum corpore, the union of the soul with the body. And our life has a
dependence from a higher cause, and our vital actions depend from a causality,
as Understanding and Will from the essence of the soul; but the life that is
in God, and his vital actions, are the same identically with his essence,
having no dependence, or inhesion, or connection at all. Tell us then where the
contradiction lies, when we say, that the living creature can move it self?
Does the Scripture teach contradictions, when it tells us, that Saul killed
himself, that Judas hanged himself, that we should accuse our selves,
condemn our selves, convert our selves, and many such like? Neither do we
say, that life consists in this, that a thing can work upon it self, as you
would have it; for we make not the essence of life to consist in this, we
only make this a property of life, for the living creature to move it self.
Neither do we say, that life is action, but that life is the principle of
action: therefore we act, because we live; actiones sunt suppositorum. Though
the form work upon the matter, yet the suppositum or compound is the subject
of action or motion: The form works originally, or as principium Quo; the
suppositum works subjectively, denominatively, or as principium Quod. The
form is (...), the suppositum (...) and so life is (...), not (...), the act,
not the action; but the efficient cause of five actions; to wit, of
understanding, sense, motion, nutrition, and generation: For, if life were an
action, it should be the cause of these actions; but actionis non datur actio.
Lastly, life is in the soul originally, in the body by participation, and in
the compound subjectively.

You challenge also Philosophers [ that they hold sensation Sect. 53. Page 275
ca. 32.
to be a working of the active part of the same sense upon its passive part,
and yet will admit no parts in it, but will have the same indivisible power
work upon it self.] Philosophers distinguish between the organ, the faculty,
and action of the sense. The organ is a substance, the faculty a quality,
which is properly called sense, of which arises the action, which is properly
sensation. The form is the cause of sense, God is the supreme cause of the
form, and consequently of sense too: for, dans formam, dat consequentia ad
formam; and sense is the cause of sensation. And so they hold, that there is in
the sense an action and a passion, but in a different respect; for the passion
is in respect of the object, the species of which is received by the sense; but
reception is passion: yet in the sense there is an action too, but that is in
respect of the soul, working by the sense, its instrument, which it animates,
and by it judges of those objects which are convenient or inconvenient, not
only for the body, but for the soul too: For the two noblest of the senses
were made principally for the soul, that by them she might gain knowledge;
and in the second place for the body. Now, out of all that is said, tell us
where this indivisible power works upon it self; or who holds any such thing.
The power of the soul in actuating the sense, the power of the sense in
receiving the species, is not the same power, no more then the power of the
soul in moving the hand, and the power of the hand in receiving a blow; the
one being an active, the other a passive power; the one being from the soul,
the other from the disposition of the matter, whose property is to suffer, as
the forms is to act: Therefore we hold not active and passive parts in the
sense, but that the whole sense is passive, in respect of the object; and the
whole sense is active, in respect of the soul working in it: So the whole water
is passive, in regard of the fire which hears it; and it is wholly active, in
respect of the hand which is warmed by it. Lastly, I hope you will not deny,
but some indivisible powers there are, which work upon themselves, else, how
can Angels and souls of men love and know themselves?

The atoms are your sanctuary, to which you fly upon Sect. 54. Page 277. c.
32.
all occasions: [ For you will now have these material parts of bodies work
upon the outward organs of the senses, and passing through them, mingle
themselves with the spirits, and so to the brain. These little parts must
needs get in at the Page 278.
doors of our bodies, and mingle themselves with the spirits in the nerves,
and of necessity must make some motion in the brain.] Doubtless, if this be
true, there must needs be an incredible motion in the brain; for, if the
atoms of two armies fighting should rush into your brain by the eye, they
will make a greater motion then Minerva did in Jupiters brain: you would call
for a Vulcan to cleave your head, and let out those armed men, who would cause
a greater struggling in your head, then the twins did in Rebecca's womb: For I
do not think these little Myrmidons would lie so quiet in your brain, as the
Grecians did in the Trojan horse. But if the material atoms of the object
pierce the organ; as for example, of a horse; then tell us how many atoms must
meet to make up a little horse: and how can that horse, being bridled and
sadled, pierce your eye without huring of it, especially, if you should see
mounted on his back such a gallant as S. George, armed with a long sharp lance;
or Bellerophon upon Pegasus? And if a thousand eyes should look at one time
upon that object, will it not be much lessened, by losing so many atoms and
parts as enter into so many eyes? Or can the object multiply it self by
diminution, as the five loaves did in the Gospel? Or suppose, you should see as
many horses at a time, as were in Xerxes his army, would there be stable-room
enough in your brain to contain them all? Or, if you should see a thousand
horses one after another, does the coming in of the later drive out the former?
Which way do they come out? the same they went in? or some other way? or do
they stable all together there? or do they die in the brain? Will not they
perish the brain, and poison your optic spirits, with which, you say, they
are mingled? Or suppose you should see in a looking-glass a horse, does the
atoms of that horse pierce first the glass to get in, and then break through
the glass again, to get into your eye? Sure, if this be your new Philosophy,
you are like to have but few sectaries of these deambulatory wise men, whom you
call vulgar Philosophers. Is it not easier, and more consonant to reason, that
the image or representation of the object be received into the sense, which
reception we call sensation; then to say, that the very material parts, which
you call atoms, should pierce the organ? for then the same object must be both
one, and many; and so, if all the inhabitants of either hemisphere should look
at once upon the Moon, there must be as many Moons, as there are beholders.
Again, we distinguish that which you confound, to wit, first, the organ,
which is called sensorium: secondly, the sensitive faculty, which resides in
the spirits: thirdly, the act of sensation, which is caused by the object:
fourthly, the object it self, which causes sensation, but not the sense or
faculty it self: fifthly, the species, which is the image of the object:
sixthly, the medium, which is air, water, etc. seventhly, the sensitive soul,
actuating the organ, and in it judging and perceiving the object, which
diffuses and sends its species, or spiritual and intentionall qualities, both
into the medium and the sensorium: and this is no more impossible, then for the
wax to receive the impression or figure of the seal, without any of its matter.

[ What are words, but motion? and words are the chiefest Sect. 55. Page 283.
c. 32.
object of our remembrance.] Words are not motion, but by the motion of the
tongue words are uttered. I believe you move your tongue many times when you
speak not: but if words were motion, you must still speak when you move your
tongue. Words are articulate sounds, but we have already showed, that sounds
are not motions, but caused by motion, or the collision of solid bodies. And if
words be the chief object of our memory, we have spent our time ill; for the
end why we learn words and languages, is to come by them to the knowledge of
things: And if we remember words only, then our knowledge is verbal only.
Do you remember nothing in Divinity but words? or are these the chiefest
object of your memory? If this assertion be true, Christians are of all men
most miserable, who spend their time, strength, and means, to attain the
knowledge of those things, which when they remember, prove but words. I have
read of a verbal, and of a real memory: some are apter to remember words
then things; others remember things better then words.

[ The medium which these bodies move in (that is, the memory) Sect. 56. Page
286. c. 33.
is a liquid vaporous substance, in which they swim at liberty.] These atoms
in this Chapter you call sometimes bodies, and sometimes similitudes and
species, confounding qualities and substances, as you are wont. But if you take
memory here for the organ, or hinder-part of the brain, that is not the medium,
but the receptacle of the species: the medium are the spirits, which conveigh
the species from the fantasy to the memory; which two senses are near
neighbors in the brain: much less can these bodies (as you call them) in the
memory, be the memory it self, which is a faculty of the intellective soul
in man, of the sensitive in beasts: And indeed, the intellect and intellective
memory is one and the same power of the soul, only differing in this, that
as it keeps the species, it is called memory; as it makes use of them in
understanding, it is called intellect: And what need we multiply faculties to
no purpose? for, as the same faculty which apprehends, judges also; so the
same faculty which understands, remembers too. And as these bodies or medium
cannot be the memory, much less can they be reminiscence or recordation,
which is the motion of the impressed images in the memory; which reminiscence
is only in man, because it requires discourse, of which beasts are not capable.

You tell us of two effects of purging: [ the one, to Sect 57. Page 292. c. 34.
make the humor more liquid; the other, to make the stomach or belly suck or
vent it.] But indeed, the effect of purging is not the liquefaction of the
humor, which is liquid enough of it self, saving the melancholy humor, which
is somewhat thicker then the rest, by reason it is more earthy; but the pituita
and choler are liquid enough of themselves: therefore it is not the work of the
purge to liquefie the humor, but, by reason of its innate similitude it has
with the humor, to draw it, as the lodestone does iron: which similitude
consists in their essential forms, and in the properties flowing thence.
And, as the lodestone draws iron, and is not drawn by it; so does the
medicament, being the more active, draw the humor, but is not drawn by the
humor. Neither do I think, that the stomach or belly sucks the humor, which
is so offensive to it; for, simile trahit simile: but the expulsive faculty of
these parts, wherein the humor lay, being partly oppressed by the humor, and
partly irritated by the medicament, sends it away to the stomach or belly; and
these also, being quickly wearied with such troublesome guests, send away the
humor by vomit, or by the stool.

[ There rises a motion of a certain fume about the heart, Sect. 58. Page 294.
which motion is called pleasure.] Apuleius makes pleasure to be the child of
Cupid and Psyche: you say, that it is the motion of a fume about the heart; of
which Psyche cannot be the mother, nor Cupid the father. There are oftentimes
fumes about the heart, which beget more pain then pleasure; and there are
pleasures, where are no fumes at all. What fumes are there in beautiful
objects of the eye, with which it is delighted? Music affords pleasure to the
ear, but no fume at all: and so the other senses have their pleasures in their
objects without fumes; for pleasure is nothing else, but the apprehension of a
convenient object, or its species rather, which object is the efficient cause
of pleasure. The form or esience of pleasure consists in the fruition of
that convenient object, either by judging of it, if present; or by remembering
it, if absent. If from this pleasure there proceed an elation of the mind, by
diffusing of the spirits, this we call joy. Again, if pleasure consist in
fruition, it is rather a rest then a motion. Besides, if pleasure be the motion
of a fume, what think you of the soul? Sure, there are no fumes, and yet there
is pleasure in the soul. And Angels have their pleasures too without fumes;
for, I believe the fumes in Popish Churches do as much please the Angels, as
they affright Devils. Did Paradise, the garden of pleasure, called therefore
Eden, beget many fumes about Adams heart? Or, are there greatest pleasures,
where there be most of these cordial fumes? I think, that where is most heat,
there are most fumes; but so a lion should have more pleasure then a man: for,
the lions heart is hotter; and so our hearts are hotter in burning fevers, then
in health. Moreover, when at the first sounding of music we take pleasure,
that pleasure quite vanishes, if we grow weary of the music; do the fumes
then vanish also? Lastly, if beatitude consists in pleasure, as many think,
then it is within our selves, having these fumes; and so we need not go far
to be blessed. But why should the fumes about the heart be pleasures, rather
then the fumes about the brain, seeing in the brain is the fantasy and
apprehension, as also the original of the senses? Now, pleasure consists in
feeling and apprehension, so that pleasure increases as the sense and
apprehension do. I believe, Tobacco-suckers and Winebibbers will hardly admit
of your Philosophy, who define their pleasure by the motion of fumes in the
brain, rather then about the heart.

[ All that moves the heart is either pain or pleasure.] Sect. 59. Page 298.
Physicians tell us, that the heart is moved by the vital spirits; the
Aristotelians by the heat, which is the souls instrument: the heat moves it
upward, the hearts own weight moves it downward, and this is that they call
systole and diastole; not a compounded motion, but two several motions,
proceeding from diverse principles; for, no natural motion can be compounded,
nor can two contrary motions make up one, nor is motion made of motions: and
not only are these two motions opposite in the heart, but also different in
respect of time. Secondly, pain and pleasure are passions of the appetite; for
every motion in the sensitive appetite is passion, caused by external objects,
being apprehended as good or evil: but passions are not agents. Thirdly, what
pain or pleasure moves the childs heart in the mothers belly, or our hearts
when we sleep, or a heart after it is taken out of the body? We see it moves,
so long as any heat or spirits remain in it: but you will hardly believe, that
pain or pleasure moves it. Fourthly, if pain and pleasure move not the senses,
but the species of such objects (which are convenient or inconvenient for us)
cause this motion, and of this arises pain or pleasure; how can these move
the heart, which never moved the sense?

[ The effect, which we call pain, is nothing else but a compression.] Sect.
60. Page 298.
Pain is not a compression, but the effect of compression, and not of this
neither; for some pleasing compressions there are, but of compression, as it is
offensive or hurtful to our nature: Neither [ are they generally Page 298.
hard things which breed pain in us, and those which breed pleasure oily and
soft,] as you say; for there are diverse soft and oily things, which, being
touched, would not cause any pleasure in us. A Toad is soft, gold is hard; but
as the touching of this breeds no pain, so the touch of that begets no
pleasure. [ Neither is the heart Page 299.
extremely passive, by reason of its tenderness and heat,] but rather active;
for heat is an active quality, and where is most heat, there is most activity:
therefore is the fire the most active of the elements, and the heart the most
active of all our members, because of heat. And how the heart is exceeding
tender, I know not; the flesh of it is not so tender as of other parts. [ Fear
in its height contracteth Page 301.
the spirits, and thence it is called Stupor.] Sorrow contracteth also the
spirits; what difference then do you put between sorrow and stupiditie? You
should have said, a sudden contracting; for stupor suddenly contracts those
spirits, which sorrow does leasurely, and by degrees. Secondly, you should have
distinguished stupiditie; for there is one that comes of fear, another of
admiration. Thirdly, fear and stupiditie are not the same thing; for in fear
there is an inordinate motion of the spirits, in stupiditie there is an
immobility of the same spirits. [ Passion is nothing else but a motion of the
blood and Page 306. c. 35.
spirits about the heart.] There is a continual motion of the spirits and
blood about the heart, even when we sleep; is there then also a continual
passion? I think, in sleep men are seldom troubled with passions. Secondly, if
passion be continually in us, then passions and patible qualities are ill
distinguished by Logicians, which make the one transient, the other permanent.
Thirdly, passion is the motion of the sensitive appetite, which is moved by the
object, and from it receives its specification, as from its form; how then can
it be solely the motion of the spirits and blood? I grant, that in every
passion there is some alteration of the natural motion of the heart; that is,
the systole and diastole is more or less: but this alteration is caused by the
passion, which is, as I say, the motion of the sensitive appetite, not of the
blood and spirits, but secondarily and accidentally. Fourthly, every passion in
us is either morally good or evil: but the motion of the spirits and blood
about the heart is merely natural; and therefore cannot be good or bad
morally. Fifthly, every passion is not a motion; for joy, which is one of the
six passions of the concupiscible appetite, is a rest or acquiescence in the
fruition of that good, which we desired, but now possess. The other five
indeed consist in motion, to wit, love and hatred, desire and flight, and
sorrow; and so do the other five which are in the irascible appetite, to wit,
hope and despair, fear and audacity, and anger: but these are the motions of
the sensitive appetite, not of the spirits and blood, as is said. [ Birds are
more musical then other creatures, because they are Page 318. c. 36.
of a hotter complexion.] If this were true, then Ostriches, Eagles, and
Hawks, should be more musical then Larks and Nightingales; for, they are
far hotter: And birds are hotter in the dog-dayes, then in the spring; and
yet in the dog-dayes they are mute, and vocal in the spring: neither do they
sing as you say, [ because they require more air to cool them,] for their
singing, being a strong motion, (as some birds by too much and too eagerly
singing, have killed themselves) should rather heat then cool them: it is not
therefore heat, but emulation which is stirred up in them by some sharp and
sympathising sound; or else the delight and pleasure which they take in the
weather or air, in which they are most conversant, and by it the spirits are
cheered.

The agreement and disagreement of the creatures [ you Sect. 61. Page 332. ca.
38.
will not have to be caused by instincts, antipathies, and sympathies, but by
downright material qualities.] This is petere principium; for, if I ask you,
What it is that makes these material qualities affect or disaffect one
another, you must be forced to fly to secret instincts, and occult principles.
Are they material and manifest qualities, that in the Torpedo stupefie the
fishers hand, and in the Lodestone draw the iron, whereas other stones and
fishes have the same manifest qualities, that the Loadstone and Torpedo have?
Why do not other stones and fishes produce the same effects? If by these
material qualities you understand your Atoms, you must be forced to fly to
occult qualities; for what cause can you give of the emanation of these Atoms
from the Loadstone to the iron, more then to any other thing, but the sympathy
it or they have with the iron? Would you have me tell you the causes of
sympathies and antipathies? I will tell you, when you can tell me the cause of
the contrarieties that are between manifest qualities. Tell me why heat is
contrary to cold. It Is modesty and ingenuity to confess our ignorance in those
secrets which God has purposely concealed from us, to teach us humility, for
the pride of our first Parents, in affecting the forbidden fruit of knowledge;
and that we should account all knowledge here but ignorance, in respect of the
excellent knowledge of Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge. This we know, there are diverse contrary, and also sympathising
principles in nature, which are the causes not only of occult, but likewise of
manifest qualities: but to demand the reason of these, is to search into those
secrets of God, the knowledge of which is reserved for us in a happier life,
then this we now enjoy. And to fly upon every occasion to Democritus his
Atoms, is a poor asylum. Why cannot qualities produce the same effects which
your Atoms do? Do not you see how the sound of Music, or the words of an
eloquent Orator, which are but qualities, work forcibly upon the affections?

You say, [ the impression which the mothers imagination Sect 62. Page 330. c.
38.
makes upon the child, is by means of the spirits conveyed from the head unto
the seed.] If you will assign us the prime cause, you must ascend higher, to
wit, to the soul it self, which is both the mover, the form, and final cause
of the body: which soul sends not only the spirits from the head of the
parent, but from all parts of the body, as it does the seed; for therefore the
seed contains potentially all the parts of the body that shall be, because it
is derived from all parts of the parents body actually in being: and as the
soul conveyes the spirits unto the seed, so does it likewise the formative
power, by which the impression is made; not in the seed, which is not capable
of such impressions, whilst it is seed, but afterward in the Embrio; which
formative power does not all its work at one time, but successively; first,
transforming the seed, then distinguishing and articulating the parts and
members, and then making the impression on the child, being now capable to
receive it.

In the conclusion of your first Treatise, [ You call qualities Sect. 63. Page
342. Conclus.
unknown entities, and you will have us prove, if in nature there be such.] If
qualities be unknown, then tell me what it is we know; for substances we know
not, but as they are clothed with their accidents or qualities. Take away
heat, color, light, levity, and other qualities from the fire in your kitchen,
and how shall you know there is fire there? and what will your Cook say, if
you bid him dress your supper with fire, wanting these qualities? We have no
knowledge but by the senses, to which, neither the form, nor the matter of
things are obvious, but by their qualities, therefore if substances be known to
us by their qualities, much more known must the qualities be; according to the
old rule, Propter quod unumquodque est tale, etc. 2. To bid us prove qualities,
is to bid us prove that fire is hot, and water cold; or to prove that you are a
learned Gentleman, a good Philosopher, a wise Statesman: and I pray you, are
not learning, wisdom, goodness, qualities? from whence proceed all
alterations in the world? do they not from qualities? the substance is still
the same. When water which before was cold, is now hot, has lost neither its
matter, nor form, it is the same water still, only altered in its quality.
Are not you sometimes angry, sometimes pleased, sometimes fearful, sometimes
bold, sometimes sick, sometimes healthie? you are not still glad, but sometimes
sad; what is it in you that is thus altered? not your body, nor your soul,
which are still the same subjects of all these passions: the alterations then
are in the passions, or qualities themselves. I believe these entities are not
unknown to you as you are a man: Homo es, humani a te nihil alienum puto.
Lastly, if qualities must be proved, then I must prove that there is motion,
action, and passion in the world; but you will say these need no proof: so say I,
and consequently, neither need we prove, that there are qualities; for if there
were not heat in the fire, there could be no calefaction in the water. The
perfection of substances consists in their operations, but take away
qualities, you take away all operation, and by consequence, the perfection of
substance; nay, you must deny all generation and corruption in nature, if you
deny qualities, for by their service the matter is prepared to receive the
form, or lose it; and they are inseparable handmaids, waiting on the forms as
their mistresses, and ready to perform their commands.

[ The body is a mere passive thing.] What think you of Sect 64. Page 342.
Conclus.
the celestial bodies? are they merely passive? if they be, what is it that
works upon this inferior globe? Are the Sun and Moon mere passive bodies, by
which all things here have light, life, motion, and vegetation? But perhaps you
mean not celestial bodies: Then come lower; Are not the animal and vital
spirits bodies? and yet they are active, not merely passive: and if they were
not active, they could not unite the soul with the body, as they do; but,
unire est agere: nay, what say you to your little Pages, the Atoms? they are
bodies you confess, and yet not merely passive; for in this Treatise of yours,
they have done you Knights-service. Neither am I of your opinon when you say, [
that rare and dense is the Page 342.
primary and adequat division of bodies.] For there is in bodies a division
more prime then of dense and rare; to wit, of hot and cold; for rarity is but
the effect of heat, and density of cold; now the effect is not the prime but
posterior to its cause.

Though we have not sworn to defend Aristotle in all Sect. 65. Conclus.
his Dictats, yet, till we know better, we will adhere to his: If you can
inform us of principles more consonant to truth, we will follow you, and
leave him; for neither Plato, nor Aristotle, but Truth is it we fight for. But
indeed, we do not find your Philosophy answerable to your pains, or our
expectations. I will not dispraise your endeavors, nor will I promise to
follow them. I honor your worth, I admire your pains, but I dislike your
tenets. Your good parts deserve my love, but your principles convince not my
judgment: therefore afford me the same liberty in dissenting from you, which
you assume to your self in deviating from Aristotle, whom notwithstanding you
think you have exactly followed in your opinion of Atoms. But if my judgment
fail me not, in this you are mistaken: for, though he denies not minima
naturalia, or atoms in bodies, which are parts of the whole; yet he never
affirmed, that all actions, passions, motions, mutations are performed by them:
much less was he of your opinion, that light, heat, cold, and other qualities
were atoms or corporieties, but through all his works, when he has occasion
to speak of them, he makes them distinct entities, and places them in distinct
predicaments: Therefore father not these your Atoms upon Aristotle, but set
the right saddle on the right horse; and let Democritus enjoy his own
conceits, to whom by right these atoms belong, and not to Aristotle.

Though Metaphysicall principles be of a higher strain Sect. 66. Page 344.
conclus.
then Physical, yet we must not [ set them apart, and make no use of them in
the compositions, resolutions, and motions of things,] as you would have us;
for, both the subject of Physic is subordinate to Metaphysick, and the
principles of that demonstrable by the principles of this. How can you know
exactly a natural body, and its affections and principles, if you know not
what is entity, essence, existence, act, possibility, etc? The thing defined,
cannot be known but by the definition, nor this without the genus and
difference. If you know not what is animal, you know not what is man. How shall
we know without Metaphysick what your active atoms are? whether they be
bodies or spirits, corruptible or incorruptible, substances or accidents,
perfect or imperfect, etc? By the touchstone of Metaphysick we must try the
goodness of your new coined opinions: but you wrong the learned Page 344.
Aristotelians, when you say [ that they imagine positive entities to the
negatives of things, as to the names of points, lines, instants:] for they
never called names and negatives positive entities; nor are the names of
points, lines, instants, negatives with them: and though they did imagine such
to be positive entities, yet they do not hold them to be so indeed; for, you
may imagine or conceive darkness or blindness under the notion of positive
entities, though you know them to be privations. And indeed, we cannot imagine
privations and negations without some reflection on their habits and
affirmations; because entities are only the objects of the intellect. You shall
do well to name the Aristotelians, who are guilty of this your accusation.

You would make Aristotle a weak Logician [ if he Sect. 67. Page 345*
should mean by qualities nothing else but a disposition of parts,] as you
say. But he is of another mind; for qualities are with him in one predicament,
the disposition of parts in another, to wit, in the Category of Site: therefore
your definitions are lame, for want of Logic and Metaphysick; for you define [
beauty, a composition of parts and colors in due proportion,] whereas beauty
is a quality, composition an action, and proportion in the predicament of
relation. So when you define [ health a due temper of the humors,] health is
not the temper of humors, but is the effect of this temper: For, as sickness
is an affection hurting and hindering our natural, vital, and animal
actions; so health is an affection, preserving and maintaining these actions in
safety: but affections are qualities. Neither is [ agility a due proportion of
spirits, and strength of sinews,] as you define it; for, proportion is a
relation, but agilitie a quality. Besides, there is in Elephants a due
proportion of spirits, and more strength of sinews then in a Mouse or Weasle,
and yet no ways that agilitie. And as bad is your definition of Science,
which, you say [ is nothing else but ordered phantasmes,] whereas I have
ordered phantasmes of contingencies, corruptible and individual things, and
yet of these there is no science. Though I have ordered phantasmes of the
effect, yet, for want of the knowledge of the cause, I have not the science of
it; for, scire est per causas cognoscere. And, if you take phantasmes for the
objects of knowledge, as they are in the fantasy, sure science cannot be
phantasmes, no more then the eye can be the color which it sees: Knowledge or
Science, and the thing known, are relatives; but these are opposites:
therefore not the same. Lastly, science is a habit, phantasmes are patible
qualities, if you speak of the objects in the fantasy; but these are
different species of quality.

You conclude your first part pleasantly, making your Sect 68. Page 345.
Conclus.
self merry in these sad times, but with your own shadow and conceits,
playing with these, as a Cat does with her own tail: You make the
Aristotelians speak absurdities of your own invention, and of which they never
dreamed, and then you laugh at them, comparing them to a boy, that, by adding
Bus, turned all English words into Latin. Thus, Turnus-like in the Poet, you
fight not against Aenaeas, but his Image, or rather your own imaginations; and
you play upon these Sampsons, who can easily pull down, with the strength of
their arguments, this temple of your large discourse, which you have been so
many years in building. If you were not a Gentleman, whom, for your good
parts, I honor, I could say, that the boy was not so much to blame for Bus, as
you are for being too busy in jeering at such eminent men, and at those
Maxims which have been so unanimously received by all Universities, and for so
many hundred years constantly maintained; but your worth and my modesty
enjoyne me silence, and restrain my pen from recrimination.

But let us see what it is that you so play upon them Sect. 69.
for, [ Because when you ask how a wall is white, they answer, There is an
entity, whose essence is whiteness, in the wall: If you ask again how
whiteness sticks to the wall, they reply, By means of the entity called
union. If again you ask, how one white is like another, they answer, It Is
done by another entity, whose nature is likeness.] Thus you make them very
simple and ridiculous, and indeed, no wiser then the boy with his Bus, or
rather Bussards then Philosophers. These men (whom you mock) say, that [
praedicare sequitur esse,] the wall is called white, because it is white; and
it is white in concreto, because the Painter would have it so, by introducing
whiteness the abstract into it. But I will tell you, why whiteness is in the
wall, and other accidents in their subjects; because they cannot subsist
without them; and they cannot subsist without them, because their essence is to
inhere. If you ask a reason of this their essence, I must leave you, and send
you to the Author of nature. If you dislike the term of entitie to be given to
whiteness, and union, and likeness; then they must be non-entities: for the
one or the other they must needs be, seeing there is no medium between entity
and nonentity. But Philosophers are not so childish as you make them, when you
will have them say, that whiteness sticks to the wall by means of union; this
is to tautologise, not to satisfy: they say not then, that union unites
whiteness to the wall, but that accidents are united to their subjects, as
heat to the fire, because without them the substance, whose ultimate perfection
consists in operation, cannot work; nor the accidents, whose essence is
inherence, without their subjects cannot subsist. So we say, that in mixture
the substances are united, not by means of union, but of humiditie, which is
the glue and cement in natural compositions, as dryness dissolves the union.
Again, one whiteness is not like another, because of likeness: that is
childish; but because nature aims at unity, and in similitude there is a kind
of unity. The reason why she aims at unity is, because there is most
entity, where is most unity; multiplicity enclines to nonentity, from which
nature flies as far as she can: and because she aims at perfection, which
consists in unity; therefore she aims at unity. And because where there is
division, there are parts; now parts being of the whole (which is the same
either generically or specifically with the parts) they resemble the whole, and
each other in some sort: Or, if you ask me the reason why two eggs are like
each other, I answer, Because they have the same quality. So then the identity
of the quality is the cause or ground of similitude; and so says Aristotle,
(...), they are like that have the same 5. Metaph. cap. 15.
quality; yet not qualities only, but other entities also are the ground of
similitude: The thing generated, and the generator have the same similitude,
because they have the same essential form. All things that are united in a
specificall form, have a specificall similitude; and they have a genericall
similitude, that have the same genus, and so equivocall effects are like their
causes. So there is the similitude of actions, passions, quantities, relations,
site, etc. And as the form, whether essential or accidental, is the ground
of that similitude, which is called of participation; so entitie it self is
the ground of that which is called the similitude of proportion. Thus man is
like unto God, because he is an entitie as God is, but by participation;
therefore like to him only by analogy and proportion. And because the
entities of God and of man are not of the same order; therefore God is not like
man, no more then you are like your picture, though perhaps your picture may be
like you. Lastly, [ you will not admit qualities, except we can show you out of
Aristotle a medium between natural and logical entities.] Then belike you
suppose, that we make qualities neither natural nor logical entities, but
some middle between both: but if you were versed in Philosophy, you will find,
that Aristotelians make qualities natural or real entities; and therefore
place them directly in the predicament, which is the receptacle of real
entities only. You would take it ill, if any should tell you, that the habits
of wisdom, learning, etc. the natural faculties of seeing, hearing, etc.
which are in you, as likewise your passions and patible qualities, with your
form and figure, were not natural and real entities. But this shall suffice
briefly to have pointed at some of your deviations, which I have done hastily,
not having time to make a full survay of your Treatise. Let us now pass to your
second Discourse, and see whether your in-sight in the nature of the Soul, be
as good as that which you have made show of in your Treatise of the nature of
Bodies.

ANIMADVERSIONS upon Sir Kenelme Digbie's Treatise, of the nature of the SOUL.
IN your Preface you traduce Philosophers Sect. 1. Page 352.
[ for turning all bodies into spirits, because they make heat and cold to be
of it self indivisible, a thing by it self.] This is a great mistake; for
neither do they make heat and cold in themselves indivisible, but divisible
rather, to wit, into degrees: nor do they make them things by themselves, but
they say, that they have no being, except in and by their subjects; so neither
do they make them indivisible, in respect of parts, but they hold qualities
partible, according to the parts of the body in which they are. And if they
did, yet it will not follow, that therefore they turn bodies into spirits; for
spirits are not free from divisions: nor are qualities bodies, as we have
already showed; nor can bodies be turned into spirits, except you mean such
spirits as fly up and down your nerves and arteries. And indeed, not
Philosophers, but the Mass Priests are guilty of your accusation; for they, as
it were, by magical words, ^^rne the bread into a spirit, and they make the
accidents of the bread to have essence and existence by themselves, without
their subjects.

[ The nature of a thing apprehended, is truly in the man Sect. 2. Page 356. c.
1.
who does apprehend it, and not the similitude; because where there is a
likeness, there is a dissimilitude, which is not in the thing apprehended; and
therefore no likeness, but the very thing it self.] Then first, the thing
containing and receiving, must be the same with the thing contained and
received, which is impossible: Then secondly, there will be no difference
between the direct act of the intellect, in apprehending things without it
self by the species or similitudes of these things; and that act which is
called reflex, when the intellect understands it self, without any species:
though in this the apprehendent, and thing apprehended be the same; yet it
cannot be so in the outward objects. Neither indeed is the intellect every way
the same as it apprehends, and as it is apprehended: it apprehends as the
intellect, it is apprehended as an intelligible object. Then thirdly, one and
the same object may be multiplied in an instant to two or three thousand, if
there should be so many to look upon an object at the same time. Fourthly, Tell
us how an horned beast, passing through a man's eye, should not hurt it; or a
stone through a looking-glass, and not break it: but there must be a breaking
of the one, and a hurting of the other, if the very substance of the thing
apprehended is truly and really in the eye or fantasy, or mind of the man
apprehending, or in the glass. Is the very substance of the seal, or only
the impression and species of it in the wax? Fifthly, The intellect is not the
same with the thing apprehended essentially and formally; but only subjecti^^
as they say;) for the intellect is the subject of the received species, which
of an abstract becomes a concrete, and which before the reception of the
species was intellectus, but not informatus, till they come. Now, if the thing
received by the intellect be a substance, then it cannot be one with the
intellect, being they are both actual entities; Ex duobus in actu non fit unum
per se. Sixthly, If the intellect be every thing really which it understands,
then by understanding or apprehending a horse, it becomes a horse, and so man
must needs be a horse, says Scaliger. Seventhly, If the intellect be
essentially Exerc. 307. 6.
the same thing which it apprehends, then the thing apprehended cannot be
present or absent without the destroying of the intellect; but we say accidents
may, and therefore the species are but accidents, because by their coming and
going the intellect is not destroyed. Eighthly, There is nothing in the
intellect which was not before in the sense; but if the substance of the fire
be received into the chrystalline humor of your eye, before the visory spirits
can apprehend, or convey that fire to the fantasy, and thence to the
intellect; either the fire will burn up the chrystalline humor, or the moisture
of the humor extinguish the fire, and so the intellect be deprived of its
object. Ninthly, Give me the reason why a man sees that which sometimes he
perceives not: Our Peripateticks give the reason thus; because, though the
chrystalline humor suffers in receiving the species, yet the visory spirits
act not by apprehending them, because the fantasy imployes them about some
other object: but this could not be, if the substance of a man or horse be
received into the eye; for it were impossible that such a substance could be
received into the eye, and not perceived by the spirits in the eye. Lastly,
There is a dissimilitude between the thing apprehended and the power
apprehending, though you deny it: for, if there be no dissimilitude between
the fire that is in your chimney, and that in your eye, then there must be the
same coals, heat, smoke, and quantity, in your eye, that is in the chimney: if
it were so, your brains could not avoid conflagration, nor your eyes a total
extinction.

[ A respect is no where to be found in its formal subsistence, Sect. 3. Cap.
1. p. 359. and 360.
but in the apprehension of man: the likeness that one white has to another,
is only in man, who, by comparing them, gives nature and being to respect.]
Then it seems there is no true and real respect or relation between a father
and his son, a master and his servant, a King and his people, but a mere
notion in our apprehension; so that if men did not apprehend such notions,
there should be no relation at all between these: So you are no longer a
father, nor can your son be your son, but whilst you are thinking of it; and if
you think not of it, nor dream of it in your sleep, your son has lost his
filiation, and consequently his tie of obedience and respect, which he owes to
you. 2. Our Philosophers were unwise men, to place relations in a predicament,
which is the series of real entities, if respects be mere notions; and so
they ought not to be handled in Metaphysics, if they be not real entities. 3.
What think you of that respect or relation which is between the Creator and
the creature? or those relations which are in the persons of the blessed
Trinity? are they only notions, and such as have no subsistence, but in man's
apprehension? 4. In relation there is opposition, but opposits differ really.
5. A respect or relation may be really lost from its subject, and therefore
it is a real entity; for when you die, the relation cease which you now have
to your son, or he to you. 6. If all respects be notions, what distinction do
you make between those which are called relata realia, and relata rationis? 7.
Relations are so far from being mere notions, that in them there is a twofold
reality: The one, as they are accidental forms, inherent in their subjects;
the other, as they import a respect to another, which is called its terminus.
Lastly, they are said to be like, which have the same quality; to wit, of
whiteness, or such like; but if whiteness be a real entity, the likeness,
which is the identity of it, cannot be a notion: for Metaphysick tells us, that
identity is real: And what will you say of that similitude which Adam had with
God, or which a regenerated man has, consisting in righteousness and true
holiness? Is this image of God in man, which by us was lost, and now by grace
is repaired, a bare notion? then will our happiness, and joy, and hopes, and
religion, consist rather in conceit then in reality:

Dii meliora piis, erroremque hostibus illum. Sect. 4. Cap. 1. p. 360.
[ BEING or a thing (the formal notion of both which is merely being) is the
proper affection of man.] This anigma would trouble Oedipus, or Sphynx
himself; for in your margin, by this word being, you understand existence: But
is this the proper affection of man? what becomes of other creatures? have they
no existence? If they have, then it is not proper to man quarto modo. If they
have not, then they are but entities in possibility; for existence is the
actuating and restraining of the essence (which in it self is indeterminate,
and in possibility) to actuality, which we call existence; therefore existence
is not the proper affection of man, but of entity as it is in act, or rather
the formality of actual entity. Besides, if existence be the proper affection
of man, what shall we say of Angels, and other spirits; nay, of God himself?
Is there no existence in them? Again, existence is not an affection or
property; for it is no accident, but the very essence of the thing actuated,
which before was in possibility; and therefore by Philosophers it is called
actus primus, to distinguish it from properties and operations, which are
called second acts; for a thing is first actuated by its existence, and then by
its properties and operations. But what you mean by [ the formal notion of
both Page 361.
which, and of their merely being,] I know not. Sibylla's leaves are not more
obscure, to which you may add, [ your stock of being, and the grafts
inoculated into it,] for Page 361.
with such mists of metaphors you involve your Philosophy, against the rules
and custom of Philosophers; and so you leave your Readers, as Sibylla left
hers, unsatisfied; thus,

Inconsulti abeunt, sedemque odere Sibyllae* I wish Mr. White had helped you
here, whose aid has not been wanting to you at a dead lift hitherto. I should
trifle away too much time and paper, if I should insist or name all your
fancies, of the tribes as you call them of predicaments, whose office you will
have [ to comprehend all the particular notions that man has: and how you will
have [all entities to be respective] and all notions to be grafted on the stock
of being, etc.] Abundance of such stuff, with which your book is fraughted, I
pass over, as being not worth the expense of time; and indeed, they refute
themselves. As likewise that you make [ essence and existence the same] whereas
they are one and the same in God only, but not in the creatures, in whom the
essence and existence differ: for, whilst a thing is in its causes, it has an
essence; but no existence, till it be produced by its causes, and as it were
quit of them.

[ All the knowledge we have of our soul, is no more but that Page 368. c. 2.
it is an active force in us.] I hope you know more of the soul then this, to
wit, that it is an immortal, immateriall substance, infused by God into the
body, created of nothing, consisting of the intellect and will, capable of
beatitude. You know also, I hope, that the soul had no being till it was
infused into the body, and that it is not in a place as bodies are, by way of
circumscription, and that it is all in all, and all in every part of the body,
and that after death it immediately goes to hell or heaven, not lingering about
the grave, or sleeping in the dust till the resurrection. But it seems you
have not very great knowledge of the soul, when you say [ that a thing
apprehended by the soul, becomes a part, or affection of the soul;] for
neither has the soul any parts, nor can that be an affection of the soul
which comes from without.

In your 5. Chapter you make [1. Being to have a very Sect. 6. Page 395. c. 5.
near affinity with the soul. 2. To be the end of the soul. 3. To be the
souls pattern and Idea.] For the first, there is small affinity between the
soul which is a substance, and Being which is neither substance nor accident,
but a transcendent. Being or existence is the general affection of entity, so
is not the soul: the body has existence before the soul is infused, and when
the soul is gone, it has existence still: the body has no more existence
from the soul, then the soul from the body. 2. If being be the end of the
soul, then it moved God to create it, for the end moves, at least
metaphorically; but sure nothing moved God, except his own goodness and
glory: and how can that existence which God gave to the soul in the creation,
be the end of its creation? Is creation the end of creation? and the giving of
being the end why being is given? what can be more absurd? And wereas being is
internal and essential to the soul, how can it be the end, which is an
external cause? 3. Being is not the pattern or Idea of the soul; for Being
is intrinsecall to the soul, so is not the pattern or Idea, but extrinsecall:
As, the Idea or pattern of a building is in the mind of the builder, but not
in the house which is built: and if being is the end of the soul, how can it
be the Idea? for the end excites the action of the agent, but the Idea
determinates that action; and these are very different.

[ You will not have the understanding to be the objects it Sect. 7. Page 404.
c. 6.
understands by way of similitude, but by way of respects.] Understanding is by
way of similitude, not of respect; for your son, who has a near respect or
relation to you, does not the more for that understand this your Book; I
believe he understands books written by strangers, to whom he has no respect,
better then these your intricate mysteries. There are relations and respects
between inanimate or senseless creatures, and yet no understanding: it is not
therefore the respect, but the reception of the species into the intellect, and
its assimilation or similitude with the intellect, that makes understanding.
Besides, there are some respects grounded upon similitudes, then I hope there
are some things understood by way of similitudes: I may truly say, all things,
for nothing is understood, but what is in the understanding; and nothing can be
there, but by way of similitude; every thing is intelligible actually, if its
similitude be in the intellect actually.

[ The amplitude of the soul, in respect of knowledge, is absolutely Sect. 8.
Page 405. c. 6.
infinite, that is, she is capable of knowing at the same time objects without
end or measure.] Where is absoluteness, there is no respect; how then can the
soul be infinite absolutely in respect of knowledge? Is there an absolute
respect, or a respective absoluteness of infinity in the soul? I thought God
only had been absolutely infinite; and what odds will you make between Gods
knowledge and man's, if the soul at the same time is capable of knowing objects
without end or measure? Gods knowledge cannot exceed this; for what can be
known beyond infiniteness and immensity? And if the soul knows at the same
time things infinite and immense, then the soul must be also infinite and
immense: For the Understanding, and the thing understood is the same; but
infiniteness and immensitie are Gods proper attributes. For my part, I
confess that all I know of infiniteness is, that I know it not. For this
cause Aristotle proves, that the principles of natural bodies cannot Lib. 1.
phys. text. 35.
be infinite, because they are known; for they could not be known, if they
were infinite: And therefore Philosophers could not attain to the knowledge of
God, because of his infiniteness, but only by degrees reached to the
knowledge of some of his attributes: as first, that he was an entity, then a
mover; then they came to know his power, after that his wisdom, and then his
goodness. And sure, all the knowledge we have of God in this life, is but the
light of the Owls eyes to the Sun. Our Peripateticks are more modest, who say
not, that the soul at the same time is capable of knowing objects without end
or measure, as you do; but they say, that the faculty of understanding must
be proportionated to the object. Now, the object of the intellect is finite;
for nature acknowledges no infinitum actu. Infiniteness by succession there
is, and so she may know infinite things, that is, one thing after another in
infinitum; for she knows not so much, but she may know more: yet she knows
not infinite things actually or habitually, because actually at the same time
she knows that only which has one species; but infiniteness has not one
species. Hence it is, that she knows in infiniteness one part after
another; and so, we know not God in this life, because there is no proportion
between his actual infiniteness, and our finite understandings. Nay, in
heaven we shall not know him by way of comprehension, though we shall then
know his essence. And because we cannot actually at the same time understand
many things, therefore the intelligible species enter into the understanding
successively. And if at any time we understand many things together, it is,
not as they are many or diverse, but as they are united in one common notion or
nature. So the Angels themselves understand not many things at once, but as
they are united in one species, whether we speak of those species which are
innate, or of those which they see in the glass (as they call it) of the
Trinity. And this truth of the Peripateticks you seem afterward to yield unto,
when you say, that if knowledge be taken properly, we Page 410. c. 7.
do not know eternity, however by super natural helps we may come to know it.

[ All things which within our knowledge lose their being, Sect. 9. Ibid.
do so by reason of their quantities.] Quantities are not active; therefore
nothing can lose its being, by reason of them. When a man dies, he loses his
being, as man; and yet the fame quantity remains that was before in the
body. If you speak of the formal being of things, they are lost, not by
reason of the quantity, but by reason of the introduction of another form,
which expells that form that was; as, the form of the chick expells the form
of an egg, and then follows a change of the quantity: but if you speak of
material being, that is not lost at all, the matter being eternal; and so
quantity, which follows the matter, remains too, but indeterminate, till
the form come, which restraines and confines the exorbitancie both of the
matter, and of its quantity. Sect. 10. Page 419. c. 9.


You say [ that those Philosophers, who search into nature, are called
Mathematicians.] They are so by you, but by whom else are they so called? They
use to be termed Physici, natural Philosophers; but for Mathematicians, they
consider not nature at all, neither the matter, nor the form of things, but
bare accidents; not as the natural Philosopher, (who handles them as
affections of natural bodies) but as they are abstracted from all sensible
matter: So the Geometrician considers continued quantities, the Arithmetician
discrete quantities or numbers, Astronomers motions and measures of celestial
bodies, Optics light and shadows, Musicians sounds.

[ All life consists in motion, and all motion of bodies Sect. 11. Page 420.
c. 9.
comes from some other thing without them. The soul can move, without
receiving her motion from abroad.] First, all life consists not in motion:
for, there is life in spirits, without motion; so there is in bodies too: In
Dormise and other sleeping creatures in Winter, in trees at the same season, in
women that are troubled with histerica passio, they have life, and yet no
motion at all. Secondly, life consists not in motion; for it is not the
action, but the act of the soul; not (...), but (...). Life consists in union;
but this is rather rest then motion. Life is not in the categorie of action.
From life proceed diverse actions: as understanding, sensation, motion,
nutrition, generation; but actionis non est actio. It Is true, that life is
manifested by motion; but it consists not in motion: for the foul, being
separated from the body, lives, but moves not. Thirdly, all motions of
bodies come not from without; for the form is the cause of motion, but the
form is not an external cause. Though your hand, in flinging up a stone, be
an external mover, yet when the stone falls downward, it is moved internally,
by its own form. What external mover is that which moves the heart, even
when it is separated from the rest of the body? Fourthly, the soul moves
not, but by receiving her motion from abroad: for, as all things have their
forms from the first cause; so from the same cause they have their motion,
which follows the form, dans formam, dat consequentia: therefore the Apostle
tells us, it is in God we live, and move, and have our being.

You are troubled with phancies, when you tell us [ of Sect. 12. Page 423. c.
10.
a perfect, and imperfect soul; that, you call a knowledge, an art, a rule,
etc. and this, you call a participation of an Idea. So in our thoughts, you
make some part of them corporeal, and some spiritual. In the soul you will
have no accidents, but all to be soul that is in her.] We say, that every
body is perfect in its own kind; so that there is no imperfect body in the
world: but how one soul is more imperfect then another, you must tell us, if
you will have us be your disciples. The essence of every thing is indivisible;
but the soul is the essence of the living creature, and the essence of the
thing is the perfection of it. A negative imperfection there is in the
creature, compared to the Creator: so in men's souls, compared to Angels;
because they have not these perfections: nor are they capable of them in that
estate they are now in, except their species be altered; and yet the souls are
perfect in their own kind: for, perfectum est, cui nihil deest. Thus a Diamond
is a perfect stone, though it has not the perfections of man. But a privative
imperfection is not in any soul, because there is nothing wanting that ought
to be in the soul (I speak here of natural faculties, not of supernatural
grace) if there be some failing or defect in the organs, by which the soul
works, that imperfection to no more to be imputed to the soul, then want of
skill to an expert Musician, because his Lute is out of tune. Secondly, when
you call [ the soul a knowledge, an art, a rule,] you make the soul an
accident, or a collection of accidents; and so, you are more injurious to the
soul then Hippocrates and Galen, who believed it to be nothing else but a
celestial heat. Thirdly, what you mean by [ an imperfect soul, which (you
say) is the participation of an Idea,] I know not. Fourthly, neither can I tell
[ how some part of our thoughts are corporeal, and some spiritual,] seeing
they are actions, and accidents of the soul. Fifthly, if there be no accidents
in the soul, then there be no habits, nor actions, nor intelligible species in
her; for these are mere accidents, but such are in every soul, or else you
must deny, that there is either knowledge or wisdom, goodness or evil in the
soul. It Is true, there are not material accidents in her, because she is free
from materiality; yet, in that she is not a pure act, as God is, there is in
her a potentiality, whence arise these spiritual and immateriall accidents
which be in her.

[ To be in a place, is nothing else but to be in a circumstant Sect. 13. Page
424. c. 10.
body. It is absurd to say [it is] therefore [it is somewhere.] it is an
eminent property of a separated soul to be no where, and yet she is every
where.] Place is not a body; for then two bodies must be in one place, which
nature abhors. Neither is place any part of a body: not the matter, because
the matter does not contain as the place does, but is contained; nor is it the
form, for the body may be separated from the place containing, without any
hurt to the body contained: so cannot a body be separated from its form,
without its destruction. And if place were either matter or form, there would
be no motion to a place; for, bodies move to their place, because they are not
in it; they move to enjoy that they want: but bodies having and enjoying
already their matter and form, cannot move to have or enjoy them; therefore
place is not a body, but the superficies of an ambient body, or rather the
concavity of that superficies. Secondly, it is no absurdity from the existence
of a thing, to prove the ubiety of it; for whatsoever is, must necessarily be
somewhere, except God, whose center is everywhere, his circumference nowhere.
And though spirits are not in a place, by way of circumscription, as bodies
are, whose extremities fill the vacuity of the containing superficies; yet they
are in their ubi, by way of definition or designation; that is, whilst they are
here, they are not there: whilst the Angel Gabriel is with the Virgin in her
chamber, he is not the same time in heaven; and whilst our souls are here
present in their bodies, they are absent from the Lord, says the Apostle. And
though Angels and our souls are in bodies, as in their ubi, yet they are not
there as in a place; for neither is there any dilatation nor condensation of
the bodies upon their entering in, no more then there is of the air in your
chamber upon the shining of the Sun beams in it: Or, if they be in a place,
they are not there by any quantitative, but by a virtuall contact. Thirdly, you
make it [ the eminent property of a soul to be nowhere, and yet everywhere.]
But if the soul be nowhere, it is nothing; and if everywhere, it is God,
whose property it is indeed to be everywhere, by his essence, power, and
providence: but how the soul can be everywhere, and yet nowhere, is one of
your riddles. I think you have read that passage in Seneca, Nusquam est, qui
ubique est. But, indeed, neither are the souls nowhere, nor are they
everywhere; not nowhere, for ubietie is so necessary to created entities,
that (like Hippoer ates twins) they live and die together: Toll spatia
corporibus, and nusquam erunt, and qui a nusquam erant, omnino non erant. What
S. Austin speaks there of bodies, must be also understood Epist. 57.
of spirits; for, no reason can be given why spirits should have more
privilege to exist without their Ubi, then bodies have to exist without their
place* And how can we imagine, that a spirit can work or produce any effect,
except the cause and the effect, the work and the worker have a local
co-existence? Therefore Plato In Timae^ part. 3.
said well, that what is not contained within the compass of heaven and earth,
cannot be at all. And so says Aristotle, that which is nowhere, is not. If
Sphinx be 4. Phys. t. 1.
nowhere, there is no such creature. And to say, that souls are everywhere,
is to oppose both Divinity and Philosophy: for the one teaches us, that
ubiquity is Gods property; the other, that Intelligences, which are of a more
eminent essence or nature then our souls, are not in every part of their orb,
but in that only which moves most swiftly. As their essence is finite, so is
their existence, and so is their Ubi. As they cannot work everywhere, so they
cannot be everywhere. The souls departed then are in their Ubi, which
excludes ubiquitie.

You say [ you have explicated how time is the motion of Sect. 14. Page 424. c.
10.
the heavens.] You had need explicate this well; for how the measure can be the
same thing with that which it measures, I know not. Now, time is the measure
of motion, but not of celestial motion: for time, being the affection of that
motion, must needs be after it; but a measure is naturally before the thing
measured; and the cause is the measure rather of the effect, then the effect
can be of the cause, says Scaliger: Therefore, as the Exerc. 352. 2.
first body is the measure of other bodies, so is the first motion the measure
of other motions. And nature by motion measures time, because by motion she
begets time; but we make time to measure motion, when we say, so many degrees
of the equinoctial have moved in such a time. Again, time cannot be motion,
because time is the same everywhere, but motion is not the same: one time is
not swifter or slower then another, but one motion is swifter or slower then
another motion. Besides, it is a received opinion among Divines, that the
motion of heaven shall cease after the resurrection, being the motion of the
Sun, Moon and Stars is a part of that vanity, to which the creature is
subject; and of this motion there shall be then no use, either for distinction
of times and seasons, or for generation, corruption, and alteration of
sublunary bodies: but though this motion shall cease, yet time shall not cease,
except it be that which is caused by their motion, to wit, hours, days,
years, etc. But that time, which consists in the succession of duration or
motion of any other thing, whether it be of our bodies, or of our thoughts,
that time, I say, shall not cease. To be brief, time is not the motion of
heaven, because that motion is only in heaven, as in its subject; but time is
everywhere, and in every thing* neither is that time, which is caused by the
motion of the first movable, the same that inferior motions are, because they
are separable; for the heaven might move and cause time, though there were no
inferior motion below: and there may be motions here below, though the heavens
stood still. The wheel of a clock would go, though the heavens moved not: And
Iosuah did fight, though the Sun stood still.

[ Though a separated soul consists with time, yet she is not Sect. 15. Page
425. c. 10.
in time.] If you understand by being in time, to be measured by time, and to
be overcome by it, I yield; for so, whatsoever has a perpetual being, is
freed from the laws of time, says Aristotle, (...). 4 Physic.
And so motion only is in time, to wit, per se, and primo, because it is
motion only that primarily, and by it self is measured by time; for time is
the number and measure of motion per prius and posterius: And therefore motion,
having of it self and primarily, prioritie and posterioritie, it is only
primarily and of it self in time, and other things but in respect of motion.
As for spirits, because they have no dependence on time, nor on the motion of
the first sphere, neither in respect of their being, nor of their conservation,
they cannot be said to be in time: for, to be in time, includes three things:
first, to be measured: secondly, to be comprehended: thirdly, to be mastered
and consumed by time; and so only corruptible bodies are in time, and yet
these are not in time, but in respect of their motions and mutations: For the
being or essence even of corruptible things consists in indivisibilitie, and
have not in them priority and posteriority, nor succession, which are
necessarily required for time. But though spirits are not in time after the
manner of corruptible bodies, yet they are in time, in respect of their local
motions, thoughts, volitions and operations, which require a succession,
prioritie and posterioritie, and cannot be in an instant: But this the
Schoole-Doctors will not have to be called physical time, which consists in
a continuated motion; but tempus discretum, being composed of diverse minutes,
or little stays or delays succeeding one another. And though their operations
be indivisible in themselves, yet they, by succeeding one another, make up that
discrete time, which is divisible: So unities and instances indivisible in
themselves, make up numbers and time which are divisible: So then this duration
of spirits, though it be indivisible and permanent, according to their proper
being, yet it is variable, according to their operations proceeding from them.
And though in respect of indivisibility and permanencie, they will have this
their duration to be called, not tempus, but aevum; yet they acknowledge them
to be in discrete time, in regard of their successive operations; and they
admit, that their aevum is virtually divisible, having its succession, as it is
co-existent with our time: And therefore the duration of Angels and separated
souls is greater this year, then it was an hundred, or a thousand years ago,
because they have been co-existent to a longer time. Besides, nothing but God
can be said to be exempted from time, because his essence, existence, and
duration or permanencie, is all one: but in the creatures these are
distinguished; for duration is extrinsecall, and accidental to the essence of
the creature, even of spirits; and therefore they are not the same with their
duration, but something else: they are in aevo, as we are in tempore, although
aevum be not a fit term to express the duration of Angels and souls, being
it signifies the same that eternity, only proper to God; for (...) is from
(...), and this is eternity: and God only is eternal, knowing neither
beginning nor exding, antiquity nor novelty: for the one supposes an end, the
other a beginning, as Tertullian shows: Deus, si vetus est, In Marcion. 1.
cap. 8.
non erit; si novus, non fuit: novitas initium testatur, vetustas finem
comminatur.

Not long ago you said, [ The soul was nothing else but Sect 16. Page 426,
427, 428* cap. 10.
an active force,] now you call it [ an indivisible substance, an actual
knowledge of all things, a skill, a rule by what it self is, that she is all
that she knows; her nature is order. That there are some imperfect souls,
and an interior soul; that the amplitude of knowledge is common to all humane
souls separated; that phantasmes are little bodies, which go with the body;
that life is a general motion, preceding that moment in which she becomes an
absolute spirit.] And then you confess, [ you have engulfed your self into a
sea of contradiction.] You have indeed, and I know not how to help you out, but
by telling you, that if the soul be a substance, it cannot be a rule, a
knowledge, a skill, an order; for these are accidents. Secondly, if the soul
be all she knows, then she needs no other knowledge but of her self; for in
knowing her self, she knows all things. Thirdly, if there be some imperfect
souls, then God is not a perfect Creator; for he immediately creates the
soul, and infuseth it. Fourthly, and if there be an interior soul, tell us
which is the exterior, or how many souls a man may have. Fifthly, and if
phantasmes be bodies, how can they have their residence in the soul or
understanding? Spirits may dwell in bodies, but that bodies should reside in
spirits, I have not heard till now. Sixthly, neither do you tell us a reason
why these your little bodies should forsake the soul upon her departure, and
go with the body. Is not the understanding of a separated soul, as capable
to lodge and entertain such guests, as before? Or, are these little bodies
made of dust, that to dust they must return? Seventhly, have all separated
souls the same amplitude of knowledge? then the soul of Judas in hell has as
much knowledge, as Abraham's soul in heaven; but I see no reason for it.
Eighthly, if life be a motion, it is an imperfect thing, consisting not in
esse, but in fieri; and so the life of man, both here and hereafter, cannot be
perfect, no not in heaven. And in a separated soul, tell me which is the
mover, the motion and the mobile. Ninthly, tell us what this She is, that
becomes an absolute spirit: Is it the soul? or is it life? If the soul, then
she was, before she was a spirit: If life, then motion may become a spirit. I
see, it is not without cause you complain of engulfing your self into the sea
of contradiction. Help your self out again, if you can.

But you plunge your self over head and ears, when Sect. 17. Page 430. c. 10.
you tell us, [ That separated souls do enjoy their knowledge, without the
help of external objects, phantasmes, instruments, or any other helps, having
all things requisite in themselves.] This is to deifie souls, and to elevate
them above the pitch of created entities. For the Angels themselves have not
such an eminent knowledge, in that they stand in need of helps; both external,
to wit, that supreme light, and clear looking-glass of the Trinity, in which
they see all things; as also of the innate species or idea, both of
universalities and of singularities, without which they can have no knowledge:
therefore a fortiori, if Angels stand in need of such helps, much more must
departed souls. Secondly, memory remains in departed souls, but memory or
recordation is by help of the species laid up in the mind, to the understanding
of which, when the mind applies it self, this is called recordation. Thirdly,
though the intelligible species depend from the senses and fantasy in their
fieri, or being, yet they have no dependence from them in their conservation.
For the sensible species in sleep serve the fantasy, though the common
sense, and all the outward, are bound up, and as it were dead. Fourthly, in
Angels and departed souls there are diverse habits both of love and knowledge,
and virtue, yea, of tongues also in respect of entitie, though there be no use
nor exercise (but after a spiritual way) of speaking: now habits are the
causes of action, and in vain should they be left in the soul, if she by them
did not work, and actually understand: neither can the effect, to wit, actual
understanding, subsist without its cause, which is the habit; for this is such
an effect as depends in its conservation from the cause. Fifthly, understanding,
and the manner of understanding accompany the nature of the soul, but the
nature of the soul is the same here and hereafter, therefore the manner of
understanding must be the same, to wit, by the species. Sixthly, Whereas the
souls departed do specifically differ from the Angels, they must have a
different manner of understanding, to wit, by discourse: but this way needs
help, not of the phantasme or senses, (being all commerce with the body is
taken away) but of the species. Hence then it is apparent, that departed souls
stand in need of helps, and of objects of their understanding, and that they
have not all things requisite in themselves: which objects are external in
respect of their essence, though the species be inherent or adherent to the
souls: much more external are these objects which they see in God, although
God himself is not intelligible by any species, by reason of his immensity;
neither does the soul understand it self by any species, nor does she know
(except by revelation) what is done or doing here on earth; which she must
needs know, if she had all things requisite for knowledge in her self; but
indeed, Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not. Nesciunt mortui
quid hic agatur, De cura pro mortuis.
nisi dum hic agitur, says S. Austin.

[ Our looking upon the phantasmes in our brain, is not our Sect. 18. Page
430. c. 10.
souls action upon them, but it is our letting them beat at our common sense,
that is, our letting them work upon our soul.] The fantasy being a
corporeal sense, cannot work upon the soul which is a spirit: it is not then
the fantasy that works upon the soul, but the agent intellect refines,
purifies, and makes more spiritual those phantasmes, or species which are
represented by the fantasy, and so impresseth them in the passive intellect;
and this is called understanding. The agent intellect is the force or quality
of the soul mediating between the fantasy and passive intellect, framing
the intelligible species, which the passive intellect receives, and so by the
one power the soul acts, and by the other suffers; but not at all by the
fantasy, whose hand cannot reach so high as to knock at the gates of the
soul. It must then be a spiritual power that must work upon a spirit: the
passive intellect is rasa tabula, like clean paper, having no innate species,
or images of objects in it self, but what it receives from the active
intellect; so that the fantasy helps the understanding only dispositive, not
efficienter, being rather the material then efficient cause of understanding,
furnishing those species which the active intellect refineth, and impresseth in
the passive. If you should ask, whether our understanding is an action, or a
passion, I answer, that it consists in both, for not only does it receive the
intelligible species, but also operats upon them. And this is that action of
the soul which you deny: and what do you talk of [ letting our phantasmes
beat at our common sense?] The phantasmes will beat whether you will or no. If
you will not believe me, believe your own dreams in sleep: I suppose your
phantasmes then beat, when you could be content they would spare their labor,
and be quieter. But so long as the spirits do make their intercourse between
the fantasy and the common sense, there will be an agitation and beating of
the phantasmes. But it seems, you take the soul and common sense for the same
thing, when you say, [ that to let the phantasmes beat upon the common sense,
is to let them work upon the soul.] They may beat upon the one, and not work
upon the other; for the soul suffers not but by it self, and her suffering is
perfective, not destructive, as that of the matter is. But she does not work
upon, or deduce her self out of possibility into act, considered as the same
thing, but in respect of her diverse faculties, whereof the one is the
efficient, the other the patient, and resembles the matter: and if it were not
so, we should never actually understand; for what should excite the passive
intellect to receive the species being purified and cleared from materiality,
and those accidents which neither conduce to the essence, nor to the
intellection, if there were not an active power, altogether impatible,
immateriall, immortal, using neither corporeal organs, nor being mixed with
corporeal senses, which we call the active intellect, and which irradiats and
illuminats intelligible things, making them actually intelligible, which before
were potentially only, as the light makes these colors actually aspectable,
which in the dark were invisible? Sect. 19. Page 432. c. 10.


[ In the state of a soul exempted from the body there is neither action nor
passion: which being so, the soul cannot die; for all corruption comes from
the action of another thing.] This is but a weak argument to prove the souls
immortality; for actions and passions do neither hinder nor further it. In
departed souls there remain loco-motive actions, for they move from the body
to their ubi, where they remain till the resurrection, and then they shall
move again to their bodies; so the actions of understanding and will remain in
them. Shall any then conclude that the souls are mortal, because they are the
subjects of action, and of passion? but their passion, as I said is perfective.
The same actions are in Angels both in moving and removing. Were the Angels
that carried Lazarus his soul into Abraham's bosom mortal? or that Angel
that carried Habakkuk, because of this action? Are there not also in Angels the
actions of intellect and will? Nay, action and passion do rather prove
immortality, and the cessation of these, corruption: For, whilst the body is
the souls patient, it lives; but when it cease from suffering, and the soul
from acting in it and by it, follows immediately its corruption. What think you
of the first matter which is the first subject of passion, and yet it is
eternal a part post? And if you take away all action and passion from
departed souls, you must abridge them of the joys they have in the fruition
of Gods presence, and of their duty in praising him; so you rob God of his
honor, and them of their happiness. Again, we have showed that habits
remain in departed souls, but to what end, if there be no action? for,
Habitus est propter actionem; and indeed, actions are more excellent then
habits. Again, if there be neither action nor passion in the departed souls,
they are in the state of death, rather then life; for life consists in
action, though it self be no action; and the soul is an act, therefore cannot
be without action: but death is a cessation and rest from all action. If you
had said, that some actions cease in the soul after her departure, as
generation, nutrition, and such as are the actions of the whole compound, you
had said somewhat; but to exempt her from all action, is to make her a dead
body, not a living soul: and though corruption, as you say, [ is the effect of
action,] or indeed, rather of passion, yet it will not follow, that all action
is the cause of corruption; for there are actions of creation, generation,
conservation, etc. Lastly, you contradict your self, for here you deny actions
in separated souls, but in the next Chapter, cap. 11. p. 439. you say, [ that
the body hinders the souls operations, and that her actions will be far
greater and more efficacious, when she shall be free from the burden of her
body.]

[ To put forgetfulness in a pure spirit, so palpable an effect Sect. 20. Page
433. c. 11.
of corporiety, and so great a corruption, is an unsufferable error.] I do not
think oblivion to be an effect of corporietie; for, as the soul is the subject
of memory, which is one of her faculties: of recordation, which is the work of
the intellect, viewing over the species: of reminiscence, which is a
disquisition or unfolding of the same species, if they be clouded or confused;
so likewise is the same soul the subject of oblivion, as the same eye is of
sight and blindness, the same air of light and darkness, there being the
same subject of habit and privation. Now, there are habits in the soul
departed as I have said, some actually there, as the habit of knowledge; some
potentially, as in their root and original, such are the sensitive habits:
where the habit is actually, there is the privation potentially; but where the
habit is potentially, there the privation is actually, as the habits of seeing,
hearing, etc. in the separated soul, make it clear. And what we have said of
the habits, we may say of memory, which is a power and faculty in the soul, by
which she retains the species: why then may there not be in her a deletion,
loss, or abolition of such species, the memory whereof will make her rather
miserable then happy? therefore the blessed souls in heaven remember not the
vanities nor infirmities of their former life: if they did, they could not be
truly happy and joyful; and so the oblivion of such things, is not in them [ a
corruption,] as you say, but a perfection rather. Therefore Albertus Magnus
before his death prayed, that he might obtain the oblivion of all former vain
knowledge, which might hinder his happiness in the knowledge of Christ. Sect.
21.


Your Rhetorical descriptions (which are both useless in, and destructive of
Philosophy) make the soul sometimes equal with God, sometimes no better then
a corruptible body; for to a separated soul you give those attributes proper
to God, [ as, freedom of essence, and subsisting in it self, a comprehension
of place and time, that is of Page 439, 440, 441. c. 11.
all permanent and successive quantity, and the concurrence of infinite
knowledge to every action of hers.] So you give to the soul independency,
ubiquity, infinity, which three are Gods due. If you lay the fault of this upon
your Rhetorical expressions, I must answer you, that Rhetoric in such a
subject may be well spared: use your Rhetoric when you will work upon the
affections, but not when you will inform the understanding; for in this regard
you do but cloud, not clear the intellect. Rhetoric is like fire and water, a
good servant, but a bad master; therefore ought not to be used, but with great
discretion, especially in abstruse questions: For this cause, Logic was
invented, to curb and restrain the exorbitancy of Rhetoric. If you will
dispute like a Philosopher, you must lay aside Rhetoric, and use
Philosophical terms; otherwise you will do as the fish Sepia, to wit, you will so
thicken the waters of your discourse, with that liquor that comes out of your
mouth, that you will make your self invisible, and delude the Reader, which is
the fashion of those, who dare not confide in the strength of their arguments;
whereas naked truth cares not for such dressings, nor seeks she after such
corners. And indeed, you are too much in extremes; for you do not more extol a
separated, then you do abase an incorporated soul, as you call it, in saying,
[ that her being in a body, is her being one thing with the body she is said to
be in:] for if she be one thing with the body, she has the same essence and
essential properties of a body, which I believe you will not subscribe to.
Sect* 22. Page 441. c 1* 1.


[ Should a soul by the course of nature obtain her first being without a
body, and be perfect in knowledge, she must be a complete substance, not a
soul, whose nature is to acquire perfection by the service of the senses.] 1.
You suppose what is not to be supposed; for no soul can obtain her first being
by the course of nature. 2. If she did, yet it were not repugnant to her nature
to be perfect in knowledge. 3. Perfection in knowledge will not make her a
complete substance. 4. Though the soul naturally acquires perfection by the
service of the senses, yet that hinders not her bringing in of knowledge with
her. Adams soul had perfect knowledge, as it was fit, being all the works of
God were created in their perfection, and Adam was to be the Doctor and
instructor of his posterity, and because he was created both in the state and
place of happiness, which could not subsist without knowledge; yet Adams soul
ceased not therefore to be a soul, or the form of his material body, nor did
her knowledge make her a complete substance; for in her substance she was no
more complete then our souls are in our nativity. Neither did that knowledge
which Adam brought with him, hinder his soul from acquiring, by the service of
his senses, a fuller measure of understanding; for he neither had the
knowledge of future contingencies, nor of the secrets of men's hearts, nor of
every particular individuum of every species, nor of every stone or sand in the
world, which belonged nothing to his perfection and happiness. If you will say,
that Adams soul obtained not her first being by the course of nature, I grant
it, nor was it possible she should: but by what course soever you imagine the
soul to have her being, she may bring perfect knowledge with her, and yet not
cease to be a soul. But when you say, [ That no false judgments can remain
in a Page 442.
miserable soul after her departure,] you make the damned souls in hell in
far better condition then we are here upon earth, who are subject to false
judgments, and erroneous opinions, even the best of us: but I am not of your
mind; for, doubtless, false judgments are a part of that punishment which the
wicked souls suffer in hell. But if there be no falsehood or error of
judgment in them, they must be in this point as happy as Adam was in Paradise.

[ If nothing be wanting but the effect, and yet the effect Sect. 23.
does not immediately follow, it must needs be, that it cannot follow at all.]
This inference will not follow at all; for we see many effects do not
immediately follow upon the working of the efficient, and yet follow at last.
The fire melts not the metal presently, nor the Carpenter builds the house,
nor the Sun produces corn, grass, and fruits immediately, nor does the
Physician presently cure diseases; and yet all these are efficient causes, and
actually work: the effects follow at leisure, and at last, though not
immediately. You should do well to distinguish between (...) and (...), the
working or operation, and the work it self. When the efficient is not only in
its act of entity, but of causality too, there follows immediately operation,
but not opus; the working, not the work; the effect in fieri, not in esse.
Again, you must discriminate between voluntary and natural agents; the one
operate freely, the other of necessity. The soul is doubtless a voluntary,
not a natural agent; so that the effect may follow, though not immediately.
And if in natural causes the effect follows still immediately, it is where
the effect is an essential property of the subject flowing immediately from
the form: as, heat from the fire, which notwithstanding produces not heat
immediately in water, or other subjects. Lastly, if your argument be good, they
are not to blame, who held the eternity of the world: for, they reasoned as you
do, that the cause being eternal, the effect must immediately or eternally
follow, or else not follow at all: But they should have known, that God was no
natural, but a voluntary agent; and though from eternity he did actually
exist, yet he did not from eternity actually create: The act of entity in him
was eternal, but not the act of causality.

In the conclusion of your discourse you make nature Sect 24.
play the Smith; for you say, [ If the dull percussion, which, by natures
institution, hammereth out a spiritual soul from gross flesh and blood, can
atchieve so wondrous an effect by such blunt instruments as are used in the
contriving of a man; fifty or an hundred years time, must forge out in such a
soul an excellency above the form of an abortive embryon.] You may with your
Rhetoric as soon persuade me, that Minerva was hammered out of Jupiters
brain, by the percussion of Vulcans hatchet, as that the spiritual soul can
by natures institution, or any dull percussion of hers be hammered out from
gross flesh and blood. It is not nature, but the God of nature that is the
efficient cause of the soul: It Is not natures dull percussion, but Gods active
inspiration that is the instrument: It is not flesh and blood, out of which it
is educed, but into which the immateriall soul is introduced. The soul is not
framed either in, or of the body, by the work of nature; but is inspired by
the breath of the Almighty, who in the beginning breathed into Adam the breath
of life, and so became a living soul. Nature cannot hammer out such a piece as
the soul is, though she had the help of Vulcans Cyclopes,

Brontesque, Steropesque, and nudus membra Pyracmon: She is of too pure a
quintessence, and of too sublimated an alloy, to be extracted out of such
gross materials as flesh and blood are. After the body is articulated, the
new created soul is infused, accompanied with her perfections, which she
receives not from, but communicates to the body; and so that rude mass of
flesh in the matrix becomes a man: And the same soul which makes him a man,
makes him lord over all the works of Gods hands; by this he subdues the wild
beasts, commands the earth, masters the ocean, measures the heaven, searches
into the nature of herbs, trees, metalls, mineralls, stones, etc. fore-tells
celestial changes, inventeth arts and sciences, and becomes the lively
character and express image of the Almighty. Can nature then hammer such a
divine essence out of gross flesh and blood? It is questioned whether God
himself can do it, without implying a contradiction, which is so repugnant to
him. Nature indeed extracts the gross souls of the beasts out of their gross
bodies, which, as they came of them, so they dye with them; but the reasonable
soul, being 1. the act of the body, and principle of all vital operations:
2. being she is a spirit, not capable of physical matter and quantity; for
she is all in all, and all in every part of the body: 3. being she is not
only the first act of the organicall body, but also the very agent or
efficient of the bodies organisation; therefore she cannot be material, nor
hammered out of the matter. 4. If she were corporeal, either in her being, or
in her extraction, the world could not be perfect or complete: for, as it is
made up of creatures, some merely spiritual, some merely corporeal; so, for
the complement and perfection of it, there should be some creatures partly
spiritual; partly corporeal; and these are only men. 5. The effect cannot
exceed the cause in perfection and eminency, but the soul far exceeds the
body. 6. Man had not been fit to rule over the corporeal creatures, if he
had not a spiritual soul, which only is capable of reason and dominion; and
not the bodily substance. 7. One species cannot beget another; but the soul is
a species of spirits, far different from bodily species. 8. There can be no
connection between the superior and inferior creatures, but by certain media,
by which nature passes from one extreme to another: therefore it was fit, that
the spiritual and corporeal creatures, which are the extremes, should be
united in that creature which is partly spiritual, partly corporeal; and this
is only man. 9. If the soul be not merely spiritual, she cannot enjoy the
vision of, nor friendship and familiarity with God, who is a spirit; nor can
she be capable of any spiritual gifts. The Spirit of God cannot dwell but in a
spirit; nor can that which is merely corporeal be like unto God, or see him as
he is. 10. If the souls be material, they must be mortal; for we have no
other reason to induce us to believe the souls of beasts to be mortal, but
because they are material, and educed out of the possibility of the matter.
11. As Christ proved the truth of his body, by feeding upon bodily substances,
so we prove the spirituality of the soul by her food and delights, which are
not corporeal, but spiritual things; for knowledge, wisdom, truth, virtue,
honesty, which are incorporeall things, are the souls chief delights, next to
God, in whom only she rests, and with whom only she is satisfied. Fecisti
August.
nos Domine a te, and inquietum est cor nostrum, nisi requiescat in te. 12. If
the soul be of the parents seed, or conveyed with it, the seed must needs be
man, and so a reasonable creature, and consequently capable, as being man, of
eternal joy or pain. 13. The operations of the soul are spiritual, such as
be the actions of understanding and will. The principal then of these
operations, which is the soul, cannot be corporeal; for no operation can in
dignity of entity exceed the substance whence it arises, or the power and
faculty of the soul by which she works, and which differs from the soul as
the property does from the subject; for as the potentia or faculty receives
its specification from the act, so the act has all its dignity from the
faculty: now, if the faculty be spiritual, the soul which is its subject
cannot be corporeal, for no indivisible quality can be inherent in a divisible
subject. And as the faculty receives its specification from the act, so does
the act from the object, and therefore the act by which we understand spirits,
must be spiritual: And, though in the act of conception we may fancy spirits
to be like bodies, yet in the act of judgment, we know them to be immateriall
substances, and of a far other nature or essence then bodies; and this act is
elevated above the senses, and abstracts the spiritual object from all
sensible conditions. 14. The soul knows all bodies celestial, terrestrial,
simple, mixed, etc. which she does by receiving these intelligible objects: but
she could not receive them being corporeal, if she were not free from
corporiety her self; for Intus existens prohibet contrarium: and she does not
receive them as the senses do, to wit, superficially only, but she pierces
into their inmost natures, searches out their causes, properties, and effects,
and yet higher she rises above the senses, by substracting bodies from
individuation, and all sensible accidents, which the senses cannot do; and so
she considers them in their universalities, which is a kind of spirituality:
but this she could not do, if she were not spiritual her self. 15. As the
dissolution or corruption of the body dissolveth not the soul, neither does
the constitution or generation of the body give being to the soul; for if she
has her being from the body, she must decay with the body. 16. Liberty of will
proves also the immateriality of the soul; for all materiat agents work
either by necessity, as the insensitive; or are led by instinct, as the animat,
except man, who is master of his own actions, and can promote or stay,
suspend, and incline them which way he likes best: and in this he comes near
to the Angelical nature, for, only Men and Angels have this prerogative of
free will; inferior creatures want it, because of their materiality, which
determinats them to one kind of operation, and so to a necessary working that
way; as, for the fire to heat, for a stone to fall downward. But such is the
independency, and spirituality of man's soul, that no creature, neither
Heavens, Stars, nor Angels, have any power to command or force man's will:
whereas all material entities are subject to mutation, by the influence and
working of the superior agents, to wit, the Angels, and the Heavens. 17. If
the intellect or the soul were corporeal, she should be hurt and weakened by a
vehement object, as the senses are; to wit, the eye with too much light, the
ear with too violent sounds: but no intelligible object, be it never so strong
and powerful, hurts the intellect at all, but perfects it rather. 18. If the
soul were corporeal, it would grow weak and feeble, and by degrees decay, as
the body does by old age; but we see the contrary, for the soul, even when the
body is weakest, is most active, and by old age rather perfected then weakened.
19. If the soul were corporeal, entity in its latitude could not be the
adequat object of the intellect; for the material and organicall faculties are
determinated by the matter to some particular objects: only man's
understanding, as likewise that of the Angels, have entity as entity for their
object; that is, both uncreated and created, spiritual and corporeal,
substantial and accidental entities: which could not be, if the intellect
were not spiritual. 20. That this has been the doctrine of the Church, of
Fathers, of Councels, of Philosophers and Poets, is manifest to them, who are
conversant in their writings: even Aristotle himself was of this opinion,
though a few passages in him have caused some to doubt. And the Scriptures,
lastly, are plain in this case, which we will not forbear to allege, though
we deal with a Philosopher: Solomon tells us, that the Eccles. 12.
Spirit returns to God that gave it. Christ commends Luke 23.
(...) spirit into the hands of his Father. S. Paul says, that (...) holy
Spirit bears witness with our spirits: in which Romans 8.
places, the word spirit is used, as it is opposite to a corporeal substance.
Apollinaris of Alexandria indeed held the souls to be corporeal, and Tertullian
too, but in that sense that he held God himself to be corporeal, to wit, a
true and real substance, and not imaginary or fictitious. And when we read in
Athanasius, Basil, Damascen, and some others, that the soul is a bodily
substance, we must know that they speak of her, not as she is in her self,
but as she is compared to God, to wit, that both souls and Angels are
infinitely distant from that purity and excellency which is in the Divine
Essence, in comparison of which, they are corporeal and gross substances. And
the more willingly they used to call the soul corporeal, because they would
beat down their heresy, which held the soul to be a part of the Divine
Essence; such as were Carpocrates, Cerdon, the Gnostics, Manichees, and
Priscillianists; then which heresy none can be more pernicious, for it makes
God changeable and divisible, and the soul altogether immutable,
all-sufficient, eternal, omnipotent: these then are two dangerous rocks we
must avoid, to wit, deifying of the soul with the Gnostics, and incorporating
her with the Stoics. He that holds the soul to be Particula divinae aurae,
is a Manichee; and he that believes the soul to be a body, is a Sadducee: the
one is injurious to God, the other to the soul; the one is the scholar of
Carpocrates, the other of Cleanthes or Chrysippus, but neither of Christ.

[ You will have a soul of fifty or a hundred years standing, Sect. 25.
Conclus.
to be more excellent then the soul of an Embryon.] All souls are of equal
excellency and perfection, as well the soul of an Embryon, as of Aristotle; if
you speak of the essential or specificall excellency, which is equally
communicated to all the singulars or individua of the same species: for there
is but one specificall difference by which man, and every particular man is
distinguished from the beasts, so that one man is not more reasonable then
another. It is true, that the genus may be more perfect in one species then in
another, so man is a more excellent creature then a beast, because the
difference of rationality, which is in man, is more excellent then the
irrationality of beasts: but Peter is not a more excellent man then Paul,
because the specificall difference is not more in Peter then in Paul; in
respect of some accidental differences, there may be some inequality, but
these concern nothing the nature or essence of man: even so, one soul may
have more knowledge, or other accidental perfections then another, in respect
of fitter organs, and a better disposed fantasy; otherwise the same
essential excellency is equal in all, and the soul of a fool is not less
excellent then that of Solomon, nor of an Embryon, then of him who has lived a
hundred years, except in accidental perfections, as I have said: for had the
Embryons soul the same perfection of organs, and fantasy that the soul of
Aristotle had, she would exercise the same organicall acts that he did; the
same, I say, that immediately flow from, and depend upon the soul.

[ Among the Intelligences, the lowest knows as much as Sect. 26. Page 453.
Conclus.
the highest, and yet the knowledge of the highest is infinitely more perfect
and admirable then the knowledge of his inferiors.] The nearer any
Intelligence is to God, the more perfectly does he know his will, and the more
acquainted he is with his counsels; the nearer he is to that Divine Light, the
more illumination he must needs have: but the superior Intelligences are
nearer to God then the inferior, and therefore better acquainted with his
counsels. There is a greater measure of knowledge and other perfections in the
superior, then in the inferior Intelligences, seeing the inferior work by
the power of the superior; and God, who is the God of order, not of confusion,
will have a dependency of these inferior spirits from their Superiors.
Secondly, where there is a greater similitude with God, and a more lively
representation of divine excellencies, there must be the greater knowledge; but
this similitude is greatest in the superior Intelligences. Thirdly, where are
fewest intelligible species, and more universal, there is a more excellent way
of knowledge; but such are the species of the superior Intelligences, whereas
the inferior must make use of multitudes of species, which is an imperfection
in knowledge. Fourthly, the inferior Intelligences do not understand so
exactly the nature of the superior, as the superior do themselves, therefore
their knowledge cannot be so great, as that of the higher Intelligences.
Fifthly, can the lowest Intelligence as well understand the nature of that orb,
which the supreme Intelligence moves, as he himself that by his understanding
moves it? I deny not but all the Intelligences immediately behold the Divine
Essence, yet not all in the same measure and perfection: we look upon the same
Sun that Eagles do, but much more weakly then they; therefore doubtless the
inferior Intelligences must in knowledge yield to the superior, who know
things both sooner, and more exactly: sothat what is revealed immediately by God
to the superior, is communicated by them to the inferior Intelligences. But
whereas you make [ the knowledge of these spirits equal, and yet the knowledge
of the highest infinitely more perfect and admirable,] is to me an admirable
riddle; for, can there be in equality an infinite inequality? this is one of
your contradictions, and none of the least: If their knowledge be equal, it
must be infinitely perfect in both, or else it is not equal: besides, you must
grant, there may be two infinits; which cannot be, because there must be
something in the one which is not in the other, or else they cannot be
discriminated; but there can be no infinitude where there is a defect.

I like not your phrase [ of a complete soul, completed in Sect. 27. Page 453.
Conclus.
its body;] for the soul receives no completion or perfection in or from the
body, but she brought it with her. You should rather say, that she is
incomplete in the body, because she becomes a part of the compositum, and
every part is incomplete. She was complete before she informed the body, and
she will be complete after she has forsaken the body: Complete, I say, in her
entitie, whether it be of essence or existence; and complete in her knowledge
too: for we know but in part here, and in aenigmate. The souls of beasts have
their completion from those bodies whence they have their original, without
which bodies they have no subsistence; but man's soul gives subsistence to the
compositum, whereof the body is a part: so that the soul receives no more
completion in or by the body, then an exquisite Musician has in or by his
Lute. The soul, being separated, cease to inform the body; but does not
therefore cease to be complete, no more then a Lutenist cease to be a
Musician, when he lays aside his Lute.

You will have us [ to supply what is wanting, before we Sect. 28. Page 456.
Conclus.
are called to our dreadful account: which is soon done, if we be what our
nature dictateth us to be; if we follow but reason and knowledge, our wants are
supplied, our accounts are made up.] We shall make but a sorry account, if we
follow such guides as our own nature, reason, and knowledge: These are blind
guides, which will lead us into the ditch. The Scripture tells us, that the
natural man comprehends not the things of Gods Spirit, neither can he: That
our 1 Cor. 2. 14.
natural wisdom is enmity against God; for it cannot be Romans 8. 7.
subject to the Law of God. Of our selves we cannot 2 Cor. 3. 5.
think a good thought, as of our selves. Our foolish Romans 1. 21.
hearts are darkened. Our understanding is darkened. We Ephesians. 4. 18.
were sometimes darkness. The light shined in darkness, Ephesians. 5. 8.
but the darkness comprehended it not. There is none John 1. 5.
Romans 3. 11.
that understands, none that seeks after God. We are Act. 7. 52.
stiff-necked and of uncircumcised hearts, and have always resisted the holy
Ghost. Evil trees cannot bring Mat. 7. 15.
forth good fruit. Our hearts are perverse and deceitful Jer. 17. 9.
above all things. The imaginations of the thoughts of Genesis 6. 5.
man's heart are only evil continually. We are by nature Ephesians. 2. 1.
dead in our sins and trespasses. What guides were reason, nature and knowledge
to the Jews, when Christ would have gathered them, as the hen gathers her
chickens Mat. 23. 37.
under her wings, and they would not? What fruit can wild olives, or withered
vine-branches bring out, if Romans 11.
the one be not inserted into the true and natural olive; the other into the
true Vine? Do men gather grapes of John 15. Mat. 7. Act. 16.
thistles, or figs of thorns? If God had not opened the heart of Lydia, her
own reason and nature had never opened it. God must give us a heart to
understand, and Deuteronomy. 29.
eyes to see, and ears to hear. He must take away our stony hearts, and give
us hearts of flesh, that we may walk Ezekiel. 11. 19.
in his statutes, and keep his judgments. He must give us his Law, and write
it in our hearts. And indeed, he must Jer. 30. 33.
give us ipsum velle, even Will it self; for, as by nature our understandings
are darkened, so our wills are perverted, our affections, inclinations, thoughts
and desires are all depraved. If nature and reason had been good guides, man,
who was made upright, had not found out to himself so many inventions, as
Solomon complains. Cain's posterity had not fallen from the true Church; nor
had the posterity of Noah, by Cham and Iaphet, nay, by Sem too, fallen into
idolatry. Why did God communicate his will by tradition before, and by writ
after the Law; nay, oftentimes by miraculous and extraordinary ways, if man's
reason and natural knowledge had been good guides? And how can these be but
deceitful guides in supernatural things, which fail us even in the causes of
things merely natural? Therefore that saying, Naturam ducem sequi optimum, is
not true in supernatural things, nor altogether sure, as I said, in natural.
The ship of man's soul will split against the rocks of error, if she have no
better helm to steer by, then the helm of reason. Reason is not the Star
that will bring us to Bethlehem, nor the cloud and firie-pillar that will
conduct us to Canaan. We must deny our selves, if we follow Christ. And what is
that, but to abandon nature, and natural reason in the things that concern
Christ? Peter had reason and nature, when he bid Christ, speaking of his death,
have a care of himself; but how Christ took him up for it, you know. There was
as much nature, reason and knowledge in the great Rabbis, as in the poor
ignorant Fishermen, yet these followed Christ, and forsook all; so did not the
others. The young Lawyer had too much nature and reason, which hindered him
from, not furthered him to Christ. And truly, the Gentile Philosophers
acknowledged, that reason was oftentimes clouded and enslaved to fear, anger,
love, and other passions; even so in us all, what was straight, is become
crooked; and what was alive, is dead: We are dead, says the Apostle, in
sin; what reason can be expected from a dead man? I know this is but a
similitude, yet it sufficiently proves, that until Christ has spiritually
quickened us, our reason and nature will little avail us. Our hearts are by
nature barren, as the mountains of Gilboa; fruitless, as the fig tree in the
Gospel; untame, as the wild colt, or the wild ass, that scorns the voice of
the hunter: and all this is natural to us. If Lycurgus his dog had not had
more then nature, when he forsook the flesh-pot, to run after the Hare, he
would have staid at home with his fellow, which had nothing but nature. And
even the Schoolmen acknowledge, that nature is wounded in us; to wit, our
understanding with ignorance, our wills with wickedness, our irascible faculty
with weakness, our concupiscible with lust. You had done well then not to have
named these guides, which, like ignis fatuus, will bring us out of the way. You
should have named him, who is the only John 14.
way, the truth, and the life, without whom we can do nothing, as he says
himself; and without whom there John 6.
is no coming to the Father. It Is he who first opened heaven to all believers;
who is the door, by whom we enter: and the key of David too, who opens, and
no man shuts; shuts, and no man opens. The bright morning-starre, the Sun
of righteousness, the ladder of Jacob, upon the steps or degrees of whose
merits and graces, we may climb up to heaven. The true brazen Serpent, by
looking on whom we are cured of our spiritual wounds. If then by nature you
had meant God, who is Natura naturans: If by reason, you had meant Christ, who
is (...), the reason or word of the Father, whose service John 1.
is (...), a reasonable service: If by knowledge you had meant that which is in
Christ, by which he justifies Romans 12.
many, and in respect of which he is called the Wisdom of the Father; for in
him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge: Or, had you meant that
which we have of Christ by illumination, and in respect of which, the Apostle
accounted all things lost, desiring to know nothing but Christ crucified: If, I
say, you had meant such guides, I had approved of your judgment, and I had
been your fellow-traveller; for, indeed, by these only [ our wants are
supplied, and our accounts made up:] And in this respect naturam sequi, est Deo
obsequi.

The Conclusion, wherein is asserted the Souls Immortality, and Objections
answered.
THus, Sir Kenelme, I have briefly run over your voluminous Discourses of the
nature of Bodies, and of the Souls immortality; in which, though you have
showed much wit and good language, yet your arguments and descriptions of the
Soul are not of that evidence and validity (which I have showed) as to
convince our understanding, and to vindicate our belief in assenting to all
your dictats in this your laborious Work: therefore give me leave, without
prejudice to your pains, to point briefly at such reasons and arguments, as I
conceive will be more evincing and pressing, and more prevalent, both with
Christians and Pagans, then those which you have imparted to us.

1. We will first then begin with divine Testimony, which is of greater
authority then all humane capacity. God tells Moses, Exodus 3. that he is the
God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; by which words our Savior proves the souls
immortality, in affirming, that God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living, Matthew. 22. and consequently, that these were not dead, but alive in
their souls. Solomon tells us, Eccles. 12. that the spirit returns to God
that gave it. The Scripture tells us, that Samuel's soul was alive after her
separation, 2 Samuel 28. which place, though it be controverted, whether it was
truly Samuel's soul or not; yet that apparition which was believed by the
Jews, shows, that they doubted not of the souls immortality. Christ tells
us of Lazarus his soul, that was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom, and
the rich Gluttons into hell, Luke 16. He tells us also of that rich man's
soul, which, after his barnes were full, was to be taken from him, Luke 12.
But if she perished with the body, how could she be taken away? He assures
the good thief, that his soul should be with him that night in Paradise, Luke
23. And he will not have us fear them that can destroy the body, but cannot
kill the soul, Matthew. 10. by which he intimates, that the soul is not liable
to death, as the body is.

2. We prove it by arguments grounded on the Scripture: as first, The soul of
Christ was immortal, when it was separated: therefore our souls are so. The
consequence is evident, because Christ was like to us in all things, except
sin: The antecedent no Christian will deny, except he will deny the
hypostaticall union of the Divinity and the Humanity, which was not, nor
could not be dissolved by death; for the Divinity was not separated from
Christ's body in death, much less from his soul, to which it was immediately
united. It Is true, Christ's body died, because the soul was separated, by
which the Divinity gave life to the body, to wit, effectively, not formally;
but God, being united immediately and principally to the soul, she could not
die. And though God has not so united our souls to himself, as he did
Christ's, yet he is so nearly united to our spiritual souls, being a spirit
himself, that they cannot die, except he should forsake them, which he will
not do; for he will not leave our souls, nor forsake them, nor suffer them to
see corruption. Secondly, man was made to the image of God, Genesis 1. which image
consists partly in hyperphysicall graces, as righteousness, and true
holiness; and partly in five physical gifts: 1. understanding, 2. will, 3.
dominion, 4. liberty, 5. immortality. Thirdly, man's soul was not educed out of
the earth and water, as the souls of other creatures were, but immediately
inspired by God, Genes. 1. by which it is plain, that the soul of man is of a
far more excellent condition and nature, then the souls of beasts are; and
that she has immediate dependence from God, not from the body: therefore not
mortal. Fourthly, if the soul die with the body, there can be no
resurrection; and so 1 Cor. 15.
our hope and faith are in vain. Now, there can be no resurrection of the
body, if the soul, its form, be not pre-existent: For how can the soul be
reunited to the body, or inform it again, if it be extinguished with the
body? Fifthly* the Kingdom of Christ, the joys and Luke 1. Matthew. 25.
happiness of the Saints, and the torments of the wicked are eternal:
therefore the souls of men, which are the subjects of Christ's Kingdom, and
the inheritors of joy or pain, cannot be mortal; for what subjects shall this
eternal King have, or to what end are the rewards and punishments eternal, if
the souls, which are the chief subjects, and chiefly interessed in these
rewards and pains, perish and die? Sixthly, Moses shows, that the Sun, Moon,
and Stars of heaven were made for the service of man, Deuteron. 4. which
argues, that man is of a more excellent nature then they. Now, this could not
be, if he were not spiritual and immortal in his soul; for in his body he
is inferior to them, in regard they are incorruptible, and unchangeable
substances.

3. We prove that the soul is not only immortal by Divine power, but also of
her own nature. First, she is made to the image of God, but this image, as I
have showed, consists not only in supernatural graces, but also in natural
powers and faculties of the soul. Secondly, the soul is a spirit of her own
nature, therefore of her own nature immortal; for spirits are free from the
prime qualities, which are the causes of corruption. Thirdly, the soul is a
simple uncompounded substance, therefore cannot be corruptible; for, how can
that be dissolved which was never compounded? And though Tertullian held the
materiality, yet he acknowledges De resur. c. 34.
the souls immortality to be natural to her, Salva erit anima natura sua per
immortalitatem. Fourthly, if the soul were not in her self immortal, how
should the Heathen Philosophers who knew not God, nor the Scriptures, dispute
so accurately as they do in defense of her incorruptibility? But when I say
that the soul is immortal by nature, my meaning is not that she is the
efficient cause of her own immortality, or that she is not mortal and
dissoluble by external power, for so God is only immortal, as the Apostle
shows, and as the sixth Tim. 6. Sess. 11.
Synod has defined, and some Fathers have proved; so that the Angels in this
respect are not immortal: but my meaning is, that the soul is not a subject
capable as bodies are, neither has she in her self any passive power or
possibility of dissolution.

4. The souls immortality is proved by natural and moral reasons, thus: 1.
If the soul perish, it must be either by annihilation, or dissolution: not by
the first naturally, for nothing of its own nature can be annihilated: God
indeed by his omnipotency may annihilate what he made of nothing, but there is
no entity of it self capable of nonentity, nor any action tending to it
naturally: Neither by the second, for nothing is dissolved but what had parts,
( dissolution being nothing else but the solution of one part from another) but
what is not compounded has no parts, and such is the soul, as I have showed:
For she is independent, as she is a substance, from any subject: as she is a
spirit, from any created substance; therefore dies not when the body dies:
for neither is she compounded of essential parts, which we call matter and
form; nor of integrall, which we call members or limbs: And hence it appears,
that though the souls of beasts may be free from such compositions, yet they
are not from dependence on the body, of which they came, and with which they
decay. 2. The soul is a quintessence, and of a more excellent nature then the
four elements are; and therefore as she is not of their nature and substance,
she cannot be capable of their affections and properties: but the maine quality
and property of elements is to be the subjects of generation and corruption. 3.
Such as the operation of a thing is, such is the subject whence the operation
proceeds, for operations are emanations of the substance, and flow from thence:
but the chief operation of the soul, which is understanding, is spiritual;
therefore the soul cannot be corporeal: for, if the soul were compounded of
the elements, these operations of the soul must be in the elements; for
whatsoever is in the compound, was before in its principles, these being their
acts, whose principles they are: but understanding and will were never in the
elements, nor are they capable of such operations: and so the soul is
immortal as she is incorporeall. 4. If the soul may be annihilated naturally,
then naturally she was produced of nothing; but such a production is repugnant
to the Peripatetick tenants, and so, by consequence, must such an annihilation
be. 5. Whatsoever is corruptible, is corrupted or destroyed by a contrary
agent, for without contrariety there can be neither generation nor corruption:
But in man's soul there are no contrarieties, for she can receive contrarieties
without contrariety, because she receives not contrary forms as they are in
their natural, but as they are in their intentionall being: Hence it is that
the heavens, though they be compounded, are not corruptible, because they are
not subject to contrarieties. 6. The Gentiles, by the glimmering light of
Nature, knew there were some supreme entities, by which the world was guided,
the wicked punished, and the innocent rewarded; which the Poet acknowledges:

Si genus humanum, and mortalia temnitis arma;
At sperate deos memores fandi atque nefandi.
But they saw, that for the most part, wicked men enjoyed most outward
happiness here, and good men were most wronged and oppressed; therefore they
believed the souls immortality, that wicked men might receive their due
punishment, and good men their reward, or else they must confess that their
gods were unjust. And as this reason did strongly move them, so it must us
also, to believe the souls immortality: for it is a righteous thing with God,
to render vengeance to the wicked, and 1 These. 1.
to you that are afflicted peace with us, says the Apostle. 7. It is an
undeniable Maxim, that God and Nature made nothing in vain; but if there
should be in man's soul such a desire, and so earnest an affection to
immortality, and yet not enjoy it, that desire which God has given to her had
been in vain. 8. From what proceeds the horror of conscience in wicked men,
their trembling at the report, and serious thoughts of future judgment? on the
other side, the unspeakable joys of good men, their cheerfulness, comforts,
and alacrity, even in their pains and afflictions, if they did not believe the
souls immortality, and that after this life all tears should be wiped from
their eyes? 9. God made man for some end, and that was to enjoy eternal
beatitude, which consists in the enjoyment of himself: but if the soul be
mortal, man cannot attain to his end, and so God made him to no end. 10. In
ecstasies and raptures, though the body be without sense and motion, and seems
as it were dead; yet the soul is not, but remains unperished, or
unextinguished: which does argue her immortality. 11. If the soul were mortal
as the body is, she would grow aged, feeble, and would decay, as the body does;
but we see the quite contrary, for then she is most active and vigorous, when
the body is most weak and decrepit. 12. If the soul be corruptible, she may
be separated from her existence and being: now this cannot be done, but by the
work of an external and contrary agent, which is more powerful then the
soul; but no contrary agent abolisheth one form, but by introducing another;
nor takes away one existence, but by giving another: for no action tends to a
negative, but to some thing that is positive. 13. The Gentiles, by the light of
nature, believed the immortality of the soul; hence sprung the doctrine of
transanimation among the Pythagoreans, of the Elysian fields, and places of
torment among the Poets,

Hac iter Elysium nobis, at laeva malorum Aeneid. 6.

Exercet poenas, and ad impia tartara mittit.
Hence Tully concludes, that the ancient Romans believed the souls
immortality, because they were so careful of their dead bodies, and funeral
ceremonies; Tam religiosa De Amici^.
jura majores nostri mortuis non tribuissent, si nihil ad eos pertinere
arbitrarentur, etc. So Homer acknowledges Iliad. 23.
the soul of Patroclus to live, appearing after his death to Achilles: The
word (...) by him, and imago by the Prince of Poets, is much used for separated
souls, as -- Inhumati venit imago, -- Nota major imago, -- Sub Aeneid. 1. 2. 4.
terras ibit imago, etc. The barbarous Indians assent to the souls
immortality, as Acosta, Lerius, Martyr, and others do witness: and Aristotle,
who in some places seems De Anima. l. 1. t. 13. l. 3. t. 5. l. 2. de genesis
Animal. c. 3.
to doubt, yet in other places plainly asserts this doctrine so universally
believed, that the souls can subsist by themselves, because they have distinct
affections and operations from the body, and the understanding or intellect
enters from without into the body; it is void of passibility, and is some
divine thing; and that the actions of the mind are not one with those of the
body; and so in the ninth and tenth Chapters of his Ethics, we may see how he
affirms the immortality of the soul, by her desire of beatitude. And whereas
some think that he held the soul mortal, because he says, she depends on the
fantasy in her operation; they are mistaken, for he speaks of the soul as
she is united to the body, and so she depends on the Fantasy; but yet only
objectively, instrumentally, and occasionally, as the Philosophers speak, and
not efficiently or formally; for it is true, that the Intellect receives its
species from the fantasy, and therefore in the body depends antecedently from
the fantasy: otherwise the Intellect is merely inorganicall, and no ways
depending on the fantasy, as a proper mover, and of it self, but only the
passive Intellect thus depends on the active, and the act of understanding is
altogether independent: And so when he says, that the passive Intellect is
corruptible, he means nothing else but the fantasy or cogitative faculty,
which, because it is in some sort capable of reason, he calls the Intellect, as
he calls the passive Intellect sometimes by the name of fantasy, because it is
moved by the superior Intellect. And so when he says, that remembrance and
love perish in the soul, he means that their dependence, the one from the
fantasy, the other from the appetite, perishes, because these are corporeal
faculties, and perish with the body; but otherwise recordation and love, in
respect of their entity, remain in the soul as in their subject. So likewise
when he says, that the Intellect is in the possibility of the matter, he
means that it is in the possibility of the matter in respect of introduction,
not of eduction; as the matter is capable to receive it, when by a superior
power it is thither induced. The soul then is in the possibility of the matter
by way of reception, but not by way of extraction. So likewise, when he says,
that the dead are not happy, he means the happiness of this life, which
consists in operations flowing from the compositum, of which the soul is not
capable. And lastly, when he says, that all have ending which had beginning,
he means of those things which had beginning by generation; and so it is true:
but the souls original is by creation.

Out of all then that we have said, it is apparent to any man, who is not a
wilful Saducee or Arabian, that the soul is every way incorruptible, both in
respect of grace, and in respect of nature; both in respect of external and
internal agents, both in respect of annihilation and dissolution. There is
only an obedientiall power of dissolution in the soul, as there is in Angels,
and in the heavenly bodies, by the infinite power of the Almighty; and that
rather by the negative act of his influx, then any positive act of resolving
that into nothing, which he made of nothing: so that the soul has no parts,
principles, or causes in her self of corruption, nor of annihilation. Such
reasons and arguments I take to be more evincing, then these far-fetched
notions of Sir Kenelm's, which he has clothed with too many words; whereas
Philosophical arguments sort not well with Rhetorical flourishes, and Tullian
pigments.

Now let us see what has of old been, or can of late be objected against this
known and generally acknowledged truth, by the impugners thereof. Sect 6.
Object. 1.


First they say, that the soul is immortal by grace, not by nature: To which
I answer, that she is immortal by both; by grace, in that the soul has her
dependence from God, the first and sole independent entitie, of whom, and by
whom she is what she is, and so by that entitie, as I said, she may be
deprived of that being, which of his bounty she obtained: for, though she be
free from subject and termination, yet she is not free from the causality of
the first agent. She is also immortal by nature, in that there is nothing
either in her own, or in the universal created nature, that can destroy or
dissolve her. Our bodies are destroyed either by external agents, or by
internal; the natural heat wasting our radical moisture, as a candle that is
either wasted by the wind, or by its own heat: but in the soul, which is a
spirit, there is no such thing.

Secondly, they allege Solomon's words for them, Eccles. Sect. 7. Object. 2.
3. 19. where he says, There is one end of man and beasts; as man dies, so
do they. Answ. Here is no comparison between man's soul, and that of beasts;
but between the death of the one, and of the other: so that both are liable to
death and corruption, and to outward violence, and inward distempers, which
procure death in both: and both are so liable to the law and dominion of death,
that from thence there is no redemption or returning by the course of nature:
So that it is no more possible for man to avoid death, or its dominion, of
himself, then it is for a beast. Secondly, Solomon speaks not this in his
own person, but in the person of the Atheist, who will not forgo his earthly
pleasures, because he believes not any heavenly, or any life after this.

Thirdly, they would make Job plead for them, when Sect. 8. Object. 3.
he says, there is more hope of a tree cut down, then there is of man, Job
14. Answ. Job speaks not there in his own person, but in the person of a
wicked man. Secondly, though he did speak this as from himself, yet this will
not avail our modern Saducees; for, by the course of nature, man cannot
revive again, though the tree may sprout again after it is cut: which the Poet
intimates, when he says,

Pomifer autumnus fruges effuderit, and mox Horat. lib. 4. od. 7.
Bruma recurret iners:
Damna tamen celeres reparant coelestia Lunae. Nos ubi decidimus
Quo pius Aenaeas, quo Tullus dives, and Ancus, Pulvis and umbra sumus.
Thirdly, man shall not return again to live that life, or to perform those
functions which he did in this world, when he lived here: but hence it will not
follow, that man shall not be raised by that power which gave him being at the
first: or, that he shall enjoy no life, because he shall not enjoy this life.

Fourthly, they would feign draw in Austin to their Sect. 9. Object. 4.
side, because sometimes he doubts of the manner of the souls production,
whether it is by creation or traduction. Answ. It Is true, that sometimes he
doubted of the manner how the soul entered into the body, because he doubted
of the manner how original sin is propagated: but will this prove, that
therefore he doubted of the souls immortality, which he strongly maintains
throughout all his Works? And so he does also the souls creation and
infusion, although in a few places he speaks doubtfully of traduction, so far
as it has relation to original fin; which notwithstanding is propagated,
though the soul be pure which is infused, by reason of the union betwixt the
soul and the body: for original sin is in the parent, as in the efficient;
in the seed, as in the instrument; in the soul, as in the subject; but in the
flesh by way of punishment* or rather indeed the whole man is the subject of
original sin, which, with the soul, is convayed from the parent to the child
by, and in the seed; but only dispositive, not effective; by disposing and
preparing the embryo to receive the soul, and not by way of efficiencie,
producing the soul: and so, upon the infusion of a pure soul into the
prepared and disposed embryo, the whole man is made up, who becomes the subject
of original sin, by reason of the union of the soul and corrupted flesh; and
in that he is the issue of such a parent, the branch of such a stock, which
has derived corruption in and by the seed, and fitted or disposed the body to
receive a soul, though pure in it self, yet upon the union impure and
corrupted, and even in it self actually void of original righteousness, and
inclinable or potentially subject to guilt or sin. As a leprous father begets a
leprous son, which leprosy is not in the seed actually, but potentially and
dispositive; so the privation of righteousness is in the seed actually, but
concupiscence, or inclination to sin, dispositive.

Fifthly, they tell us, that man's soul cannot conceive Sect. 10. Object. 5.
any thing, yea not a spirit, but under the notion of a body; therefore she
is corporeal, and consequently mortal. Answ. Though she were corporeal, yet
is she not therefore mortal; for, the Sun, Moon and Stars are bodies, and
yet incorruptible. Secondly, though the soul, being in the body, understands
by the outward senses and fantasy, yet the act of understanding is
inorganicall, and that not only when she is separated, but while she is in
the body: though then in the body she stands in need of the fantasy,
without the body she shall not need it. Thirdly, the soul not only
understands bodies under material notions, but searches deeper then any
corporeal faculty can do, even into the natures, forms, and abstruse
principles of bodies; so that here she understands the quiddities and essences
of things, which a bodily power cannot do.

Sixthly, they say, that the soul can suffer, to wit, by Sect. 11. Object. 6.
grief, pain, etc. therefore she is corruptible. Answ. As the soul is a
spirit, so her sufferings are spiritual: all suffering supposes not
corruptibilitie, except it be caused by the prime elementary qualities, of
which the soul is not capable. Secondly, there are some sufferings so far from
being destructive, that they are rather conservative and perfective; such are
the motions of the heavens. Thirdly, the soul suffers not, but by her self in
grief: for by her own agencie she makes her self a patient; by her thoughts
and knowledge of grief and sorrows she grieves and sorrows, and so becomes
a sufferer.

Seventhly, they tell us, that immaterialitie is no argument Sect. 12. Object.
7.
of the souls immortality; for spiritual graces, which are infused into us,
are immateriall, yet corruptible. Answ. These graces are accidents; we speak
of the soul, which is a substance. Secondly, these graces are not corrupted by
us physically, but metaphorically, or morally only.

Eighthly, the desire of immortality, say they, is the Sect. 13. Object. 8.
affection of the whole man, not of the soul alone, and yet man is mortal:
therefore they will not have us infer the souls immortality, from her
desire thereof. Answ. Though this desire be subjectively in the whole man, yet
it is originally in the soul. Secondly, it is a good argument to prove, that
something is immortal in man, though not all, because he so earnestly desires
immortality. Thirdly, this desire is in man only, and not in beasts; which
shows, that he, not they, has an immortal soul. Fourthly, though the beasts
strive to preserve their natural being, yet man only aims at a supernatural
being, as having a more divine knowledge and appetite then other creatures are
capable of. Fifthly, how much man desires immortality, is plain by the many
pyramides, obelisks, triumphant arches, mausolets, brass, and marble statues,
prodigious palaces, books, and other monuments; for which who would care, if
he thought his soul should perish with the beasts?

Ninthly, man's understanding perishes after death; Sect. 14. Object. 9.
therefore the soul cannot be immortal. Answ. Though the act of understanding
did cease, yet the power remains, and consequently the soul, the subject of
that power. for actually we understand not many things here, by reason of some
defect in the organs; yet the soul cease not therefore to be, nor the
faculty of understanding to be none. Secondly, the soul does actually
understand, and more excellently, being separated, then she did in the body;
because not only does she retain the species which she carried out with
her, but also she receives an addition of new species, by divine
illumination. Thirdly, though she understands now by the fantasy, yet
hereafter, by reason of new illumination, she shall need neither fantasy,
external object, nor any corporeal organ. Fourthly, the knowledge which the
soul shall have after death, shall be natural to the soul, though it proceed
from God; for he is the author both of natural and supernatural light.

These are the chief weapons, by which the Souls Sect. 15.
Antagonists strive to wound and kill her; which are of no more validity to
hurt her, then that dart, which old feeble King Priamus flung at Pyrrhus, was
able to hurt him:

-- telum imbelle sine ictu
Conjecit, summo quod protinus aere pependit.
These arguments make a sound, but have no strength: These Arabian Pigmies will
never be able with such engines to overthrow the souls immortality, which is
the strong Fort and Citadell of every good Christian in his afflictions. Let
there be but way given to this doctrine of the Saducees, we must bid farewell
to laws and civility, nay, to Religion and Christianity. We must bid adieu to
virtuous actions* and to all spiritual comforts. Christ died, the Apostles
labored, the Martyrs suffered, but all in vain, if the soul be mortal. Our
faith, our hope, our preaching and reading, our restraint from pleasures, our
sorrowing for sins, our taking up of our cross, and following of Christ, is
all in vain, if the soul be mortal: And, in a word, we Christians are of
all men the most miserable, if the soul be mortal. Why did Abel offer
sacrifice, Abraham forsake his country, Joseph forbear his mistress, Moses
refuse the pleasures of Pharaoh's Court? And why have so many thousands endured
mockings, scourgings, bonds, prisonment, stoning, hewing asunder, murdering by
the sword? Why would they wander up and down in sheeps skins and in goats
skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, if the soul be mortal? What
needs Cain fear to kill his brother, Joseph to lie with his mistress, Saul to
persecute the Church, and Felix to tremble at the mention of a future
judgment, if the soul be mortal? Admit but such Lucretian doctrine, you may
shake hands with heaven and hell.

Esse aliquos Maneis, and subterranea regna, Iuven. Sat. 2.

Et contum, and Stygio ranas in gurgite nigras,
Atque una transire vadum tot millia cymba,
Nec pueri credunt, nisi qui nondum are lavantur.
Here I had ended, but that I have now lighted on a Sect. 16. Man's mortality.
Pamphlet by chance, the Scribler of which was ashamed to put to his name, his
cause is so bad. He undertakes to prove the souls mortality, but so weakly,
that I should lose too much time, and spend too much paper to answer him
according to his folly: For there is nothing in it but the froth of a luxurious
wit, wantonly abusing Scripture, and obtruding a cloud in stead of Juno,
shadows of reason in stead of solid arguments: As first, when he will prove
the death of the soul out of Scripture, he brings those places that speak of
the metaphorical or spiritual death of the soul, which is the defiling of
her by sin, and her separation from God; and so he confounds the life of
nature, of grace, and of glory, as he does death spiritual and corporal.
Secondly, he abuses the Synecdochicall speeches in Scripture, when he will
have those phrases which are spoken of man, to be understood of the soul and
body dis-junctively: And so, when the Scripture speaks of man's dissolution
and death, he will have the soul die as well as the body; but by this means
he must affirm, that the soul eats, drinks, plays, sings, weeps, because
these things are spoken of men. What? were the souls of the Egyptians drowned
in the red sea, and the souls of the Chaldeans burned in the fiery furnace, or
the soul of the disobedient Prophet torn by the Lion, because these men died
such deaths? Many things are spoken of the whole man, but not wholly: the
total compositum is the subject of such predications, but not totally. Christ
died, was buried, was borne, was crucified; and yet his Divinity suffered none
of these things. He is a bad Divine, that knows not, that by the
communication of properties, that is spoken of the person of Christ, which is
proper only to either of his natures; and so that is spoken of man, which is
proper only to either of his essential parts. Thirdly, he confounds the act
and the habit, concluding that the habit is lost, because the act ceafeth; as
that there is no habit or faculty of reason in a mad man, because the act of
reasoning is hindered: As if you should say, that a Musician has lost his
skill in Music, when he cease to play. Fourthly, some old objections he
has inserted, which we have already sufficiently answered; and the rest of
the passages in his Pamphlet are so frivolous, that they are not worth the
answering, or reading: for, Magno conatu, magnas nugas dicit. And so, he that
shall diligently read this former Discourse of ours, and shall make use of
these four Observations which now I have set down, will find that this
irreligious Rapsodie of his, is but froth, a vapor, or one of his dreams, Par
levibus ventis, volucrique simillima somno: Virgil.
and which I think will little prevail with any rational man, much less
with him who is truly sanctified with grace. For he that was led merely by
reason, confessed, that the fatal hour of death was the last hour to the
body only, not to the soul. Decretoria illa hora, non est animo suprema sed
corpori. Seneca.
For, even reason will teach us, that the soul, which in her self is
immortal, (I exclude not here the general, but the special or miraculous
concourse of the Almighty,) may naturally subsist by her self after separation;
for if her subsistence from the body were violent, then her return to the body
should be natural; as, if the holding of a stone in the air be violent, the
falling down of that stone, upon the removing of the impediment, must needs be
natural: But her returning to the body, is an not miraculous, and of
supernatural power; for though the soul, as she is the form of the body,
has a natural propensity, or innate appetite to a reinforming of, or reunion
with the body, yet is she not again conjoined with the body, but by a special
and supernatural work of God in the resurrection. Neither again must we
think that the soul subsists after separation, by any special or
supernatural power, for then we shall make the soul so subsisting, of no
better metal then the iron so swimming on the water, both being sustained not
by their own, but by a special and miraculous power; and by this means the
soul of a dog may as well subsist after death, as the soul of a man: but he
that thinks so, that the soul has no other being after this life, may be in
name a Christian professor, but is indeed a Cynick Philosopher, or Epicuri de
grege porcus, fitter to dwell in the Isle of dogs, then among men. Therefore,
as it was natural for the child's soul to subsist in the mothers womb, and it
is as natural for the same soul to subsist without it; so is the subsistence
of the same soul in and without the body essential and natural to her, and
not violent or supernatural.

But, to leave these men, whose souls are fitter Sect. 17.
to dwell with Nebuchadnezzars in a beasts body, then in their own; I will
conclude this Discourse with an acknowledgement and confession of that solace,
and true comfort which I take in these dismal and calamitous times in which we
live, from the consideration of my souls immortality; that, however she be now
tossed upon the proud and lofty billows of the turbulent sea of afflictions in
this life, with Noah's Arc, yet a higher mountain then those of Ararat is
prepared for her to rest upon; and however this weary Dove flutter upon these
boisterous waters, that she can find no rest for the soales of her feet, yet
she sees a window in that celestial Arc which is above, ready open to receive
her. Christ has not in vain gone to prepare a place for us; he has prepared
it, that we may enjoy it: and to what end should he shed his blood for our
souls, and redeem them at so dear a rate, if they be mortal, and can not
enjoy that which they long after, as earnestly as the Heart brayeth after the
rivers of water? Does God mock us, when by his Prophet he tells us of fullness
of joy in his presence, and at his right hand pleasures for evermore? Is God
our Father, and Heaven our Inheritance, and must we be put off from the
enjoyment of either? We are here miserable Pilgrims and strangers, if, after
our tedious journey, we have no other home to rest in but a cold and stinking
grave, and no other companions but worms: better is the condition of beasts,
then of Christians. Surely the place of our future rest should not be called
the Land of the living, if our souls there must die. And why should the Angels
be so careful of us here, if they must be debarred of our company hereafter?
In vain are our souls fed here with the Bread that came down from Heaven, if
they must not enjoy that same bread again in heaven. Our condition will be far
worse then that of the Prodigals, if we shall be fed with husks here, and not
have access, when we return by death, to eat bread in our Fathers house,
where is such exuberant plenty. Can Christ, the Bridegroom of our souls,
suffer himself to be perpetually separated from his Bride, whom he has bought
with so high a price as his own blood? Our life is a warfare, what
encouragement have we to fight the good fight, if we enjoy not the Crown of
righteousness? Has Christ no other reward for his soldiers but a crown of
thorns? then indeed we fight, as one that beats the air; and we were
better, with Caligula's soldiers, spend our time in gathering of shells and
pebblestones, then fight under the standard of such a General. But indeed we
need not fear, for he that permitted the soul of the penitent thief into
Paradise, and by the ministry of his Angels conveyed the soul of Lazarus into
Abraham's bosom; and when himself gave up the Ghost, recommended his soul
into the hands of his Father, will not leave our souls in hell, nor will he
suffer his holy ones to see corruption. Though the shell of our bodies be
broken, the precious kernel of our souls shall not be lost: these earthen
pots may crack, but the jewels in them shall be preserved: There lies a hid
Mannah within (not our golden, but) our earthen pots, which is not capable of
worms and corruption. Let that proud insulting Conqueror, who rides upon the
pale horse, bruise the satchels of our bodies (as the Tyrant did that of
Anacharsis) unto dust, yet over our souls, which are our selves, he has no
power. Be not dismayed; though our mistress, Nature, strip us of the garment of
our body, as Potiphars wife did Joseph, yet of our* souls she cannot rob us:
she gave us the garment, it is her own, she may challenge it; but the soul
was no gift of hers, she has no title to it, she cannot claim it. Diseases,
infirmities, and injuries, like so many Sodomites, may beset these houses of
our bodies; but they cannot injure our souls, which are the Angels lodged
within us. The celestial fire of our souls shall never be extinguished,
though the temples of our bodies in which they burn shall be destroyed. That
fire which consumed the Temple of Peace at Rome, did no hurt to the Palladium
that was in it; neither shall the conflagration of our bodies in a Calenture or
Burning-feaver, prejudice or hurt our souls. The Vestall Virgins were not more
careful to rescue the Palladium from the flame, then the good Angels, our
ministering spirits, shall be to convey our souls out of these flames, unto a
place of refreshing. Therefore my soul shall not be dismayed, though she be
carried in this weak and leaking ship of an infirm body, on the waves of the
Red sea of persecution; for even from hence she smells by faith the sweet odours
of her heavenly Arabia, though as yet with her bodily eyes she cannot see it.
The hot fiery furnace of affliction shall no more consume and annoy her, then
the flame did consume the fiery bush, or the fiery furnace of Babylon did the
three Children. The Presteres live in the fire, and are not burned; fresh
waters spring out of the salt Sea, and yet are not thereby infected; nor are
the fishes salt which live in salt water: neither shall our Soul either suffer
by sickness in the body, or die with the body; but after she has fought the
good fight, like a Conqueror or Emperor, she shall be carried out of this
campus Martius upon the shoulders, not of Senators, but of Angels. And as an
Eagle flew out of the funeral pile when it was set on fire, leaving the body
of the Emperor to be consumed; so shall our souls fly up unto their Maker,
leaving their bodies to be wasted by time and corruption. For, as it is
impossible for the body to die till the soul forsake it, which is the life of
it; so much more impossible is it for the soul to die, until God, who is her
life, forsake her: and that will never be, till God himself cease to be; for
he has promised never to forsake us, his love like himself is unchangeable. A
mother may forget the fruit of her womb, fathers and mothers may, and will
forsake us, but the Lord will never forget or forsake us; but when friends, and
all leave us, he will then receive us: therefore let our souls magnify the
LORD, and let our spirits rejoice in God our SAVIOR.

FINIS.

