RELIQUIAE RALEIGHANAE, BEING DISCOURSES AND SERMONS ON SEVERAL SUBJECTS.

By the Reverend Dr Walter Raleigh, Dean of Wells, and Chaplain in Ordinary to
His late Majesty King Charles the First.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Black Bull in
Cornhil, over against the Royal Exchange. MDCLXXIX.

Imprimatur,

Geo. Thorp, Rmo in Christo P. and D. Do Gulielmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacris
domesticis.

Sept. 11mo. 1678.

A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE AUTHOR.
IF the Reader be desirous to know who the Author of these Discourses was, he
may be pleased to take this short, but true account, which I have from those
who were well acquainted with him. He was second Son of Sir Carew Raleigh, a
Gentleman of an ancient Family in Devonshire; descended, as appears by a
Geneology I have in my hands, from John de Raleigh, a great man in the time of
William the Conqueror, who Knighted him in the 2d year of his Reign. His
Mother was the Relict of Sir John Thynne of Longleate in Wiltshire, and
Daughter of Sir William Wroughton, Vice Admiral under Sir John Dudley
(afterward Duke of Northumberland) in the expedition: against the Scots, 1544.
in the latter end of the Reign of Henry the 8th.

Concerning both which persons I shall forbear to say any thing; because, if it
be an honor to be related to those that are Great and Worthy, there is nothing
greater of this kind, in my opinion, that can be said of him, than that he was
Nephew to the famous Sir Walter Raleigh: whom a late Author Antiquitates
Univers. Oxon L. ii. p. 109.
has honored with this Character, that He was greater than the examples of
times past, and the imitation of those to come: whose History, I may add, which
(as Casaubon, in his Preface to Polybius, says a History ought to be) is a
kind of practical Philosophy, will make his name immortal among us.

The place and time of his Birth I cannot certainly learn, nor where he was
bred; till he came to Winchester School: where he made such proficiency, that
he was ripe, I am informed, very early for the University. And being sent to
Oxford was made a Gentleman Commoner in Magdalen College; a famous Nursery of
many great men. Among whom we should have found, no doubt, this Doctor placed,
in the late Antiquities of that University; had these Discourses come out soon
enough, to have given the Author of that work, occasion to make a better
inquiry after him, than it is in my power to do. Who can learn nothing further
of him there, than that he was admired for his Disputations in the Schools even
when he was an Under-graduate; and having taken his Degrees of Batchelour and
Master of Arts, was made Junior of the public Act: which he performed with
exceeding great applause. For beside the quickness of his wit, and ready
elocution; he was master of a very strong reason: which won him the familiarity
and friendship of those great men, who were the envy of the last Age, and the
wonder of this, the Lord Falkland, Dr. Hammond, and Mr. Chillingworth. The last
of which was wont to say (and no man was a better Judge of it than himself)
that Dr. Raleigh was the best Disputant, that ever he met withal.

And indeed there is a very great acuteness easily to be observed in his
writings: which would have appeared more if he had not been led by the common
vice of those times, to imitate too far a very eminent man, rather than follow
his own excellent Genius. A fault that ought to be carefully avoided by those
that study Eloquence; in every kind of which, as Quintilian observes ^. x.
Instit. C. 2.
there is something which is common to all Eloquence, id autem imitemur, quod
commune est, and that alone is the thing which ought to be imitated.

But in that way which he took, his Fame grew so great, that several of the
Nobility were desirous to entertain him into their Families: And at last
William Earl of Pembroke gained him for his Chaplain. With whom he had not
lived above two years, before he became his kind Patron^ bestowing on him a
very good Benefice, in a plentiful Country, at Chedzoy in Sommersetshire. Where
being settled he took to Wife a Daughter of Sir Ralph Gibbs, Sister to the
Reverend Dr. Charles Gibbs, one of the present Prebendaries of St. Peter's
Westminster. By whose affectionate care and diligence these Papers were
retrived and preserved from perishing: as a great many others are like to do;
unless they, into whose hands they are fallen, will be so kind and just as to
send them to him, or to the Bookseller, or undertake themselves to give a
faithful account of them to the world.

Who will be glad, no doubt, to see more of the fruits of so happy a brain,
especially those of his Maturer years. When he grew Famous at Court, as he had
been before in the University and Country; and was made Chaplain in Ordinary to
King Charles the Martyr. Before whom some of these Sermons were Preached;
particularly that upon Matthew. vi. 33. which it appears by the Conclusion, was
the last Sermon His Majesty heard before he began his Journey into Scotland.
From whence being returned, he bestowed upon the Doctor, the Deanery of Wells:
intending to confer farther favors on him, had not the unnatural War which
presently after broke out, put an untimely end to both their lives.

Never, I think, was any Nation so distracted, and perfectly beside it self, as
this of ours in those miserable times; when they could not see the happiness
they enjoyed in so excellent a Prince as God had set over us, and in such Pious
and Learned Divines as he had about him: against whom they perpetually
declaimed in the most abusive Language, deprived them of all their Estates, and
at last barbarously Murdered some of them, together with their Royal Master.
Such, I am sure, was the fate of this Doctor; who being sequestered, and
hurried from one Prison to another, and still there immured, where several
Prisoners dyed of the Plague, was at last shut up in his own House at Wells,
which they had turned into a Gaol: and after he had escaped the Pestilence in
many places, was vilainously Murdered by him, who was appointed to be his
Keeper. The manner of it, was thus:

The Committee of that County coming to sit at Wells, the Doctor desired to be
permitted to speak with them; hoping to gain so much liberty as to go to
Chedzoy to his Wife and Children, in order to settle some affairs which nearly
concerned them. In which reasonable request meeting with a denial, though a
Gentleman of a thousand pound a year offered to be bound for his return, at the
time they should appoint him, he could not but expostulate the matter with
them: and happened to say, among other things, it was very hard that he should
be refused a courtesy from them which several other persons obtained without
them; who had liberty to go home, some for a week, some for a month, when they
pleased. Which in stead of mollifying the Committee toward him, only sharpened
their anger toward the Jailer; whom they chid for his remissness, and
threatened to turn out of his place, if he took upon him any more to grant this
license to any Prisoner. This rebuke stuck in the fellows stomach; and the next
morning entering into the Doctors Chamber, when he was writing to his Wife, to
let her understand he could not procure leave to come and see her; he clapped his
hand upon the Paper, and demanded a sight of it. To which the Doctor fairly
replied, that he should with all his heart, if he had any authority from the
Committee to require it: otherwise he might be satisfied with his protestation
that it was nothing else but a Letter to his Wife, to acquaint her with the
denial the Committee had given him, as he knew well enough already. Whereupon
the Keeper began to endeavor to take it from him by force; but the Doctor
being too strong for him, wrested it out of his hands. Which being done, the
fellow stepped back, drew his Sword, ran it immediately into the good Man's Belly;
and gave him an incurable Wound: of which though after a few days, he dyed, his
Murderer notwithstanding was suffered to live. And as the Author of a Book
called Ruina Angliae Better known perh^ps by the name of Mercurius Rusticus,
an. 1647.
informs us, the Committee were so little affected with the business, that
afterward they turned the Doctors Wife and Children out of doors; and forced
his Son to fly the Country, for that he would have prosecuted the Law against
his Fathers Murderer. Whether that be exactly true or no, I am not able to say;
but this may be relied on (coming from an undoubted hand) that though his Wife
Prosecuted him two Assizes together, she could not get him brought to a Trial:
But she falling sick before the third came, and not able to attend it; then the
fellow appeared and was acquitted; there being no body ready to make good the
charge against him.

Thus fell this Excellent person; in whose writings I beseech all the Authors
and Abetters of the late Confusions, who still survive, to see what kind of men
they persecuted in their blind rage: that it may be a warning to them for ever,
and they may give their Posterity a charge, to beware how they let loose the
like furious passion in time to come. By which, as an unknown Writer speaks
concerning another of those Sufferers (Dr. Stuart) they either robbed
themselves of those holy men, and means, which God in his mercy had given them:
or else exchanged (...) Gold for Counters, the Cherubins of the Temple for the
Calves of Bethel.

There was a monument, I have been told, designed, if not promised, for the
preservation of his Memory. But I think now this Book is all he is like to
have; and it is the best perhaps that can be made for him, because made by
himself. Who was a Master-workman even in his Youth; when several of these
pieces, it is evident, were composed: And had been a far greater, if he had not
fallen, as I said, into a way, wherein his Masterly wit was so much confined,
that at last he broke out of it. As appears by his Discourse of Oaths, which is
strong and nervous, clear and judicious, as well as full of spirit and life:
and may be sufficient to show what he could have done, if he had set himself to
it, in other Arguments, and handled them in the same manner, that the rest of
his Friends before named did those wherein they were engaged.

To which Friends of his, I should have added two other Eminent persons; one of
which is dead also, the late Earl of Clarendon Lord High Chancellor of
England; the other yet living, the Right Reverend Father in God the present
Lord Bishop of Winchester. Who was a great lover of this Doctor, and still
preserves, I am confident, so kind a remembrance of him, that, if he had not
wholly sequestered himself to the thoughts of another world, he might be easily
persuaded to bestow such a Character of him, as no man now alive but himself
(who in a great old Age retains a mavelous vivacity of spirit, and sharpness
of wit) is able to give.

Instead of which I have thought good to conclude this Preface with the
following Epitaph which an Admirer of his, in the other University, was pleased
to make for him.

ELOGIUM Viri Desideratissimi RALEIGHEI Doctoris S. S. T. and Decani Wellensis,
pro Causa Regis and Ecclesiae a Custode suo misere trucidati.
SI commune Regni bustum, unam reliquit lachrymam,
Unius (quaeso) rore lachrymulae spargito hos Cineres, Viator.
Tum memor Hospitis sui, hoc Marmor extillabit alteram.
Non hic vilis harpago sectae neotericae
Ritus inducens novos, veteres ut liguriret reditus:
Sed Raleigheus jacet (O nimis verecundus lapis!
Hic jacet spreta Majestas, Nobilitas, Lex and Humanitas)
Qui dum oppugnat dedecus hoc ultimum Mundi:
Et delirantis Naturae informem sobolem.
Sociavit suos cum patriae Cineribus.
Verum, quot Carceres honestavit prius? Magnum Luminare
Quoties sub modio conclusum est? Tandem, Nefas!
Extinctum a potestate tenebrarum.
Vastata Ecclesia, nequiit stare diutius
Hoc Templum Spiritus Sancti:
Quin infremuit Carcerarius, suspicatus and Carcerem
Tali Hospite nunc iri consecratum.
Ergo evaginavit gladium, and ferri clave Sacrilega
Apperuit, aut effregit fores
Emisitque Captivum jam emeritum,
Pervagari per campos beatae lucis and aeterna prata.
Uno ictu duplici liberavit custodia;
Esuo and e corporis sui Ergastulo.
Sic nempe Noster hic
A carceribus transiens ad optatam metam
Cupiit dissolvi and esse cum Christo.
TITLES of the SERMONS, with their ORDER, NUMBER, and TEXTS.
SERMON I. A Discourse of Oaths. Folio 1. Jerem. iv. 2. And thou shall Swear,
The Lord lives, in Truth, in Judgment and in Righteousness.



SERMON II. Of the Duty of Man. fol. 47. Eccles, xii. 13. Let us hear the
Conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his Commandments. For this
is the whole Duty of Man. For God, etc.



SERMON III. Of Christ's coming to Judgment. fol. 83. Matt. xvi. 27. For the
Son of Man shall come in the glory of his Father with his Angels: And then he
shall reward every Man according to his works.



SERMON IV. Of the Original of Wars. fol. 120. James iv. 1. From whence come
Wars, and Fightings among you; Come they not hence, even of the Lusts that war
in your Members?



SERMON V, VI. A Discourse of Election and Reprobation. fol. 151, 174. Hosea
xiii. 9. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thine help,



SERMON VII. The way to Happiness. fol. 206. Matt. vi. 33. But seek ye first
the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and all these things shall be added
unto you.



SERMON VIII. A Preparation for the Holy Communion. fol. 236. 1 Cor. xi. 28.
But let a Man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of
that Cup.



SERMON IX, X, XI. On Christmas day. fol. 268, 295, 324. I. on Luke ii. 10,
11. And the Angel said unto them, Fear not: for behold, I bring you tidings of
great joy which shall be to all people.

For unto you is born this day in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ
the Lord.

II. on Gal. iv. 4, 5. When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his
Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law:

That he might redeem them that are under the Law, that we might receive the
adoption of Sons.

III. on Esaias liii. 8. And who shall declare his Generation?



SERMON XII, XIII. Two Funeral Sermons. fol. 356, 384. I. For the Mother, on
Psalm. cxlii. verse ult. Bring my Soul out of Prison, that I may give thanks
unto thy Name; which thing if thou will grant me, then shall the Righteous
resort unto my Company.

II. For the Daughter, on Rom, viii. 10. And if Christ be in you, the Body is
dead because of Sin: but the Spirit is life because of Righteousness.



A DISCOURSE OF OATHS.
SERMON I. Upon JER. iv. 2.
And thou shall swear, The Lord lives, in Truth, in Judgment and in
Righteousness.
THough all Sins be dangerous unto the Soul of man, and none so small as may be
neglected, since a man may be choked under a heap of Sand, as well as crushed
to death by the fall of a Tower; yet the greater a sin is, and the more general
it is grown, the greater danger and more inevitable destruction does attend it.
And therefore it does require our chief labor and diligence both to avoid such
in our selves, and to give the best notice we can unto others of the peril. By
negligence the least Leak may drown the Ship: but the Pilot's special care is
of the Rock, on which if his Vessel fall, it certainly splits.

Now of all the Sins whereunto the Corruption of man is subject, I think there
is scarce any so great and so common, so great in it self, and so common in the
world, so injurious unto the Majesty of God, and so frequent amongst the Sons
of men, as the sin of Swearing: The vain and irreverent using, rather abusing
of that Sacred Name in our ordinary speech, which if well considered we should
tremble but to think on. A sin which the Wise man tells us, will bring a Curse
upon the house, where it is used; and it is no less likely to bring a Curse
upon a whole Land and Nation where it is universal. So that this impiety of all
other, as it brings with it a greater and more general danger: so it calls for
from all, especially from all us whom it most concerns, a great and universal
care: All endeavors should run forth to the quenching of a common fire.

It is indeed often galled and sharply taxed from such places as these,
obviously and by the way: But the point contains much, and will require a set
discourse of that and nothing else: for we cannot be too industrious against a
public mischief. For which reason I have now made it the subject of my
discourse, as it is of this Verse: Wherein you have the whole Nature and full
doctrine of an Oath, and how prepared, it may be wholesome, which otherwise
used is deadly poison. For an Oath is not simply and utterly unlawful, my Text
says, Thou shall swear, but then it must be qualifyed with the due form and
matter and manner: The form must be [ As the Lord lives,] that is, in the Name
of the living Lord: The matter [ Truth and Righteousness:] the manner or
modification [ Judgment:] Thou shall, etc.

But before you may fully apprehend the division of the Text, it will be
requisite that I show you some divisions of an Oath, for there are diverse sorts.

There is a bare and simple Oath: and there is an Oath, mixed with a Curse and
execration. The bare and simple Oath, is only a plain and naked contestation,
wherein we call God to witness of what we say: The execratory, is, when we bind
over and oblige either our selves, or something dear unto us, unto some
notorious punishment, if so be that be not true which we say, as when one
swears by his Life, Soul, Salvation, and the like.

Again there is an Oath wherein there is a manifest and express assumption of
the Name of God, which needs no instance, we know it too well, by daily and
fearful example; And there is an Oath wherein God is called to record, tacitly
and implicitly, under the Name of those Creatures wherein his Glory does
especially shine and appear: So he that swears by heaven, swears both by
heaven and by him that dwells therein. And lastly, which is specially
material, There is an Oath Assertory, and an Oath Obligatory. Assertory, when
we affirm or deny any thing, past or present: Obligatory, when we promise or
threaten something to come. Which being observed, you may easily make a fit
Application of the three terms in my Text; Truth, Judgment and Righteousness:
Truth unto an assertory Oath: Righteousness, unto a promissory: Judgment and
discretion unto both; For which cause it is placed in the midst between both.
For an Assertory oath, must be True, lest we swear falsely: A Promissory,
Righteous, lest we swear to do unjustly; and both with discretion and judgment,
lest we swear lightly and rashly. Thou shall swear, etc.

So then we may in some case swear; but the Oath must have the right form, it
must be made in the name of the Lord: And the due matter, in Truth if
Assertory, in Righteousness if Promissory: And then in a discreet manner, with
premeditation and judgment in both. Wherein you see, how we may swear, and how
we may not swear: In Truth, Judgment and Righteousness we may swear: but
falsely, unjustly, and rashly and vainly we may not swear. Of these points in
their order, beginning with the first, The Lawfulness of an Oath, and that in
case a man may swear; Thou shall, etc.

1. There are not wanting some and those even amongst the Fathers themselves,
who have censured all Oaths (though permitted by the Law, yet) as condemned by
the Gospel, which contains they say a Doctrine of more than legal perfection:
of this opinion were St. Basil, and Theophylact, and it is the error of the
Anabaptist unto this day. Others have thought that an Oath may be lawful under
the Gospel, but then only before a Magistrate, and when it is required by such
as have authority thereunto. But the common and more general opinion both of
the Ancient Fathers and Modern Divines is, that it is not simply unlawful for a
private man to swear, and in a private action, when some urgent cause, either
the honor and Glory of God, or some great good and benefit of our Neighbor
does call for it at our hands; since it is not the use of an Oath, but the
abuse that makes it evil: for that it is both lawful and good in it self, in
its own nature and kind, is evident, if we consider either the original from
whence it springs, or the end for which it was ordained. The original is from
Faith, and a faith of the knowledge, omniscience and power of God, for it is
grounded upon a persuasion, that God understands and knows whether we speak the
Truth, and is able to take revenge of us it we speak otherwise: an oath being
nothing else but the calling of God for a witness of our speech, and a Judge
against us if we speak untruly, for a further Confirmation of such things as
have no other humane witnesses or proofs. And the End is no less profitable
than the Original Religious; for it is ordained to no other purpose but to give
an assurance of the Truth in question, and so to determine dissentions and
controversies among men, as the Author to the Hebrews testifies, for an Oath,
says he, is an end of all strife, Heb. vi. 16. For which reasons, especially
the first, it is, that an Oath wherein God is confessed and acknowledged as an
immutable and infallible Truth in himself, so a Judge and revenger of falsehood
in others, as being the only searcher of the heart, that alone can bring to
light the secrets that lie hid in the Closets thereof; for this cause I say, it
is, that an Oath if rightly performed, both is, and in Scripture is often
accounted, as a part of the very service and worship of God. And therefore in
the vi. of Deuteronomy. 13. it is set down, side by side, with the fear and service of
the Lord, wherewith it is made but one Commandment, Thou shall fear the Lord
and serve him, and swear by his Name. So Esaias prophesying of the Vocations of
the Assyrians and Egyptians unto the same Covenant and worship of God with
Israel, expresses it in these terms, They shall all speak the language of
Canaan, and swear in the Name of the Lord, as if the swearing in his Name were
a sufficient professing of the Religion he commands, Esa. xix. 18. yea the very
Heathen themselves did acknowledge it an honor due only unto the Gods.

-- Praesens Divus habebitur
Augustus, etc.
we honor thee Augustus when thou art present as a God, erecting Altars
whereon we swear by thy Name. So that an Oath is not only good in it self, but
a special Act of Religion, and therefore cannot be evil unless irreligiously
used. And though this religious use be more evident and solemn in Oaths that
are public, yet it may be no less truly though not so manifestly in others,
that are private, if performed with a due respect unto God, and out of a
Charity to our Neighbor; which is then done, when reverent respect unto God in
him that makes the Oath, and the utility of him whose infirmity requires it, do
meet together. And though the other have a stronger foundation by precept, yet
this wants not evidence in Scripture, and frequency of example; for if the Oath
between Abraham and Abimeleck were public as is pretended and is likely, yet
that between Jacob and Laban was certainly private. Boas was a private man, and
yet he confirms the promise of Marriage unto Ruth with an Oath, Ruth iii. 13.
Obadiah was a private man, yet a just man and one that feared the Lord, as the
Text has it, yet he spared not to strengthen his speech even unto the great
Prophet Elias with an Oath, As thy Soul lives, etc. 1 King. xviii. 10. Again
in the 2 King. v. 16. the holy Prophet Elisha himself swears: in the 1 Cor. xv.
and in diverse other places the holy Apostle St. Paul swears: In the x. Apoc. an
Angel of heaven swears: yea and in many places God himself swears, and yet none
of them required unto it by a Superior that had authority over them. And it
has as well evidence in Scripture as example. For there is no sufficient
reason why that testimony of St. Paul unto the Hebrews should be restrained
unto public Oaths: And it cannot be, but that my Text must extend it self unto
such as are private, and if it did not, yet that in the xv. Psalm is without
question, where he that swears unto his Neighbor and disappoints him not, is
said to be the man that shall dwell in the Tabernacle of God, which no man can
doubt to be spoken of a private oath.

But leaving those that acknowledge public Oaths and deny private, let us come
unto those that condemn both, both public and private; the use whereof they
confess was tolerated under the Law, which now they conceive as wholly
abolished by the coming of the Gospel. The foundation and only strength of
which opinion is grounded wholly upon that speech of our Savior, Matthew. v. You
have heard it has been said by them of old, Thou shall not forswear thy self,
but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oath. But I say unto you, swear not at
all, neither by Heaven, for it is Gods throne: neither by the Earth, for it is
his footstool, etc. But let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay; for
whatsoever is more than these comes of Evil; from whence they infer a double
Argument; the one from the Inhibition, the other from the reason of it. The
inhibition is general ( Non jurabis omnino) swear not at all: and the reason is
as universal, laying the stain of evil upon all others equally without
difference or distinction of any, for whatsoever is more than yea and nay,
comes of evil; The place seems to be very strong for them, and sure is not
without some difficulty; from which that we may the easilier free it, we must
speak something of both: But first of the Inhibition, and then of the reason.

And first we are to consider that there are many passages of Scripture set
down in general and universal terms, which notwithstanding have not simply and
absolutely an universal sense, but universal in a certain kind. What can be
more generally pronounced than that in the Psalms? God looked down from Heaven
upon the Sons of men to see if there were any that would seek after him, and
behold they were all gone astray, they were altogether become abominable, there
was none that did good, no not one. And yet notwithstanding in the same Psalm
we find another sort of people clean opposite unto these, whom God terms his
own people, because they faithfully served him, a people therefore whom those
wicked ones could not endure but sought to destroy and utterly devour, eating
up my people as it were bread. So that the former passage cannot be understood
simply of all the Sons of men whatsoever, but only of all in a certain kind, of
all the Sons of men who were only the sons of men, and not by the spirit of
Regeneration become also the Sons of God. In which sense the Apostle St. Paul
in the beginning of his Epistle to the Romans, ere he seeks to infer the
necessity of the Gospel, does apply it to show that all men are naturally evil
and deprived of the glory of God, and therefore stand in need of the Grace of
Christ that they might attain unto it. In like manner it is said in another
place, Omne Animal in Arca Noae, that every Creature was in Noah's Ark, which
notwithstanding cannot be verified of every Creature, but of one of all sorts
and kinds of Creatures, and not of those absolutely neither, but of all kinds
that could not live in the waters, for there were no Fishes there. It were easy
to give you instance in many more, but these may suffice.

Now that in this place, this Inhibition here is of the like nature, though
absolute in terms, yet not in sense, restraining Oaths, but yet not all without
limitation or distinction, is manifest both by the letter of the Scripture and
the example of St. Paul that writ it, and the perpetual practice of all
Churches since. The Text of Scripture is that before cited in the 6. to the
Hebrews, where St. Paul does not only approve and allow of an Oath now under
the Gospel, but sets it down as a principal remedy for the establishing of
peace, and dissolving of quarrels and discords amongst men, if so be that St.
Paul were the Author of that Epistle as is most commonly held, (though it be
not greatly material whether he were or no; for it skills not much who^ was the
Pen, where it is confessed by all that the Holy Ghost was the Writer.) And if he
were not the Author of the Doctrine, yet he does elsewhere frequently maintain
it by his own practice and example, often confirming his speeches even in his
holy writings, sometimes with a bare and simple Oath, as Romans i. 9. God is my
witness, whom I serve in the Spirit, etc. Sometimes even with an execratory
mixed with imprecations, as ( Testem invoco Deum in Animam meam) I call God for
a record upon my Soul, 2 Cor. i, 23. and in diverse other places. Now who can
imagine that blessed Apostle either so ignorant or so evil, as not to
understand the precepts of Christ, or else so often to disobey them, especially
in those holy pages and sacred instructions of the whole Church, wherein he was
but the quill or at most the Scribe unto the blessed Spirit that did dictate
and indite them? Whereunto if we add the consent of all famous Churches from
that Apostles time unto this very day, not only approving, but in diverse cases
even requiring of an Oath, it will be more than abundantly manifest, that that
speech of our Savior is not so absolutely Universal as to be received without
all limitation and restraint; only the difficulty is, unto what kind of Oaths
it ought to be restrained. For even they that consent unto a limitation, as the
most of the Fathers do, yet they do not consent in the specialty whereunto it
is to be limited. Some conceive that our Savior does here prohibit not those
Oaths that are made in the Name of God, but such only as are sworn by some of
his creatures: for which cause, after the inhibition [ Swear not at all] he
immediately infers, neither by heaven, for it is his Throne, neither by the
Earth, for it is his Footstool; of this opinion was St. Hilary, yea and St.
Hierom; Consider says he, (upon this place) that our Savior does not here
forbid men to swear by the Lord, but by the Heaven, the Earth, Jerusalem and
his head. But this Commentary seems to fail, because the assuming of a
Creatures Name in an Oath is not utterly unlawful, (as you shall hear when we
come to it) as also for that the words of our Savior tying up our speech unto
yea, yea, nay, nay; and afterward that whatsoever is more proceeth from evil,
does clearly exclude all forms of Oaths promiscuously as well those in the name
of the Creator, as those by the name of a Creature.

Others are of opinion, that the words are to be restrained unto all false
Oaths, taking jurare for pejerare, swearing for forswearing; To whom if you
object that according unto this exposition, nothing is added by our Savior
about that which was said unto them of old, if swear not at all, be no more
than thou shall not forswear thy self: They answer, yes that there is, because
the Lord in the latter part does forbid all kind of forswearing, even that by
the Creatures specified in heaven, earth, Jerusalem and the head, which the
Jews did not conceive to be forbidden of all, for they had a Tradition which
they sucked from the Pharisees, that there were certain Creatures, by whom if
they made their Oath, they did not stand bound to perform it. It is true indeed
that such a Tradition they had which made a distinction of Creatures in this
kind, as of the Temple, and the gold of the Temple, the Altar and the gift on
the Altar, affirming that to swear by the one was nothing, but he that swear by
the other was a debtor; which our Savior in the 23 of this Evangelist does
both mention and refel, and not without indignation. But it seems not to be his
intent here, both because, yea and yea, and nay and nay, does debar all
swearing as well as forswearing; as also for that our Savior does purposely
alter the first word, forswearing, into swearing, to show and signify that he
understands an Oath as it differs from Perjury. And yet St. Austin himself (
lib.de Sermon. Domini Cap. 17.) did sometimes give this Interpretation. Others
again (as St. Bernard, and Christianus Duthmanus that lived long before him)
upon this place desire to have it esteemed rather for a Counsel than a Mandate,
a Counsel of extraordinary perfection rather than a Mandate of necessary duty,
wherein he that fails does not sin, though he that observes it does the better.
But neither may this satisfy, for it is clear that our Savior does prohibit
something which the Scribes and Pharisees thought to be lawful: Neither is it
likely that St. Paul whom we find often swearing in his Epistles, would neglect
the Counsel of Christ, when he ought to give example of perfection unto others.
But St. James puts it out of all question, who repeating those very words of
our Savior, he so repeats them as a Mandate and Commandment, as he makes
damnation a punishment of the breach: for, where Christ says, let your speech
be yea yea, and nay nay, for whatsoever is more comes of evil, he to show that
this evil is sin, and a sin that deserves death, does paraphrase it thus, let
your speech be yea, yea, and nay, nay, lest you fall into Condemnation: No
counsel therefore James v. But not to hold you any longer with several and
erroneous opinions, They seem to make the best interpretation, that restrain
this prohibition unto the idle, trivial and customary Oaths of common speech,
which the Lord did forbid, as well as unjust and false Oaths in weighty
matters; though the Scribes and Pharisees and subtle Glosses had corrupted it;
for they had a Tradition, as appears by Philo in the beginning of his Book,
that in lesser and smaller matters they were not to swear by the name of the
immortal God but by some of his Creatures, supposing that though they swear
never so idly by them, yet they were free from any breach of the Law, since
they took not the name of their God in vain, which that did forbid. And
therefore so long as they swear truly, they cared not for swearing lightly and
frequently, so it was not by the Lord himself, but by some of his works. Our
Savior therefore, seeking in this place not to enlarge the Law, but to free it
from those depravations and corrupt comments of the Pharisees, shows them that
they were to refrain as well from swearing rashly and undoubtedly idly, as
falsely: As also that they are no less guilty of the vain abuse of his name, who
swear by it obliquely and covertly under the Creatures, than those that assume
it directly and plainly in a proper appellation, since there is not any work or
workmanship of his whereon he has not in some sort as it were engraven himself
and his Name; All of them from his Throne unto his Footstool being either
pledges of his favor, or illustrations of his power and glory, if not both; so
that Oaths made by them do reach home even unto himself, whose they are, and
whose greatest Attributes of Glory and Goodness they do plainly set forth. And
therefore the sense is, Swear not usually and vainly at all, that is, with no
kind of Oath, neither by heaven nor Earth nor any thing else whether Creature
or Creator, for the word ((...) at all) does not so much relate unto swear not
that goes before, as unto those several forms of swearing that follow after,
and therefore does not exclude all Cases wherein an Oath may be required, but
all forms which for difference and distinction the Pharisees had invented, as
showing that no forms or titles may justify an Oath that in it self is vain and
unnecessary. And this is the exposition of Mr. Calvin (lib. 2. Inst. c. 8.)
Peter Martyr and diverse learned men besides, and it agrees well with that
interpetation of St. Austin (in his Book de Mendacio) where he says, We are not
so much forbidden by this place, to swear, as to love, affect and delight in
the use of swearing; And indeed that which our Savior adds, Let your
Communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay, plainly shows that he relates unto the
frequent and affected Oaths of daily and familiar discourse. And thus much of
the Inhibition, which rightly understood, you see, concludes nothing for the
objectors.

Now one word of the reason of it, ( for whatsoever is more than these, to wit
yea and nay, comes of Evil) And I think this will conclude as little. St.
Austin (de Sermon. Domini) does interpret this Evil from whence an Oath does
proceed, to be the infirmity and incredulity of Others, which though it be not
a sin yet it is evil, and as the effect of sin, so the cause of swearing; for
no man should need an Oath, if another would believe his word. And after the
same manner does Innocentius the 3d. expound it, de Jurejurando. A malo est,
sed non tam culpae quam poenae, nec exhibentium sed exigentium Juramentum; It
is from Evil, says he, but the evil not of offense but of punishment, neither
the evil of him that exhibits the Oath, but of him that exacts it. Others
again, otherwise, A malo, hoc est, a mendacio, from evil say they, that is from
evil deceit and lying; for if the lips of men were not subject to falsehood, no
man would require an Oath for the assurance of the Truth.

Chrysostom. Euthymius, Theophylact, do render(...), not from evil, but from the
evil one, the evil one by an Antonomasie, that is the Devil, because as some
render the reason, the Devil first brought in sin, and sin first occasioned an
Oath, since in the state of Innocence, where there could be no suspicion, there
needed also no confirmation of any man's speech. But all these Interpretations
though they are true in themselves, yet they are not pertinent to the place:
First because they concern all Oaths, for there is none so good and lawful but
in these senses proceed from evil, 2. Because they place the evil from whence
the Oath does proceed, not in him that swears, but in him to whom the Oath is
made; whereas our Savior does not restrain all Oaths promiseuously, (as is
proved already) but only some, because they proceed from evil, which could be
no sufficient reason of the restraint: neither, if confessed, that evil be an
offense, and an offense not of another but of the swearer himself; for if such
a general and occasionary original from evil were sufficient ground for a
prohibition, we might as well be forbidden to believe in Christ, or repent from
dead works; since if sin had not entered into the world, there had never been
any use either of such faith or repentance. And therefore I rather like
Abulensis Commentary, A malo est Juramentum, id est malum est, the Oath here
forbidden is so from Evil and the evil one, as it is evil it self; and so evil
as it deserves condemnation, says St. James; for Christ here speaks only of
irreverent and unnecessary Oaths, Quae and mala sunt, and a malo Peccatore and
ore proficiscuntur, which are both evil, and proceed from the evil mouth of an
evil sinner, (says Barradius.) Neither does this any way prejudice our cause,
for whatsoever, the Term of Universality here in the Reason will help them as
little, as the [ not at all] has done in the precept, which is not at all, for
they must be both conversant about the same matter, and therefore as that does
restrain, so this does condemn only vain and superfluous swearing; so that the
whole sense is only this:

Swear not idly and vainly in any form whatsoever; for whatsoever is more than
yea and nay in your daily and ordinary communication proceeds from evil: So
that both do leave room for the moderate and charitable use of an Oath when any
urgent and necessary cause, as the benefit of our Neighbor, the Church or
Commonwealth do require it; so that the Gospel you see does not thwart with the
Law, and swear not at all, in the one, if rightly understood, does not hinder
but that there may be necessary Causes, wherein we may say Thou shall swear,
with the other, that inhibition of idle Oaths no way destroying this precept of
such as are serious and requisite: but as they are great sins, so these may be
holy services, and a man may as well offend against Charity in omitting these,
as sin against God in committing the other. And therefore it still remains firm
and unshaken, Jurabis, Thou shall swear, etc.

Well then, sometimes it may be Lawful for us to swear; but yet as we may not
swear in all cases, so neither under all forms, But thou shall swear, The Lord
lives, that is, only in the Name of the living Lord; And the reason of it is
evident, by that which has been said already; for since an Oath is an Act of
religious worship, as containing in it a tacit acknowledgment of the
infallibility and verity, omnisciency and omnipotency of him whom we make the
witness and the Judge of the otherwise unknown Truth and falsehood of our
speeches, it must needs be an honor due only unto the alseeing and ever-living
God, to whom alone those Attributes are proper; And cannot but be direct and
gross Idolatry to communicate it unto any thing else. And so God himself does
ever interpret it as a manifest defection from himself; Filii tui dereliquerunt
me, Your sons have forsaken me, says God in the Prophet, and they swear in the
Name of those that are not Gods, Jer. v. 7. The greatness of which crime he
does elsewhere aggravate, by declaring the punishment, Perdam eos, I will
destroy them that swear in the name of the Lord and of Malcham, Zephany i. 5.
But this point, the swearing in the name of false Gods, is so gross in it self
and so frequently forbid in the scripture, as we shall not need to discourse
any farther of it. Only I will note two things out of St. Austin, and so pass
from thence unto swearing by the Creature. The first is, that it is not simply
unlawful to receive an Oath of him that swears in the name of false Gods, if
just necessity does exact it, and he acknowledge not the true God of whom it is
exacted; as when a Christian King confirms a League or Peace or any other
business of high importance with a Prince that is an Infidel: This St. Austin
does expressly affirm in his 154 Epistle, where he does not doubt neither but
it might be confirmed by examples out of the Scripture, as by those Covenants
which Isaac and Jacob made with Abimelech and Laban who were Idolaters, and
that by an Oath on either side given and received; though I see not how these
may justify the point, for though Abimelech and Laban were Idolaters, yet they
acknowledged the true God, and in those Covenants seem to swear by his Name;
And therefore I rather think that of Judas Maccabeus with the Romans might be
more pertinent to the matter. The second is, That they which swear falsely by
false Gods, notwithstanding both are and are taken and punished too for
Perjurers by the true God, whether it be done by those that do not acknowledge
him, or others that do; for even some Christians of the Primitive times when
they meant to deceive the unbelievers with whom they lived, that they might the
better do it and with the less sin, would swear by their Gods, as taking it for
nothing to swear falsely by those Idols which they knew to be nothing, whom St.
Austin, Epist. 154. does finely refell, showing that instead of lessening the
sin they double the crime, bis ulique peccat, for such a one, says he, sins
twice, Quia and juravit per quos non debuit, and contra pollicitam fecit fidem
quod non debuit: first in swearing by that which he ought not to worship, and
then in breaking his faith which he ought to have kept; And God will assuredly
punish both, Non audit te Lapis loquentem, sed punit te Deus fallentem, for the
stone does not hear thee by whom thou swearest, yet that God will take
vengeance of thee who sees thy deceit, (says the same Father.) And he seems to
have learnt both out of the Wisdom of Solomon, who says the same of gross
Idolaters that swear by the Idols which they worship; for says the Author of
that Book, In as much as their trust is in Idols that have no life, though they
swear falsely, yet they look not to be hurt: but for both causes shall they be
justly punished; both because they thought not well of God giving head unto
Idols, and also unjustly swear in deceit, despising holiness. Wisdom xiv. 28,
29, 30.

But I leave the false Gods, and come unto Works and Creatures of the living
God; for though there be no doubt, but the Oaths made in the name of them are
sinful and Idolatrous, yet it is much questioned whether a man may lawfully
swear by these; and there want not great and learned men that affirm and
maintain it too, and I assure my self very rightly: for he should assume too
much boldness and reserve too little Charity to himself that durst censure and
condemn others for irreligious, even all those holy men of God whom we find in
the Scripture to have sworn by his Creatures; both before, under, and after the
Law. Before the Law Jacob swear by the fear of his Father Isaac, which if it
may be taken objective, for the God whom he feared, yet that of Joseph cannot,
who swore by the life of Phara^h. Under the Law examples are many, As thy soul
lives, says devout Anna unto Eli the Priest: So said Obadiah unto Elias the
Prophet; and so Elisha the same unto the same Prophet, and that three times in
one Chapter for failing: And I protest by your or our r^j^^ing (as some read
it) I die daily, says St. Paul under the Gospel, I Cor. xv. and many good
Christians even unto this day swear by the Evangel, body of Christ, their own
faith, soul and the like; and it were hard to condemn them all, as some do,
which had they but observed that distinction of Aquinas and other Schoolmen,
they would not have done; for an Oath, says he, made in the Name of a Creature
may have a threefold respect. The first is, when a Creature is called for a
witness, simply considered as it is in it self, without any further relation
unto the Creator, and this is ever sinful and Idolatrous, as attibuting a
Divinity unto that which has it not. The second is, when the Creature is
called upon, not as considered in it self, but with a respect and reference
unto that God whose goodness or glory is manifested in it, which though it be
in all Creatures, yet it is more conspicuous and eminent in some; and this may
be done without any sin: for though the Creature be only named, yet thus taken,
it is not the Creature, but that God whose favor or power we honor in it,
that is called for the witness, as the Master of the Sentences does interpret
it, nay as our Savior himself does expound: who for this very reason in the
xxiii. of Matthew does plainly affirm, that whosoever swears by the Temple,
swears both by it and by him that dwells therein, and whosoever swears by
heaven, swears by the Throne of God and by him that sits thereon; And
after the self same manner, that Oath by the soul of another (as thy soul
lives) so frequent amongst the holy men under the Law is to be received, for
they swear not by the soul alone but by that God whose image and likness it is;
for so it is to be understood, As thy soul lives by the power and providence
of him that first made it to his likeness and does still preseve it by his
mercy. The Third and last is, when a man names a Creature in an Oath, not as
swearing by it but as exposing it by way of imprecation unto the judgment of
that God who is the true witness of his speech, which is the execratory Oath
touched in the beginning; so when a man swears by his own Soul, it is not meant
as if that were called to the record of that he speaks, but as pledging and
pawning unto God the welfare and Salvation of it upon the truth of his speech.

And therefore he that swears by his Soul, does in abbrevation say no other
than what St. Paul did in plain and full terms, I call God to record upon my
Soul, for that is the meaning of it, and both the meaning and example are
strong proofs that it cannot be simply understood. Now that other of Joseph (by
the life of Pharaoh) may be understood both these ways; for either he calls
that God to witness whose judgment by the ministry of Pharaoh was executed upon
Earth; or else by way of imprecation, he does upon the truth of the speech
appignorate unto God the health and safety of Pharaoh as a thing of all other
most dear unto him. The Master of the Sentences is for the first, and others
for the latter; both may be good, but this in the Text the more probable. So
then there may be diverse forms wherein the Creature is named, and yet the Oath
made only by the Creator; for he does still swear by him, that swears by any
excellent work or mercy of his, with reference to him; in which sort, he that
says (as thy Soul lives) does at the same time and in the same words swear as
my Text requires, At the Lord lives, for the full sense and meaning is, as the
Lord lives by whom thy Soul has life. And though peradventure it may be
better when just occasion does require an Oath, to make it clearly and
expressly in the Name of the Lord; yet the interpretation of our Savior and
the examples of so many holy men, do forbid us utterly to condemn all such as
do but implicitly call him to record under his Creatures. And sure if they
want not other necessary conditions of an Oath, they will hardly be believed
for this, the form will free it self, if they want not the right manner and
matter, if they be performed in truth, judgment and righteousness, the
qualities and inseparable companions of a lawful Oath, which now come to be
considered in their order, and first of the first, Jurabis in Veritate, Thou
shall swear The Lord lives in Truth.

From the Form we come unto the Matter, and having seen in whose Name an Oath
is to be made, we are now to consider with what Conditions it is to be
qualified; And they are but three, in all whereof Truth has the first place;
and most deservedly, since nothing is so opposite to the very nature and
essence of an Oath as falsehood: for the Person whose name in an Oath is
assumed, is the God of truth; the end for which an Oath it self was ordained,
is the confirmation of truth; and the perjurer by dishonouring that and
frustrating this abuses both oftentimes to the hurt and damage of his
Neighbor, but ever unto the great prejudice of his Creator. And therefore the
Egyptians (says Diodorus Siculus,) did ever punish the perjurer with death,
whereof they esteemed him twice worthy, ut and qui pietatem in deos violaret,
and fidem inter homines tolleret, maximum Societatis vinculum, as one that did
both violate his piety to God, and his faith to men, the greatest bond of
Society.

But to omit these injurious effects of a false Oath unto man as depriving him
sometimes of his Credit, good name, and reputation, and sometimes even of his
Goods and Life too; do but only see and consider how impious it is against God,
and how infinitely he sins that shall call him, who is not only true, but truth
it self, to testify his falsehoods, and so, as far as in him is, make him a Liar
like himself; for as Estius says, in lib. 2. sent. did. 39. 5, 6. Qui falsum
jurat, quantum in se est Deum facit vel mendacem vel ignorantem, he that swears
falsely, as much as in him lies makes God either ignorant or a liar. Falsehood is
ever vile and odious in it self, but when it is fastened upon God, when we
teach our own Inventions (those spurious brats and bastards of our own Brain,)
to call him Father, it must needs be detestable. For we cloth him with the
Attribute of the Devil who is properly a liar and the Father of lies, Job.
viii. And therefore even we our selves, though we be all liars, yet we cannot
endure to hear it, and when we do, nothing can satisfy but his blood that
tells us so, though never so truly; How then, may we think, and with what
indignation will God receive it, when they are so unjustly pinned and stuck
upon him, who hates a lie more than we can love our selves? And with what
severity may we imagine he will revenge it? what reward will he give unto such a
false Tongue, but sharp Arrows and hot burning Coals at the least, even those
Arrows in Job, the Arrows of Gods wrath, the venom whereof drink up the spirits
of him in whom they stick: and those Coals or rather Flames of St. John, for
all liars says he, shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire
and brimstone, Rev. xxi. 8. And if all Liars have a part, then how great a
portion will be assigned to the Perjurers? for if God will not hold him
guiltless that uses his holy Name but vainly, how shall his guilt multiply and
his Sin become exceeding sinful that does abuse it falsely? and if he will
destroy those that do but speak out their lies (as it is in the v. Psalm) Thou
shall destroy those that speak Leasing, how great shall their destruction be
that fear not to swear them out and uphold them by the holiness of his name?
Certainly so great, as I think the depth and bottom of Hell does not know any
greater; for I assure my self that neither the Idolatrous Gentile, nor the
unbelieving A theist shall lie lower in that Pit of everlasting horror than the
contemptuous Perjurer; for the one does worship no God, the other a false God,
but this makes a false witness of the true God: his Sin is Infidelity, the
others Idolatry, but this man's is not without blasphemy, which is worse than
either; for it may worthily be esteemed a less Crime to acknowledge any thing
for God, yea or not to acknowledge any God at all, than to be contemptuous and
injurious unto the God which we acknowledge.

And as their Sin is greater, so shall be their punishment in that last and
fearful day when God whom at their pleasure they have here made a false witness
of their lies, shall then come to show himself a just judge and severe
Revenger, that will vindicate his own truth; At what time, none of all our
cunning Inventions, no counterfeit and new-named Oaths so frequent in these
times, nor no devices of former Ages, neither the subtleness of the Scribes and
Pharisees that had forms of purpose to forswear by; no nor yet (which exceeds
the cunning of the Scribes and deceit of the Pharisees, though later,) the
equivocation of a Priest and mental reservation of a Jesuit shall ever be able
to excuse and free them; for as the formers Tongue doubles with an Oath, so the
laters mind doubles with his Tong^e, when God requires Truth in both especially
in the inward parts, (he that speaks the truth from his heart, says D^vid,
Psalm xv) and therefore will certainly take vengeance of both for their
falsehood. Rightly then is Truth the first property of a lawful Oath, but of an
Oath Assertory that does deny something present or past: but because it is so
evident in it self, I leave it and come to the Oath that is Obligatory, that
does promise to do or omit something to come, whose material property is
Righteousness. Which though it be the third and last as they are here set down,
yet the order of method requires that it should not be last handled, as being
peculiar only unto an Obligatory Oath as the first is to an Assertory, when the
second is common unto both, between which it lies, and therefore will be best
considered after both.

First therefore of Righteousness, wherein I will be as brief as in the former,
it being manifest and clear in it self as that was. For it is plain and evident
to every man's eye, that Justice or Righteousness is as proper to a Promise, as
Truth to an Assertion; and he that with an Oath does vow to do evil, is as
resolute a sinner, as he that in an Oath affirms a falsehood; the one abuses
Gods truth for the stablishing of a lie, the other his holiness to the acting
of mischief: and it is hard to say whether is worst, both being no less
injurious to God than pernicious unto men. For he that swears to do unjustly,
does but call God to witness that he will injure his brother whom he has
commanded to love as himself, and so in effect he only swears by God that he is
resolved that he will disobey God; an Oath most impiously made and yet is more
impious to be acted, since the more religiously a man does observe it, the more
irreligious he is: for that which begins with unrighteousness and ends in
villainy, must needs be ill made, but worse if it be executed. And therefore we
ought to be thoroughly persuaded and assured of the lawfulness, honesty, and
goodness of that promise which we bind with an Oath, lest we be enforced either
to offend God and injure our Neighbor, or else to violate our Oath and
forswear our selves, which in this case is rather to be chosen, the breach of
such an Oath being ever a less sin, and scarce any sin in comparison of the
observance; for though a promissory Oath be obligatory, as they say, yet it
does not always oblige and bind men unto the performance. There are three cases
wherein a man is evidently free, and in two of them, even when the thing
promised and sworn is just and lawful. The first is, when he to whom the Oath
is made, remits the obligation; for though the one bind himself, yet the others
release unties the bonds and sets him at liberty; from which tie the Oath
though in it self obligatory, does yet through another courtesy cease to
oblige; neither is it then thought to be termed a false Oath if not performed,
be the thing never so just, as neither a bare promise in this case to be
accounted false, since either are to be understood quatenus ab eo cui fit,
acceptatur, according to his acceptance unto whom it is made, for without it
the very essentia, reason of a promise did either not subsist, or else does
presently expire. The second is, when the thing promised, though lawful, be yet
impossible, whether it were impossible then when it was sworn, or else became
so afterward; and the reason is, Quia nemo tenetur ad impossibilia; because as
the vulgar Axiom has it, No man can be bound unto impossibilities; But yet
this case is not absolute and without restraint, for though he that swears knew
not of the impossibility, yet if it be such as he should or might have known
it, his Oath is not without Sin; but if he knew it to be impossible before, or
else through his own default it became so afterward, it is then not only
sinful, but perjurious. As for example, If a man should swear to pay a certain
sum of Money at such a time, which notwithstanding either because he used not
his Industry to procure it; or for that he riotously played or misspent it, he
cannot then possibly do; the Impossibility here will not free him from the
guilt of Perjury, because it was his own neglect that wilfully made it so. The
same fault that made his performance impossible, does at the same time make
himself perjurious. The third and last which was before mentioned is, when the
thing that is sworn is unjust and evil in it self, or most likely to be
pernicious unto others; and the reason why in this case we stand not bound to
performance is manifest, (quia nihil est quod hominem obligare possit ad
peccandum) because there is nothing can oblige or bind a man to sin wilfully
against God. A worthy example of this we have in David, who though he had
rashly sworn the destruction of churlish Nabal and all his family, yet
afterward being better advised he refused to perform his Oath, which he saw
without great danger could not be performed, as himself confesses, even
blessing God who withheld him from it. Benedictus Deus, Blessed be the Lord
that has kept his servant from doing evil, 1 Samuel xxv. The contrary example
whereunto, you may behold in Herod, who what he had rashly sworn would needs
more rashly fulfill, choosing rather to destroy a holy Prophet of God, than not
to observe his own inconsiderate Oath; In Vovendo stultus, In Reddendo impius,
becoming, as foolish in vowing, so more impious in performing. Rightly
therefore Isidore, In malis promissis rescinde sidem, in evil promises rather
break faith than violate honesty. Which is the opinion also of St. Austin and
St. Ambrose, reverend Bid and many more of the Fathers, yea and some Councils,
which for brevity sake in so clear a case, may well be omitted. And these three
ways it is true that the obligation of a promissory Oath is naturally dissoved,
which otherwise in all other cases, when the thing sworn is just and good in it
self, and possible unto him that swears it, and accepted and required by him to
whom it is sworn, though it be unto his own damage, and then too though won
from him by fraud or enforced by violence, it is notwithstanding religiously
and inevitably to be observed. The example unto this purpose of Joshua and the
Gibeonites, is most remarkable; for though Joshua had a Commission from the
Lord to root out and destroy all the Nations that bordered upon the Land of
Canaan, and to give their Cities and possessions unto the Children of Israel,
yet having sworn a League with the Gibeonites a neighbor Nation, who
counterfeiting themselves a strange People that came from far, deceived him,
and by this subtilty obtained Peace, he feared for all that ever to violate the
Oath which himself and the Princes of the Congregation had made with them. And
though all the people murmured at the League, for the Gibeonites had fair
Cities, yet he never sought unto the high Priest for Absolution or
Dispensation, those high Mysteries of Iniquity were not then known; neither yet
did he plead that Treacherous Axiom, That Faith is not to be kept with
Heretics and Infidels, which were by the Council of Constance against all
Faith both Humane and Divine shamefully decided, and with the blood of
Innocents more barbarously confirmed. Such subtilties were too acute for the
dull simplicity and honesty of those better times; But without all shifts and
devices both himself and all the Princes that had taken the Oath, resolutely
answer the mutinous Congregation, We have sworn unto them by the Lord God of
Israel, now therefore we may not touch them, Josh. ix. 19. And that you may
perceive how precious in Gods sight such sacred Attestations be that are made
in his holy Name, do but consider with what severity and bitter revenge the
Lord persecuted the breach, though long time after in the days of Saul, even of
this very Oath, which though it was at the first obtained by the Gibeonites
with fraud and imposture, and confirmed by Joshua besides, if not contrary to,
his Commission, and that without ever consulting the Lord, (as the Text does
especially mention) and at length violated by Saul not without a good and
zealous intent, for Saul fought to slay them (says the story) in his zeal unto
the house of Israel and Judah; yet for all that because the thing was not
unjust in it self, so highly did the breach displease and offend the Lord, that
for this very cause, even after the death of Saul in the days of David, he sent
three years famine upon the whole Land, for which no atonement might be made
until this sin were particularly revenged, and seven of Saul's Sons hung up
before the Lord in Gibeon, and then the famine ceased, as you may read 2. of
Sam.xxi. In which Chapter there is one thing more observable unto this purpose,
for it leaves us a double example, recording at once unto posterity, as Saul's
impious breach of this Oath with the Gibeonites, so David's religious observance
of his Oath with Jonathan; for when he delivered up the posterity of Saul unto
the revenge of the Gibeonites, he spared Mephibosheth the Grandchild of Saul
and Son of Jonathan, because (says the Text) of the Lords Oath that was
between them between David and Jonathan the Son of Saul, v. 7. of the same
Chapter, for Jonathan and David had sworn, as you know, a league of friendship,
and though Jonathan were dead and gone, yet faithful David (far unlike the
falseness of this world) remembers it in his posterity, and fails not to show
that love and kindness to the Son which he had formerly vowed and sworn unto
the Father. And whence it is also more remarkable that this Oath is not termed
David's Oath or Jonathans Oath, but the Lords Oath, the Lords Oath that was
between David and Jonathan, to show and signify that the Lord is interested in
the performance of an Oath wherein his name is assumed, and that his truth is
dishonored in the breach, unless the falsehood be revenged by his justice,
whereof he will never fail, either here or hereafter; sometimes (yea and often)
here, but ever and for ever hereafter; And therefore either make no Oaths, or
else perform the Oaths which you make; either make them in Righteousness, or
make them not at all: and being righteously made, be sure they be not
unrighteously broken, for there is, as righteousness in the making, so also a
righteousness in the observance, and if either be wanting, God will not fail to
show his righteousness in the avenging of both. And so I leave Righteousness
and come to Judgment, Jurabis in Judicio, Thou shall swear as in truth and
righteousness, so also in judgment.

For though we may sometimes affirm a truth, and sometimes confirm a lawful and
just promise with an Oath, yet notwithstanding we may not swear promiscuously
every Truth, nor yet bind every such promise with the attestation of God whose
name is holy, and in ordinary and trivial occasions cannot be used without
profanation. And therefore besides Truth and Righteousness in the thing sworn,
there is required also judgment and discretion in the swearer, that he may
discern between cases and causes of moment, and not unadvisedly temerate this
sacred name, when neither the weight of the business nor our brothers weakness
does make it necessary; for as St. Austin has it, lib. 1. de Sermon. Dom. Qui
intelligit non in bonis, sed necessariis jurationem esse habendam, refraenet se
quantum potest, ne ea utatur nisi necessitate. He that knows that an Oath is
not food but physic, not to be desired for it self but to be used for another
necessity, let him refrain from swearing till that necessity does require it,
and when that is, the next immediate words will show us, cum videt pigros esse
homines ad credendum quod iis utile est credere, nisi juratione firmetur, when
he sees men otherwise unwilling to believe what he knows is behoofeful for them
to believe: But Mr. Calvin who does also allow of a necessary Oath, lest we
should enlarge the cases of this necessity at our own pleasure, gives a fuller
rule to prevent it, Non alia praetendi potest necessit as quam ubi vel
religioni velcharitati est serviendum; We may never pretend necessity (says
he) but when we may do some good service to Religion or Charity, that is, to
God or our Neighbor: So that as the two former properties do restrain us from
untrue and unrighteous, so this latter from unnecessary swearing: They forbid
us that we swear not falsely and unjustly, and this that we swear not rashly and
vainly, the one thing specially intended. And when the egregious licentiousness
of these times does require a principal labor in reproof, as being a sin that
like a deluge has overrun the whole World, and covered the face of the whole
Earth as a flood, which is so much the more intolerable (says Calvin) quod
assuetudine ipsa pro delicto imput ari desiit, That the frequent use and custom
has taken away the sense and apprehension of the sin; and though there be
little hope in this case of redress, for (as Seneca says well) desinet esse
remedio locus, ubi quae fuerunt vitia mores sunt, there is no place left for
remedy when those things which were made to be vices, are now become fashions
and manners; yet not despairing of Gods goodness and mercy unto any, both for
our own sakes and yours, we are at least to show you the peril and danger of so
great a sin, and leave the success unto him.

And sure there were danger enough in it, though it were no sin, and did we
never transgress so long as we swear frequently, for as St. Austin has it, Use
runs into facility, into custom, and from the custom of swearing we easily fall
into the detestable sin of Perjury and forswearing. And indeed it is almost
impossible that he which swears daily and hourly and almost perpetually, should
not sometimes swear deceitfully and falsely. Neither do I think there is any, if
he impartially examine and observe himself, that does familiarly use the one,
but he will find that he has often and easily slipped into the other; for the
Conscience that dares to play with the sacred name of God and continually to
use it with irreverence and contempt, it is likely will not stick now and then
to abuse it by perjury. And therefore the Counsel of the same Father is good,
Epist. 89;. ad Hill. 2. Abstain from swearing as much as is possible, melius
quippe nec verum juratur, quam jurandi consuetudine in perjurium saepe caditur
and semper perjurio propinquatur, For it were better not to swear any truth
than that by a custom of swearing we should often forswear our selves, and ever
endanger it. Excellently therefore to the same purpose he concludes in another
place, Falsa juratio exitiosa est: Vera juratio periculo sa: at nulla juratio
secura, False swearing is damnable and exitious: true swearing is dangerous:
but no swearing is secure; which is the reason that under the name of swearing
is included oftentimes perjury and forswearing; the Scripture for this cause
knitting and linking them both together as in the sin, so in the punishment:
Since no Man can be subject unto that but he will be found also often guilty of
this. And therefore there were danger enough (as I said) in this unadvised
custom, if it were no sin: but how much more then when it does not only lead
and conduce unto sin and the greatest almost of sins, but also is little less
sinful in self, I am sure is more expressly forbidden in the Commandment, which
says not, Thou shall not swear falsely, though that be included, but thou shall
not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, that is, lightly and idly: and
David gives the reason, for says he, holy and reverend is his name. Now that
which is holy, if it be brought into common use, it is profaned; And that
which is reverend, if it be irrespectfully handled, is contemned. So that it is
not only a bare sin but a threefold, a trebble sin and terrible, compounded of
irr^v^rence, profanation, and presumptuous contempt; The least whereof were
enough to plunge a rebellious Soul in the depth of eternal sorrow, whereof he
is now thrice worthy as being guilty of all three. For what indignity must it
needs be unto the Divine Majesty, and how unsufferable, with idle and empty,
supervacuous and unnecessary Oaths every moment, and in causes of no moment,
irreligiously and contemptuously to toss and bandy, if not tear in pieces that
sacred name, which should never be thought on but with trembling, nor ever be
uttered without religious adoration? That Name vererable above all names, so
excellent and admirable in all the world, how excellent is thy name in all the
world (says David) by way of question, and none can answer it; That Name which
the Jews thought so sacred, as they never durst utter it, nor was lawful for
any but the high Priest ever to carry it about him, Exodus, xxviii. so much as
written, who was commanded to wear it on his forehead in a leaf of Gold, the
very sight whereof made the greatest Monarch of the World, (even proud
Alexander) that would needs be a God himself, yet to stoop and do his
reverence: Lastly, that Name which the very Devils in Hell and spirits of
darkness cannot hear without horror; no nor Powers and Principalities, Cherubin
and Seraphin, the blessed Angels of God ever mention without glory and great
worship? What dishonor must it needs receive to be at length thus shamefully
contemned by dust and ashes: thus hourly and idly to be belched out from the
foul mouth of a sinful man without all esteem or respect, yea or so much as
ever thinking of it? Rather consider those glorified Spirits and tremble; I saw
God, says the Prophet Isaiah Chap. vi. sitting on his Throne, high and
exalted, and the Cherubins and Seraphins standing round about it, crying and
calling unto one another, and saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath,
Heaven and Earth are full of thy Glory. Behold, says Chrysostom, with what
fear and horror, with what redoubling of praise and glory they make mention of
his holy name I may say thrice holy, that is most sacred, Name! And shall the
Sons of men presume contemptuously to violate that which the Angels themselves
when they mention, do with Reverence adore? Why, if we say (says the same
Father) of one of our selves, if of extraordinary virtue and worth, Os lava,
wash or wipe your mouth before you name him; And if a servant will not mention
his Lord, nor a subject his Prince without Titles of Respect and Honor, with
what fear and reverence should the name of the Lord of Lords and King of Kings,
the God both of men and Angels be warily pronounced? Our mouths here had more
need of fire than water, not to be washed, but with Isaias Cole from the Altar
inflamed with a religious zeal, when we dare to mention it. Judge therefore in
your selves how great is his Sin that can assume boldness not only with
unhallowed and polluted lips to mention, but even with idle, nay rhetorical and
wanton Oaths, fearfully to profane and lacerate that Name which some men's
Reverence never durst utter, and no Angels without terms of praise and glory
will ever pronounce? Now if our light, trival and customary Oaths are so
derogatory unto the honor of God, what then may we think of intemperate,
passionate and choleric Oaths, the Oaths of Gamesters and others wedded unto
other sports, who if a Die or Dog run not to their liking, or a Kite fly where
they would not have him, fall instantly into such a fit of hideous Oaths, as if
with Jobs Wife they were resolved presently to curse God and die: If the former
were profanations, these sure are direct blasphemies, when men enraged with
their trifling misfortunes pour forth floods of direful Oaths, as the desire to
wreak their anger upon that God whose providence they know does guide them, and
because they cannot reach unto his Essence, they will at least this way avenge
themselves on his Name. For you shall see such Tear-Gods sometimes swear a
whole Catologue of Oaths over and over, still swear them and still say nothing
else, as having no other end in their swearing but to swear, for they swear not
to affirm a truth or confirm a promise, yet they swear and to no other purpose
but to offend God by swearing. Their Tongue, as the Psalmist speaks, walks
through the Earth, and they set their mouth against heaven, and yet as if
neither Heaven nor Earth could afford them Oaths enough to swear by, they set
their invention on work for strange, uncouth and unheard of blasphemies, which
not without rancor of mind they dart at God himself, and spit with more than
Epicurean Liberty in the very face of the Almighty. The Tongue, says St.
James, is but a little member, yet it has in it a world of wickedness, it sets
the world on fire, and its self is set on fire of Hell. Which though it were
spoken of the malicious and slanderous Tongue, yet it may be no less true also
of the blasphemous, for this, if any, is certainly set on fire of Hell, and
flames with a sin hot enough, and likely enough to set fire on the whole world
in the last day, when for that world of wickedness it shall find a world of
sorrow and torment; and as it was fired from Hell before, so it shall now be
fired in Hell, where (like Moses bush) it shall ever burn and never be
consumed; for this later fire, none shall ever escape, but such as with a River
of penitent Tears do quench the former before they come there. But omitting
such high and horrid blasphemies, the hellish impiety whereof every one must
needs perceive, and none that have any goodness remaining can choose but abhor:

We will a little insist only on those lesser Prophanations in the vain and
frequent Oaths of common speech, which though men can be content to account a
sin, yet they would willingly esteem it such as may easily be excused. It is
only a Custom that is grown upon me, I like it not, but I cannot leave it; the
plea of the world as common as the swearing; and if it might stand for an
excuse, it were easily excused indeed: But consider it well and you will find
it such an excuse as only seems to make the sin more inexcusable: since that
very reason which they give to lessen the Crime, is the principal thing that
augments the offense: for sin never becomes above measure sinful, until it grow
into Custom, that heaps it up infinitely and so makes it immensurable, until it
rule and reign in our mortal bodies, which alone can style us, not only sinful
but the slaves and vassals of sin, and then we are sinners indeed. There is no
man, not the best of us without sin, yet all are not sinners; it is not the
falling into sin, but the habit and serving of sin that gives the denomination:
A man may sin and be the servant of God, for what servant of Gods does not
sometimes sin? but to serve sin and be the servant of God, is impossible; And
therefore of all things else, the habit and custom of sin, especially mortal
and presumptuous sin, is most dangerous, as being incompatible with the state
of Grace and reconciliation with God, who never gives remission of the sin,
unless we abhor and utterly renounce the custom; for which cause the Swearer
(and no man has the name of a swearer but from the habit of swearing) is set
down in the same Catalogue with the Adulterer, the Drunkard and other heinous
sinners, which St. Paul tells us shall never enter into the kingdom of God. And
therefore let no man flatter himself and deceive his own Soul; it is a custom
that we must leave one time or other, or God will eternally leave us. The which
that we may be the better induced to do, I beseech you, do but consider besides
the greatness of the sin already shown, to how little or rather no purpose it
is committed, and with what severity it will be punished both here and
hereafter; for so highly to offend God, and no way in the world to pleasure our
selves, is the utmost of folly, and treads on the very heels of madness. Why,
he that burns in Hell for his Mistress had once yet some delight for that
torment he shall ever suffer; All other sins have their strong provocations in
our corrupt nature whereunto they give some content: but this idle and wanton
sin is without all instigation of the depraved flesh, and can give satisfaction
to no one appetite of our frail condition, unless death and everlasting sorrow
dwell in our desires. And as it can give no pleasure and delight, because it
has no affection in nature to fulfill and content: so neither (that you may
perceive it to be utterly vain) can it plead any other benefit, there being no
just pretense or reason or end for it, why it is used. And if neither pleasure
nor profit be in it, the malice of the Devil is in it, if to gain nothing here
we will run headlong into eternal destruction hereafter. If there be any end of
it in the world or benefit that we may reap by it, it can be no other than the
gaining of credit to our speech, and to be believed of others when we speak,
which is indeed the true and proper end of an Oath, but an end which the
trivial and customary swearer of Oaths in reason cannot expect, and if he deal
with rational and wise men, shall never obtain, though they urge it often and
think it their best plea to stop the mouth of reproof for this sin, Why, they
would not believe me? whereby notwithstanding instead of excusing they do but
condemn themselves, and yet gain not their purpose with others. For first, if
they mark it, what does it argue but that they do not usually speak truth, that
cannot be believed without an Oath? Qui jurat, suspectus est de perfidia, The
very use of swearing is a manifest sign that he is suspected of perfidy, says
Philo. And therefore rightly St. Basil, Turpe and omnino stultum etc. he does
no less basely than foolishly accuse himself as unworthy of credit and belief,
that perpetually flies unto the safeguard and sanctuary of an Oath; for which
cause the Esseni, says Josephus, did avoid and abhor swearing no less than
perjury, as conceiving that he was beforehand condemned for lying, that could
not be credited without swearing. And as they condemn themselves, so they
obtain by this custom as little credit from others. For that which does breed a
suspicion in their persons, cannot well beget an assurance of their Oaths. And
indeed what trust or confidence may be reposed in an usual and ordinary
swearer? whom the very custom of swearing does condemn of persidy, how can he
choose but suspected of perjury? Since he that cares not how often he swears,
it is likely will sometimes care as little what he swears: So that as the word
of a faithful and honest Man is as good as his Oath; so the Oath of a false and
perfidious Man is no better than his word: And therefore he only gains thus
much by swearing that the more often he swears the less he is to be believed,
since the best way of gaining credit is to accustom our selves not to swearing,
but not to swear; for he that lives justly and uprightly and speaks the truth
calmly, shall be believed upon his word, when the other's Oaths shall not that
swears frequently, though he swear never so earnestly. I have often heard it
pleaded, with Chrysostom, hom 26. Unless I swear he will not believe; true,
nor when thou swearest neither: but thou, says he, art the cause of this
unbelief that do so lightly and easily swear; for if thou did not so, and
it were manifestly known that thou were no swearer, believe me that only say
it, Quod iis qui mill devorant juramenta, majorem ipse fidem solo nutu
invenires, Thy only beck and nod should find more esteem and credit than a
thousand Oaths poured forth by another. And in like manner, I have beheld,
says Philo the learned Jew, the impiety of some with such intolerable
impudence heaping and hudling up the religious names of God not to be heard
without horror, as if they thought by the number and multitude of their impious
Oaths to evince and even extort belief from the hearer: Fatui^qui non
intelligunt consuetudinem crebro jurandi argumentum esse perfidiae non fidei.
Fools, says he, that do not understand that the custom of often swearing is an
argument not of fidelity but perfidiousness. And therefore though they swear
until they burst, they shall never the sooner gain any credit; only this they
gain, that by their often swearing they have bereaved themselves of all means
of gaining belief, firm and assured belief, even when they swear the truth; for
it is not multitudes and millions of Oaths, but the truth and sincerity of a
man's behavior that shall win him reputation and credit. Non juramentum sed
vitae testimonium, It is not our Oaths (says Chrysostom Homil. 7.) but the
testimony of our lives that can give assurance to our words. And therefore
excellently (St. Austin de Sermon. Dom.64.) Christianus verum loquatur, neque
jurationibus crebris sed morum probitate commendet veritatem, Let a Christian
only speak the truth, and let not his Oaths but the probity of his manners
commend or confirm the truth of his speech. For the Christians are termed the
faithful (says Josephus lib. 2. de Bello c. 7.) though but half a Christian
himself. And therefore tanta Sanctitate ornata sit fides ut sine jurejurando
facial fidem, Their faith ought to be adorned with so much sanctity as it
should be able without the assistance of Oaths to beget faith and credit in
another: which if the sincerity of their life cannot do, the frequency of their
Oaths will much less obtain, whereby instead of gaining credit with others they
do only further discredit themselves. And therefore since it does breed a just
suspicion rather than any certain belief; what end there is of this vain and
ungodly custom, what profit or colorable pretense it may have to shroud it
self under, I cannot understand any, unless peradventure some men esteem it as
a mark of nobleness and gentry, which they have little reason to do since the
vilest Beggar wears the fashion as well as themselves, and though he have not
two pence a year Starling can swear after the Revenues of a great Lord that
has thousands. Or it may be, some take it as an ornament of speech; or others
an argument of valor; and sure he is very hardy that fears neither God nor
Hell, which if it be valor let every good Man be a Coward: and however unto
ungracious hearts, it may be thought a grace in their tongue, yet unto a good
mind that desires to worship God, and think on him with reverence, it is a
sound that is worse than the turning of Brass grates, and horror to his ears, if
it be not the greatest torture and torment unto his righteous Soul. And is it
not now most strange that we should be so desperately wicked against God, or so
wretchedly careless of our selves, as thus wantonly to offend him, and
prodigiously to spend our own Souls in a sin that has neither pleasure nor
profit, no just end, nor yet so much as a fair pretense to give it color? But
the less color and pretense a sin has, the greater still it is, and with the
greater punishment it shall ever be rewarded, and this of all others shall be
sure not to be forgotten; for it is not for naught and to no purpose that in
those brief precepts of the Law written with the very finger of God, all other
sins are barely inhibited, Murder, Adultery and the rest of our crimes merely
forbidden, without any special mention of punishment unto the offenders; only
this sin, as if it displeased him above all the rest, is not without a peculiar
commination of revenge annexed, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that
takes his name in vain. Whether it be the vanity and needlesness of this
wanton and presumptuous sin, that has neither pleasure nor profit nor
pretense, does exceed all other; or whether it be the extraordinary neglect of
men in suffering this sin of all others to escape unpunished, that moved the
Lord more particularly to assure us that he will take it into his own hands and
see it rewarded himself: whether this, or that or both or neither it is not
certain, neither is it much material to inquire, since it is enough that this
is certain, that something there is in it odious above other sins, otherwise he
would never have been so careful above all others in particular to register the
revenge of this. And as this does assure, that it is a sin which shall
certainly be punished: so there want not other places to show us what the
punishment shall be. St. Paul delivers it negatively by exclusion from the
Kingdom of Heaven: St. James affirmatively but indefinitely by condemnation,
lest ye fall into condemnation. But St. John does affirm and fully define
whither and to what they are condemned, even unto the inconceiveable sorrows of
Hell. They shall be cast into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone;
Apoc. And if you put all together, you have all the punishment, and it is no
less than all which a Sinner may receive, the punishment of loss, and the
punishment of sense, the loss of all good in the exclusion from Heaven, and the
suffering of all evil in the torments of Hell. This expressed in Scripture, by an
unquenchable fire; that, by a gnawing and never dying worm; Divines contending
which is worst when either is insufferably bad, but both joined together make a
double death and destruction which none can conceive; And therefore the Son of
Syrach, 23. 12. does well term it a sin that is arrayed and apparelled with
death, there is a word (says he) and it is clothed about with death: God grant
it be not found in the heritage of Jacob; and that you may know what the word
is, which he means, he presently infers, use not thy mouth to intemperate
swearing, for there is the word, the word of sin clothed about with death, and
I pray God it may not be found in the heritage of Jacob, neither in our Jacob,
nor his heritage, his Son or Subject, neither himself nor any of his Kingdom.
And this were punishment enough it should seem, were there no other; yet this
is not all, for this general and universal destruction of the world to come, is
common to all sins and sinners: but the special threat and commination in that
precept against this sin, seems to relate unto some special revenge that God
will take of it even in the life of this world here, before they depart unto
the sorrows of another: for neither in that or this shall they ever be held
guiltless, but receive a just reward and recompense in both. Concerning this
later what and how grievous it is, you may read in the 23. of Eccles. before
cited; It is briefly thus, and I beseech you mark it, Vir multum jurans, a man
that uses much swearing, shall be filled with iniquity, and a plague or curse
shall never depart from his house. How terrible and dreadful is this! himself
shall be filled with iniquity, and the curse of God shall be upon his house,
nay which is worse, Shall never depart from his house; his Spirit will forsake
the one, that being given up unto a reprobate sense, he may fill up the measure
of his sins, and fat himself against the day of slaughter, be shall be filled
with iniquity; and his blessing will leave the other unto the waste and spoil
of a consuming malediction, until ruin eat it up and wholly root it out, the
curse shall never depart from his house. Gods judgments for other sins are
great, yet they seem to extend themselves but to the third or fourth Generation
at the farthest; how deadly then is this iniquity, and how heavy the revenge,
that stays not there, but runs through all Generations? Shall never depart
from the house, until the house it self depart, and be no more? A bitter curse
indeed, that wastes and spoils wheresoever it comes, but utterly ruins the
House where it remains, nay leaves not so much as any ruins to remain, neither
Stone nor Timber, for it eats up both, as you may read in the Prophet
Zechariah, where you shall find the curse written in a Role, a large curse as
it should seem, for the Role has room enough for more curses than ever the
Spirit of God has registered; for it was twenty Cubits long and ten Cubits
broad, a great and flying Role, which when that Prophet beheld in a Vision, the
Angel which gave the interpretation, said, This is the curse, that goes forth
over the face of the whole earth: according unto which the swearer shall be cut
off, for it shall enter into his house, and remain in the midst of his house,
and shall consume it, with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof, Zech. 5.
4. A strange remaining wherein nothing not so much as Timber and Stone shall
remain, and a heavy malediction when a Man shall be emptied of all his goods,
and filled only with his own Sins, He shall be filled with iniquity! How many
deaths and destructions do attend and inviron this accursed Sin! the death of
his estate and substance which shall be consumed, the death of Sin, or rather
of Grace through Sin! wherewith he shall be filled; and the everlasting death
of Body and Soul in a lake of burning brimstone wherein he shall be perpetually
tormented: So true is that of Syracides before mentioned, but never enough
repeated, it is a word clothed about with death: and we can never enough
repeat his prayer, God grant it be not found in the heritage of Jacob.

Consider these things now, and then say It is a Custom and I cannot leave it;
shall it excuse the Malefactor, if he say to the Judge, I take no pleasure in
Theft, only my fingers have been inured to it from my youth, and I cannot now
forsake the habit? and yet the Thief (who notwithstanding has his Curse
written also in the other side of Zecharies flying Role) may be the better
excused of the two, for though he take no pleasure, yet there may be profit in
the sin; But the Custom whether without or upon pretense shall never excuse
either, till both forsake the Custom. It is this only through which we shall be
held guiltless, and by which alone we may remove this Curse of God both from
our selves and our houses. And why can it not be done? what should hinder that
we may not forsake it? where lies the labor or wherein does the difficulty
consist that it should be so invincible? Why, what says Chrysostom (Homil. 17.
on Mat.) Nunquid pecuniarum opus est impensa? Nunquid aerumnis and sudore
perficitur? is it a business that requires the expense of any great sums of our
money, or else of our spirits in sweat and painful labor to atchieve it?
Tantummodo Velle sufficit, and totum quod jubetur impletum est: No such thing!
only will, that is, bend thy mind and thy will to it, and the thing required is
presently fulfilled; As use has bred a custom, so disuse must destroy it, and
a contrary use beget a contrary Custom; And sure the Will of man cannot think
of a Custom so easy to be disused as this; all others are deeply rooted in
natural Affections, and therefore hard to be plucked up; but this has no hold
in Nature, not one Appetite in the infirmity of man, that gapes and waters
after it, it can neither quench the Thirst, nor kill the Hunger of any desire
whereunto our Corruption is subject; but is only an external, a naked and a
bare Custom which only use has begotten, and does still nourisn, and disuse
without any great difficulty can again starve and strangle, Tantummodo velle
sufficit, only set thy will to it, and the business is ended; for as St. Austin
has it, lib. 8. Conses. In the ways of God, Ire and pervenire, is nothing, but
Velle ire, to walk is only to will, and whosoever wills, cannot but walk, but
then it must be velle fortiter and integre, no cold and faint desire, but a
strong, a total and a resolute will. The sluggard may be willing to rise, and
yet for all that lie still in his warm Bed; but it is not a Will that he has
but only a Velleity or willingness, for when he will, he rises, yea when he
wills he cannot possibly choose but rise, for the body does naturally obey the
mind so easily and readily, ut vix a servitio discernatur imperium, that the
wit of man (says St. Austin,) can hardly discern between the command of the
one and the execution of the other; And therefore to will is to do, and he that
does not do, did never will; he that does not do what is possible for him to
do, did never will, since if he will such things, it is impossible for him not
to do. So that rightly in this Velle sufficit, there is nothing required but
thy Will, yet thy full and total Will, not a saint and lazy Velleity, but a
resolved Will, that is ever accompanied with watchful and diligent endeavor,
which the Tongue of all other does especially require of us, (as the same
Father elsewhere speaks) Lingua facilitatem habet motus, in udo posita est,
facile labitur in lubrico, The Tongue has a great facility in motion, and is
seated in a moist and slippery place, where it is easy to slide of it self, but
much more through Custom; And therefore quanto illa cilius movetur, tanto tu
adversus illam fixus esto, The more movable the Tongue is, the more immovable
and fixed must be thy resolution and Care; and the longer the Custom, the
greater thine intention to break it. For vigilance will conquer it, and the
fear of God will beget vigilance, and the meditation that thou art a Christian,
that must render an account of all at the last day, is able to instill the fear
of God into thy heart, says the same St. Austin, who does also encourage us
not only by his exhortation, but even by his own example, who seems to have
been as deeply engaged in this evil habit as another; but how freed he himself?
Timendo Deum Jurationem abstulimus de ore nostro, The fear of God (says he)
stripped it from my Tongue, Luctatus sum, etc. For I wrestled with the evil use
and wrestling I called upon God, and Gods assistance delivered me from the
Custom: And now, nihil mihi facilius quam non jurare, there is nothing so easy
to me as not to swear.

Beloved, let us imitate the holy Father and we shall also as easily vanquish,
he has beaten out a straight and plain path to victory, and we need only to
tread in his steps; And therefore with him, Let us cast up our eyes upon that
sacred and dreadful Majesty which we offend, and then fear, and fearing
wrestle, and wrestling call, and calling, we shall certainly receive
assistance, undoubtedly to conquer yea and to insult over it conquered, with a
Nihil mihi facilius, nothing is now so easy unto me as not to swear. And sure
the fear of God is ever the beginning of Wisdom, especially here, where the sin
is the direct opposite to it, as being a presumptuous irreverence in the very
face and against the very honor of the Almighty, which cannot possibly consist
with his fear, which is the surest bank and bulwork against all ungodliness.
And therefore, when that like a Flood-hatch is plucked up and cast aside, no
marvel if dishonor be presently poured forth upon God, and men become filled
and overflown with Iniquity: And as little marvel that the Lord for both
respects, as well for our benefit and good as for the fear and reverence of his
own Name, injoineth this as the very first thing we should beg of him in our
prayers, Sanctificetur Nomen tuum, hallowed be thy Name: and as the first thing
inhibited with a special note of revenge ( for he will not hold him guiltless
that takes his Name in vain;) and as a prime instruction of the first Sermon
that ever he preached, I say unto you swear not at all. That which he was so
careful as to make the Instruction of his first Sermon, the first petition in
his prayer, and the first revenge in the Decalogue, cannot be thought a matter
of light importance: but must needs argue it a sin no less odious unto himself
than pernicious unto man; for which reason, St. James seems worthily to enlarge
our Savior's instruction, swear not at all with an Ante omnia, above all
things, my brethren, swear not at all. To whose exhortation, we may all yet
well add another, Ante omnia, of Prayer above all things. O Lord plant thy fear
in our hearts that we swear not at all; If the awful fear of thy Majesty may
not deter us, at least let the dreadful fear of thy Judgments terrify us from
this presumptuous sin, that it get not the dominion over us: So shall we be
innocent from the great offense, and freed from the great malediction, Thy
curse upon our selves, and houses whilst we live, and destruction of Body and
Soul in everlasting sorrow when we die. Which the Lord of his infinite mercy
avert; and instead thereof grant unto us, so to Reverence his holy Name now, as
we may be admitted with Saints and Angels everlastingly to magnify and adore
it, in thy Eternal Kingdom hereafter. Whereunto God of the same infinite
Goodness, etc.

Amen.
A SERMON OF THE DUTY of MAN.
SERMON II. Upon ECCLES. xii. 13.
Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his
Commandments. For this is the whole Duty of Man. For God, etc.
THIS whole Book is nothing else, but a Search and Enquiry of King Solomon into
that grand and famous Question de Summo Bono, what may be the chief Wisdom and
happiness of Man in this Mortality. And this Verse with that other which
follows, as they close up the Book, so they contain the Conclusion of the
point, a full discovery and resolution of that which in the former Chapters was
but fearched after and enquired into: whereunto his answer is short and plain,
but thus, Fear God and keep his Commandments. This only the whole matter of his
Conclusion; and that we may take it for full satisfaction to the Question, he
assures us, that it is the Conclusion too of the whole matter, Let us hear, etc.

A Conclusion then we may be bold to term it, for so it is, and so it terms it
self: A Conclusion that has two parts: Fear God, and keep his Commandments.
And both backed with two Reasons, (He will not beg the Conclusion, but prove it)
For this is the duty, the whole duty, not of the Priest or some of the People,
but universally of Man. Every Man's Duty, and the whole Duty of every Man: That
is the first Reason. There is a second in the next Verse, and I may mention it,
though at this time not meddle with it, drawn from the day of Gods Retribution:
For there is a day approaching wherein he will make a severe enquiry into this
Duty, censure the Breakers Terribly, and honor the Observers Eternally. For
God will bring every work into Judgment, etc.

So that you see he does not beg the Conclusion, if he beg any thing, it is
Audience and Attention, which indeed he does in a Solemn Preface for the
purpose, Let us hear, etc.

And this too he seeks to win with reasons of weight, as well as beg: For it is
a Conclusion, and that no trivial, no narrow one neither, but material and
universally material, worth the hearing.

These downright points grate something close upon the Soul; and men it seems
do not much (...) the hearing of them, and therefore he is driven to Pray and
Preface for Audience, before he delivers them, and to back them strongly too,
when they are delivered, for Acceptance: That so his distasteful Conclusion
lying between both, between the Preface and Proof, might be fortifyed behind
and before, in the Van and in the Rear, be led in and carried out with Reasons
and Arguments, that might procure and gain it entertainment. So then we have
these Three, the Preface, the Conclusion, and the Proof. The Conclusion, that
is well seated in the midst, has Two Branches: The Proof that follows, Two
Reasons; and the Preface in the front, Two Insinuations. Of these in their
order, so far as the Text shall lead us. And first a word only or two of the
Preface for Audience. Audiamus, Let us hear, etc.

For the truth is, every Man has not an Ear apt in itself for such
Conclusions; nor can have, so long as it is farced and stopped up with the filthy
brood of their own Corruptions. Indeed every Man has an Ear, but not an Ear to
hear, at least not to hear all things; and therefore when he utters such Points
as these, He that has Ears to hear, let him hear, says not Solomon, but our
Savior himself. They are sad and sullen Duties, Fear God, and keep his
Commandments, and of an harsh sound, as seeking to beat us from those delights,
which peradventure, we are not resolved as yet to forsake. And then that which
is distasteful to the mind, will never prove over-pleasant to the Ear. Let us
indeed seek out delightful words, such as may comply with Men's desires, set our
invention to hunt, like Esau, after Venison, make Men savory meat, such as
their Soul loves; with what Appetite does the Ear presently fall to, and how
ready themselves (though couzened with a Goat instead of Venison like blind
Isaac) even to bles^ (...) us for it? There needs no Audiamus, no Exhortations,
or Prefaces for attention here; it is Music to their itching Ears, and they
suck it as the Ox does water; but precepts of Duty, and days of Doom, or the
like are bitter Pills and will not down without gilding, though Solomon himself
be the Physician and Administer. His very Person, yea but his Name, a Man would
think might be enough to prevail: Solomon the Wise! Solomon the King! Solomon
the Preacher! and all by way of Supereminence, the Wisest of Men, the Royallist
of Kings, the most Excellent of Preachers; who shall not attend unto him, and
even hang narrantis ab ore, if he but open his lips? And yet in such cases as
these, (though he well knew his own Wisdom and Power) yet he is not so
confident of his Authority and Person, but thinks it well if he may gain
hearing, though he pray and exhort for it himself, and give himself too, for an
Example in it, become both Preacher and Auditor, not refusing to include
himself in that Duty which he does urge upon others; for so it lies, Let us
hear, etc. It is the next way for our words to take, when we require nothing of
our hearers, but what we our selves are as ready to do and perform; an easy
matter it is to bind heavy burdens for other men's shoulders, but it is not so
easy to persuade the people to take them up to bear them, so long as the
binders, like those Pharisees in the Gospel, refuse to touch them with the
least of their Fingers. If we think to awaken the World out of their dead
sleeps, it will not be enough to Crow unto others, unless withal we shall beat
our Wings too on our own sides. It will make a double noise, and the likelier
to pierce the Ear when it comes, not with an Audite vos, or Audiant illi, do
you hear, or let them hear, but like Solomon in this place, with an Audiamus
nos, Let us be hearers as well as speakers, especially in such Conclusions as
this: Let us hear the Conclusion, etc.

And sure it is something the likelier to be heard, and regarded too, for that,
were it nothing else, that yet it is a Conclusion, a truth orderly drawn, and
deduced from its undoubted principles; a discourse that flutters not up and
down at random, like a seeled Dove, but flies on to its period, like and Eagle
to her stand, cutting its way through the vanity and vexation too of all things
else, and not staying until it come to pitch and rest it self on a Conclusion
firm and stable, even the Fear and Service of God; which as it is our whole
duty here, so will prove our happiness eternal hereafter in that day, when God
shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be
good or whether it be evil. And this shows it to be something more than a bare
conclusion, a material one, of and to the matter, indeed to that matter, which
of all other is most material. Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole matter,
etc. And that certainly is one degree higher, and would require too an higher
degree of regard, that it is not only an orderly Conclusion but a material and
important; No curious, idle, frivolous dispute de lana caprina, no thin empty
hungry speculation of the Schools, though these be the only conclusions the
delicate ears of most Men desire to be tickled withal, such as may exercise the
wit, but no way affect the Conscience. And indeed it is a principal Stratagem
of the Arch-enemy of Mankind by curious impertinences to divert the mind from
those real and necessary points that concern their Souls, and the welfare of
them for ever: An unhappiness whereof these latter times have sufficiently
tasted, the Children of the Church for these many years employing their wits in
nothing so willingly as in wrangling with their Mother, and that about trifles,
every light Ceremony and almost Circumstance, that concerns but the outward
forms of the external worship of God, neglecting in the mean time that, which
is indeed material, the internal truth and substance of his service. But to
such wayward contentious spirits, I shall now only say, it were much better for
them to leave such unprofitable disputes, and betake themselves to obedience,
and if they fear not God, yet at least that they would honor the King,
reverence the Church, and keep the Commandments of both, for this is their duty
too, and this indeed would be to some purpose, that so they might be at leisure
to set their working heads about some more pertinent questions, not about a Cap
or a Surplice or the like, but rather about such as are solid, such as that in
the Gospel, Quid faciendum? What shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?
and pursue it home, not leaving until they have brought it to Solomon's
Conclusion here, Fear God and keep his Commandments. For this is the Conclusion
of every material question, not only of the matter, but the matter too of all
Conclusions that are material: For it is the Conclusion totius materiae, which
is our last degree, and the highest, as universal as material, of the whole
matter.

But of what whole matter? of the matter of this whole book? Yes of this and of
all Books else, all Divine Books else whatsoever; and so much we have here
expressly in the inference of it, of making many Books there is no end, and much
study is a weariness of the flesh, the verse immediately precedent. And
therefore that we might have all in little he infers this, as briefly including
the whole matter, not only of this and those books that were already written,
but of all such also as should be ever written hereafter.

And sure all our discourses are but vain and empty, if not impious, at least
they will conclude nothing to the purpose, unless they draw all at length unto
this Conclusion, which is every way total whether we regard knowledge or
action: For when we have imbroiled and wearied our selves in the pursuit of the
things of this world, it will be to no purpose, no though they succeed
according to our desires; For what shall it profit a Man to gain the whole
World, and enjoy it too for a season, if when he has done, he lose his own
Soul afterward for ever? After all his vain labor spent, he will find this is
the only business and profitable employment he must set himself down unto in
the end. When we have entangled our selves in all those fine and delicate webs
of the Seraphical Doctors, which when once we come within Ken of the Port of
Death, whither all winds serve to drive us, will be swept away in an instant,
like those of the Spider; when I say all these aerial disputes are ended, this
will be found the only solid Conclusion, whereunto our meditations must betake
themselves at the last, as being the last and utmost issue, end and upshot of
all Conclusions speculative or practick, to be done or to be studied, Fear God
and keep his Commandments. It is the whole duty of Man, rightly therefore the
Conclusion of the whole matter. So much does Solomon magnify his plain and
despised text, that if it may not be received upon his authority, request and
example, it might yet be entertained for its own worth, as being rightly drawn,
material and universal, that so the plainness of it might be recompensed with
the importance. This then for the urging of attention is but right and just,
and therefore Audiamus, Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter. We can
do no less, and that we may do so, hear it indeed, we will now pass from the
Preface to the Conclusion it self, from the Conclusion of the matter, to the
matter of the Conclusion, Fear God and keep his Commandments; but we must begin
with the first, Deum time, fear God, and then keep his Commandments.

And well do we begin here, at which all Religion, Piety, and true Wisdom does
begin: So says our own Solomon, and so David his Father before him, Psalm. cxi.
2^.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: But the Son of Syrach goes
farther, and makes it to begin and finish it too unto the full, for the fear of
the Lord, Ecclus. i. 16
says he, is the fullness of wisdom; yea not only begins and fulfils, but
crowns it also, The fear of the Lord is the crown of wisdom. Ecclus. i. 18
Indeed I scarce know any thing, whereof more contrarieties seem to be
delivered, than of this fear of the Lord: Fear has pain in it, and he that
fears is not perfect in love, says St. John. 1 John iv. 18.
But what says Siracides; The fear of the Lord makes a merry heart, and
gives joy and gladness. Ecclus. i. 12
Perfect love casts out fear, says the same St. John in that place: Nay not
so, The fear of the Lord is clean and endures for ever, says David. Psalm.
xix. 10
Again, Work out your salvation with fear and trembling, says St. Paul unto
the Philippians: Tou have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear,
says the same Apostle unto the Romans: Romans viii.
what is this but fear and fear not? yea what else says our Savior? Fear not,
little Flock, for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom: Matt. x.
And yet fear him that can cast body and Soul into Hell fire, says our Savior
again unto the same Flock: If assured of the Kingdom, what need they fear the
fire of Hell? and if they may fear that, how assured of the Kingdom? Of
necessity therefore, to reconcile these seeming contradictions, Divines have
been driven to distinguish of fears and persons too, unto whom they are
appliable; For indeed all fear is not of one sort, but is diverse, according to
the diversity of objects which it respects: if it look upon secular and
worldly evils (for generally Timor est expectatio mali) and through too much
apprehension run into excess, it then takes the name of Timor mundanus, a
worldly and secular fear, when men fear men more than God, temporary and
corporal evils, more than ghostly and eternal; And this fear is always evil,
and so are they ever in whom it has dominion; and when it has not dominion,
yet because it has undoubtedly in all, that are not perfect in love, some
greater hold than it should have, that of our Savior is but just, and for the
most part seasonable unto all, Fear not those that can kill the body, but fear
him that can cast both body and soul into Hell fire. Again, if it look upon
God, and that Hell, which in his justice he has prepared for sinners, as our
Savior here commands, the fear indeed is then good, because as you see
commanded, and besides is an act of faith and restrains from evil; And
therefore they that simply condemn it, do but cut the banks and pluck up
hatches, the better to make way for a deluge of wickedness: But yet if it rest
there, and look no farther; if our obedience have no better motive than this,
though the fear be good, it is not yet so good as it should be, for the man is
still evil, and his fear therefore so long but slavish, and so it is termed
Timor servilis, an illiberal and servile fear; And this is that fear which, as
St. John says, has pain in it, as curbing men in their desires; and we may
add imperfection too, as not able to sanctify their Persons: yet is it, as the
Son of Syrach speaks, the beginning of wisdom, and leads unto that which is
perfect; for by constant forbearance of evil, though out of terror, men may
come at length to love and delight in goodness, and then every degree of such
love casts out a degree of that fear, till perfect love at last casts out
all fear, all that is painful, but withal induces another fear, of another
both name and nature, Timor castus and filialis, a chaste and filial fear, the
fear of offense, not of punishment, a fear not only good in it self, but such
as makes the subject good too wherein it resides. And this fear has two Eyes,
with the one it beholds God, as the supreme and Sovereign good not only in
himself, but of all those that adhere unto him, and then loving him as such,
they cannot but withal fear to offend, or lose that God and goodness, which
above all things they love: But the other Eye fastens it self on God, as no
less great than good, and contemplating, as well as it may, or as far as it
dares, the Sanctity, Power, and Immensity, the infinite Majesty and glory of
the divine Essence or Deity, is stricken with admiration and adoration too of
so great and inconceivable Excellence, from whence it takes another
denomination, and is styled Timor reverentialis, a devout and reverential fear.
It is true that the time will come, when even this filial fear shall lose one
of these lights, and be no whit the less comely and beautiful for that neither:
for as the filial fear throws out that which is servile, so fruition will cast
out the first part of that which is filial. For being confirmed in goodness,
there is no room for the fear, when there is no danger of offending, or losing
that God which we enjoy. But this reverential fear is never thrown out by any
thing else, but is that fear whereof David spoke; The fear of the Lord is clean
and endures for ever. It attends not on this life only, but runs it self into
immortality; the fear of blessed Angels now, and shall be the fear of all holy
Saints, as here, so in that blessedness for ever hereafter: And then indeed it
will be the fullness of wisom, and the Crown both of it, and that fullness also.
But as on these several fears, so are we to look on men too, and their several
conditions, otherwise our discourse will not be so real as rational: But yet
though these fears abstractedly considered, have their several forms whereby
they are differenced, and are in supreme degrees some of them incompatible; yet
in the concrete as they subsist in their subjects, they are not usually in this
life so intense and pure, but that, though one be predominant, they are all
three mixed for the most part and compounded together. Whence it is, that holy
men, even the greatest Saints and Servants of God, whose fear therefore filial,
and founded in love, yet because liable, through this body of death, unto
frailties and sometimes unto falls, are now and then found to be sensible also
of his wrath: Even David himself, whose Confidence otherwhiles can carry him
through the valley of death without fear, yet at other seasons is driven to cry
out, A Judiciis tuis timui, I was afraid of thy judgments; yea from my youth
up, thy terrors have I suffered with a troubled mind. Holy Job, though a
perfect and upright man, by the mouth of God himself, yet not so perfect in all
his ways, and upright, but that we may sometimes read these sad complaints. The
Arrows of the Almighty stick fast within me, the venont whereof drink up my
Spirits; and, Quid faciam, cum surrexerit ad judicandum Deus? Job xxxi.
And if it thus befall the green Trees, how shall it fare with the dry? If such
Worthies so complain and cry out under the terror of divine judgment, how
shall we that are worse, dare to reject it, as servile? Certainly he that does
so, does withal take himself for perfect in love, since perfect love alone it
is, that can cast out all fear that is painful. Presu^mption indeed can do the
like, cast it out too for a time, but will undoubtedly bring great fears upon
them in the end. And therefore for such as grow high through the favors of
God, and more consident than their behavior under them can warrant, the
Scriptures want not corrosives to beat down the proud flesh, and abate the
presumptuous Spirit. Be not high minded but fear; yea work out your Salvation
with fear and trembling also. But on the other side, where this fear and
trembling has taken hold, and the humbled Soul steeping it self in the sense
and sorrow of her sins, comes to labor under its own grief, in this Case there
wants not Balm in Gilead, neither Lenitives, nor Cordials for the wounded
Spirit; Ye have not received the Spirit of bondage again to fear, but the
Spirit of Adoption, that cries Abha Pater; and what is your Fathers will? why,
fear not little Flock, it is your Fathers will to give such for their sorrow
now, a Kingdom of joy hereafter, to wit, in sensu composito, if they run not
back again into those sins, for which they are so sorrowful.

Thus the Scriptures are not contradictory, only they suit diverse fears with
different properties, and contrary dispositions with as opposite exhortations,
as is but just and reasonable; To scatter the proud in their imaginations, but
to bind up and strengthen the brokenhearted. Now as these fears, more or less,
at one time or other pertain unto all, but to our gries, if not shame of
Christianity are scarce truly to be found in any; so are they all here in my
Text, not all generally only and in gross under the name of fear, but with
special intimations of all, and each of them in several.

For first, here is the worldly fear, but forbidden; as negatives are ever
under their affirmatives. Fear God, not the world, or worldly evils which press
only the body, but that God which can cast both Body and Soul into everlasting
fire. Secondly, the very mention of duty in the first reason implies a
superiority, and that ever requires Reverence, another of the Fears; And when
duties are performed formally on that manner because duties, and such, as in
the breach whereof we know the God, whom we love, is offended, it is the fear
then of offense not of punishment: and both these make up the entire filial
fear. But yet the fear of punishment is not left out neither, as good in it
self, though materially servile, for that is a motive too, and as the least so
the last of all; For God will bring every work into judgment, etc. as it is in
the next verse. So they are all joined here in the text, and when they are
joined too in man their subject, the ywill make up that complete fear which
indeed is the full and complete worship, internal worship and service of God;
And therefore in the Scripture, it is usually taken even for our whole
Religion, Piety and Adoration of the Divinity, according to that of David, O
come hither, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord, that is the worship of
the Lord. Psalm. xliii.
So Jonah unto the Mariners that enquired of him, I am an Hebrew, says he, and
I fear the God of heaven, and that made the Sea and the dry land. Jon. i.
So Jacob in like manner when he swear unto Laban, he swore by the fear of his
Father Isaac, to wit by that God whom his Father Isaac feared, that is
worshipped and served. Genesis xxxi. 53.
Whence it is that what Moses terms fear, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God,
that the Septuagint, and our Savior himself renders by worship, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Deuteronomy. vi.
And therefore we shall not need to scruple much at the enquiry, Matt. iv.
why the Text says not Believe or Love, or the like, but rather Fear God and
keep his Commndments; for he that has said, Fear, has said all; no word can
go beyond this: It includes both faith, and hope, and love, and all, yea
something more than all. Not the meanest of these fears, the fear of
punishment, but implies faith, and the fear of offense both faith and hope and
love also; but the reverential fear is love, and something more than love, even
Veneration too, as acknowledging the love to be, not like that of ordinary
friendships inter Pares, between Companions, but at a distance, and such an
infinite distance on Gods part, as requires the lowest Reverence and Adoration
from all that love him. For though it has pleased his goodness to make and
style us his friends, yet I hope we do not cease to be his servants, nor he to
be our Lord, every way our Supreme and Sovereign Lord: So indeed our Lips style
him at every word, and by that style and Title too he himself requires his fear
at our hands; if I be your Lord, ubi Timor meus, where is my fear? Where indeed
his fear of Reverence? for he is Lord of Majesty and Glory. Where the fear of
offense? for he is the Lord no less good than glorious: and as terrible as
either, to his contemners; where then the fear of his wrath? And sure the
question is pertinent enough, and it is but right that he demands, where it is,
or what may become of it? It seems to be fled with Astraea to Heaven, sure I
am, it may trouble a man to find it out any where upon earth. His judgments are
far off, as David speaks, even out of our sight, at least they seem yet to be
beheld with such security, as a Man would think most Men were in a league with
death and at a Covenant with Hell, as the Prophet speaks, so little fear is
there of his revenge: And sure they that fear not punishment, will hardly be
restrained by any filial, the fear of offense. Indeed it were something well,
if we did not offend with less trouble, than any thing else. And as for the
other, the fear of reverence, and that principally in the holy place where his
special presence has made it especially due, that is so far from regard, as it
seems to have gotten an ill name of late: we are grown some of us into such a
familiarity with God, as the reverence of his Sanctuary, or of him in it, or
any decency or dignity that may serve thereunto is suspected now a days for an
out-work of Popery: God grant we do not make it Idolatry too to reverence even
God himself in his Temple. Is not the question just then in these times also,
ubi timor meus? where is his fear indeed, where any of his fears? sure they
have all left this world, and it seems left in it little but worldly fear
behind them; That indeed and that alone runs through the world, and only
prevails; For her we duck like Die-dappers at every Pebble that is thrown at us
by a powerful hand, and yet can stand up sturdily, like Capaneus upon the walls
of Thebes, against the Thunderbolts of the Almighty; we are become, as he said
well, Giants, yea even Gods against God, but Slaves unto Men, whose Bodies and
Consciences are sometimes equally rotten. The revenge of the Law and shame of
the world is for the most part all our fear; so we may avoid these, save our
goods from loss, our names from disgrace, our skin from hurt, our bodies from
death, we can sin on merrily, it little matters for him that can cast both body
and soul into Hell fire. This is the whole of most men's fears; but fear not ye
their fear, neither be afraid, but sanctify the Lord himself, Is metus vester,
is pavor esto, let him be your fear, let him be your dread. But what then, is
God only to be feared and nothing besides? Isa. viii. 12.
surely yes, God and not any thing else, if any thing shall stand in
competition or opposition with God; but yet under God, and in subordination
unto him, we are to fear God and others too for Gods sake; And all the people
feared exceedingly God, and his servant Moses. So the Apostle, fear to whom
fear, and honor to whom honor appertains, and both sure appertain to all
Superiors, but eminently above all to him that is Supreme: Reverential fear,
for he has a character of the Divinity upon him: Fear obediential, and filial
fear too, for he is Pater Patriae: And fear of his wrath also for he is Gods
Minister for vengeance. And therefore fear the King, for he carries not the
sword in vain. Yea and I must tell you fear the Church too, and those in the
Church, that have power over us also, another kind of power indeed, but yet
such as renders them Gods Ministers in like manner, and your Ghostly Fathers,
and therefore will require in their degree obedience and reverence too, yea and
fear of their wrath also: for they want it not for the wicked when occasions
serve, and therefore fear these too: for they carry not the Keys in vain. The
Powers that are, they are all of God, and he that resists the power, whether
Temporal or Spiritual, resists the ordinance of God, and receives damnation
unto himself. It is true these are two distinct powers, yet is it as true also,
they are not simply collateral, but subordinate, ever subordinate when the
Prince is Christian, as having, though not all power in himself, yet a Princely
dominion over all Persons, and that in all Causes whatsoever; neither is more
claimed, and less cannot be denied. For two Supremacies in a Kingdom are no
less inconsistent, than two Omnipotencies in the world; And therefore the
Apostle gives unto him universal subjection, and conscientious too. Let every
one, yea omnis anima, let every soul be subject to the higher powers. But
however this Spiritual power be not collateral simply, but subordinate unto the
Royal; yet is it in regard of its original, and derivation, clearly
independent, as being not derivable into the Priesthood from any Prince or
Potentate upon earth, but immediately from him who has it written on his
Garment, and on his Thigh, The Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. Rev,
And being thus distinct without derivation, it is not possible the censures of
the one should come forth in the name of the other, but only indeed in Christ's
name and in their own persons, who in this are the Ministers not of the King,
but of Christ, as exercising no part of the power belonging to the Sword, but
only of those Keys, that properly are their own, and underivable too from any
upon earth, but those of their own Order. However therefore these powers are
subordinate, yet two distinct powers they are, and both as was said,
immediately from God, and both therefore to be feared of men. And sure this
latter, though the lesser, yet not a little to be feared neither; for though
the Kings Laws bind the Conscience, yet his revenge for the breaches of them
cannot reach home unto the Soul: His Sword is material and can but lash the
Body, though so lash it, as sometimes to divide it from the Soul; but St. Paul's
Sword is spiritual and reaches directly to the spirit, dividing the Soul not
indeed from its own Body, but from the Church the Body of Christ, and so from
Christ too, the head of the Body: a power therefore in it self no way
contemptible, it is Christ's own, and he the more careful to vindicate it from
contempt, yea not it only, but the power and person too of the meanest Priest
amongst us: for that of his concerns all, He that despises you, despises me,
Mat^
and he that despises me, despises him that sent me. But yet all this, were
not that other Royal Power propitious upon earth, I think would be of little
force in these days to preserve them from contempt, or confusion, crushing
confusion; For did not the Sword of the Prince defend the Keys of the Priest,
they might well put them under their girdle, if not under the door and be gone.
But blessed be God, he that is the defender of the Faith and Doctrine of the
Church, in his Piety and Princely Goodness is pleased to be the Defender also
of her Jurisdiction and Discipline. Et defensoribus istis tempus eget, for
otherwise the Antihierarchical of these times and indeed Antimonarchical too,
as not well affecting any either Power or Prerogative but their own, were it
not for this, would soon level all by their own Rule, that is level with the
ground, lay all Power Ecclesiastic and Honor too, like David's, in the dust,
if not rubbish even Monasterial. But then they may do well to think of another
dust too, the dust of our heels, which if but justly shaken, there is one that
assures us the sorrows of such Contemners will prove more insufferable, than
those of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of Judgment. It is but right therefore
and well too, that the Regal Power is the Superior, that so as it is the
Moderator and Governor of the temporal, it might be also the Protector of the
spiritual, causing that fear and reverence which is due unto both, to be paid
also respectively unto either. Neither in requiring this unto them do we divert
from the right object of fear in my Text, for it is but fear God still. For God
himself has in a sort Deified Authority. He has given them of his own power,
and imparted his very Name unto their Persons. I have said ye are Gods, and ye
are all sons of the most high; And Gods indeed, not only by appellation, but in
effect also, for the great and universal benefit which they bring unto mankind;
For were not Man thus made a God unto Man, Men would soon become Wolves unto
themselves and devour one another. And therefore to fear such Men, is not to
fear Men, but God, since the fear is not so much exhibited unto their naked
persons as unto those beams and participations of the Divinity wherewith they
are clothed. And in this sort, it is not amiss to say, that God and not any
thing else is to be feared; And indeed he that thus fears God, he only fears
nothing else; though the waves of the Sea rage horribly, and though the Hills
of the Earth be carried into the midst of the Sea, nay as the Poet, Si fractus
illabatur orbis, Impavidum ferient ruinae, though the whole world should
disjoint and fall, he would be buried in the ruins of it without fear, for he
fears none but God, and the offending of that God whom he fears; That indeed he
does, as desirous to obey him too, as well as fear him: and so we must all, it
is our Duty also, for so it follows: Fear God, and keep his Commandments; the
second Part of our Conclusion, keep his Commandments.

These two are inseparable ever, and it is but just, that they are not here
only, but so often joined together in Scripture; The fear of the Lord, says
David, is the beginning of Wisdom, and he subjoins, but a good understanding
have all they that do thereafter: So God himself, Job xxviii. 28.
as Job testifies, And unto man he said, as if it were the product and total of
all that is or may be said unto him, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and
to depart from evil, that is understanding: The self same in substance with
Solomon here, Fear God and keep his Commandments. Neither may it possibly be
otherwise; Nature has linked them as close as Scripture; for no man departs or
can depart from the one, the Law of God, that does not first depart from the
other, the Fear of God. The soul and body of man have not a stricter union,
than these two, the one the body, the other the very soul of the new and
interior man. And therefore the original has it col ha adam, for this is not
the whole duty, but the whole man, the whole spiritual man indeed: The outward
works of the Law are wrought by the body, and such righteousness of the body is
but the body of righteousness; but the fear of the Lord sanctifies the soul,
and the righteousness of the soul is the very soul of righteousness: And the
spiritual man created in holiness and true righteousness must have both these
parts as well as the animal, a soul and a body too: Some men's righteousness
indeed is all body, do many things good and commanded, but for ends upon by and
vicious respects: here is a Carcass of holiness, but no soul to inform it, only
hypocrisy inhabits and gives it motion; as the Devil sometimes, they say, does
the body of a dead man: Others will be altogether Soul; Fear God as much as you
will, every man likes it well, and thinks he does it too, as well as any man:
but bring them to the Commandments, to the corporal works either of Charity to
the distressed, or of bounty for the public honor and worship of that God,
whom they pretend to fear, and then they leave you; This they begin to doubt
whether it may be any part of their duty or no: But however the soul of the old
and outward man may be immortal, though severed from the body, yet is it not so
with the new man: Sever the fear of God, from the observance of his
Commandments, and it will instantly cease to be fear. As St. John of love, so
may we say of this fear that includes it: He that says he fears God, and
keeps not his Commandments, is a liar. Again, observe the Commandments but not
in the true fear of God, and it will be, not observance, but dissimulation; A
Liar this, of all Liars, whose hypocrisy can make the very spirit of wickedness
to inform and actuate the comely limbs and members of true holiness. A
prodigious conjunction, and therefore a Monster detestable both to God and man!
It is but right then, and as it should be that these two here, make but one
whole conclusion, one whole duty, one whole matter, one whole man. They may be
distinguished, they may not be divided: God has joined them together, and let
no man seek to put them asunder, but he that fears God, let him keep his
Commandments also.

Keep his Commandments? durus est hic sermo, this is an hard saying, and the
world sure will be hardly brought to this part of the conclusion, yea it were
something well, if those that seem purest amongst us, did not conclude clean
contrary; That the Commandments were not given to be kept, yea that there is no
possibility for any man, though under the state of grace, at any time, or in
any action to keep without violation even the least Commandment.

But two things there are, that seem especially to deceive men in this point:
First, an erroneous opinion, that a spiritual action cannot be good, so long as
it may be bettered, as having so much of sin, as it wants of absolute
perfection, which they suppose, the Law under the high terms of eternal death
does require at every man's hands. But this is apparently mistaken, for evident
it is, that the Law under the penalty enforces only essential goodness, not
so, that, which is gradual, otherwise the holy Angels may now sin in Heaven,
for they excel one another as in nature so in their zeal and operations, yea he
that is holier than the Angels, Christ himself would be endangered, of whom the
Scriptures do plainly affirm, that he prayed at one time more earnestly than at
another; And rightly, for goodness is not seated in puncto, in any precise nick
or indivisible Center, but has its just latitude, and is capable of degrees of
comparison in the Concrete, bonus, melior, optimus: So Priscian will instruct
them with this opinion, not admitting it has false Latin in it, and false
Divinity both at once. This the first.

The Second thing, is another supposal too, and little less erroneous than the
former. That in every good and divine action the flesh lusting against the
spirit, does by that malignant influence, corrupt and vitiate even with sin the
whole operation. But what if the lusting flesh do not always move and in every
action? What if when it moves, it does not yet enter into composition with that
act, that subdues and quells it? as indeed it does not: what if the virtue of
such conquering acts be the greater by the opposition? as indeed it is ever the
more excellent, by how much it breaks through stronger resistance, according to
that of our Savior, virtus mea in infirmitate perficitur. Lastly, what if
every act of lust it self be not in true propriety a Sin? As if it be merely
natural, great Clerks conceive it is not, because sin is ever voluntary and
moral. They take it for a true Rule, ^Lex datur non appetitui sed voluntati,
and so they conceive our Savior does interpret it, when he makes not every one
whose flesh lusts, but him only that lusts in his heart, that is, with his
will, to be an Adulterer. St. Paul, they suppose, follows his Masters
interpretation, and though no man does define lust more than he, yet he does it
with caution, as the sin, not of the person, a subject properly not capable of
sin, but of the flesh: I know that in me, but with correction, that is, in my
flesh, there is no good thing; It is no more I that do it, but sin that
dwells in me. And that we take it not for such a sin, as transgresses the
Law, he is bold to say, that the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in
those, that walk not after the flesh, not that have no carnal motions, but
after the Spirit. Romans 8.
St. Austin therefore, they conceive, said well, that when the appetite does
lust but the will does not like it, is as when Eve had eaten, but not Adam. And
as we sinned at the first, not in Eve, but in Adam, so is it still; for unless
Adam eat as well as Eve, the will consent, as well as the appetite water, the
fall is not finished. The lusts therefore and appetites of Nature, if they
arise immediately out of the Body, and be not raised by our unhappy fancy,
which the Will sets on work, or by some act or custom of Sin, which the Will
has already wrought, they are not in their opinion sinful, unless we will make
God the Author of Sin who is the creator of nature and natural appetites, yea
and Christ too the subject of sin, that was not without a natural inclination
directly opposite to the known will of God, otherwise he could never have said
as he does, not my will but thy will be done. No doubt but by the lustings of
the flesh, humane frailties and imperfections more than enough may and do too
often cleave like moles and stains unto the divinest actions of the most
spiritual men; but a mole of frailty is one thing, and the corruption of
mortal-sin another. One thing claudicare in via, to go on though halting
sometimes, and interfering in the way to Heaven: and another to cross out of
it, run counter directly toward Hell. And therefore from such surreptitious
and involuntary defects to conclude, that no man can love God with all his
heart (clean contrary to the testimonies of the Scripture, That the just man
falls seven times a day, to wit into sin, though that Scripture intend no
such matter, that all his righteousness is but a defiled rag, and the divinest
action in the eye of the Law, but a mortal and deadly Sin), is an exaggeration
that does but rack and tenter a truth until it burst into two errors and
dangerous ones, both in Gods regard and man's. As if men were bound unto mere
impossibilities, and God, that hard man in the Gospel, reaping where he does
not sow, and requiring a law at their hands, to whom he gives no ability for
performance. In Gods name therefore and man's too, let us be content to speak as
the Scriptures do, which in this here and more than a thousand places besides
do seriously urge and necessarily require the observance of the Law and keeping
of the Commandments, which St. John tells us, through the grace of Christ are
not grievous neither. Such as will needs speak otherwise, that they may not be
kept either for any time, or in any action, let them take heed lest they open
gates unto impiety, and like those Spies in the 13 of Numbers discourage the
hearts, and weaken the hands of the people of God; yea let them beware, lest
they cast dishonor too as on God himself, so especially on the blessed Spirit
that inhabits, and Christ Jesus our Lord that dwells in his Saints, if all yet
can produce in any, not any thing, but sins. Much better therefore it were to
leave disputing, and give good ear to that of our Savior, He that breaks the
least of these Commandments, and teaches others so to do, shall be least in
the kingdom of heaven; that is, as some interpret, shall least of all others
enter into that Kingdom. For what is this indeed but to withdraw men from their
duty, and teach them disobedience? for even duties cease to be due, whenever
they begin not to be possible. But this is every man's constant duty, and the
whole duty of every man, the invincible reason wherewith Solomon here backs his
conclusion, and withal confutes this opinion. Fear God, and keep his
Commandments, for this is, etc.

The Reason is strong and full: three degrees or ascents there are in it. First
a Duty, and Secondly universally of all men, the duty of man and man's universal
duty, and Thirdly the whole duty of man; And though there be diverse inventions
sought out, many turns and wrenches made to slip this duty, yet one of these
three or other will meet with and refel all our devices: For they that scruple
at the conclusion as impossible, evince that they will not stay there, but be
as apt to quarrel with the duty at least, as not simply necessary; a duty
peradventure in the rigid exaction of the Law, and of such as are under it, as
they were to whom Solomon spoke this; but we are under the Gospel, dead unto
the Law, that we might be married unto one, even to Christ our Lord and our
life; what then has this legal duty of Commandments to do with us, or we with
it, since we are mutually dead one to another?

Yet be we under what times we will, or states either; so long as we lose not
our humanity, so long as we cease not to be men under any, as being not really
dead, but morally, so long it will have to do with us, for this is a duty not
of some times and persons, but universally of man.

Neither were they simply under the Law, to whom this was spoken; led indeed
they were by the economy of the Law, but yet under the promise and promised
seed, and were saved by the Gospel, as we now are, though the Gospel not so
distinctly believed then, as now it is; Neither indeed they, nor any people
else under Heaven, since that promise (The seed of the woman shall bruise the
serpents head) are so merely under the Law either of Moses, or Nature, but that
if they do their duty, keep the Commandments which they have, and glorify God
according to their knowledge, they may (for ought I understand) be saved too by
the Gospel, which they knew not, for even the Gentiles so doing, their
incircumcision shall be counted for circumcision, as the circumcision otherwise
is esteemed but as incircumcision. In that day, when God shall judge the
secrets of all hearts, not simply by the Law, but according to my Gospel, says
the Apostle, Romans 2. And indeed this is the only reason, why this duty
continues still to bind, because men are not under the Law simply, but under
the Gospel; for that is the state only of Devils, whose doom is sealed: and
though the law of their nature cannot be abrogated, as being a branch of
eternal equity, yet they seem not to be liable unto any men's punishment, for
the breaches of it now, because not capable of any reward for the observance.
The Gospel therefore does not evacuate, as St. Paul speaks, but establish the
Law, since every man is therefore bound in duty unto the Law because not
absolutely excluded from all benefit of the Gospel; But we who are under the
fullness of this Gospel, are in a fuller manner tied and in an higher degree
unto the observance of the law, than any people else before that fullness came,
as being bound now by the special coming of the Holy Ghost to keep the
Commandments not in the oldness of the letter, which as it seems was
sufficient, whilst the Heir was but a Child and in minority; but in the newness
of the Spirit; for the Spirit it is which gives life and vigor unto the
Commandments, as being the very strength and power of all lively performance.
And therefore our Savior though he came with Gospel in his mouth, yea was the
Gospel himself, yet think not, says he, that I came to dissolve the law: I
came not to dissolve, but to fulfill it. And that we may know, the true
fulfilling of it, if we think to enter into life, belongs to us, as well as the
entire and perpetual unto himself, after he had vindicated the Text of the Law
from the corrupt glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees, and set it forth in the
highest perfection, if not added perfections above the Law, and beyond that
which was said unto them of old, he closes up all at last with this
conclusion, He that hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken
him unto a wise man. Matt. 7. 24.
What then, though being dead under the law, we become through the favor of
the Gospel to be dead also even unto the law, yet it is but to the condemning
power, the killing letter of the law, that so we might be married unto Christ
our life, since the end of this marriage is but to bring forth fruit unto God,
as St. Paul in that place, and that in the newness of the spirit, which is not
sure to break but to keep with more exactness the Commandments of God. This
therefore a duty still, the duty of Jew and Gentile and Christian too,
universally of all mankind. For this is the whole duty of man, etc.

But though a duty, not only in Solomon's time, but even now under the Gospel,
yet for all that, it may be but a voluntary duty, a freewill offering indeed of
thankfulness and gratitude, or so, but not a necessary duty, necessary unto
life: Our life in this World is our justification in Christ, and Christ and
justification too we have them both by faith, and by faith alone without the
works of the Law: Romans 4.
So St. Paul assures us. But however a duty it is and a necessary duty,
necessary even to life, unless no duty be necessary, or Solomon here be
deceived, For this is the whole duty of man. Justification indeed is that act
of God, which by remission of Sins through Christ puts men into the state of
Life here, and gives them right and title unto Life eternal hereafter. And
though therefore an estate attainable by the Gospel only not by the Law, which
all have transgressed, yet is it most true, that so long as any shall continue
wittingly and deliberately to transgress the Law, they are not capable of this
or any other benefit of the Gospel: The Gospel it self and whole Scriptures are
clear in the point; Now then, says even St. Paul, on whom they rely, speaking
of the time of the Gospel, now then there is no condemnation, and no
condemnation is full justification, but to whom? to them that are in Christ
Jesus, but who are they that follow? which walk not after the flesh but after
the spirit; If any man walk otherwise, he has nothing to do with Christ: If we
say we have Communion with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, says St. John,
and do not the truth, 1 John i. 6. He that loves not his Brother, that is one
of those, that according to him walks in darkness; and as he wants light, so
life too, he has no life abiding in him, yea manet in morte, he remains in
death, 1 John iii. 14. And what is said of one Sinner, is true of all, for be
not deceived, neither Fornicator, Adulterer, unclean person, or covetous, or
any other the like, has any inheritance in the kingdom of God and of Christ.
As little therefore in justification which is the estate of life, and has
right to that inheritance; no marvail therefore, if St. James be bold to
conclude in terms clean contrary, Ye see then, that by works a man is
justified, and not by faith only, James ii. 24. Indeed much stir has been
about the seeming differences between these Apostles: He said not amiss, Meum
and Tuum are the common Barrators of the world, and Faith and Works seem no
less to have broken the peace in the Church. The points have been beaten so
long, as some think it time now they were beaten even out of all discourse; But
the truth is, they are some of the noblest that our Faith does yield, and unto
the Christian Religion of all other most essential though most abused, as
discovering the necessity of the Gospel and invalidity of the Law, with the
main differences and union too of both Law and Gospel; And peradventure are not
driven so home as they might be unless by very few, unto their just and right
issue even unto this day. If any thing lead the way unto that, it must be the
perfect reconciliation of these two, which by diverse ways and distinctions has
been attempted on either side, but not I suppose with so good success as may
fully satisfy; for in this, I take it, Iliacos, intra muros peccalur and extra.
To distinguish of the Law Ceremonial and Moral, as some do, supposing that St.
Paul excludes the works of the Ceremonial Law, and St. James requires those
only of the Moral, is to no purpose; for clear it is, as the Sun, that St. Paul
excludes both, for he disputes against Jew and Gentile, but especially the
works of the Moral Law, as that which is broken by all, and therefore cannot
justify any. Neither will it be more available to distinguish with others of
works preceding faith, works of Nature, and such as follow, and are effects of
faith, works of Renovation and grace: for St. Paul utterly rejects from the
ability of justifying, all works whatsoever, whether before faith or after it,
because the Law being once broken, no after-observance can so satisfy for the
breach, but that it will still condemn all those that shall stand at that
Tribunal. The distinction then of works not prevailing, others fall to
distinguish of justification, and indeed that is the right way, if it be
rightly done: The Romanists according to the Council of Trent make it twofold,
a first, and a second justification: From the first St. Paul removes works, and
St. James they suppose, requires them only to the second: But they are
frustrate in both distinction and application too; for since their second
Justification is but the increase and augmentation of that Righteousness which
is infused in the first, they cannot be two justifications, since more or less
will not afford a specific difference, or numerical either: And were they two,
yet the works which St. James requires, he requires for necessary unto the
first justification as well as the second; for he does instance in Rabab not
justified before, by their own confession: And the works which St. Paul
removes, he removes from the second justification as well as the first, as
first or last never to be found in any. And therefore he makes his instance in
Abraham, that was justified long before even that time of his instance. The
distinction of justification in the obtaining, and of justification already
obtained is much after the same manner, and is choked utterly with the self
same answer. Others on the other side distinguish Justus factus, from Justus
declaratus, of justification before God, and justification in the Eyes of men;
St. James's words they refer unto this, and St. Paul's to the former, but most
erroneously also; for nothing is plainer than that both of them speak of
justification in the sight of God, St. James as well as St Paul; for he plainly
denies salvation unto faith, if not accompanied with works, with an
interrogation, Can thy faith save thee? and proves too, that it cannot, as
being a dead faith, and the faith of Devils, and such sure can justify neither
with God nor man, sooner indeed with men, than with God. That way therefore
which is most general and has been thought the best peradventure, because the
subtlest, is to distinguish between the act of justifying, and the Subject or
Person to be justified: St. James, as is supposed, requiring only the presence
of works in the Subject, which St. Paul removes only from the Act, and is but
thus, in other terms. Fides sola justificat, sed fides quae justificat, non est
sola. This may have a promising look, but will not satisfy neither, but is out
too, and that on both sides, for St. Paul clearly removes the works he speaks
of, from the Person to be justified, as well as from the act that does
justify, non operanti to him that works not, but believes on him, qui
justificat impium, that justifies the ungodly: And St. James requires the
works he speaks of, no less than faith, unto the Act, as well as in the
Subject. His words are express, ex operibus, by works a man is justified, and
not by faith only. Why, but how then shall they be reconciled? surely no way so
well, as by looking unto their different intentions, from whence it will
appear, that St. Paul removes works, all works from being the things that do
justify; and St. James requires them only, as conditions and qualifications
upon which we are justified: For the purpose of St. Paul, is by the breach of
the Law, to demonstrate the necessity of the Gospel, that that only is the
power of God unto Salvation; for since all the world stands culpable before
God, it follows of necessity, that either we must perish without remedy, or
else be justified by a Gospel of mercy, which he well terms the justification
of faith in mere opposition to works, all works, even faith it self, as the
things which may be thought to justify. Now St. James intent is only to
vindicate this wholesome and necessary Doctrine from the abuse of Heretical
Spirits, whose evil words had at once corrupted both St. Paul's meaning and
their own good manners, affirming, that since works could not justify, no
works were necessary, and therefore it mattered little to observe the Law, it
was enough only to believe the Gospel. Against these dissolute Epicures this
Apostle, as St. Augustine observes, wholly directs his dispute, the purpose
whereof is, not to place justification in the works of the Law (for in many
things, says he, we offend all, and if but in one, yet are we guilty of the
whole) but only to show, that unless the works of the Law, though formerly
broken, do come at length to accompany our faith, we can never be justified by
any grace of the Gospel. So then if we divide rightly according to these
intents, we must distinguish of a twofold justification, by Innocence, and by
Pardon; for it must be either by works, or by mercy, a legal justification or
an Evangelical: And of two sorts of works subservient unto these several
justifications, and of two sorts of ways by which they do justify, Works of
Perfection and perpetual perfection, that inherently justify, and formally in
strictness of Law, but are excluded by St. Paul as no where found in any; and
works of Renovation after the breach of the Law, required by St. James in every
one, that expect the justification of the Gospel: Those works perfectly keep
the Law, and never break it; These keep the Law sincerely, but after it is
broken: They justify therefore in themselves, and by their own worth; These
not so, but because found in none but sinners, prepare only and qualify for
the justification of Christ: They justify, these obtain justification: That
strictly the justification of works, this properly the justification of faith,
which is their fountain. And faith alone, alone without these may justify, yea
cannot justify with them; for such works evacuate faith, as not needing it,
which is St. Paul's doctrine. But faith alone without these cannot justify, yea
without them is not faith, not a true and a living faith, which is St. James
his assertion. And in this Reconcilation does appear the reconciliation and
opposition too of both Law and Gospel, Faith and works, how they conspire and
meet, how they jar and refuse to mingle. For the justification of the Law
evacuates Christ, who then died in vain, as St. Paul speaks. For there needs no
Savior where there is no sin; And the justification of Christ disanulls again
that of the Law, as arguing it to be broken, yea and the condemnation of the
Law too, notwithstanding the breach: So they contradict and dissolve one
another; But what the Gospel excludes by remission of sins, it closes withal
again by the manner of remitting: Never pardoning offenses, till they be first
forsaken, and men return again to the observance of the Law; nor yet continuing
that pardon longer, than they shall continue to observe it, saying unto none
but the penitent, Thy sins are forgiventhee; nor yet unto them without saying
also, Sin no more lest a worse thing happen unto thee. So the terms stand thus;
No condemnation from the Law though broken, whenever we return to observe it;
and until we do observe it, no grace or mercy by the Gospel: and so they meet
and are reconciled; For so far the Gospel does establish the Law, yea and
farther, for it not only requires, but gives grace, for the performance of that
it does require, even the observance of the Law. And this reconciliation St.
Paul himself, the great urger of the opposition, every where does acknowledge,
for they are his own words, not the hearers but the doers of the law shall be
justified. And that the law is done by faith is evident, for faith works by
love, and love is the fulfilling of the law. Romans 8.
So the Apostles are both met, St. James requires Faith and Works, St. Paul a
working Faith, working by love, and that even all the Commandments of God, not
so as to justify in themselves, but only to qualify for the justification of
Christ. The Commandments therefore are no freewill offering at pleasure, no
voluntary duty of gratitude only, but a duty necessary unto our justification
here, and eternal welfare, if any be necessary. For this is the whole duty of
m^n. Why, but yet (for there is no end of wrangling, though this wrangle shall
end all) though a duty now, and a necessary, yet since the Gospel affords a
Mediator, were it never so due, the debt we hope may be paid by another, that
is our Surety, and that surety is Christ, who has exactly kept the Law, and is
made unto us Wisdom, Justice, Sanctification and Redemption, so says the
Apostle. But no surety in this kind. That which is the duty of Man, is every
Man's own duty, and must be performed in his own Person. True indeed it is,
Christ our Lord fulfilled the Law exactly, but that we may break it in our
selves, and yet at the same time fulfill it in him that is our Mediator, this I
take it, is not so true. The Apostle says indeed, that he accounted all things
loss and dung too, that he might be found in Christ, not having his own
righteousness, which is of the Law, but the righteousness which is of God by
faith. Yea farther, that God made him to be sin for us, that knew no sin, that
we might be made the righteousness of God in him; but yet this righteousness of
God is not to be taken for Gods own righteousness, but only as he said in the
former place, for the righteousness which is of God by Faith; which
righteousness includes both justification, which is imputative, and
sanctification, which is inherent; but yet neither in St. Paul's sense, is our
own, because not of the Law, but of grace and mercy by the faith of Christ. Be
it then, that Christ is made unto us Justice and Sanctification both, yea
Wisdom and Redemption also, yet not all after one and the same manner: Wisdom
he is made, because he has revealed his Fathers will: Redemption, because he
has appointed a day to vindicate his Children out of the hands of corruption
into liberty, which is glorious: Justice, because he has offered up himself a
Sacrifice for sin; but Sanctification, because he has given us his Spirit.
Christ therefore unto us, is all these, but yet not all these by imputation,
for then his Wisdom should be imputed too, yea and even the redemption of our
bodies from the grave imputative also. Indeed we can dream willingly of nothing
but imputation. All seems nothing worth unless Christ did so do all for us, as
we may not have any thing to do for our selves. I doubt we may come in time to
conceive, that he did believe and repent for us too, for these are his
Commandments, and so believe only this, that neither Faith nor Repentance are
in our persons necessary. For if Christ as a surety has absolutely undertaken
any thing for us, we like the Scapegoat must go free upon his performance; The
same debt may not with justice be required of the surety and principal too; if
so, then do what we list, all things are done to our hands already; O this were
to be a gracious Savior to purpose, if we might take our pleasure, riot in
Intemperance and Luxury, and withal have his Abstinence and Moderation imputed
to us, be beheld of God at the time, as no less Temperate and Chaste than
Christ himself; Were it not glad tidings, a Gospel indeed, that we might be
Feasting, Carousing, Swearing, Drinking, and yet under the eye of God at the
same instant, as if we were Watching, Fasting, Praying, Weeping even with
Christ himself in the Garden? As though God beheld Men through Christ, as Men
do other things, by a perspective, which represents them to the Eye not in
their own colors, but in the color of the glass they pass through. No, God is
not deceived with shadows, neither does Christ cast any such: He takes not good
for evil, nor yet evil, no not for Christ's sake, ever for good: And let not us
be deceived with vain shows neither; The truth is, it is well, that upon our
Repentance we are justified by imputation, we shall be too putative, if we
conceit an imputed sanctification too: for two such imputations will not well
agree together; one of them will be needless ever or impossible for
justification, that is, remission of sins is it self sufficient without
imputation of farther sanctity, because as St. Austin has it, Omnia ut fact a
deputantur, quando quod factum non est ignoscitur; And perfect sanctification
imputed on the other side, will leave no room for remission or imputative
justification: so Christ's death might have been spared, since we should then be
saved by his life; for what use may there be of his blood for Remission, so
long as beheld in his righteousness, that never sinned? If no sinner, he needs
no pardon; if he need a pardon, he must of necessity be beheld as a sinner, and
therefore Remission of sins and perfect Righteousness are opposite forms that
cannot at the same time possibly be imputed unto the same person, for they
expel and shut out one another. Let it suffice then, that our blessed Lord
vouchsafed to shed his blood for our sins, let us not therefore suppose that we
are not bound to forsake them ourselves; that were to shed his blood afresh and
crucify him again, as the Apostle speaks. But as he did that for us, which if
we neglect it not, will prove our justification; so we through his assistance
must do this for our selves, otherwise we shall want our sanctification, and
wanting it, want the other also: That indeed is the mere act of God, but on
those that are qualified for it: This proceeds from God and his grace, but is
the true duty of man, and which gives him his qualification, and in man
therefore it must inhere; for the righteousness of justification is perfect,
but not inherent, but the righteousness of sanctification now inherent but not
perfect, hereafter in that glory, whither it leads us, it will be both perfect
and inherent, yea inherent, perfect and perpetual also. Rightly therefore to
conclude all this righteousness of the Commandments, the duty of man still, and
since Faith is included in it, as being now commanded, as rightly the whole
duty of man: That duty which does accomplish his election; for if any man purge
him self from these things, he shall be a vessel unto honor; fulfils the end
of his Creation, created unto good works, that we might walk therein; makes
effectual the Divine Vocation, for we are called unto holiness; is it self our
sanctification, for the Commandment is holy and just and good; procures our
justification, they wrought righteousness and gained the promises; and lastly
leads into Glory, for they that have their fruit in holiness, have their end,
everlasting life. That fruit here, this blessed end hereafter, the God of Glory
grant unto us all in his Kingdom, even for Jesus Christ his sake the righteous.
To whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, etc.

Amen.
A SERMON OF CHRIST'S Coming to JUDGMENT.
SERMON III. Upon MATT. XVi. 27.
For the Son of Man shall come in the glory of his Father with his Angels: And
then he shall reward every man according to his works.
I Left untouched in my former Text the second reason wherewith Solomon ends
his Book, and confirms his Conclusion of, Fear God and keep his Commandments,
which is this, For God shall bring every work into judgment with every secret
thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil. And now for variety sake I
have chosen to prosecute the same subject, not in Solomon's words, but in our
Savior's; for these are inferred unto the same end, and much too after the same
manner.

In the verses precedent, What shall it profit a man (says Christ) to gain the
whole world and lose his own s^ul^ or what shall a man give in exchange for his
soul? As if he had said, Gain any man what he list or what he can, be it never
so much (for the world indeed runs all after gain and never enough) yet if by
this means he come at last to lose his own Soul, there is no profit in it. He
will still be a loser by his gain. Or on the other side, lose in this life
whatsoever he has, or may lose, Pleasures, Profits, Honors or any thing else,
even Life it self, yet if in the loss of all other things, he may preserve and
gain his own Soul, he will be a winner even in his losings. To keep his Soul,
he can part with nothing that is too dear, or if he would part with his Soul,
he can receive nothing that is dear enough: for what can either way be of
sufficient value to make a just exchange for the Soul? But yet so it is, small
things are given in exchange for great, and according to the momentany works
and behavior of men here, so shall their Souls be gained or lost eternally
hereafter. For the son of man, etc.

The words deliver up themselves unto us in these particulars. 1. The person,
filius hominis, that here is his appellation, The Son of man. 2. The appearance
of this Person once more unto the world; venturus est, he shall come. 3. The
form or manner of his coming, in gloria palris, in the glory of his Father. 4.
The end or purpose of his coming, for retribution, and^ tunc reddet, then shall
be reward. 5. The impartiality of it, without respect of any man's person,
reddet unicuique, he shall reward every man. 6. And lastly, the justness of his
reward; in due proportion to his desert, He shall reward every man, secaudum
opera sua, according to his works.


The points lie in the same order, as the words do in the Text, and therefore I
shall handle them without any material transposition, beginning first with the
Person, that here speaks this of himself, and his appellation, fillus hominis,
The son of man.

He that was both God and Man, may style himself as he please by either; but
yet our blessed Lord (whether to intimate his love unto our whole kind, or to
instruct us in the imitation of his humility) usually makes choice of the
meanest of his Titles, and though the Son of God, yet seldom or never speaks of
himself, but in the Style and Title Filii hominis, of the Son of Man.

But yet as he assumes it, it is no vulgar or common style neither: for he
assumes it with a difference and distinction from all other the Sons of men
whatsoever: for it is (...), The or That son of Man; the son of Man after such
a special and eminent manner, as will make it a peculiar title, an Attribute
proper only unto himself and applyable unto no other. As for our selves, we are
all Filii hominum, Sons of Men indeed, in the plural, he only in the singular,
and therefore he only singularly, Filius hominis, the Son of man. Homo has
both genders, and here in the right sense it is only feminine, and Filius
hominis, no more than semen Mulieris, the Son of man, than the seed of the
Woman the Son of the she-man; for Son of man but in this regard he was not, as
being that mighty stone in Daniel, cut out of the mountain without hands, and
flos campi, the flower not of the Garden but of the field, growing up without
setting: for he, who as the Son of God, had a Father, but no Mother; as the Son
of man, had a Mother, but without any Father, and therefore by the Mothers side
only Filius hominis, the Son of Man. There was indeed a woman once, that was
filia hominis; Eve taken out of Adam, without the help of woman; as Christ our
Lord filius hominis, taken out of woman without the assistance of man. And as
Eve the daughter of man, was both daughter and wife unto her own Father: So
Christ the Son of Man, was both son and husband unto his own mother: And being
Son unto that Mother, in Her he was the Son of her Ancestors, of David and
Abraham and others, but not otherwise; for no descendant from them, or any
other was ever or might be his natural and immediate Father. Of necessity,
therefore, the Son of Man can be no more, than the Son of the blessed Virgin,
that is, the son of a woman: And however in relation unto God, Christ though
both God and man, may not have two son-ships, the one as man the other as God,
as God, the natural, and as man, the adopted, because the Relation of a Son
adheres not to the Nature, but to the Person, and so having but one Person
cannot have two ^iliations: yet nothing does hinder but that in reference unto
some other, this whole Person, though the Son of God, may rightly be termed the
Son of Man also. For when the Son of God vouchsafed not to abhor the Virgins
womb, he then received a new Relation, and being brought forth into the world,
though otherwise the Son of God, he now became really the son of a woman, and
she that brought him forth as truly Deipara, the very Mother of God. In regard
whereof St. Peter being demanded by our Savior, who do men say, that I the Son
of man, a^, Answers, Tu es filius dei viventis, Thou the Son of man art the Son
of the ever-living God; Two Sonships and but one Person, but in regard of two
several relations, and that unto two several Persons: The prime Article This of
our Faith, and foundation of that Church, against which the gates of Hell shall
never prevail. The Son of God then, and the Son of Man too: The Son of Man he
was here, before he went hence, and as the Son of Man he shall return again.
For so it follows in the second place, Filius hominis venturus est, The Son of
Man shall come.

And come indeed he shall, nothing more sure; but the when, the Time of his
Coming, than that nothing more uncertain. And therefore without all limitation
is doubtfully delivered here, and indefinitely, only with a venturus est, He
shall come, and no more.

Our Savior would have all men stand upon their guard, be vigilant and
watchful for that hour, have their Loins ever girt and their Oil always ready
in their Lamps; for that cry at midnight may come at unawares, and for this
reason he would have men aware of it. That it cannot be long hence indeed, he
has given sufficient warning, shown it clear unto all. For a thousand years it
is and six hundred since it was said, These are the last times, yea Horae
novissima, the last hour, and Judex prae foribus, the Judge is at the doors;
and that Judge himself in the last of the Revelation, Ecce venio cito, behold I
come quickly, and my reward is with me: but how much time this Quickly has in
it, how near or far off it may be, this he has not shown unto any, yea has
refused to show unto his own, though desired by his own Apostles: But keeps it
as a secret, reserved unto himself, and to be reserved for ever in his own
bosom: The Angels in Heaven understand it not, yea the Son of man himself, that
is to come as the Son of man only, that is in his humane nature, he does not,
he cannot discover the time of his coming. How vain then are the endeavors and
enquiries of all other impotent and ignorant men? And yet man's busy head must
needs be working; nothing can restrain his curiosity from prying at least, and
though he cannot possibly affrm any thing for certain, yet he will be old to
deliver his conjecture. And conjectures indeed there have been many, but all no
less temerarious than vain. The Astrologian, and the Philosopher will needs
have it fall out just in the fatal period of the great Platonic year; when all
the Spears and Stars fixed and wandering shall return again unto their first
points and positions, wherewith they were originally aspected: But a Platonic
year (were any such possible) would sooner be spent, I suppose, than these wise
men agree among themselves, when and what time this great Revolution will be
finished: This atempt therefore as rash and vain, so ridiculous also. The
Modern Jews and Talmudists seem to go upon better grounds, and with them some
of the Fathers, as Lactantius and others, these all resolve the former for
certain, the latter in a strong opinion upon six thousand years for the worlds
continuance, two thousand under the Law of Nature, two thousand under that of
Moses, and two thousand under the Gospel of Grace: And that these once expired,
the son of man then comes without fail in the glory of the Father. And the
truth is, they have some shows of reason and pretty congruities to countenance
their divinations: Some of the Rabbis by their Cabal learning have found this
out even in the first verse of Genesis, where Alpha, the first of the Hebrew
Alphabet, and the Numerical letter that denotes the number of thousand, is just
(as they observe) six times written: That so the worlds Age and dissolution
might be mysteriously read in the very front and forehead of the worlds
Creation: which in the Creation it self, and the manner of it, is, they
suppose, much more legible, as farther typed out, and more fully discovered.
For in six days, it pleased God to create the Heaven and the Earth and all that
is therein, and on the seventh day he rested: And to show that this concerned
man's continuance of Travel in this world, God afterward commanded him also six
days to labor, and to observe the seventh for a Sabbath, the figure of Eternal
rest in the Heavens: now mill anni coram Deo, sicut dies una, A thousand years
with the Lord are but as one day, one day therefore in signification here, as a
thousand years; And the self same, they would have yet farther insinuated in
the first Patriots and Progenitors of this newborn world, Generis humani
satores, the first storers of the Earth with Mankind: six succeeded one another
in order, and then died: Adam, Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, and Jared; but
Enoch the seventh from Adam was translated, taken up to walk with God, as the
type and figure of all his Children. To these, others add diverse other suitable
instances. Genesis viii. 4.
That the Ark of Noah, the Type of the Militant Church, floated six Months on
the Waters, and that in the seventh it rested on the mountain. That Moses six
days was in the Cloud, and in the seventh was called unto the prefence of the
Lord. Exodus xxiv. 16.
That Jerico, the figure of this world, as being opposed unto Jerusalem, the
type of that to come, being six days compassed by the command of God, in the
seventh fell utterly, and ruined, which happened too, just as the Israelites
were going off the Wilderness to possess their promised Land. Josh. vi. 16.
Some more yet there are to this purpose, but of another strain, and fetched
something farther. There be, that fish for it out of the sixscore years given
to the old world for amendment, before the coming of the Flood, which though in
that regard literally meant, yet in a mystery these, say they, do design as
many great years, or years Mosaical, and Jubilar, every one whereof contained
fifty of the common and ordinary, and then fifty drawn on six-score, every
score producing a thousand, the product that results from the whole must needs
be just six thousand years, the general space they conceive for the repentance
of the whole world, before the coming of the second deluge, diluvium ignis,
that deluge of Fire. The same these Men collect likewife from the life of
Moses, who lived precisely a hundred and twenty years, forty years in the Court
of Pharaoh, which answers, as they would have it, unto two thousand years under
Nature; forty years in the Desert with Jethro, keeping Sheep on the backside of
Horeb, which responds unto two thousand under the Law given in that Mountain;
and forty years in the wilderness governing the people of God, and leading them
on unto their Land of rest, which design the other two thousand under the
conduct and Kingdom of Christ our Lord, who, when these shall be once elapsed
and spent, will come again and deliver up the Kingdom unto his Father. So some;
But Lactantius and others otherwise, That he shall come indeed at the end of
six thousand years, but the end for all that, is not yet: For he shall spend,
they suppose, a thousand years in a kingdom of Righteousness upon Earth, as a
spiritual Sabbath from sin, which first kept, they shall then pass into that
great and eternal Sabbath of Glory even for ever.

These may be pretty Speculations (to say no worse of them) but they cannot
conclude any thing: They are little better than what that learned man terms
them, Commenta, quibus malignus ille humana detinet ingenia: something indeed
they have of wit, much of curiosity, but of certainty nothing at all. For
suppose the conjecture true, were six thousand years as they would have it, the
full period of the Worlds age, yet what could certainly be discovered from
thence, when the different Calculators themselves are at a fault, or rather an
unrecoverable loss concerning the just age of the world, and how much of it is
spent already? But what need such computations? Excellently St. Austin. Omnium
de hac re calculantiu^ digitos... and quiescere jubet, qui ait, non often
vestruni noscere, etc. He raps all Accountants on the fingers and commands them
to cease, who says, it is not for you to know the times and the seasons, which
the Father has put in his own power. What the Son of God with such a check
refused to reveal, why should any other the sons of men dare presume to search,
or think to discover? But such are the cross, and preposterous ways of perverse
Mortals, ever attempting to know, where they are enjoined to be ignorant; and
there for the most affecting ignorance, where God most requires their knowledge.

Otherwise we might find other computations, much fitter to be busyed in;
forbear counting of the Times, and think rather upon that, Read rationem
Vilicationis, how we may make up our own Accounts against that day, which when
all calculations are ended, will notwithstanding steal upon the world
undescryed, like a Thief, says our Savior, in the night, when men least dream
of it, overtake even these busy Calculators, as the Enemy did Archimedes
drawing his Circles for prevention, in the dust, and not suffer him to finish
his diagrams, nor These peradventure their Computations: For as it was in the
days of Noah, men eat and drank and married securely until the Flood came and
carried all away: So says he himself, will it be at the coming of the Son of
man, who will come as a sweeping deluge indeed, yea much more unresistable, For
he shall come in power, and Majesty, and great glory, even in gloria Patris.
Our third Point.

The Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father. For though the time of
his coming be concealed, yet not so the manner of it, That indeed is plainly
expressed, and revealed unto all; but in such and so high terms, as mortal man
can no way worthily speak of; no nor rightly in any degree conceive in his
thoughts, until he shall come to see and behold it with his Eyes. Then indeed
and then only he shall know what it is to come in gloria Patris, in the glory
of the Father.

He came once already in the days of his humiliation, and then he came Filius
hominis, the Son of Man, emptying himself of his Divine Honor, and vailing it
up in the cloud of our mortality, when he was content to suffer himself to be
contemned, scorned and derided, reviled, spit upon and buffeted, scourged with
whips, and crowned with thorns, until he became a worm, and no Man, having
neither form nor beauty why we should desire him, and last of all crucified on
a Tree: But now the scene comes to be altered, the face of things utterly
changed: That was dies hominis, Man's day indeed, and the hour of the powers of
darkness: They did then what they list, and he was pleased to suffer whatsoever
they list to do. Now comes dies Domini, and the Lord shall have his day too: He
will now be active, and men another while must be content to suffer every one
according to his deservings. This poor despised filius hominis, this worm,
without form or beauty to be desired, will now appear in the strength of his
Glory, as the Sun breaking out of a Cloud, or the Lightning out of the East,
striking all eyes even with astonishment at his beauty and brightness, yea and
make all faces, all faces of the wicked gather blackness too to behold it: For
as every hand has wounded him, so every eye shall see him whom they have
pierced, but not every eye endure the sight of such overawing and dreadful
Majesty, as shall draw them to embrace Rocks, and cry unto deaf Mountains to
cover them from the presence of the Lamb and him that sits on the Throne,
for he now comes in gloria Patris.

But why in the Glory of the Father? Indeed at his first appearance it was,
Ecce Rex tuus venit mitis; Behold thy King comes unto thee meek, sitting on an
Ass and the foal of an Ass. Now it is, Ecce Judex tuus venit terribilis; Behold
thy Judge comes with terror flying upon the wings of the wind, and riding
upon Cherubins, as the Psalmist speaks, yea many Cherubins and Seraphins,
millions and myriads of holy Angels attending on his Glorious Majesty, when the
whole Earth and Heavens too shall be filled with the Majesty of his Glory;
Because he endured the Cross and despised the shame, valued not his life, but
humbled and bowed down his Soul even unto death, therefore God now exalts him,
sets him on high, yea gives him a name above all names, whereat the knees, that
now are so stiff, shall then, will they nill they, bow and bend, and the tongue
of every one confess, laudando, as he speaks vel ululando, that Jesus is the
Lord, to the Glory of the Father; for he now comes in gloria Patris, in the
Fathers Glory. He comes at this time for Judgment, and that originally belongs
unto the Father; Vengeance is mine, I will recompense, says the Lord. But yet
the Father judges no man, says Christ, but has referred all judgment to the
Son, even filio hominis, to this Son of man, to whom as man he has given all
power both in Heaven and Earth: The son indeed himself even as the son of God,
is a Receiver from the Father, even of the Glory which he has; for glory he
receives from him, from whom he receives his Essence the fountain of glory, as
having his very being not of himself but of the Father, Fons Deitatis, the
fountain that communicates the Deity immediately to the other persons, solely
unto the Son, who is therefore Deus de Deo, God of God and light of light. Yet
having received it from eternity, it is his own, even his Fathers both essence
and glory, and so though God of God and light of light, yet because the same
both God and light, he is in Majesty equal, in Glory coeternal: equal without
robbery, says the Apostle, and though not without reception, yet without any
duty of gratitude for the receipt, as receiving it, not by a free and
voluntary, but by a generation no less natural and simply necessary than
absolutely eternal. For which reasons he is elsewhere said to come, not in
gloria Patris, but in gloria sua, even in his own glory: when the Son of Man
shall come (...) in his own glory, as he does here, (...) with his own Angels.
Matt. 25.
In the glory of the Father and with his Angels. And his Angels sure they are
whom they are commanded to adore and worship. Heb. 1.
Worship him all ye Angels of his. All of them must worship, and all attend on
him now, even the whole Quire and Court of Heaven, not an Angel left behind,
for he shall come with all the Angels. Matt. 25.
No marvel if Daniel said, thousand thousands shall minister unto him, and ten
thousand times ten thousand shall stand before him in that day: what a presence
of state indeed will this be, how full and every way Majestic! But yet these
are not only for State and Majesty, at this time, but for ministration also.
Thousand thousands shall minister unto him, for the time is now come when that
of the Apostle, out of David, is to be fulfilled, He shall make his ministers a
flaming fire, at least to minister to those flames that shall never be
quenched; for the great Harvest of the world is now come, and their employment
in it, is set down beforehand. The Angels must be the Reapers. These are they
that must separate the Sheep from the Goats, sever the Tares from the Wheat. We
may be too forward in plucking them up now, endanger the good Corn, 'twere best
let this alone for them whose proper office it is, and will do it exactly,
gather the Tares in fasciculos into bundles, as the Text has it, bind them up
too, and cast them into everlasting fires. Bind them in bundles indeed, to tell
us that sinners in the same kind shall be sure to participate in the same
punishment. The professed and merciless Mamonist with all his brokers and bribing
ministers that assist his incestuous money to engender on it self, in one
bundle bound up now, and presently burning in bands of their own parchments.
The tattered young Prodigal whom they undo, with his Tapsters and Drawers, and
the whole knot of Roarers and Ranters about him, taken all as in a net, and
bound up in another bundle. The Adulterer and his Mistress the Adulteress with
the Chamber Attendant, and all other the sordid Factors, that truck and
traffic between them, truss't up on an instant in a third fardle, and as nasty
as any of the other. All indeed and many more the like fit Faggots and Fuel for
those devouring, but not consuming flames. Their time is come, and thither they
must, to receive the just recompense of their ways, for that is the end of
Christ's coming, who now comes for general Retribution and due reward unto all.
Et tunc reddet unicuique etc. And then shall he reward, etc.

The Then here, was omitted in the division, but may not be so in our
discourse; for there seems to be an Emphasis, a strong Accent on it, on this
particle of time (...), and then he shall render unto every man according to
his works. And sure it is something well yet, a comfortable hearing to those,
that have clear bosoms, that yet there is a Then in store, a time that will
come at last, when every one shall receive a reward according to his works.
Here on earth (the Babel of confusion) where all things are mixed and blended
together^ no man's works can well be discerned or judged of by the reward he
receives. The reward of the righteous sometimes happens to the wicked, says
Solomon, and the reward of the wicked is sometimes given to the righteous. No
man can know either good or evil by all that is before him. Some rare examples
indeed there now and then fall out, when evil men are filled with their own
devices, and made to eat the fruits of their own planting. As I have done,
says Adonibezeck, unto others, so God has requi^ed me; and so he requites
many more, hangs them up sometimes like Haman on their own Gallows, or buries
them in the pit which themselves have dug. This God sometimes does, that we
may know his providence sleeps not even for the present. Yet this he does but
seldom, says St. Augustine, that we may consider there is a day of judgment
to come, and the nearer that day approaches, the more rare and seldom are
exhibited such remarkable examples. The indignation of the Almighty, that was
wont in former Ages to follow notorious wickedness at the heels with as notable
and exemplary revenge; now in these latter times, the day of final accounts
draws nigh on, seems to slacken the pace and come leisurely after at a
distance, God inhibiting as it were the inferior Courts of his Justice upon
earth against the approach of the great day of his general visitation in the
Clouds. In the mean time, because it is man's day, this, he permits men for the
most part unto themselves, steers the line of his providence, suffers them to
run on at pleasure in their own courses, and men thus permitted to themselves
are oftentimes sure but ill Judges and worse rewarders of their brethren. For
the malevolent and malignant world prone to calumniate the noblest actions,
does usually reward men not according to their works, but its own malignancy.
It is not judgment but fancy and faction, that now adays gives a suitable
censure on all men's ways and actions. But it is little material, for benefacere
and male audire Regium est. That of the Poet is most true, and will be ever,
virtutem praesentem odimus, envy never fails to attend on present virtue, urit
enim fulgore suo, and the more eminent it is, the more it provokes unto envy;
but yet that which follows is true also, sublatam ex oculis quaerimus invidi,
future times when it is gone, will do it right and reward it with honor: But
however, if they do not, yet it is but fit, that virtue should be put to the
true Test, and give proof of her sincerity. Every man can easily pursue those
attempts that are seconded with vulgar applause: but to go on with courage,
though met in the face, and followed at the heels with storms of reproaches and
unsavory calumniations; in this case non se subducere nimbo, not to decline
those showers, run to every bush for shelter, but to bear up manfully
notwithstanding into the very eye of the wind and weather, Hoc demum est
pietas, hoc quoque fortis amor, this is virtue indeed, true and approved love
unto God and goodness, removed utterly from the danger of those by-respects of
Pride and vainglory, the cruel Widwifes of Egypt, appointed by the infernal
Pharaoh to stifle and smother the Children of the Israelites in the very day of
their birth. No matter therefore how it goes here with men, that judge secundum
faciem, according to appearance, as St. John speaks, or rather sometimes
without any appearance at all. That which is the stay and solid comfort of
every man, is within him, in his own bosom, where he is assured his work is
with his God, that judges righteous judgment, and will have his time at last
to make all things manifest, and reveal the secrets of all hearts, when
smother^d righteousness shall break forth as the light, and just dealing as the
noon day. For as Solomon rightly, he that ponders the heart, does consider it,
and he that keeps thy Soul, does know it, and he it is that shall reward
every man according to his works. Prove. xxiv. 12.
In the mean time that of the Apostle is seasonable, Patientes estote fra^res
usque in adventum dominis, be ye patient ^^til the coming of the Lord; for when
he does come, then every man's works shall appear, and then indeed he will
reward every man according to his works. But what is not the reward given until
then? not until the coming of the Lord? A reward sure there is even in the
present life, but it lies secret in the Conscience; a greater reward unto the
separated Soul after death; yet the fullness of reward I conceive (though I
contend with no man) not until the day of resurrection. In the mean time the
departed Soul lives, it does not die to be raised again, like the body, as the
Socinian would have it; nor yet sleep out the time in a T^ance, as others
affirm; but this is certain, the Soul^ of the righteous are in the hand of God,
so says the Wise man; yea more, they are thus far blessed that die in the
Lord, far they rest from their labors, so says the Spirit; nay farther yet,
they are in refrigerio, in a joyful freshing with Abraham, so says the Pa^able
of La^^^^^^; yea in a Paradise of delight, so says Christ unto the good Thief
upon the Cross. And therefore wherever they are, be the place what or where it
will, Abraham's bosom, or Paradise, or under the Altar, there they are
undoubtedly where the glory of Chirst shines unto then and on them with full
assurance of the like glory shortly to be rewealed and wherre with themselves
shall be inde^ssibly invested. In the presentation and contemplation whereof,
mi^abili quadam volupt ate afficiunt up (...) Their affections, says Gregory
Nazianze^ even (...) with mavelous delight, which can be no less than a
Paradise of pleasure unto them: But yet, that they now are already in that
happy place, or in the actual fruition of that full happiness and glory, which
shall hereafter give them the fullness of their reward, this the Scriptures do
not seem to teach, nor the Eathe^ to affirm^ but a great consnt of both may he
rather sound to the contrary. Of those that departed this life before the
coming of Christ our Lord in the flesh, or his going away again and ascending
into the highest Heavens, (...) as the Apostle speaks unto the Hebrews, that of
the same Apostle may not be denied, All these died and received not the
promises, but behold them a far off. Heb.ix. 8.
And that very beholding holding was their refreshing it seems, in that place
of rest where they lay after death, as it were at anchor, in a calm and quiet
Harbor, free from those winds and tempests wherewith they were beaten, whilst
they stood off at Sea, in the painful Navigation of this life, for so the word
(...) in the Greek, and sinus in the Latin may import, and so Theophylact does
expound Abraham's Bay, as well as Abraham's Bosom. But yet though at rest, they
as yet, says he, received not the promises, and he gives his reason for it
too, God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should
not be made perfect. Heb. ^i. 40.
Which reason too will serve for all others that died since the Ascension of
our Savior. For as it was not convenient they should be made perfect without
us, so neither that we our selves should be made perfect without the rest of
our brethren; If any were so, who sooner than the Souls of those Saints and
Martyrs that refused not even death for Christ and his Gospel? And yet even
these are arrayed only in white Robes, as Candidati, and ready dressed in their
wedding apparel for the marriage of the Lamb, but are willed withal to rest a
while, until their fellow servants and the rest of their brethren to be slain
likewise should be fulfilled also. slev. vi.10.
That so all might be perfected together, and by three degrees according to the
three estates, of life, death and judgment, draw on unto the fullness of that
perfection, as having a good hop^ in life, infallible assurance in death, and
plenary possession at the resurrection. In life here we walk by Faith, we see
not God: In the estate after death we see him, but afar off, as the Apostle
speaks; but at the Resurrection face to face. Here in this world we lie as
cripples in Solomon's Porch, but cured by the name of Jesus, death carries us
into the body of the Temple where we are leaping for joy, exulting and praising
God; but the day of Christ will draw the Veil, lead us into the Holy of Holies,
where God himself dwells between the Cherubins. Lastly, now upon earth we are
Militant, Pugnato^es, wrestlers and warriors, in death we are declared
Victours and Conquerors: but in the resurrection, triumphant, and crowned even
with that Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the just Judge will give,
says St. Paul, in die illo, in that day: laid up indeed before, as he there
speaks, but not before that day, it seems, to be given, but then it shall, for
then he shall reward, etc.

The like on the other side, may well be conceived of the wicked; their Souls
as^ soon as departed enter into sorrows, and torments; the worm that shall
never die, begins presently to feed upon them, but drenched, it seems, as yet
they are not in that lake of fire, which shall never be quenched, and will be
the fullness of their reward. The Devils themselves are not yet there, and
therefore are bold to say unto our Savior, Art thou come to torment us, a^te
temp^^, before our time? A set time sure there is appointed for that; In the
interim, as the Crown is reserved for the Righteous, so these and all their
Adherents, are reserved, it seems, unto that day, which shall give them the
full accomplishment of their sorrows: So St. Jude, Reserved in chains under
darkness unto the judgment of the great day. Verse 6.
This they all know and cannot without horror think of it; They believe
therefore, says St. James, and tremble. Jam. iii.
And so likewise all other the Spirits lewd and diabolical people, they
understand their final and fearful doom already, on which their condemning
thoughts do perpetually feed not without infinite regret, indignation and fury,
and so though locally seated in Hell, yet, as yet scalding there, and burning
only in the flames that arise from their own bosoms. But when that great day
shall once come, and the Son of Man appear in his glory, then shall that old
Dragon, the deceiver, with all those apostate people whom he has deceived, and
are not written in the Book of the Lamb, be thrown into that Lake burning with
fire and brimstone. Rev. xx. 10.
Yea death and Hell too, shall be cast into that Lake; Hell, to show that all
they, who are now there in custody, shall then be thrown into that Lake, as
into the Center, tower-ward and Dungeon of that fearful Prison: And death too,
to signify their immortality there in a perpetual dying life, and everlasting
living death, even for ever and ever. And death and Hell were cast into that
Lake of fire. Rev. xx. 14.
For now the time of full Retribution is come, this is the great day of reward,
and there is no other. To that then let us pass with my Text, from the time, to
the reward it self. Then he shall reward, etc.

This word of Reward seems to stick in the Jaws of many men, at least to come
forth fumbling between their Teeth, as if they did not very well like it. But
whether they like it or no, so the Scriptures often speak, and accordingly we
must be content to receive them. The truth is, there are extremes in this point
as in most others, liable unto dispute and controversy; and Verity, like
Virtue, lies in the golden mean between both. For some are wholly and totally
all for reward, and no Grace unless it be a stock of Grace, whereby they may
condignly merit the reward.

Others again can away with no Reward at all, but will have all of mere Grace:
when the truth consists in a mixture compounded of both, neither totally grace,
nor merely reward, but merces gratiosa, a gracious Reward: And that not only in
regard of the Grace first given, but of the work too it self, that is to be
rewarded.

The former take Heaven to be as fully merited by the works of the Righteous,
as Hell is deserved by the sins of the wicked.

The latter suppose Heaven to be merely a free gift, and in the consequences of
their Positions, make Hell as free a Collation, as the Kingdom of Heaven.

Both seem to be equally out, and not much unequally to share both truth and
error between them. For thus much I conceive is clear and certain, and ought
to be acknowledged by either: That the first Graces of God either conferred in
time upon Earth, or prepared eternally by him, who dwells in the Heavens; are
a free collation, and absolute without any thing of reward: otherwise Grace
were not grace, as the Apostle speaks. Secondly, The last punishments in Hell,
a mere reward in justice, without any thing of free and undeserved collation;
otherwise Punishment were not punishment. But the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
joys of that place come to us after a mixed manner, though originally and
principally yet not altogether by grace, neither yet altogether by merit; not
as a gift only, nor yet wholly as a reward: but is so a reward, as it is still
a gift; so a gift; as it is still a reward: A reward, because promised unto
works; a gift, because that promise was of grace, and these works no way
deserve the reward: And therefore the Scriptures apply themselves unto both:
terming it sometimes an Inheritance by Adoption: sometimes a Crown of
Righteousness: sometimes a gift of Grace: sometimes a Reward of our Works. But
that we mistake not, we are most commonly careful, not to mention the one
respect, without some intimation of the other; In that very place where the
Apostle affirms it a Crown of Righteousness, yet that we may receive it as a
Crown, rather given than deserved, it follows immediately, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me in that day. 2 Timothy
On the other side in those places where it is called an Inheritance, as it is
in many, yet in all we shall find it to be an Inheritance, of the Saints, and
never conferred but on obedient Childeren. My Sheep, says our Savior, hear my
voice, and follow me wheresoever I go, and do istis vitam eternam, and I give
them eternal life. There it is a gift, but yet to his sheep, that hear and
follow him, d^num dat^m, non personae sed vitae, a gift given, not to the
persons of men but to their lives, and that is no other than a reward, as St.
Jerome rightly.

In the v. of St. Ma^thew, it is a reward, merces vestra, your reward is great
in the Kingdom of Heaven, yet it is merces coprosa, a great and plenteous
reward, magnan^mis, as God said unto Abraham, I am thy exceeding great reward,
a reward with excess, far exceeding indeed all the works and passions too of
men that are to be rewarded. So true is that rule of the Rabbis concerning the
holy Scriptures, In omni loco, in quo invenis objectino^ pro haeretico, ibi
quoque invenis medicamentum in latere ejus, Not a place that seems to favor an
heresy, but has an Antidote or Medicine hanging at the side of it. But on the
other side most true it is, Hell and eternal death are the wages and mere wages
of wickedness. That of the Prophet, Vita and ^ors a domino, life and death are
both of the Lord, is right, but yet must be rightly understood; not both of him
after one and the same manner, but with St. A^stins difference, Vita scilicet a
Donante, mors a Vindicante, which we may render in the words of the Apostle,
Life is the gift of God, but death the wages of Sin. To show therefore that
death is be to attributed not so properly to the In^^ctour, as to the deserver,
the Wiseman is bold to say Deus mortem non fecit, God has not made death, but
men by the errors of their life have sought it out and drawn it down upon
their own heads.

Let not any man therefore conceive the evil works o^ wicked men, as effects of
a foredoomed destruction, bu^ destruction rather wherever it lights, to follow
both i^ design and execution as a just meede and recompense of evil doings: for
the merciful Lord, that preserver of Souls, as the same Author has it, cannot
possibly hate any man, as David's enemies did him gratis, without any cause, but
is ever, as the Scriptures teach, and the Fathers proverbially affirm, Primus
in amore and ultimus in odio, first in love, and last in hatred: And they that
will needs think otherwise, if they be not reckoned among the haters of God,
sure I am they will be found liars at the last; for the Lord is a just God, and
so is his reward, that will look precisely on the work without respect unto any
man's person be he what he will, or may be, for so it follows in the next place,
reddet unicuique, he shall reward every man, etc.

Great diversity there is among the Sons of men, but the summons of this day is
universal and will reach unto them all: Be they rich or poor, noble or ignoble;
none so mean, as to escape unregarded, none so mighty as to decline the
Tribunal: we must all appear, says the Apostle; we and we all, no remedy, we
all must make our appearance before the judgment seat of Christ. And however
here upon earth, there does indeed belong great respect and reverence unto the
persons and dignities of great and honorable men, yet these things are all now
passed away, and Christ the great Judge in this terrible day will have no
regard unto any man's person or titles, farther than these have had an influence
into his actions, and rendered them justly rewardable with greater honor, or
else with sorer punishment. For the Virtue or Vice of such Men, dies not at
home in their own bosoms, but as their persons are great, so their works and
ways in like manner eminent, and every way more exemplar. And therefore the
Wise man says but right, Potentes potenter, mighty Men that have done amiss
shall be mightily tormented; and for the same reason those that have done well,
as mightily rewarded. There is nothing mean in them now, nor shall be
hereafter. For these are they, whom God has made great upon Earth, filled them
with substance and honor, that pouring out of their plenty upon the
distressed, and relieving the oppressed by their power, they might become even
as Gods unto their brethren. These he has placed tanquam majores venae, as the
greater veins in the body Politic, to minister blood and spirits unto the rest
of the members; tanquam communes Patriae parents, as the common Fathers and
Parents of their Country, to whom all the weak and injured may fly as unto a
refuge and sanctuary of protection; yea tanquam planetae and stellae majores,
as the greater Stars and Planets in the Firmament of power, by sweet and
propitious influence to cherish the Earth under them, and all good things that
are in it. These now, if clean contrary shall abuse this wealth and power, push
the weaker cattle with them, as with horn and shoulder, as the Scripture
speaks; If the higher Potentates and Princes, like so many mighty Nimrods,
molest and vex the world they should govern, provoke Heaven, and take peace
from the earth, embrue and embroil all to satisfy their own impotent and
unlimited ambitions; If the greater Peers among the people instead of being
Gods and common Fathers unto their Country, prove Wolves unto their brethren,
and like Pikes grow great and vast by eating up the Fry that is round about
them, donec Serpens serpentem devorans fiat Draco; If instead of benign and
benevolent Stars, they shall be of a sour and Saturnian Aspect, only blasting
whatsoever comes within the sphere of their activity; or else, but of a
Mercurian concurring influence, good with the good, and bad with the bad, not
as justice, but as affection and faction shall lead them: then no marvel if
mighty men come at length to be mightily tormented. But if these Noble Persons
shall be truly Noble indeed, and as God has termed them, Gods and Fathers unto
their Country; If like Job, Job xxix.
they shall deliver the poor and such as have none to help, from those that are
too mighty for them, break the jaws of the wicked, and pluck the spoil out of
their teeth, until the blessing of them that are ready to perish come upon them
for it; If the Prince, that is supreme, be not a disturber like Nimrod, but
rather as Solomon, Princeps pacis, a King of peace, nourishing his people, like
David, with a perfect and upright heart, and ruling them prudently with all his
power; If his moderation be known unto all, and his Piety unto God and goodness
no less exemplary, than his Virtue: then undoubtedly both he and they and all
such Mighty men in this great day, shall be as mightily honored; when he that
has made you Rulers of his people, set you here in the seats of Justice as on
the throne of David, shall then advance you higher, take you up even upon his
own throne in the Clouds, as being in the number of those Saints, that shall be
Assessors there and with Christ, as the Apostle tells us, to judge the world;
whilst those mighty and glorious Monarchs that once so much troubled the earth
and other Princes, Great men, and Favorites of the world, shall now stand like
poor worms, beneath you at the Bar, nudo latere palpitantes, and sententian^
aeternae mortis expectantes, naked and quaking, as St. Hierome speaks, under
the sentence of eternal death. Where now are all their Dignities and Titles,
their Pomp and former Splendour? how is it vanished! Alas all these things
accompany none any farther than the grave; but their works, these follow after
unto judgment, where according to their works, they shall be now rewarded,
which is our last point. And then be shall reward every man, secundum opera
sua, according to his works.

This, as it is the latter part of my Text, so is it the most substantial, but
withal the most troublesome: for here we seem to meet with nothing but
difficulties.

There are but three words in it: And whether we look on the opera, which is
the main; or the sua, that adheres; or the secundum, that has reference unto
both, Objections we shall find, and some of them difficult enough even in all
three.

Set the Accent first upon the opera (for that as I said is the main) and we
shall no sooner do it, but the objection is instantly emergent; for if Men
shall be now judged with precise respect unto their works, since none are so
wicked but have some good deeds; nor any so righteous but have many sins; how
should it come to pass that either any should escape Condemnation, or if some
do, why should not all escape it, for all are sinners. But this knot may well
be dissolved without any great labor. For though works at that day shall be
judged of, as good or evil precisely according unto that Law which they have
transgressed, yet the men whose they are, shall be sentenced for these works,
not according to the law, but with reference and respect unto the conditions of
the Gospel; for God shall then judge the secrets of all hearts, says St. Paul,
secundum evangelium meum, according to my Gospel. Romans i.
And according to the Gospel the same works are not always of the same
condition with reference to reward and punishment, but according to the
repentance of the person, or his falling from it, do receive ever a new
qualification. The Schools therefore do accordingly distinguish of opera mortua
and mortifera, viva and mortificata, and rediviva too, of dead works and
deadly, of living and mortified and reviviscent also. Works morally good, but
not done with any Pious or Spiritual intention, they account dead works, as
liable neither to reward nor punishment: Works morally and mortally evil, these
are mortisera, deadly Works, that draw death and destruction after them: works
of Faith and Charity in the converted Soul, these are opera viva, living works,
and such as have title unto life everlasting; but both these latter may be
mortified, and both after mortification revive again; when the sinner repents
him of his Sins, all his former wickedness is forgotten; and when the penitent
man returns again to his Sins, none of his former righteousness shall then be
remembered. And as men do ebb or flow in their true repentance, so their sins or
their good deeds do either revive or mortify, and the mortification of the
one, is the reviving ever of the other: And for this reason, says our Savior,
in the Revelation, Behold I come quickly and my reward is with me, to render
unto every man, not as his works, but in the singular, as his work shall be;
For according unto this one work of repentance, either his sin or his
righteousness has the predominance, and shall be accordingly rewarded by him,
who will now reward every man in this sense, according to his works. But yet
since this Judgment proceeds in mercy, and according to the Gospel, why are we
not said to be rewarded according to our Faith rather than according to our
works? As though works, where the Gospel is revealed, were of any validity
without Faith, or Faith any way rewardable farther, than it is operative and
fruitful in works: But besides, this is a day of universal reckoning, not
confined within the precise latitude of that revelation; every man without
exception must now come to his account, and what every one is bound to account
for, according to that, and to that only he shall be sentenced. New the Gospel
of Christ has not been revealed unto all, but the notions of good and evil are
implanted in Nature, and men are to be judged of, and accepted too, according
to what they have, not according to what they have not, as our Savior
speaks. And therefore the Faith of the Jew was not required of the Gentile,
neither yet the Faith of the Christian at the hands of the Jew. The Law of
Nature indeed binds all, but positive Laws those only to whom they are given:
And thus much seems to be both Law and Gospel, That no man give an account but
for the Talents that were delivered him; For God is no such hard man, as that
lazy fellow in the Gospel would make him, to reap where he did not sow; or else
like Pharaoh, requiring his Brick where he does not afford Straw for the
making. Not therefore according to the Faith, which they knew not, but
according to the good and evil which they knew, so shall all be judged by him,
who now comes to reward every man according to his works.

From the opera now, if we come to the sua, remove the Accent thither, we shall
but remove from one difficulty to another; For some there are, that have no
works of their own; How many that die, as soon as born, and not a few before,
and both before they have done either good or evil, for which they may be
rewarded? It may be said peradventure, that yet even these have one work of
their own; for being all in Adams loins, when he sinned, his Sin, by virtue of
the first Covenant becomes theirs and theirs therefore by St. Paul it is
expressly termed, in quo omnes pecc^verunt, in whom all have sinned. Romans v. ^2.


This is right, and has nothing but truth in it, if we consider only the
Nature of the first Covenant, and go no farther than so; But farther I suppose
we are to go; for since there is a second Covenant passed, and the second, as
the Apostle to the Hebrews, and reason it self, will tell us, must disanul the
f^rst; A second stricken even with the same Adam, (and in him we all were at
the transaction of the one as well as of the other, and reputed in his loins,
when he was restored, as well as when he fell) for that is the perpetual nature
of Gods Covenants, Vobis and liberis vestris: Deus tuus and seminis tui. Acts
xi. 48. Genesis xvii.
And sure if we make our stay in the old Testament, the Father must have come
in his own glory, the Son of man could never have come in the glory of the
Father to render unto every man his own works; for had he not first been our
Mediator, he had never been our Judge. Now therefore we are to look up unto
him, contemplate the person, before whose seat of Judgment we are to appear,
even Christ our blessed Lord, that innocent Lamb that was slain from the
beginning, that Lamb of God which by his blood, being slain took away (...),
that sin of the world in the singular, and other such singular sin of the
world, but there was not any. And for this cause is rightly termed Adam
secundus, a second Adam, a second through whom all receive justification unto
life that became liable unto death and condemnation in the first. Romans v. 18.
This is our Judge, even the Author of the second Covenant, who therefore will
not sentence men, as those Apostate Angels, strictly after the Law of the
first, but as St. Paul speaks secundum Evangelium meum, according to my, or
rather his own Gospel. Romans i.
Before this Judge, when St. Paul cites every man, he assures us, no man shall
answer but for what himself has done, or be rewarded with punishment, but as
my text has it, secundum opera sua, according to his own works, and those his
own, not because acted in the loins of another, but because done in his own
body; for so says St. Paul expressly, and purposely it seems to prevent the
interpretation, we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that
every one may receive (...), the things done in his body, or rather not (...),
but (...), as some of the best Copies read, and ancient Fathers cite, and the
vulgar does render, propria Corporis, the proper things done in the body. 2
Cor. v. 10.
This therefore will not satisfy the doubt, and were it admitted, would yet
satisfy but on one part, the part that perish; still the difficulty would
remain, how those on the other side, that are saved by Sacrament, should be
rewarded with heaven secundum opera sua, according to their own works. But not
to meddle any farther in this matter, the truth is, (and it is the fullest
answer I can give it) That we may not measure such ignorant Innocents either
always by the common rules of doctrine, or at any time by the general precepts
of duty; For those the Scriptures are usually spoken of, and these perpetually
directed unto none, but the full-grown and adult, as they that alone are
capable of them; The not observing whereof, is the chief cause (I conceive) of
the great variety of opinions and intricate difficulties, which this point of
Infants has begotten; Some excluding them utterly from this day and seat of
judgment because without Works either good or bad to be then discussed; Others
admitting of their presence there, but yet neither among those on the right
hand or yet on the left, and so not liable to either of these two grand
Sentences which shall then be pronounced. A third sort subjecting them unto a
Sentence, and of these some unto such a Sentence, as shall carry them to
beatitude, but in a Paradise apart, others conveying them thence directly to
heaven. A fourth sort even to Hell; and a fifth unto a middle state, a
condition between both. But yet among all these varieties this is remarkable,
not any one of the Ancients was ever so severe unto any of these, whether
baptized or otherwise, as to cast them into that nethermost Hell, and those
torments, which he suffers there of whom our Savior said, it had been better
for him, if he had never been born. Mat. xxv^
No not that learned and holy man who was esteemed durus Infantum Pater, of all
others a hard Father unto infants; for even he, though he placed them in a
Region of Hell, yet in such a tolerable condition therein, as it were better
for them to be even there, than not to be at all. August. lib. 4. cont. Julian.
cap. 8. But for my part I determine nothing amidst so many doubts, and
distractions; 'twere best leave them to stand or fall to their own Master,
especially since my Text, which speaks of works rewardable like other general
Scriptures, does not, as I said, concern impotent and ignorant Infants, but
grown Men, knowing and operative; for whoever of such receives the Kingdom of
Heaven, must receive it merely as an Inheritance without any respect of works.
They are exempted from such common rules, and so not included in this every man
here, that shall now be rewarded secundum opera sua, according to his own works.

And now in the last place, let us come to this secundum, the first of the
words, and then sure we shall find our selves in no less streights than any of
the former, yea ut unda undam, so one doubt and difficulty seems here to drive
on another.

For first, since the good shall now be rewarded ultra meritum, beyond their
merit; and the evil, citra condignum, short of their desert, which is a Maxim
in Divinity; they may well be rewarded for, but not any of them precisely
secundum opera, according to their works.

Indeed some there are that like well enough of the secundum, but can by no
means away with the propter in this case: But yet St. Gregory for this reason
conceives otherwise; and since the reward is ever beyond, or on this side the
work, takes the propter to be more properly spoken, than the secundum opera;
But the truth is, both are true, and the reward shall be now given both for and
according to their works; not indeed in a strict Arithmetical adequation, but
yet in a proportion exactly Geometrical, for bonis bona retribuet, and
melioribus meliora, God shall now give good things, as Aquinas has it, unto
the good, and though not in precise equality unto the goodness of their works
in themselves considered, yet comparatively in what degree of goodness they
exceed others, the excess of their reward shall arise ever in the same
proportion: And so on the other side, malis mala and pejoribus pejora, in like
manner. Neither will the Parable of the Laborers and their penny any way
destroy this, though we have not leisure at this time to consider it, because
of another difficulty arising from hence, which as it shall be the last, so it
seems to be the greatest of all other. For be it that good works are rewarded
beyond their merit, yet how should those that for short and momentany
pleasures, burn in perpetual and everlasting fires, be said to be punished
short of their desert, yea how should not their desert rather seem much short
of their punishment? For that the Sins of a Mortal Man acted in an instant, and
the pleasure thereof perishing even with the act, should be rewarded with
infinite and interminable sorrows, is more than earthly man's wit, I suppose,
can easily reach unto. And therefore is well termed by St. Paul, Ira revelata
de Coelo, wrath revealed from Heaven, as being without those brighter beams of
Revelation, not fully penetrable by the Starlight of reason. For what reason
may well be rendered, why or from whence it should be, that limited and finite
works should arise and grow up to an infinite and unlimited demerit? Is it that
men are born in an aversion from God, and but for God, might they never die,
would never leave sinning, and so in the proportion well deserve punishment
without ceasing? as St. Gregory would have it, voluissent utique sine fine
vivere, ut potuissent sine fine peccare. But no man is now judged for what he
would have done upon suppositions, but what he really has done, and that in
the body; otherwise Tire and Sidon should have been saved, and peradventure
even Enoch himself have perished, of whom the Wiseman affirms, raptus est, ne
malitia mutaret intellectum ejus. This therefore is but vain, and for this
reason the Learned Schoolmen rest not on it, but rely rather on the common
answer, that the full estimate of sin is taken not from the person that sins,
or the time and continuance of the sin, but from the object, the person
offended: And this person being the infinite God, the sin therefore deserves an
infinite punishment. But even this way is liable to many and great
difficulties. For though offenses do otherwise arise in proportion unto the
dignity and greatness of the Person, that is hurt or wronged by them; yet it
seems not so in this case, where the party offended is infinite. First, because
such a Person is clear out of the reach of Man, out of danger of any real
lesion or hurt by him or any of his actions. Secondly, for that infinity, I
conceive, is a proper Attribute of God's, and absolutely incommunicable to any
creature, unless it be where he communicates his own Essence and Person, as in
our blessed Lord by union hypostatical, though yet even then he made not the
Humane Nature infinite, or yet gave the actions of that nature an estimate so
much as morally infinite, any other way, but by assuming it into the unity of
his Person, which alone could make the sufferings of Man the passions of God
also, from whence only they receive the infinity of merit. But between the act
and the object there is no such union to affect that with a demerit as infinite
on the other side. And lastly, a posteriori, were the act after that infinite
manner affected by the object, how then should not all sins be equal and
equally to be punished, since in Infinites there is no inequality of magnitude,
nor can there be made any augmentation or diminution by any thing we can do or
imagine unto them? For to that, which is once conceived as such, nothing can be
added to make it greater, or taken away to render it lesser, than before, no
not though we should take away finite parts, or yet add one infinite to
another. For one infinite divided, will but make two; and two, yea two thousand
infinites clapped together would run all into one. For as one indivisible point
amounts to as much as a million, so a million of united infinites will arise to
no more than one, because all those have not any, and every of these has all
quantity in it. He that once should conceit an infinite number of Towers,
though his imagination should furnish every Tower with six Bells, yet he could
not with reason say for all that there were more Bells than Towers, for more
than infinite may not be imagined. And this is alike true even in moral
magnitudes, as well as mathematical, whether discrete or continued. And as
nothing is to be gained by Addition, so Substraction on the other side, will
lose as little: He must of necessity take half, whosoever will take any thing
from that which is infinite. As the circle that has no bounds, is every where
Center, so an infinite line, the Diameter of that Circle, having no extremities
is therefore all middle, cut it where you list, you shall still divide it into
two equal parts, and which is stranger, both parts will be equal to the whole,
for either part will still be infinite in regard of one end, and therefore of
quantity immensurable, and that can be no more which is infinite on both ends.
The Product of this will be not only, that all sins are equal because infinite,
but that one sin is equal in demerit unto all, to all that have been committed,
yea and to infinite sins too, if they might be imagined; As appears plainly in
the sufferings of our Savior, which though of different degrees in regard of
the sorrow and torment, yet because infinite through his Person, they were all
equal in respect of the merit Whence it is, that that satisfaction which was
required for any one sin, could even in strictness of Justice expiate all,
though never so many, and that which had fallen short of expiating all could
never have given satisfaction for any one, even the least sin that is mortal.
Neither will this be avoided by that answer of the Schoolmen, that sin has
infinity only secundum quid, that is, in regard of the object. and that
therefore other circumstances there are, which may add degrees unto it, because
not simply infinite. For even that, which is but one way infinite, cannot be
enlarged by any finite additions the other way: As a line, that should run on
without end, though pieced out never so much at the beginning, would yet be
never a whit the longer. If the world be supposed eternal, a part ante, though
days and months, and years be added, yet it would be no older an hundred years
hence than it is at this very day: or if having had a beginning, yet conceived
to be perpetual, a part post, it would then be as near the end this very day
as an hundred years hence. Aristot.
But this peradventure comes to pass, because the addition is still made in the
same kind, that is, in length and longitude only: Nothing hinders for all that,
but that two things equally infinite in one dimension, may yet be unequal in
another, and capable of augmentation. The Mast of a Ship, and the Spear of a
Soldier, that should stand by it, though both allowed to run on in insinitum,
and so of one and the same length, yet notwithstanding in bulk and body there
would be great difference still between them, and might be greater as we should
add unto the one, or withdraw from the other. And so in like manner all sins
may well have a punishment equal in duration, because all offenses against God,
and yet by reason of other different circumstances, that give the bulk and
magnitude, not all receive punishment equal in degree and intension, but some a
sorer punishment than others, though not a longer. But this though it look
well, will not satisfy; for the punishment is one thing, and the sin another:
In that indeed we may distinguish the duration from the magnitude or intention,
but in the sin we cannot so distinguish; This does not receive longitude in one
respect, body and bulk in another; but the sin is infinite in magnitude only,
not in length, and deserves a punishment infinite even in intension; that it
becomes so only in duration is accidental: for being that a punishment
intensively infinite, as the sin deserves, may not possibly be actually
inflicted, not through any impotence in God, but incapacity in the Creature;
hence in this supposition it comes to pass, that what could not after an
infinite manner be at once received, should yet in a finite manner, as it may
be perpetually suffered. The punishment therefore by succession is only
potentially infinite, not in act, nor shall be ever, but the sin is actually
infinite, otherwise the punishment should be even actually finite. The instance
therefore of the Spear and the Mast, is besides the matter, and yet even in
these, though this be greater in sound than that, yet not in matter and
substance; For still not an inch of wood or an ounce of weight in the one more
than in the other. Others therefore propound a third way, and that is from the
infinite reward that is proposed unto the righteous; whence they conceive it
but right, that as infinite a punishment should be prepared for the wicked:
when two infinites are laid in the balance, the scales cannot but hang the
more equal: for what injury is there done unto any, if an eternal Heaven or an
everlasting Hell be set open unto all; and then every man accordingly rewarded
as he shall freely through Gods grace, or his own perverseness ^run himself into
either? And sure it seems but reason and every way just, that they who for
temporary and trifling pleasures neglect full and never fading joys, should
receive for their meed, no less great and never ending sorrows; And indeed we
our selves that by the condition of our birth, without any sin of our own, came
at first to be plunged into that pit of everlasting misery by the transgression
of another, could not (it seems) with Justice have been so through the mere
nature of sin, for then all the sins of our intermediate Forefathers should
lie upon the Children also; but only by virtue of a Covenant grounded in this
very equity, that we who were in his loins, should not incur more hurt by his
fall than receive benefit by his standing; For he was to stand or fall, not to
himself alone but to all his posterity. This notwithstanding may be subject to
some objections, though not so unanswerable, which the time now forbids me to
discuss. However be it this upon what regard it may be, that so it shall be is
most certain, and that without injury unto any. God is a righteous Judge and
will clear himself, both when he is judged, and when he judges also. For my
part I am satisfied with this last reason, and were I not with it, or any
other, yet in a point so clearly delivered in the Scripture, my reason should
be led captive by my Faith. For it abundantly suffices, that it is, as I said
at first, wrath revealed from Heaven. And I would it were a little better
considered on upon Earth, what a miserable ruin and calamity it will then
bring upon all the Sons of Pride and Children of disobedience, sorrows no less
insufferable, than interminable, in both, by Man in this life, inconceiveable:
For who knows or can know the power of his wrath? But this destruction is nor
near enough to affect us now, though (as that learned Man says) there is only
that puff of breath which is in our Nostrils, betwixt us and it, and that God
knows how suddenly too, may be taken from us. Yet I say, it is not near enough
to affect us now; but in novissimo intelligetis plane, in the end ye shall
understand all things clearly: In the end indeed, when the Son of Man shall
come in Glory and his reward with him, then they shall understand and know,
when they begin to feel their sorrows, the strange folly of their ways, and
truly then apprehend the vanity of their pride and pleasures here, only this
one way of value, that once they might have been given in exchange for their
Souls. In the mean time, what a misery is it, transire hinc in Infernum ut ibi
discant, quod bie creder^ noluerunt: To pass from hence into Hell, there to
learn the truth, which here they refused to believe? How much better were it
for us to believe, and practice too whilst we may, and whilst it may do us
good? Profit in any thing else there is not any, though a man should gain the
whole world: For most assuredly whosoever has the wealth and honor now, yet
the Righteous only shall have the dominion in the morning; In the morning of
this great day, when God shall show himself no less terrible unto Sinners,
than, as David speaks, mavelous in his Saints; Happy men are we, if in that
manner we shall compose our lives, as may enroll us in the Communion of that
blessed number. That so when the Son of Man shall come in the glory of the
Father, we our selves may be declared among the Sons of God, and go with him
into the Father's Glory eternal in the Heavens. Whereunto, etc.

Laus Deo in aeternum.
Amen, Amen.
THE ORIGINAL OF WARS.
SERMON IV. Upon JAMES iv. I.
From whence come Wars, and Fightings among you; Come they not hence, even of
your Lusts that war in your Members?
THIS Epistle, however received at first not without some scruple by reason of
those heretical Libertines ( Simon, Nicholaus and similes) against whom in the
judgment of St. Austin, De fide and operibus.
it is especially directed, and lately also questioned by such once more as
setting up a solitary faith, would gladly return again unto the old
licentiousness; yet the long and general reception of the universal Church has
now fully confirmed it unto her Children for undoutedly Canonical. If any thing
yet remain doubtful, it concerns not the doctrine but the Author of it, this
indeed is not altogether so certain; That it was St. James, all agree, but
which of the James's, there lies the difficulty; Two of that name we find among
the twelve Apostles, James the Brother of John, and James the Brother of
Alpheus, Mat. x. 2. but whether James the Brother of our Lord, as St. Paul
entitles him, Galat. i. 19.
surnamed the Less by St. Mark, Mark. xi. 40.
the Just by Ecclesiastical writers, the first Bishop of Jerusalem, and by
Eusebius (lib. Hist. 2. Cap. 22.) St. Hierom and others, held for the Writer of
this Epistle; whether this James were one of those two whom we find in the
number of the twelve, or a third out of that number, is much disputed with
great authorities and reasons on either side: and adhuc sub judice lis est. But
whether of them soever it were, it is little material, it suffices that the
matter of the Epistle is Orthodox and Canonical: Directed it is unto the
Christian Jews, dispersed (by the persecution which began with St. Stephen,)
into diverse quarters, but not agreeing there (it seems) among themselves,
especially dissenting in points of Religion, every one striving who should be
the greatest Rabbi and Master among them, which contention St. James seeks to
dissolve by inquiring into the foul and poisoned Fountains from whence it
proceeds, From whence come, etc. But though directed principally unto the Jew,
yet the Epistle you know has the Title of Catholic: The whole doctrine
therefore must be general, and these particular words not bound unto others,
but pertinent also unto the Wars and fightings of all other Christians. The
enquiry sure will equally concern them all, and all be found equally liable
unto the reproof. For universally, whence come Wars, etc.

In which words we have two questions proposed, and one of them is an Answer to
the other. Unde Bella? whence are Wars, and fightings among you? This is the
first, Interrogatio disquisitiva, an Interrogation by way of inquiry, An non
hinc? Are they not hence, even of your Lusts? This is the second, Interrogatio
Responsiva, an Interrogation by way of resolution; A Question in form, an
Answer in effect; negatively proposed, Come they not from hence? but
affirmatively concluding as much as to say, from hence they come, even from
your lusts that war in your members.

It seems to involve Riddles, a questioning answer, and a negative affirmation,
but such is the condition of these responsive Interrogations.

In the former, The Question Inquisitive, three points are apparently
discernable.

subjectum circa quod, the subject concerning which the Question is moved, and
that twofold: (...) Wars public, and solemn first; then (...), lesser strifes
and fightings Whence, etc.

inter Vos, the Parties contending, Brethren by Nature, and adopted unto the
same Inheritance by Grace, Christians, bis fratres, twice brethren. Unde inter
Vos? whence among ye?

In the second Question R^ponsive, besides the Interrogation, An non hinc? Are
they not hence? we may distinguish three particulars more, arising like Rings
in gradation. 1. Lust; 2. Lust Warring; 3. Warring in the members.

First, Lusts in the habit, that unprovoked lie Couchant, sleeping, and so in a
manner dead, and Homo mortuus non belligerat, as it is in the proverb, so long
they fight not: These awakened and stirred up by the flesh or fancy, or Devil
working by both, presently become militant adversus animam, for they war, but
against the Soul. 1 Pet. 2. 11.


Lastly, if the warring Lusts of the members prevail against the Soul, draw it
unto Lust, the Lusts of the Soul do thenceforth war again in the members,
making them but instruments of iniquity unto iniquity, Romans 6.
of iniquity in consent unto iniquity in Act and Execution, as St. Paul speaks,
And then if hindered in the execution, Stirs begin abroad, Wars and Contentions
are instantly raised. And that this is the intent here of St. James his phrase
of warring in the members, is evident, for the original says not indeed Lusts
but Delights, it is not (...) but (...), not from your lusts, but from your
pleasures that war in your members. For when Lusts are turned into pleasures
and delights, they then become Vices, which before were but temptations
reigning in the Soul, and employing all the members of both Soul and Body as
Instruments and Weapons too to beat down all opposition, until they shall
atchieve and fully effect their intentions. But because these three are not
three several things but only three degrees of one and the same lust, lust
dormant, militant, and victorious, for victorious it must be in the mind, ere
the lust of the mind can become militant in the members, the utmost improvement
and exaltation of lust, when it loses her name by running into a corrupt
affection or delight; Under that Title therefore we shall simply consider it in
this responsive question; such noysom affections at home being indeed the
ground and foundation, the wellhead and Fountain of all Wars and Contentions
abroad. But we must first begin with the former Question, and in it, as Nature
requires, first enter on the subject concerning which it is moved, (...), Wars
and Fightings, from whence, etc. Qui in genere and confuse loquuntur, seipsos
decipiunt and alios, ergo distinguamus, says Aristotle. And St. James here,
that his speech be the more distinct, follows the Rule, and does first sever
public and general contentions, from private strifes and lesser
brabbles,(...). But this difference consisting in degree rather than Nature,
does not hinder, but that we may farther distinguish the diverse kinds of
either; And two sorts sure there are apparently, Verbal Wars and Violent: so
the Orator does divide, duo sunt genera decertandi, ^num per vim, alterum per
disceptationem. There are two sorts of war and contention, the one by force,
the other by dispute, and contestation; that proper unto Beast, this unto Men;
yet Men may fly unto that, faith he, when this latter may not be used, or has
been used to no purpose; For in case of injuries between States or Princes that
have no Superior Judges if reason may not prevail for right, or restitution,
the Sword of necessity must dispute the cause, and be bold to carve out its own
satisfaction. But then what large satisfaction men do usually cut out to
themselves that are their own Carvers and Judges in their own causes, backed
with Caesar's Maxim of War in the Poet, Omnia dat, qui justa negat, what bitter
revenges they take of their brethren; what sorrows and calamities, what
slaughter and effusion of blood, and confusion they bring upon the world, until
the whole earth does groan and mourn, if not totter and reel like a drunkard
under the burden, is an argument fitter for tears than discourses, for prayers
unto God than declamations unto Men that little regard them. But such are the
conditions of the former sort, violent and bloody. The second are of a milder
nature; disceptive onlay and verbal; In which kind I shall not now meddle with
the pleas and pleadings between right and wrong, bellum forense, These are but
(...), private brabbles between person and person, founded in meum and tuum,
frigida illa verba, says St. Chrysostom, quae innumera genuere bella, etc.
but only with (...) those disceptations and disputes, which concern verum and
falsum, Truth and Error, even in Faith and things pertaining unto God, bellum
Ecclesiasticum, a war public too, as that other between States and Kingdoms,
so this between Churchmen and Churches, as the war most especially intended in
the Text, and that we be not much offended at it, ever and in all ages
permitted by the Divine Dispensation for great reasons, more or less to
exercise the Church of God; And these wars, it were yet something well, had
they contained themselves within their proper sphere of disceptation and
dispute, though even thus, such contention it self, and the bitter fruits which
it produces, is cause sufficient to bring sorrow enough on the heat of every
true Son of the Church; for, whose heart smarteth not to consider the
divisions, I say not now of Reuben, but of Levi, and their great thoughts of
heart to behold the parts and parcels, divisions and subdivisions, factions and
fractions whereinto they have broken and even crumbled themselves? To see the
Coat of Christ that should be without seam, not only rent in pieces but torn
even unto rags, until Religion, Christian Religion, seem to suffer the same
fate with that Lady in Plutarch, quam cum procorum singuli possidere nequirent
integram, in parts direpserunt, and obtinuit nemo omnium. But have these
contentions stayed here? Have they not thrown aside the Pen and drawn forth the
Sword, lest chiding and fallen to blows? words have bred exasperation and
exasperation hatred more than Vatinians mortal or rather immortal hatred, not
content to spend it self on the goods, the bodies, the lives of the living, but
to rage on the Memory, the Bones and the very Ashes and Sepulchers of the dead,
yea on the very Souls, as far as they might, of both; how many such Souls of
our late Predecessors (whole blood in most Savage manner poured forth and
spilt, is yet even almost warm) are there now lying under that Altar in the
Revel. and crying unto God with an usquequo, how long Lord, merciful and true?
And how well may we cry out and admire too with that Poet, Tantum Relligio
potuit suadere malorum? For certainly there is neither of these contentions,
whether by disceptation, or violence, whether they be (...) or (...), public
Wars or private Fightings of either sort, but will well deserve an unde of
admiration and inquisition too; but first of admiration in regard of the inter
vos, the parties contending, which is the second point, whence, etc.

And sure were the vos here, only but men, it were not without marvel, since
such violent and bloody contention (as the Orator said well) is proper to
Beasts, to Beasts that are of diverse kinds and several natures, as full of
passion, as void of understanding, not unto Men that are rational, of the same
blood, and descended from the loins of the same Parent, in whom the lines of
their several Pedegrees do all meet and center themselves in unity original,
that so in their running on from thence there might be continued a fraternity
perpetual. Beasts indeed come forth armed, and in their several kinds well
appointed for war, into the world; but Man is sent out without Tooth or Talon,
horn or hoof from the womb, tanquam animal sociale, and ad pacem colendam
natum, as a civil and sociable creature designed and born unto peace. Is it not
strange that such notwithstanding should become belluis ipsis magis belluini,
more full of beastly ferity than beasts themselves? That this sociable Animal
should justify the madness of the most Savage and intractable creatures, steel
their affections with more cruelty and barbarity than Bears and Lions can learn
in the Wilderness? As if they had sucked Tigers in the desert, rather than the
Daughters of Men, or were a Cadmean generation, born not of Women, but terrae
and filii sprung up out of the earth, sown with the teeth of Serpents, for just
so we destroy one another, and pereunt per mutua vulnera fratres, like the
young men that played before Joab and Abner, every man thrusting his Sword in
his Brothers side. 2 Samuel 2.
This cannot be without marvel; But yet this is not it, there is something more
in the vos than this. St. James directs his speech not merely unto Men, to
animal Men and Infidels, but unto Christian Men, to Men whose Badge and
Cognizance, yea whose very form and essence, is mutual Love and Charity; unde
inter vos? It is but a just admiration, this, whence are wars amongst such?
That diverse and several Religions should strive even unto death; that the Jew
and the Christian contending, the Gentile should fall upon both as in the
primitive times is no great matter: but that one and the same should nourish
intestine war, that the Children of the same Mother should struggle and fight,
like Jacob and Esau, in the very womb that bears them, that is it that is
mavelous indeed. For we may not conceive that Christianity infolds within it
several Religions; As far as the World is Christian, it is but one, in which
indeed there may be and are Factions and Parts, some Schisms and rents, which
notwithstanding are not so torn in sunder, or so utterly divided, but that they
hang together, though at some distance by many threads. As long as there is no
new foundation laid, the building of Hay and Stubble upon the old, may well be
termed Error, and error sometimes peradventure Heretical, a new Religion it
may not, cannot be: That then this one should so vary and multiply it self into
many several forms and shapes, every man admiring and contending for the beauty
and proportions of that which his own fancy beholds, if not frames, and that
with such enmity and bitterness; this cannot be but very strange indered, and
we are now to inquire into the causes, that it may be strange no longer. For
this Unde of St. James, stays not in the admiration, but tends especially unto
Inquisition, the last point, whence are Wars and Fightings?

And he does well to inquire into the Causes of such deadly evils, as being the
best and readiest means to remove not only the admiration but the Evils
themselves; For Wars in the world, are but as sickness in the Body, both
distempers and tumults bred by corrupt humors, the one in natural bodies, the
other in politic and religious: Every Empirick may palliate the malignity of a
disease by outward and local Medicines, but a skilful Physician deals upon the
root and fountain, that he may make a cure of it; And so does St. James here,
though his discourse be of War, yet his whole intent is for Peace, the health
of a Church and State, yea and the wealth too; The blessing of peace, says the
Psalmist, as if all other blessings were, as indeed they are, without it
unblessed unto us. But this peace however otherwise pieced and palliated, yet
he well knew could not be firmly knit and established, without removing the
causes of War; neither these causes that feed and foment War, removed, unless
first shown and discovered; And therefore the enquiry is no sooner made by one
Interrogation, Unde Bella? but the discovery follows in the neck of it, by
another, Annon hinc? Are they not hence?

And that we may proceed unto this second general, we will now follow him
accordingly in both; first make the Enquiry and that distinctly with respect
unto the several sorts of Wars and fightings before mentioned, and then
consider the truth of his return unto it, whether he has not opened the right
fountain, justly laid the blame, where it should lie, upon warring lusts; And
lastly, take a more particular view, what Lusts they are, that warring in the
members at home, do cause all other strifes and contentions in the World
abroad. Whence are Wars? Are they not hence?

But first by the way it will not be amiss to prevent a mistake, lest some
Anabaptistical Spirit peradventure may conceive it St. James his meaning here,
because he derives them from lust, to condemn all violent Wars for utterly
unlawful; True it is, that War cannot be juston any side, unless worldly lusts
have caused injustice on one side, though it be possible in case of ignorance
through inextricable difficulty of title, that a War which can be just but on
one part, may yet not be unjust on any: But in case of apparent injustice, vim
vi repellere, is the unrepealable Law of Nature even for private men, how much
more for such as are supereminent, and public? For Kings and Kingdoms that are
bound more strongly to preserve themselves, than any particulars else, are
therefore least bound of all others to suffer injuries, especially such as are
destructive, or but look toward it: A just War here is ever to be preferred
before a running and dishonorable Peace: Though yet this indeed, is or ought
to be the last remedy, not willingly to be used, unless injuries with peace may
not otherwise be repaired: He said well, Malis foelicitas, bonis necessitas: To
lay hold of any occasion to subdue Nations, and enlarge Dominions by Conquest
and bloodshed, wicked and Tyrannous Princes may esteem great glory and
felicity, but by good and Christian Kings War is never sought, but enforced,
and is therefore rightly termed malum necessarium, though indeed it be never
evil morally, but when it is unnecessary. And therefore Cuncta prius tentanda,
all good means are first to be endeavored, but then if it still remain
immedicabile vulnus, an injury otherwise incurable, e^se recidendum, the Sword
must cut it off as a Gangrene, lest it creep on to ruin and destruction: In
this case they alone must deservedly bear on their own heads, as they may, the
blame and blood too of the War, whose warring lusts would not permit them to
hearken unto the treaties and just conditions of peace. Though therefore the
ground and occasion of a War be ever some corrupt lusts on the one part, yet
the prosecution may be but justice on the other; And just Wars are so far from
being evil, as they are termed somewhere, even in the Scriptures, the Lords
battles. This premised to remove the Anabaptist that stood in the way, let us
now come to the answer, first proposing the question, and then applying the
responsive interrogation in the several sorts of contention, beginning the
enquiry as the Text does with (...), whence are wars, public Wars and violent
amongst you?

But the demand here I confess may well be spared: such Wars are neither so
proper to the Text, nor yet unto our profession, and were they both, yet the
inquiry into them is impertinent at this season, and to this Assembly: Here is
no room for the Question, no place for the inter Vos: Blessed be God there are
no such Wars amongst us, -- Quicquid minabitur Eurus
... plectuntar sylvae.
says the Poet. And so it has been with us hitherto, and may it be so still.
The Hail-storm that threatens our Cities, may it ever fall upon the Forest, as
the Prophet Esaias speaks: The Lord, it seems, as he sometimes said of his
Israel, has given Egypt for your ransom, Ethiopia and Sheba for you, and the
chastisement of our peace is upon other men's shoulders; we therefore may better
put the question clean contrary, Unde non sunt bella? Unde Pax inter Vos?
whence is it, that there are no such Wars amongst you? This Unde and enquiry
certainly is not without some admiration neither; That the streams of your
Gospel should run pure and clean, whilst the Rivers abroad are turned into
blood; that whilst other Nations lie even waste in the desolations of War,
imbroyled and imbrewed in their own gore, your Country remains unto you in the
mean while like the Garden of Eden, fresh and flourishing, every man sub umbra
pacis delighting and sporting himself in the Bowers of Peace and Plenty too,
Unde haec nobis tanta faelicitas? we may well indeed make the demand, whence
this is happened unto us above all others? And may we not as justy answer like
St. James here with another demand, An non hinc? Is it not from hence?
certainly next unto God and his gracious favor, from hence it is, that we have
a Prince to rule over us that is Princeps pacis, as the Defendour of the Faith,
so a Prince of Peace also. A Prince of such mild and temperate affections, as
the eye of envy cannot but perceive his bosom to be free from those revengefull
or ambitious thoughts, ab immen sa illa dominandi libidine, from that immense
and illimited desire of enlarging dominion, and all other those impotent lusts,
that reigning in the breasts and warring in the members of other Kings, have so
much troubled the world, and like that horseman in the Revel. taken peace from
off the earth. Happy men are we, did we understand our own happiness, or rather
are we not miserable the more that understanding our happiness, regard it so
little? That notwithstanding this invaluable blessing of peace, able to swallow
up all petty pretended grievances, can yet hardly, and scarce without murmuring
be brought to contribute any thing for the preservation of our own felicity,
though wrought out with the care, and brought home unto us with the trouble and
travel of another? An ingratitude able to deprive us of our blessing; and
indeed nothing but deprivation, can teach us rightly how to value it. But then
let it come unto this, set once an inter vos upon it, make it your own case,
though but by imagination: Let your fields be spoiled and your labors wasted,
let your eyes behold the rifling of your houses, the direption and sacking of
your Cities; Let your Sons be numbered unto the Sword, and your Daughters to
reproach and violation; lie but a while under these, and the like calamities of
War, that usually attend on the victories of proud and insulting Conquerours,
and then consider and say whether any thing be too dear to redeem that
blessing, which you now have, and think every thing too much, though never so
little, that should be expended for the continuance of it. May such
unthankfulness never bring it to a real case among us: but sure this and our
other iniquities are like enough to do so. I am neither Prophet nor Son of a
Prophet, only this I say, and a reverend Prelate has taught it me, That Mercy
and Justice are two Sisters, and as the one has had her day, so the other in
time may come to have hers also. For God has two Arms, two Cups, two
Recompenses: Verily there is a reward for the Righteous, and doubtless too
there is a Judgment in store for unthankful, murmuring and obstinate sinners.
But, it is well, as yet we are free, and blessed ever be God we are so, that we
have now nothing to do with (...), but have we not with (...)neither? we cannot
put the question here, unde bella? but may we not, unde pugnae? whence are
fightings? I would we might not. Would to God there were no room for inter vos
here neither; But however the tartness of the humor be something allai'd (and
you know still through whose care) yet room there is, and too much room, if
please God, left for making the enquiry, unde sint? whence they are? and for
justifying the answer too, even from hence, from she lusts that war in your
members. And it was but time for the Lords Anointed to set to his helping hand,
we were even grown wanton in destroying the life of one another. A wry
countenance, a mistaken word, any thing was cause enough, non in commodum, sed
occidendi causa occidunt, Men kill, as he said, for no other reason, but only
to kill, not for profit, but for praise, and since they conceive there is
honor in it, take a pleasure in killing; As if no matter were fit to build up
the aerie Castles of honor, but such as is tempered with blood; And yet see
the reward, when the Devil by the Laws of God surrounds and seiseth on the
conquered, dying in malice, and the Hangman by the Laws of the King, gives the
Garland of Honor to the Conqueror: A worthy reward, if any reward may be
worthy of such impiety! How may we say with old Jacob unto his fighting
children, cursing their wrath, for it was cruel, O my Soul come not into their
secret, O mine honor be thou not joined unto their Assembly; For indeed it
neither is, nor can be esteemed honor with any but the Assembly of Ruffians
and Rodomantado's, Brethren of the Sword that read Tavern Lectures, and have
made an Art and Philosophy of quarrel, unless it be honor to Live and Die in
the disobedience of God, the King, and the Church, and to suffer the baseness
of those bitter revenges of all three; for as you have seen them, the
execrations of God and the King, so are the Anathema's of the Church too,
excommunicated ipso facto, and not permitted in other places Christian burial,
but cast out into the common Field, among those beasts they: imitate; and pity
it is not so in our own Church. For he that dies like a Lion, or rather like a
Mastiff, justly deserves, as that Prophet speaks, the burial of an Ass^ But
though this be the chief, yet is it not the affectation of this false honor
alone which is the only warring lust, that inforceth these Combatants to the
Field. They can fight sometimes for their money, the Gamesters quarrel:
sometimes for their Consorts in the work of darkness, the Adulterers quarrel:
and sometimes even for pure revenge, the malicious Man's quarrel; when if they
miscarry and perish in the Conflict, The first dies the Worlds, the second, the
Fleshes, the third the Devils Martyr: And honor still there is no doubt in all
three. Are these Men Christians, trow ye? Certainly I begin almost to doubt,
whether they are within the Verge of this, inter vos, here or no. Sure I am
they cannot resolve to fight these Battles, but they must at the same time
resolve to renounce Christianity: yea and so themselves profess (and
peradventure there is honor in that too) that they may not, they cannot do it
as Christians, only they are bound to maintain their reputation as Gentlemen.
But what, are the Noble and Ignoble become several species of Christians, or
are there several Gospels, one for the Peasant, another for the Gentleman to be
saved by? I have read that the great Bishop of Cullen could plunder a Country
with his Army, but as a Duke, not as a Bishop; but he was well derided for it
by the Countryman with that sarcastical demand, that when the Duke should be
burning in Hell for such outrages, what would become of the Bishop? And surely
when the Gentleman falling in a Duel shall be damned, we may as justly demand
with the like derision, what will become of the Christian? will God and the
Devil divide the spoil, come to the old composition, nec mihi nec tibi, sed
dividatur? or will Christ deliver the evil Christian to Satan, and take the
privileged Gentleman to himself? But not to be over pleasant in a matter that
is serious, I only say thus much, If the Christian be a Noble Gentleman, let
the Gentleman too be a Noble Christian; Such brute and barbarous Kites may well
be wild branches of Gentilism, but will no way accord with Christianity, or
true Generosity either; yea the Gentiles themselves, those great Masters of
honor, the old Romans, that so eagerly fought for it, and won it too in just
and lawful wars, yet otherwise esteemed it the greatest both Honor and Valor
too, privatas injuries magno and excelso animo praeterire, with an high and a
Noble Mind to pass by and contemn private offenses. And therefore he is a Noble
neither Gentile Gentleman, nor Christian that cannot do the like, but a sordid
Vassal unto those base and unworthy lusts that war in his members: God and his
Scripture can afford him no other Honor, and with it I leave him, and pass
unto those other fightings and contentions disceptive, the wars Ecclesiastical,
into the bitter root and original whereof, we are now to enquire and consider,
An non hinc? whether these also issue not from the same Spring and Wellhead,
still the head of all evil, lust warring in the members. Are they not hence?

Not that these wars neither are on all parts unlawful, like those latter,
because derived from lust: unlawful indeed they are on that side, where lust
raises errors; but necessary on the other, where truth seeks to dissolve
them. These are not as Duels, and private Fightings, but rather as those former
solemn and public Wars; and as there Lust begets Injury, and Justice repells
it; so here Lust ingenders error, and it is but fidelity to oppose it; But then
we must be sure the error be clear, and of moment too, otherwise we may be too
forward to make a war about it. And indeed it will behoove us not to make or
nourish more quarrels here, than needs we must, especially not to prosecute
them over-eagerly; contention in the Church, is as a wound in the Soul, or a
breach of the Sea, it may have small beginnings, but nothing an well make it up
again. It sometimes fares with the Watchmen of Israel, that have the charge of
the Churches peace, as it did with Elijahs servant upon Mount Carmel; At the
first looking out peradventure they see nothing; they look out a second time,
and behold a cloud arising out of the Sea no bigger than a Man's hand; but ere
they can well look about them the third time, the Heaven is instantly overcast,
and down comes a dashing shower, if not a Tempest upon the Church: if the wood
be dry, a small thing will serve turn to kindle a flame, which greater pains
will not so easily again extinguish. It will therefore concern us highly to
take heed how we strike fire upon Tinder, or blow that which is stricken: how
we either begin or foment the least sparks of contention, where the matter
round about us is so combustible, and ready to take fire, as are the affections
and fancies of giddy people, prone of themselves to nothing more than novelty
and disobedience. And since it is our office not to feed such flames, but to
quench them, we are to do it accordingly, as the points shall require. If
material and of moment, by casting on of water even by opposition; but if
otherwise, by withdrawing the Fuel, agreeing or not furiously striving in
unnecessary and difficult disputes. It is therefore but the idle jealousy of
busy Zealots, when they see any out of this desire of the Churches peace and
union too, as far as may be, not willing to raise or nourish more controversies
than are needful, (where God knows there are too many already) presently to
conceive them for underminers of Religion, betrayers of the Truth, that deliver
it up once more, if not to Pilate yet to Caiaphas, to be Crucified, either out
of fraud, or I know not what fear, ne Romani veniant and tollant gentem: True,
there is no counsel against the Almighty, and he that shall seek to save any
thing by deserting his truth, does but take the readiest way to lose it. The
Lord has said it, and (in such subtleties as the Wiseman says, are fine but
unrighreous) ever takes it his honor to do as he says, Perdam sapientiam
sapientum, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and take them in the
craftiness of their own imaginations. Alas! who knows not this as well
asthemselves, and who sees not, that in such points as are apparently noxious
and hurtful, for Sions sake we do not, we may not hold our peace, but where we
cannot otherwise join, we are ready to join battle? They are the Lords battles,
these of all other; and since the wall of partition is erected on their ground,
and the errors that occasion the War, founded in the lusts that war in their
members, we spare not here, as occasion serves, to lift up our voices, like
Trumpets, and stand prepared to jeopard our lives even unto death in the high
places of the Field, lest the curse of Meroz overtake us, that bitter Curse by
the voice of an Angel, Judge. v. 23.
for not coming forth unto the help of the Lord: But yet even in these
contentions that are most necessary, soundness and moderation too, would do
well; for violence or bitterness against Men's Persons may confirm them in their
errors, but is no way able to convert any Man to the truth. We our selves will
not be so converted, though I doubt not but in case, where sensual Lusts and
desires have stupefied the sense, and made Men wilfully deaf unto milder
admonitions, such may sometimes be rubbed up a little the more roundly. But
whether such terrene affections be the true causes, as of other Wars, so of
these contentions also, we are now to see and inquire.

St. James here affirms they are, but by a negative demand. Are they not hence?
And he seems to do it purposely in that form, to see if any Man can except
against it, or find out any other original. For some have employed themselves
in the discovery of other Fountains, and would willingly cast the blame, as
well, if not rather upon the ignorance of Men and the difficulty of the
Scriptures; and indeed in the Scriptures, there are some things difficult
enough, and among Men many ignorant more than too much; but ignorance in
difficulties never comes to error and contention, if Men can be content to be
ignorant in what they cannot well understand, this is, pia and doct a
ignorantia, as St. Austin has it, a pious and a learned ignorance: indeed not
so much an ignorance, as a willing and voluntary necessity, which of all things
else in matters that are thorny and perplexed, is the best preserver of peace.
There may be, no doubt, abstruse questions enough, proposed by Churchmen and
handled too, but they never come to stirs and strifes in the Church until they
that are ignorant and blind, like those Pharisees, out of pride or some other
Lust, will needs say and believe too, that they see; And then such guides and
their blinder followers, how suddenly are they both in the ditch plunged over
head and ears in error, ere they are aware? Ignorance therefore never causes
error and dissension, unless one Lust or other does first cause the ignorance:
so St. Peter tells us, somethings are hard to be understood in St. Paul's
Epistles, which yet hurts none but unlearned and unstable Men; Men carried
about, it seems, with diverse Lusts, like empty Clouds with several winds, who
therefore pervert such difficult places to their own destruction; and let it
ever be their own blame, not the Scriptures, which are most unwillingly wrested
to the adulterating of that very truth which themselves do deliver. But the
holy Scripture is not composed only of difficulies, it has shallows in it, and
Fords where the Lamb may wade, as well as Pools and Pits, where the Elephant
may swim, yea and drown too. As there are exquisite rarities to depel satiety,
so is there solid food enough too, to satisfy hunger; And in these that are
universally necessary unto life, the Scriptures. are so clear and free from
difficulty, as there is no room for ignorance, did not Men look on them through
the false Spectacles of their deceitful affections; For if the Gospel be hid,
it is hid unto those that perish, to those, whole Eyes the God of this world
has blinded, says St. Paul plainly; neither does the God of this world
otherwise blind them, but by exhaling the vapors of worldly Lusts, that darken
and pervert the judgment. Whether therefore we recur either to the difficulty
of the Scripture, or ignorance of Men; we are still brought back in conclusion,
according to St. James here, to the lusts of their members, as the true and
proper causes from whence such bitter contentions in the Church have been
raised, nourished, and with such violence prosecuted, for are they not hence?

And hence indeed they are, so much the very demand does import; but it is not
enough to say so, we must show it too, as well as say it. And that may not well
be done, unless we condescend unto some particulars, take a short view of these
several Lusts, and see a little what several errors they have begotten, and
with them what contentions in the Church. Love and Hatred, if misapplied, are
the two radical Lusts that both found and foster all others. Those that proceed
from Love, the concupiscible part of the Soul, are either from the immoderate
Love of Pleasure, or of Profit or Honor, which the beloved Disciple terms, the
lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the Eye, and the pride of Life, and these are
all either worldly or sensual: But those that issue from Hatred, the irascible
part, whether from the hatred of peace, or of truth, are more directly
Devilish; And therefore our St. James James iii. 15.
a little before reduces them all unto three heads. But if there be bitter
emulation and strife among you, this wisdom descends not from above, but is
earthly, sensual, and devilish.

To begin the instance with that terrene and worldly affection of Pride and
Vainglory (though this has something of Devil in it too) what a fruitful
Mother has it ever been of dissentions in Religion? and how many ways has she
hatched and brought forth her deformed issue? Sometimes by an itching desire of
knowing all things, which boldly searching into hidden secrets leaves nothing
unransacked, whereby it may appear more learned: And then what such men
conceive their profound speculations with much travel have drawn up out of the
depth of night and darkness, lest they should lose the price of their labor,
they obtrude upon others as necessary to be believed. It was most rightly said,
Never Heretic yet, that racked the bowels of the Church, but his pretense was
for truth; and Men do usually fall so deeply in love with the conceited truth
of their own invention, as all their pains seems to be lost, unless they may
press it too upon the Conscience of every Man else. And then when probable
conceits come to be published for necessary truths, and speculations of fancy
are once turned into Articles of Faith (as we see it has fallen out, as in
many others, so in the new Platform of Presbyterial Purity, at first conceived
but for a convenient Regiment, yet afterward men becoming more enamored with
their own conceptions, came to be urged at length for the necessary discipline
of Christ, clearly commanded in Scripture, as the Scepter upon Earth and very
Kingdom of our Savior,) no marvel then I say, if contentions be not only
raised, but eagerly and obstinately pursued also; which yet are rendered the
more violent by a second elation of mind that can well away with no
superiority: And those, that by other mundane desires, are driven to endure it,
yet how Heavenly do they do it? How do they mumur against the power of their
Superintendents, like Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Ye take too much upon you, ye
Sons of Aaron, and much ado they have, not to say so of Moses too. Doubtless
the cry in their hearts, is but that Conspiracy in the Psalmist, Let us break
their bonds asunder, and cast their cords from us. Sometimes again by an higher
degree of ambition that will admit of no equality, that as the former would be
subject unto none, so this would have all subject unto himself. -- Nec far
potest Caesarve priorem,
Pompeiusve parem.
The one like Caesar, the other like Pompey, That can endure no Superior, nor
This brook any Equal: And on this ground it was, that the Greek Church first
brake with the Roman, whose Bishop against right and reason, the rule of
Christ, and decree of the Fathers, as she justly taxed him, did arrogate unto
himself a plenitude of power. And from the same fountain have issued those
Waters of strife which do at this day overflow, and almost drown all
Christendom. Lastly, by an ambitious desire of Secular Rule and Empire; For
there are not wanting examples in story sacred and profane of such as have
brought in new Religions, or fitted the old unto the Palate of the People, by
this means to retain their own, or gain unto themselves the Territories and
Dominions of others; To this end Jeroboam first made an alteration in the
Church of Israel, setting up his Altars in Da^ and Bethel, lest the ten Tribes
by going up yearly unto Jerusalem to sacrifice, as they were commanded, should
chance to return in time unto the house of David from whence they were rent.
And I could with such secular and politic respects had no power among any of
our selves, I say not out of any fear lest the ten parts. should return again
unto the house of Levi, or rather of God, from whence they are rent, (it were
pretty well, if they could rest contented there,) but rather that such regards
might not prevail with them, in the desire and intention of a farther renting,
to animate our mutinous contenders and egg on their contentions, that look that
way; I hope there are no such crafty Interlopers as he terms them, that put in
their stock among the brawling Bankers, help to trouble the Waters, supposing
in time to make another good fishing for themselves. Though it is to be feared,
some Consciences there may be in the world extensive enough, and patent to
swallow even a Cathedral on the top of an Abbey, and never trouble the Stomach
of it much with the digestion neither. It little matters for Sacrilege, they
abhor Idols, and that is sufficient. But this appertains not so properly unto
Ambition as unto Avarice, the second of these earthly affections, but no less
contentious and turbulent than the former. The Apostle well terms it radix
omnium malorum, the root of all evil, and especially so it is, by being the
root of dissension, for where envying and strife is, there is confusion and
every evil work. Jam. iii. 16.
This therefore a second Parent, and Nurse too of this viperous brood of error
and contention: For what a multitude of erroneous but gainful pardons and
dispensations, purgations and expiations of sin, what indulgences to commit, or
else to continue in manifest wickedness, what translation of other men's merits
on those that want of their own, and the like, has this affection conceived,
and brought into the world, and that not for morsels of bread, or handfuls of
barley only, as that Prophet, but all, like Judas, for pieces of Silver? Such
Silverlings what are they indeed, but Judas's, quaestui habentes pietatem,
says St. Paul to Timothy, that make other men's goodness their own gain, yea
and their wickedness too? Both are equally the Churches Treasure, that may not
be dispensed, nor these purged without money: So that Purgatory is but a
Subterraneous Vault, dug only to come at a Mine, and that ignis fatuus,
though it be but fantastical and imaginary, yet it serves turn to melt Bullion
into his Holinesses Mint more abundantly, than any Princes fire else, that is
real; And therefore it is not to be wondered at, if much stir be made, and many
bellows ever blowing to keep it from going out. On the other side are there not
others to whom the Apostle long since prophesied, that speak perverse things to
draw Disciples after them, out of whom they suck no small advantage? such as
can lead silly women Captive laden with sins and diverse lusts, that like their
Forefathers, the old Pharisees, can creep into Widows houses, and devour too
under pretense of long Prayers? that can teach the Son of a profelyte to say
unto the Father, or rather the Wife Corban unto the Husband, if not a proselyte
as themselves? Nay, until they become such, that neither the one, nor the other
has any just title unto his own goods, which therefore may be purloyned from
them with a good Conscience, if it be to supply the necessity of the Saints,
the right owners of them. Is not this likewise, as the same Apostle, Veritatem
cauponari, to make merchandise of the Gospel of truth, or rather of their own
fancies and falsehood? Against all which questuous errors of such sheepskin'd
Wolves on either side, when the true and faithful shepherd shall oppose
himself, when these Flints and this Steel begin to knock and collide together,
out fly the sparks of dissension, that inflame presently and set the world in
combustion. Hence Luther stoutly opposing the Marts and Markets of the Roman
Indulgencies, and whipping those buyers and sellers out of the Temple, first
began that battery which since we see has made such a wide breach in the very
Towers of their Babel. But these wars and contentions are sensual, says St.
James, as well as earthly: and sure pleasure is of little less power with us,
than profit: And whether we take it strictly for the concupiscence of carnal
things, or more generally, for a desire of sinning freely and without sting of
Conscience, has her part in these Tragedies, and brings not a little oil unto
the flames of contention; For this affection, finding the doctrine of the Cross
grievous unto it, whose chief desire it is to enjoy the delights of this life,
and from them to pass into the joys of a better, has for this purpose sought
out Doctors, such as may comply with her desires, and it seems has found them
too, and that by heaps; 2 Timothy iv. 3.
so says the Apostle, they heap up unto themselves Teachers after their own
Lusts. I confess, I should not a little admire why the Romanist that is so
strict in discipline, should yet in life be as loose as any; whence it should
be, that pressing the necessity of good works so vehemently in their Doctrine,
few men yet seem to want them or commit the contrary with less trouble to their
Conscience; did not their enormous dispensing with Oaths of fidelity and
horrible Incests, their supplying of some men's empty Lamps with other men's Oil,
their enlarging of Ve^al Sins, and their easiness of Absolution in such as are
Mortal, and serving others the like, take off that admiration: Not that I
dislike the distinction of Mortal Sins and Venial rightly stated, or yet the
use of dispensation in the Church, much less of Absolution; but only the abuse
of these things, which yet I think are more abused by particular Persons,
sensual Priests, and presumptuous people, than by the general Doctrine of that
Church, though so abused also: And I would we had no abuses tending that way at
home: For some there are so strict in profession, and yet withal so dissolute
in their Doctrine, and the unavoidable inferences of it, as would make a man
admire on the other side, why they should not either teach, as they profess, or
else profess plainly, as they teach; such as can distinguish also of Venial and
Mortal Sins, but in another manner, not from the Nature of the Sin, but the
Condition of the Person; The best works they can do, are deadly unto some,
whilst the deadliest iniquities they commit, shall be but Venial in the mean
time unto themselves, as not making any breach between God and their Souls,
even then, when they commit them, yea as pardoned with a non obstante before
they are committed; such as having no part of true righteousness in themselves,
yet even then by Faith and Faith alone may have the Merits imputed, and
Righteousness too of another: such as can actually commit Mortal iniquities,
and yet at the same time remain still habitually Righteous: such as can exclude
good works from the gaining of their justification, and when they have gained
it, can lose it no more by any works that are evil: such as need not care what
sins their flesh commits, so long as they act them not without some
reluctance of the spirit. For so sin the godly; and since no Reprobates have
any commerce with the internal motions of the Spirit, as being altogether
flesh, they can even from the enormity of their sins grieving the Holy Ghost,
conclude the very certainty of their Salvation, as no way else more certain
that the Holy Ghost is within them. No marvel sure if these and many other
their sweet and comfortable positions have easily found such multitudes of
Disciples in the world, or that they contend so eagerly and strive for them
tanquam pro aris and focis, as for the main points of their Religion and Faith,
or whatsoever else is dear unto them. And less marvel it is, that these
Disciples should be so free and open-handed unto their Teachers, when their
Teachers understanding their desires are so favorable unto their Disciples:
For certainly next unto that of the Alcoran, I know not any Doctrine else in
these days so kind and courteous unto flesh and blood, or in the Genius and
just consequences more impure and dissolute, than that of those who of all
others most profess strictness and purity. But so it is fit such corrupt
people, and their hired Priests should claw one another, but scratch and
lacerate every Man else. You have seen the earthly and sensual affections of
Love, the love of Honor, Profit and Pleasure, blowing the coals of dissension;
there is one blast of Hatred behind, and that will show it to be Devilish also.
For there are not wanting instruments of Satan most like himself, malignant
Spirits, that without the help of these respects can find in their hearts
merely out of the hatred of Peace and Truth too, some of them, to raise Cavils
and Contentions in the World, such as those of whom Salust speaks, Quibus quiet
a movere magna merces videbat^r, who take it for a sufficient hire to set them
a work, ^ if they may but disturb things quiet and established^ Est enim
quoddam hominum genus, quod sine host vivere non potest, for there is, as he
well says, a Nation of People, that cannot endure to live without an Enemy;
such as Trogus pronounces the old Spaniard, adeo infensum concordiae, ut puro
illius odio inimicitias suscipiat: Fishes that cannot live but in
Flood-hatches, Salamanders that die, but in the flames of Contention. But some
of these are of an higher pitch, and have their aim even at Truth it self; and
though for the most part but Table and Trencher Mates for buffoonery; yet
besides their scurrilous profaneness, they can sometimes be bold to argue^ and
it is mavelous to consider what scruples of difficulty they move, what knots
of Sophistry they knit, what accusations on all sides these Scepticks frame,
and this to no other purpose, but to puzle the World in the already difficult
search of verity; hoping that others upon despair of finding out the true
Religion, may come at length to conceit, as themselves in favor of their
Epicurism do, that there may be no truth in any; for this can be no other
beast, than that which we term an Atheist, something worse than Devilish. For
the Devil does believe and tremble. And such are the true causes of those Wars,
from whence proceed all the wounds and breaches, that are or have been made in
the Church. Other prejudices and partialities there are arising from them, that
keep these wounds open, and will not permit them to close again; but this may
suffice for the present to verify the answer of St. James in this his
responsive demand, For are they not hence?

Now the intent of all this search into the beginnings and first Fountains of
Dissension and War, is but to lead us in the end into the way of Reconciliation
and Peace. This was the purpose of St. James's enquiry, and it should be ours.
Shall we then for conclusion of all change the question, let go unde bella, and
demand now at last clean contrary, unde Pax? From whence comes Peace? from
whence amidst all these stirs may that be procured? If we do so, An non hinc,
is at hand, comes it not hence, even from removing those Lusts and corrupt
affections, that are the causes of War? Many good means and medicines indeed
have been sought out and applied to cool the burning heat of these Feavors of
Dissension, and yet all but Empirical palliations, for a time peradventure
affording some ease; but hope of health or recovery there is not any, until
the putrid humors shall be purged out, that cause and feed the distemper: All
other remedies of decision, or ways of pacification, which Men can either
propose or practice without this, are too feeble and weak for the purpose; For
what, are the Fathers they that may give end to these differences? There is a
reverence belonging unto them, and let them have it; but how should they finish
the broils of after times, that could not pacify the stirs of their own? Shall
the antecedent Councils give the definitive Sentence? But what if they handle
not all the controversies among themselves? How if a good Cause found ill
Pleaders, and so fell, not through its own weakness, but fearful silence, or
unskilful defense? None of these are impossible, yea some say, that all of them
have fallen out. Shall then a present Council clear all doubts? There is little
hopes of any such, that shall be Ecumenical; and were there any such, less
hope but that it would be carried by Faction. Or else is the Bishop of Rome the
Man, on whose peremptory definitions we must all rely? But this is one of the
points of controversy, the mainest one, and in such he may not be his own
Judge. It is not any of these, nor indeed any thing else, that may restore us
our peace: Not that device of an implicit and infolded Faith, for these
Controversies are between great Clerks, that belongs only to the ignorant and
simple; Not that Law of the Muscovite, which forbids all disputes in point of
Religion (though in impertinent curiosities of excellent use, and whilst
Spirits are enraged in others too, that are material) for so every Man may
teach dogmatically what he list, and be sure to be controled by no Man; Not
that position of the Alcoran, that every one may be saved in his own Religion;
for it is impious, though peradventure true enough, if his own be the Christian
Religion, yet not of force enough to allay Contentions, for we are to consider
what is likely, as well as what is possible, and Errors that are dangerous
must be oppugned as well as such as are absolutely deadly. No not the decision
by Miracles, for we are forewarned against them: Antichrist must come with all
false signs and lying wonders, able to seduce if it were possible the very
Elect of God. Nor yet that brief and compendious way of ending controversies by
killing those that gainsay them, a Remedy as ^ain as wicked: For the true
Church like the lopt Tree, Per damna; per caedes, ab ipso
Ducit opes animumque ferro,
has ever thrived under the Axe, and gained by the lopping. But peradventure
what the Hangman cannot do, nor any thing else, the Devil may; for some have
been so shameless to repair even thither for the ending of controversies,
adjuring and conjuring by Spells and Exorcisms Satan himself to give answer out
of possessed bodies, as out of his Prophetic Charms, unto the truth of his
disputed Articles: A strange remedy and desperate as their cause, that would
establish truth in Religion by the Spirit of Error, and Father of Lies.
Neither these, nor any thing else can prevail. Authority may restrain, wise Men
may mollify and persuade, but neither the power of the Magistrate, nor skill
of the Learned are both able to effect it; whatsoever remedies the Wit and
Confidence of either dare, or any Catholic Moderator else, yea of the great
Cassander himself may invent or propound, until every Man seek to remedy one,
will be found too weak for the purpose; they are all either dangerous, or not
fully profitable Plasters, if not malignant and hurtful, yet at best too
narrow for the Sore, and unable to pierce unto the root of the Malady; It is
only the removing of those inordinate Lusts, the causes of War, that is able to
give us a true and durable Peace; For the bitterness of the streams must be
cured at the Fountain, and the fire quenched by subduction of the fuel,
otherwise effects will ever issue from their causes; And therefore the wisdom
which is from above, says my St. James, is: first pure, then peaceable; And
our Savior observes the same method in his benedictions: Matt. V.
first, blessed are the pure in heart, and then immediately, blessed are the
peacemakers; for until the heart which is the Fountain be purged, there is no
expectation of Peace. We may therefore cast up our Eyes toward Heaven, and
profess outwardly as much purity as we please, but so long as we are
contentious, and at opposition still with the Church and her peace, it is a
manifest sign our Wisdom is not from above, nor yet our selves so pure in
Heart, as we should be; For were the Heart once well purged and purified from
these earthly and sensual desires, that disturb the Soul, and darken the mind,
what peaceable and peacemaking affections would succeed, what calmness and
serenity, able to clear the eye of the Soul in discerning evident truth, and to
temper the passions of the Soul in such truths, as are not easily discernable?
And so end most controversies and at least moderate all, teaching us, as St.
Paul speaks, sapere ad sobrietatem, to be wise, but unto sobriety, or as St.
James, to show forth our works in the meckness of wisdom; For soberness,
meekness, patience, gentleness, brotherly-kindness, love and the like, these
are the high and proper effects of the Wisdom, which is desuper from above, but
may not descend into a Soul filled already with those Lusts, that are desubter
from flesh and earthly things beneath. Virtues and endowments these, that seem
to restore the Soul to her native beauty, render it sweet and amiable, and of
all other makes her most like unto her Savior: Virtues therefore so peculiar
unto his Gospel as it breaths almost no other language; And were that Gospel, a
while obeyed rather than disputed, obeyed in necessary duties, rather than
disputed in speculative difficulties, it would soon be unto us, what it is in
it self, Evangelium pacis a Gospel of Peace, which the God of Peace vouchsafe
unto us all to study, even through Jesus Christ our Peacemaker, to whom with
the Holy Ghost, three persons, etc.

Amen.
Laus Deo in aeternum.
Amen.
A DISCOURSE OF ELECTION AND REPROBATION.
SERMON V. Upon HOSE A xiii. 9.
Oh Israel thou have destroyed thy self, but in. Me is thine help.
AS there is nothing more necessary, so is there not any thing of greater
difficulty, than to draw man unto a true thankfulness for Gods Mercies, or a
just acknowledgment of his own Errors. It will not be easy for his Ministers
to prevail in that here, which could not be done in Paradise, no not by God
himself, where although it were not the first Sin (for it does of necessity
suppose a former) yet it was the second in time, and I think in greatness
before the first. The Woman she transfers the fault on the Serpent, and Adam on
the Woman which thou gave me, she delivered me of the fruit and I did eat.
Genesis iii. 12.


And such as was then, such or worse is still the corrupt and stubborn
disposition of a Sinner, who, though his own guilty Conscience make him hide
his head in a bush for shame, yet thinks any Fig Leaves of excuse will serve
turn to cover his nakedness from those Eyes, unto which all things are
transparent; A crime we have received from our Forefathers, that first used
it; the Teats of Eve gave no other milk, than this perverseness unto all her
Children. In good and laudable actions every man can readily teach his mouth to
kiss his hand, as Job speaks, to commend and applaud the work, and be content
to receive the honor unto himself: But if the question be of our Errors and
misdeeds, how do we labor and sweat to convey the burden from our own
shoulders! How ingenious presently is the froward nature of most men to knit
the Stoical Chain of destiny, and (be the action never so detestable and vile)
to fasten the first Link not to the foot of Jupiters Chair, the Stars and
Constellations of Heaven, but, which is a degree beyond the Stoics, to the
very arm of the Almighty! In this case we are all grown acute Philosophers, and
can climb the physical Scale of Causes, as if it were Jacobs Ladder, until by
it we ascend into Heaven, yea into the very closet of God, where they will
search the Book of hidden Counsels and eternal Decrees, and from thence draw
dark and blind consequences of inevitable and fatal necessity, rather than
flesh and blood should want wherewith to plead with its Maker; That as the men
of the Man of sin have devised a compendious way by one position to answer all
objections against their Doctrine, namely That their Church cannot err: So these
men have found out as brief a Tenent to stop the mouth of all reproof in the
Errors and Heresies of their life, to wit, that they cannot choose but err; As
if they had no means to decline the punishment, unless they drew in God to be a
Party in the offense. But it were good that Man would plead with Man, that the
Potsheard would contend with the Potsheards of the Earth, as Isaiah speaks, and
not with his Creator; whose Scepter is a rod of Iron, wherewith he can at his
pleasure bruise the vessel of the Potter, for he has power over his clay: A
power, notwithstanding which how unwilling he is to use, and how justly at
length he does use, and how mercifully he forbears to use, we are in these few
words by God himself given to understand, that so we might cease to wrangle
with the Divine Justice, that is so loath to strike. O Israel! words of great
compassion, and learn to condemn our selves and our own sins in the evil we
suffer, when it does strike. Thou have destroyed thy self. And to bless and
adore God for all the good we either do or receive when in special mercy it
does not strike, -- but in me is thy help: O Israel, thou have destroyed thy
self, but etc.

But Israel is a word that wants not ambiguities, for all are not Israel, that
are of Israel: There are Israelites of the seed, and Israelites of the Faith of
Abraham. There are Sons of flesh, and Sons of the promise, and Israel is the
Church of God, the womb that conceives and bears both. Duoe Gentes in utero: It
is Rebekahs womb, in which Jacob and Esau, and in them two mighty Nations do
contend and strive; It is the Net in the Gospel, that contains things both good
and bad; The Fold, that has Sheep and Goats; The Field, that has Tares and
Wheat; The Barn-floor, that has Wheat and Chaff. So then to collect the sum
and substance of those points, which this Scripture does especially present
unto consideration:

Israel.



O Israel, thou have, etc.

That these words may have a true and litteral understanding of Calamities and
Deliverances incident unto this present life, that which immediately goes
before in the precedent verse, I will meet them as a Bear bereaved of her
whelps, etc. will not suffer any Man to doubt: But that they are only and
principally meant of such, and not of eternal destruction, and Salvation in
them, that which follows, will permit no man to believe, I will ransom them
from the power of the grave: I will redeem them from death: O death, I will be
thy plague, O grave, I will be thy destruction: verse 14.
words that do not carry a sound of momentany affliction. And therefore this
illustrious promise, or Prophecy, or both, by the Apostle to the Corinthians 1
Cor. xv. 55.
is repeated, and worthily appropriated unto him, who is the Savior of Body
and Soul, and has redeemed us from first and second, both Corporal and Eternal
death. The more deservedly is P^scator, otherwise a Learned and Industrious
Pastor, to be blamed, who in a late and negligent tract of Predestination,
having so ordered the state of Reprobation, as he saw God thereby must needs
become the first Author and Procurer of his Creatures endless destruction, lest
this place here, Oh Israel thou have destroyed thy self, should cross his
intent, or hinder his building, replies that it is meant of such destruction
only as pertains unto the present World; as if there were not one and the same
cause of destruction in both, nay as if it were more prejudicial unto God, and
his Justice, to be the absolute cause of slight and short troubles here, than
of perpetual and everlasting sorrows in Hell hereafter. It is strange he should
rather seek an answer, than acknowledge the truth of so excellent a sentence: A
sentence, that is indeed the very line and level, whereby himself and every one
else, must direct and square all his propositions, that concern those eternal
appointments and decrees of a just and merciful God. It is the best if not the
only Star and Card and Compass too, on which the weak age of reason must
continually fix it self, whilst it Steers in this dangerous Navigation, in this
immense and bottomless Sea of Predestination, in which Abyssus Abyssum invocat,
one Deep calls upon another, Deep upon Deep and Rock upon Rock, so thick, that
in seeking to avoid the one, unless this Golden Rule be our direction, we shall
be sure to strike and split upon the other, as many that have sailed before us,
have done, whose Bark and burden should never have perished, had this notable
Saying sat Pilot at the Helm, by whose shipwreck we may learn wisdom to
beware. For some of the first and best Reformers of the Roman Superstition,
justly displeased at the Pelagian freedom of the Papist, whereby Man is made
the first mover unto his own good, striving with all their might to bear up
from this Charybdis, fell foul upon Sylla on the other side, and instead of
Pelagian liberty brought in more than Manichean necessity, whereby God is as
far entitled unto Man's ill: Both in extremes and both extremely to be blamed;
the former being not able fully to say, In thee is our Salvation, unto God; the
latter, Thou have destroyed thy self, unto Man. Arminius of late, an Acute
Dutchman, steps forth to reform these Reformers, whose main Error
notwithstanding, which he should have condemned especially, he is found
especially to imitate, fleying where he should but sheer, and flying from one
extreme to another, when the truth lies between both. For as they upon a worthy
dislike of a conditional Election upon foreseen merits, through heat or
ignorance, come to maintain an absolute Reprobation; so he out of his as worthy
dislike of this Iron and Adamantine decree of absolute Reprobation without
demerits, fell back again unto conditional Election: In both, both of them
equally erring, the truth lying equally distant from both, so as it is not
easy to judge, (Election upon good works being derogatory to the freeness of
Gods mercy, and Reprobation without evil unto the Truth of his Justice) whether
contains the greater impiety? The one gives too much unto Man in the work of
Salvation; The other too much unto God in the means of damnation. My Text
convinces both, the former in the latter part, and the latter in the former. O
Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help.

And as in Errors, so are their portions not much unequal in Truth. For
Arminius election upon foresight, and his Adversaries absolute reprobation are
not more false, than their absolute Election, and his Reprobation upon
foresight are, as I conceive it, apparently true; which is not the least
reason, that they which are brethren and friends in all other points, sweetly
conspiring against the common Enemy, should with such violent affections enter
into this Civil War amongst themselves; For there is no stronger nourishment
unto mutual persuasion, than when either side shall behold some demonstrative
truths in his own, and as gross and palpable errors in the others opinion: It
can hardly choose but beget prejudice and partiality in either: with which
spectacles, that alter the quality, and double the quantity of things, if once
Men come to read or judge, no marvel if there follow a stiff and stubborn
defense, and as eager and peremptory prosecution on both sides; Paries jam
proximus ardet. Hence it is, that the neighbor Countries are in so great
combustion, and it may well be feared, lest some sparks of their flame, if
neglected, should kindle a fire of the like contention somewhere else. So that,
that which judicious Hooker observed between Reverend Beza and his Adversary in
the question of Excommunication, that they had made an even division of the
truth, may well be verified of Arminius and his followers, with their opposers,
the Remonstrants and Contra Remonstrants, as they term themselves in Germany,
as they that have no less equally shared both Truth and Error between them.
And the reason hereof is, for that either seeking to rectify the croocked
opinion of the other, deals with it as he would do with a crooked stick,
bending it as far unto the one side, as he found it before inclining unto the
other: and indeed it is the best way to bring the stick to the straight line
between both; But opinions are not like rods that have springs in them they
draw rather unto the nature of a Lesbian leaden rule, where you bend them,
there they stand. The cure by contraries is not always good in the sickness of
the Body, seldom or never in Errors, the Diseases of the mind; because Truth
for the most part, like Virtue, dwells between two contrary extremes, that are
vicious. The Persian Manes, who well deserved that name from the Grecian (...)
for his unsound Doctrine that carries so much madness in it, had not long
established his Heresy in one extreme, by fastening upon Man's will a natural
necessity unto evil by creation; but our Countryman Pelagius directly opposes
and confronts him with his Heresy in the other, by giving unto Man's will a
natural freedom unto good after corruption. The Truth in the mean time evenly
wades between both, affirming the corruption of Nature, but by freedom of will
against Manes, and in this corruption no freedom but by grace against Pelagius.
In like sort Nestorius in the Primitive Church is so earnest for the
distinction of two Natures in Christ, as he divides his Person: and Eutyches on
the other side is so intent unto the unity of Christ's Person, as he confounds
his Natures: the Catholic verity holds the Golden mean, a distinction of two
Natures in the unity of one Person. After the same manner it fares here;
Arminius is so violent to remove God from being the Author of evil, as he makes
Man the first mover unto good; His Adversaries on the other side are so
desirous to entitle God unto our good, as they lay a necessity upon Man of his
evil; the one through a respective Election, and the other by an absolute
Reprobation. The truth, as I take it, lies here also between these two, that
are extremes; I am sure the opinion of St. Austin does, bestowing according to
the tenor of my Text, the just desert of Man's destruction upon his own
voluntary disobedience by a respective Reprobation against the one, and giving
the honor unto the free Grace of God in our good and Salvation, by an absolute
Election against the other. And the Coherence of these two, an absolute
Election, and a Reprobation upon foresight, if we suppose sin to preceed
either, as of necessity we must, if not in act yet in prescience, is clear and
manifest; For the Reprobation is respective, where there is a desert of
destruction; but the Election absolute, when all deserve nothing but
Reprobation. Thus veritas inter haereses, the truth does evermore hang
crucified between two heresies, like Christ,^(whose it is,) between two Thieves.

Of these three, The one making both the Decrees absolute, must needs withal
make God the Author as well of evil, as of good; The other making both upon
foresight, must needs make man the author as well of good as of evil; Only the
mean making one absolute, and the other upon foresight, does withal make God
the author of man's good, and yet leaves man to be the procurer of his own hurt.
It was a witty and a pleasant saying of Maximilian the Emperor comparing
himself with the Kings of Spain and France together, That there were but three
Kings in the time wherein he lived, Rex Hominum, Rex Asinorum, Rex Regum. The
Spanish, a King of men, because he used them ingenuously and liberally, as men:
The French, of Asses, for the immoderate exactions he took of them: Himself a
King of Kings, for they would do only what themselves pleased. What was by him
merrily spoken of those three Kings, may not unfitly be applied for sundry
respects unto these three opinions: The first whereof leaves reasonable
creatures no more freedom in their actions than if they were beasts: The second
gives them so much, as if they were left like Kings to the government of their
own wills: The third only squares with the liberty of men, to whom it gives
Election and Choice, whereby they exceed Beasts, but that in their Spiritual
good sweetly guided and governed by divine Grace, whereby they fall short of
absolute Kings. The one makes God a Tyrannical, the other a Titular, the last a
real and a just King; A King that will be justified in his sayings, and
overcome when he is judged; Neminem indebite damnans, neminem debite liberans,
utnec illius justa querimonia, nec hujus verax arrogantia, si vel iste dicat
meruisse se^gratiam, vel ille asserat non meruisse se poenam; damning no man,
says Prosper, undeservedly, nor saving any man deservedly; that so neither the
ones boasting should be true if he say he has merited grace, nor the others
complaint just, if he say he has not merited punishment. And indeed both are
utterly to renounce either, since both have deserved punishment, and both
received undeserved grace; for either part of my Text may have a convenient
sense appliable unto either sort of men: The Elect in some sort have destroyed
themselves, and the Reprobate in some sort have had help from God; For as
these, unless they had help, could not rightly be said to have destroyed
themselves; so neither they, unless they had or would have destroyed
themselves, could rightly be said to have had help from God. The Reprobate then
have had sufficient help, and the Elect have done sufficient to deserve
destruction; yet so as we must still remember, that we are especially to
appropriate the first, that is destruction, to the Reprobate, who only shall be
actually destroyed; and the second, that is help, to the Elect, who only are
effectually helped. But howsoever the Reprobate have the first place, and the
Elect the second, as they here lie in my Text; yet since Election is in order
precedent unto Reprobation, I hope I may have good leave so to order it,
setting the first last, and the last first, as in Nature and dignity they
deserve. And therefore reserving the second place, and ending of this discourse
unto the destruction of the wicked, that shall never end; we will begin,
through the help of God, with that help and salvation which the Elect receive
of God by a Decree that never had beginning, but is as Eternal, as he himself,
who for this respect here says, In me is thy help.

At the feet of whose Divine Majesty I now cast my self, humbly beseeching and
imploring his aid and assistance unto my Heart and Tongue in these high and
secret Mysteries, that I may speak nothing but what is agreeable unto his holy
word, and that with such reverence, as becomes his Majesty, and this Sacred
Place.

Since this whole sentence, as I said, is appliable unto either sort of people,
it follows, that before we speak of this special help of the Elect, we say
something of that destruction whereunto this help does relate; wherein
notwithstanding we shall not need to spend much time; for that the Elect of God
have destroyed themselves, that is, were and are in themselves worthy of
destruction, none, I think, do either doubt or deny: Only concerning the order
and precedence, question has been made, some giving the priority unto
Election, affirming that they were first elected, who afterward through sin
came to deserve destruction, as thinking it impossible that the merit of
destruction, as being a temporal Act, should preceed the free mercy of God
established by an eternal Decree, and thereby, (which is the cause of no few
errors) inverting and perverting both the order of my Text, and the nature of
the things, strangely presupposing help or salvation, without supposing any
former destruction, which such relative terms must of necessity respect: As
strange a contradiction, as if they should say that punishing Justice did
precede the fault which it does punish, or acts of mercy might be extended on
those that never were in misery; For since the decrees of Election and
Reprobation are made and ordained by the same properties in God, whereby men
are punished or saved, it follows, that as Reprobation must needs be an act of
punishing Justice, so Election an effect of contrary Mercy. And herein does
consist the special difference between the Predestination of Men and Angels:
For their Election was a mercy preserving them from falling into the pit of
destruction: But ours a mercy raising us up, and drawing us out of that
destruction whereinto we were fallen: Theirs may better be termed Goodness, than
Mercy, because it is not opposite unto Justice, as ours is, and therefore is
not goodness, but strictly and properly the mercy of God: now Misericordiae
propria seeds, miseria est, the proper seat or object of Mercy is misery, says
St. Bernard. Ber.de.Con. ad Cleric.
And therefore, Qui non ponit primo miseriam in laps^ hominis, ponere ill
misericordiam in Electione non potest, He that first grants not misery in the
fall, can never place mercy in the Election of man, said a late worthy Bishop:
Abbot in praesat. Exercitat. de gratia and perseverant.
both agreeing with that of Esdras after his confession unto God: But because
of us senners, thou shall be called merciful. To make this yet more manifest by
the definition of Election, It is, says St. Austin, Praeparatio: benoficiorum
Dei, qu^bus certissime liberantur, quieunque liberantur, De bono Persev. cap.
14.
A preparation of those benefits of God, whereby they are certainly saved
whosoever are saved: And what are these benefits but a new heart and a new
Spirit, begotten through effectual grace, and a powerful vocation unto sincere
repentance, and to lively faith in the death and blood of the Son of God? Now
what have any of these to do with Innocence? To whom else may they belong, but
a sinner, but to one subjected and devoted unto that destruction, from whence
he could not be delivered but by the mercy of such a Redeemer? As for the
reason drawn from the time of sin and the Decree of Salvation before all time,
the deceit and error of that does apparently consist in a wrong comparing of
an external Act of man's, with an internal Act of Gods; when the comparison
should have been, if rightly made, between two internal acts of God: for man's
work is here to be considered, not as it was done by him, but as it was
foreseen by God; and then, if thus taken, you shall easily find the temporary
sin of man to be no less eternal in Gods prescience, than the deliverance from
it, or punishment for it could be in his Decree: For as Gods Electing does in
order of necessity presuppose the foresight of their being that are elected,
though they be elected before they be, quia objectum prius est in se quam
objiciatur actus in ipsum tendenti: So for the same reason, that it does
presuppose this positive foresight of their being, it must also the permissive
of their being miserable, because Election is from mercy, and mercy, as is
said, does always presuppose its object, which is misery. It follows therefore,
to conclude this point, that the very Elect of God acknowledge to the praise of
the riches of his exceeding free compassion, that when he in his secret
determination set it down, Those shall live and not die, they lay, as ugly
spectacles before him, as Lepers covered with dung and mire, as Ulcers
putrified in their Fathers Loins, miserable and worthy of nothing, but to be
had in detestation. In the proof whereof, I have made the longer stay, partly
because it opens a passage for some things that must follow anon, but
especially that the truth of St. Austins opinion might more clearly appear,
affirming, that in the search of Election and Reprobation, no man's wit should
presume to ascend above the miserable mass of corruption. Man's Nature at first
was by Creation Gold, but Sin was the poisonous menstruum, the aqua regis more
than Chemical, that dissolved it and drew off the purer parts, leaving unto us
nothing but this earth and these faeces of that Gold. Thus was his fall a great
fall indeed, from the purity of Gold, to the vility of Clay; and this Clay is
that impure lump, meant by St. Austin, over which he grants with the Apostle,
that the Potter has power thereout to frame Vessels either to dishonor or
honor as it pleases him best. Romans ix.
The one being their desert, the other his own mercy. Huic fit misericordia,
tibi nou fit injuria, says the same Father. God chooses one, he refuses
another; to him he shows mercy, to thee he does no injury, since the one does
receive but what all do deserve. But enough of the desert of destruction: now
of the undeserved help; For Man might fall of himself, but rise again he could
not without the help of another, nor of any other but him, who here says, In
me is thy help.

And that we have help from God, and that we need so to have, there is none, no
not Polagius himself, that in plain terms ever durst deny. He will,... if
pressed, for shame acknowledge and subscribe unto the necessity of Grace in
show of words; but as the manner of all Heretics is, he does but equivocate,
making terms, in themselves plain, by secret reservation false, and fraudulent,
that so he might have a backdoor at a time of need, whereat to deceive and
abuse both himself and his reader; For secretly within his own mind, he desires
Grace, by quicquid gratis datur, that by this means under the name of Grace, he
might hedge in free will and abilities of Nature; Nay if this fraud be
detected, he will come yet closer, for he will not refuse to confess a
necessity of true internal Grace, such as the Gospel mentions, the Grace of
Christ and of his Holy Spirit, and that it is the gift of God, yea a special
gift which all have not, yet still he keeps this secret in the deep of his
Heart, that all might have it, and that it is their own faults if they have it
not, since as he holds, this Grace is given and withheld according to the
merits or demerits of Men, by a former good or evil use of their free will, ut
gratia sonaret, and meritum delitescret, that so grace might sound in their
words, and yet they retain merit in their minds. Such shift does proud slime
and dust make to magnify the arm of flesh, and so unwilling is it to give the
true and whole glory unto God whose it is.

Yet this is not all, Men have more subtilties to rob God, or rather to deceive
themselves. Arminius and his followers, the late Semi-pelagians step one Step
farther, and with the Catholic truth acknowledge not only a true and internal
Grace, but a liberal, free and preventing Grace, a Grace given, not deserved.
But for all this he understands only such a Grace, as is common to both, to
Elect and Reprobate, upon the good or evil use whereof it is, that Men become
either. For according to these, Election does not provide or prepare according
to St. Austin, any special Grace for particular Men, but some particular men
are specially elected, upon foresight of their well-husbanding of that Grace,
which is common: so that Man must still have the pre-eminence. For however it
be from Gods Grace, that they have ability to obtain Salvation; yet that they
are saved, when others, who received the same Grace, are not, this must needs
be, not from his help, but their own will: An old rancid opinion long since
broached by Faustus and Cassianus, whose Books for this were condemned by
Gelasius and a Council of seventy Bishops more, for erroneous and Apocryphal,
and now lately again revived by Arminius, and others, who are not the Authors
and Inventors, but only strenuous Advocates, requiring a relief after Judgment
of a dead and rotten, a damned and long since condemned Heresy. So that it is
a good judgment of a Reverend Bishop, Faustum and Cassianum quasi per
Metempsyohosin in Arminio and Bertio revixisse, That the Souls of Faustus and
Cassianus do as it were live again in Arminius and Bertius, they do so justly
jump and conspire with their Doctrine of universal Grace, and Election upon
foresight, than which no opinion can be more injurious unto God, or more
grossly and demonstratively false in it self. For however it retains the name,
it perverts the end and destroys the very Nature of Election, causing that
Predestination which the Apostle unto the Ephesians tells us; was ordained in
laudem gloriae gratiae suae, to the praise of the glory of his Grace, to serve
and tend only unto the honor of our own propension and will, since he that
reigns in Heaven; has no more whereof to thank God, than he that lies burning
in Hell; because from equal Grace they have wrought out these their unequal
fortunes. And therefore, say St. Paul what he will, Salvation is rather of him
that wills and runs, that believes and works, than of God that shows
mercy; whereas it is not: neither does it less pervert the End than the Nature
thereof, converting the cause into the effect, and the effect into the cause,
making Election a consequent of Faith and Repentance, when these are the true
fruits of Election, which is the wellhead of Grace, and all the rest of Gods
favors, and our good deeds but streams issuing from that Fountain, who have
all obtained mercy, with St. Paul, not because we were, but that we should be
faithful. Non vos me elegistis, for you have not chosen me, but I have chosen
you, says our Savior, and have ordained you: for what? that you should go and
bring forth, and that your fruit should remain; for I have ordained, I that do
both begin and perfect the good deed, that do work in you both to will, and to
do, Phil. i. 2.
do work in you also to do and to persevere, and that by my free Election and
absolute decree; Ego posui, for I have ordained, John xv.16.
that you go, and bring forth fruit, and that that fruit remain.

It were an endless work and a bootless expense of Travel to heap up places of
Scripture for the enforcing of this point, they are every where obvious, the
Glory of Gods grace through a free and undeserved Election being a main branch
of the Gospel, and therefore often inserted, but by St. Paul purposely disputed
and proved in a set discourse; wherein these new oppugners are so directly
confuted, as if the Holy Ghost had especially looked on them, when he spoke by
his mouth, for there is no other intent or purpose, in that place, but to
demonstrate, Romans ix.
that the Adoption of the Sons of God, does not depend upon the carnal
Generation of Abraham, as the Jews conceived, nor yet upon our own or our
Forefathers works, but simply upon the Eudochie, the mere good will and
pleasure of God.This he makes manifest in all in a Type, under the names of
two, Jacob and Esau, Brethren equal in all things, only unequal in the favor
of God: both begotten by the same parents, and both born at the same birth, on
either side no advantage by blood, and as little in quality, they had done
neither good nor evil, nor could do at that time, wherein notwithstanding that
the purpose of God might be known to stand according to Election, it was said,
I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau: No difference in the Persons, and yet a
different respect of God, who is no respecter of persons, which moves the
Apostle to a strange interrogation, but natural unto the place. Nunquid
iniquitas apud Deum? what then, is there iniquity with God? God forbid; but how
does he answer it? does he with these reply, that though they had then done
neither good nor evil, yet God elected the one and rejected the other upon
foresight of the good and evil which they afterward would do? This had been an
acute and brief answer, Quis iftum acutissimum sensum Apostolo defuisse non
miretur? Who can choose but wonder the Apostle should not see this subtilty?
says St. Austin. Epist. 103.
For had he known it to have been so, eodem modo solveret istam quaestionem, he
would soon have answered the question, immo nullam quam solvi opus esset,
faceret quaestionem; Nay he had then never made any such question, that should
need an answer, For there had not remained so much as any show of injustice,
where Love or Hatred does proceed according to good or evil deserts; But now
that there should be a different judgment, where there is no difference in
merit, there cannot but seem a just occasion of making the demand, Nunquid
iniquitas? Whereunto leaving this vain gloss, as directly contrary unto his
purpose, he reduces all unto the mere will of God; I will have mercy on whom I
will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion; An
answer sounding to this effect, That since both were equally conceived in
original sin, deserved his Justice, his Love unto one was an act of Mercy, and
in Mercy there is no cause of his will, but his will, nor of his Mercy, but his
Mercy, I will have mercy, etc. And then quis nisi insipiens Deum iniquum putet,
sive judicium poenale ingerat digno, sive misericordiam praestet indigno? Aug.
Enchirid. cap. 98.
Because, as before was noted, though the one obtain free favor, yet the other
receives no injury; By which answer he does at once free God from all injustice
toward the Reprobate, and withal withdraws all merit from the Elect, who have
that Name and Grace for no other cause but only because he had a will to show
Mercy, special Mercy unto them, which he did not unto others to whom
notwithstanding they were of themselves in all things equal, and with whom they
were in like sort obnoxious unto the revenge and power of Justice. False
therefore and vain, and very derogatory unto the goodness of that God, in whom
is our help, are their conceits that build Election upon a foreseen good or
evil use of a general and sufficient Grace, to the prejudice of that which is
special and particular. For however we deny not, but rather piously believe,
that his Providence does sufficiently help all those whom his mercy does
vouchsase to call, yet withal we acknowledge it to be such an help, as where^
withal God, when he looked down from Heaven, saw there was none did good, no
not one. A help therefore, which in effect does not give Salvation, but takes
away excuse, and seems not so much to justify them, as to make their
Condemnation more just, who notwithstanding that they might not all perish, and
that he might yet show his Mercy, of his infinite goodness freely elected some
to such special Grace whereby they should not perish, a Grace effectual;
receiving the rest unto endless punishment, for abusing that which was
sufficient. So that God does not only give such Grace whereby we may be able to
do, and then elect us for doing what we were able; but contrarily foreseeing
that we would not do what we were able with that sufficient Grace to do, of his
absolute Mercy did decree to give us such powerful and efficacious Grace,
whereby we certainly should do, what otherwise without this special help, he
knew we should not: For had not he by this means, as the Scripture testifies,
reserved unto himself a Remnant, notwithstanding the former Grace, we had been
all as Sodom and perished as Gomorrha; And therefore Reliqui mihi, says God
unto Elias: It is not there are, or there remains unto me, but I have reserved
unto my self seven thousand which never bowed the knee unto Baal. And from this
Reliqui, they are termed Reliquiae secundum electionem gratiae salvae factae
sunt, A Remnant only are saved according to the Election of Grace: And if of
Grace, surely not of foreseen works; yea so far is God from respecting the will
or work of Man in the dispensation of his Grace, as he sometimes denies that
help unto those that would use it well, which notwithstanding he offers and
exhibits unto others, that he knew before would reject it. Had those great
works, says our Savior, upbraiding the Jews, been done in Tire and Sidon,
they had repented in Sackcloth and Ashes. Lo how God ploughs the Sand and
scatters his good seed upon the dry and barren hearts of the Jews, fitter for
salt; and in the mean time withholds it from another soil, that would have
fructified, and brought forth the fruit of Repentance unto eternal life. What
shall we say unto this? Two things occur which I only am willing to answer,
says St. Austin in the like case, and are very fit for this, nunquid iniquitas
apud Deum? De sp. and lit. c. 34.
And, O al^itudo divitiaerum! An Interrogation, and an exclamation, the one out
of the ninth, and the other out of the eleventh to the R^m. And both joined
tend unto this, That being assured there is no injustice with God, we should
not search the cause but admire the depth of his Wisdom, whose judgments are
unsearchable, and his ways past finding out; For he often treads on water, that
leaves no path or impression behind. He walks upon the great deep, says Da^id,
and his footsteps are not known. And whom this will not satisfy, I must advise
with the same Father, Quaerat doctiorer, se^b caveat, ne inoeniat
praesumptiores: Let him seek those that are more learned but take heed he does
not meet with those, that are too presumptuous. Such surely as these
conditional Electioners are, who, as if they were fore runners of the second
coming of Christ, endued with the Spirit of Elias, have cast down every Hill,
and filled up every Valley, made whatsoever seemed crooked straight, and
whatsoever was rough smooth and plain, and by this means they, though but
lambs, can easily wade, where those Elephants, the Fathers of the Primitive
Church, found such Pits and Pools as they were glad to swim. For what is there
in their Doctrine not easy and even obvious and open, if God has diversely
determined of none but such as are of diverse and different merits? what room
then is there left for O altitudo! For they that give a cause of Election, take
away all cause of the Apostles exclamation, because none do admire an effect
but they that are ignorant of the cause, as here all must needs be, when of
those that have one and same cause, there is not one and the same regard, but
the one is justly exposed unto hatred, the other vouchsafed love without all
cause, at least that we can search out and inquire. The head of Nilus may be
sooner found, than the Spring and Fountain of Election; the eye of the Eagle,
that looks on the Sun, cannot discover it, because it remains in his bosom that
dwells in inaccessible light. And yet notwithstanding we do not make the will
of God (...) irrational; For though there be no absolute cause of his will, yet
his will is a reasonable cause of all other things, and it were most
unreasonable to conceive that he should want reason for what he does, that does
all things according to the counsel of his own will, that is, all outward
things; for the internal and eternal operations of the Divinity are natural and
necessary, and of such there is no counsel; but all his transient and outward
works or immanent acts, if they have outward objects, (of which sort Election
is one) are free and voluntary, and must needs have a reason why they are done,
because there was no necessity they should have been done. All these things he
does not only according to his will, but (...), According to the Counsel of his
Will: And whatsoever is done with Counsel or wise resolution, has of necessity
some reason why it is done. And though this reason, as here it is, be often
unknown unto us, who can know no more of his Will, than he himself shall please
to reveal; yet howsoever we know not the reason, yet this we know, whatsoever
the reason be, it cannot be drawn from our merits. The Election of the blessed
Angels, who received either a more excellent nature, or else a greater ability
of Grace than the rest, as St. Austin disputes, was therefore free and without
merit. Lib. 12. ^ ^i^it. Del cap. 9.
Nay the Election of Jesus Christ the Man to be made the Son of God, was of
mere grace and goodness, as the same Father does in sundry places affirm. And
shall Man, a Worm and dust of the earth, plead desert, that only of all the
rest deserved nothing but destruction; which though otherwise he did not, yet
for this very arrogance he worthily should deserve? How much better were it for
them, with those Saints in the Revelation, to cast their Crowns at the foot of
the Throne, and with true humility to cry out with David, Non nobis Domine, non
nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto
thy name give the glory, for thy mercy, and thy truths sake. For we have
destroyed our selves, but thou have redeemed our life from destruction, and
wilt crown us in mercy and loving kindness. Then our mouths shall be satisfied
with good things; In the mean time let them be full of thy praise, for in thee,
O Lord, is our help, in whom we live, move and have our being, for whom, and
from whom, and by whom, are all things, and to whom be glory for evermore.

Amen.
A DISCOURSE OF ELECTION AND REPROBATION.
PART II.
SERMON VI. Upon HOSEA xiii. 9.
O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in Me is thine help.
HItherto That help and Salvation is of the Lord, Now That the death and
destruction of man, is from man, O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self. For
however it be true, that it is God only who properly inflicts destruction, in
regard whereof it is rightly said, vita and Mors a Domino, Life and death is
from the Lord; yet because he does inflict it but for man's wilful offense, it
is as true, that he is not so specially the author of destruction, the
inflictour, as he that deserves it. And therefore it is no less rightly said by
the Wiseman, on the other side: Deus mortem non fecit, God has not made death,
Wisd. i. 13.
for he desires not the destruction of the living, but they themselves by the
errors of their life and works of their hands have sought it out, and drawn it
down upon their own heads.And therefore though life and death be both of God,
yet after a different manner, Vita scilicet a donante, mors a vindicante: Life
is his free gi^t, says St. Austin, but death the reward and wages, as the
Apostle, of man's merit. From whence it is, that God is ever termed Pater
misericordiarum, the Father of Mercies, but never of Justice, because no desert
of man can make any claim unto it. It is born and bred within himself, a Thread
like that of the Spiders, woven and spun out of his own bowels, whose nature
and property it is, to have mercy and compassion. But for his Justice, it is
not so with it, that seems so far from being natural, whereunto he is, as it
were, violently drawn against his nature, tactus dolor cordis intrinsecus,
Repenting, and as it were grieved at the heart, he said, I will destroy the man
which I have made. Genesis
Neither is it more proper than natural, it is opus suum, his Act indeed but
Opus alienum suum, not his proper but his strange Act, as it is in Isaiah,
because there is something without him which calls for it, and requires it too
of him. Lib. 3. contra Julian. cap. 13.
And therefore excellently St. Austin, Bonusest Deus, justus est Deus; potest
sine bonis meritis liberare, quia bonus est; non potest sine malis meritis d^^^
are, quia justus est: God is good and God is just, He may save without good
deserts because he is good, but he cannot condemn without evil, because he is
just. Some notwithstanding affirm he may, because they imagine the Creator has
an absolute power over his Creature; but we must beware, how we set the
properties of God at variance among themselves, attributing unto him such a
Power as shall thwart and shoulder with his Justice; It is no less, nay it is
more true of him, than of his Creature, I^l^d potest, quod jure potest, That he
only can do; which he lawfully may do; Not that he is bound by any superior
Law, but because as the Apostle said of the Gent^le, Sibi ipsi Lex, He is a Law
unto himself, which Law, in these kind of actions, is his Justice, not his
absolute Will; For their Rule is not to be approved, that say, God does not
will actions, because they are right and good, but all actions are right and
good, because he wills them. For then he might will any thing without
injustice, since by willing he makes it just, even the destruction of the
righteous with the wicked, which notwithstanding Abraham thought and was bold
to affirm unto God himself (of whom he was not blamed for it neither) that even
in him it would be unjust. Whereunto that round and witty saying of St. Austin
does also subscribe, Deus reddit mala pro malis, Aug. lib. de Orat c. 22.
quia justus est; bona pro malis, quia bonus est; bona pro bonis, quia bonus
and justus est; solumnon reddit mala pro bonis, quia injustus non est. But this
Rule and that power was purposely invented to defend the direful decree of
absolute Reprobation, that so they might establish dominion, and that by might,
which they saw by equity could not be maintained, as I am now to show and
prove, being it throws the blame of man's destruction upon God, no otherwise
than the former Election gives Gods glory unto man. The Authors of the one, and
the other opinion being deceived by one, and the same reason, which both
imagined^ was to be had of both these opposite Decrees: And therefore as they
saw a necessity of framing the one, so they ordered the other; the one making
both upon foresight, the other, both absolute; whereby it is impossible but
either of them must err in one, since both cannot be true. For if Reprobation
upon foresight only leave man to be the cause of his ruin, let Election be
upon foresight too, and by the same reason it intitles him to his own
salvation: So on the other side, if an absolute Election make God the Supreme
Author of all our Good, how should as absolute a Reprobation choose but say the
same of him in our Evil? For if good works be therefore the effects of Gods
Election, because it is absolute; evil works must needs be the effects of
absolute Reprobation for the same reason; what is said of one cannot be denied
of the other, especially, since they do so exactly square and sort one in all
points answerable unto the other; Election, that is absolute, intends the end,
and then provides the means, does not absolute Reprobation do the like? wherein
they say the first Act or Decree of God was, to manifest his glory by the
declaration of his Justice; but because Justice might not be showed, but upon
sinners, he did in the second place Will, Ordain and Decree (for these are the
words of some, and it is the meaning of all) the ingression of sin by the fall
of Adam, that so he might make a way for the execution of his Justice according
to the former Decree; and whereby they are of necessity constrained thereunto.
For either God by his second Decree must determine Adams Will unto the
committing of Sin, or Adam by the freedom of his Will should have power to
frustrate Gods first Decree in the Declaration of his Justice. Horribile
decretum fateor, an horrible Decree I confess, says Mr. Calvin, whom but in
this and his Platform, I shall ever honor. A horrible Decree indeed and of all
pious minds to be abhorred, that first makes God unjust, that so he might show
his Justice, which in regard of the former, is not just neither: Nec enim
justitia dicatur, Ad Moni. lib. 1. c. 22.
for his Justice shall not be just, says Fulgentius, si puniendum reum non
invenisse sed fecisse dicatur, if he does not find but make Men worthy of that
punishment which it inflicts. For what greater injustice, says the same
Father, quam lapso retribuere poenam, quem stantem praedestinasse dicitur ad
ruinam, than to punish him for falling, whom he did predestinate to fall whilst
he stood? It is reported of Tiberius Caesar, Suit. cap. 61.
that he had a great desire to have certain young Maids of Rome strangled to
death, not for any offense of theirs, but such was the cruelty of his
disposition, only because he had a mind to have it so; but understanding that
it was not lawful by the custom of the Country to put Virgins to death, he
decreed and commanded (so to open a passage unto his former purpose) that the
Hangman should first force and vitiate, and afterward strangle them. I forbear
to make application, it is too manifest, and choose rather to pray and make
supplication unto Christ, that he would be favorable and merciful unto the
Doctors and Pastors of his Church, if deceived through Error they are bold to
teach and speak and write according to the example of Tiberius. I know it is
not their desire or meaning to charge God with the Sin and Iniquity of Man,
they constantly and with great indignation deny him to be the Author thereof;
but like ill Logicians, they deny the conclusion, and in the mean time,
establish those premises, from whence though they grow hoarse yea burst with
denying, it will of necessity follow: All the distinctions brought for the
purpose fail, and should a Man rack and ransack every dusty corner of his brain
for more, they would still be all too few to defend or excuse it. That of the
act, and of the vitiosity in the act, with the lame instance of an halting
Horse, or an untuned Lute is often urged, and may have its use, but not here:
For God, they say, is the cause of the action, but not of the obliquity in the
action: As when a good Horseman rides a lame Jade, or a skilful Musician
strikes a cracked Lute; the one is the cause of the motion, but not of the
lameness; the other of the sound, but not of the harshness: these are defects
wherewith they are not to be blamed, because they arise not from their manner
of working, but from the distemper of the subjects, on which they wrought.
After Adam indeed had lamed and maimed himself by a fall, this distinction
finds room for application; but what has it to do with Adam in his Innocence,
free from all lameness or laxation in his joints, a well-strung and a
well-tuned Instrument? Nor when the question is by what means he came to his
hurts; let them take heed how they make God ride him lame, or strike him so, as
to strike him out of tune: Let him be never so acute, he shall find it an hard
matter to bestow the action upon one and the obliquity on another. In positive
and affirmative precepts where a good action may be ill done, as he that gives
Alms to be seen of Men, it is easy to distinguish the vitiosity from the act;
but in negative inhibitions, where not the manner of acting, but the act it
self is forbidden, so that do it after what sort soever he will, he can never
do it well, how we can discern the one from the other, and how God in this case
may be the cause of the act and not of the Sin, which is necessarily annexed to
the act, because the act is it which is employed, is more than my apprehension
can reach unto. I know there is a difference even here, between the act and the
Sin, because the act, as the act, is not evil, but as forbidden by the Law. But
how God may be an antecedent cause that Adam should eat, and yet not the cause
of his transgressing the Law, when he did eat, is that which I say I cannot,
and which I think few else can any way conceive. For when God by his will
leaves a necessity of the act, I pray what will become of Man's possibility to
avoid the sin? surely there is no plea for it, but this, that since necessity
has no Law, that which is done under it, is no sin, for sin is the
transgression of a Law. Many other distinctions there are alleged, as that of
the decree and the execution of the decree, of necessity and coaction, a
diverse respect of the Divine decree and the Nature of Man, of a double will
signi and beneplaciti, a secret and revealed will; and lastly, the label
annexed unto all, is the addition of the End, that it is willed and decreed
only for the illustration of Gods Glory. These and more quiddities they have
invented, the vanity whereof the time will not now permit me in particular to
discourse; sure I am, they all fall short of effecting that, for which they
were devised; they may peradventure quiet the Authors mind, but shall never
justify those imposed and cruel decrees. There is a story or a Fable of a silly
Man, that lying down to sleep with his head against a brazen Pot, and finding
it but an hard Pillow, claps a Cushion into the mouth of his Pot, and lies down
again, and then thinking the matter well mended and himself at ease, falls into
a sound Nap. Methinks they that imagine they may rest themselves upon this iron
Doctrine having stuffed it with the Feathers of these distinctions, do fitly make
up the moral of this Fable: for though they lie as hard as they did before, yet
this they have gained, that though they receive not thereby any true ease in
their doubts, yet at least by thinking so, they content and please their own
conceits, and so are fallen into a profound sleep, embracing dreams for truth,
out of which God of his mercy vouchsafe to wake them, that so seeing and
rejecting the weakness and lewdness of these trifling subtleties, they may
rather abandon, and utterly forsake, than with such poor shifts seek to defend,
a Doctrine so harsh in it self, injurious unto God, and dangerous unto Men, and
unto the rest of the truth they profess, so extreme scandalous. Who can believe
them in any thing else, says Bellarmine, that shall see them only so gross and
impious in this? And it is mavelous to consider how all our Adversaries do
generally raise their styles and themselves, how they insult and triumph when
they come unto this point, and what infinite absurdities they empty out, and
disgorge upon us and our Doctrine, affirming that all those odious propositions
falsely imposed on St. Austin, do rightly and justly light upon us, who teach
that God did therefore only create, that he might destroy the greatest part of
mankind, whereunto they are unavoidably subjected by the unalterable, and
energetical decrees of an eternal predestination, more immutable than the Laws
of the Medes and Persians, that alter not; and more reluctable, than the
destiny of the Stoics, binding Men with the iron chains of immutable
necessity; from whence they say, it will follow, as the natural fruit of that
Tree of Fate, that God is the Author of Sin, that he does properly sin, that he
only does sin, and so that sin is no sin: Pudet haec opprobria nobis Et dici
potuisse, and non p^tuisse refelli. It both shames and grieves good minds, that
such ignominies should be objected, and that they may not be refuted; surely,
at least for ought I understand, by the ordinary way, they may not. And
therefore the only and soundest refutation, as I imagine, will consist not in
laboring to decline and avoid such consequences by empty distinctions, but by
an utter detestation of those points and positions, that is, those absolute
ordinations, from whence such consequences flow and proceed. This was St.
Austins manner of answer, and it may well be others in the same case; he sought
out no quirks and strains of Wit to salve the appearance of injustice, but
simply denies, and confesses the decree that was objected. Nihil ergo talium
negotiorum Deus praedestinauit ut fieret, etc. God has not predestined,
says he, any of these things, speaking of sins, that they should be, neither
is any Soul that lives wickedly and filthily prepared or ordained of God so to
live: sed talem futurum non ignoravit, and de tali se just judicaturum esse
praescivit; but he was not ignorant how wicked such a Soul would be, and knew
he could justly Judge and Condemn him for being so. Lib. advers. mort. sibi
falso imp. ad artic.10.
So that St. Austin does not acknowledge any decree unto sin, but only a decree
unto punishment for sin, which he foresaw but decreed not. A decree only that
can clear all those doubts and heinous criminations, and is afterward no less
clear in it self. For if Election does presuppose sin, as it is proved in the
former part; much more must Reprobation, because it is not precedent but
subsequent in order to Election. And as Election, because an act of Mercy,
requires a subject of Misery: so Reprobation, because administered by Justice,
can have no place, but where there is a precedent offense, and that only
foreknown not preordained, for then it would cease to be an offense: And
therefore mala tantum praescit and non praedestinat Deus: sins are only
foreseen and not predestined, says the same St. Austin. So that it was
rightly observed and said by a worthy Bishop of our own, even in his preface
unto that book of Lectures and Sermons penned and published against Arminius,
That he must leave behind him the absolute decree of Reprobation, whoever he be
that comes to the studying and reading of St. Austin, which he terms a sad and
heavy opinion, lately bred and ever to be abhorred: so that though he refute
Arminius conditional Election, yet he will not maintain his Adversaries
absolute Reprobation, as being an opinion which the Church of England, though
it sometimes seek to mitigate and excuse, yet it did never receive and embrace:
and therefore he afterward adds in the same preface, That if Arminius had only
inveighed against that absolute and truculent decree, contrary both to
Scriptures and Fathers, and their days, commode adhibuisset industriam suam,
and Ecclesiam nostram Anglicanam habuisset consentientem secum. As for some
private Men, that think and write otherwise, they are not the Churches but
their own private conceits, says the same Bishop in the same place. By whose
authority, though great in it self, yet I am the easier led, because I see that
this Church though it does not fore some respects actually and publicly
refute, yet it does purposely refuse to give grace or countenance to any such
Doctrine whereof it does in this regard forbear to determine. For in the
Articles of Religion whereunto she requires subscription, the Article of
Election is proposed and illustrated at large by many propositions; but of
Reprobation, not an Article, not a proposition, no word, no mention at all; by
which silence in that place the Church (as I conceive) seems not to approve the
vulgar opinion, at least to think it a Doctrine dangerous to mention. And what
it there forbears by writing to confirm, it had formerly by fact disavowed, as
appears in the Case of Travers who was censured and silenced by the Authority
of the Church for opposing the Doctrine of Learned and Judicious Hooker,
whereof this was a branch, that God in his counsel and purpose rejects none
without a foreseen worthiness of rejection, going though not in time, yet in
order before: This is it, which has made me the more bold to wade so far in
this point, wherein though I may offend some particular Men, yet I shall not
our own present Church, nor the learned Fathers of former, whose voice unto
their dissolute flocks, has ever been the same with this here of God, O Israel
thou have destroyed thy self.

The inference and issue of all that which has been already said in this point
does reach only to this, That that Destruction which fell upon the world
through the sin and fall of the Protoplast Adam, ought to be ascribed unto his
own free and voluntary fault, and not unto any irresistible appointment and
Decree of God's, all whose Ordinations unto Destruction do not precede, but of
necessity foresee and suppose this offense. Not that this or any other sin, is
the absolute cause, why God does, but the desert and merit why he justly may,
reject and reprobate whom he please. It now remains that we proceed and step
one step farther, and enquire, whether God, as he may, so he actually does
reprobate immediately out of the Mass of corruption, upon the foresight of
this, and no other sin. Otherwise, I shall fall short of giving full
satisfaction unto my Text, wherein God seems not so much to relate unto the
original misery, wherein they were conceived and born, as unto their particular
and actual sin and disobedience, refusing his love, and rejecting his mercy,
when he so passionately bursteth out, O Israel! And if this be rightly spoken
in regard of their own Acts and Actions, they must be such also, as are
willingly and wilfully done: For surely they that are destroyed for sins, which
by natural Corruption they could not choose but commit, they may be pitied, but
cannot be blamed; and then it will stand firm and good, that it is not Israel
that have destroyed themselves, but their fore-Father only, that has destroyed
Israel, since necessary crimes are not to be imputed to the Doers, but to him
that contracted the necessity. Unto these and many more difficulties, as I
conceive unanswerable, must they be liable, who make the Decree, and
Reprobation peremptorily to proceed, immediately upon foresight only of
original sin, without any other respect of disobedience and contempt of the
Grace of God, or Gospel of Christ, neither of which they say was ever provided
for them. For first, it will from hence follow, that though they allow an
especial favor of God unto some few particular men, yet they bereave him of
his philanthropie, his grace and benevolent affection unto the kind, which the
scripture frequently mentions, and so make him to exercise upon the far greater
part of men mere severity without all mercy, as he did upon the Devils, whereby
they clearly remove the main difference between the Reprobation of men, and of
Angels, which the Fathers place in this, that is, afforded them means of
recovery, but the evil Spirits none, because the Devil sinned of his own proper
motion and instinct, but man at the instigation of the Devil. Nay farther, that
God deals in much more severity with these miserable men, who only sinned in
the Loins of another, than with those powers of darkness, that wilfully
transgressed; for that all their life long he still presses them with
impossible commands for no other end, but to heighten that damnation whereunto
they were before unavoidably denoted. Surely, a heavy case, and I verily
believe unbefitting the great compassion and mercy of God which the Scriptures
mention, that he should be so far from pitying the Case of his own Creature in
an involuntary misery, as he should lay new loads on their backs, and then whip
and scourge them here, and torment them in perpetual fire hereafter for sinking
under those burdens which they were no way able to bear. Besides, how does
this make God seem to flout and delude poor Souls in the deep of their
distress, calling unto them who lie in anguish, have all their bones and joints
bruised and broken with a deadly fall, to rise, and come unto him, and he will
help them, and in the mean time, affording them not one jot of his help to rise
who, he knows, notwithstanding, are not able to stretch forth so much as a
finger in their own help? Nay how should our blessed Saviors words, yea his
Tears over Jerusalem, seem to be false and counterfeit, (O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, etc.) if at the same instant notwithstanding, he had no purpose
either to die for them, or to give them grace, whereby they might believe in
him. So that his Commandment of Faith in his Blood, should want both verity in
him, because he did not die for such; and possibility to be performed by them,
for that he gives them no means to do it, who have none in themselves. From
All, this Conclusion will result besides, that they either make God a hard man,
like the lazy fellow in the Gospel, reaping where he does not sow: or a cruel
man, with Pharaoh withdrawing the Straw, and yet still demanding the full tale
of Brick, requiring works, and withholding the Grace whereby they should be
done. For if without giving a Savior, or providing any Grace, there be a
rejection and reprobation of all mankind immediately out of the Mass of
Corruption, Who sees not the necessity of all these strange consequences, so
reproachful unto God, and so full of severity, if not cruelty unto men, who
lying under more than fatal Necessity, being not able to go any other way, must
needs run headlong in those paths that lead into Hell? A Position so absurd, as
Zeno a Philosopher derided, and confuted with blows rather than words: His
Servant being examined upon an error he had committed, acknowledges the fault,
but lays the blame on his Fate, desiring his Master to pardon him, because it
was his destiny, and he could not avoid it: Zeno falls on his Man, and Cudgels
him most severely; when he had done, tells him he had indeed beaten him
something extremly, but he must be content, it was his destiny so to beat him,
and he could not help it. And this by him, was well and wittily done. But had
this Philosopher's Man served some Ancient Divine that had been of this Modern
opinion, his excuse and Plea had been good and unreprovable, because according
to the Rules of his Masters Doctrine, who therefore could have no cause to
correct or beat him, unless it were for anger that he has nothing else to
answer, as you may see none of them have, if we consider the replies which they
make to the like impious and idle Dilemmas. If I be Elected, God will not fail
to bring me to his Kingdom; if Reprobated, there is no means to shift his
decree, and therefore what need I take much care of Religion? An objection
often proposed by themselves, but which never was, nor possibly can be by their
Doctrine justly refuted. The answer of all that I have ever read or heard is
but one, and that briefly to this effect, That Men may not imagine they may sit
idly and have the Kingdom of Heaven brought home unto them; it is not at a
lower rate than thy daily bread, that it should be purchased without the sweat
of thy Brows: for he that will attain unto the end, must labor and use the
means. Which is good Divinity, but gives no satisfaction to the doubt: for
though it be the right answer, yet it may not be used by them; for how can they
blame others for not using the means which they themselves acknowledge is not
in their power to use, since they that are denied Glory, are withal rejected
from Grace? And therefore it is easy for the opposers to reinforce their
forked Argument: If I be elected, I needs must, if otherwise, I cannot possibly
use the means, and therefore still what need I trouble my self, what is it you
blame me for? Here they utterly fail, and not well knowing what they may say or
do, they first fall upon the objectors, terming them dissolute people, and this
kind of reasoning as lewd, as they are dissolute: but if they be dissolute of
necessity, and this kind of reasoning part of that dissoluteness, how should
they choose but reason so, that cannot choose but be so dissolute? and therefore
this may not be objected. This then not prevailing, their second Essay is (such
is their perplexity) to reconcile necessity and freedom, that so at least the
works of wickedness might be justly taxed, because they transgress, though not
without necessity, yet willingly and freely without all constraint. But what
freedom is this, to be free from coaction, if they be withal also void of
election? A freedom surely which the Stoics deny not, yea which the Manichees
allow their Fate, and the gens tenebrarum of these, that is, both external
necessity from Stars, and internal from a corrupt and depraved Nature, will
suffer agreement and reconciliation with it. A freedom, which is not only in
wicked Men, but in the blackest Devils, nay in beasts, yea farther, in stocks
and stones, and indeed in whatsoever the world has, that has but motion and
operation: for whatever naturally works or moves, must needs move and work
without constraint: so that as it is truly said of the service of God, that it
is perfect freedom; so it may be as rightly affirmed of this freedom, that it
is a plain and absolute servitude, from whence you may no more blame Man for
sininng, than you may accuse fire for burning, being they both work with equal
liberty: for it is not sponte but libere that is the Adverb, it is not the
willing, but the freedom of the will which affects the action, and subjects it
unto just censure and punishment. Well then, this will do no good neither, yet
they stay not here, so strenuously do they labor for necessity, they have
sought and found out a third device, that actions of necessity may worthily be
blamed, and punished now in themselves, because they had and have wilfully lost
the freedom of their will in Adam. But this is of as little force for diverse
respects.

First, for that (as was before noted) it removes the destruction from
themselves, contrary to this accusation of God's, and renews the old Plea and
Proverb of the Jews; if we pine and languish under: our Sins, what remedy? The
fathers have eaten sour grapes; and contrary to the protestation, yea and the
Oath of the same God, As I live, it shall no more a Proverb in Israel.

Secondly, because by the same reason God should require actual. Faith of
Children and Mad men, Idiots and Indians, who either cannot conceive or never
heard of the Gospel of Christ, as well as of those to whom it is continually
preached; because he that wants Legs, is no more to be condemned for not
walking, than he that has neither Eyes nor Legs: for where impotency cannot
free, ignorance may not make any excuse, especially since the one as well as
the other had, and lost in Adam, whatsoever they now want and have not, from
whose sin both blindness and lameness and all other frailties and infirmities
are equally derived.

Lastly, it can no whit avail them, because their Doctrine, as has been
showed, makes Adam to sin with no less necessity, than his Children do. And
therefore finding no other help, their utmost and last refuge is (which is
remarkable because it disanuls and destroys all the shifts they formerly made)
that it is certainly just with God so to do, though how it should be so, Man
cannot see nor conceive: Inst. lib. 3. cap. 23.
Excusabiles peccando haberi volunt reprobi, quia evadere nequeunt peccandi
necessitatem, praesertim cum Dei ordinatione sibi injiciatur hujusmodi
necessitas: Nos vero inde negamus excusari, quandoquidem Dei ordinationi, qua
se exitio destinat, conqueratur, sua constet aequitas, nobis quidem incognita
sed illi certissima.

Wherein besides the plain tergiversation and downright begging of the point in
question, it may please you to observe how little injury the Doctrine does
receive when it is accused of Stoicism, unless it be, that it falls short and
charge it with less impiety than it does deserve or the Authors of it
themselves confess, acknowledging in plain terms, as you see, a necessity of
sinning unto the wicked, and Gods decree to be the cause of this necessity, for
which the Stoics modestly never durst ascend farther than the Stars, the
loosest and lewdest of them do but complain of the Planets: Mars committed the
Murder, and Venus the Adultery: whilst the Doctrine of these makes Men bold to
lay both upon God, unto whose Arm it fastens the first Link of that fatal
Chain, which the Stoics never durst but at the foot of his Chair. And yet
farther will some of the Manichees that would rather make a coeternal Devil
than want a good God, of whom it is better not to think, than to think what
becomes him not; it being a less offense to acknowledge none, than to account
him evil whom they acknowledge. But howsoever wicked Men may now take advantage
of the Doctrinal errors and mistakes of the good, laying hold on such
misconceived decrees, from thence to plead and justify the cause of their
crying crimes; yet the time will come when no such excuses will be taken, yea
when those nor any others can be made. They may here have tongues, and these
loud in their own defense, whilst they dispute with Men; but when the
Bridegroom shall once come and question them for their wedding Garment, the
case of one will be the same in all, they shall be speechless, not a word,
unless it be to condemn their own follies, we fools, and so forth, as the
Wiseman has it, and to justify God in his sayings, especially in this, O
Israel thou have destroyed thy self.

Hitherto of those inconveniences that cleave unto Reprobation, if made
immediately out of the mass of corruption. But it is not sufficient to convince
error, unless we establish truth, which must be by showing that Gods patience
and longanimity does not forsake Men for one sin or utterly reject them for the
first fault, without any farther care of them, according to that of Gregory.
Non sinit neglecte perire quod est, qui hoc etiam quod non fuit, creavit ut
esset. Moral. lib. 26. cap. 10.
The manifestation whereof will consist in these three points.


And first, for the first, the extent of the death of our Lord and Savior unto
all. I know not how it is possible for the wit of Man, to set it down in
plainer, fuller, and more variety of terms, as if the Holy Ghost did strive to
free it from all objections. What terms of universality are there, wherein it
does not seek to express this truth? He died for all, for the world, for the
sins of the whole world: and that the word may not still be taken only for the
Elect, it is here used with opposition to them, not for our sins only, but for
the sins of the whole world, says St. John, 1 Ep 2. 1. And yet that it might
not be understood of the world of Elect only, that were in after ages to
succeed; St. Paul has the same Antithesis in other terms that utterly rejects
the cavil: God is the Savior of all men, especially of the faithful. 1 Timothy 4.
20. Nay yet more directly, the Savior of those that perish; for through thy
knowledge shall thy Brother perish, says the same Author, for whom Christ
died. Yet more positively for those that are damned. There shall be false
teachers among you, 2 Per. ii. 1.
who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that
bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.

For All, for the world, the wole world, the wole world of faithful, and
others, and those others, they that perish, they that are damned: what can be
said more for it, or answered unto it, I know not. To say herein, that he died
for all sufficiently, if truly meant, is as much as is required, as the places
enforce: but if their intent be, as it is, That the merit of Christ's Blood and
death is, in it self considered, sufficient for all, had it been, as it was
not, intended and laid down for them; then to say that he died for all
sufficiently, is but to abuse others and contradict themselves. For how can it
be said he died sufficiently for those for whom he did not die? This is all
they can answer, and the consequence, that if Christ died for all, they cannot
see but how all should be saved, is all or the chief thing they can object,
which they would not object neither if they observed the difference and
distinction between the imputation of Redemption, and the application thereof:
His life may be laid down for the whole world, though his death be actually
imputed and applied to those only that are faithful believers; for he was as
the Brazen Serpent hung up for the good of all, but benefits none but those
that look upon him, that is, believe in him. A distinction sweetly insinuated
and strongly confirmed by the Oracle of Learning, the non sicut of Divines, in
the non sicut of Sermons, upon the non sicut of Christ's passion, whereof to the
former purpose he thus speaks; It pertains unto All, but All pertain not to it
^ after whose authority it were but ill manners to seek a farther proof.

To proceed therefore to the second point, wherein we are to show, that this
Savior is wanting unto none with sufficient power, whereby they may lay hold
on him, and if they will, be saved by him; to none that are called, that are
within the pale of the visible Church, that come to hear his Gospel and profess
his name, according to that of the Apostle, quotquot receperunt eum, as many as
received him, dedit iis potestatem filios Dei fieri, to them gave he power to
become the Sons of God. And according to St. Austin, where power is given,
necessity is not also imposed, that you may know many might receive this power
who never become the sons and servants of God; for of all that are called and
come not, that of the same Father is true, qui velle praecepit, posse praebuit,
and non impune nolle permisit, He that commands to will gives power to perform,
and yet justly permits to neglect: which place he does not retract though he
repeat it in his Retractations. Retract. lib. 1. cap. 11.
Unto that supper prepared in the Gospel, says he elsewhere, neither would all
come that were called, neither could they have come that did come unless they
had been called, Itaque nec illi debeut sibi tribuere qui venerunt, quia vocati
venerant, nec illi, qui noluerant venire, debent alteri tribuere, sed tantum
sibi, quoniam ut venirent vocati erant in eorum libera voluntate. Lib. Arbit.
cap. 16. What can be more manifest? From whence it is, that that which from
thence he infers, is as just, That he which deserved not to be called, begins
to deserve punishment, when he neglects to come being called, because then it
first begins to be in his power: Sicut non habuit meritum praemii ut vocaretur,
sic inchoat meritum supplicii cum vocatus venire neglexerit. lib. Quaesti. 38.
quaest. 68.

Many other passages of this Father might be produced unto this purpose, but I
pass them over now to come to the places of Scripture which are infinite, from
whence this Doctrine may be concluded. I will only point at two: in one whereof
God makes men themselves the Judges, and in the other the Prophet calls heaven
and earth for witnesses of this truth, Deuteronomy. l. 19. I call heaven and earth to
record this day, says Moses, against you, that I have set before you life and
death, cursing and blessing, therefore choose life that both thou and thy seed
may live.

The reason hereof he had before set down, because the Commandment which I
command thee this day is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off, that is,
thou art neither ignorant of it, neither is it out of thy reach or beyond thy
power to perform and effect it. This then being so plain, no marvel that God
calls to the Men of Israel themselves to judge between him and his Vineyard,
that is, between him and themselves: Isai. v.
judge, I pray you, between me and my vineyard: I have not chosen out any
barren soil, for it is seated pingui dorso, in a very fruitful hill; I did not
plant it with a wild or degenerate or bastard slip, but generosa stirpe, with
the choicest Vine; it has not wanted manuring and culture, sepsi and
elapidavi, I enclosed, hedged it in, and threw the stones and weeds out; after
all I built a Tower and a Vine-press therein expecting Grapes, and fecit mibi
labruscas, and it brought forth wild grapes; now judge I pray you, Quid amplius
debui facere vineae meae; what I ought more to have done unto my Vine? This was
enough to convince them; but these times are more acute. Had some Men of our
Israel been made Judges, they would quickly have stopped the mouth of this
Plantiff; Why, you have withheld the first and the latter rain, the dew of
Grace and the influence of Heaven, no marvel if your Plants thrive not: if you
would needs plainly know, this you ought not to have done, if you would have
expected grapes. Give but that blessing, and your earth will bring forth its
increase. As if in the enumeration of some few particulars, those that these
speak of, and whatsoever else is simply necessary for this rational Vine, were
not virtually included. Surely the Lords Vineyard was not planted upon those
cursed Mountains of Gilboa, on which there fell neither dew nor rain: for
certainly the influence of Heaven has not been restrained, the Sun of
righteousness has risen and shined upon this Vine, but it has loved darkness
more than light: the dew of Divine Grace was not wanting to the branches
thereof, but they have turned his grace into wantonness, quenching and grieving
his holy Spirit: And therefore a little before the utter rooting up and casting
out these degenerate Plants, St. Stephen frames the Indictment unto their just
destruction: why, ye are a stiff-necked people and a stubborn generation, as
your Fathers did, so do ye, ye have always resisted the Holy Ghost.

And this leads us unto the third and last point, That God reprobates none, but
after the often abuse of his grace: for as they were cut and cast off, so are
all other also rejected and reprobated, for first rejecting and resisting the
same Holy Ghost.

My people would not bearken unto my voice, and Israel would none of me, says
the Lord, So I gave them up unto their own hearts lufts, and they walked in
their own counsels, Psalm. 81. 11. And this is the first external act of
Reprobation: when God gives Men up unto a Reprobate sense, withdrawing his
abused Grace, and leaving them unto the counsels and lusts of their own hearts.
A Judgment never denounced in Scripture but for contempt of Mercy. Now by the
external act, Man must judge of the internal and eternal decree; for what God
in time does, that before all time he did decree to do: for they that imagine
that difference between the decree and the execution of the decree, that the
one has respect unto Sin, but the other none, must either make a decree that
is never executed, or an execution that varies from the decree, as if God did
ordain one thing, and do another; And therefore if he does now give up and
reject a people for their obstinate sins, for the same cause in his Eternal
Reprobation, he did order so to reject them. And as it is in rejection from
Grace, so it fares in exclusion from Glory, from which no Man is irrecoverably
abdicated but for long and wilful grieving of that God who would have brought
them to it. Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and then I
swear they should not enter into my rest. Than which I know no sentence that
does so clearly represent and express the true nature of Reprobation; for what
is it, but Gods eternal oath of rejecting wicked Men from his Glory into that
destruction they have deserved? And this he does not suddenly in a passion of
choler, upon every light occasion, but in his wrath, his wrath urged and
provoked by a long Rebellion: even forty years long was he grieved, and then he
swear in his wrath, he resolutely determined they should not enter into his
rest. A decree that seems not to proceed, but when by extremity of injury it
is, as it were, violently extorted: so loath and unwilling he is to be brought
unto it, as he does not so much as think or speak of it without passionate
interjections of sorrow. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self!

And upon these exhibitions of Gods mercies and goodness unto the Reprobate,
depends the verity and truth and justice of this complaint against them: for
they that never received any means of Salvation, can by no means ever be termed
the authors of their destruction: But now since God and his favors have not
been wanting unto them, but they unto God; since they have wilfully forsaken
his mercy, they can rightly blame none but themselves for their own misery; for
as the ancient Father Irenaeus has it, Judicium justum recipient, quoniam non
sunt operati bonum cum possent operari illud. Lib. 4. cap. 71.
The judgment of God is just, which they shall receive, because they did not do
well when they might have done it. Whereunto Clemens Alexandrinus does agree:
All impenitents, says he, shall be judged, aliqui quidem quod cum possent,
noluerunt Deo credere, alii vero quod cum vellent, non elaboraverunt ut fierent
fideles: Some because, when they might believe, they would not: others because,
when they would, yet they did not labor truly to become what they desired. And
it were easy, (that no man might conceive the Doctrine to be new,) to show the
like out of the Fathers, yea generally out of all, both before the Pelagian
heresy, and after: but (left the time should fail me) to those already
mentioned I will only add the Judgment of the third Synod of Arles, assemblged
for the defining of these very questions, wherein, what you have now heard, is
not only affirmed, but a Curse and an Anathema laid upon those that shall think
the contrary, Anathema illi qui dixerit quod Christus non pro omnibus mortius
sit: Cursed be he that says that Christ died not for all. And Anathema illi qui
dixerit illum, qui periit, non accepisse ut salvus esse posset, Cursed be he
that says, he that perished, did not receive means whereby he might be saved.

But unto this and whatsoever else in this kind may be said, that in the ix. to
the Romans of Jacob and Esau (before ever they had done good or evil, that the
purpose of God might stand according to Election, it was said The elder shall
serve the younger, according to that of the Prophet, I have loved Jacob but
Esau have I hated) like Medusa's head is ever objected, though seldom or never
understood: But that it may be; besides theirs of absolute Reprobation, I will
first show you the several interpretations of others. The ancient Fathers both
Greek and Latin before St. Austin, yea and St. Austin for a while until the
Pelagian heresy arose, interpret these words of the Election of some unto
salvation upon prevision of their future faith and piety; and of the rejection
of others, upon the fore-fight of the evil they were afterward to commit.

But St. Austin rejecting this opinion, and doubtless worthily, thinks and
proves, that the Apostle speaks here of the Election of some unto life, and the
preterition of others, without any regard either of the one, or the others good
or evil, that should be personal. Both opinions agree in this, that the place
concerns the Election and rejection of particular persons. And yet there are
not wanting learned men that conceive these Verses in a proper and literal
sense chiefly to intend only external and temporary blessings of this life, but
typically under them to shadow the free and undeserved Salvation of the
faithful, and the abjection of those that believe not; and that therefore the
types are not to be extended farther than to show that our Justification is of
mere grace and favor, no way descending either from carnal generation or legal
Justice. Of this threefold interpretation, which is the most genuine and proper
unto the Text, would require a longer disquisition: at this time it shall be
sufficient to show that absolute Reprobation does follow from neither. Of the
former and the latter there is no doubt, all the difficulty is of St. Austins
opinion between both: from whence notwithstanding we shall not be enforced so
to decree an absolute reprobation, if we so interpret his words, as we make him
speak something more indeed than the Ancients do, but nothing contrary, that
is, if by a conditional science we reconcile both opinions, and then the mind
of the Apostle will be thus, Before any absolute prevision and without any
regard of Jacobs merits I loved Jacob, and decreed to confer upon him such and
such a measure of grace as I saw would certainly bring him to salvation: And
again I hated Esau, that is, I did not so particularly love him, but decreed to
give him only such grace as might argue a good and sincere intent of his good
in me and in it self sufficient for him, though through his fault I know it
would be ineffectual: And though I foresaw, that if I should afford him this
mercy he would abuse it, yet I did not destine unto him any other grace, but
for the manifestation of my Justice did Decree Eternally to punish those evil
ways of his which through the former grace he might and ought to have avoided.
And both these without any respect of merit, for he may dispense his free mercy
as himself pleseth. And according to this last interpretation, to hate after
the Hebrew manner imports no more than not so specially to love, minus aware,
or alteri posthabere, to love less, or not so much to esteem and regard.

So Leah in the xxxix. of Genesis 31. is said be hated of Jacob, that is, in
respect to Rachel (whom he loved more dearly,) something neglected: so our
Savior Christ says, Luke iv. 26. If any come unto me and hate not his Father
and Mother and Children and brethren, yea and his own Soul, he cannot be my
Disciple: Not that Christ in the Gospel does now command men to hate what in
the Law yea and in Nature he has taught them to honor and love, but to show
that when the question shall be between these and God, these and our Religion,
we are to prefer the last, to leave all, be they never so near and dear unto
us, and follow Christ: and therefore instead of hating, when the same point is
preached in St. Matthews Gospel x. 37 Qui amaverit patrem aut matrem plus quam
me, aut filium and filiam super me, non est me dignus: He that loves Father or
Mother more than me, and he that loves Son or Daughter above me is not worthy
of me. And that this kind of hatred, as it is taken for less love does well
agree with St. Austins Doctrine, appears by that which he elsewhere speaks of
Esau, whom he does acknowledge God did not so hate but he vouchsafed him means
whereby he might have been saved. Noluit Esau and non cucurrit, sed si
voluisset and cucurrisset, Dei adjutorio pervenisset: Esau would not and so he
ran not; but if he would and had ran, by the help of God he should have
obtained. Qui etiam velle and currere vocando praestaret, nisi vocatione
contempta, reprobus fieret, who by his vocation would have wrought in him, both
to will and to run, but that by contemning the call he became reprobate. And
the whole Church of Lions as well as St. Austin, is of the same judgment,
affirming in the cause of... de scalius, the predestination, (whom though she
defend as far as she well might, and as Hinciomarus than thought and others
still think, in some things farther too, yet in this she leaves him) affirming
I say, that Gods reprobation, that is, this hatred here does subject, she says,
not Esau only but no man else unto any unavoidable necessity of destruction;
neither does she only say this, but she says it is Blasphemy for any else to say
the contrary. Si quis neget esse apud Deum Praescientiam and praedestinationem,
manifest insidelis est. Si quis dicit, quod praescientia and praedestinatio
ejus atiquem compellat ut malus sit, and aliud esse non possit, horribiliter
blasphemat: If any man deny prescience and Predestination of God, it is
manifest infidelity. And if any affirm that this prescience or Predestination
of his does enforce or necessitate any man (for that she says before she means
by enforcing) unto evil, so that he could not be otherwise, it is horrible
Blasphemy. No marvel therefore that the Valentin Council did detest it with a
Curse, or rather cursed it with all detestation, as another Synod also had done
before. Aliquos ad malum praedestinatos esse, videlicet ut quasi aliud esse non
possent, non solum non credimus, sed etiam si sint qui tantum malum credere
velint, cum omni detestatione, sicut Arausica Synodus, illis Anathema dicimus:
vid^ Voss. page 75^. But for my part I shall be so far from laying this Curse
upon such, as I rather desire God to bless them with the knowledge and
confession of their error.

And by this time the truth and equity of this Accusation or increpation of
God, I say not against Ammon and Amalek, de extraneis judicabit Deus, for of
those that are without, God will judge, we may not; but against Israel, against
the Church of God, against those that are called unto the Knowledge and
profession of the truth, think is evident and clear enough, O Israel thou have
destroyed thy self. If it be not, there is yet one fresh argument more and
strong enough, before your eyes, more fully to prove it. If any man die, either
by hereditary or contracted Diseases, that has a medicine before him, able to
cure both, he may well praise the good will of his Physician, but can justly
blame none but his wilful self, if he perish. It is that Calix salutaris,
David's Cup of Salvation, wherein is a potion mixed and tempered for all
Complexions, and all Distempers, (...) the universal medicine of the World, of
power and virtue enough to cure all, if all drink it, so they drink it not upon
full Stomachs, but after a time of fasting and abstinence, if not from flesh,
yet from those fleshly Lusts that war against the Soul. As Naamans servants
said unto him when Elisha willed him to repair unto Jordan for the cure of his
Leprosy, If the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have
done it? how much rather then, when he says unto thee only Wash and be clean?
so may we unto you, if God should command you, sick unto death and poisoned
with a more contagious Leprosy than ever Naaman was, to do some great thing
for your recovery, would you not do it? how much rather then, now when he says
only Drink and be whole?

It is open and proposed to all, no Man is debarred, no Man excepted, yea all
are invited, nay all commanded. Drink ye all of this, Matt. xxiv.
even when Judas himself was one of them all: yea and there is no doubt but if
Judas afterward with a faithful and penitent heart had drank it, he might have
been saved by a draught of that blood, which himself drew out and betrayed.

There can be no stronger argument for the general intent of Christ's death,
than this holy Mystery wherein it is generally offered. If his purpose in
shedding be not as large as his command for drinking his blood, he must say one
thing and purpose another, which is hypocrisy with Men, and let his portion be
with Hypocrites, for my part, that shall think so of god. Does he enjoin you
upon pain of death, those many which are called, to receive that which he never
meant to give, but to those few only, that are elected? does he now bind those
to believe in his death to whom he never intended any good or benefit when he
died? who therefore if they should believe, must notwithstanding be damned in
their belief, or else saved for believing a falsehood? Both infinitely absurd,
and contain, as a Sea of injury against God, so a swallowing Gulf of
disconsolation and desperation against Men. To avoid which shall we minister
this blessed Sacrament with a tacit and secret condition, if thou belong unto
the Elect? as Zanchius and some others otherwise learned, driven by the like or
rather the same absurdities, confess they baptized Children even the Children
of the faithful: a dangerous Doctrine and of most fearful consequence, making
Christ himself, that is the truth it self, in whose mouth was never guile found
(for in his person all Ministers that are his in the dispensation of those
mysteries speak) amidst the comfortable and gracious promises of Mercy and
Salvation, to deceive and delude poor creatures, like a false Jesuit with
mental reservation. Thus to decline one error, they fall into another, and it
is hard to judge which is the worst. How much better the Valentine Synod, In
Ecclesiae sacramentis nihil cassum, nihil ludificatorium, sed prorsus totum
verum and ipsa sui veritate ac siuceritate subnixum. In the Sacraments of the
Church there is nothing empty and hollow, nothing delusory, but all in them
altogether true, as being upheld by no other props but their own proper
sincerity and truth. And therefore as the judicious and Learned Hooker has it,
Unless we our selves hinder, they ever give and exhibit what they promise, and
are unto us what they signify. They are the Conduits of Grace, it is conveyed
from the common Fountain (unless we our selves obstruct, the Pipes) to every
Man's private Cistern; the Seals of the promise of life, which being given in
general in the word, is here by the Elements of Bread and Wine, sensibly
applied in particular. Now the promise, says St. Peter, in the Acts, belongs
to you and your Children, even unto as many as the Lord our God shall call, not
to those only which he shall Elect, and many are called though few are chosen.
And then to as many as the promise does belong to, the Seals of the promise,
yea and sanguis tastamenti, the blood of the promise both promised and sealed,
must of necessity appertain. This being too plain to be denied, they grant that
every Man called by the Gospel ought to believe, that his blood was shed for
himself in particular, but withal ought to believe also that it was not shed
for all others that ought to believe it. All may believe of themselves, that
themselves may not believe of all, and my Faith must deny me to believe that of
them, which I must enjoin them to believe, and so make one Faith to contradict,
and like opposite pellets, to shoot out one another, every Man conceiving, that
every other may be deceived in his Faith beside himself, and so mutually
deceive both themselves and each other; why, if he died for every one in
particular, how could he choose but die for all in general, and if he died not
generally for all, with what truth may every one believe it in particular?

But such mazes and Labyrinths, error, once hunted out of knowledge, is
enforced to tread and it would weary me to follow her. The end of the Chase I
am sure, is an abrupt and dangerous precipice, for how does it evatuate and
frustrate the general Will and Testament of God, like a quirk or gull in Law,
that all may fall to the particular Heir? It cuts the very strings and Sinews
of our general hope, and loses the Cable of our Anchor, if not clean through,
yet more than half way; it lops and maims the everlasting promises of bliss,
nay it troubles and shakes our very Faith, the life of our Souls, and renders
it both dubious and deceitful. In a word it digs so low and close upon the
foundation, as I think it should not be endured. But to such inconveniences are
they driven, who having the persons of Men in too much admiration, think they
cannot sufficiently admire their Teachers virtues, unless withal they maintain
their errors: But from whence soever the doctrine comes, and howsoever it be
so frequently taught in this Kingdom, I am sure it is not the Doctrine of this
Church who enjoins all by subscription, that shall teach in it, so to preach
the particularity of predestination in particular, as they destroy not the
universality of the promise. And yet though the promise be universal, it does
not follow that all must receive the benefit of it, because though the promise
of Christ and his blood be absolute, yet the application of it is upon
condition, which when all do not perform, all do not receive; but it is their
own fault, who being prevented by Grace may, but neglect to perform it. Let us
therefore fear, says the author to the Hebrews, lest a promise being left us
of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it. For even
those Jews had a promise of Canaan and in it of the eternal rest, whose
Carcasses notwithstanding for their disobedience, fell short of it in the
desert; and God swear in his wrath, they should not enter into his rest.

And therefore though the passion and death of Christ be absolute, and in it
self belonging to all, yet there may be but a few to whom the good and benefit
of it shall redound. For remission of sins does not immediately flow from his
blood without intercedent obedience in us: the next effect of it, is not
presently Salvation, but a way and means whereby, non obstante justitia,
without any impeachment to his justice, we may now attain unto Salvation. It
does not instantly convey us again into Paradise, but only gives us the word,
whereby we may, if we will, safely and without impeachment pass the Angel and
his flaming Sword, that guards the entrance thither: so that by it, non
solvitur omnibus captivitas, sed solvitur omnibus captivitati necessitas,
though all be not actually loosed from Captivity, yet all are loosed from the
necessity of Captivity, as the late and learned Writer of the Pelagian Story.
The gates of Brass and bars of Iron are smitten in sunder, and so a way opened
unto the Captives, who notwithstanding if they be so far enamoured with their
misery and captivity, may for all that, lie still in their Prison. It is a
potion for the good of all that are sick, sed si non bibitur non medetur, if it
be not faithfully drank it shall never effectually cure, saith^ Prosper. And
therefore we need not be anxious or doubtful on Gods behalf, but only careful
and solicitous for our selves, what he has promised in Baptism that he for his
part will not be wanting, sure he will never break in his Supper; He will not
fail to perform his promise, if we but seriously bewail the breach of ours. It
is a Spiritual Banquet whereunto there never came any sorrowful and hungry Soul
that ever departed empty. And therefore let us draw near in full assurance of
Faith no way wavering, for he is faithful that has promised, says St. Paul.
And as he is faithful that has promised, yet because he promises nothing
here, but to the faithful, we must bring this with us, though it be not of us,
a living Faith that only can work Repentance from dead works not to be repented
of. And this Faith, only once thoroughly rooted, begets that other confidence
and fullness of Faith the Apostle speaks of, which, if it has any other
Parent, is illegitimate, ill born and falsely termed Faith, when the true
Father's name is Presumption. And for this cause those that the Apostle exhorts
to draw near with full assurance of Faith, he thus qualifies, having a true
heart, an heart sprinkled from an evil Conscience. Then we go on rightly and
orderly, when we come not to the confident faith but by the penitent; and as we
go from faith to faith here, so we shall appear before the God of Gods in Sion
hereafter: if therefore our heart within be true an upright within us, if by a
deep and entire Repentance it be sprinkled from an evil Conscience, let us draw
near in full assurance of faith, as being most confident, that our lips do not
more truly drink the fruit of the Vine, than our Souls do the blood of our
Savior, the effect and merit of his blood, whereby that which before was but
sprinkled, shall now be drenched and thoroughly cleansed from all the stains
and impurities of Sin.

Our heart is ready O God, our heart is ready: only come thou and dwell in our
hearts, purge them and cleanse them wholly with thy blood, and being cleansed
keep and preserve them by thy Spirit spotless and blameless, until the day of
thy second coming in the Clouds with Glory. That we who receive thee with
fullness of faith now, may stand before thee with the same confidence then, and
be received by thee and with thee into those eternal habitations, at the right
hand of God, where is fullness of joy an pleasure for evermore. To whom with
thee and the Holy Ghost, three Persons, etc.

Amen. Laus Deo in aeternum.
THE WAY TO HAPPINESS.
SERMON VII. Upon MAT. vi. 33.
But seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you.
IT is a part of our Saviors Sermon in the Mount, and the conclusion of a
larger discourse in the precedent Verses whereto it refers. And indeed it is or
should be the Conclusion of all our discourses. For all are little material and
to no purpose, unless they tend unto this issue, The Kingdom of God and his
righteousness. Let us hear the Conclusion of all, says Solomon, of all not
only discourses, but humane endeavors upon Earth, Fear God and keep his
Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man. The second Solomon, infinitely
wiser than that first, strikes here but on the same string, though by his
double touch, it receives an air and relisheth more evangelical; Unto the
Righteousness of God adding the reward of it, the Kingdom of God. That so the
works which the Law requires, might be rightly wrought in the hope and faith of
that immortality and glory which the Gospel proposes. However then we busy our
selves about many things, this is that unum necessarium, the one thing that is
necessary, able to resolve Parmenides his Riddle, Unum omnia, one thing
necessary wherein all necessaries are included, whatsoever is necessary for the
body or the soul, whatsoever concerns either employment here or felicity
Eternal hereafter, the whole perfection of man and the whole goodness of God.
If these things be all, all these are enclosed in this one, this one little
exhortation, Seek ye first, etc.

The communication of divine goodness, (besides that of hypostatical union
particular and supereminent) has generally but three degrees of participation:
Nature, Grace and Glory. And here they are all three either in their utmost
extent or in their highest exaltations.

First, all the necessaries of Nature pertaining to the These things shall be
added unto you: but though slightly yet fully, All these things, all that are
requisite shall be added.

Secondly, the utmost improvement of Grace, that cannot His Righteousness.

And lastly, the highest degree of glory, nothing can be The Kingdom of God.
The less marvel therefore that our search and travel for these, these latter,
yea our utmost industry and endeavor be so carefully called led upon and
inculcated, with a Quaerite and a Primum quaerite, seek and first seek, Seek ye
first the Kingdom of God, etc. Wherein the division is as plain, as the matter
important. The main parts but two:

A Precept. The Precept, seek. A Promise. The Promise, All these things shall
be added unto you.
A promise, not, as it sounds, only of these things which shall be added, but
of those spiritual things also we are willed to seek for; if those be added, it
implies these shall be given. These given as the Reward of our search, Those
added ex Abundanti as an overplus, or surplusage out of his Providence: so the
Promise is of all both spiritual things and secular: of the one sort expressly,
implicitly of the other: And so it should be, for Righteousness has the
promise of this life and the life which is to come, says the Apostle.

The precept on which the accomplishment of this promise does depend, and
wherein only, I think, I shall at this time proceed, has these particulars.

1. The Action enjoined, and the manner and modification of that Action, Seek,
and first seek.

2. The object of our search proposed: a double object, prime, and secondary.
The Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness of God: for both must be sought, that
intentionally as the end of our Travel, this by prosecution, as the way, the
only way that leads unto it, Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his
Rigeteousness, etc.

But because the object (as the Schools speak) does ever precede the Action
that works upon it, not ever indeed as really existent, but yet always Ideally
in the mind and contemplation of the worker, whether it be God or man, whether
actions transient, or immanent, external Creation, Decrees, and prefinition
internal; Though they suppose nothing in being, but their Author, yet they
presuppose all things as being understood and apprehended, before they can be
either wrought or willed.

3. Therefore in the third place the right way thither is discovered,
Righteousness, a way as clean as right, unto happiness through the paths of
holiness: to the Kingdom of God, by the righteousness of God. But Righteousness
is not so easily found, or being found, is not so easily kept and observed. And
therefore it is not a bare seeking that will serve the turn here, he must seek
and search, knock and call with his best might and his utmost endeavor, which
will be the fourth and last point though first named. First seek.

So have we all the direction and incitation too, that may be desired: The Port
and Haven of our rest and happiness everlasting, proposed; the Kingdom of God.
Our duty and endeavor urged to weigh Anchor, put to Sea for the search and
discovery of it; Seek. Our course shaped and directed, that we wander not in
the Ocean; by the Righteousness of God. And lastly, because the voyage is
tedious and difficult unto flesh and blood, and no less perilous than painful
by reason of many Rocks and Shelves, and Quicksands that lie in the way, at
least about it, our vigilance is farther admonished, our best attention and
industry again, and more earnestly called upon with a primum quaerite: first,
that is, chiefly and above all things most carefully seek. For so seeking we
shall be sure to find; performing our part in the precept, God will not fail to
perform his part in the promise: give both the Kingdom which we sought, and add
those other things which are unworthy of our search. But I begin with the
Precept and in it with that Kingdom that should quicken us to the practice of
it. The Kingdom of God.

Whereof yet at this time I shall speak but little, because no Man can say
enough, or indeed any thing to purpose of that, which neither eye has seen nor
ear heard, nor possibly can enter into the heart of Man. St. Peter saw but a
weak beam of it in the transfiguration of Christ, Luke ix. 33.
and he was so ravished with it as he spoke presently he knew not what. St.
Paul heard but a little sound of it with his ear in an ecstasie and rapture
into Paradise, and he was himself he knew not what; whether in the body or out
of the body, he could not tell; only he heard words there, 2 Cor. xii. 4.
which, when he came to himself, he could not utter neither, (...), ineffable
words, words impossible, and were they possible, not lawful to be uttered. The
holy Spirit himself seeks not to express this happiness in it self, but only to
intimate it by similitudes and such feeble notions as we are capable of and
acquainted withal. And of all such, this here, this of a Kingdom is the best,
Kings and Kingdoms they are the most glorious things that are upon Earth, and
therefore fittest to resemble the glory of Heaven. And yet they are but
resemblances neither, indeed shadows, as the Author of the Hebrews, rather than
full resemblances of this Kingdom, Regnum Dei, the Kingdom of God. A Kingdom
fully accomplished with all Dignities and Prerogatives Royal, and that in an
eminent and excellent manner. They seem principally to be but four. 1.
Dominion. 2. Majesty. 3. Wealth. 4. Pleasure. Dominion and Empire, Majesty and
Glory, Wealth and Treasure, Pleasure and Delights, these are the dazzling beams
that give such luster and brightness unto sublunary Monarchies, and they are
all here, and all infinitely more illustrious in the celestial, the Kingdom of
Heaven.

For Empire and Dominion how full and absolute, how large and spacious^
extending it self not only from Sea to Sea, from the flood unto the lands end;
but from Land to Sea, from Sea to Air, from Air to Heaven, from thence to the
Heaven of Heavens, which as they contain not his person, so neither may they
limit his. Dominion and Power. It is called the Kingdom of Heaven, not that it
is there ^onfined and bounded, for it runs through Heaven and Earth, the heaven
is his throne and the earth is his footstool. That indeed is the City of the
great King, the Metropolis and principal Province of the Kingdom, the Heaven of
Heavens. Next unto it is the Ethereal Region, wherein are the Celestial Orbs,
the Stars and wandering Planets, all of them keeping the due course and order
their King has appointed them, and not fainting in their watches, as the Wise
man speaks. From hence it passes into the Aereal, wherein are the strange
and formidable Meteors, lightning and thunder, fire hail, snow, vapors, winds
and tempests, and all of them fulfilling his word, as the Psalmist has it.
After this into the Aqueous, the Region of Waters, the great Sea, and all that
walk in the paths of the Sea, all subject to his power that made them, they and
their raging Element. He has given them a law which they may not break, he
has set this bound which it cannot pass; hitherto shall thou come, and here
shall thou stay thy proud waves. The earth follows, as the Center and
Foundation of all, which yet has no foundation it self but is hung out upon
emptiness, as Job speaks. And this though a remote yet a principal Region it is
of his Empire, and furnished with the noblest Inhabitants of all other, not
only with Minerals, Plants and Beasts, but as yet with rational Men though
mortal, to some of whom the Lord even in this life has imparted of his own
sovereignty, a Lordship over the earth, yet so as he retains the Supremacy, and
will be still Lord paramount himself, for his is the earth and the fullness
thereof.

And yet it stays not here, but pierces farther into the lowest of all, the
subterraneous Region, a Region of death and darkness: Arabia deserta, a desert
and doleful Region this, that brings forth no good fruits, but is appointed
only for the habitation of wicked and apostate Angels, and such of Men as they
have seduced to the like wickedness. All these Regions and Provinces are
contained within the circuit of his Dominion and Kingdom, for omnia serviunt
tibi, all things what soever serve thee. Psalm. cxix.

This is Gods Kingdom, and the Kingdom of God it is, that shall be imparted to
the children of Men: His it is, his only by natural righteousness: his servants
it shall be by gracious communication. Indeed the communication of the Kingdom
is first and principally unto Christ who is Haeres universorum, the Heir, the
immediate Heir of all things, Heb. i. There is not an Inhabitant of the three
grand Regions, Heaven, Earth, and under the Earth, but they are all put in
subjection under his feet, and must every one therefore bow the knee at the
very name of Jesus, as a reverence and homage unto their Lord. But yet in and
through Christ, it shall be communicated also unto all his, that are truly
Christians: for these are heirs too, heirs of God, and coheirs with Christ,
Romans viii. As they partake of his name, so they shall receive of the Royal
Unction which it signifies; He only is the anointed King, but the ointment
rests not only on him; but from him, as from the head, runs down into the
beard, and drops on the very skirts of his Raiment, by which they are all
interessed in the same Kingdom. And therefore, qui vicerit dabo ei sedere in
throno meo: to him that overcomes will I give to sit with me on my throne,
even as I overcame, and am sat down on my Fathers throne, Revel. iii. 21.

So Gods throne is over all, Christ sits on God's, we on Christ's and therefore
on God's: and so have a communicated power from God, through Christ, over all
that God and Christ have. He will make him Ruler over all his goods, Matthew.
xxiv. 47.

Justly then a Kingdom in respect of Dominion, and no less rightly in regard of
Majesty and Glory, the second Prerogative of Kings and Kingdoms. And sure they
are no mean rays of Majesty, and Majesty Divine, that above all other persons
do descend and settle on the heads of Princes, crowning them more than that of
Gold, with Glory and Honor. True it is, every rational Man is engraven more or
less with the image and similitude of God, which all other creatures irrational
do acknowledge by their fear: the fear of Man is on them all. But Kings bear
this similitude with a difference of eminence and excellency, and are stamped
with a special character of the Divinity, that commands reverence and dread
from all their inferiors, even those whom all things else do fear. A great
participation of honor, than which there is not a greater, unless in this
Kingdom, the Kingdom of Heaven; that indeed infinitely surmounts it: for there
and there only is the fullness of Majesty, Majesty Divine, where is the Seat and
Scepter, the very Throne of the Divinity, at the erection and presence whereof
all other Thrones and Scepters, though never so glorious, must at length tumble
to the Earth, as that Image before the Ark utterly broken. It was a goodly
statue that Nebuchadnezzar beheld, it had a head of pure Gold, but when that
mighty stone cut out of the Mountain without hands once fell upon it, it ran
instantly into powder: so the same Prophet Daniel in a vision of his own does
assure us: I beheld, faith he, till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient
of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow; and the hair of his head like
pure wool: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels like burning
fire. A fiery stream came ^ssuing forth from before him: thousand thousands
ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousands stood before him: the
judgment was set, and the books were opened, Dan. vii. 9, 10. And this sure is
a majestic Throne, and even on this Throne about which so many blessed Angels
stood and ministered, men (which is strange) holy men and Saints shall sit as
Assessors, judging not only the Tribes of Israel, but the whole world, the
world of the wicked, both men and Angels, 1 Cor. vi. 2, 3. And as their majesty
is, such is their glory, a glorious Majesty, and mavelous. For the glory of
the Lord shall shine upon his Servants and he shall show himself mavelous in
his Saints: Their very bodies shall be glorified and shine as the Sun in the
firmament, but their Spirits much more glorious: with them they shall see God
as he is, that is, in his glory; and by seeing be transformed into his Image,
that is, made like unto him in glory, 2 Cor. iii. ult. And as of Glory, so I
think it will be found for Riches and Treasure, the third thing of eminence in
the Kingdoms of this world, as being the sinews of their strength, the support
of their state, dignity and magnificence.

3. But as all power is but impotence, all honor ignomity; so all wealth but
poverty respectively unto the Riches of this Kingdom: This only has veins and
mines of Treasure indeficient, Fountains of wealth inexhaustible when these
below are quickly drawn dry, and whilst they run, cannot quench the thirst of
those that drink them, who therefore have no means to be truly rich by adding
to their wealth but by withdrawing from their desire. But this beggarly
Philosophy (the best yet, that is in this Vale of misery,) is utterly banished
the confines of this Kingdom, whose Riches are of another nature, and powerful
not only to provoke, but to satiate the appetite. We need not make a virtue of
necessity here, be content with such things as we have because we may not have
such as we would; at best but a rich poverty; but enlarge your selves to the
uttermost; open the mouth wide and it shall be filled: and that is true wealth
that does fill the mind, not that which does restrain it; that does not curb
the desires, but feed them till there be nothing more to be desired. And such
are the riches of this Kingdom. For what can he desire more, that has God? and
all that God has, all that he has, for omnia ejus nostra sunt, All that he
has is ours; all that he is, is ours too. Deus erit omnia in omnibus, God
shall be all in all, 1 Cor. xiii. Doubtless it could be the intuition of no
other Riches but these that could make King. David (a Prince of such mighty
wealth as the Treasure he left behind can at this day hardly be calculated, yet
amidst them all) to cry out, Ego vero pauper and egenus, but I am poor and
needy, but the Lord cares for me: See where his Riches lay, in that God which
may not be enjoyed but in this Kingdom.

4. The last things of moment attending on the Kingdoms of this world are
Pleasures and delights; whereof indeed they afford great variety, but wherein
little satisfaction. For as their Gold has much dross, so their little
pleasure is mixed with travel and trouble not a little. Only the Kingdom of
God, the Paradise of true delight, is it, that has liquid pleasures and pure
from all mixtures of sorrow, Revel^ iii^ 3. We that are immersed, drowned in
flesh and blood, can hardly think there are any other pleasures but these of
the body; though our own Reason, if consulted, cannot but inform us, that this
cor^^ptible earth is not more inferior unto the immortal Spirit that informs
it, than the delights of that Spirit are excellent and Divine above all the
gross and brute pleasures of the perishing body: Though here are all, and all
sorts of delights, all that are immixed and pure from imperfection both for
body and Soul. The senses of the one, the powers and faculties of the other
shall be all satisfied to the full; and satiated with their highest and
diviness object^; with their (...) and closest (...) with them, to the utmost
of their enlarged and glorified (...) cities. It is the Feast of the great King
wherein he means to set forth all his magnificence, like Ahasuerus unto his
Princes. The marriage feast of the Lamb, and write, says the Angel, Blessed
are they that are invited to the supper of the Lambs Marriage, Revel. xix. How
blessed then are they that shall at that time be married themselves unto the
Lamb? The Body indeed is invited to the feast, but the Soul is it that shall be
married unto the great King: as it is in the Prophet Hosea, I will marry thee
to my self in everlasting kindness. Quales Thalami illius amplexus? Who can
possibly conceive the joys then of the Bride-chamber, or the pleasures of the
Bride-grooms embracement! when God and the Soul shall be so closely knit and
closed together, as they become but one Spirit; as by this marriage here, two
are made one flesh, 1 Cor. vi. 17. A strange and mavelous union, that as the
Father is in the Son and the Son in the Father: so all blessed Spirits shall be
in both, and all but one in both as both they are but one. A true marriage this
and a through on all sides: Souls knit unto Souls, and all unto God: A union
divine like the union of God, the effect of it therefore a joy divine, no less
like the joy of God: So like, as in Scripture it is said to be the same: Intra
in gaudium Domini, Enter into the joy of thy Lord, even into that joy wherewith
the Lord himself rejoices, and is everlastingly blessed, who perfectly
apprehending his own infinite worth and goodness does as perfectly enjoy it in
himself. And such shall be your joy, who shall not only pierce: the inmost
verity of all other things, and clearly know the truth of whatsoever is
doubtfully disputed here, but shall be enabled to behold and contemplate with
open face all the excellence and beauty of the Divinity it self, by the
understanding; and enjoy it too, by embracing and cleaving unto it with the
will and affections: though not comprehensibly and commensurably as God does,
yet fully; every one according to his capacity and as a Creature may, Totum
Dei, but not totaliter, seeing and enjoying all of God, though not in that
alsufficient and supereminent manner as God does; This is intrare in gaudium
Domini, to enter into the joy of the Lord, and that is to be filled, as the
Apostle speaks, with all the fullness of God: which since it is the most we can,
it shall be the last we will at this time say of it; only adding thus much,
that though we may put an end to the speech of it, there shall be no end of the
joy. At his right hand are pleasures for evermore. A Kingdom then it is, and in
all respects the Kingdom of God: In regard and so seeing, be made like unto
him, and that is participation of the glory of God: In regard of wealth and
riches; we shall be Rulers over all his goods, and that is a full possession of
the Treasures of God: And lastly in regard of pleasures and delights, we shall
enter into the Lords joy, and that is no other than the joy of God. Joy,
Wealth, Honor, Dominion, all Divine; and a Kingdom of all; and therefore the
Kingdom of God, that is an everlasting Kingdom: for Regni ejus non erit finis,
of his Kingdom there shall be no end, Lukeiii. But we must end the point,
wherein if I have stayed the longer, you may please to remember what St. Peter
said, when he saw but a shadow of it, Bonum est esse hic, it is good to be
here: A subject so pleasing, that once entered, a man can hardly be drawn off,
with that Apostle, from building Tabernacles there, and dwelling on it for
ever. But yet we are not so to contemplate the happiness of this Kingdom, as we
forget to consider, what we are to do that we may attain unto it: for something
is to be done, though not much; seek it we must at least, if we mean to have
it; the second Point, Seek the Kingdom of God.

2. And sure it is little worth, that is not worth the seeking; not any thing,
not so much as our daily bread but must be sought; and that in sudore vultus,
in the sweat of thy brow. And shall the Kingdom of Heaven so far above all
things, be valued at a lower rate than any thing else? for there is not any
thing but misery on earth, and Hell beneath it, the just reward of sloth, that
may be purchased without travel. Those idle people in the Marketplace whom our
Savior questions in the Parable with a quid hic statis otiosi, had yet some
rational plea for their idleness, no man has hired us; we have none such; see
a Kingdom, even the everlasting Kingdom of God is your hire. He that is now
idle, is idle without pretense, and let him be miserable without pity. And yet
two sorts of Men there are, that trespass in this particular. The one seeks,
but without all respect of the Kingdom; the other would gladly be invested in
the Kingdom but will by no means seek it: he scorns to work for hire; this no
hire can set a work: that relies too much on divine attraction; this aims too
much at supposed perfection; but seek the Kingdom of God convinces both.

The first, (to touch first on them) in their refined zeal conceive they could
serve God sufficiently, were there neither Heaven nor Happiness to encourage
them: yea that men ought to serve him without all consideration of either,
branding all intuition of reward for selflove, and all service founded thereon
as merely mercenary. But Gods hired servants, are servants, and have bread
enough, says the Text; and will have, while these aereal conceits blow up the
Soul only with wind, no way fill it with solid nourishment. Indeed were the
reward any thing but God himself, it might well be self-love and a love merely
mercenary to expect only the reward. But when the reward is God himself, he
neither loves God nor himself, as he should, that does not then fasten his eye
on the reward; working in the hope and joy of it whatsoever he works. It is
most true, every Man ought to love God above all; yea all love ought to be
fully and finally terminated in God. But yet with reference unto him, a Man may
and should love both himself and other things also besides; And therefore every
love of himself, is not presently self-love. Indeed he loves himself least,
that has most of self-love in these poor things and perishing, that add
nothing to his intrinsic perfection, which he is bound to love: And since God
himself, and God only is the full perfection of a Soul capable of God; it
follows, he cannot but love God most that most affects his own perfection, that
is, union with God. And thus the love of God and self-love are competible; yea
are and must be inseparable. Neither is it enough to love God only as the
Supreme and Sovereign good in himself, unless he love him also as the supreme
and sovereign good of the lover of himself, that loves; otherwise while men
seek to clarify, they will but cool their love; but evacuate utterly their
hope; That must henceforth be razed out of the number of the Theological
virtues, yea by this account, must needs become vicious. But there remain these
three, says St. Paul, Faith, Hope, and Love, and let them remain still; for
sure unless we love in hope, and have hope to cherish our love, we shall
neither love nor hope as we should, no nor believe neither. But that blessed
Apostle it seems was not yet arrived unto these Men's perfection; nay nor he
neither, that was perfection it self: He, in whom the fullness of the Godhead
dwelt bodily, was yet encouraged by therecompence of the reward, which is set
forth as a reason, why be endured the Cross, despised the shame and run with
patience the race which was set before him: for he had an eye unto the
recompense of reward. And as he had an eye unto it himself in his own
particular, so he fails not to draw all eyes unto it, almost every where in his
discourses. This very Sermon (and it is the first set and solemn Sermon that
ever he preached) takes beginning with this, this proposition of the reward,
this very reward of the Kingdom. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for their's is
the Kingdom of Heaven. Afterward in the whole course of his preaching, you
shall find it frequently pressed and earnestly: yea after his death and
resurrection, in those last forty days before he ascended, appearing often unto
his Disciples, he discoursed unto them of the Kingdom of God, Act. i. 3. This
brings in and leads out all his Sermons; the beginning, continuance, and
consummation of them seems to be Regnum Dei, the Kingdom of God. And sure were
it well known, did we clearly apprehend the hope of our calling, the riches of
the inheritance of the Saints, could we comprehend with them all what is the
height, and length, and breadth, and depth, and know the dimensions of that
love of God in Christ, which passes knowledge: nay were the inestimable
treasures of that Kingdom, which this love has prepared, but truly believed, I
think no Man would account any labor too great that might bring him thither.

But to leave these, that seek, but not for the Kingdom, for they are not so
many; The disease of those other that would gladly have the Kingdom, but
without seeking, is more general. Few Men's thoughts are much troubled with this
employment. If it concern these things indeed, the pleasures or profits of the
present, how diligently do most Men seek and search, rack and ransack all
corners and quarters of the world? That Woman for her lost groa^, or these
Gentiles in the verse here precedent, not half so painfully. But for that true
wealth and honor, and those immortal pleasures of the Kingdom which is to
come, as if they would come of themselves, though we would gladly enjoy them
when we can no longer hold these, other yet travel or trouble for them in the
mean time, we would not willingly suffer any. As if we thought to light on this
Kingdom of God, as Saul did on his, whilst we seek Cattle in the desert. Here
we can be content to look on the Lilies of the Field (as our Savior a little
before wills) but with a contrary intention, and would willingly be clothed
with Immortality and Glory, but on their condition, neque laborant neque nent,
so we might neither labor nor spin for it. No voice so welcome to our ears as
that of Moses at the red Sea, Stand still and see the salvation of God: or that
of St. Paul to the Romans, He was found of those that sought him not. It is
strange we can trust God for nothing, that concerns this life and the good
things of it, without our utmost industry and endeavor: and yet can be
confident in him for the blessings of the future, though we stir neither foot
nor finger in the prosecution of them. As if my Text were to be inverted, and
first seeking these things, we supposed the Kingdom of God were to be added out
of his providence and without our care. All care and thought of our own
seeking, seems to be drowned in the conceit of his drawing. That of our Savior
is so much in our eye as we can hardly see any thing else. Nemo venit nisi
Pater traxerit. And it is most true, unless God prevent us with his Grace and
draw us unto himself, we of our selves shall never, can never come unto God.
But do we utterly want that attractive Grace, or rather do we not draw back,
and turn the Grace of God into wantonness, as the Apostle speaks? For how does
God draw, or whom? though he draw, yet he does not drag: he draws Men and not
blocks, so draws one way, as yet refractory dispositions may and too often do
another: if any man shall draw back, my soul shall hate him, Heb. x. There are
but two ways to work upon the heart of Man, Power or Persuasion: That is
possible only to the omnipotence of God; this proper to the rational nature of
Man. And it pleases God usually to deal with Men according to their nature,
Quos sic movet, ut motus suos agere sinat, whom he so moves (says St. Austin
lib. 7. de civit. Dei cap. 30.) as he yet permits to be their own movers; yea
when he moves most effectually, yet he moves not but congruously also. So says
the Wise man of him and his providence, pertingit a fine usque ad finem
fortiter, and disponit omnia suaviter: powerfully first yet sweetly also, that
is, aptly and sutably to their nature and disposition; He draws them indeed,
yet not by the heels, but by the ear, qui audivit and didicit, he that has
heard and learned of my Father comes. The very next verse unto that former in
the 6. of St. John gives the way of drawing, by instruction not by impulsion.
Rational Men therefore must expect rational means, direction and instruction. I
will inform thee in the way wherein thou shall walk, I will guide thee with
mine eye. Bitt and bridle that hold in by force, as it follows, are for horse
and mule, that have no understanding. Not a word of his mouth, not a motion of
his spirit, not a benefit of his grace and favor, but are as so many cords to
draw us unto himself, and so himself testifies in the Prophet Hosea, I took the
yoke from their neck and I laid meat before them, In funibus Adami, and loris
amatoriis atiraxi eos, I drew them with the cords of a man, with the bonds of
love. The love indeed and goodness of the Lord laying meat before them, as the
Keeper draws his Call, proposing a Kingdom as in this place (and what may draw
if such a Kingdom cannot?) especially when the gracious motions of his Spirit
unto yours are not wanting, and the like. These are the cords and bands,
wherewith he drew them; and with which intelligent Men should be drawn, and
well therefore styled funiculi hominis, the cords of a Man: All other Physical
traction being the cords of Carts and Carriages, of beasts and blocks rather
than Men. And when God thus draws and allures, it will concern Man highly to
obey and follow the attraction. We may not think to stand idly under the
influence of Grace, like Fruit Trees under the beams of the Sun; much less hang
under the attraction like dead and inanimate trunks; least of all hale another
way; but being prevented by Divine Grace (for you are not under the Law, but
under Grace, says St. Paul) it will behove us to cooperate; having received a
Talent, to negotiate; a gift, to stir up the gift of God that is in us, as the
same Apostle unto Timothy, ne quis desit gratiae Dei, lest wanting not grace in
himself he himself chance to be wanting unto his grace, Heb. xii 15. Rightly
therefore the Spouse in the Canticles, trahe me post te, and curremus, draw me
after thee, and we will run, Cant. i. 4. And it should be the resolution of
every one else, for that of St. Austin is most true, Qui fecit te sine te, non
salvabit te sine te: he that made thee without thy self, will not save thee
without thy pains: fecit nescientem, non justificat nisi volentem, he made you
without your knowledge, he will not justify you without your will and
endeavor, much less glorify. Nemo coronatur nist certaverit, no Man shall
receive the Crown unless he strive for it; or be conveyed into this Kingdom
like Philip to Azo^us, unless he seek it, and seek it in the right way, as he
is here directed, by Righteousness, even the Righteousness of God, seek the
kingdom of God and his righteousness.

As no man finds unless he seeks: So every one that seeks does not presently
find, unless he seek in the right way. If he err in this, the more eagerly he
seeks, the more he errs, it is but Cursus celerrimus praeter viam, and then the
farther he runs, the farther still from his home. Above all things therefore it
concerns us to be sure of the right way before we run on too furiously. And
sure the way were not hard to be discovered, but that it is now almost
overgrown like the rest of the field, for want of passengers. It is indeed unto
humane corruption something tedious and troublesome, rough and rocky; which is
the reason men have diverted into so many bypath of their own, hoping to find
out some shorter cut or at least a more pleasant passage into the Kingdom. In
this kind certainly, we have had seeking enough yea and too much: every one
almost bending his wits how he may best shape the course of Religion suitable
unto his own fancy and affections: Setting up his own Ladder, as St. Austin
said of that Heretic, that so he may climb to Heaven alone by a way which
none ever went before him; but wherein he supposes every man thenceforth is
bound to follow him. Yea by this means so many Paths and several Alleys have
been beaten out, as a Maze may sooner be trodden than such intricate
labyrinths: and (which is more) every man contending so earnestly for his own
track, as he condemns and even damns all others that tread never so little
besides his footsteps. Not considering that men may come to the same place by
several tracts, if they run on in the same road. So long as they agree in
necessary truths and fundamentals, which is via regia, the Kings high way, or
rather the high way unto the Kingdom, they may differ in such as are disputable
and doubtful; and yet both come safe enough thither. And yet we may not much
complain; so it has ever fared and will fare with the Church of Christ.
Errors if not heresies must needs be, that they who love the Truth may be the
better approved. But what then is to be done in this case? Amidst these doubts
and disputes where shall we fasten for that approbation? sure no way in the
world so safe and secure as this (the foundation we hold in common, standing
unshaken) to let go disputes, and fall unto practice; leave the unhappy fatal
tree of Knowledge, and betake us to the tree of Life: that since we cannot
otherwise find truth, or else agree in it; we may at least seek righteousness
by which we shall certainly find both agreement and truth a great deal the
sooner. For seeking truth too earnestly, unnecessary truth, we may easily lose
righteousness and truth too. Virtue and Vice (as he said well) being commonly
at truce, whilst truth and error are at wars; but seeking righteousness in
peace we shall hardly fail of truth, Stand up from the dead, faith the Apostle,
and Christ shall give thee light, Ephesians. v. And blessed therefore ever be the
Counsels of his Royal breast, whose high prudence by damming up these waters of
Marah in their Fountain and chasing away bitter disputes, that began to
overflow this, as they have drowned almost other Countries, has both reserved
truth to more deliberate and appeased cogitations hereafter, and given peace
unto the Church for the present: That so the clashing of Truth and Error
(indeed truth and truth, error and error) being silenced, Righteousness and
peace may meet, and kiss each other the more freely. And that sure will be
found the right and best way too at the last. For most assuredly when all
contestations are terminated, when all these Sophismes and subtilties of the
Schools, Subtilitates ultramundanae and plusquam Chrysippeae, Subtilties, as he
said, beyond the Moon, and such as Chrysippus never dreamt on, shall vanish
into air, leave and forsake us utterly, it will be righteousness only that
shall do us good in the end; this righteousness of God and our faithful
endeavor in it, that shall be able to give peace and comfort to the Soul in
death, and through death lead and light it into immortality and life. No way in
the world, no Righteousness thither, but this only the good way, the way which
the Prophet Samuel long since discovered, I will show you the good and the
right way, fear the Lord and serve him in truth, and consider how great things
he has done for you. A good and a right, and therefore a right good way. Not
that every way which is good, is presently right, (some may have the zeal of
God but not according to knowledge) but than undoubtedly it cannot be right,
unless it be good. Whatsoever way it be, if it cross or part with goodness, it
will in the same place certainly part with verity: where it leaves
rightousness, we may be sure it leaves truth; the true Doctrine being always,
as the Apostle testifies of it, Doctrine secundum pietatem, a doctrine
according unto piety, I Tim. So Rectum est index sui and obliqui, That which is
right, does both discover it self and other things that are crooked. But be the
doctrine never so right and righteous, yet if the man be not so, to what
purpose is it? Had he all truth and were endued with the knowledge of all
mysteries; yet if he detain that truth in unrighteousness, it should profit him
nothing, but to augment that wrath of God, which, says the Apostle, is already
revealed from Heaven against him. When on the other side, did he know nothing
else, nothing but Christ and him crucified, (as St. Paul desired to know no
more) yet walking faithfully in that path of Righteousness, which he has
taught and ^rodden out before him; his ignorance of other controvertible
truths, or suspension either, I think would hurt him but little. For
Righteousness naturally does lead into truth, and unless men did first forsake
it, they could hardly run into dangerous error. For were not the Soul depraved
with unrighteous lusts, and the judgment of the mind perverted by corrupt
affections, it could not easily resist apparent truth, or not discern manifest
falsehood. But when the will gives it self over to be ruled by the appetite, no
marvel if the intellect (naturally subject unto the will^) be as easily wrapped
in error. Ambition and Avarice, and desire of sinning; with sting of
Conscience, having once seized upon the Scribes and Pharisees, of old, what
strange leaven were they soon brought to mingle with the bread of life? And how
mightily have the same affections since wrought in many more? Hence, as from
the Trojan Horse, so many impious, but profitable deceits and devices have
issued forth upon ignorant people: on the one side, dispensing with them for
their own sins, and dispensing to them other men's merits, the imaginary
treasure of the Church, that the Church might be filled with real. Hence what
strange positions, and unto Piety most dangerous have been formed, on the other
side? establishing justification even in the loss of sanctification;
presumptuously clothing themselves and their disciples with the righteousness
of another even then when they are wilfully unrighteous in themselves. And so,
not content upon repentance to be justified by imputation, but have found out,
even then whilst they sin, an imputative (indeed a mere putative)
sanctification; that by this means amidst the works of darkness, in the
paradise of conceit, they may still remain Children of light. But be not
deceived, says St. John, he that does righteousness, is righteous. All which,
though spisse and palpable hallucinatious on both parts; yet so long as the eye
is not single, as our Savior speaks, but blear'd with mists of profits and
pleasures, they may not easily be deceived, less easily redressed in either.
They may term themselves as they please; but so long as impure desires are
seated in the Soul, nothing shall be able to tie them to the purity of that
truth which opposes, or withhold them from contending for such falsehoods as
suit with those desires. Itching ears and lusts in the spirits, neither will
nor can endure sound Doctrine, says the Apostle. But rather than fail, will
raise up unto themselves Teachers after their own lusts, and at their own
charge raise preserments for them too, that so their hired tongues may tickle
their ears when they itch, smooth or smother their sins; In this case who shall
prevail, or what shall give Men light, if in favor of their evil ways, they
love darkness more than light? It is only the search and study of Righteousness
that can bring us into the way of truth, and dissolve errors, and their
controversies, by taking away their causes: by removing those gross and earthly
affections that like Foggs at noon darken and benight the judgment. The pure
and cleansed heart shall see God, says our Savior; see him perfectly
hereafter; see of him and his truth more clearly in the present; as he does
elsewhere assure us. If any man does the will of my Father, he shall know of my
doctrine. But besides the nature of Righteousness, leading into truth, the
protection and providence divine seems specially to assist and direct it. The
very secrets of the Lord, says King David, are upon them that fear him; who
himself having respect unto the Commandment, became wiser than his Teachers.
But however secrets, yet light enough sure shall ever spring up unto the
righteous, who have undoubted interest in the promise of that Comforter, which
unto the worlds end, shall lead into all truth; all that is necessary for the
leading of them, when this world ends, into the glory of a better: yea and
teach them mildness in truths of less consequence for the present. For did we
follow righteousness and not pride and passion, we should easily learn to enter
on mysteries warily, and to maintain our opinions soberly. And when the strife
is peradventure, but about a cracked pane in the Window; or a loose tyle in the
Roof, as he said well; not to raise such stirs and outcryes as if the
Foundation were presently endangered. It is only the judgment which
Righteousness has cleared from perturbations, that can discern the necessity
of points, and direct our prosecution accordingly; instructing us not to call
every problematical question by the name of necessary and infallible truth; but
agreeing in fundamentals, either to leave superedifications to the trial of
that fire, which will prove whether they are Gold or Stubble; or else dispure
them so calmly, as neither peace be disturbed, nor charity destroyed;
according, si non sententiis, saltem animis, if not in opinion, yet in love and
affection.

And for these regards and many more (indeed any but that of imputation) is
justly termed his Righteousness, the Righteousness of God. It is that Image of
the Father, the chief lineaments of that similitude of God, wherein we were at
the first formed, and whereunto we are still created: Created unto good works
that we might walk in them, Ephesians. ii. 10. It is the end and purpose of the Sons
Redemption, That we being delivered from the hands of our enemies, might serve
him in holiness and righteousness, before him all the days of our lives. The
intent and effect of the Spirits vocation, for we are called not to
uncleanness, but to holiness, and that not outwardly only by the word, but
inwardly by the power of the Holy Ghost; cleansing from all filthiness of Flesh
and Spirit, that he may purge unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good
works; yea it is, I say, not the form that does justify in it self; but the
quality that only can qualify for justification and entitle unto it, as it is
taken for remission of sins in Christ. Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, that they may have right unto the tree of life, Revel. xxii. That
tree of life is Christ; in whom without Righteousness, no Man has any right:
who came by water and blood, says the same St. John elsewhere: first cleansing
and then pardoning. For as he does sanctify as well as justify; so I take it
he does first sanctify before he justify, and no longer justify than he does
sanctify. Lastly, it is the direct and unavoidable means, though not merit of
glorification: without holiness no man shall see God, nor any enter into the
Kingdom of God.

So many ways is it the Righteousness of God; and so many ways no less
necessary for Man, as being indeed All in All; the fullness of the Law, the full
effect of the Gospel, the substance of Gods revealed will in both, This is the
will of God even your sanctification. But what then becomes of Faith? for this
seems to be altogether work? Is that nothing unto the way that leads unto the
Kingdom? Surely yes, much every way, but yet without Righteousness not any
thing: For Faith is not opposite to Righteousness, but a part of it; the very
fountain or root from whence it is immediately derived. For true Faith is ever
that of the Heart not of the Brain, and with the heart man believes unto
righteousness. It is neither Faith nor Works apart and severed, that can do us
good, but Fides operans a working faith; faith working by love, and love is the
fulfilling of the law, says the Apostle. This is that active Faith so much
magnified in the xi. to the Hebrews, by the power whereof those Worthies there,
of whom the world was nor worthy, besides many other great things, especially
wrought righteousness: and gained the promises, v. 33. And to these and the
like Worthies it is that that Angel points in the Revel. Hi sunt, These are
they that keep the Commandments of God and the faith of Jesus. To show that
none keep his faith as they should, that do not keep his Commandments,
Revel.xiv. 12.. Indeed it is the keeping not the believing of the Faith that is
available. I have kept the faith, says St. Paul, henceforth is laid up for me
Corona Justitiae, a Crown of righteousness. Faith kept is Righteousness; and
such faithful righteousness only it is, that shall be crowned at last.
Righteousness therefore the only way unto the Kingdom: and so by all those that
would come thither, of all things else and in all regards most especially to be
sought for, with their best strength and utmost endeavor. For it is not
quaerite, but primum quaerite not seek only, but seek ye first, The last point,
but must be briefly handled, though indeed it has two points.

As First has a double signification: for it either respects

The actions of Piety and Righteousness are the highest and noblest operations
of the Soul, and therefore of more worth; They run cross and counter to the
bent of our corrupt affections; and so of more difficulty, than may be lightly
and easily archieved. Indeed facilis descensus averni, it is a descent down the
hill, the swing of our own corruptions can carry us headlong thither; but the
way of life is on high, said King Solomon. Virtue must upwards and hale the
heavy body after it; climb Hills, and craggy Mountains: hic labor hoc opus,
this is not without sweat and difficulty. But notwithstanding all difficulties,
virtus aut inveniet aut faciet viam. The spirit of God by the power of that
almighty faith, to which all things are possible, will and must break through
them all. To do good and suffer evil, to deny our selve^ and take up the Cross,
to ^ubdue lusts and root out affections, and the like, till it come to that
point, these are justitiae culmina the heights and steps of righteousness, and
up we must, though like Jonathan, and his Armo^bearer, we creep on all four,
hands and knees for it, on the knees of humble and fervent prayer; but using
the hands too, faithful and diligent endeavor: And therefore it is not every
cold and careless seeking that will be sufficient. The way is narrow and the
gate strait: contendite intrare, strive, says our Savior, for many shall seek
(seek negligently) and shall not be able to enter. Nay more than strive, and
struggle too. I press hard, says the Apostle, for the price of the high
calling which is in Christ Jesus. He well knew that though no Man be Crowned
unless he strive for it; yet that every striving does not presently gain the
Crown, nisi legitime certaverit, unless he strive as he ought. And therefore he
fought not as those that beat the air, but as he that means to conquer: for
even this Kingdom is not gained, but by conquest. The Kingdom of heaven suffers
violence, and the violent take it by force. In this point we need not fear
offending in excess. Modus amandi Deum, est sine modo amare, the measure of
loving God is to love him without measure. In opinions indeed and disputes that
have their extremes, moderation may be good and commendable, (disputants in
heat and passion, supposing they are never far enough asunder till both be
equally sundred from the truth, and then in this case to halt, as they say,
between two opinions, may be to walk most uprightly) but no such here; to halt
between two Masters, between God and Mammon, God and Belial, God and Baal is
most insufferable, yea more than the clear rejection of him. Utinamcalidus
esses aut frigidus, I would you were hot or cold, says the Lord to some in the
Revelations. As if since they were not thoroughly hot, he had rather by much
they were utterly cold, than in that faint temper between both: fit for naught
but evomition, as is there threatened; for the indignation of God rises at
nothing so much, as when Men neither so cold as to contemn Religion, nor yet so
hot as to forsake their sins, present him with a cooler mixture of both. Better
therefore be a pure Gentile, or a graceless sinner; than a compounded and
perfunctory Christian; worse than either, and harder to be cured; his
mediocrity being grown venerable unto the world and himself, under the show and
title of calmness, and moderation. For which cause, that may be verified of
these our Savior said of others, Publicans and harlots shall sooner enter the
kingdom of heaven. If we mean to find entrance there, it may not be by the
formal and falsehearted seeking, seek the Lord and you shall find him, but if
you seek him with all your heart and with all your soul: otherwise instead of
finding a Kingdom we may chance to fall upon a curse. Cursed be he that does
the work of the Lord negligently. Seek ye therefore first with all Industry and
with all speed too: that it may be the first thing you seek, every way first,
in time as well as in intention. Death is uncertain and delays are dangerous;
whilst we take farther day unto our selves, enlarging our time, as the rich
Fool did his Barns, God oftentimes derides us as he did him. Stulte hac nocte,
Thou Fool this night shall thy soul be taken from thee. And who in his own
particular knows the length and date of this his day? who can tell how many
hours there are in it, or how many of them are spent already? How soon that
now, that henceforth of obstruction and blindness may come upon him, and
refusing to cleanse his Soul whilst the Spirit, like that Angel in the Pool of
Bethesda, is moving the waters; how suddenly he may fall under that fearful
Sentence of the same Spirit in the Revelation, He that is filthy, let him be
filthy still. If that Fig Tree were cursed even before the time of fruit in
comparison was come, before the Gospel was thoroughly published; may not those
that have lived long under the bright beams and Sunshine of it, and still
bring forth naught but leaves, of show and formality, have just cause to fear
every moment the approach and probation of that final and fatal doom, Never
fruit grow on thee more? Whilst Men in their presumption are sporting
themselves and grieving God with their sins, God in his wrath, in the mean
while, may be swearing they shall never enter into his rest. Undoubtedly did
the rays of true wisdom and divine pierce into the Soul; had the heart any true
impression of future things or of the vanity of the present; did Men taste and
relish the good gift of God and the powers of the world to come; they would not
permit any quiet to their Spirits or peace unto their Souls, till their Souls
had made and gained peace with their God, and freed themselves from such
uncertainties. This is the Haven of our Rest, and Heaven upon Earth, and we
that see it may well say unto our Souls, better than he did say, but saw it
not, O quid agis anima me^? fortiter occupa portum: what do thou O my Soul?
the Port is before thee; steer away before Sea and Wind manfully; foul weather
is behind thee, make haste to escape the stormy Wind and Tempest. And however
there should chance not to be any, for there may be room for misericordia
Domini inter pontem and fontem, He has not shut up life nor the gate of his
mercy upon any: yet it will concern wise men to fear the worst, that is more
likely, and prevent it, whilst they have time; to work the work of the Lord
whilst it is yet high day, before that dreadful and terrible night approach
wherein no man can work. To defer it to the eleventh hour, to the evening and
twilight, were a presumption too full of boldness; especially since our Sun may
set at noon and our light go out in the midst of our life. For we are but dust
as our Fathers were; and the Spirit of the Lord will not always strive with us.
Let us therefore laying aside all delays be resolute and vigilant, attending
speedily to open when it pleases him to knock; when he calls, instantly to
answer, Lo I come; when he says, seek ye my face, to echo immediately, thy face
Lord, will I seek. So seeking his face in holiness here, you may be sure to see
it in glory hereafter. In the mean time, that God who has added all things
else plentifully unto you all, abundantly unto one, continue and multiply his
favors unto all, but principally and above all unto that one. For since it is
one of the last services your Majesty, before your journey, is to receive from
this place, I would not willingly leave it, without one word of apprecation.
For though I may not bless, yet I may pray: God almighty whom you seek and
serve, has blessed you ever hitherto; and may his faithfulness and truth be
your shield and protection ever hereafter. He that went with Abraham in his
Journey, be with you in yours: Let him lead you forth in peace, and to the joy
of all hearts, return you again in safety. May he carry you from Crown unto
Crown, from one Kingdom to another upon earth; and having ministered all things
else unto you according to your hearts desire here, may he at last, (and let
that be late) minister an entrance unto you also abundantly into his own
Kingdom, this Kingdom of God. Whereunto the same God of his infinite mercy
vouchsafe to bring us all for and in the meritorious blood of his dearly
beloved Son and our most blessed Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen. Laus Deo in aeternum.
A PREPARATION FOR THE Holy COMMUNION.
SERMON VIII. Upon 1 COR. XI. 28.
But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread and drink of
that Cup.
THE holy but fearful Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord as it is the
highest and noblest Institution the Christian Religion has: so is it to be
approached unto with the greatest reverence and regard. For as it affords
inestimable comfort to the worthy participant: so not less danger and terror
to the unworthy Receiver. He that takes it must know he takes a powerful
medicine, that will work one way or other; either cure or kill, prove wholesome
Physic, or deadly poison. As the patient is prepared, so it works this way or
that; even either life or death. For the blood which is received, if it do not
wash and cleanse, it will^ certainly stain and die the Soul of the Receiver:
which must be made partaker, or shall be made guilty: either partaker of the
virtue, or guilty of the shedding thereof to his endless destruction that
receives it unworthily. The guilt you have in the precedent Verse, He shall be
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. The destruction in the subsequent, he
eats and drinks damnation to himself not discerning the Lords body. The
exhortation in my Text lies between both, that it might be the more vehemently
enforced, and every man might know how much it behooves him diligently to
examine himself before he eat of that bread and drink of that Cup, But let a
man examine, etc. Wherein you see there are two general parts: first a
preparation, then an admission unto the blessed Sacrament of the body and blood
of our Savior. The Admission in the latter part, Let him eat; and the
preparation in the former, but first let a man examine, etc. Of the holy
Sacrament it self and an admission unto it, hereafter; at this time only of the
preparation that should go before it. Wherein you may consider, 1. The Act
wherein it consists, Examination; and then the object of that Act, himself. Let
a man, etc. But we shall run both together, and out of both draw these points,
which we will commend to your observation.

1. Because the end of examination is to prepare our selves, we will show the
necessity of this preparation. 2. That we may know wherein to examine our
selves, we will consider the quality and extent of that preparation which is
necessary, for the making and constituting of a worthy Receiver. 3. We will
show that the best means to attain unto this due preparation^ or qualification,
is the study and knowledge of our selves and our own ways. 4. Because the heart
of man is deceitful above all things, and we are all apt to deceive our selves
in judging of our selves, that it is not a superficial view but a strict
examination that must give the just and true knowledge of our selves. 5. And
lastly, we will make and practice this examination in those points we have
found necessary: that after it they who are approved in their own Consciences,
may cheerfully approach unto the sacred Mysteries, and eat of that bread and
drink of that Cup to their endless comfort; and others that are not so, (as I
think few are) may first reform themselves, lest they eat and drink as the
Apostle here threatens, damnation to themselves: So these five, The necessity
of preparation, and what the prepation is that is so necessary: That the best
means to attain it, is the knowledge of our selves; and the best way to come to
this knowledge, examination: which examination because it is the chief point,
we will strictly make, in the last place, that according to it, we may either
approve or reform our selves before we presume to come to the dreadful
Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord: These 5. I say we shall at this
time as God shall enable, prosecute in their order; but plainly, as desirous to
leave you rather better than more learned. And first of the first, the
necessity of preparation, But let a man examine, etc.
The end of examination is preparation; for to examine and not to prepare our
selves, were but to see our own foulness and refuse to cleanse it; to inquire
into our Lords will, and neglect it when we have done: and that will only make
us worthy of more stripes. And therefore he that commands the one, does in the
same words of necessity injoin the other. And indeed holy and Divine Mysteries
as in reason they require an holy and sanctified preparation; so in Scripture
has it ever been prescribed and exacted at their hands, that shall draw near
unto them: yea the very Heathen Priests would not enter upon their
Superstitious Ceremonies to their false Gods without first proclaiming a,
procul este profani, all profane and unhallowed persons be ye far away. And it
was the use in the Primitive Church for the Minister as it is in St. Basils
Liturgy, or the Deacon his Assistant as Chrysostom has it, To cry with a loud
voice before the Communion Sancta Sanctis, holy things pertain unto holy
people. And for this cause it was that the Lord gave such strict command in Law
that no uncircumcised person should presume to eat of the Paschal Lamb; nor yet
any circumcised neither under four days preparation and sanctification of
themselves. Exodus xii. 48. xxii. 6.
With what reverence then and awful regard should we draw near unto the true
Passover, in the blessed Sacrament, which succeeds in the room of that other?
and exceeds it too, no less than the substance does the shadow, than the body
and blood of the Son of God, does the flesh and blood of a Lamb, taken from the
flock? To show this, our Savior himself at his last supper, arises from the
Table, takes the Basin and the Towel, washes and wipes his Disciples feet
before he would institute his blessed Sacrament or suffer them to be
Communicants at it. Now by the feet in holy Scripture are meant the affections
of the heart; for as by the feet the body walks, so by the affections the Soul
moves to whatsoever it desires: They are the springs and Fountains of all her
vital operations; and as the Fountains are, such are the streams; if those be
troubled, these will be foul; if they be cleansed, the other will run clear.
And therefore these feet, these affections of the heart being once washed (the
meditations of the head, the words of the mouth and the actions of the hand,
which are but rivers flowing from the abundance of the heart and the hearts
affections) cannot but partake of the same purity. For which reason when Peter
who at the first was not willing to be washed at all, afterward was desirous to
have all washed, his head and his hands as well as his feet; our Savior
replies, he that is washed needs not to wash save his feet only, for then he
is clean every whit, Joh. xiii. 10. The feet then, the affections of the Soul,
on whose cleanness does depend the purity of the whole man and all his actions;
these are they that our Savior by this act of his own does instruct us
carefully to wash and cleanse, before they tread a step toward his holy Table.
How can they there expect to be partakers of him, who himself in that place
told Peter that without this washing he could have no part in him? They
frustrate the end and benefit of the holy Sacrament, they prostitute the
blessed mysteries themselves, they dishonor both them and the Majesty of that
God who is present at and in them; who presume with unwasht feet, unhallowed
affections to enter upon the sacred Symbols sanctified with the peculiar
presence of the precious body and blood of the Son of the everliving God. No
marvel therefore if such profaners of this blood are held as guilty of the
shedding of it which was purposely shed to cleanse them from the guilt of their
sins; if instead of sealing salvation to their own Souls they do but eat
damnation to themselves for not discerning the body of their Lord. For did they
discern it, did they understand and conceive it to be there, they could not but
approach unto it with greater reverence, with much more heed and awful regard.
When it was at the worst and lowest estate the malicious Jews could bring it
to, bereaved of all form and beauty, yea and of that blessed Soul which dwelt
within it; and now remained only a dead and crucified Carkase, all over gaping
with wounds, and gored with blood; yet even then with what care and reverent
respect was it handled by the good Arimathean? It was wrapped up in fine and
clean Linen, imbalmed with sweet Oyntmens and perfumes, and laid in a new
Sepulcher hewn out of the Rock: How then and with what high esteem should we,
(we that are to be made not Sepulchers, but Shrines and Temples, not of his
ignominious, but glorified body, not of his body only, but of his whole person,
of his body and blood and Soul and Divinity and all) how I say and with what
diligent preparation should we see that all things be pure and clean, and
sweet, and new, where such a guest is to be entertained, where he is not to be
lodged for a night or two, but to inhabit, where he is not to lie a while as in
the grave, but to dwell and live for ever? This were something to the purpose,
and we should then show we discerned the Lords body, which now we seem not at
all to regard; eating and drinking of his flesh and blood with no more
reverence and respect, than if we were at an ordinary Table of Bread and Wine.
Nay I assure my self, many of us make more preparation, being but to dine with
some Neighbor; than they do to come to the great Kings supper. They can with
all diligence apparel and trim up the outward man, against every ordinary
feast; in the mean time neglecting the inward man of the Soul, little regarding
how foul and slovenly that comes to the holy Banquet. But let such careless men
in time take heed; the wrath of the Lord has never shown it self more
terribly, than on the profaners of holy things, especially his own holy
presence. Many and fearful are the examples in this kind. The great King of
Babel no sooner polluted the Sanctified Vessels, but even whilst he is
carrouzing in the bowls of the Temple, a strange hand from heaven writes his
doom on the wall before him: the terror whereof loses the joints of his
loins, and makes his knees knock one against another: which was but a
forerunner of his ruin, who that night lost at once both his Kingdom and his
life. But how dreadful was that judgment in the 1 of Sam. vi. where fifty
thousand Souls are suddenly struck dead for but looking irreverently into the
holy Ark; and Uzzah instantly smitten with the like vengeance for but touching
it with profane hands, though with a good intent to hold it up when in his
judgment it was like to fall? And shall we who are permitted (I say not, to
touch or to look into the moveable, but) to walk into the standing Ark, the
Temple of the Lord, yea to enter in within the Vail and approach up even to the
Mercy-seat, and eat of the holy show bread that stands before the Lord, if we
continue to pollute that sacred place and banquet with our unwasht feet,
unclean and impure affections, shall we think to escape alone without wrath
from Heaven? Let no Soul flatter it self with such a bold and mad presumption.
The divine indignation that in former times was wont ever almost to follow such
profanations at the heels, though in these later ages the great day of final
accounts drawing on, it seem to slacken the pace; yet it will certainly
overtake them one time or other, if not here in this world, yet infallibly in
that other hereafter, though oftentimes even in this also.

Even at this instant when the Apostle wrote this very Chapter, the Lord had
sent a fearful sickness amongst the Corinthians, and that for this very cause,
their profaning of the Sacrament; as you may read the words immediately
following my Text. For this cause, says he, some are even now sick, others
weak, and many amongst you fallen asleep; that is, taken away by bodily death.
But however it go with us now, yet at that day when the great King shall come
to take a particular view of his guests, he will not fail to find out all those
careless people, that have presumed to sit down at his table without their
wedding garments, and pronounce upon them that heavy doom in the Gospel, take
them, bind them hand and foot, and cast them into utter darkness, there shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth. So necessary is this duty of reverent
preparation, and so great the necessity urged upon the high terms of no less
than plagues and punishments here, and destruction for ever hereafter. So true
is that of our Apostle, he that eats unworthily does but eat judgment unto
himself; so the word imports, judgment temporal, though he repent, and without
repentance damnation eternal; and that in so heinous a manner as if he were
guilty of the very body and blood of the Lord, no less than the cruel Jews that
shed the one and crucified the other, or treacherous Judas that betrayed both.
Well then, necessary it is and highly: But to come to the second point, let us
now see what the preparation is that is so necessary: wherein it consists, and
how far it extends that must denominate and make a worthy Receiver. Surely
though no Man living be Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, Love and Charity, Love to
God and Charity to our Brethren, I suppose, are the chief if not all. And these
sure at least are simply necessary, by them we must examine and with them we
must prepare our selves, whosoever will be worthy Receivers.

First with Knowledge, Knowledge
an honest degree of knowledge, what the mysteries are, what they signify and
exhibit: for what purpose they were ordained of God and are received by our
selves. Thus much seems requisite in the meanest capacity; for so long as we
are ignorant of the substantial parts and fundamental doctrine of the
Sacrament, so long as we neither know nor consider the main ends and purposes
for which it was instituted, how can we possibly prepare our selves worthily to
receive it? we shall fall short for want of discerning the body of the Lord.
And in this every Man ought to examine himself; and many Men others too as well
as themselves. It is not the proper duty of the Minister of God only to
Catechize: every Father and Mother of a Family, is or ought to be in this
regard as a Minister within his own charge. It is our part, not to be still
laying of the Foundations and Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, but to lead
you on toward perfection, Heb. vi. 1. As St. Peter the Apostle said of
ministering at Tables, nay as St. Paul of Baptism it self, I was not sent to
baptize but to preach: So we may much more say of Catechizing, We were not sent
to Catechize but to preach the Gospel: our office is to dispense the Word and
Sacraments, yours it is properly to prepare: yours it is to teach and instruct
your Children and Servants, that they may be fit and capable to receive both;
though the sloth and ignorance of these times, to your sin and shame, has cast
this burden wholly upon our shoulders, most Fathers for the want of willingness
or knowledge deserving to be Catechized no less than the Children that are
under them; yea in my understanding much more, having lost in their age, that
little which they learned in their youth.

The second qualification is Faith; Faith.
without it, it is impossible to please God; as in any other duties we can
exhibit unto him, so especially in this of the Sacrament. It is the eye of the
Soul, by which we behold and look upon; the hand by which we lay hold and
apprehend; the very mouth by which we eat and receive the Body and Blood of our
Redeemer, given and applied unto us in these mystical figures. Non dentes sed
fidem, prepare not therefore thy teeth but thy Faith, says St. Aug. for creed
and manducasti, believe and thou have eaten. And for this duty, we suppose
there needs little preparation or trial, every Man thinks he can readily assure
and acquit himself in the performance; but when we come to examination anon, we
shall find it a harder matter than we imagine, to believe aright and as we
ought.

The third of these preparatory qualifications is Repentance, Repentance.
which though it be also generally required as precedaneous unto all sacrifices
and services which we offer unto God, according to that of the Apostle, Let him
depart front iniquity, whosoever will call upon the name of the Lord: yet the
more holy and sacred the actions are, the more especially ought we to cleanse
our selves and purge our sins and corruptions before we go about them: for I
will be sanctified says the Lord in those that draw near unto me: And nearer
well we cannot draw unto God or God unto us, than in this Sacrament; ordained
of purpose to join and unite both in one. But do we think his pure and precious
body will vouchsafe to be received and dwell in an unclean and polluted Soul?
shall this bread, panis de Coelo, bread from Heaven, the Childrens bread, as it
is in the Gospel, and indeed the food of Angels, shall it be given, do we
imagine, unto whelps? shall these precious Pearls of the Gospel shell'd up in
Divine Mysteries be opened and cast unto Swine? shall the cup of the Testament
be given unto him, that has nothing to do with the Covenant? surely no, What
have thou to do, says God in the Psalms, to take my Covenant in thy mouth so
long as thou hate to be reformed? to take it in thy mouth so much as by
naming of it; how much less have thou to do to take the blood of the Covenant
in thy mouth by receiving it, so long as thou refusest to reform thy self by
true Repentance? This therefore is the main and principal part of our
qualification wherein we cannot be too diligent and careful: and the other of
Love is like unto it.

Of Love Love.
first unto God who has shown such mavelous Love unto us, and from us should
receive all Love and thankfulness again. And then unto our brethren, that as
God has loved us, so should we also show Love and Mercy unto one another.

In regard of the first, this blessed Sacrament is well termed the Eucharist,
that is, the Sacrament of thanksgiving, wherein by the assistance of the
blessed Spirit we do in all thankfulness and grateful return of our best
affections, solemnly commemorate the wonderful Love of the Son that suffered,
and the infinite goodness and mercy of the Father that gave him to death for
the sins of the world. In regard of the other (the Love of our brethren) it is
as rightly styled a Communion, that is, a common union for so it is doubly, a
common union of our selves amongst our selves, and of all unto our Savior; But
first we must be united unto one another, before we be united unto him: as we
drink of one cup and eat of one bread, so we must be knit into one body
mystical by Love, or we shall never be knit unto our head Christ Jesus by
Faith. What union can thou expect with him so long as thou art at variance
with those for whom he died? His blood was shed for us all whilst we were yet
enemies, and shall we think we may drink it, and in it remission of sins to our
selves, so long as we refuse to remit the sins of another? can we hope or
expect that mercy from God, which we will not show to our own flesh? No, no, if
without this thou think to receive any favor from him, or look he should
receive or accept any sacrifice from thee, thou deceivest thy self. It is his
rule in the Gospel, If when thou come to offer at his Altar, thou remembrest
that thy Brother has ought against thee, leave thy gift there, go and first be
reconciled to him, then come and offer thine oblation, Ecce honorem suum
despicit, dum in proximo charitatem requirit. Behold (says Chrysostom.) how he
prefers thy Charity before his own honor; who will not accept of any
sacrifice to himself, till thou have shown love to thy neighbor. And so here
these four, Knowledge, Faith, Repentance and Love, are as you see the principal
qualifications wherewith due preparation must of necessity adorn and beautify
the Soul; they are the several parts, whereof that Wedding Garment must be made
up, wherewith it is to be arrayed, and wherein every one must appear that would
be held and accepted of God for a worthy Receiver. And thus much of the first
points, the preparation and the necessity of it drawn from the phrase and
commanding force of the Text, Let a man examine himself, for this [ Let] is not
permissive, let him do it if he will, or if he will not let him choose, but
mandatory and imperative, let him see and be sure that he does it: and that
under pain of damnation, as it follows in the next verse.

Proceed we now in the third place unto the act whereby that preparation is
made, and these qualifications are best attained unto, and that is a diligent
search and examination of our selves and ways. Let a Man examine himself. For
certainly the readiest way and directest unto due preparation is the true and
faithful knowledge of the right temper and disposition of our own Souls. And
therefore next unto the book of God, Man himself is the best book he can study,
since the knowledge of himself (as the very heathen Philosophers could
acknowledge) is the beginning and fountain of all both Wisdom and Goodness: of
Wisdom, because as himself is a microcosm and compendiary sum of all creatures,
so the knowledge of himself cannot but be the sum and brief abstract of all
sciences: and of goodness, because he is evil without remedy that does not
understand how evil he is: for of necessity he must know his own corruption
before he can cleanse and purge it, which is the reason that evil Men, who
though they love not evil as evil, yet love the pleasure of it: are so nice to
enter into their own Souls, and fearful to make too strict a search into the
pollutions of their hearts, lest they should be driven to abandon and forsake
them when they cannot retain without too much trouble to their own Conscience.
Rightly therefore Seneca, Mali ubique sunt, praeterquam secum, wicked Men are
willingly every where else, rather than at home, they are still gadding abroad,
and the less they can abide to look on themselves, the more they delight to be
curious examiners of other men: how securely will they pry into all their
actions; how narrowly can they observe every defect and imperfection, the least
mote in their Brothers eye that will not behold beams in their own? within
blinder than Moles, without quicker sighted than Serpents. And Plutarch though
but a Philosopher can give you the reason of both, for the guilty Soul, says
he, which in it self is but as an unclean cage, a very sink of Sin and
iniquity, metuens ca quae intus sunt, exibit for as, fearing that foulness and
ugliness which is within, quickly flies out of doors, and like a Fly flutters
up and down till it light on a gal'd back, sucking and feeding upon other men's
vices, that he may the better lessen and excuse his own, or dare to attempt
greater himself. It is happened unto such, says the same Author, as unto those
that have sooty houses or cursed Wives, they are never well longer than abroad.
Like Satan in Job, their Souls compass the earth, and walk through the world:
wandering stars they are to whom the blackness of darkness is reserved, says
St. Jude, at whose doors though our Savior himself stand and knock never so
long, never so loud, he cannot hope for admission: there is no body within to
answer or open and let him in, their Spirits are gone forth, and it is
impossible they should hear what is done at home, their cogitations are so
deeply busied abroad; or if peradventure they now and then hear him at their
better leisure, they consider it but little, as supposing they have not much
need of him. They have been so long taken up in the view of other men's sins, as
they forget their own; they have so constantly fixed their eyes on the crimes
of their brethren, as they begin to think themselves innocent: In this case now
is it possible they should duly prepare or deeply repent, whilst they judge of
their own goodness by others evil, and suppose themselves well enough already,
because peradventure they are more wicked? But could we observe the Apostles
rule, let other Men alone and examine our selves, could we as diligently
observe our own defects and imperfections (to give them no worse name) as we do
other Men's, and other Men do ours, taking estimate of our selves by what we
truly are in our selves, not what we seem opposed to others; we should quickly
discover at least the corruption and hypocrisy of our own hearts: we should
soon find how rotten we are at the core, how desperately sick, and what great
need we have of the Physician. And still the longer we look, the wickeder shall
we appear; the more narrowly we search and the deeper we dig into these impure
vaults, the more ever shall we abhor our selves with Job; till we cry out with
the Prophet: O that my head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of
tears, that all the day long I might bewail my sins and iniquities in the
bitterness of my Soul. What else was it, but this serious consideration of
himself, that made holy David so afflict his body with sackcloath, and his head
with ashes? what was it that made his eyes so often to water his couch, and his
bed to swim with perpetual tears, but that in the 51. Psalm, I acknowledge my
iniquity and my sin is ever before me? And sure did we carefully look into our
selves, did we faithfully and frequently set our sins before us as that Prophet
did, we should soon acknowledge and bewail them with that true and hearty
sorrow that he has done. So directly does the contemplation and knowledge of
our selves lead unto true repentance, the sum of our preparation. But this
knowledge of our selves, especially of our sins, is not so easily attained as
we imagine, and it is not presently gained upon the first view: every Man has
not such clear eyes as Adam, at first sight to discover his own nakedness: or
if he have, he can quickly find out fig leaves, subtle shifts and excuses to
cover it, as well as he. And therefore it is not a slight view, but a strict
examination that must eye it: Let a Man examine himself. It is strange that
himself should be driven to examine himself: does not the Soul understand the
Soul? cannot the spirit of man understand what is in man, without searching it
out by examination? surely no, the heart of man, says the Prophet, is
deceitful above all things and wicked, who can know it? and because wicked,
therefore deceitful; and cunning not only to deceive others but even it self.
The understanding indeed has eyes, clear and bright enough to search into the
dark corners of the Soul, and discover the windings and turnings, all the
obscure Alleys and Labyrinths that are in it; did not the heart send forth a
thick fogg of gross and earthy affections to muffle up and blind them lest they
pry too far into her secrets. For the will wherein the affections reside, has
taught the intellective power (which is under her command, being Mistress of the
Soul) either not to look at all, or look very favourbly ^on that which she
likes; and instead of judging of the goodness (which is the proper office of
the understanding practick) she diverts her employment wholly to the seeking of
cunning devices, and finding out of false colors and disguises to cover the
foulness of the evil, which pleasure or profit moves her to affect. And then
how is it possible for this knowing faculty of our Souls to discover those sins
and hypocrises, which her self with all her wits seek to hide even from her
self as well as from others? And therefore unless we vindicate the intellect
from this thraldom, and deliver it from the power and tyranny of the will; and
that will's corrupt affections, that it may be a free Umpire and Judge within
us; unless laying aside all love of our selves and sins, we deal truly and
impartially with our selves; Nay unless we be jealous of our own souls and take
our selves, as we well may, for the greatest enemies of our selves; and so deal
with our hearts as we would do with felons and other offenders; that is, search
and examine them with all strictness and diligence; we shall never thoroughly
discover the truth of our own bosoms. For the heart is a sly and subtle
malefactor; he will not quickly confess; he must be tript with many questions,
often taken in contradictions, nay have evident proofs brought in against him,
or he will never acknowledge his error: nothing but manifest truth can extort
it from him: Unless it be the rack, on that indeed, he will sometimes confess:
on the rack of some sudden Judgment, on the rack of a tormenting Conscience you
shall hear it then cry out before any body examines them, like Judas, I have
sinned in betraying innocent blood, and hang themselves when they have done,
and to sin worse in shedding their own. But this of the rack, is confess and be
hanged; that which we seek by examination, is confess and be forgiven. If we
confess our sins, God is faithful to forgive them, says St. John, though most
men had as lieve be hanged as confess; and out of a stubborn Pride had rather
excuse than acknowledge their crimes: So losing the benefit of remission, for
want of seeing how much they deserved punishment: which nothing but a true
inquiry and a faithful examination can set before their eyes. For want whereof
it is that so many think well of themselves now, and are as sure of heaven as
if they had possession already, who God knows shall never come there. Only this
benefit they gain by their false security, that without any murmuring of
Conscience they go merrily to Hell: for as Solomon has it, there is a way that
is right in a man's eyes, but it leads down unto death. In this way the Pharisee
in the Gospel seemed to walk: I thank God, says he, I am not as other men, no
Adulterer, no Covetous, Extortioner, no unjust person, as that Publican: but he
gave Alms to the poor, he fasted every week and paid Tithes of all that he
had: He was right indeed in his own eyes, and why? but because his eyes looked
only outward, upon other wicked men whom he found himself unlike: or if at any
time inwards, it was through the false spectacles of pride and self-love which
can present him with nothing but seeming goodness, and that multiplied much
more than it was: But as he was right in his eyes, had his eyes also been right
in his head, he might upon better examination have seen what our Savior easily
discerned, the hypocrisy of his heart; which did but cover it self with Sheeps
clothing being inwardly more ravenous than a wolf; under pretense of religion
and long prayers, eating up the substance of poor women, and devouring Widows
houses: and therefore he tells them, Publicans and Sinners (that is, the most
lewd and dissolute people) should sooner enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: For
the foulness of their Crimes past all excuse, leaves some hopes they may in
time come to see and detest them: whereas the other whose sins being deep and
secret are not so easily discerned, and his wounds though they fester and
putrify at the bottom (as being never searched to the depth) yet because they
are skinned over at the top with an outward formality of Religion, he pleases
himself with a conceit he is thoroughly cured, and so of necessity nourishes
his death within him, without ever looking after the Surgeon. These
Pharisees are not yet all dead, they still live and will do in many a bosom,
and in theirs especially that live most civilly, and least think they are
harbored there. For who almost is there amongst us that is not right in his own
eyes? who is there that looking on the outward surface of his actions, how
justly he lives and free from aspersion, how diligently he frequents the
Church, hears Sermons, receives the Sacrament, and the like, does not secretly
in his heart thank God he is not like other men? when if he look into it a
little better, he may peradventure find it, for all this, as empty of true
piety unto God, or charity unto his Brother, as that false Pharisee was. We do
not yet know, nor shall we till we undestand our selves better, how apt we are
to deceive our selves, and flatter our Souls out of their salvation. The very
gross and palpable offender can shroud, you see, his crimes under such fair
titles as they seem to him little or none at all, nay virtues sometimes instead
of vices. The Covetous man is but thrifty, and the Drunkard a good fellow: the
quarrelling Ruffian a man of valor; and the prodigal Spendal, kind and
freehearted. How much more easily then shall the civil hypocrite slide away
under the false pretenses of a goodly outside? Wherewith he is so industrious
to cosen others, that at length v^luing his goodness by their opinions, whom he
has abused, he chea^s himself ere he is aware of his own Soul. That therefore
in so dangerous a case we may take care we do not deceive our hearts any
longer; but every man deal faithfully and truly with himself, where it so
highly concerns him: Let us come at length to the examination it self. For this
hitherto is but to show how necessary it is to examine: we will now endeavor
to make that examination, and we will make it not in all things we might, but
only in that preparation^ and those qualifications of it which erewhile we
found necessarily required in a worthy Communicant: that accordingly we may
condemn and reform our selves before we approach unto the holy table. Wherein,
because I desire to deal impartially with mine own Soul and yours, I shall
entreat your patience, if I come as near your Consciences as may be, which you
cannot afford without finding the comfort of it in your selves, for assuredly
the more willing the heart is to be furrowed and plowed up, the better ever it
takes the immortal seed, and the sooner and surer sends forth fruit to eternal
life. To enter on it then, The qualifications of our preparation, wherein we
are to examine our selves, I have shown you to be four, especially, Knowledge,
Faith, Repentance and Love. But before we deal upon them, it will not be amiss
briefly to reflect on the examination and preparation of our selves, and see
and consider how much heretofore we have failed in both; and how short we have
been of that due Reverence and regard those Sacred Mysteries require. Shall I
ask you then? for so he must do that will examine: what time you have taken
from your earthly affairs to bestow on this holy employment? nay ask but your
own hearts, and they will quickly answer you: for have you afforded your
selves, I say not a month or a week, but a day or two or some hours of them to
call your Souls to a strict account, to strip your hearts of worldly cares and
vanities, and recall your wandering thoughts to those severe and serious
cogitations as may become your own sanctification and the high and holy
institution of your Savior? Consider well whether with David, you have entered
into the Chambers of your own bosoms, and faithfully communed with your own
Souls: whether you have tried out your hearts and reins, and your spirit has
made diligent search, as he both did and requires. Observe heedfully whether
casting off all masks and visors of Hypocrisy, all Fig Leaves of diminution and
excuse, how thou have exposed thy self and thy Soul naked unto the view of thy
searching Conscience; whether thy mortified heart beginning to thaw with
remorse, has freely opened her pleits and folds wherein she hid her iniquity;
and presented thee with her sins in their true shape, that thou might as
truly detest and abhor them. If it be so, it is well: if not, take heed, labor
and strive, weep, cry, pray, do not cease, be not satisfied till it be so; for
then it will never be right, thy preparation will lack of his due, and thy
examination will be lame. But I examine this examination no farther. It is a
secret act known only to their own reins and the searcher of them, to whom
therefore I remit it; and pass on to the qualities and virtues wherewith you
are to prepare, and wherein I may more freely examine and evict your Souls, as
having outward and sensible effects whereby they may be judged. And the first
of these (to omit knowledge whereof we have spoken sufficiently already) is
Faith: but here examination thou think altogether needless; for thou art
most sure and certain thou believe. Yet what if one should tell thee thou
did not believe? like enough thou would tell him again^ thou do not
believe him in that, for thou will still say thou know nothing better than
that thou believe, why? and I know it too, and know more, that the very
Devils believe and tremble, which is something farther: and their Faith
peradventure something better than thine, who believe and do not tremble:
which yet thou well might, did thou understand thy self or believe in God
aright, and as thou ought. But the truth is, most men's Faith (as we showed
but now of the understanding) follows their affections; believing little more
than what they desire. Should a Man preach and maintain that the goods of this
world ought not to be engrossed into private and particular hands, but that all
things, (as it was in the primitive Church) amongst Christians should be
common, who think you would believe this soonest, the Rich or the Poor? The
Poor indeed would quickly embrace it, because beneficient to them; but the Rich
that should be losers by it, would hardly or never assent. In like manner
should we urge that precept under the Law, that money should be lent freely to
our brethren that want, and not be put out to interest: or enforce that Divine
Precept of the Gospel, to lend and look for nothing again, Matthew. vi. the poor
Creditor you may be sure will entertain this for his relief, but the griping
^surer is deaf on that side, and can easily find out shifts and distinctions to
avoid his own inconvenience. Search now and examine thy self narrowly and see
if thy Faith does not deal thus with God in the chief Articles of it: scarce
ever believing any thing but what it likes. The object of Divine Faith is the
word of God, wherein besides Histories, the chief things it proposes to
believe are but three, Precepts, Comminations, and Promises: Precepts of duty:
Comminations of punishments: and Promises of reward to the observers or
neglecters of them. And all those equally to be assented unto, because
delivered by the word of the same God: otherwise thy Faith is defective and
maimed. See then and consider truly whether thou do adhere unto the one as to
the other, whether thy Faith does not rest only upon the promises, neglecting
the duties; and yet slighting the threatenings against those that neglect them.
The promises of Mercy indeed are sweet and comfortable; who does not willingly
and gladly believe them? but comminations and duties are terrible and
troublesome, and few will give them faithful entertainment. That Christ
suffered on the Cross, and shed his blood for the sins of the whole world and
every man's in particular, is a pleasant and grateful Doctrine, how does our
Faith hug and embrace it as if there were nothing else to be believed? But
should we once thunder out that of St. Paul, That notwithstanding this blood,
no Liar, no Drunkard, no Adulterer, no covetous or unclean Person, shall enter
into the Kingdom of God: here our Faith is at a stand, and will be sure either
not to believe it, or never to acknowledge that themselves are such. Again,
blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin, says David; yea marry,
blessed be that tongue for ever, I believe it with all my heart: nay read a
little farther, and in whose spirit there is no guile, how now? why do thou
stagger? pish! it is impossible; this seems to have crept into the Text, no body
knows how. St. Paul when he cited it, left it out; and wear not bound to
believe it, or any thing else we cannot away with. There is no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus, says St. Paul, a gracious promise, and a^very
cordial to the Soul, every Man is ready to lay hold of it before it be out of
his mouth: but to whom does it appertain? To them, as it follows, which walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit. This is a severe duty on our part,
and a very corrosive to the flesh; which will hardly be brought in subjection
to the law of God, and therefore will not easily believe it should or possibly
may be. Thus thy fruitless and preposterous Faith is ever strong to lay hold on
the promises, though weak and of no power to work obedience to the commands, or
believe the judgments denounced against disobeyers. For did thou so, truly
thy belief would teach thee to tremble; for which cause I told thee thy Faith
(which in this case is only a carnal confidence) falls short of that which the
Scripture tells us is found in Devils, that believe and tremble. Nay, if we
search and examine a little farther, we shall find thy Faith failing even in
the very promises. For though in spiritual promises that concern mercy and
remission of sins now, or the Kingdom of Heaven hereafter, thou art more than
faithful, even foolishly presumptuous: yet in the promises which pertain unto
this life, we are all for the most part (though Christians in profession, yet
in truth and practice) gross and palpable Infidels. Thou beginnest thy Creed
with, I believe in God the Father Almighty; wherein thou do acknowledge him
thy Father, and therefore willing; Almighty, and therefore able to relieve and
succor thee in all thy wants and distresses; but from the teeth outward: for
let want or distress approach though but afar off, how art thou presently
perplexed? what anxious and heartbreaking care does instantly vex and
disc^ciate thy very Soul? how are thy thoughts lost and distracted this way and
that, and every way searching and bending thy will upon all humane helps and
succors that may be imagined, with such fear and distrust, as if there were no
God in Heaven or providence of his upon earth? Tell him how of his Father
Almighty, that knows whereof he shall need, and will not fail (if he first seek
his kingdom and the righteousness thereof) to add and supply all other things
that are necessary, and you shall give him as much comfort, as if you had cast
water in his Shoes. He is clear out of his belief now, and Pater noster too,
when if you show him the plain Text in Mat. Take no care (that is no anxious
and solicitous care) what you shall eat, or wherewith you shall be clothed; or
in David, do good, and verily thou shall be fed, he will sooner laugh at their
promises than believe them. Nay which is strange, a Man whom God has well
blessed, that has (...) want within ken, nor likely to have any, yet scrapes and
scratches on every side, as if poverty were coming on him like an armed Man, as
Solomon speaks; who if urged to relieve the necessities of his poor Brother
(without a small piece of Silver) though the King entreat, and the King of
Heaven command, and his Ministers persuade, yet it may not be wr^ng from him.
He can presently cast doubts, who knows whether himself or his Children may not
live to want? Show him the promises of God in the Scripture assuring the
contrary, that it shall be a means to prosper and multiply the rest: tell him
that of the Wiseman, Cast thy bread upon the waters, and after many days thou
shall find it: or that of another, be that gives to the poor, lends unto the
Lord; yet nothing can move him: which manifestly argues either he does not
believe God when he says it, or at least not believe he is a good paymaster;
yet this Man thinks he has Faith; nay many of them are so far from relieving,
as they can find in their hearts to oppress and grind those that are poor
enough already: and as if they conceived that honest courses and Gods blessing
on them were too weak means to provide sufficiently for themselves and
Children, they can shift and shark; project and undermine; screw themselves
into testaments and deceive trusts; buy over their Brothers head that imploys
them for himself; and use all their wits and fraudulent devices to compass an
estate, and root their possession in it for ever: madly supposing to establish
their Generations by those ways for which God never fails, as he every where
threatens, to weed them or their posterity out of the Inheritance so purchased;
it being his glory ever to destroy the wisdom of the wise, and to ruin the
house built in fraud or on the ruins of others. For the hope of the wicked,
says Job, is as the spiders web, cunningly spun out with a great deal of
labor all night, and suddenly swept away in the morning. What Faith then is
there in this? or indeed, what is it else but a wild branch of mere Gentilism
and infidelity, if not absolute Atheism? For did he truly believe God or his
comminations, it were not possible, one that loves his Children so well, could
run so direct a course to destroy them. But assuredly he does not believe; and
whatsoever we pretend, yet for the most part, we secretly say in our hearts
with that Fool in the Psalm, if not, there is no God, yet at least, there is no
knowledge in the most high: or else with those wicked ones in Job, tush, God
cares not, circa cardines coeli perambulat, his walk is about the hinges of
Heaven, he does not trouble himself to behold or regard the things upon Earth.
Do not suppose I wrong you: search your own Consciences truly, and I believe
the best of you all will find even this infidelity lurking in them. For were
thou absolutely assured in thy Soul of the omniscience, and omnipresence of the
Lord; did thou faithfully believe that he is every where, and beholds every
action and operation of thine, though never so secret, that he is about thy
path and about thy bed and spyeth out all thy ways, and sees thy thoughts
more clearly than thou thy self; how were it possible for thee in his presence
and under those eyes so often and deeply to dissemble with thy Brother, with
thine own heart and with God himself? Could thou imagine a window in thy
bosom and thy Neighbor permitted now and then when thou dreamest not of it,
to look in upon thy impure and fraudulent thoughts, and see how thy cogitations
are busied; how would thy Soul shame and blush to be taken tardy in such base
and unworthy employments? which yet thou can freely exercise and continue
without any trouble or interruption at all, though God himself and his pure
eyes behold them, whereunto thy breast is transparent as glass, and more open
than the air, what does this show but that thou believe it not? for to
believe his presence truly, and so much contemn it, is merely impossible. It is
beyond imagination to conceive, were thy Faith firm in this point, how it
possibly can be, that the sight of God and his holy Angels, should not deter
thee, not only from thinking but from acting those secret works of darkness;
which the coming in but of a little child can utterly interrupt and hinder. Of
necessity thou must be driven to confess, either that thy Faith is asleep, and
thou do not believe it: or thy reverence utterly dead that thou esteemest of
a child more than thy Maker. Assuredly could we fortify our persuasions but in
this one Article of Faith, and strongly apprehend the truth of it, nothing
could be of greater power to purge our hearts, and our hands too from all evil
and uncleanness. Thus if thou carefully examine thy faith by the effects, and
judge of it, as thou should, by thine actions, (for the tree is known by her
fruit) thou will easily find notwithstanding thy former conceit of thy self,
how full of infidelity thy false heart is, and how little thou believe either
threats, or precepts, or promises, or providence, or any thing else sincerely
and as thou should. Well therefore it would deserve thy frequent cogitations
and prayers and tears to consider and bewail it thoroughly, crying out with him
in the Gospel, Lord, I believe, help my unbelief. And never think it helped
till thou find it reforming thy affections and lusts, not led and ruled by
them: till thou perceivest it working powerfully in all the thoughts of thy
heart and actions of thy hands, and the whole course of thy life. For this is
the true test and trial, and to these marks our Savior himself sends thee, to
make full proof of it. These are the signs, says he, that shall follow them
that believe. In my name shall they cast out devils, they shall speak with new
tongues: they shall take up serpents: and if they drink any deadly thing it
shall not hurt them: and when they lay their hands on the s^^k they shall be
healed. If those signs follow not thy Faith, it is vain and thou art yet in thy
sins. But thou will say the time of Miracles is past, and these days require
them not. Neither do I require them as then; neither then and in those times
were they common unto all Believers: But the saying of our Savior is universal
and in the spiritual sense is ever true, that these signs follow them and all
them that un^^ignedly believe: For every Man naturally has Devils enough
within him to be thrown forth, and unless thy Faith have power and virtue
enough to dispossess and cast out the impure spirits of luxury and avarice, of
envy, wrath, malice, and hypocrisy, and the like foul Fiends wherewith our
nature is full: unless it be able to give thee a new tongue and a new language,
and cleansing thy mouth of all oaths and blasphemies, of slanders and
reproaches, of deceit and scurrility; can teach thee to speak the words of
sobriety, and sanctity, and of truth every Man unto his Neighbor; unless it
can embolden thee to take up Serpents, to receive and lovingly embrace thy
mortal enemies, and make treacle of them too, drinking up all the deadly venom
which their poisoned stomachs can disgorge against thee, not only without hurt,
but even as thy physic; that so lifting up pure and innocent hands upon them
with prayers and benedictions, though they revile and curse, they may yet at
length be won from it and cured of the malice wherewith they were sick; and
others also by thy example, of their several diseases, who seeing thy good
works may glorify thy Father which is in Heaven: Until, I say, thy Faith has
power to work these things (unless our Saviors signs be false) it is never
current and effectual. If you say, these things are too high and hard for us,
we cannot attain unto them; you do withal say and confess that you do not truly
believe: For true Faith is not dead or dro^zy, but powerful and operative,
working even wonders unto flesh and blood; which St. Paul proves by a full
cloud of witnesses in the 11. to the Heb^ producing a whole Catalogue of the
ancient W^^thies, who all through Faith aspiring to the promises were mighty
and mavelous in their actions, overthrowing Kingdoms, working righteousness
and doing such great things as we cannot consider without admiration. And
whence all this, but because their Faith was stirring and active, not lazy and
languishing like ours; which is only a Carcass of belief without any soul of
life and vigor in it: otherwise we should soon find in our selves what the same
Author elsewhere affirms, that nothing is available like Faith when it is
working. working by love; which is ever impatient and restless till it attains
what it desires. Who then, or what power is able to resist it? not the power of
the whole world: this is it that overcomes the world, even your faith, John v.
3. no nor the power of any thing else, credenti omnia sunt possibilia, to him
that believes all things are possible, says our Savior: And therefore if ever
these things be impossible to thee, if thy Faith be so weak that it cannot
dispossess thee of thy wicked spirits and work those spiritual miracles on thy
Soul, it is a greater miracle if ever it save thy Soul. For true Faith purifies
the heart, and cleanses the very reins, and is assuredly dead, if it do not
work powerful effects within us. If of unclean and covetous, of malicious,
envious and deceitful persons, it does not make us pure and temperate, mild and
merciful, upright and just in our actions; it is unprofitable, and shall never
justify with God: In whose account, whatsoever you think, none are taken for
believers any farther than they are practisers of his word. He that says he
knows God and hates his brother is a liar, says St. John: and sure he that
says he believes in God and yet forsakes not his sins, lies as loudly, and
does but abuse his own Soul; vainly dreaming of Faith when he has but the
shadow of it without truth or substance: and will be found at last but in that
poor Man's case, who dreamt all night of treasure, and in the morning when he
awoke was not worth a farthing. With that Church in the Revelation, they have a
name that they live, and conceit they are rich, whenas there it is said, they
are blind and poor and naked and miserable, and shall so understand themselves
in the end: for however now we please our selves for a while with the vain
opinion of our imaginary Faith, yet when we have slept our sleep, and dreamt
our dreams; in the morning when we shall all awake from our graves and come
unto Judgment, it will be found far otherwise than we conceived. When the son
of man comes, says our Savior himself, shall he sind faith upon the earth?
surely yes, such as ours for the most part is, Faith enough; such a speculative
fancy that floats only in the brain never affecting the heart; such a
presumptuous confidence that can seize on mercies, neglecting commands, lay
hold on the passion and death of a Savior, but neither obey his precepts, nor
imitate his life; of such Faith we doubt the Christian world will be then and
now is, full as it can hold; he shall every where find it: But of that true and
real Faith, rooting out sinful affections; of that high and mighty Faith,
inthroned in the very heart of the Soul, and from thence commanding all the
powers and faculties which it has; of that prevalent and victorious Faith,
conquering Sin and Satan, and treading under foot the glory and vanity of the
whole world; of this solid and substantial Faith, which only deserves the name
of Faith, and he only looks for, of this he shall then find but little in the
world, as indeed there is very little now. Some scattered sparks of it only
there are in a few of our bosoms, but raked up in a great deal of embers: and
if we take not heed, like enough to be stifled ere we are aware. O preserve and
collect them carefully, blow upon them with thy meditations and ferventest
prayers, never cease till they break forth into a flame, that may even scorch
thy heart with compunction and penitent remorse, and fire thy Soul with ardent
and burning affections of love unto God and charity to thy Brother, which are
the rest of the qualifications wherewith you are to prepare your selves, and
wherein if we should proceed to search and continue a strict examination, I am
sure we should find them every way and every one as false as our Faith. For
Faith is the root, and if that be corrupt, these which are the branches cannot
possibly be sound. Such as our belief is, such is our Love, such ever our
Repentance: all these but Cakes of one piece of Dough, and seasoned with the
same leaven, hypocrisy; our repentance being but mere formality, our love only
verbal, and our charity for the most part but pride or disguised malice.
Repentance sincere and true, we may well say, is fled with Astraea to Heaven;
or rather doubt whether there be any such matter. Sure it is but a mere word
that has nothing to answer it. Search thy self, try others by their actions,
and see if thou can almost any where find it. A Man of an humble and a
contrite heart, broken and bruised with the sight and sense of his sins,
groaning and bleeding under the weight and burdens of his iniquities, changed
truly, converted, regenerate, and reformed in the whole disposition of his
Soul, cast as it were in a new mould and become a new Man, a new Creature; such
a one were worthy the seeing; but our eyes may even look till they fail, and no
where behold him. Behold indeed we may every where new things enough, but not
new men. At these solemn feasts they can have all things new, but their Souls,
these they can permit to go in their old clothes; yea to grow old in the same
sins, which they learnt, and grew up with them in their youth. The ancient
swearer we see is a swearer still, receive he never so often. The covetous man
takes the Sacrament and goes away no less covetous than he was. The malicious
man can drink the blood of Christ, which he shed for his enemies, and yet
continue in the same gall of bitterness as before; lupi veniunt, lupi receduni,
Wolves they come, though in Sheeps clothing, and Wolves they depart says St.
Austin. For indeed they do but put on a seeming sanctity for the time, and
presently reassume again their old ways. And do generally deal with their
^^^lice and the rest of their sins, as men do with their beards, shave them
against a good time; but leave the roots behind which afterward shoot out the
thicker. And this is the repentance, this is the love of which these times are
full as the Moon: but for that which is serious and sincere, knock at your
hearts; and see if they do not sound as hollow as empty Casks. And for the
last, our love and affection to God^ it is no less verbal than that unto our
Brother is feigned, or our repentance formal. It is in every Man's mouth but no
where else: they draw near him with their lips, but their heart, is far from
him; that is wholly taken up with pleasure, pride, and profit; the Trinity
which the world worships, that generally knows no other God but Mammon, as it
will appear if they search their thoughts, for where our treasure is, there are
our cogitatlons. But the due examination of these points will require a fuller
discourse than this time will afford which is run out already, and therefore we
must refer it to another. In the mean while beseeching God of his great
goodness to give us clear eyes and understanding Spirits, to discern and abhor
the hypocrisy of the world and the deceitfulness of our own hearts, that we be
not counted amongst those formal Pharisees wherewith these times abound,
professing godliness, but denying the power thereof in their actions, which can
have no part or communion with Christ; but being inspired with a true and a
living Faith rooted in love, and built up in charity unfeigned, we may be
reckoned amongst those few which shall be held for worthy receivers of those
pledges of his love in the holy mysteries now; and be esteemed worthy to be
received into the pleasures of his everlasting Kingdom hereafter, whereunto the
same God of his infinite mercy vouchsafe to bring us all, etc.

Amen. Laus Deo in aeternum.
A SERMON ON CHRISTMAS Day.
SERMON IX. Upon LUKE ii. 10, 11.
And the Angel said unto them, Fear not: for behold, I bring you tidings of
great joy which shall be to all people.

For unto you is born this day, in the City of David, a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord.


IN the verses precedent, the Nativity and birth of our Lord and Savior is
described: in these here, it is proved and published, descried in them by an
Evangelist, preached and published in these by an Angel; by an Angel unto
Shepherds, by an Angel the highest and most excellent workmanship of God, unto
Shepherds the meanest and sillyest people amongst all the fons of men.

So you see already the three general parts into which my Text does branch it
self: The Preacher: the Audience: and the Sermon: The Messenger: They to whom
the Message is sent: and the Message it self: The message or Sermon (for so the
Angels word imports, Evangelizo vobis, I preach or publish unto you) is the
birth of our Lord and Savior. The Audience Shepherds: the messenger or
publisher of it, an Angel. These are the main or principal parts. Two other
there are which are accessory: for his message is high and of great importance:
his Audience mean and fearful, affrighted with his presence: the one deserves a
preface of honor, the other a word of comfort: first therefore he chears up
the Shepherds and magnifies his message: before he will deliver it, he chears
up them, Fear not: and magnifies that, behold I bring you tidings of great joy
which shall be to all people. So have you these Five. 1. A. Message. 2. And
that Message magnified. 3. An Auditory. 4. And that Auditory comforted. 5. Both
performed by an Angel. And the Angel said unto them, etc. there is the Preacher
and his audience: Fear not, etc. there is the Audience and their comfort:
Behold I bring, etc. there is the extolling of the Message: For unto you is
born this day, there is the message it self. And this message again has diverse
parts, some more substantial, as the Birth it self and the Titles and
Attributes of the person born. Three in Number, a Savior, Christ, the Lord.
Others it has that are Circumstantial, as the time when, hodie to day: the
place where, in the City of David: and the persons for whom, For you, vobis,
for unto you, etc. These are the parts of the message: and the Preface that
magnifies it, has no fewer particulars: 1. It is News: 2. News of joy: 3. Of
great joy: 4. Great joy to all people, all that are or ever shall be. That
shall be, etc. 5. And these all well ushered in witlr an Ecce of admiration and
attention, Behold. These two, the message and the magnifying of it, are the
main parts of this days celebrity and solemnity, and therefore they are full,
and have many branches: the other three, the Audience, their Comfort and the
Angel Preacher that gives it, are of less importance, and so are but single
points briefly delivered. And the Angel said unto them, Fear not. But we must
begin with these, though the lesser, as the Text does: and first with the
Preacher or publisher of the Nativity, an Angel, dixit Angelus, And the Angel
said, etc.

And right and fit it was that an Angel should say it: he is an high and
excellent creature, and his ministry has ever been justly used in high and
excellent actions. Now of all the actions and operations external of the divine
power, the best and the greatest, the highest and most excellent, the wisest
and most wonderful is the Incarnation, and birth of the Son of God. The other
eminent acts of goodness and power manifested either in his life or death,
resurrection or ascension, they do all depend on this which is the ground and
foundation of them all; therefore questionless as it is the greatest benefit
the world ever knew, so is it the greatest work that God ever did: wherein God
is made man, and man become God; God and man, becoming but one person. Such a
generation as this who shall declare it, says the Prophet Isaiah? who shall
preach and publish it indeed? surely no creature in the world is absolutely
fit; yet since it must be done by some, none so fit as an Angel, the best of
his Creatures, to preach and proclaim the Nativity, the best of his works. The
Angel said, and he had no sooner said it, but a multitude of Angels receive and
applaud it, with a hymn of glory. Gloria in excelsis, Glory be to God on high:
one Angel preaches and a Quire of Angels sing praises. So the whole service of
this day both Sermon and Anthem, by Angels all. So great is the day we now
celebrate and the benefit we are now to treat of. And it were to be wished it
might still be preached by the tongue of that Angel which first published it.
But yet since it has pleased God to impose it upon sinful men, we must perform
it as well as we may; but still remembering you, that though we do it, it is a
theme in it self fitter for an Angel. The Angel said, illis unto them.

And what were they? in the verses precedent you may see: Shepherds, they were
watching over their Focks. What a fall is here? The best news the world ever
heard, the greatest mystery God ever wrought, fit to be uttered by no tongue
but an Angel's, the highest of his Creatures, now in this state to be preached
and published to none but Shepherds, the lowest and meanest of the people? what
congru^ty is there in this? The Custom of the world in case of News great and
extraordinary, especially tidings of Joy, is to post with it to great and
extraordinary persons, Kings and Princes, no man's ear may have a taste till
theirs be first possessed with it. And surely this if ever any, was News fit
for a King and the greatest King. Why is it then delivered unto Shepherds? why
is it not sent to Caesar Augustus the Monarch of the Earth, now sending forth
his Edict for the description of the whole world? why does not the Angel hye
him unto Cyrenius his President, or to Herod his King of the Jews? why goes he
not unto the high Priests, to the Scribes and Pharisees, that sat in Moses
Chair? or to some other of the Grandees and Magnificoes of the world? why unto
none of these? why? but because men have one Custom and God another: they look
to the great, to the good: men respect the high and mighty; but God regards the
humble and meek: Especially in his divine Revelations; I thank thee O Father,
Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent and revealed them unto babes, Luke x. 21. This is his Custom, not many
wise according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called; but
God has chosen the foolish, the weak and the base things of the world to
confound the wise and mighty, 1 Cor. i. 26. No marvel therefore, says St.
Ambrose, if in the first publication of the grace of Christ, God did rather
respect innocence than power, and the simplicity of Shepherds than the pride
and imperiousness of Kings. It was not amiss then that Shepherds they were,
mean Men, Men of an humble Spirit, of an innocent and contemplative life, it
was not amiss I say, in this regard, if but to show the use of God whose manner
it is ever to resist the proud and show grace unto the humble; but it agreed
well too, in other respects. He that was now born was sent to the lost Sheep of
the house of Israel, and it was but right that Shepherds were made acquainted
with that; to show spiritual Pastors their duty, who first receive the Gospel,
that they may preach it to others; and the flocks their obedience, not to
adhere to their own Revelations, but to receive their doctrine ordinarily at
the hands of their Teachers, for to show this, the Gospel was first justly
preached unto Shepherds. Besides, it was the birth of a Shepherd that he came
to tell: the Shepherd that was so long ago promised: Behold I will raise you up
a shepherd, Ezekiel. xxxv. 25. he is now born, the chief shepherd, 1 Pet. v. 4.
the great shepherd, Heb. xiii. 20. the good shepherd that gave his life for his
flock, John x. II. It was but just then to tell Shepherds of the birth of a
Shepherd, and the news fitted them well: rightly therefore dixit illis, he said
unto them.

But still said he not his errand presently; they were not in case to receive
it. The appearing of the Messenger has so frighted them, that they are not
capable of the message. If he now tell it, they may chance not to hear it, or
if hear, not regard it. And therefore before he go on with his news, he does
first settle their minds for receiving it with a nolite timere, fear not.
Afraid then they were, and sure they might well fear. It was in the depth of
night, and the Angel appeared suddenly and in great glory, the glory of the
Lord shined round about them. They were but Shepherds, no marvel if such fear
at such and so unexpected a sight; better men than they and other manner of
persons have been troubled at the approach of an Angel though in the day time.
Zachary though a just person that walked in all the commandments of God without
reproof; though a Priest, though in the Temple and ministering there: The Virgin
Mary whom all generations must call blessed, though a Virgin, though the best
of Women, though separated and sanctified for the Mother of God, yet (as you
may read in the very Chapter before this) at the appearance of an Angel they
are afraid both; and both comforted, as these here, with a noli timere, by the
Angel, fear not Zachary, v. 13. fear not Mary, v. 30. And the like might be
shown of diverse others; so general it was to fear at the appearing of an Angel,
that scarce ever any Angel appears but with this salutation of fear not, seven
times (as a learned Man observes) we read it in this very Gospel. But whence is
it, and how comes it about? Timere ubi non est timor, to fear where no fear is,
argues a guilty Conscience, but these were innocent and just persons, why then
do they fear the Messengers of their comfort? Sure though some may be more
innocent than others, yet it is not so absolutely right as it ought to be in
any. None so good and unreproveable in the sight of Men; but yet they may be
conscious of something more or less within themselves. But say they were not;
suppose them free from actual sin, yet they cannot be freed from natural
infirmity occasioned by the first original sin: which Adam had no sooner
committed but he was afraid of God himself when he appeared, and hid his head
in a bush as soon as he heard his voice in the Garden. And ever since all the
Sons of Adam have been afraid at the appearing of any Messenger or receiving of
any message, from that Divine Majesty. Two things therefore it argues; first,
that our nature is fallen from her first original; that her primitive
excellence and dignity is gone; since he (says Stella) who was framed and
created to behold the Glory of God, cannot now endure the aspect of one of his
Angels. And secondly, besides weakness it argues something of wickedness; and
shows all is not right: Heaven and we are not in the terms we should be, not
the best of us all. Angels are Messengers from Heaven, what tidings they bring
good or bad, we know not; and therefore we fear, because we know not: a plain
sign all is not well between Heaven and us; that upon every coming of an Angel
we presage to our selves no better news from thence; but still are afraid of
the messages and Messengers that come from that place. Since then it befell so
great Saints, it might well be the case of poor Shepherds in this case to be
afraid; and being afraid they must be comforted, or the message will hardly be
received: fear being in the mind, nothing else can well enter: fitly therefore
before he pours in the one does he seek to cast out the other with a nolite
timere, And the, etc.

But fear is not so easily cast forth, it is plenus consternationis affectus, a
tenacious affection full of distraction and consternation, and will not
presently be thrown out with a couple of words. Comfortable words they are
indeed, and may well serve to stay their minds and collect their spirits; but
not thoroughly to eject their fear. To effect this, something more is required
than bare words. It is not enough to speak them, but he must give a reason for
them too, that would have them prevail. And what better reason not to fear,
than to show them there is no reason of their fear? Timor est expectatio mali,
fear is the expectation of evil, and here is no evil toward, nothing but good,
and good not toward, but present; that were but tidings of hope, this is of
joy and great joy to them and to all the people besides. And this is a nolite
timere indeed; a fear not, to the purpose; not barely propounded, but backed
with a reason of power to destroy it: for behold, etc.

Wherein the Angel does at once, as dispel their passion, so with an honorable
Elogy advance and magnify his own message before he will deliver it: he pours
it not forth presently; but sends a preface of state before to usher it in with
reverence and regard. And every degree that is in it (for you see it has many)
joy, great joy, common joy, and every degree I say in it is, as a comfort to
the Shepherds and diminution of their fear, so an ecce of admiration and
attention unto his errand: for Ecce, Behold, etc. ecce est vox admirantis, it
is ever commonly the watchword to a wonder: atleast is seldom set but as a
note or mark upon things of greatest importance, and such as require our
special regards. And indeed what do Men regard so much as news, rare and
admirable events? who grows not erect, what ear is not open and attent to
receive them? And such here is this, no ordinary and trivial matter, every day
to be seen and met withal; but news it is, unusual and unheard of it is, which
you are called to behold. Behold I bring you tidings, strange tidings indeed of
a strange birth full of prodigies and wonders; wherein the Ancient of days is
become a swadled child; and he who is the Son of God without a Mother, now made
the Son of a Woman without a Father; a strange Woman too, that is both a Mother
and a Virgin, nay at once both Mother of her own Father, and the Daughter of
her own Son. For such a Mother she must needs be, that is the Mother of God.
Where is Solomon with his nibil novum sub sole, there is no new thing under the
Sun? sure here are many new things which the Sun never saw nor the world ever
heard of before; and therefore a greater than Solomon is here: of whom Jeremy
spoke when he said, creavit Dominus novum super terram, a new thing has the
Lord created upon the earth, a woman shall compass about a man, Jer. xxxi. News
then it is, and that strange and admirable; but yet if it be as well good as
strange, as well beneficial to us as wonderful in it self, we much more
willingly behold it. Do so then, for it is both; both news and good news;
tidings and tidings of joy; great joy too; for behold I bring you tidings of
great joy. Joy for the benefit and honor; great joy for the great benefit and
honor we reap by it. Such as the fuel is, such is the fire; and as the
benefit is, such should be the joy. Never such a benefit, never so great honor
to us and our nature; never therefore so great cause of joy: nay, never any
cause of joy at all but in this, or at least in the hope of this. Set it aside,
and nothing but argument of woe and lamentation through the whole world to be
seen. All mankind without it utterly lost in everlasting sorrow; and the whole
frame of Nature and whatsoever is within the compass of it subject to
malediction too, for their sakes; and therefore could do nothing but groan and
travel in pain together with us, as the Apostle speaks, Romans viii. whose case
is well expressed in the Psalm, for we all sat in the region of death and
darkness, and quale gaudium iis qui in tenebris sedent, and what joy has he
that sits in the dark, said blind Tobe unto the Angel? But that is not all, we
were fast bound too in misery and iron: bound with the chains of our sins, and
shut up to condemnation under the Law, as in a Prison of misery, and quale
gaudium? what joy unto such, not only in darkness but in chains, chained both
in darkness and misery? This was our case, and in this case to tell men now of
a glorious light, of a rising Sun that should shine into their darkness; and
not only so, but to tell them of a strange deliverer also born into the world,
to give them liberty as well as light (for light without liberty would serve
them only to see their own misery) of a mighty deliverer indeed that both could
and would break the gates of Brass and smite the bars of Iron in sunder, and so
open the Prison to the miserable Captives, quale gaudium hoc, how great were
this joy, the joy of these tidings? And these are the joyful tidings the Angel
now brings, well therefore may he term them tidings of joy and great joy by
which we are delivered from darkness and misery, utter darkness and everlasting
misery. Behold I bring you tidings of great joy. Joy then there is in it, and
great joy, yet this is not all that is in it, it is public joy too, and that is
something more. Great joy there may be, and we see there often is, which yet
concerns but a very few: others in the mean while may wail and mourn. This is
not such, but as it is great in it self, so it spreads and diffuseth it self
unto many, to all, omni populo, to all the people. Behold, etc. And well fare
that joy where it is merry with all: every good heart will like it the better,
bonum quo communius eo melius, for the better it is, ever whatsoever is good,
the more general it is: This is a degree beyond general, it is universal joy; a
joy that runs through the universe and affects the whole world. And the world
may well wonder at it. It never saw, I am sure never could give any the like.
As our Savior said of his peace, so he might well say of this his joy, non
sicut mundus dat gaudium, not as the world gives joy so give I joy, the world
is poor and beggarly, and cannot give to one but it must take from another,
cannot make one rich, but it must impoverish another, cannot advance one, but
it must depress another; and therefore cannot give joy to one, but it must give
sorrow to another. This is the condition of the world, and all worldly joy; The
Conqueror celebrates his triumph, and the vanquished lament their misery; The
heir joys and rejoices in his inheritance, the possessor dies weeping and
mourning that he must leave it. The advanced ascends merrily unto his seat of
dignity, whilst his predecessor tumbles from thence with sorrow into his own
ruin. Run through all the glory of this present life, and see if you can any
where find any man happy whereto felicity does not arise out of another
misery; and whose joy is not built upon another man's sorrow: and therefore if
some be merry, some must be sad: if some laugh, others must weep: if some
rejoice, others must mourn: no joy in it to all the people: Non vox hominem
sonat, it is not the condition of humane felicity this, neither can it spring
out of the Earth; an Angel must bring it from Heaven, from that God who is
truly rich and of unexhausted bounty, able alone to fill some without any
diminution or emptying of others. Yea to fill all and leave none empty. Only
exinanivit semetipsum, it pleased him to empty himself of his honor this day,
by assuming our flesh, that we and our nature might be replenisht with it: he
made himself poor lying in a manner among brute beasts, that his poverty might
redound unto the riches of the world; and make men who for want of
understanding might well be compared unto the beasts that perish, in knowledge
and goodness too, like the Angels of God that stand about his Throne, unless
themselves refuse it. And this is the tidings of joy the Angel here now brings,
true joy indeed and public joy, Christmas joy right, gaudium omni populo; Joy
unto all the people; to all that will but entertain and embrace it; to all that
do not wilfully reject and refuse it. To such indeed this joy shall be turned
into sorrow, but that is their own fault. If when the Prison is opened, any of
the captives be enamoured of their own misery, and still love darkness more
than light, they may questionless perish in it; but then they may thank none
but themselves; it was still matter of joy that a passage was made, and they
might have come forth if themselves would. We must still distinguish between
the event of a thing unto obstinate men, and Gods intention of it in his own
mercy: which though some men abuse to their hurt and sorrow; yet the news of it
in it self is news of joy unto all, to all the people, to all that then were,
and to all that ever shall be, quod erit omni populo, which shall be to all
people, etc. Not only it is joy which is unto the present age, unto all the men
of that or any one time, but which shall be unto all ages and generations
successively unto the worlds end, and therefore she that now brought forth the
blessed tidings which the Angel here delivers, all generations, says the
Scripture, shall call her blessed. And this is our comfort, it is the word of
tenure by which we hold, that it shall be to all people. But this good Erit,
that shall be, is not reserved only to omni populo all the people that shall
be; but may be read with the joy that goes before, gaudium quod erit, joy which
shall be; not joy which is for a while, and then vanishes; but which shall be
for ever and ever, everlasting joy. And this gives us one degree more in the
joy. For joy though never so great in it self, though public and common unto
never so many, yet if it abides not it is but a perishing and transient joy:
but if great, public, and permanent too then it is complete and absolute joy
indeed; when it is gaudium quod est and erit, joy which is and which shall be;
that is none but Christ's joy, a joy which none can take from us. The worlds joy
is, quod est, and non erit, a joy which is, but which shortly shall not be, but
a flash, but a blaze, quickly kindled but as suddenly out. Invicem cedunt dolor
and voluptas: Joy and grief, like day and night, take their turns in this life,
and mutually ever expel one another. They are clean contrary, yet, like twins,
they are bred in the same bowels, wherein though they sometimes struggle as
Jacob and Esau did who shall first come forth, yet the advantage of precedence
is but little, when the latter is not so far behind but he has ever hold of
the formers heel: like Actors in a Tragedy, so they play their parts on the
Stage of this world; when one goes off, the other enters; and though joy begin
the Prologue, the Catastrophe ever shuts up in sorrow. All our pleasures though
never so sweet in the mouth, proving, as the Wiseman speaks, but gall and
wormwood in the belly; and sometimes rottenness in the bones. It is therefore
gaudium quod est, only a joy that is, but shall quickly cease to be: a joy
which like the winter Sun may rise gloriously, but is soon overcast with clouds
of discontent, and must set ere long in a night of sorrow: a long night unto
some that shall never see morning. Only Christ's joy, the joy which the Angel
here brings, Christmas and Christian Joy, is gaudium quod erit, a joy which is,
and which shall be; which is begun here and shall be perfected and accomplished
for ever hereafter: when we shall sit down at the right hand of God, where are
pleasures for evermore. So now you have all unto the full, great joy, public
joy, permanent and perpetual joy; nothing more can be added to make it fuller
or greater; it has already all the dimensions of greatness, height, length,
breadth and depth; As deep as Hell from whence it delivers; as high as the
highest Heavens whither it will bring us; broad as the whole Earth spreading
unto all people, that have or do inhabit it or ever shall; and long as eternity
can make it, whereinto it runs: joy which shall be for evermore. Well did it
deserve that Ecce of admiration set up in the top of it, as a burning Beacon to
draw all eyes and affections toward it. Behold I bring you, etc.

But this is but the Preface: proceed we now unto that wherein all this Joy
does consist, and whereof it is spoken: the message or sermon it self: whose
whole subject is the blessed birth of our Lord and Savior we this day
Celebrate, For unto you, etc. Wherein there are three Circumstances of the
birth, where, when and for whom: Unto you is born this day in the City of
David: And three Titles, or Attributes of the Person born, a Savior which is
Christ the Lord. The Circumstances are first placed, but the parts of substance
must be first handled: both because they are more worthy in themselves, and
also have nearer reference unto the joy precedent and the three degrees of
exaltations of it: whereunto these three titles do fitly answer and correspond:
the joy was great, public, permanent, and now we see the reason: Great Joy,
for a Savior is born: public joy, for that Savior is Christ: permanent and
perpetual joy, for that Christ is the Lord; the Lord of eternity that only can
give eternity to our Joy. And briefly of them all: but first of the first
Attribute of him which is a Savior.

1. And sure if ever any, this is tidings of great Joy, tidings of a Savior:
no joy in the world to the joy of a man saved. We our selves acknowledge it in
other matters; If it concerns the saving of our skin, of our goods, of our
life, or the like, how do we rejoice in such Saviors? Let a man under the Law
in case of a lost man, cast and condemned, expecting nothing but execution: and
then let a Savior come to him with a pardon, and see if it be not a welcome
message; if he think it not the joyfullest tidings that he ever heard. But
beloved we have Souls too, and they are our better parts by far, and the
sorrows of that death they are subject to, great and more lasting: And if the
saving of a perishing transitory life or living, be so precious unto us, how
full of Joy would the birth of a Savior be, for them that otherwise must die
for ever in perpetual torments? O when it concerns the loss of Heaven and
danger of Hell, when the Soul is at stake, and the well doing or undoing of it
for ever; Consider it right, and in this case sure no joy to the joy of a
Savior. But we do not consider it, at least not thoroughly, and that is the
reason it affects us so little. To spiritual things we are dull and dead, but
quick and sensible in carnal: and as it seems, more apprehensive of our
sickness, than our sins, of the saving of our goods and bodies, than of the
loss of God or perishing of our Souls. Otherwise the preserver of those wishes
would not be welcomed with such joy, and the Savior of these which are
infinitely better, so coldly esteemed. Certainly could we but see our sins in
the true shape, and behold with our eyes the sorrows they deserve, and our
souls must suffer for them; were we permitted a while to look into that fearful
pit, whereunto we are condemned, and take a view of the horror that is in it, A
Savior from them and from thence would be something better regarded. But
however we esteem it not now, when the destruction is too far off us to affect
us; yet the time will come when it shall, In novissimo intelligetis plane, in
the end, says Jeremy, Jer. xxx. 24.
ye shall clearly ^nderstand. In the end indeed, in that sad and fearful day,
when the destruction shall approach and the destroyer shall come, when
tribulation and anguish shall be upon every Soul that has done evil; when they
shall cry unto the Rocks and Mountains to fall upon them, and hide them from
the presence of the Lord and the wrath to come; then indeed when we shall find
the want of a Savior, we shall plainly understand this, and value the benefit
and joy of it as we ought, and know and find that there is no joy in the earth
to the joy of a Savior. A Savior that is the first: the Angel adds for a
difference, (...)
which is Christ; to distinguish him from all other Saviors. For others there
were many born, and sent unto them at diverse and several times to deliver them
from particular and several distresses. As Moses, Joshua, Gideon, Jephta,
Shamgar, Sampson, and the rest in the Book of the Judges; which indeed is
nothing else but a Catalogue of Saviors which the Lord at sundry times raised
up to free and avenge them of their enemies. These were Saviors all in their
kind, and joy there was in them, and great joy too in their times and to that
Nation, but no universal joy: they were but petty and particular Saviors. One
there was yet behind, that was worth them all, one that should save his people
from their sins; save not their bodies for a time, but their Souls for ever;
which none of these Saviors could do. And therefore a public, general and
universal Savior, of whom all had need, as being all sinners: one much talked
of, and long expected, the great and famous Savior of all; such a one was
behind: And now he is come, this is he, the Savior which is Christ, etc. He of
whom all Prophecies made mention; and he the performance of them all; of whom
all the Types under the Law were shadows, and he the substance of them all: of
whom all the Prophecies ran, and he the fulfilling of them all: he of whom all
those inferior Saviors were figures and forerunners, and he the
accomplishment of all that in them was wanting.

This is he, Jacob's Shilo, Esay's Emmanuel, Genesis xlix. 10.
Jeremy's Branch, Daniel's Messiah, Esa. vii.14.
Aggai's desideratus cunctis gentibus, the desire of all the nations,
Jer.xxiii. 5.
the desire of them then, and now the joy of all nations, Dan ix 25.
Gaudium omni populo, the joy of all people, a Savior which is Christ. Za^.
vi.12.


And this, Hag. ii. 8.
this universality of joy is comprised in the very name, for Christ signifies
anointed, and that is as much as S. John delivers in other terms, a Savior
sealed, John vi. 27. for by anointing, Kings and Priests and Prophets in old
time were deputed, signed and sealed, as it were, to their several offices, and
received power and commission to execute those high functions.

So then a Savior he is, not as those others were raised up upon a sudden upon
some occasion to serve the present, and never heard of till they came; but a
Savior in Gods forecounsel resolved on and given forth from the beginning;
promised and foretold and now anointed and sent with absolute commission and
fullness of power to be a perfect and complete Savior of all, a Savior which
is Christ That is, a Savior ex officio, whose office and very profession is to
save: that all may have right to repair unto him and find it at his hands; not
a Savior incidently, as it fell out, but one ex professo anointed to that end,
and by virtue of his anointing appointed, set forth and sent into the world of
purpose to execute this function of a Savior: not to the Jews only, as did the
rest, but to all the ends of the earth. So runs his commission unto his
Disciples, ite in universum orbem, go into the whole world and preach the
Gospel, omni Creaturae to every Creature: so runs his own Proclamation, venite
ad me omnes, come unto me, and come all, Matthew. xi. 28. and of them that do
come I will cast none out, John vi. 37. Servator omnium hominum, the Savior of
all men, 1. Tim. iv. 4. and as the Samaritans said of him Servator mundi, the
Savior of the world of Samaritans, Jews, and Gentiles; of Kings, and Shepherds
and all. And sure this is public and universal joy, gaudium omni populo, joy
unto all people indeed; for whom there is now a saving office erected, one
anointed to that end, a professed Savior to whom all may resort. None shall
henceforth be to seek; there is a name given under Heaven whereby we may be
sure of Salvation, and this is that name, the name Christ, A Savior which is
born, etc. Two of his Attributes then we have, a Savior which is Christ, that
is, a Savior and a public Savior; but he gaudium quod erit, joy which shall
be lasting, everlasting joy, none can give that but an eternal and everlasting
Savior: And he that will be such; must be something more than Christ: so
therefore he is a great deal more, Christus Dominus, Christ the Lord.

Not a Lord that is particular, and has reference to a private title, whereof
he is Lord; Lord of this or that place, or people, and the like: but the Lord,
which is absolute, and universal, without any addition: you may put to it what
you will, Lord of Heaven and Earth, of Men and Angels; Dominus Christorum, and
Dominus dominorum, Lord paramount over all: such was this Savior, and such it
behoved him to be; not only Christ, that name will sort with Men, yea it is his
name as Man only, for God cannot be anointed. But he that would save the world,
must be more than Man, and so more than Christ. Indeed Christ cannot save us,
he that must save us, must be Christ the Lord, and none but the Lord, ego sum,
ego sum, says God himself, and praeter me non est Servator, it is I, it is I
who am the Savior, I am, and besides me there is no Savior; none indeed; no
true Savior but the Lord, all other are short, vana salus hominis, Man's
Salvation is vain, says the Psalmist, any Salvation is vain, if it be not the
Lords, though they be Christ's, as Kings and Princes are, who are Gods anointed,
yet they cannot save. Trust not in Kings and Princes, for non est salus, there
is no salvation, no; no health nor help in them, their breath departs, and they
return to the earth. For though they are Christ's, yet they are but Christi
Domini, the Lord's Christ's, and we shall never arrive at full and perfect
Salvation, till we come to Christus Dominus Christ the Lord. All the help and
Salvation which those other Christ's and Saviors can afford, does but concern
the body; that indeed they may sometimes kill or save at their pleasure; but
not one of them can quicken his own Soul, much less give a ransom for
another; it cost more to redeem it than so, and he must let that alone for
ever: let it alone for this Christ whose work it is, Christ the Lord that only
can save both Body and Soul, his own and other Men's too. Secondly, those other
Christ's which are not the Lord, as they save only the Body; so can they save
only from bodily and corporal enemies: but we had need of a Savior from
ghostly adversaries, from spiritual wickednesses in high places, a Savior that
might wrestle with principalities and powers, and triumph over them too; and no
Christ may do this but Christ the Lord, the Lord of power and might, only able
to bind the strong Man in his own house, and spoil him of his goods: of power
alone to destroy Abaddon the great destroyer of the bottomless pit. Thirdly,
those other Christ's as they save but from corporal enemies; so but from worldly
calamities, from debts, and arrests and prisons and the like penalties of their
own Laws. But who shall deliver us from sin, and death, and hell? From sin the
grand debt of mankind, from death the universal Sergeant of all flesh, and from
Hell the everlasting prison of Body and Soul? For these they can give no
protection, they are all subject unto them themselves, for breaking a higher
law, the eternal law of the Almighty which no other can satisfy for, but a
Christ as Almighty, Christus Dominus Christ the Lord. Lastly, all other Christ's
or Saviors whatsoever, as they save but in few things and those only corporal,
and worldly; so in them they save but for a little while; which is but a
reptieve rather than a saving; for long they cannot save others, that so
quickly perish themselves. Evermore they die, they drop away still, and leave
their favorites and followers to seek: but it is not a short rescue for a
time, but a permanent and perpetual Salvation that we expect for ever, and for
ever we might expect it at the hands of any other Christ's, and not find it,
because they cannot endure by reason of death, Heb. vii. 23. only this Christ
because he is the Lord, Dominus vitae, the Lord of life, indureth for ever;
has an everlasting Kingdom; wherein he dispenses eternal Salvation which he
purchased by his Priesthood. The author of eternal Salvation to all that depend
on him, Heb. v.9. and mark that well, for none but the Lord can work eternal
Salvation. To save, may agree unto men; thus to save, to none but Christ. To
begin and to end, to save Soul and Body from bodily and ghostly enemies, from
sin the offense, and death the punishment, from Hell the destruction, and Satan
the destroyer, for a time and for ever, Christ the Lord is all this and does
all this. Now then we are right and never till now, we have all his attributes,
a Savior, the word of benefit, whereby he is to deliver us; Christ, his name
of office, whereby he is bound to undertake it; the Lord, his name of power,
whereby he is able to effect it. Now our joy is full and never till now, we
have all the degrees of it: whatsoever the Angel promised is here performed:
great joy, he is a Savior; public joy to all people, a Savior which is
Christ; perpetual joy, joy which shall be even for ever and ever, he is Christ
the Lord: the Lord who will not only free us from our misery and bring us to as
good and better a condition as we forfeited and lost by our fall; (for else
though we were saved, we should not save by the match:) but that we may not be
savers alone, but gainers and great gainers by our Salvation, estate us in all
the bliss and happiness he is Lord of himself. And Lord he is of life, as I
said. Life then he will impart: and he is Lord of glory, 1 Cor. ii. 8. and
glory he will impart: and he is Lord of joy, Mat. xxv. 21. Joy then he will
impart, life and glory and joy, and make us Lord of them, and of whatsoever is
within the name and title of Lord, even for ever and ever. And then it will be
perfect joy indeed when we shall enter into the joy of our Lord, into that joy
and life and glory and blessedness wherewith our Lord himself is eternally
blessed. Gaudium quod erit, joy which shall be indeed and never cease to be,
everlasting, for evermore. So now we have all and never till now, all his
Attributes, a Savior, Christ, the Lord; all our joy, great, public and
perpetual; nay if you mark it, we have yet more than this: all his composition
too, two natures in one person: his humanity in Christ, his divinity in the
Lord: and but one Savior of both, one Savior which is Christ the Lord, and
one person which is Man and God. And just so it should be, for of right none
was to make satisfaction for Man, but Man; and in very deed, none was able to
give satisfaction to God, but God. So that being to satisfy God for Man, he was
to be God and Man: and so he is: A Savior who is Christ the Lord. And so he
became this day; when though the Almighty God as this day he was born into the
world in our nature and made Man. The blessed birth of which thrice blessed
person, thus furnished in every point to save us thoroughly, Body and Soul, from
sin and Satan, the destroyers of both, and that both here and for ever: the
blessed birth of this thrice blessed person (for every word in his name is a
several blessing) is the very substance of this days solemnity, of the Angels
message and of our joy: That which remains is but circumstance, circumstance of
persons, time and place; of the persons for whom; of the time when, and the
place where: yet not so light and trivial, as may wholly be omitted: the Angel,
the Holy Ghost would not leave them unmentioned, and we may not pass them over
untoucht: yet we shall but touch them and so conclude, but taking them in their
order backward, beginning with the place where: where this Savior was born, In
the City, etc. And where should the Son of David be born, but in the City of
David? not in that City which David repaired, and wherein he reigned (that is
Jerusalem, a famous City indeed) but in that City where David was born, which
is Bethlem, a poor City, a Village rather than a City: And in this, this little
Town did this great Savior, this Christ the Lord vouchsafe to be born. Indeed
when he would die, he would die at Jerusalem; when he was to suffer shame and
ignominy, derision and disgrace, and all manner of dishonor, he would suffer
it in the eye of the world in the great City; but when he was to be born, he
would be born in Bethlem: when he was to be glorified by Angels and receive
gifts and worship from Kings and Princes; he would receive it in an obscure and
private place; this little Village: that so he might condemn the worlds pride
at his first entrance into the world, and teach men by his very birth the first
point of Christianity, to contemn honor and embrace contempt. A doctrine which
yet the particular place of his birth does urge much more vehemently: for it
was not only in Bethlem a poor Town, but in an Inn of Bethlem and a poor Inn:
so it seems, for there was no room for them in it; and not so only, but in the
poorest and basest part of the Inn, in the Stable. This was the Chamber of
state for this great King, instead of sweet odors perfumed with filth; and hung
with no other Arras, but what was weaved by Spiders, wherein he had only
Littier for his Bed, a Manger for his Cradle, and an Ox and an Ass for his
attendants. So low did he descend for our sakes, by his own example utterly to
cry down all the pomp and honor of the present life, than which nothing is of
more power to deprive us of the glory of the life to come. What a deep
humiliation has he begun withal? and how strange a disproportion is this,
between the titles of his person, and places of his birth? the Savior, Christ
the Lord to be born in Bethlem, in an Inn, a Stable; a Savior in Bethlem,
Christ in an Inn, the Lord in a Stable? yet so he would have it for our
instruction; yea and for our comfort also. It is not point of doctrine only,
but matter of joy too: for joy there is in it, even that it was in Bethlem:
Bethlem signifies the house of bread, and bread signifies all that we want; to
give us our daily bread, is to give us whatsoever we need, whatsoever we need
for the body; but this is spiritual bread, and supplies us with whatsoever we
can desire for the Soul. Joy and great joy in this, panis de Coelo, bread from
Heaven, the living bread, of which whosoever eats, shall never die; and
therefore perpetual joy too; joy which shall be for ever, he shall never die.
Joy in Bethlem then: nay and joy there is too in the Inn, joy in the very
Stable; and that public joy, omni popul^, joy to all the people: For an Inn is
domus populi, the house of the people, open and free for every Man; and though
there may be private rooms, wherein Men sort themselves in the Inn, yet the
Stable at least is publici juris, all Men have interest in it: that is common.
And as the place, so is the benefit of his birth, the dew of it is as the womb
of the morning, says the Psalmist, that is, his birth, from the womb, is as
the morning dew, watering and refreshing not Gideons fleece alone, the land of
Jiery, but the face of the whole Earth. And this is the first, the place where.

The second circumstance is the time when, hodie this day, says the Angel, for
unto you is born this day. And what day was this? most think it was the first
day of the week, as this is, so it will serve us right hodie, as this day; this
very day of the week: but what day was it of the year? why of all days of the
year, upon the shortest in the depth of winter; and of all hours in that day in
the darkest, for it was in the depth of night; and so in the very point and
close of the old week and beginning of the new. That as he chose the worst and
meanest places for his birth; so the lowest periods, and utmost limits of time
wherein he would be born. According to his own rule, vere recubuit in novissimo
loco, he every way sat him down in the lowest rooms. And every way is cause of
Joy unto us; for still we have joy in all, joy and great joy: that he came in
that season in the deep of winter, when all things were at the worst; when all
things were fruitless, sapless and even dead, for want of heat and comfortable
influence. It reflects on our spiritual estate; for just so and such it was:
and the Sun of righteousness could never rise in a better season, in a time of
greater need, to unthaw with his divine beams our frozen affections, to give
light to our minds, warmth to our devotions and life to all, that so we might
become as Trees of the Lord, full of sap, growing up in Grace and Virtue, and
bringing forth fruit unto eternal life. Joy and public joy that he came on
that very day, the first day of the week; it was the first too of the world;
and that he who was to redeem the world, should be born into it on the self
same day wherein the world was created, what does it argue but that the
redemption was to be as universal as the Creation; as the creation of this
aspectable world that was made for man? And therefore go into the universal
world, says our Savior, and preach the Gospel unto every Creature. Lastly,
joy and perpetual joy that he came in that precise hour, in the deep and lowest
bottom of the night: the Sun that can then rise and in that point and shine
upon us, it is impossible it should ever set. If our very night be turned into
day, that day sure can never see night: unless men wilfully muffle themselves
and turn their day again into night by putting out their own eyes: and not to
be pitied by any if they dwell in perpetual darkness ever after. So we have
all, all the joy and all the degrees of it in this circumstance too, the
circumstance of time. There only remains the particular application of all,
which indeed is all in all, and you have it in the last point, Vobis, all is
for you, Unto you, etc.

There is not a word in the Text but, as you have seen, has joy in it; but
this word has the joy of them all, all the joy which is dispersed and
scattered through the whole, being collected and united in this one. Before it
was only as oil or wine pressed out into several vessels: but this is the pipe
wherein all must be poured and tunn'd up, before it will work either
cheerfulness in the countenance or gladness in the heart, were the joy never so
much. For if it be prepared for others, if we shall remain as empty Casks; quid
ad nos, what is it to us? and what are we the better? But now all is poured
forth into our own bosoms; and that we may be all filled with the fullness of
it, it is particularly applied unto you, and every of you, For unto you, etc.
And herein is the comfort of all, not that he was born for all in general, but
for you in particular. Omni populo to all the people, is something too large
and universal, and the hundredth part of them shall not receive benefit by him,
and so it leaves us still in doubt: we would gladly therefore hear it in more
restrained terms, in terms of some propriety that may assure us: why vobis for
you, he is born for you. Yea now you say somewhat; And twice it is here said
for failing, in every verse; once Evangelizo vobis, I bring unto you good
tidings, in the first; and now. Natus vobis, born unto you, in this latter,
that ye may know the message is yours and the birth is yours: therefore the
message is sent unto you, because the birth concerns you. So yours they be
both, both message and birth, and joy and all; whatsoever is contained in both
is wholly yours. Yours the Savior, yours the Christ yours his benefit, his
office, his power: his benefit to save you; his office to undertake you; his
power to secure you. Yours his salvation as Jesus, his Anointing as Christ, his
dominion as the Lord. For if the birth be yours, all that follows the birth
must be yours too: if he himself be yours, all that is his is yours also. And
so it is, omn^a ejus vestra sunt, all that he has is yours, Luk xv.31. Now
then since he, and all that he has is ours; will it not be well done to make
our Entry, to take seisin of him, and then to dispose all to our best benefit?
so shall we, as Bernard wishes us, uti nostro in usilitatem nostram, and de
salvatore salutem operari, employ or make use of him, for our best behoof: draw
his proper extract from him, and work salvation out of this our Savior. But
how may that be done? sure no way better, than as God in his infinite mercy
this day gave him, so we this day again in all thankfulness receive him:
otherwise we shall but evacuate the gift, and dishonor the giver; but abuse
his goodness, and lose our own benefit: For it is not so ours, but by our own
neglect it may be lost: For though all be ours, because given us; yet nothing
shall be ours, if not accepted. Ours indeed he and all his are already by right
and interest; but they are never thoroughly ours, till they be ours by
possession, and then they are ours indeed. Possession then let us take: but how
or which way shall we take it? no way so well as in the blessed Sacrament, in
the holy Mysteries instituted of purpose, and ordained to no other end but for
pledges to assure us, and conduits to convey unto us this blessed Savior and
all his benefits. There and there only we may be seized and possessed of both:
for there and there only are both to be received. Thither then let us approach
with all reverence and due regard to claim our interest in them, and then be
assured it shall never be denied: He himself will presently meet and answer us
with an Accipite, Here take this is my body, by the offering whereof ye are
sanctified: Take this is my blood, by the shedding whereof ye are saved. Take
and receive them both, and with them all the joys and blessings they both have
purchased, or this Text does afford, for now after this, all are yours in right
and yours in possession; none can bereave you of them. You have the Author of
all safe enough, and fast enough, with you, nay within you. It is no longer now
Natus vobis to you is born a Savior; but in vobis in you he is born, and in
you he lives and will live for ever. Ye may henceforth say with St. Paul, jam
non ego vivo fed vivit in me Christus, it is not I now that live but Christ
lives in me; and if he live in us now, we shall live in him for ever
hereafter: For if whilst ye live, ye do not live but Christ lives in you; why,
when ye die ye shall not dye but live in Christ, in Christ the Lord of life and
glory and joy; and with Christ be made coheirs and Lords of them all, and
whatsoever other blessedness wherewith he himself is everlastingly Blessed.
Which the Lord God Almighty vouchsafe unto us, for this our Savior, Christ the
Lords sake: who this day came to purchase them for us, and to whom with the
Father and the blessed Spirit, three Persons, etc. be rendered all, etc.

Amen. Laus Deo in aeternum.
THE SECOND SERMON ON CHRISTMAS Day.
SERMON X. Upon GAL. iv. 4, 5.
When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman,
made under the Law:

That he might redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the
adoption of Sons.


THE Text begins with the fullness of time, but we may well begin with the
fullness of the Text, for it has both, fullness of time and fullness of matter;
the love of the Father, the humility of the Son, and the happiness of man
arising from both are here at the full. First the fullness of the Fathers love,
who so loved the world as he gave his only begotten Son. When the fullness, etc.
God sent his Son, etc. Secondly the fullness of the Sons humility, not only
vouchsafing to take on him our nature, made of a Woman, but also our miserable
condition, undertaking to satisfy the Law unto whose condemnation we were
subject, made under the Law, etc. Thirdly and lastly, the fullness of our bliss
and happiness arising from both, as being now ransomed from the death of
everlasting sorrow which the Law did threaten, that he might redeem, etc. and
not so only but adopted also unto that immortal life of glory, which the Gospel
does promise, that we might, etc. by the one we are freed from all evil, by the
other invested with whatsoever is good, and both must needs make up the fullness
of happiness, That he, etc. So these three are here at the full, and in the
fullness of them does consist the fullness of the whole Gospel, whose foundation
is wholly built upon the Son of God sent into the world; of whom there is
little to be known, and by whom there was little performed and fulfilled, which
is not even in these verses fully expressed. For you have here both foundation
and roof; both substance of the work and all the circumstances that belong unto
it; and you may see in it not only that he was a Savior sent into the world
(which is the main) but also, who it was that was sent, and by whom, and in
what manner, to what end, and in what time, which are necessary adjuncts. If
you demand of it, who it was that was sent? it tells you the Son of God; if by
whom? it answers, by God his Father, God sent his Son; if in what manner? it
replies in a twofold; made and made again; twice made, factum ex, and factum
sub, made of, and made under, made of a Woman, and made under the Law. If to
what purpose all this? it gives you a double end, which is the comfort of all,
Redemption and Adoption unto men. To them that were, etc. That we might, etc.
Lastly, if when it was performed? you have it clearly and fully in the first
words, in plenitudine temporis, in the fullness of time. When the fullness, etc.
So have you the sending, and whatsoever may seem to belong unto it, who was
sent, and by whom, how, and why, and when, not one the least circumstance is
omitted: but you have all, so full it is, and yet you have not all the
fullness. For should we inquire more particularly into the nature and person of
this Savior, here they are all three, one person and two natures, or two
natures in one person; he is the Son of God, see his Divinity, but of a Woman,
see his humanity: made of a Woman; see their union in one person, for God
cannot be made Man, but by making himself one person with Man. This for his
incarnation, will you now inquire for the birth or nativity of the person so
incarnate? it is here too, for as he was made, so was he sent; as made of a
Woman, so sent into the world: made of a Woman by incarnation, and sent into
the world by birth and nativity. God sent his son made of a woman. Should we
yet proceed a step or two farther, after his incarnation and birth, would you
behold his life or contemplate his death, see what he did in the one, or
consider what he suffered in the other; that you may do also, factus sub lege,
will give you both. For what were the actions of his life, but the keeping of
the Law in himself? or what was the passion of his death, but the satisfying of
the Law for others that had broken it? and in regard of either, made under the
law, under the law to fulfill the precepts which it commands; and under the Law
to satisfy the penalty which it injoins. So by this time I think it is full,
filled with the fullness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, whose natures, person,
actions, passion, whose incarnation, birth life and death, it fully contains,
vere verbum abbreviatum, it may well be termed and abbreviated word, a viol of
Spirits; a very extract, and quintessence drawn from four Evangelists, and
clapped up in two verses by an Apostle. Two verses, which as I said, have but two
general parts; fullness of time and fullness of matter, both tend to declare the
greatness of the Fathers love, the depth of the Son's humility, and the height
of man's happiness. The Fathers love is full, and grows unto its fullness by two
degrees. He sent, and he sent his Son. The Sons humility is full, and it
arises unto its fullness by two degrees, made of a woman, and made under the
law. Man's happiness is full, and it comes to its fullness also by two degrees,
Redemption and Adoption, that he might, or that we might, etc. If then the
greatest thing the Father could send (the Son) or the worst thing the Son could
suffer (the malediction of the Law) or the best thing men could receive or wish
for (adoption of Sons) can make it full; it is full indeed and to purpose; for
it is filled with all these. And of this fullness we will now draw out unto you
as much as the short time will permit, beginning first with the fullness of the
time, When the fullness of time was come, etc.

All the works of God, says the Wise man, are done in number, weight and
measure, and therefore questionless in a just and opportune time; For time it
is that does both number and measure all his works, yea and gives weight unto
them too: his weightiest works and greatest would be something the lighter and
lesser, were they not designed unto the fullest and fittest times. This then,
as it exceeds all other in the greatness of the work: so was it fit to receive
an answerable fullness of the season: And sure the season must needs be full
when so great a work was poured into it, when he came to fill it, in whom the
fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily. True, but yet the Text does not so much
derive the fullness of the time from his coming, as apply his coming unto the
fullness of the time: as being full and fit to receive him. Again the time
appointed by the Father, as it is a little before, and foretold by his
Prophets, was now full come and expired; this then must needs be the fullness of
time. True also; they argue the fullness of time, but short as we make it; for
had there not been a fullness and fitness in the time it self, it had never been
either appointed by the one or foretold by the other: though without his
appointment it came not to this fullness neither. True it is, that the wit of
Man is too narrow a vessel fully to receive and comprehend all the reasons of
this fullness; yet sure in that which it does apprehend, it has reason enough
to admire the wisdom of the Lord in the fitness of his appointment; not without
special convenience, choosing out neither the first beginning of the world nor
the last end of it, but a mid time, as it were, between both, when the world
should arrive at his just age. Not a time of war, but a time of universal
peace: Not the time of a Commonweal, but the time of a general Monarchy: not
of the AEquinox, but the Solstice: not in the Summer, but the Winter: not in
the day, but in the night: for all these may be comprehended within this
fullness, as not wanting their convenient fitness.

First then upon great reason the Lord chose not the first ages of the young
world, but deferred it for some thousands of years, that being first shadowed
in types and figures, and promised by many and ancient prophecies and
predictions, his coming might be the more desired and expected of Men; and
himself the better received and with less doubt entertained when he should
come. So great a mystery is the Incarnation of the Son of God, that unless his
person and actions, his birth, death, and resurrection, with all the
particulars of either had been clearly and frequently for many ages foretold by
the Prophets his forerunners, we should have little means either to persuade it
to others, or at this day to believe it our selves.

And again upon as good reason he chose not the end and last age of the
decrepit world; lest all eyes should fail, and hope faint, in too long
expectation, with Where is the promise of his coming? Rightly therefore in a
point and period of time between both these; neither when the world was too old
and doting, nor whilst it was too young and under tutorage, as it is two verses
before, but when it came to full age and strength in the sight of him that made
it.

Secondly, he chose not a troublous time of war, but of calm and settled peace;
as being the true Solomon and Prince of peace, that came to no other end but to
make and establish an everlasting peace between Heaven and Earth, God and Man,
Man and his own Soul.

Thirdly, he chose not a time of Republic, neither of Aristocracy, wherein
few, nor Democracy wherein the people have the chief power; but a time of
Monarchy, when one Man (Augustus Caesar) had obtained the Dominion, did sway
the Scepter, command and give law unto the whole world; to show that the
universal Monarch of all Nations, the Supreme head of all Churches, the
Catholic Bishop, and Pastor of all Souls, was now born into the world.

Fourthly, he chose not the AEquinox but the Solstice; not the Summer Solstice,
when the Sun runs at his highest; but the Winter Solstice, when the days are at
shortest: because then the Sun first begins to return, and the days to
increase; as in light, so afterward in heat.

So in like manner he chose the Meridian time; not the diurnal Meridian, when
the Sun by his presence makes light more: but the nocturnal, when by his
absence he makes the deep noon of night; because at that time the Sun is in the
furthest point he can go from us, and first begins to ascend toward the
morning. And both, to show the true Son of Righteousness was now approaching
and drawing near unto us, by his comfortable presence to give new light unto
our minds and divine heat unto our affections; to unthaw our benumbed and frozen
consciences, and to dispel the darkness of error that covered our Souls, by
the beams of his gracious countenance, without which a Winter of perpetual
coldness and an everlasting night of ignorance would for ever hang upon this
little world of Man. So fit every way and full was this time: A time when the
world was at full age; and fullness of peace was spread upon it: when a full
Monarchy had general dominion, and the Sun (the measure of time) arrived at his
full period: on the Solstice, the fullness of the annual, and on the Meridian,
the fullness of the diurnal revolution; the one making the depth of Winter, the
other of night. A time therefore every way full; but fuller yet by that which
it now received, even him that was filled with all the fullness of God, and from
whose fullness we all receive whatsoever grace or goodness we have: who was the
substance of all those shadows, the body of all those figures, the
accomplishment of all prophecies and the fulfilling or filling full of all the
promises that belong unto our happiness, and in this regard it is tempus
plenitudinis, a time of fullness; as in the other respects it is plenitudo
temporis, the fullness of time. And the fullness of time it is: and so the very
institution of this feast does show it to be; for look how many months there
are in the year, so many days we have given to the feast; for every month a
several day: that as the year is a full abridgment of all time, so this time a
full recapitulation of the whole year; that as it is in it self, so in our own
observance, we might acknowledge it to be the fullness of time. But it is time
to pass from this fullness to another: from the fullness of time, to the fullness
of the Fathers love that was now shown in it, who now not only sent as at other
times, but sent his Son, when the fullness of time, etc.

And sure as it is the first, so it is not the least degree of his love that he
vouchsafed to send at all. Do but consider what he is that sent, or what we are
to whom he sent, and we shall soon with our shame acknowledge it. For what is
he but the Lord of glory? what we but vile worms of the earth? he a gracious
Creator emptying forth his goodness upon us: we his Creatures and yet rebelling
against him by pride and disobedience. In this case for him to have sat still
in the Throne of his Majesty, and suffered himself to be sent and sued unto by
us, had been a great favor; and happy we if our humble requests might be but
received at his hands: But now when he a person so infinitely above us, and so
mightily provoked and offended by us, not once so much as looked after, but
still neglected with the same pride by which he was at the first contemned:
That he now instead of hurling down upon our heads deserved vengeance and
destruction, should condescend so low as to send and sue unto us for peace and
reconciliation, must needs argue an infinite love, and bowels filled with
yearning compassion on our miserable estate. Erubescat ergo and confundatur
humana superbia, O how should the pride of Man's heart blush and be confounded,
when the offended God first seeks unto sinful Men, and yet wretched Men stand
upon terms one with another, think themselves dishonored in seeking peace, and
choose rather to die in enmity, than admit of reconciliation unless first sued
unto, and not always then neither! But God you see does otherwise, and thinks
it no disparagement neither to send and send first, first and first unto us.
Mark well, I pray you, what one of his Messengers says, We are Ambassadors for
Christ Jesus and in his stead, obsecramus vos, we beseech you to be reconciled
unto God. 2 Cor.v. God esteemed it no dishonor to send Ambassadors unto Men
with terms of begging and beseeching reconciliation at their hands: and yet
perverse Man holds himself dishonored any way to seek it at the hands of his
Brother. Our cogitations sure are carnal and worldly, and our selves full of
secular arrogance, otherwise we should esteem it our chiefest honor to imitate
the love of our heavenly Father, and to prevent others rather than be prevented
in virtue and goodness. So then a love there is in it, and a love that has
fullness far beyond the empty affection of the insolent world, even in the very
sending; that such a sender should once send unto such persons an offended
Creator unto offending creatures; this love has fullness, but in that which
follows is the fullness of love, for he not only sent, but he sent his Son, When
the fullness of time was come, God sent his Son.

The Lord had many times heretofore sent unto the sinful world, sometimes by
the ministry of Patriarchs and Prophets; sometimes by the ministering Spirits
the holy Angels of Heaven: yet both are but his ordinary Messengers, and
therefore declare no more than his ordinary love: But now he sent one, that was
never sent before, one infinitely above either Prophet or Angel or whatsoever
creature else is, or may be, an unusual and extraordinary person. And therefore
if we rightly estimate, as we should do, the love of the sender by the
excellency of that which is sent, especially being sent not as the former only
in a message but as a gift unto the world; then since there is nothing so great
and excellent as his Son, his only begotten, and only beloved Son in whom is
the fullness of his own Godhead and brightness of his own glory, As in sending
him he sent the greatest, the best and the fullest thing he had: so it must
needs argue the greatest, the best, the fullest affection that may be imagined.
There is not a sending of his, but has ecce char^tas in it, behold the love of
God; but this ecce quantam charitatem ostendit Deus, behold how great love God
has shown unto us! 1 John iii. 1. In every one of the other sendings there is
a dilexit Deus, God loved the world, but now it is sic Deus dilexit, God so
loved the world as he gave his only begotten Son. It was not therefore any
thing but love, and no empty love neither, that he sent at any time and by the
ministry of any to such as we; but now sure it is full, and the fullness of love
when he sent unto us him whom he most loved; his only beloved Son. And sure it
is well for us that he sent such a Messenger: no other that had been but a mere
creature could have been sent in his errand, or at least if he had been sent,
could ever have returned with his dispatch.

Were there nothing in his business more than the conquest of Satan, I doubt
not some other creature strengthened by God and the power of his might, might
easily have been enabled to tread down that evil spirit under our feet. But
considering that God meant not to deliver Man by a powerful conquest, but a
just redemption, by a just Redeemer that should dissolve the just condemnation
of the Law, there is something more in it than the conquest of Satan: In this
case he that shall undertake it, must not only vanquish the Prince of darkness,
but by satisfying Divine Justice appease the King of Glory that was offended.
And this I suppose no mere creature endued with any power of God whatsoever
(unless that which arises from personal union with the Creator, and makes him
cease to be a mere creature) could ever be enabled to perform and accomplish.
He that shall come to Redeem, as it is here, that is, lay down a full price for
Man's transgression: He that shall put himself under the Law, that is, undertake
the penalty which Divine Justice does injoin unto the breakers: if he be but a
finite person, he shall be sure to suffer infinite sorrow: or rather because
being finite he cannot at once suffer any thing that is infinite, he must
suffer it infinitely, that is, never make an end of suffering, but lie under it
for ever. The person satisfying must be as infinite as the person offended;
otherwise he can never be of that infinite merit as to make a temporary passion
equivalent to a perpetual punishment. And this still adds fullness to the
Fathers love and to his wisdom too, who by sending this person not only sent
one that was full and answerable unto his own love, but full and suitable also
to our necessity. When no other Creature either in Heaven or Earth was either
of worth sufficient to be employed, or of sufficient ability to perform the
employment of this message and embassy, misit filium, he sent his Son.

So the Fathers love is full; twice full: he sent and sent his Son: sent first,
and sent the best thing that he had. We now pass on to the Sons humility;
wherein we shall perceive his love, arising unto fullness by two degrees, made,
and twice made; Made of a Woman, and made under the Law. It must needs be a
great degree of humiliation for the Son of God to be made at all, to be made
any thing; for to make him, says one well, is to mar him, be it what it will
be. He is the maker and Creator of all things, and therefore when he himself is
made, no less than the Creator is made a Creature, which cannot be but an
infinite abasement: But yet since he may not come in his own glory, but must be
made; if there be any thing better than other, let him be made that; some Angel
or Archangel, or any other of that Celestial Hierarchy. No he would by no means
take on him the nature of Angels, that descent was not low enough for his
humility. He made himself lower than the Angels; he was made man, and a man not
made immediately by the fingers of God like Adam in his full strength and
beauty; but bred by degrees in the womb of a Woman: for even that he vouchfafed
not to abhor, factum ex muliere, made of a Woman, etc. Thus it pleased the Lord
to abase himself, and thus it pleased him to exalt us and our Nature; by the
assumption whereof, man is now become God, and God is made man. He that was the
Son of God without a Mother, is now become the Son of a Woman without a Father:
and as God at the first drew a Woman out of Man without the help of a Woman; so
he now took a Man out of a Woman without the help of Man. For he was not
begotten but made; made a man, but of the substance only of a woman, made of a
woman, etc. Blessed woman; from whose body the redeemer of mankind took the
blood that was to be shed for the sins of the world: yea of whose blood he made
that body which men and Angels must ever adore. What wonderful titles have thou
obtained, thou Daughter of the Father, Mother of the Son, and, I had almost
said, spouse of the Holy Ghost that wrought thy conception^ how, and how
strangely art thou become, as the Daughter of thy Son, so the Mother of thy own
Father! For so she must needs be that is the Mother of God. Blessed therefore
thou art, and well may all generations so call thee; from whose bowels so great
a blessing is descended to all generations. This much we willingly afford, and
more than this we may not give, thou may not receive; we honor, but we may
not adore thee: we bless thee, we praise thee, we magnify thee; only we do not
worship thee: that belongs unto thy Son, which is both thy Son and thy Savior.
For the blood which he took from thee, he even paid for thee: he took it from
thee, so he is thy Son; he paid it for thee, so he is thy Savior. God thy
Savior, and therefore thy Father, as well as thy Son, as well as thy Savior.
So his thou art, and his Creature, by a double title of Creation, of
Redemption. Thou may not then take unto thy self any part of his honor and
worship; whom thou thy self art for ever bound to worship and honor. Honor
enough it is for thee, that he that made thee vouchsafed to be made of thee,
Made of a woman, etc.

Neither has he honored her alone in her own person, or in her own Sex; but
man and all mankind. For though he were made of a woman, yet not made by a
woman; made of a woman, but made himself a man; that both man and woman might
rejoice and glory in him. How well may we cry out with David, Domine quid est
homo, Lord what is man that thou did magnify him, or the Son of man that thou
did so visit him? And how well may we answer with the same Prophet, Homo est
res nihili, man is a thing of naught; that is, a thing drawing near unto
nothing, of no worth, no value, no continuance; yet such a thing it pleased the
Son of God to be made, and therein to be made lower than the Angels, that he
might raise and advance this thing of naught far above all principalities and
powers, and crown him with worship and glory. So have you both his natures God
and man; the Son of God, and yet the Son of a woman. So he was, and so it was
convenient he should be that was to be the redeemer of man; who might not be
redeemed, but by a passion proportionable unto a perpetual punishment. For as I
said before, had he not been God, his sufferings could never have been of that
infinite value: so I now say, had he been nothing else but God, he could not
have suffered at all; and for this reason be was both God and man: man to
suffer, God to merit: man to serve, God to set free: man to die, God to rise
again from the dead: for had he been God alone, he could never have suffered;
had he been man alone, he could never have made an end of suffering: God only
could not die; nor man only rise again from the dead: rightly therefore was he
both, both the Son of God, neither made nor created, but begotten of the
Father; and the Son of a man, not begotton by any Father, but made and created
of the substance of a woman, Made of a woman, etc. And even unto this his love
brought him for our sakes; for whatsoever else he had been made, it would have
done us little good. In this then was the fullness of his love as before of his
Fathers; that he would be made, and was made not what was fittest for him, but
what was best for us: not what was most for his glory, but what was most for
our benefit and behoof. But yet this is but the first step of his fullness, he
was made once more for our sakes; made of a woman, and made under the Law too,
made under the Law.

It was a mavelous descent and humiliation that the only begotten of the
Father should vouchsafe to be born of a woman; that the Son of the everliving
God should be content to lay aside his own Majesty and glory, and cloth
himself with the rags of our mortality: to leave his habitation in the highest
heavens, and dwell in a Tabernacle of Clay whose foundation is in the dust, as
Job speaks. Surely were man turned into a beast, into a worm, into dust, into
nothing, it were not so great a disparagement, as that the Son of God should be
made man. This making cannot but make his humility, and with it, his love, unto
us, deep and full: but this next making (made under the law) makes it deeper
and fuller still. For in that he only took on him our nature, but in this our
condition: First our nature as Man, now our condition as sinful men: men under
the law, as it follows, that is, subject unto the heavy malediction wherewith
the Law threatens the breakers of it. This was our condition, and this he
undertook: which was much more than to take our nature: by that he was made
man, but by this, he that knew no sin was made sin, 2 Cor. v. that is, made a
sacrifice for sin; was contented to be handled as a sinner, and to endure
whatsoever the Law could lay upon sinners; and this is factum sub lege made
unden the Law indeed; under the Law he was, and freely was so; and it must
needs add some fullness to his love, that (...) was merely voluntary, and free
from necessity. We indeed, though we willingly sin, yet we would not willingly
lie under the Law: but we are either born under it through corruption of
nature; or cast under it for our corrupt actions, whether we will or no: but
for him who neither knew original soil nor actual sins; who though he took on
him our flesh, yet not that flesh which lusts against the spirit; though born
of a woman, yet of a woman only without mixture of fleshly generation, of a
woman but a woman overshadowed by the Holy Ghost, and therefore pure in his
conception. And as conceived by the Holy Ghost, so he was united to the Son,
whereby he became incapable of voluntary transgression, and therefore no less
pure in his actions, than in his conception, but clear and innocent in both;
(just so he was born, so just he lived:) for him I say, if he come under the
Law, it must be Love and not necessity that shall bring him. lex justo non est
posita, no Law for the just, no Law could touch him. The Law was added because
of transgressions, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy i. 9. but no transgression was
found in him: who could convince him of sin? and therefore quid illi and legi,
what had he to do with the Law or the Law with him? He might indeed well be
Dominus legis, Lord of the Law, as he said he was Lord of the Sabbath: but sub
lege under the Law, or subditus legi subject to the Law, to the pain and
penalty of the Law, no Law in the world could make him, had he not of his own
accord made himself so. And therefore it is not natus but factus, not born
under the Law, no nor fallen under it neither (that is our condition) but made
under the Law: to show that it was not laid upon him either by natural
necessity, or through voluntary breach; but merely by his own free undertaking
was made that which naturally he was not, and in justice ought not to be. Made
therefore, not by any other but by himself, who of his own accord, and out of
his own love unto us freely undertook and paid that debt which he owed not:
otherwise no power of Law, no malice of Devils, no nor the wrath of the Father,
could ever have seized on an innocent person, had he not of grace and great
compassion unto men taken on him the person of sinners, and in their stead put
himself under the Law, that they might be freed from the punishment. Freely
therefore and of his own accord without all constraint, without any necessity,
of mere love and compassion, factum sub lege, made under the Law.

And now the doctrine begins to be comfortable indeed; comfort there was in it,
and not a little in his first making ex muliere, when he was made of a woman;
for made of women we are all; so there was an alliance and consanguinity
between us in that: besides, the flesh and blood which the Divinity assumed,
must needs be advanced to great glory; so there is honor in it also to our
nature. But yet if this were all, if there were no more in it than so, his
alliance with us and the honor of our nature in him would prove but a cold
comfort God knows; for what good is it to us that our nature is exalted in
another person, though to the height of Heaven; if we our selves be thrown
down and perish in the depth of Hell in our own persons? or what were we the
better to have a kinsman great and wealthy, if notwithstanding we lie in prison
under the Law for our own debts? Sure his wealth is little unto us unless he
relieve us with his wealth: But if he please to become our surety, to enter
into bond, and put himself under the Law for us; then he shows the part of a
true kinsman, and there is real comfort in that. Such and far worse was our
case and estate: such and infinitely beyond it was his love and compassion. We
were debtors indeed by virtue of a handwriting that was against us, Colos. ii.
14. a handwriting of ordinances which was our bond; for we were bound to keep
and perform them: but we brake the covenants and so forfeited our bond, and in
it forfeited no less than our lives. The condition of our obligation was no
money matter, it was not pecuniary but capital; and the debt of a capital
obligation, is death. Now he that shall undertake such a debt, that in this
case shall be content to take up our forfeited bond, and put in new security of
his own, be bound skin for skin, body for body, and life for life, and be
content to pay the bond too when the day comes; his love sure is full, and he
brings comfort with him to purpose. And even this he did; this he undertook and
this he performed for us. He undertook it at his Circumcision, and performed it
in his passion. Whosoever is Circumcised, factus est debtor universae legis,
he becomes a debtor unto the whole Law, says St. Paul, Gal. v.3. At his
Circumcision then he undertook the debt, he entered bond anew with us; and in
sign that he so did, he then shed a few drops of his blood whereby he signed
the bond (as it were) and gave those few drops as a pledge or earnest, that
when the fullness of time came, he would not fail to shed all the rest. And shed
it he did; what at his Circumcision he undertook, at his passion he performed,
even to the full. He bound himself in a bound of death, and death he underwent,
even the death of the Cross, the most bitter reproachful cursed death of the
Cross: so paid all to the uttermost farthing; and having paid it, delevit
Chirographum, he cancelled the handwriting, the sentece of the Law that till
then was of record, and stood in full force against us; but now that the whole
world might know it to be void, he hung it up in the same place where it was
satisfied, he nailed it to the Tree of his Cross, Col. ii. 14.

But yet this is not all; the penalty is but one part of the Law and he became
debtor universae legis, to the whole Law, says the Apostle, and the whole Law
he paid whatsoever was due. In the Law we consider a double force or power: it
has a commanding, and it has a condemning power: a power directive, and a
power vindicative: it has precepts which it injoins, and it has punishments
which it inflicts: by the one it informs us what we are to do: by the other
what we must suffer if we do it not; and he was under both parts, that both
might be fully discharged: for as he satisfied the one at his death, so the
other in his life. In his life he exactly kept and observed all the precepts of
the Law to the least tittle: and in his death he received the full punishment
of the Law to the worst and utmost extremity, and so was under both, and
fulfilled both, paid all, both principal and forfeiture: the principal, in
keeping the Law himself; the forfeiture, in suffering the penalty of the Law
for others, that so others might be freed from both. Sure now the Sons humility
(that humbled himself to death, even the death of the Cross) is full, no less
full than the Fathers love. The Father sent, and sent his Son: the Son was
made, and made of a Woman; made of a Woman, and made under the Law; made under
the Law, and both parts of the Law, that he might be fully made. And this is
Gods fullness: Let us now proceed unto Man's fullness; for from this fullness of
the Fathers love and the Sons humility we all receive the fullness of our own
bliss and happiness contained in our Redemption and Adoption; for to these
purposes all this was done, That he might redeem them, etc. And these two,
Redemption and Adoption, are the two degrees of our making (for without them we
had been marred, utterly undone) and they fully answer unto the two degrees of
his making, made of a Woman, and made under the Law: He under the Law, that we
might be redeemed from under the Law: he made the Son of Man, that Men might be
made the Sons of God. So the making of him was his own marring, but his marring
was our making; he twice marred by his making; we twice made by his marring. He
of God made Man, and of Man made a sinner; we of sinners, that is, bondslaves
to the Law, made Freemen, and of Freemen Sons; Sons of God and Heirs annexed
with Christ. And what more is there that we could wish to make it up fuller?
since our desires can extend no farther, than to be rid of all evil and to be
endowed with whatsoever good is; and by these two, Redemption and Adoption, we
are made partakers of both. To be redeemed from under the Law, is to be quit of
all evil; and to be adopted into the state of Children, is to be entitled unto
all that is good. For all evil is in being under the Law, from whence we are
redeemed: and all good, in that heavenly inheritance whereunto we are adopted:
we were created to inherit a glorious Kingdom, but through sin we lost our
inheritance; and not so only but together with it we forfeited our lives; a
sentence of death and everlasting destruction was passed upon us; and from this
now we are freed by redemption; in that again we are reestated by adoption, and
what would we more? But we must speak a little in particular of both, and first
of Redemption. That he might redeem, etc.

Every deliverance is not Redemption; but such only as is obtained by a just
and a full price; so the word imports, and something more: Redemption; a
rebuying or buying back again of something formerly sold, or forfeited into the
possession of another. Ever a former alienation must go before, and a valuable
satisfaction follow after; otherwise there may be a bare emption without the
former, a reemption without the latter: but unless both be precedent, it cannot
be Redemption. And sure such a matter had formerly befallen us. A kind of
alienation had gone before whereby we had made away our selves, sold our
inheritance and forfeited our lives: A making away indeed, rather than a sale
it was; for such a trifle made away: first in Adam for the forbidden fruit, a
matter of no moment: since in our own persons daily made away for some trifling
pleasure or profit not much more worth: And having thus passed our selves away
by this selling our selves under sin, the Law seiseth on us, whose dreadful
doom is death and Hell, and everlasting sorrows there with the Prince of Hell.
So infinite a punishment does it inflict, because in the breach of it an
infinite Majesty was offended. In this heavy case we lay shut up under the Law
as in a Prison, Romans iii. 23. fast bound with the cords of our own sins, Prove.
v. 22. the sentence passed on us, and we waiting but for execution: what evil
is there not in this estate and on every Soul that is in it? Our Faith sure is
weak, and we do not thoroughly apprehend what we have only heard of: but could
we see it with the seeing of the eye, as Job speaks, were we permitted to stand
on the brink and look into that fearful pit of everlasting horror whereunto we
are condemned by the Law, what misery and fullness of misery should we then
discern? or rather what misery should we not discern in our lamentable estate,
sentenced unto that gulf of sorrow before our eyes with legions of Devils
attending at our backs, ready to execute the sentence, and push us in to suffer
that torment which we could not endure to behold? Could we but with our fancy
place our selves in this case, which they are in that are under the Law, this
point, I am sure, would be full on our parts, even fullness of misery. Well then
the first degree of our happiness, is to be rid, to be quit of this miserable
estate; but by what means may that be done, and who shall obtain it for us?
Prayers and entreaties would not serve turn, our pardon may not be had for the
begging; but sold we were, and bought we must be: God was wronged and must be
righted: the Law was broken and must be satisfied; and without this ransom the
prisoners may not be delivered. A matter therefore not of Intercession, but of
Redemption; But now the price of Redemption who shall lay down? sure it is not
so easily done; we sin indeed with great facility, but to expiate sin, will
cost a great deal more: he that will do it must resolve to suffer as much
punishment, as a world of Men can deserve or an offended God in justice
inflict: and who or what is there amongst the works of the whole creation, that
may stand under his wrath, until it has taken full revenge, and not perish
under it for ever? Gold and Silver in this case is of no worth, the blood of
Bulls and Goats of no value, Men of as little esteem as either; and therefore
should they offer the Sons of their loins for the sins of their Souls, they
could do no good, it cost more to redeem them than so, therefore they must let
that alone for ever. Nay should an Angel of Heaven be incarnate to suffer for
sin, he would become but as an incarnate Devil and must lie in Hell for ever.
He is, though an excellent creature, yet but a creature; and a creature may not
satisfy the Creator: when therefore nothing may do it; nor mineral, nor beast,
nor man, nor Angel, nor any thing else created, no remedy but God himself must
be made Man, and the Man God made under the Law, ut ille, that he may do it,
that he might redeem them that were under the Law. This is the ut, the end, the
first end for which all this ado is kept; for which Heaven and Earth are thus
troubled; for which is all this business, this sending and making, making over
and over again; that since there was nothing of sufficient value already
created, a new person of extraordinary worth and dignity might be made, ut
ille, that he at least might be able to redeem us from under the Law. And sure
full and able he was every way; being Man he might undertake for Man; and being
God he could give satisfaction to God: for as sins against an infinite person
are of infinite guilt, so suffering in an infinite person must be of as
infinite merit: from whence it is that a short passion in him is equal to a
perpetual punishment in us; for what is wanting in the sufferings is abundantly
supplied in the dignity of the sufferer, whose infinite person suffering
finitely, carries full proportion with finite persons suffering infinite
punishment. Able then he was and no less willing than able; what he only could
do he lovingly did do, and did it too to the full. Any the least sufferings of
his had been enough, but that he might be sure to lay down a full price, he
gave, pretiosum sanguinem, his precious blood, says St. Peter, yea his life
blood, says St. Matthew, dedit vitam, he gave his life a ransom for many,
Matthew. xx. 28. he is content to bleed unto death for this little world, when
the least drop of his blood had been enough for many worlds. He was not sparing
in his price; but as the Psalmist speaks, with the Lord is plenteous
redemption; plenteous indeed, every way there is a plenitude and fullness in it,
he fully made under the Law, we fully delivered from under the Law; which yet
is but part of our fullness, but the first degree of our happiness to be rid and
quit of the misery under which we lay. And yet this had been full enough were
there no more; but yet this is not all, no he left us not there, but that the
measure might flow over, he gave us not over, when he had freed us of this
wretched estate, till he had brought us to the blessed estate himself is in;
and of prisoners under the Law, made us Heirs of that glorious Kingdom promised
in the Gospel. For so it follows at the last end of all and the fullest too, ut
nos recipiamus, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons: that is, of
Captives condemned become children adopted; adopted to the joint fruition of
all that he has, which is fully as much as he could give or we could desire.
To purchase our pardon, to free us from death and the Law's sentence, this
seemed a small thing to him, yet this is lex hominis, man's goodness goes no
farther: and gracious is the Prince that does but so much. For who ever heard
of a condemned Man adopted afterward, or that thought it not enough and enough
if he did but escape with his life? So far then to exalt his bounty to that
fullness as pardon and adopt both, non est lex hominis haec: no such measure
amongst Men. Zelus Domini exercituum, but the zeal of the Lord of Hosts was to
perform this Isa. ix. 7. So full is this on his part, that he did not only
redeem but adopt, purchase us, and purchase for us: give us our lives, but part
with us his own Kingdom. And full it is, I am sure, on our parts that are
adopted; did we fully know the riches of our inheritance; which we shall not do
till another fullness of time come. Many and glorious things are spoken of thee
thou City and Kingdom of God; but yet when we then come to behold it, we shall
say of it as the Queen of Sheba did of the wisdom of Solomon, when she came to
him: The report was less than the truth, and the one half thereof had not been
told us. For what tongue may tell us that which neither eye has seen, nor ear
heard, nor ever may enter into the heart of Man, till Man enter into it, till
that day when it shall be said unto him, intra in gaudium Domini, enter into
thy Masters joy? In the mean time where we cannot conceive, what should we
speak? where the thing is so full, that all words are too empty to express it,
it will be enough to admire in silence, or say only with David, Sure the lot is
fallen unto us in a fair ground and we have a goodly heritage: so now we are
come to the true fullness indeed, and we may not go farther, not farther in our
discourse, it must needs stay where all words fail, and every tongue of
necessity is speechless. Nay no farther in our desires; this Adoption is the
fullness of our option, nay a fullness beyond our wish; since we could not
possibly conceive so great happiness to wish for it. By this time then it is
full Sea, and all the banks are filled on every side. It is now as Ezekiels
waters that he saw flow from under the threshold of the Temple, that took him
first to the Ankles, then to the Knees, after to the Loins, at last so high
risen there was more no passage, Ezekiel. iv. 7. for just so it fares here with
the Text, that by the like degrees runs on, till at length it rise to an
immensity of fullness, not to be forded. First, from the fullness of his
compassion God sent to release us: Secondly, from the fullness of his love he
sent his Son; who in the fullness of humility, was content to be made; and to
make a full union with our nature, made of a Woman; and to make the union
fuller yet with our sinful condition, be made under the Law; that we might
receive a full deliverance from all evil, by being redeemed; and a full estate
of all the joy and glory of his heavenly inheritance, by being adopted. Lo here
is fullness of all hands. And sure amidst all this fullness, it were much unfit
that we only should be empty for whom all was done. If there be fullness of
compassion in the Father, if fullness of love in the Son to purchase benefits
and blessings for us, full above measure; sure there should be in some measure
at least a fullness of duty in us again to return unto them. Otherwise if we
neglect so great Salvation, we may and shall notwithstanding this Redemption or
Adoption either, depart as empty of mercy, as we are of goodness. The Catholic
Redemption is not so absolute but that many may perish for whom Christ died, as
the Apostle speaks; The general and probationary Adoption is not so peremptory,
but that upon misbehaviour diverse may be disinherited again. Filii Regni
ejicientur for as, even the Sons of the Kingdom shall be cast forth, says our
Savior himself. If thou then would be a firm and constant partaker of these
benefits, being thus set free by so noble a Redeemer, and at so high a price,
stand upon thine own worth; value thy Soul at the same rate it was ransomed at;
do not again basely sell it and thy birthright, for the poor pleasures of this
world, like Esau for a mess of pottage: But as God is full of compassion, full
of mercy, full of love; so be thou full of Duty, full of Piety, full of
Repentance, and then Redemption and Adoption both shall be fully thine and
thine for ever. But yet these are but the general duties of our whole life: if
we would make it up full indeed, we are to consider those that are special and
proper to this time in particular, and they are principally two, Joy, and
Thanks; that as the persons are two, the Father and the Son, and the benefits
two, Redemption and Adoption; so that both might be fully answered, the duties
are two, joyfulness and thankfulness unto the Authors from whence they proceed.
So these two will make up all full; especially if they be in those full
degrees, if they be full in us, in our selves. And that so they should be, their
very names do teach us, Joyfulness and Thankfulness both ending in Fullness; to
show that they may not be remiss, but that we should be full and abound in
them, as at all other times, so chiefly in this which is the fullness of time,
or the time of fullness, choose you whether. And a time of fullness I am sure it
will be in one sense; of fullness of bread, and fullness of bravery, of fullness
of mirth and pastime; and so it may be, and so it has ever been a joyful time
even in outward appearance: only we must be careful that this outward joy eat
not up, evacuate not our spiritual joy proper to the feast. Which then is truly
spiritual, when our spirits shall rejoice not so much in external sports with
the multitude, as with the blessed Virgin, in Domino salvatore, in God our
Savior: God our Redeemer, as it is here. And sure a Redeemer brings joy with
him indeed: we our selves acknowledge it in other matters, if it concern the
redeeming of our goods, or of our momentany lives. Tell an undone Man of one
that will redeem his mortgaged and forfeited Land; tell a lost Man cast and
condemned under the Law of the Kingdom, of a Redeemer that will purchase his
pardon; it is a welcome message, the joyfullest news that ever he heard. Shall
those transitory things affect us thus, and shall spiritual things and eternal
affect us nothing? Are our earthly estates so dear unto us, and is the recovery
of a celestial inheritance in a Kingdom of everlasting glory not worth the
thinking on? Are our animal and perishing lives so precious, and shall the
redemption of our Souls cast and condemned to the sorrow of eternal torment not
be regarded? Sure did we worthily conceive of it, such a Redeemer would be
welcomed with our best and fullest joy. But however it go with us now when the
destruction is not near enough to affect us, sure I am the time will come when
it shall: In novi^^imo intelligetis plane, in the latter end ye shall fully
understand, says the Wiseman. At that day, that fearful day, when tribulation
and anguish shall be upon every Soul that has done evil, when they shall
vainly cry unto the Rocks and Mountains to cover them from the presence of the
Lord, then indeed ye shall understand and know that there is no joy in the
world to the joy of such a Redeemer: but alas then of a gracious Redeemer he
will become a terrible and inflexible Judge. And therefore, beatus populus qui
scit jubilationem, blessed the people that now know how and wherein to rejoice.
And as we are to rejoice for the benefits we receive, so we may not be
unmindful of them from whence we receive them. That were like swine that fat
themselves on the mast, but never look up to the hand that beats them down. And
therefore after our joyfulness or fullness of joy, our fullness of thanks or
thankfulness is to ensue. We must sing both parts in the Christmas Carol of
that blessed Woman of whom he was this day made, My soul does magnify the Lord,
as well as my spirit rejoiceth in God my Savior. To render our thanks then and
to remember to do it fully; to forget none, to him that was sent, and to him
that sent; sent his Son in this, the Spirit of his Son in the next verse; the
one to procure, the other to seal and assure unto us both these benefits. To
all three therefore, to the Father that sent, to the Son that came, to the Holy
Ghost that made him at his coming: (for by him he was conceived) to the Father
for his mission, to the Son for his redemption, to the Holy Ghost for his
adoption (for by him it is wrought; he that made him the Son of man, does
likewise regenerate us to the state of the Sons of God:) worthily therefore to
all three is all thanks and praise and honor to be rendered for evermore. But
yet this thankfulness is but verbal, and therefore not yet full; for fullness of
thanks would surely be expressed in something more than words: and in what may
that better be, than in the holy Eucharist, the Sacrament of thankfulness, and
is by interpretation thanksgiving it self? When David's zeal thoroughly warmed
with the consideration of Gods mercies brake forth into that fiery demand, quid
retribuam Domino, what shall I return unto the Lord for all his benefits? he
could find our nothing so full as this, accipiam Calicem salutis, I will take
the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. Surely if our hearts
be hot within us as his was, and we meditate a return as he did; Ecce calix
salutis, behold the Cup of salvation; let us take it, and with it in our hands,
call upon him, render him our true Eucharist or real thanksgiving indeed. The
Cup of Salvation cannot but do well in the day of salvation: In it is the blood
of the Covenant, the price upon Covenant to be laid down for us, and therefore
the Cup of Redemption: In it is the blood of the Testament wherein our glorious
inheritance is by way of legacy conveyed unto us; and therefore the Cup of
Adoption. So that our freeing from under the Law and our investiture into our
new adopted estate, are not full, nor fully consummate without it. And yet this
may not be all. No, when this is done, there is an allowance of twelve days
more for this fullness of time, that we shrink not up our duty into this day
alone, but continue it throughout the whole. Sure every good heart in this
solemn commemoration of our Redemption, and Adoption, will himself remember to
redeem some part of the time, to adopt too some hour in the day at the least,
to think on him a little and bethink himself of the duty the time calls on him
for. That so no day be empty, quite empty in this fullness of time: but that
fullness of time, fullness of mercy, and fullness of duty may all meet together
and make a full union. That as the time is filled with the compassion of the
Father, and the love of the Son; so we may be filled with the grace of the Holy
Ghost. Then shall we be sure to pass on from one fullness to another, from this
here to another which is behind, from the fullness of Grace to the fullness of
Glory. For all this is but the fullness of time; that is the fullness of
eternity: when time shall be run out, and his glass empty, and tempus non erit
amplius, and shall be no more; which will be at his next sending; for yet once
more shall God send him, and he come again. At which coming we shall then
indeed receive the fullness of our Redemption, not from the Law, that we have
already; but from corruption to which our bodies are yet subject: and receive
the full fruition of the inheritance whereunto we are here but adopted. And
then it will be perfect, complete, absolute fullness indeed, when we shall all
be filled with the fullness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. i. 23. that is,
with the fullness of God himself. For Deus erit omnia in omnibus, God it is that
shall be all in all, 1 Cor. 15. and then sure all will be thoroughly full
indeed. To this we aspire, and in the fullness appointed of every one of our
times, Almighty God bring us; by him and for his sake that in this fullness of
time was sent to work it for us in his person, and work it in us by the
operation of his blessed Spirit. To whom with the Father and the Son, be
rendered all thanks, etc.

Laus Deo in aeternum.
THE THIRD SERMON ON CHRISTMAS Day.
SERMON XI. Upon ESAIAS liii. 8.
And who shall declare his Generation?
OF whom speaks the Prophet this, of himself or of some other man, said the
Queen Candace's Treasurer unto Philip: and Philip, says the Text, began at
that scripture and preached unto him Jesus: Act. viii. And this is that
self-same Scripture, at least part of it, which that Ethiopian Eunuch then
read, and Philip, that we be not ignorant whom it concerns, of Christ Jesus
expounded. And though he who was a stranger unto the Commonwealth of Israel and
the Oracles of God, could not understand it without a Teacher; yet unto us that
are conversant in the mystery of Christ, it is manifest in it self; there being
no clearer nor more illustrious Prophecy of it than this whole Chapter, wherein
his birth, passion, death and resurrection are so fully and evidently
described, as it may well be termed an Evangel a Gospel, rather than a
Prophecy. It begins first with his first birth and beginning, He shall grow up
before him as a tender plant and as a root out of a dry ground, v. 2. It goes
on to his sorrows and sufferings, and for whom he endured them. He is despised
and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief, etc. He
suffers then, and for us he suffers, but he must suffer unto death, and of that
it will assure you too. He is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, etc. But
though he be mean, slain and slaughtered, yet he may not abide under death:
though judgment be passed on him and executed too, and he imprisoned in the
grave and jaws of the pit, yet all the bands and cords of death cannot hold
him, he must up in despite of them all: And therefore it follows, he was taken
from prison and from judgment; which was verified in his resurrection from the
dead, wherein the judgment and sentence of death was disannulled and the Prison
of the Grave broken up. In contemplation of which high argument of his Divinity
that could so arise; the Prophet breaks forth into this admiration of his
Celestial descent, and offspring, Who shall declare his generation?

So then it is manifest not only by Philip's interpretation but by the
Prophecies own clearness and fullness, that the Prophet spoke not this of
himself but of some other man; and that other man to be none other than Christ
Jesus the Eternal Son of God, whose Incarnation, birth or generation we this
day with all joy and thankfulness publicly Celebrate, and are now as well as
we can to discourse of; yet not as thinking to express it, but only to show you
how inexpressible it is, for Generationem ejus, etc.

Now (that we may bound our discourse within certain lines and limits, this
generation of our Lord and Savior is not simple and of one sort, but various
and manifold. As his Person is compounded of diverse things, so has he
accordingly several generations. In the blessed Trinity there are three Persons
and but one Substance: In Christ Jesus three Substances and but one Person: he
has but two Natures indeed, Divinity and Humanity; but the Humanity again is
compounded of two several Essences, corporal and spiritual, a body and a Soul;
so in all there are these three, a body, a Spirit, and the Divinity; whereunto
both are united. And according to these three we shall consider a threefold
generation, Divine, Humane and Spiritual: For Christ was born from all
Eternity; and still is in heaven without a Mother; on earth he had in due time
a humane birth without a Father; and in the minds and Souls of men he is
spiritually born without Father or Mother: of a Mother without a Father he was
born once: without Father or Mother he is born often: of a Father without a
Mother he is born always and perpetually. Lastly, of his Father in Heaven he is
born God; of a Mother on Earth he was born man; without Father or Mother in the
Souls of men he is born God and man. As there are three Substances therefore in
our Lord and Savior: so has he three births or generations which we shall
consider in their order, Divine, Humane and Spiritual; all three so hid and
full of admiration inutterable, as the Prophet and we with him, may well say of
them all, Generationem, etc.

To begin then with the First his Divine generation, whereof we shall say but
little, because indeed we can say nothing worthily and as we should say: For
how shall frail man say, what no man can possibly conceive, since he cannot
fully say and enunciate what he does conceive? That there are several persons
in the Godhead, is the high, yea highest Act of our faith, no subject for our
expression. That God has a Son we are bound to believe, but how he begat him
we are bound not to inquire; because he has not revealed, nor will reveal,
peradventure may not, but to the glorified eye. Then indeed and then only when
we shall see him as he is, we shall see his generation and be happy in seeing
it: it is the eternal and everlasting blessedness of the Father to beget him,
for it is his inmost natural Act and essential: and it shall be our perpetual
happiness hereafter to behold it, which we shall then but behold, comprehend it
we may not; but know it we shall: And this is life everlasting to know thee and
him whom thou have sent. In the mean time till that life everlasting come,
whilst we are Pilgrims, and lead a life temporary here upon earth, wherein we
know and prophecy but in part; it is not our least wisdom, to know such high
mysteries are no part of our knowledge. It is enough for us with holy Moses to
see the back-parts of the Lord, to see him in his effects, his word and outward
works; to see him in his glory, in his Essence and inmost operations, we
cannot, and live. And they who will attempt it with those Bethshemites that
would needs pry into the Ark, shall assuedly die. Such aspiring Spirits, that
with the bold Schoolmen, do pierce into the hidden secrets of Divinity, what do
they but like foolish flies, flutter about the light, till they are at length
singed with the flame? For qui scrutatur majestatem opprimetur a gloria, he
that searches into the majesty of God shall assuredly be oppressed with his
glory. And therefore it is docta ignorantia, a learned ignorance, as St. Austin
has it, not to know what may not be understood; and it were much better
piously to profess it than rashly to arrogate science: For that may deserve
pardon, but this shall never want punishment, says the same Father, Sermon. 15.
For which reason well said the great St. Basil of this high Point when he came
to treat of it, mysterium hoc silentio potius quam oratione colendum, it is a
mystery to be adored in silence not expressed by words. Homil. de. Not. Domini.
The Prophet Esaias himself was not able to do it, and which is more, he knew that
none else could. And therefore quis enarrabit who shall declare it? for his
Interrogation has the force of a Negation, who shall? that is, none can, who
shall declare, etc. There is indeed in it self, nothing so light and clear and
evident as this Divine generation, wherein light of light, and very God of very
God, is produced and begotten: but withal unto us, nothing more hidden, secret
and obscure. Not that there is any obscurity in God, in quo tenebrae non sunt
ullae, in whom there is no darkness, says the Scripture: but that he dwells in
unaccessible light, and is clothed with Majesty inapproachable, as with a
garment; aciem oculorum vincens, non solum hominum sed etiam Angelorum, darking
and blinding the sight both of men and Angels. And therefore how is it possible
to behold the light of his generation, who is the brightness and very splendour
of his Fathers glory? men's deficit, vox silet, non mea tantum sed etiam
Angelorum, the eye of the mind fails, and the tongue of every Creature becomes
mute and dumb, not mine alone, says St. Cyprian, but of the b^lessed Angels
also. Therefore Quis enarrabit? Before ever the world was, or any foundation of
it laid, Ibi non tempus, non seculum intercessit, nemo spectator adsuit, when
as yet, says St. Basil, neither time nor age was formed, nor any spectator by,
to witness or report it: but God alone enjoying and embracing himself from all
eternity in himself and of himself he begot his only Son, who is none other but
himself: no other God though another person. And who then shall declare? Again,
the Father begets a Son, and yet the Son is not younger than the Father; nor
the Father any antienter than the Son: he begets him by communicating his
Essence unto him, and he communicates not any part, for it is indivisible, but
his whole and entire Essence unto his Son, and yet parts with none himself, who
has heard or may conceive such things? who therefore shall declare? Yet once
more: the Son of God is perfect and complete within himself and so has been
from everlasting, entire and wanting nothing, and yet, which is strange, as
continually produced and begotten: for not as in the beginning God made the
Heavens, so in the beginning he begot his Son; who in the beginning both was
and was begotten: the Heaven was made once, but the Son is begotten for ever,
and who, etc. Lastly, to omit many things, the eternal word is truly the Son of
God, and is truly born of him; and yet notwithstanding has no Mother that ever
bare him, but (which has most admiration) is begotten only with a look, by
mere aspect and intuition, as the Fathers speak and the Scriptures intimate,
and therefore who shall declare? These and many other the like high and
inexplicable mysteries of this wonderful generation the Apostle seems not to
express but to shadow as well as he might, when he terms him the brightness of
his Fathers glory and the express image of his Person, Heb. i. 3. For though
these words cannot reach home to the thing; yet others more apt and significant
may not be found. For brightness is ever coeval with the thing that is bright;
if bright in it self: the brightness of the Sun is neither before nor after;
but fully as ancient as that Sun that begat it: and so begat it, as it does not
cease still to beget it. For it is not produced once for all, but is generated
perpetually; and generated not of two, but of one only; who can communicate it
to other things, and yet lose none of it himself. Excellently therefore the
brightness of his glory; and as fully the express image of his person, to show
as far as may be shown the manner of his generation by sight and intuition. For
the images which we behold when we look on our selves in a glass, are of all
others the most exact and perfect. Now God himself is his own mirror; wherein
beholding and comprehending himself, he produces the most express and absolute
image of himself. So that the Divine intellect of the Father reflecting inwards
and fully conceiving his own perfection, does at once both conceive and bring
forth his own and only Son; the substantial and essential picture of himself.
And therefore no thought here, of Mother or Matrimony, nor imperfection or
inquination; but he is begotten after a pure, clean, chaste, high and sublime
manner: as the beam from the Sun, as the image from the glass, as being the
brightness of his Fathers glory and the engraven Character of his person.
Though neither of these can fully express it; for it is wonderful, and
therefore to our ears cannot be uttered: it is singular, and therefore has no
example: for how should the imperfect Creature every way square with the
absolute perfection of the Creator? And therefore let us adore in Soul and
believe it in heart; but lay our hand on our lips and not think to utter it in
words: whereof when we have spoken, yea and thought all that we can, we must
shut up all with the Prophets Admiration, who shall declare?

And this shall suffice for the non-declaration of his Divine birth and
generation, we now pass on to his humane the subject of this days Solemnity,
and therefore the chief theme of this hours discourse, but a theme every way
beset also with so many Pearls of highest admiration, as we may well say of it
as of the other, Quis enarrabit? Nay in some things it may seem something
stranger than his other generation. For that God should be born of God, though
we can no way apprehend it, yet in reason it carries some Correspondence and
proportion: But that God should be born again, and born of a woman, has such
an infinite disparity, that unless it had been foreshewn by such illustrious
prophecies and confirmed by so many and great miracles, it had exceeded not
only reason but even all belief. Well therefore did S. Paul term it a mystery
and a great mystery, and great too without controversy, without controversy
great is the mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy iii. God
in the flesh, a great mystery indeed! yea how many great mysteries are there in
it! The Ancient of days is become a swadled Child; and he who was the Son of
God without a Mother, now made the Son of a woman without a Father; a woman
that is at once both a Mother and a Maid; conceiving and bearing a Son, and yet
a Virgin in and after both conception and birth. Nay more, the Mother of her
own Maker, and so the daughter of her Son: as he the Son of his own daughter.
No marvel therefore that at this admirable birth of his, he had marvail and
admiration it self given him for his name; for his first, To us a Child is born
and to us a Son is given, the principality shall be upon his shoulders, and you
shall call his name Wonderful, Isa. ix. wonderful, and full of wonders, as in
other things so especially in his birth and generation, and therefore, Quis
enarrabit? Wise Solomon having with all his skill and diligence searched into
the depths and profundities of Nature, after all his travel could find out no
new thing under the Sun; but that you may know a greater than Solomon is here,
our Savior this day together with himself brought many new things, you see,
into the world, which the Sun never saw before, nor ever shall see again: A new
birth, new man, new person, new Heavens, new Earth, a new Creation; for all had
need of renewing, and all things in him are made new, Ecce nova jam facta sunt
omnia, behold all things are become new, says the Apostle. All things, but
wretched men, that regarding it not grew old in their Sins, but shall receive a
punishment hereafter that shall never grow old in it self, because it shall
never be ended. And therefore Quis? Yet that we may declare it as far as we
can, or at least declare how far it is above all declaration, we will in their
order briefly touch upon these circumstances of his birth and generation: Who
it is that is born, of whom, and in what manner, and where he was born: For
there is newness and strangeness in them all not fully to be declarable. And
first, who or what he is that is born? And what is he, an ordinary man as we
our selves are, one of the rout, one of the vulgar? A Man indeed he was, and
when he was at the lowest and worst, Pilate could term him so: ecce homo,
behold the Man: but yet no ordinary Man, he was a King too, and a King born;
where is he that is born king of the Jews? say the Wisemen of the East. Nay no
petty King, no King of the Jews alone; he shall have the Nations too for his
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possessions, says
God in the Psalm. And therefore an universal Monarch. And yet higher, for I
will make him my firstborn, higher than the Kings of the earth; higher indeed,
even the high God that is King both of Heaven and Earth; and therefore his name
shall be called Wonderful and mighty counselor, and Deus fort^s, the strong
God, pater aeternus, the everlasting Father, says my Prophet in the place but
now quoted. And it is worth the observing in the beginning of the verse, A
child is born and a son is given: toward the end this weak child is the mighty
God, this young Son is the everlasting Father; for the Son of God is our
Father, and this Father now became the Son of Man and made himself our Brother.
The Ancient of days that sat on the throne in the 7. of Dan. whose garment was
white as snow, and the hairs of his head as pure wool, to shadow his eternity,
who has neither beginning of days nor end of life; This is he that is this day
born a young and tender child, even that mighty and Almighty God now a weak and
swadled Infant. This sure is new and mavelous, rightly therefore still do his
titles begin with wonderful, whose person and birth may well be admired, cannot
be expressed, for Quis enarrabit?

And yet this is not all the wonder that is in him: strange and very strange it
is, that he should be the Son of Man and Man's everlasting Father; that is, God
and Man: but yet it is another new thing and little less strange, that this God
should be perfect Man. and yet have no Humane Person. A Humane Nature he had,
but a Humane Person he had not. And therefore non solum actus est novus, sed is
qui nascitur est homo novus, it is not only a new birth, but he that is born is
a new kind of Man; the like whereof was never known, having a Humane Nature,
but a Divine Person. Nestorius indeed after the manner of other Heretics, not
content to leave this mystery unto his Faith, but seeking to comprehend it with
his reason, was so blinded with gazing upon a light too strong for his eyes, as
he would not acknowledge the thing, because his weakness could not conceive who
it should be; how a Humane Nature should be and subsist without a created and
Humane Person: and therefore he impiously formed unto himself a double Person
in Christ, and so in effect two Christ's, one that had a Humane, another that
had a Divine, both Nature and Person: a great error and pernicious: For were
it so, were they not several Natures, but two distinct persons, the actions or
passions of the one could not properly be attributed to the other since the one
is not the other. Christ the God could not be Man; and Christ the Man could not
be God: but one God alone, the other Man alone: and so neither could have
redeemed the world; for God could not suffer, nor Man satisfy. Christ Jesus
therefore our blessed Lord is but one; one substance and hypostasis that has
two Natures Divine and Humane; both knit and united in one and the self-same
Person, and therefore justly and truly may be said to be, and is, both God and
Man: and because Man, could die; because God, could add an infinite price unto
his death, and so reconcile both God and Man. But you will say, how is it
possible that a Humane Nature should subsist in a person and hypostasis not her
own, who may conceive, who can apprehend it? neither do I say you should, but
that you should believe it. Had we reason to demonstrate it, it were not
wonderful; had we example, it were not singular: But now when besides and above
the whole order of created Nature, a new Man and after a new manner with so
great a miracle is born and brought forth, having a created and Humane Nature
subsisting in a Divine and uncreated Person, we may truly say quis enarrabit?
And this for the person, who or what he is that is born.

Now if we shall remove our consideration unto her of whom he was born,
peradventure we shall find neither less nor fewer marvels and miracles in this,
than in that other. For certainly that God should become Man is very much; but
that he should be born of a Woman is yet much more. For he might have created a
Humane Nature out of the Earth, as he did the first Man, and had it pleased
him, assumed it in an instant: and therefore needed not have lain nine months
in the womb after that manner as we shame to imagine, and is altogether unfit
we should speak: there is horror in the very conceit of it, and therefore well
says the Hymn, thou did not abhor the Virgins womb, This would be very
strange indeed could we apprehend the infinite Majesty of that God who was
pleased for our sakes to descend so low. That that sublime and excellent glory,
in presence whereof the holy Angels themselves cover their faces with their
wings; that Almighty Lord which sat on the circle of the Heavens, and in
comparison of whom the inhabitants of the Earth are but as Grasshoppers, and all
the Nations of the World but as the dropping of a bucket: that such and so
great a God, for our good, and that we might have nearer affinity with him,
should disrobe himself of all his honor, and be wrapped in films and skins
instead of a Garment; leave that circle of the Heavens and cast himself into
the Dungeon of the womb, not abhorring that dark place, which we our selves
abhor but to think on: Astonishment may well seize the mind that shall truly
meditate on it. If it do not kindle your affection and devotion, it cannot at
the least but raise up admiration; enforcing us to cry out with the Prophet,
Quis enarrabit?

Neither is this all the strangeness, that God was born of a Woman, who by this
means was advanced into a strange affinity with her Maker, becoming at once
both the Mother of her Father and Daughter of her own Son: It is strange too
and a miracle in Nature that he was born of none but a Woman, that he who
before had a Father and no Mother, should now have a Mother and no Father.
Three sorts of Generation or rather Production, had passed before: The first,
without Man or Woman, so Adam. The second, of Man without Woman, so Eve. The
third of both Man and Woman, so we all their posterity. But now to make all
complete and never till now, the fourth is added, of a Woman without a Man;
that so a Fatherless Son, and a Virgin Mother might double the wonder: this is
it which my Prophet intimates in the first entrance of this Chapter, he shall
grow up as a pleasant plant and as a root out of a dry ground: as a root
springing of its own accord from that virgin earth, untilled, unsown, and
unmanured by the hand of Man: So sprang he from the maiden loins of his Mother,
and had no Man's assistance living for a Father, who then shall declare etc.

And as he was begotten without a Father: so (that we may touch upon the
manner) was he born, as it is likely, without pain or hurt unto his Mother. It
is true a punishment it was, and from the beginning, and from the beginning
until now has it ever prevailed, all Women naturally bringing forth in sorrow.
But our Savior was no natural Man: All things in him you see are miraculous
and supernatural. And why not this in his birth as well as so many things else?
why not born without sorrow as well as conceived without pleasure? It is the
collection of a Father, Ubi voluptas partum non antecessit, neque dolor
subsecutus est. She who felt no delight in the conception suffered rightly as
little pain in the birth, says Greg. Nyss. orat. de Christi resurrect. Nec in
conceptione sine pudore, nec in parturitione cum dolor: unstained in her
conception, and unpained in her parturition, says St. Austin, Sermon. 14 de
Nativ. and in my understanding, rightly; for what labor or sorrow could he
bring in his birth, that left her a perfect Virgin, that bare him? And
therefore in this regard also, who shall declare, etc.

So many wonders are there in his birth, and yet it is not a much less wonder
he made choice of such a place to manifest all these wonders in. In Bethlem an
obscure and little Village, in a poor and mean Inn of that Village, in the
meanest and basest place of that Inn, the Stable. This was the great Chamber^
the stately Mansion hung with Arras weaved by Spiders, and paved with the filth
of other Beasts; wherein this great Monarch, the mighty King of Glory, was
pleased to be born, and together with himself to produce so many miracles into
the World: The very place, wherein he had only littier for a Bed, a Manger for
his Cradle, an Ox and an Ass for his attendants, being as great a miracle as
the rest. And as the basest place, so did he make choice of the obscurest time:
A time indeed famous for an universal peace spread upon the face of the Earth,
but in it he picked out the lowest and utmost extremities time has; the last
age of the world, the lowest period of the year, the deepest and darkest point
of the night. And so in both regards, vere recubuit in novissimo loco, he truly
sat him down in the nethermost room; and at his first entrance into the world,
trod the world and all worldly pomp and glory under foot: that his very birth
might preach contempt both of it, and all the vanities it has, unto sinful
Man, for whole sakes he vouchsafed not to abhor, I say not now, the Virgins
womb, but the durty cratch and filth of the Stable. And in either respect, who
shall declare, etc. or who shall declare the infinite love he showed in it unto
miserable Men, for whose advancement the King of Glory was pleased to abase
himself so low? Surely as the great Gregory in his Morals, Deo tanto magis homo
debtor fuit, quanto pro illo Deus etiam indigna suscepit, The more unworthy
things God undertook for us, the more ever are we bound unto God, and therefore
let every Soul truly and effectually say with St. Bernard, quanto pro me
vilior, tanto mihi charior, by how much the viler he has made himself for me,
the dearer ever shall he be unto me. Thus every circumstance of his production
is wonderful, and cannot but declare how every way undeclarable his generation
is. But yet, that we may more perfectly behold it, we must ^a^e our
con^^^erat^on ^ig^er, from the circumstances to the substance and effects of
this mighty work. And indeed in these regards, who shall declare his
generation? For it is the best and greatest, and wisest work the Almighty ever
wrought, and does more fully manifest his infinite power, wisdom, and goodness,
yea and justice too, than all the rest of his creatures, or all the rest of his
operations in them. First then for the power and omnipotence of God, how
unutterably is it here shown more than in any, or all other things else? the
Incarnation of God being a greater work than the Creation of the whole World.
He made indeed at the beginning Men and Beasts, Plants and Elements, Sun and
Moon, Heavens, Stars, and Angels, excellent works and wonders of his power: but
yet when the word was made flesh, he made and wrought a greater wonder than
them all. Much power was shown in knitting and combining jarring and discordant
Elements peaceably in one body: more in the conjunction personal of this
material body with an immaterial spirit; but incomparably most of all in the
hypostatical union of created Body and Spirit, with the uncreated divinity of
the Godhead it self. For howbeit to make Man of dust, and dust of nothing
argues an infinite power; yet that infinite is much more conspicuous when this
Man is made God, and that God which made him, made Man himself. And the reason
is, because that in making of Man, or any other creature the infinity of power
is not manifested in the effect, which cannot be but finite because created;
but in the manner of creating it of nothing, and the ability every of creating
it, of some other greater and more excellent. So God might have made a larger
world than this, and creatures of other kinds, and in every kind of richer
essence and higher perfections: And when he had done so, might do so again and
again, yea and after that might yet still and perpetually do so. For an effect
of finite and limited perfection, may be infinitely multiplied by an omnipotent
power, but can never grow infinite in it self; and because it cannot grow
infinite, is infinitely capable of further perfection. But here the infinity of
power is not only in the manner of working, but discernable after a sort in the
work it self. And God has now produced an effect even commensurable with his
power, and incapable of farther perfection substantial, an effect whereunto
nothing can be added that may advance it higher, or make it greater; silly Man
being made and become the great God, whom all other both Men and Angels must
worship for ever. So here is in a manner an infinite effect, and so the
expression, as firm as may be, of an infinite power; not that the humanity is
infinite, for then it should be the divinity, but that both are so united as
they make but one person, which is infinite. From whence it follows, that as
Christ the God, is truly Man: so Christ the Man, is truly God: and therefore to
be adored, both God and Man. And what more infinite production of an infinite
power is there imaginable than the making of a creature so one, (as he is, and
is to be adored as one) with the Creator blessed for evermore? For who then
shall declare the power of his conception? Secondly, the wisdom of the
Almighty, which though like his mercy it be over all his works; is yet more
conspicuous here and shines brighter, than in the Sun or any other operation of
his hands, had we eyes to discern, or wisdom enough of our own to behold it.
For in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, says the
Apostle. The treasures, that is, the wealth and riches, the abundance of the
Divine Wisdom, are all in him; but like veins and mines they are hid in him, in
him are hid all the treasures, and we cannot fully discern them now: yet unless
we be stark blind we may discern enough for our satisfaction. He is the eternal
wisdom of the Father: and indeed none but the Fathers wisdom could have found
out a way to show mercy unto Man, and yet give full satisfaction unto his own
justice. For Justice and Mercy, (Man offending) were, as it were, at variance,
either pretending who should have him. Justice demands him, to be given to her
for revenge: Mercy opposes and with all her might pretends for a pardon: both
struggling in the bowels of the Almighty, that dearly affects both. Justice
proposes but few, only two arguments: but they are powerful. The first urges
the Almighty with his own verity and truth. Thou have spoken the word, the day
that thou eatest thou shall die the death: And with thee there is no shadow of
change, therefore thou must not alter the thing that is gone out of thy lips.
The second, with a precedent drawn from his former actions. The Angels sinned,
and thou did not spare them; why, be alike then unto all. For why should
thou afford earthly men that favor which thou deniedst unto Celestial Spirits,
of far more excellent Nature? But now Mercy on the other side cries out
pitifully with that cry in the Psalm, wherefore have thou made all men for
naught? what though thou have said the word, it was but the word of
legislation, and thou art Lord of the Law, the supreme Lawgiver, and therefore
may dispense with the Law, which thou give, and in doing so thou do but
remit thine own right, thou wrongest none other, which therefore is without all
wrong to thy Justice. And for the Angels, they were but some of them, not all
the Angels that sinned, and they sinned willingly and wilfully, of their own
accord and without a Tempter; their sin remaining in themselves not propagated
to others, and therefore they perished worthily in thy wrath, and I made no
intercession for them. But Man was deceived and seduced by the subtlety of the
Serpent: his sin besides not cleaving to himself alone, but passing forth upon
all his posterity that pass from him. And shall the whole generation and kind,
who sinned not of their own will but by being in his loins, be eternally
destroyed, for one and that another transgression? It is sufficient that
Justice has triumphed in those evil Spirits, let me have my victory now in
these: Good reason there should be some regard had of me, as well as of her:
she is thy Daughter indeed, yet she is but thy Daughter-in-law, I am thy
natural: it is thy nature and property to have Mercy and compassion. Thus these
two, the very favorites and darlings of the Divinity, contend together, and
who or what wit shall decide the controversy; or give both content when they
have contrary demands? Herein then shines the infinite wisdom of God that in so
difficult a case, and perplexed (as Damascen terms it) could discover a way,
find out an issue, that should give full satisfaction unto either: and not only
so, but manifest the glory of the rest of his Attributes; of his power, wisdom,
goodness and all, and all at once, and in one action; by informing a piece of
our clay and contriving himself, and his whole Divinity into a trunk of Earth,
that so one person might be made of both. A person on whom Justice might take
her full revenge; that Mercy afterward might be shown unto the offender: that
so both death might be inflicted (as the one urged) and a pardon granted (as
the other entreated.) For being Man he could die, and being God his temporary
death could satisfy for an eternal: And being God and Man he could dye, and
with conquest, (having satiated revenge) rise again from the dead, and proclaim
life and grace unto the whole world. So by the infinite wisdom of this work all
strife ends, and both are well pleased: Mercy and Truth are met together,
Righteousness and Peace do kiss each other. Yea so great is the wisdom of it,
that the blessed Angels themselves desire to pry into it profoundly. Sure it
exceeds the natural understanding of the wise and subtle Lucifer himself; who
for all his wit and cunning was clearly deceived, and foiled in this mystery
whereby he was drawn on to bite at that heel which he little dreamt would crush
his head, even whilst he bit it: For supposing to swallow the humanity which he
saw, he was suddenly choked with the divinity which he could not comprehend.
So wisely God by Man restored Man, and vanquished Satan in theself-same nature
he had conquered before. And therefore who shall declare the wisdom of his
generation?

But above all either power or wisdom, the wonderful love and goodness of the
Lord in this act shown unto the whole world, especially unto wretched Man, may
well drink up admiration and confound the understanding of both Man and Angel.
For what an astonishing consideration would it be, could we consider it as it
deserves, that such vile worms and wretches as we, should receive such high and
undeserved favor from that God whom we had so grievously offended, and having
offended, never notwithstanding so much as sought or regarded? That he for all
this should seek us, yea and assume our nature and become as one of us, that he
might the better find us? That instead of hurling such rebellious sinners into
the depth of Hell, as they well deserved, he descended from his own glory in
the highest Heavens and took on him the infirmity and baseness of our earth,
that he might carry it thither, and into that glory from whence he descended? O
the infinite goodness of this God to undergo the wretchedness of Man, that Man
might be assumed to the blessedness of God, that sinful Man to the blessedness
of that God against whom he sinned, and delighted only to sin! O Lord, says
David, what is man that thou did so regard him, or the son of man that thou
did so visit him? Surely, homo est res nihili, Man is a thing of naught, of
no worth, no value; yet such the eternal Son of God vouchsafed to become, that
he might advance this thing of naught far above all Principalities and Powers,
and Crown him with Worship and Glory. Neither did he by this act glorify that
particular humanity alone which he assumed, but the benefit shall redound,
though not in that manner nor yet so fully, yet in a mavelous degree unto all
others that shall but glorify him; for in him they shall be made partakers too,
even of the Divine Nature, 1 Pet.1. 4. He was anointed indeed with the Oil of
gladness above his fellows; not alone then anointed, but above and more
abundantly than any others. As that precious Ointment which was poured forth on
Aarons head, so Divine honors and graces by this union descended upon His;
which it most plentifully drenched: but drencht not it alone (for of his
fullness we have all received) and therefore it trickles down upon his beard,
and all men living that shall adhere unto him; and not so only, but from thence
drops on the very skirts of his raiment, even the rest of the Creatures, who
have all some interest in his body and therefore in his glory.

Whereby we are given to consider not only the greatness, but the large extent
of the Almighty's, goodness in this Act of his Incarnation. For bonum est sui
diffusivum, goodness is diffusive, and loves to communicate it self, and that
of God the supreme good most of all other: And indeed whatsoever we every where
see, whatsoever any where is or has any being, it is nothing else but a
Communication of the Divine goodness from whence they have all that they have
whatsoever they are. But now in this mystery God did communicate a new
goodness, and a greater than ever before; not only unto man, but in a sort unto
all his Creatures: which all have some title in his person, and shall in their
time receive a benediction from it: for man as he was Supremum Creationis
colophon, the last and supreme work of the Creation; so was he the sum and
recapitulation of all that was created before him: and all that was so created
was but either spiritual as the Angels, or corporeal as the rest of the world:
and in man who has a material body with the one, and an immaterial Soul
suitable to the other, both were bound up together in one Creature. A Creature
which has being with the Elements whereof he is compounded; life and
vegetation with plants; sense with beasts; reason and spiritual existence with
the Angels; and therefore a little but complete world within himself, Nexus and
vinculum totius creaturae, the very knot and band that holds together the whole
Creation. And therefore the whole world being united in man and man unto God,
every Creature of the world cannot but have some interest in the union, who
have a part in the Nature that was united. Had he assumed the nature of Angels,
the rest of his works that are corporeal had been excluded. Had he taken unto
him a Celestial body and made his Tabernacle in the Sun, the Creatures that
have life and sense had lain unregarded: and should any of these have been
honored with it, those that are intelligent and spiritual, men and Angels, had
been left out under contempt for ever. Man therefore was the only creature in
whom he could interest and honor all the rest, as being both corporeal and
spiritual, and having in him being, life, sense, intellect and whatsoever the
rest have and are. And mansnature therefore he only assumed, ut dum una
assumitur in qua reliquarum gradus continentur; in una reliquae omnes quoad
suos gradus assumerentur. That so assuming the one wherein the degrees of all
the rest were contained, all the rest in that one, according to their degrees
might be assumed. Wherefore that Cardinal Schoolman Cajetan said not amiss,
Incarnatio est elevatio totius universi in divinam personam, the Incarnation is
an exaltation of the whole Universe into the Divine Person. Since by it man, in
whom all things are knit together, is himself knit and united unto God; that,
as man is all in one, so God might be all in all. And all from God receive not
only elevation and honor, but blessing and benediction in Christ Jesus, the
Son of God, who is therefore the head both of men and Angels; to them a
Conserver, to us a Redeemer, and not unto us only but unto all other Creatures
that were made for our use, and become subject unto vanity through our sin:
that as they suffered by man's transgression, so in man they might partake of
man's Redemption. And therefore the whole Creation, says St. Paul, travaileth
in pain together with us, and together with us shall be delivered into the
glorious liberty of the sons of God; and therefore waits until they shall be
revealed. For which reason our blessed Lord fully is, as he is termed,
Saelvator mundi the Savior not of man alone but of the whole aspectable world
and whatsoever is in it. Thy truth reaches unto the Heavens, (says David of
him) and thy faithfulness unto the Clouds; how excellent is thy name in all the
World! thou Lord shall save both man and beast: and what name is that which is
so excellent in all the world, but the name of a Savior? thou Lord shall save
both man and beast. And therefore the prophet Esaias calls unto Heaven and Earth,
the Forest and all the Trees that are in it, that is the whole world and
whatsoever dwells therein, to sing and rejoice together for this Redemption,
Sing O Heavens, for the Lord has done it: shout ye lower parts of the Earth,
break forth into singing ye Mountains, O Forest and every Tree therein; for the
Lord has redeemed Jacob and glorified himself in Israel; Esaias xliv. 22. And
St. Paul gives the reason (which is the same we have hitherto given) because in
this Redeemer all things in Heaven and Earth were collected, and gathered
together in one even in Christ, Ephesians. x. 10. And not only gathered and
collected, but restored in him and renewed: For nova jam facta sunt omnia, all
things are now made new, says the same Apostle. Most worthily therefore at the
name of Jesus, the knee of every Creature, both in Heaven and Earth and under
the Earth is enjoined to bow and give glory; as being by that name glorified in
a sort, and restored to more excellent perfection. So great, so universal is
the goodness declared in this Act: Yet this is not all. But as it is great unto
man, and universal unto the Creature: so is it the highest Communication of
goodness in it self, and the best demonstration of the intrinsic goodness of
the Creator: the highest in it self, because in this he communicates himself,
which is not goodness, but goodness it self. Besides this there are but three
degrees of communication, Nature, Grace and Glory: but this fourth of
hypostatical union, infinitely exceeds them all: on which all acknowledge their
dependence; for it restores Nature, gives Grace, purchases Glory. Nature
indeed and natural properties are a great communication of Gods goodness unto
natural things: supernatural Grace unto the Soul of man in this life a greater:
Divine glory unto body and Soul in the life to come greatest of all: yet the
best goes not farther than a Created quality; for though being glorified, we
shall see God, see his Essence and be blessed in seeing it, yet we shall see it
but per speciem, by a Divine indeed but a created light: but in this of
Incarnation he does not exhibit any shows or similitudes, he does not bestow
any created gift, whether of natural or supernatural order; but he gives and
bestows himself immediately unto his Creature: who does as immediately see and
enjoy him in himself, being the self-same Person with him: a communication of
goodness wonderful above all other, and not to be conceived, had it not been
revealed. And as the highest in it self, so is it the greatest demonstration of
the intrinsic goodness, that is, holiness of the Lord that vouchsafed it. For
if the detestation of evil be an argument of goodness, how full of goodness is
he, who, that we might know how utterly he hates and abhors all sin and
wickeness, rather than it should escape unrevenged, would incarnate the
Divinity it self, that so he might punish it and severely too, even in his own
Son? which does not only manifest his goodness, but his Justice also, and
together with both the greatness and grievousness of our sins. How far were our
Souls gone, and how deadly our Iniquities that must either draw God from
Heaven, yea dragg him to the Cross, or plunge us in an everlasting Hell? And
unto that our blessed Lord vouchsafed to be brought, that we might be delivered
from this -- Who then shall declare, either the heinous guilt of our sin, or
the infinite power, the manifest wisdom, or infinite both goodness and justice
declared in his generations? Especially his goodness unto us miserable sinners,
which we must ever especially think on, but never hope to utter? O what mind,
what speech shall utter, say or conceive the great honor he has this day done
unto our nature? how many and mavelous benefits he has in it conferred on our
persons? freeing us from all that is evil, sin, sorrow, death and Hell, and
investing us with whatsoever is good, Grace, Joy, and Glory everlasting in
Heaven? Say we then all with Pelergus, Age O Christ Dei Verbum and Sapientia,
Well then O dear Jesus, the word and wisdom of the Father, what shall we poor
miserable Creatures return unto thee for all thy favors? Tuae enim omnia, and
a nobis nihil cupis nisi salvari: for thou have done all things for us, and
requirest nothing of us again, but that we would suffer our selves to be saved;
nay thou give us salvation and take it kindly at our hands, yea, as a
benefit unto thy self, if we will but receive it. O infinite goodness! and that
we may laud and praise and worship thee worthily for it, add one more mercy
unto all that is past: and as thou wast pleased to be born in our nature; so
vouchsafe to be born again by thy holy Spirit in our Persons, that we may once
more say, Quis enarrabit, etc.

So we pass unto our last point, from his Divine birth of the Father and his
Humane from the womb of the blessed Virgin, unto his spiritual in the Souls of
all the faithful: For it is not enough that the Son of God was born for us or
in our nature, unless he be also born within ^us and in our particular spirits,
by his grace: that so as he was made the Son of Man by being united unto our
flesh, we might become the Sons of God by being united again unto him in the
spirit; By wihch spiritual union and mystical, are conveyed and applied unto us
all the benefits and graces purchased by the personal. And it is not the
meriting of Mercy but the actual conferring of it, that must do us good; which
is never fully done until he that was born for us be reborn again in and within
us; till he live in our hearts by Faith, and his life revive in our
conversation; till his patience be stamped upon our Spirits, and the rest of
his Divine Virtues engraven and formed on our Souls. For so speaks St. Paul of
this Spiritual Generation, My little children, of whom. I travail in birth
again until Christ be formed in you. Gal. iv. 19. And formed then he is in us,
not before, when we can shape and form our hearts in some good measure,
according to the pattern and precedent he has left us, truly saying with the
same St. Paul, Vivo jam non ego, sed Christus vivit in me, I live now, and yet
not I, but Christ lives in me: A birth and formation so full of marvel and
miracle, as we may no less say of it than of those other, Quis enarrabit, etc?

For in the first indeed God is born of God: in the second God is born of a
Woman; but in the third, many Men and Women at once both bear and are born of
God: because Gods formation in Man, is Man's reformation unto the image of God:
his generation in us, our regeneration in him. And so by the same act in which
God is born in Man, in the self-same both act and instant. Man is born of God,
as St. John speaks. And that by the insensible and unsearchable working of the
Spirit, which works so secretly, as Man himself cannot observe and discern it,
though it work within himself and even in his own spirit. The child is not more
inobservably conceived in the womb of the Mother, than Christ Jesus in the Soul
of the Christian. And therefore the kingdom of heaven comes not by
observation, says our Savior: that it is come, we find; but how it came, we
perceive not: and what we cannot discern, how should we express? who then shall
declare, etc.

Neither is it more secret than strange and powerful; there being nothing of
greater admiration than the wonderful work of God in the conversion of a
sinner. How mavelous is it, that the hearts of wicked Men, that were for so
many years before, domicilia Daemonum, the habitation of Devils, wherein the
Foxes had holes, and the fowls of the air their nests, that is deceit and
ambition roosted, and with them Luxury and Avarice, Envy, Wrath and Malice,
Profaneness, Falsehood, and all manner of filthiness, until it became a den of
beasts, a cage of unclean birds, and indeed a very Hell of impure spirits; that
such a Stable of filth, Augea^'s Stable, should suddenly be cleansed, and a
Tenent of Grace, Jesus, as in that of Bethlem, be born in it, in an instant?
That so dark vaults of lusts and uncleanness should presently be transformed
into Temples of the Holy Ghost? That so impotent and inthralled Souls should be
endued with power from above, and inspired with such an Almighty and miraculous
Faith, as is able in a moment to cast out all those Devils? To teach the
profane to speak with a new tongue, the wrathful and vindictive with patience
to suck up all the poisoned malice venomous stomachs can disgorge against them,
without hurt; and not only to be good in themselves, but by laying their hands
on the sick, by their charitable works unto the distressed, not only relieve
them, but with their very example recover others that were sick of sin unto
death. Who can behold such a change, such and so sudden a mutation, and not say
with David, This is the Lords doing and it is mavelous in our eyes? Sure it
is digitus Dei, the finger of God indeed, the very power of his Spirit; nay no
other than another incarnation, and spiritual birth of the Son of God in such a
Soul. And quis enarrabit?

A generation performed with so secret and yet so powerful an operation. Which
yet we shall perceive the better and receive too the sooner (for though it be
powerful all do not always receive it) if we be observant of the circumstances
of this spiritual, in the mind, which for the quality of time, place and person
does much resemble that other humane birth in the flesh. For as then he was
born in the night; so still is he usually begotten in the nightly and silent
meditations of the Soul. When all things were in quiet silence, and the night
in her swift course, then the Almighty word left the Royal Throne and leapt
down from Heaven, says the Author in the book of Wisdom: And sure then
especially when all things are quiet and silent, when the works and toils,
cares and labors of the day are laid aside and the Soul in sweet contemplation
of the vanity of all her travel under the Sun, then I say especially is Divine
Wisdom preparing the place for the Son of God: who though he leave not Heaven
and his throne there, yet by his spirit does he vouchsafe to descend and live
and dwell in this earth of ours for ever. And as in the deep of night, so for
the most part is he born still in the depth of Winter. For in the Summer and
sunshine of prosperity, we are all apt to forget God and regard but little
what he speaks unto us; but in the cold and bitter storms of Winter when our
Bark is tossed in a tempestuous Sea of afflictions; then like other Mariners we
can quickly pour out vows, leave our canns and carouses, and betake our selves
to Supplication and Prayers; and can attentively hearken also what the Lord God
will say concerning our Souls. Only take heed of the 3d. circumstance in this
point: and though he came in the last age of the world, yet be sure not to
defer thy entertaining of him till the last age of thy life. For however he be
sometimes, and it may be usually as yet born spiritually in that point of Man's
days, as he was then of the world; yet it cannot be safe, yet it must be more
than foolish to presume of it. For we well know how frail we are, and God knows
how suddenly we shall be swept away in our sins; when we would give the whole
world, if we had it, for but one hour of that time we so foolishly neglected,
and may not have. Remember therefore thy Creator in the days of thy youth
before the eveil day come; and give attentive consideration to the counsel of
the Wiseman, Defer not to do well, and put not off from day to day, for
suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord come forth and in security thou shall be
destroyed. But lastly and above all, be most assured that as then, so he will
still be born in no other time but a time of peace. Peace there was in the
whole world when he was born in it; and we must cease from wars and envies and
hatreds, and have peace every one with his Brother, or he will never be born in
us. It was the Song and Anthem at his birth, sung by Angels, Glory be to God on
high, in earth peace, good will toward men. He is the great peacemaker that
came of purpose to establish an everlasting peace between God and Man: but on
this condition, that Man shall first be at peace with Man; otherwise not to
expect it from God, of whom he may not so much as beg mercy for his offenses,
but as himself remits the trespasses of others. O take heed therefore, flatter
not thy self, but search narrowly and be sure to strip all wrath and revenge
from thine heart, or be most assured Christ will never dwell and inhabit there:
who cannot but hate the very place where such odious and hateful sins make
their abode. Sins that bind all the rest of our iniquities on our Souls, yea
make whatsoever else is good, sinful unto us. Whereof so long as thou art
guilty, thou do but curse thy self when thou prayest, and damn thy own Soul
when thou receivest. This for the time: see now how well the other
circumstances agree, which concern the place of his birth, and especially the
person of whom he was born. For born he was not of any ordinary Woman at a
venture, but of a pure and chaste Virgin: and so will he still be both born and
bred; in a clean and unpolluted Soul. Into a defiled heart full of noisome lusts
and sordid affections he will not enter, they must be first purged out, and all
the stains and pollutions of them washed away and cleansed in a bath of
penitential tears; then he will descend thither, be born there, and instead of
those natural corruptions fill the place with all divine and supernatural
Graces: and so not find but make the Soul a Virgin by being begotten in it: A
Virgin full of virtue which he will espouse and marry unto himself for ever.
But yet of all virtues he most affects humility in her; the first and laft of
virtues; the first beginning and last consummation of whatsoever is virtuous.
For without it, the Soul is not capable of virtue; and had she never so many
would spoil all by growing proud of the virtues which she has. And therefore
as he was born of a Virgin, so would he be born in no other but a Stable the
meanest place and lowest in the house: to show us the condition of the mind,
the humility and lowliness of the spirit, where he still is, and ever will be
spiritually brought forth. For as the covetous Soul is but a Barn; the
Epicure's a Kitchen; the Drunkard's a Cellar; the Ambitious a Chamber of State;
so the low and regardless Stable may well signify the humble spirit; that both
is, and esteems it self a wretched sinner. Not then in the Barn of Misers, nor
in the Kitchen of Belly-gods: not in the Cellar of Winebibbers, not in the
great Chamber of Pride and Prodigals; but in the despised Stable of humble and
dejected spirits, there is he, there will he and no where else ever be born.
And every Soul wherein he is so born may be bold to say with the blessed Virgin
that first saw him; for thou regardest the lowliness of thy hand-maiden.

But yet humility is not more acceptable to him than worldly cares and
covetousness displeasing; than which nothing can more hinder his conception and
generation in our Souls. For God and Mammon cannot dwell together. And for this
cause, as in a Stable, so he would be born in an Inn: For an Inn is domus
populi, free and open unto all comers: and so must the Soul be wherein he will
be the second time born; free and generous; holding nothing as it were in
private, and proper to it self, but open and ready to communicate all things to
those that want and are distressed, and no less freely than the other for
money. And the sooner because he knows the world it self is but an Inn, where
we do not inhabit but lodge for a season: and who is so mad as to build and
plant, garnish and make great provision in an Inn? in his passage and upon the
way, being to depart ere long, peradventure the next morning? For here we have
no abiding place, no permanent City, but as strangers and pilgrims, we look for
one which has a foundation. And in such a Soul, which is in it self as an Inn,
and esteems the world for no other, and therefore void of all scraping and
wretched desires, the Son of God is ever most infallibly born, and will as
certainly bear it where are true riches and everlasting. Now these three,
pleasure, profit and pride, that is, the flesh, the world and the Devil, are
the three heads whereunto all sins are reducible: and as Christ cuts them all
off in his birth, so must we cut them off in our selves, or he will never be
born in us. Carnal pleasure must depart, he will be born of a Virgin: Devilish
pride abandoned, he is born in a Stable: worldly cares and covetous desires
utterly discharged, he is born in an Inn. And when the Soul is thus prepared,
by being truly cleansed from all these, the time is at hand; and then let him
make have and go up with confidence unto Bethlem, for there he will be born,
that is the last and general place of his nativity, born in Bethlem.

And Bethlem is domus panis (so the name signifies) the house of bread; and
never so truly as now, when the bread of life was born in it. And as then, so
will be still be born in Bethlem in the house of bread. Of bread not corporal
but spiritual; and such as can nourish the Soul: and what house think you is
that? surely Bethlem is nothing but Bethel; the house of bread, none other but
the house of God. Where Men eat Angels food, and that bread of life is freely
dispensed; not only panis verbi, but panis verbum, the bread of the word, but
the bread which is the word, the eternal word of God; panis de Coelo, bread
from Heaven, of which whosoever eats shall never die. And this is that house:
and ecce, and behold there is that heavenly bread indeed, not so much bread as
the body of thy Redeemer, the bread which we break is it not the Communion of
the Lords body? the Communion sure of his body and blood too: of himself and
all that he did or suffered, yea or purchased either. For all are communicated
in these; the same Symbols of all, and Conduits by which all are conveyed to
us. And therefore Christ Jesus himself is under this bread; and comes down to
thee as from Heaven in this shape; that he might be at once both received in
thy mouth and conceived in thy heart; conceived and born; live and inhabit
therefore ever. So justly was Bethlem the seat of his Nativity: and therefore as
Jacob said when he awoke out of sleep, in that place where some suppose the
Temple was afterward built: how fearful, says he, is this place? the Lord was
in it and I was not aware: this is none other than the house of God and the
gate of heaven: if he said so of the Temple the house of that bread, how much
more justly may we say of the bread of this house, How fearful is this bread?
the Lord is in it, and much more, especially than, in the Temple; and woe unto
them that are not aware of it, that discern it not; for they do but eat
damnation to themselves, because they discern not the Lords body. Take heed
therefore above all things unto thy self when thou come to this fearful,
twice fearful place, this double Temple; the Temple of his worship, and Temple
of his Body: and so, that thou make thy approach with due regard and diligent
preparation, with that deep sorrow as becomes thy sins, that low reverence as
becomes thy Savior. And so in the end think on the night wherein he was to be
born, and betake thee to thy sweet and silent meditations: consider the deep of
Winter, and embrace thine afflictions: Look upon the days of peace, and let go
wrath: view the Stable, and down with thy pride: see the Inn, and contemn the
World: contemplate the Virgin, and cleanse thy self from all pollutions of the
flesh: so shall the King have pleasure in thy beauty and thy Virgin Soul; come
up safely into Bethlem and take of the bread of life freely, and with it the
blessed Lord of life himself: who will make thy spirit another spiritual
Bethlem or house for this living bread; an habitation for this living Lord, to
be born and live in, so long as thou live, and give thee everlasting life,
when thou can live no longer. Which God of his infinite mercy, etc. To whom,
etc.

Laus Deo in aeternum.
TWO FUNERAL SERMONS: The FIRST for the MOTHER.
SERMON. XII. Upon PSALM. cxlii. verse ult.
Bring my Soul out of Prison, that I may give thanks unto thy Name; which thing
if thou will grant me, then shall the Righteous resort unto my Company.
DO not marvel, the Text may be fitter than you imagine, or I could have made
choice of: for it is not I, but another: it was not taken, but given me. She
that is now gone and at rest (and may she rest for ever in peace) she whose
dissolved Tabernacle, the prison of whose blessed Soul lies here before your
eyes, as a spectacle of mortality, as a document of the frailty of our humane
condition, which I would, (if I might so wish) it had this day appeared by some
other example; She this worthy and honored Lady, now glorious Saint in Heaven,
to whom we are at this time to perform our last office and Christian duty: She
it is who as she made it her frequent praise in her life, so she desired it
might be commended to your meditations in her. death. And you will anon
perceive how justly; when you shall see how well it sorted with the one, and
how fully it is now accomplished in the other. But for this you must stay a
little. First therefore of her Theme, then of her self, Bring my Soul, etc.

The whole Psalm is a prayer of David's, pursued by Saul and shut up in a Cave
as appears by the Title, but whether that of Adullam in the xxii. of Samuel as
Haimo and Remigius; or else of the other of Engedi in the xxiv. of the same
book, as Ambrose and Athanasius suppose, is uncertain, nor is it material to
enquire: In one of them it was, and in this distress he flees unto the Lord for
sucour, in this whole Psalm; the sum and substance of whose devout prayer you
have in this last verse, Bring my Soul, etc. This is the Historical truth; and
the literal sense of the Text which arises from thence is manifest. Deliver my
Soul out of Prison: Espelunca, out of this Cave; and not so only, not out of
the Cave alone, for so he might have fallen into the hands of Saul from whom it
did secure him out of that danger and deep distress wherewith he was environed
on every side, and wherewith he was enclosed, shut up and surrounded as in a
Prison. And out of this Prison Educ animam, redeem, deliver, bring forth my
Soul.

But besides the literal; the holy Scripture (it cannot be denied) especially
the old Testament, and the Psalms more than any else, does every where abound
with many other both moral and mystical senses: for as St. Paul has it, omnia
contingebant illis in figura, all things happened unto them under the Law in a
figure; and are for examples unto us on whom the ends of the world are come.
Their very Histories were Prophecies, and their actions predictions, says St.
Austin: and as when words signify actions, there arises the historical sense;
so when those actions again are instead of words to signify other several
operations, from thence does emerge the mystical interpretation. For which
reason it is, that the Fathers and learned Writers of our own and former ages
have given unto this place such variety of expositions; and that not by way
only of accommodation, but as the proper and intended meaning of the Spirit,
that endited it: justly taking that for the Souls Prison which does any way
either naturally or morally straiten or oppress the Soul, or restrain the
freedom and liberty of it in her operations. And therefore every faithful
Christian under what distress soever, whether of outward afflictions or inward
and inherent sins, whether of bodily infirmities, or worldly troubles and
cares, whether meaning any or all and every of them, he may truly say with
David, Bring my Soul e custodia, out of the enclosure and custody of this
miserable Prison: for though David peradventure did not himself actually behold
all those meanings when he prayed; yet the Holy Ghost which did dictate to him
might easily forethink, and intend unto more senses, than the wits of men can,
according to the analogy of faith, find out or discover. And as this first part
is something troubled with diversity of Interpretations, so the latter part is
become much more difficult through variety of readings,

Here it is, Which thing if thou shall grant me, then shall the Righteous
resort unto my company, as if it were promissory and votive. In the rest it
seems rather assertory and positive, The Righteous shall compass me about, for
thou shall deal bountifully with me, so our new Translation. Then shall the
Righteous come about me, when thou have been good or beneficial unto me: so
Junius and Tremelius render it. Me expectant Justi donec re^ribuas mihi, The
Righteous wait and expect till thou do reward me with deliverance, so the
vulgar edition. Yet all seem to agree in this, that upon his deliverance the
Righteous shall compass him about, and he either to them or they with him shall
praise and magnify the name of the Lord by whom he was delivered. But this help
these diverse readings will afford us, it will make the Text more appliable unto
the several expositions the Ancients have given us. So having opened the
passage and a little cleared the sense of the Text, we may now go on without
offense to the divisions of it; wherein we shall not need to labor much, it
requires neither Art nor Industry; Nature has already done it to our hands: It
runs forth of its own accord into two Branches, and no man's eye so weak but he
may see them of himself, Prayer and Praise. Prayer for deliverance; Praise and
thanksgiving, when he has obtained it: in the one ye may behold the devotion;
in the other the gratitude of his Soul. Deliver my Soul out of Prison: see the
Prayer, That I may give thanks unto thy name: see the Praise. And yet you see
not all of the praise neither: Praise his name he may do in his own heart and
within himself, and that is but private praise: but this is not enough, he will
have it public too: his good heart is already filled but to think of his
deliverance, and he presently meditates where he may vent it: and no where so
well as in the Ears of the righteous, who will soon flock about him to rejoice
in his mercy, and gladly bear a part in his song of thanksgiving; among them
therefore he will pour it forth, that the voice of honor and praise, as from a
full Quire, may ascend into the Ears of the Lord his deliverer. Which thing if
thou will grant me, then, etc.

But because it will be more convenient for us to end with the Prayer, we will
begin first with this last, the Praise, and it will agree well with the order
of nature: for indeed every Man's praise should be first in his resolution,
before he offer to open his mouth in his prayer. Offer unto God thanksgiving,
says David, and pay thy vows unto the most High, and then call upon me in the
day of trouble, and I will deliver thee; as if no Man might expect deliverance
in that day, the day of trouble, unless he first resolve on and vow
thanksgiving unto the most High. And indeed thus far we can go with the
Prophet: we are all apt enough to promise and vow many thankful returns unto
the Lord when our Souls are in sorrow, and his afflictions lie heavy upon us;
but for performing of these promises and paying of these vows afterward, there
is the difficulty, and there we leave him. Under our burdens and distresses,
especially if great and pressing, it is almost every Man's vow: O if the Lord
will but deliver me now, free me but this time, we will do this and that and
mavelous things then: but the hand of the Lord is no sooner removed, the
prison of our afflictions broken up, and our Souls brought forth in safety, but
all is instantly forgotten, as if it had never been. We are now well and at
liberty, and have no need we think of the Lord; when we have, he shall hear of
us again, in the mean time pay vows he that list; it is enough for us to smile
in our sleeves, as if we had overreacht the Lord and cheated him out of a
deliverance with fair language. But God will not fail to reach home one time or
other, unto such false hypocrisy: for Hypocrites they are and no better; and
for such they are esteemed and styled by God himself, though they promised
nothing but what at that time they truly meant to perform. When God slew the
Israelites, says David, then they returned and inquired early after God, they
remembered that God was their rock, and the high God their redeemer; and no
question but all this with true devotion: yet because upon the deliverance they
fell back like their forefathers, starting aside as a broken bow, the Prophet
presently subjoins, Nevertheless they did but flatter with their lips and
dissemble with their double tongue, for their heart was not right in them,
neither were they steadfast in his Covenant: not steadfast, and therefore in Gods
account not right; but even dissemblers in what they truly intended, because
they falsely forsook it. Hypocrites then they are, and with hypocrites they
shall have their portion. Consider therefore faithfully what thy lips spoke,
when thy heart was in trouble; and be sure that thy hand perform it when thou
art released. And yet if your lips spoke nothing, if you have no vow upon you,
thanksgiving is due without it, pay that at least with cheerfulness. No such
Monster in the world, not the Hypocrite himself, as the unthankful Man; he that
has said Ungrateful, has said all, and the worst he can say. And therefoer
above all things, if there be no vows to pay, yet offer unto God thanksgiving;
next to that of a broken heart, it is the best sacrifice, thou can offer him.
This shall please the Lord better than a bullock that has horns and hoofes,
Psalm. lxix. 31. Nay not all those Hecatombs and millions of Sheep and Oxen
which Solomon offered at the dedication of the Temple, no nor thousands of Rams
and Rivers of Oil, as Micah speaks, can so glad the Altars of God, as these
Calves of our lips, the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving; but then it must
be made a burnt-offering, that is, kindled with the fire of zeal and true
devotion, sing praises lustily, says our Prophet, and with a good courage. And
as he gives us the instruction, so let him be our example, that you may know he
did not promise more in this place than he was glad and willing to perform
afterward. See how lustily, and with what a good courage he does perform it:
he does not go about it drowsily, but his very preparation to it is hasty even
beyond expression by any Man's words but his own, Psalm.lxxi.
My heart is fixed O God, my heart is fixed, awake up my ^u^e and glory, ^ my
self w^^ awake right early. My lips will be fain when I sing unto thee, lvi.
and so will my soul which thou have redeemed: xxxv.
nay my mouth shall be satisfied as it were with marrow and fatness, when I
shall praise thee with joyful lips: words that have vigor and life, and show a
good courage indeed; but all this is but preparative, for when he comes to
performance, see how he stirs up all the parts of his body and powers of his
Soul to concur with him in the work, Praise the Lord O my Soul, and whatsoever
is within me praise his holy name: And yet it is not enough, himself and all
his faculties are too little, this is still but private praise, he must have it
public too, and so it is to the purpose: you may see him summon up, not only
righteous Men, (as here) but all the creatures of Heaven and Earth, to bear a
part with him: Angels, Sun, Moon, Stars, Fire, Hail, Snow, Vapor, Storm and
Tempest too, praise ye the name of the Lord. And as yet not satisfied, he calls
for all the Instruments of Music, Trumpets, Psaltery, Harp, Timbrel, Cymbals,
and the high tuned Cymbals to express and set it forth the more solemnly.
Neither is it a passionate flash, like fire in Flax, as quickly out as kindled,
but a constant and parmanent affection, Whilst I live I will praise the Lord,
and as long as I have any being I will sing praises unto my God, Ps. cxlvi. How
mightily does this upbraid the dead and cold devotion of the present world!
scarce a spark of this holy fire to warm it, can now be found in one bosom of a
thousand: we think we have performed a worthy sacrifice, if with a barren and a
dry heart we can only say with the Pharisee, I thank thee O Lord that thou have
not made me like other men. Superficial we are and perfunctory in all our
service, forward in nothing but to run on the point of that curse of the
Prophet, Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligently. And the
reason is, ^or that it all things do not run according to our desires, we are
insensible of the goodness of God in other matters, and seldom meditate on it
thoroughly. But had we apprehensive spirits, and could duly weigh and seriously
consider the mercies of God, not only to Man in general, but every Man his
special favors unto himself in particular, a thousand ways, when a thousand
ways he deserved destruction, he would soon find his breast straightened and too
narrow for his swelling affections, till he breath them out in our Prophets
double expostulation of love, not only, Domine quid est Homo? Lord what is Man
that thou art so mindful of him? but Domine quid sum ego, what am I, what is my
Fathers house that thou so regardest me? Let such meditations blow on the
little fire that lies raked up in our embers, and they will soon kindle into a
flame, wherein our devotions may ascend into Heaven like that Angel which went
up playing in the flames of Manoabs sacrifice, Judge. xiii. And this shall
suffice for this part, for the thankfulness the Prophet promises, both private
and public, within himself and in the resort and company of the Righteous. I
now leave his praise and come to his prayer. Bring my soul out of prison O
Lord, etc.

And being in prison, in streights and pressures, what should a good Soul do
but pray? If any man be merry let him sing, if he be afflicted, let him pray,
says St. James. For prayer it is the Souls Herald sent forth in extremity to
parley and entreat for comfort. And as nothing can relieve our distress better
than prayer, so nothing can again assist our prayer better than distresses.
They inflame our zeal, and set an edge upon our devotions: the cries of our own
will are weak and feeble, as cooled with success, in respect of those which
grief does utter. Sorrow is ingenious to pray; and in an instant forms the
slowest tongues to an holy eloquence; and furnishes them with sighs and groans
which cannot be expressed. And sure those are the best and most piercing
prayers of all other, fidelis oration plus gemitibus constat quam sermonibus,
plus fletu quam afflatu: faithful prayers indeed consist rather of Tears and
silent groans than many words. And such a prayer is this to speak on, it is but
a groan, very short but very pithy: few words, but fervent and full of
substance, including in it, (as an abstract of all prayer) whatsoever
conditions may seem necessary to a holy and devout supplication, if you
consider the object, the manner and the matter of it. The object the Lord, so
some Texts have it here, but it is evident in the former verses, I cried unto
the Lord. The manner vehement, by way of crying out, as himself in the same
Psalm testifies, I cried unto the Lord. The matter or extent larger than we
imagine, even no less than deliverance from all evil that may any way inthral
the Soul, as will appear when we come to open this Prison from which he desires
it may be freed. Bring my Soul, etc.

First then it is well and rightly directed not to Saint or Angel or any
creature else in Heaven or Earth, but unto the Creator of Earth and Heaven and
Angles and all, to him that made them and is Lord over them. He cried unto the
Lord, this cry, Bring my Soul, etc. He well knew what Is^ia^ wrote afterward,
Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel knows, us not. And if they should know
and understand him and his prayers, yet he well understood they could not help
him in his distress: for which reason amongst an hundred and fifty Psalms which
he wrote (one hundred whereof at least are prayers,) you shall not find one
directed to Cherub or Seraphim, to Gabriel or Raphael, Abraham or Moses, or any
other whatsoever, but still his cry is unto the Lord: He was sure, he could
hear his complaints, and no less able than willing to relieve him when he
complained. It is he only that is Lord indeed of Death and Hell, of sin and
affliction too; who alone has the Keys of all these Prisons; who opens and no
Man shuts, who shuts and none shall ever open; that has power and strenght in
his holy arm to break the Gates of Brass, and smite the bars of Iron asunder,
and so make way for the Captives that are fast bound in misery and iron; either
in the Iron chains of sin; or the misery of distress and affliction. To him
therefore must this prayer come of all others, Bring my soul out of prison,
that of all others, can break it up at his pleasure. And however in small and
petty grievances we may cast about for humane succors and strain our wits for
stratagems to relieve us, neglecting the Lord in the mean time, yet cum dignus
vindice nodus inciderit, in great and overwhelming calamities, especially if
sudden too, when neither head nor hand, counsel or force can provide a remedy;
when it is once come to David's case in this Psalm, that we have no place to
flee unto, nor any Man that cares for our Souls, tunc Deus intervenit, then we
run readily whether Papists or Protestants, leave all, they their Papois and
Pictures we our projects and devices whatsoever, and betake our selves only
unto the Lord, the Lord alone of deliverance, and in David's cafe approach with
David's petition, deliver thou my soul out of prison.

So then the object was right, and his prayer well directed: And the manner was
answerable, devout and fervent, he cried it out, Deliver my soul out of prison.
And yet it is not likely he cried with his voice, he now lay hid in a cave, and
it was not safe for him to make any loud cries, says Theodoret and Austin. It
was not therefore the outward sound of the lips, but the inward affection of
the heart that sent forth this; the cry of this voice, as those Authors
observe; for as St. Bernard has it, Desiderium vehemens, clamor magnus, a
strong and earnest desire cries loud though the lips say nothing. And this is
the cry, the cry of the heart that gives acceptance to our prayers, and
deliverance too from our Prisons. The prayer of the Just avails much, if it
be fervent, says St. James: otherwise even the prayers of the Just if they be
cold and of custom rather than Devotion and Piety, may hurt but they profit
nothing. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him faithfully, says
David, not formally; if as those Jews we draw near only with our lips, when our
heart is far from him: he may draw near unto us with plagues and miseries, but
his heart will be as far from our supplications and distresses, when you
stretch forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes: and though you make many
prayers I will not hear you, says the Lord in Isa. i. The reason is there,
your hands are full of blood; the reason to us may be, your hearts bleed not.
Your Altar is without fire; your prayer without heat, how should I accept your
sacrifices? The very wooden Priests of Baal may be an instruction to us: They
called, says the Text, on the name of their god from morning till noon, and
when they had no answer they cried loud, nay they themselves with knives and
lances, till they prayed not only in tears but in blood, that they might be
heard: and I would the children of light were as zealous in their generations,
though not so foolish. But yet rather let us receive directions here at home
from our own Prophet. You saw how zealous he was in praise, and he is as well
affected in Prayer: it was his darling this, and delight of his Soul; and it is
hard for any Man ever to pray well, that has not learnt it of him. No Man ever
so frequent, so fervent in this holy exercise; I will pray, says he, at
Morning, Noon, and Night, yea seven times a day will I pray, and that instantly
with the inwardst and deepest affections of his mind. His bleeding heart may
easily be discerned at his weeping eye, which every night washed his Bed and
watered his Couch with tears. He mingled his bread with weeping, nay made
weeping his bread, tears were his meat and drink. Sure he had a strange fire
within him that made him run over so fast: or at least he was watered
plentifully with the dew of Heaven, that could minister such continual
fountains to his eyes. We, why we go to prayers as if our Souls and tongues
were strangers; like the right hand and the left in the Gospel, one seldom
knows what the other does; as if we gave God an Alms and not prayed for our own
necessity Our Bodies peradventure are in the Church, but our affections abroad:
our lips utter prayers, our hearts are on our penny: and then no marvel if our
eyes be dry when our devotions are so drousie. But this is not it that can do
it, such faint and feeble prayers will break open no Prisons. He must cry
louder and deeper, that will be heard in his distress, when we can say with
David, e profundis, out of the deep have I called on the Lord, when the depth
of our sins calls for the depth of our sorrow, and both upon God for the depth
of his mercies, when Abyssus Abyssum shall call one upon another then with
David we shall be sure to be heard, and have our Souls brought out of Prison,
which is the matter of the Prayer: our last point, but has many points in it.
Bring my Soul out of prison.

For it is not a Prayer only for one penned up in a Cave; but whatsoever does
any way enclose and straiten the Soul, as was said before, may not unfitly be
termed the Souls Prison, and for ought we know intended in this Scripture, at
least applyable to it. And of these things that thus besiege and shut up the
Soul, though they are infinite almost in themselves, yet they may be reducible
to these four. Afflictions, the World, or worldly cares, sin, and this body of
sin and death: And under any of these we may say and pray with David here,
Bring my Soul out of prison.

tribulatio and angustia are inseparable companions, Tribulation and anguish
upon every Soul that has done evil, says the Apostle; and Anguish is nothing
else but the English of Angustia, for streights and pressure there are in all
tribulations. Prosperity and Joy do dilate the spirits, and draw forth the
Soul; but stricken with grief and sorrow, like a pricked Snail she shrinks into
her shell, and is instantly straightened. But yet of all the Prisons this is the
most necessary: It is the Bridewel of the world, and without it we should
quickly grow Bedlam and run mad in excess and wanton delights. For all sins are
frenzies, and such sinners seldom recover their wits any where else. The wild
Prodigal whilst free and in prosperity, runs on in his course and never
perceives his own distraction, till shut up here and well whipped a while redit
ad se, then he comes to himself and can say, surgam and ibo ad patrem, I will
arise and go unto my Father. For tribulatio id habet proprium ut hominem
revocet and reducat ad se: it is the very nature and property of affliction to
call home and reduce Men again unto their senses. Neither does it only give
them their wits but sets them on work, affording them matter whereon they may
exercise themselves and all the Christian virtues, Faith, Hope, Patience,
Meekness, Humility and the rest, which otherwise would languish and vitiate, if
not exhale for want of employment. This Prison therefore is of excellent use:
But why then if it be so profitable, should we pray to be freed of it? why,
absolutely we do not; but with limitation; if God shall think it expedient for
us; who when the cure is perfected, it may be will dismiss us; or if he keep us
there longer, he will make us large recompense for it hereafter. Our Saviors
Prayer is our rule in this point; because all afflictions are grievous for the
present we may say with him, if it be possible, transeat calix ista, let this
cup pass: but still with submission to his good pleasure, not mine, but thy
will be done. And thus much though not always expressed is ever reserved and
understood, whenever in this case we shall say here with David, Bring my Soul
out of prison.

The second is the world, or rather worldly cares, that to use the world as if
they used it not; but satisfying nature only, account the rest that belongs to
pomp and superfluity, nothing near at that high rate as they are bought and
sold for in this Market of Fools, quanti venduntur and emuntur in nundinis
stultorum. These indeed have some freedom, and though they are in a sort
prisoners, yet they are prisoners at large, and have liberty as large as the
Prison, wherein they have elbow room enough, not to be straightened. But those
miserable wretches that, admiring the wealth and honor of the present world,
have inthralled and wrapped their Souls in terrene and base solitudes, how close
are they shut up, and how miserable a servitude do they endure! No Gally-slave
can be tied in stronger chains than the Ambitious and Covetous Man; like those
condemned to the Mines he digs under earth, and sweats for Ore all his life
long; and when he dies has his mouth stopped only with a handful of gravel. And
here every one may freely pray, and without any restriction at all, Out of this
Prison O Lord deliver my Soul.

Lazarus in his Grave; the very emblem both of the Prison and Prisoners. And
unless that Son of God who came down himself from Heaven to open this Prison
and preach liberty unto the Captives, unless he graciously call unto us, yea
cry aloud as in the Gospel he did, even groaning in his Spirit (to show how
difficult a thing it is to dissolve these bonds wherewith custom and habit has
tied us as with cords) unless he, I say, by the power of his holy voice cry
unto us all as lie did unto him, Lazare veni for as, Lazarus come forth, we
shall all perish in our captivity for ever, and never see light. For this sink
of sin (wherein the longer we lie, the deeper indeed we sink) does at length
empty it self into Hell, the bottomless Pit and Prison of everlasting sorrow.
But blessed be his name, the bars are smitten asunder, and the doors thrown
open by his death: And he still calls unto us by the voice of his Ministers,
yea and Spirit too, to come forth; and unless we be enamoured of our own
misery, and like Beasts delight to lie in our own filth till we perish in that
nethermost Gulf, let us hearken unto his calls and rouse up our selves betimes,
answering his voice with another call of our own, calling and crying with all
our might and without ever ceasing, all of us, From this Prison good Lord
deliver our Souls. But yet call and cry as long and as loud as we can, our
Souls shall never be clearly freed either from this Prison of sin, or those
others of Cares and Sorrows, so long as they are still enclosed in this of the
corruptible body. Which is the Fourth and last Prison of the Soul, and here
intended by David according to the exposition of many Fathers, whose words I
cannot now stand to recite.

And therefore Laurentius Justinianus said well of Verba sunt peregrinationis
suae miserias meditantis, etc they are the words, says he, of one meditating
on the miseries of his peregrination on Earth, and the joys of the celestial
Jerusalem above, and as it were sighing in himself that he was detained so long
from praising the name of God, and singing hymns of thanksgiving and honor
amidst all the company of the righteous there, and congregation of the
firstborn both Saints and Angels, he grieves at his absence, and groans out
the ferventness of his desire in this short Prayer, Bring my Soul out of
Prison, that I may praise thy name. A desire which he does elsewhere often
express, As the Heart desires the waterbrooks, so longs my Soul after thee O
God. When shall I appear before the presence of the Lord? Blessed be they that
dwell in thy house, they shall be always praising of thee from generation to
generation: and that he might be in the midst of them praising his name, his
desire in this Prayer is here, Bring my Soul out of Prison etc.

And yet, if we shall suppose he did not, yet others may, and no question but
many do. The Roman Catholics report, not without Joy, that their holy St.
Francis died with this very sentence in his mouth, and this sense of it to be
his mind, which he had no sooner uttered but Anima a Corpore libera evolavit in
coelum, his Soul according to his request freed from his body, flew away into
Heaven. And certainly whosoever has but so much goodness, as he can grieve to
be detained from Heaven, or desires to be freed from the molestations of sin
upon Earth, cannot but esteem of the body as a Prison which hinders him in
both. Nay the very Philosophers that knew neither of those respects, out of
moral regards, could both perceive and acknowledge it for such, Carcer and
sepulchrum Animae, the Prison and Sepulcher of the Soul. And so may we term
them too, only we must be careful we avoid the error of Origin, That our Souls
sinned in Heaven, and are condemned to bodies, but as to Galleys or Prisons
where they are to do penance for former transgressions. But as St. Austin does
well distinguish, it is not the body in it self which was first built for a
house of delight though sin committed in it, but the corruption of it that
makes it a Prison, according to that in the Book of Wisdom Corpus corruptibile
aggravat animam, the corruptible bod^ presses down the Soul; and cease not
to fight against it with many noisome lusts, in regard whereof the Apostle
himself was enforced to cry out as even weary of his Prison, quis liberabit,
who shall deliver me from this body of death? why? Thanks be unto God through
our Lord Jesus Christ, this is he that shall deliver us, this is the Lord to
whom David did and we all must pray, that desire this benefit. Bring my soul
out of Prison O Lord.

And yet though we may lawfully make this Prayer in this sense, yet it must be
as before with submission of our will unto his: we must wait the Lords leisure
with patience to whom only belong the issues of death, and therefore not seek
to break through the walls or throw our selves out at the windows; but stay
till he shall please to open the door, and lead us forth in peace, for it is
Educ animam, we may not thrust it out our selves, but he must lead it forth, or
we shall but thrust it out of one prison into another infinitely worse. Nay it
seems by that word it should be no hasty desire, that he himself should do it
neither: it does not sound as if we would have him presently break down and
demolish the building, and so sweep us away in an instant; that were Eripe
animam, pluck forth my Soul out of prison, but it is Educ, lead it forth, and
seems to import not so much an anticipation of our time as an humble Petition,
that when our time is come, and this Tabernacle must needs be dissolved; that
then amidst all the conflicts and terrors of death he would be pleased to be
with us to sustain and uphold us with his grace, chean up and guide forth our
Souls with his comforts, for this is educere animam, to lead the Soul out of
Prison. And happy, thrice happy are those Souls that are thus led and conducted
in this perilous time. Every one indeed prays for it, but every one shall not
obtain it, It is Educ animam meam, and we must put an accent upon that meam on
David's Soul; that faithful and penitent Soul indeed was, and all others without
fail shall be (in their due time) thus led and guided out of their Prisons in
peace: but those that have no part in his penitence, they may say, if they
will, but they shall have no part in his Prayer. As they neglected God and all
his ways in their life: so God again will be as far from hearing or keeping
them in their death, but will rather laugh in their destruction and mock, when
their fear comes, as it is in the first of Proverbs. And then on the otherside
how miserable, thrice miserable, shall he be, that must part with his Soul at a
venture, without any comfort to sustain it, or light of grace to lead it,
through the fearful passages of death! Look on him, and you shall then see,
when after all his mirth and revels, you shall find him at the last laid on his
groaning pillow, on the bed of languishing, as David speaks. O consider well
how woeful and disconsolate his estate must needs be, when after all his former
pleasures being worn out with his body, the Soul begins to loath the ruinous
house of age and sickness; when it may not stay, and yet knows not whither to
go; at what time those sad and severe cogitations formerly beaten from him
through youth and felicity, return to afflict, and pay him home for all his
vain and wanton delights: yea peradventure when the terrors of God shall fight
against him, and the Arrows of the Almighty stick within him, the venom whereof
drinks up the spirit, as it is in Job; In this misery of his, wounded in body
through sickness, and distressed in conscience through sin, what shall lead him
forth with comfort since God refuses to do it? shall his wife, his sons or his
friends, his honors, offices or wealth? why the very thought of these and
whatsoever else he has, that is good, does but double his afflicton, since now
he must part with them for ever; and may well therefore say unto them as Job
did unto his three friends, miserable comforters are ye all: what then? shall
he comfort himself as some of the servants of God have done, by looking back on
the ways of his life? why nothing can possibly torment him more: he now sees
that he has but wearied himself in the ways of Iniquity; and perceives, though
too late, what before he refused to believe, that such paths lead down unto the
Chambers of death. Since then he can neither comfort himself, nor receive any
from the rest of the world, shall he for his last refuge, as thousands of
others have done, cry, Lord, Lord, be thou my help and comfort, and bring my
Soul out of Prison? But alas unto what purpose, and upon what acquaintance? He
that gave his Soul unto sin and Satan in his life time, why should he think God
in his death will embrace and entertain it? No, no: Either give up thy Soul
unto God when he calls for it in his word, in the provocations of his love, in
the holy motions of his Spirit unto thine; or else when thou would give it,
he will none of it; unless as an angry Judge to deliver it over to the
tormentor. And in these streights what remains, but that he either take up the
ditty of that dying Emperor, heu, quae nunc abibis in loca, fearfully part
with his Soul he knows not whither, or else embrace the counsel of Jobs wife,
desperately curse God and die? Either way he comes to his deserved end; and he
whose whole life was as the way of a snail, not a step but leaving filth
behind; at the last dies like a Candles end in the Socket, boiling and burning
in the flame of his own distressed and distracted Soul, till he go out in a
suff, and leave an ill savor behind him amongst all good people. Such is
oftentimes the fearful departure of those whom God for their former wicked
lives shall refuse to lead out of their Prisons when they die. No, this favor
belongs not unto them, it is reserved for those faithful Souls that with holy
David, have thoroughly sorrowed for their sins, for they only shall partake of
David's Prayer that imitate David's repentance. And these, however he may seem to
absent himself for a while, and hide his countenance from them, yet in that day
of need, in that last and Fearful time that most requires it, they shall be
sure of his comforts. He will not fail then to discover his face, and make the
light of his countenance shine into that region of darkness: and by the beams
thereof cheer up his people, leading and lighting them through all the dark and
winding Alleys of death, until they arrive in the glorious Kingdom of
immortality and peace.

Believe not me, but behold the holy man of God and see it performed with your
Eyes. Look upon Jacob the Patriarch, and Father of the Patriarchs, he that
wrestled not only that one time at the River Jabbock, but all his life long
with the arm of the Almighty continually afflicting him, yet in the end, all
these storms are blown over, and he is gathered unto his Fathers in a calm of
content and peace. But first mark how the Lord gave him strength, before he
went hence and was no more seen; wherewith he collects his fainting Spirits,
raises himself up in his bed, calls his Sons about him, gives every one his
several blessing and benediction in such a high and Prophetical strain, as if
an Angel had sat on his lips: and I think many Angels sat waiting in that
door of his body for the coming forth of his Soul, which stayed not long after,
to convey it into the bosom of his Grandfather Abraham, there to rest in
everlasting peace. Look upon Joshua the Captain of Israel, after all his Wars
and Battles past; at length he sits him down and divides the spoil among the
Tribes of Jacob; and death drawing near, see how he summons the whole people
together, and with such power of speech exhorts them to the fear and service of
God, which had dealt so mercifully with them, that the whole Congregation as if
it had but one heart and one tongue and both thoroughly affected, joint ly cry
out unto him, God forbid, that we should forsake the Lord; nay but we will
serve him, for he is our God. Thus out of the flame of his own zeal having
kindled a fire in the breast of others; this great Worthy was led forth from
his Prison in peace. See Samuel the Judge of Israel going to his grave as to
his bed, and in him consider the power and virtue of a good Conscience, arising
from the memory of a well acted life: Whose Ox or whose Ass have I taken, whom
have I defrauded, or at whose hands have I received a bribe? says he unto the
Congregation, as all bear him Record, says the Text, hoc ducit ad funus and
sepulturam: This is it which accompanies him to his grave, and lays him in his
rotten Sepulcher. Lastly, consider St. Paul and his mavelous confidence, even
before his death, that made him bold to deliver up his Soul almost like his
Savior with a consummatum est, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord
the just Judge shall give me at that day: words worthy of a Soul so near unto
its Heaven: such have been the blessed ends of these holy Men of God and many
more, famous in their generations, and such it is and shall be in all others
that faithfully serve him, though it be not ever manifest in all.

And what is there now that can more deeply affect a good heart? what can a
religious mind so much desire unto it self, or behold with so great delight in
another; as to see a devout and penitent Soul give a peaceful farewell unto
Nature, and in the midst of death depart full of comforts of immortality and
life? as those Souls only do, whom God shall vouchsafe to lead out of their
corruptible prisons with the sweet consolations of his spirit.

But peradventure far off examples, will be left too far off respects. Usually
those that are nearest do affect us most: if so, this sad occasion will afford
you a worthy one: for I have done with her Text, and must speak as I promised
and you expect of her person, that made choice of the Text: and by this time
you cannot but perceive how justly. She delighted in prayer and praise while
she lived, and she left this behind her written with her own hand, that it
might testify so much for her even after her death; and that by it she might in
a sort (lest her thankfulness being private should die with her self) publicly
praise the name of God amidst the company of the righteous, the congregation of
good men here on earth, even then when she her self, freed from her prison,
should be singing honor and glory with Saints and Angels in Heaven, Yet this
was not all the reason of her choice. It sorted well with her condition whilst
she was in the body; and she knew it would be fully accomplished when she
should be led out of it. For she had her part of afflictions, and they pressed
sore upon her too, even straightened her Soul. Her branches she saw were rent
away, branch after branch; and to so loving a nature they could not but go off
as limbs from her body. What Bernard said in the loss of his friend is most
true in her case: Her bowels were plucked from her, and she could not but feel
the wound; and therefore if for naught else but her sorrow and afflictions sake
she might well pray, educ animam, etc.

But other troubles she had besides and distractions in the world, that often
called her meditations from Heaven where they delighted wholly to converse:
especially in her later time wherein she so inured her Soul unto blessed
contemplation, as she had almost freed her self from this prison ere she was
freed from the body: that indeed was still in the world, but her mind and
affections were usually with her Maker: So that those earthy cares which hang
at the heels of other men's Souls like talents of lead, hung at hers only but as
a line that usually gave her leave to soar aloft, only humane necessity that
held the end of it, had power now and then to draw her down, to the grief and
sorrow of her heart. I am a witness of her complaint, and of her tears too that
any worldly occasions, though never so necessary, should trouble and interrupt
her spiritual devotions, and therefore I am sure in this regard it was her
frequent prayer, Bring my Soul out of prison.

And besides afflictions and cares, sins she had too no question, for what Soul
is without them? but yet so few and so far from habit, as I think no man can
easily tell what they were. Infirmities and omissions it may be, though for my
part, I know them not; yet this I know, that her goodness esteemed them as the
greatest sins, and bewailed them with sorrow enough to suffice one that had
murdered his Father, or betrayed his Country, never ceasing to send forth her
fervent supplications in this behalf unto the last gasp. Her tongue, her hands,
her heart, all prayed this prayer: her tongue as long as it could move, and
when that failed, her hand spoke; and when both were gone, yet questionless her
heart cried this cry, deliver my soul out of this prison, the prison of sin.
But yet until the body be severed from the Soul, the Soul can never utterly be
severed either from sin or care, or sorrow of affliction. And a body she had,
it is now you see a carkase: but sometimes was a goodly frame, a well built and
come^y mani^on, and even; cut out of an ancient Quarry; but unto her, whose
thoughts were on another habitation above, as it was in it self, by reason of
the corruption whereunto it was subject, so she esteemed it, but a prison unto
her Soul: and that did at last trouble her peace with pains, and delay her from
those joys that are pure and know no mixture of sorrow.

No marvel therefore, if in the desire of these she could make that her prayer,
which others tremble to think on, deliverance from her Prison. But yet there
needed no earnest Prayer for this, death comes fast enough on of it self
without hastening; it more concerns us to die well and with the comforts of God
in our bosoms, that may shield us from our spiritual enemies that are then
busiest; and guide and conduct us through the dark valley of death, that is
terrible in it self. And therefore in this respect I rather conceive, she that
was so careful of her Soul, could not but make it her humblest and heartiest
prayer that when the time should come, the Lord of his mercy would be pleased
to lead it out of Prison. So fit was it every way, and in many regards so good
a choice did she make of her prayer, whilst she lived, and the Lord from his
holy habitation heard her cry and at last accomplished and fulfilled it all in
her death. Though before he pleased to lay sorrows enough upon her, yet now in
the midst of them all, his comforts did refresh her Soul. Now he comes to it in
his dearest loving kindness; and leads it forth indeed with his choicest
consolations and graces to make her a full recompense for all her former
afflictions. How does it now rejoice others about her, even in the depth of
their sorrow, to see her full of the Spirit, and out of the abundance of it
sometimes pouring down blessings on her children and childrens children, and
every one his several blessings, like Jacob: sometimes stirring up and
exhorting to the fear and service of the Lord, with holy Joshu^; sometimes
again solacing her self in the sweet peace of a good Conscience, as blessed
Samuel: and lastly sometimes venting out her strong hope, and steadfast
confidence with St. Paul, but in the words of Job, I know that my Redeemer
lives, and I shall see him with these eyes, as she often repeated. But what
may be said enough of her fervent praying? she was ever pious and frequent in
this holy exercise through the whole course of her life, thrice a day at the
least, at morning, at noon and at night, besides her times of public prayer:
so five times a day she prayed, and I doubt not but instantly too. But now when
her prison began to ruin and death to appear within ken, how assiduous is she
now? it is not David's seven, nor twice seven times a day that can suffice; but
she plies it, as if she had meant to fulfill the Apostles precept, pray
continually. I told you but now her heart, tongue and hand prayed to the last
gasp, and I think that gasp was a prayer too, when her understanding failed,
and she could neither hear nor see others, yet others might see and perceive
that she prayed. So perfectly had she taught her tongue to pray, that when her
senses were locked up, it could run of it self. And if such a Soul as this, be
not, whose shall ever be, led forth with comfort and peace? But yet before her
leading forth, being remembered of it, she willingly made confession of her
Faith, acknowledging all the Articles of her Belief, and adhering only unto the
blood of Christ Jesus for her hope: in these she had lived, and in them she
would die; but die in charity too forgiving and desiring to be forgiven of the
whole world: as at other times she did not refuse to ask it even of her own
Servants when she had but uttered a word with a little more earnestness than
ordinary. And this solemn profession made, that she might farther yet fulfill
all rights, she gladly makes her Son her Father, and receives his absolution.
And not long after the God of all mercies on whom she continually called,
answered her gently, and opening the Prison, eduxit animam,led forth her
blessed Soul full of gracious comforts unto everlasting glory, for with this
all the other prisons are utterly dissolved. No more afflictions now, nor sin,
nor death for ever: all tears are wiped from her eyes, and sorrow from her
heart, all pain from her Body and sin from her Soul; which now in the highest
Heavens compassed about with the righteous, sings the songs of praise and
honor and glory unto him that sits upon the throne and to the Lamb for
evermore.

Who now shall mourn, who shall weep for such a Soul? none can sorrow for her
unless they envy her happiness: foelix illa anima, imitationem desiderat n^n
planctum that blessed Soul is no subject of grief, but a pattern for imitation.
And therefore if any weep in her death, they must be tears of joy, not of
sorrow; and if they be of sorrow, they must not be for her but for our selves,
and our own loss. This indeed is great and invaluable, and when you think on
it, weep a Gods name. Quis natum in funere matris flere vetat? he were
barbarous that would forbid it you: yet you shall not have all to your selves,
we'll bear you company, for she was a public loss. Such a Wife, such a Mother,
such a Friend, such a Mistress, such a Neighbor, such and so good a Woman, and
so great an example of Virtue, cannot, should not go to the grave with dry
eyes, in whose loss so many have interest. I would praise her if I could, to
make you weep more, but she is beyond my commendations. A Woman of her Wisdom
and Judgment, of her Wit and discourse, so free and liberal and yet so prudent
and provident withal, for she was so in her self, though misfortunes befell her:
so sweet, so kind, so mild, so loving and respective to all, and withal so
charitable to the poor, a Surgeon to the hurt, and a Physician to the sick:
she eat not her morsels alone, and their loins were warmed with her wool, as
Job speaks; such a Woman, so well born and bred, and of such a strain beyond
ordinary, as she seemed with the blood to inherit too the virtues of all her
Ancestors: so upright and clear and innocent in her whole course, that the eye
of envy, nay were all the malice of the world infused into one eye, it could
not find any just stain to fasten on her; such a one, so every way complete,
surely no Man unless he had her own, or the wit and tongue of an Angel can
sufficiently commend: neither can we, if we regard our own loss, sufficiently
bewail. But the truth is, she is not lost, non amissa sed praemissa: sent
before she is, lost she is not: And therefore you whom it most concerns though
you mourn, mourn not as those without hope. It is but a short separation, and
the time will come when you shall see her again, though not with these earthly
affections. Pay the due tribute unto nature; but then shut up the sluices for
graces sake. And the God of all grace give you comfort; the Holy Ghost the
Comforter himself replenish your heart with consolations. And the blood of
Jesus Christ wash us all from all our sins, and strengthen us with the power of
his might; that we may so live whilst we remain here in this Prison of the
Body, that when it shall be dissolved, we may obtain mercy from him, to lead
forth our Souls. To lead them with his grace, and then (as he has done to this
blessed Saint) receive them unto glory; There with her and all the company of
righteous spirits that are gone before us, to sing praise and honor unto his
holy name for evermore. To this God the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, etc.

Laus Deo in aeternum.
THE Second FUNERAL SERMON, FOR THE DAUGHTER.
SERMON XIII. Upon ROMANS viii. 10.
And if Christ be in you, the Body is dead because of Sin: but the Spirit is
life because of Righteousness.
MAN of all Gods Creatures, is the strangest compounded, the most mavelous
mixture that ever was, a very fardel of contrarieties, wonderfully united and
wrapped up in one bundle. Heaven and Earth, light and darkness, Christ and Belial
may seem to dwell together, and man the house of their habitation: what can be
more directly opposite than Flesh and Spirit, Life and Death, Sin and
Righteousness? and lo all of them united here in one verse, nay in one man. For
the Text is but the Anatomy of man, and must therefore be composed of and
divided into the same parts man himself is. As his body is composed of contrary
Elements, heat and cold, fire and water: So his person is composed of contrary
Natures, Corporal and Spiritual, Body and Soul: His Natures again of contrary
qualities, Life and Death; the Body is dead, the Soul lives: and lastly these
qualities issuing from contrary causes, sin and righteousness, death from sin,
and life from righteousness. The Body, etc. And though the sin by which the
body dies is our own, yet that we may know that the righteousness whereby the
Soul lives is not of our selves but received from our Savior, there is a
caution given in the entrance of the verse, If Christ be in you. So then here
are three couples, a Body and a Soul: Sin and Righteousness: Life and Death:
The body with her two attendants, sin and death; the Soul with her two
endowments, righteousness and life. The former is universal and common to all
the Sons of Adam according to the flesh; the latter particular and proper only
to the Children of the second Adam begotten by the Spirit, If Christ, etc.

I begin with the first part, which is a meditation of death and our chief
Christian comforts against death. But yet before the Apostle brings in his
consolations he premises a conditon, If Christ be in you: To teach us, that the
comforts of God belong not indifferently to all men: He that is a stranger from
Christ, has nothing to do with them. What have thou to do to take my Covenant
into thy mouth, so long as thou hate to be reformed? says God in the Psalm
I. When our Savior commanded his Disciples to proclaim peace unto every house
they came to, he foretold them it should rest only on the Sons of peace. He
forbad them in like manner to give those things which were holy, unto dogs, or
to cast pearls before Swine. This stands a perpetual Law to all his messengers,
that they presume not to proclaim peace to the impenitent and unbelieving; but
as Jehu said unto Jehoram's horsman, what have thou to do with peace? so are we
to tell the wicked who walk on still in their sins, that they have nothing to
do with the peace or promises or privileges of the Gospel, If Christ be in
you, etc.

Secondly, if we compare the verse immediately precedent, or that which is
subsequent with this between both, you shall easily perceive after what manner
Christ dwells in his Children. Sometimes we are said to be in Christ, and
sometimes Christ is said again to be in us; and both in effect come to one: we
are in Christ by faith, and Christ is in us by his Spirit: For so it follows,
If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that
raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies. It is not
then a Carnal presence, but a Spiritual, that does link and associate unto
Christ. To make up our union with him it is not needful that his humane nature
should be drawn down from Heaven; or that his body should be every where
present on Earth, as the Ubiquitaries affirm: or that the Bread in the
Sacrament should be transubstantiate into his body, as the Papists imagine. His
dwelling in us is by his Spirit, and his union with us, is spiritual. So
himself in the same place where he speaks of eating his flesh and drinking his
blood, does interpret himself, the flesh profits nothing, the words that I
speak are spirit and life. And his Spirit, it is, not his body that shall give
life unto the Spirit, when the body shall perish, If Christ, etc.

This touch shall suffice for the condition, I proceed to the substance of the
Text. The Body is dead. It contains, as I said, an admonition of our frailty,
corruption, and death, and comforts against death. It is but the body that is
dead, the Spirit is life, First of our corruption and frailry, The body is
dead. That we all tend unto death we all know; but the Apostle's speech is more
remarkable: he says not, the body is subject to death, but by a more
significant phrase of speech he presses it homer, The body is dead. There is a
difference between a mortal body, and a dead body. Adams body before the fall
was mortal in some sort, that is, subject to a possibility of dying: but now
after the fall our bodies are so mortal, as they are subject to a necessity of
dying; yea if we'll here with the Apostle esteem of death by the beginning and
seizure of it, they are dead already. The forerunners and harbingers of death,
dolours, infirmities and heavy diseases have seized already on our bodies, and
marked them out as lodgings which shortly must be the habitation of their
Master.

But how near this manner of speech draws unto true propriety, they best
conceive, who best understand how that malediction of God and curse of the Law,
The day that thou eatest thereof thou shall die the death, was fulfilled. If
God spared not the Angels when they waxed proud, will he spare thee, who art
but a putrefying worm? Ille intumuit in coelo, erga in sterquilinio, he was
puffed up in Heaven, and therefore was cast down from the place of his
habitation: and if I wax proud lying on a dunghill, shall I not be cast down
into Hell? So often therefore as corrupt nature stirs up the heart to pride,
because of youth and health, beauty and strength, and the like perfections of
the body; let this consideration humble thee, that though these are fair and
beauti full flowers, yet they cannot but suddenly wither; because the root from
whence they sprung is corrupt and rotten and even dead already. Neither is it
more available to the cutting down of arrogance and pride, than to teach us
Temperance and sobriety. What avails it to pamper that Carcass of thine with
excess of delicate feeding, which is possessed by death already? If Men took
the tenth part of that care to present their spirit holy and without blame unto
the Lord, which they take to make their bodies fair and beautiful in the eyes
of Men, they might in short time make a greater improvement in Religion and
Virtue than they have done. But herein is their folly; they make fat the flesh
with precious things, which within few days the worms shall devour; but never
care to beautify the Soul with holy and virtuous actions, which shortly is to
be presented to God. Let us therefore refrain from the immoderate cherishing
this proud and dead flesh; meats are ordained for the belly, and the belly for
meats, but God will destroy them both, 1 Cor. vi. 13. I might enlarge this
point almost infinitely; for the benefit of this consideration is not confined
unto Humility, Sobriety, and Temperance or any particular virtues, but it is
universal; restraining from all evil, and inciting powerfully unto all virtue
and goodness. Nihil sic revocat bominem a peccato quam frequens mortis
meditatio, says St. Aug. nothing can so recall a Man from his evil ways as the
frequent meditation of death; especially if he consider, as the certainty of
death, so the uncertain time of his death, and the unchangeable estate of
everlasting misery if he die in his sins. Would to God we were wise, thoroughly
to apprehend and apply this unto our own Souls. It is strange that there is
nothing so well known, nothing of greater benefit, and yet nothing so little
regarded. What a Prodigy is it, that sinful Men should carry about their death
in their bosoms and in every vein of their Bodies, and yet scarce admit a
thought of their mortality into their minds, but live here as if they verily
thought they should never die? If we had no Religion, yet reason would teach us
that our strength is not the strength of stones (and yet them even the drops of
water wears) nor our sinews of Brass and Iron, as Job speaks (and yet these
the rust and canker consumes) but a vapor, but a smoke, which the Sun soon
dries or the wind drives away. It was wittily said of Epictetus the
Philosopher, who going forth one day and seeing a Woman weeping that had broken
her Pitcher, and the next day meeting another Woman that had lost her Son, Heri
vidi fragilem frangi, hodie video mortalem mori, Yesterday, says he, I saw a
brittle thing broken, and to day I see a mortal Man die. And what difference of
frailty between these two? surely none unless Man be the frailer of the two.
For as St. Austin has it, Take the brittlest veslel of earth or glass and keep
it safe from outward violence, and it may last many thousand of years: but take
a Man of the most pure complexion, of the strongest constitution, and keep him
as safe as thou can; he has that within his own bowels and bones that will
bring him to his end. Nay I hear some say, says the same Father, that such a
one has the Plague or the Pleurisy, and therefore sure he will die; but we
may rather say, such a one lives and therefore sure he will die; for diverse
have had these Diseases and did not die of them, but never any Man lived, that
did not die. The Consumption of the Liver is the messenger of Death, the
Consumption of the Lungs the Minister of Death, the Consumption of the marrow
and moisture the very Mother of Death; and yet many have had these Diseases and
not died of them. But there is another kind of Consumption which could never
yet be cured; it is the Consumption of the days; the common Disease of all
Mankind. David saw it and spoke of it, when he said, my days are consumed like
smoke, Psalm. cii. yea the Philosopher saw it and could say of it, quicquid
praeteritum est temporis mors habet: all our time that is past, death has
seized on it; and so much of our life is consumed. Let me then warn you and
stir up your meditations of your mortality in the words of Moses, Deuteronomy. xxxii.
29. O that men were wise, then would they understand this, then would they
consider their latter end. Sure we are unwise that we consider not the things
past, the evil we have committed, the good we have omitted, the benefits of God
we have abused, the time we have misspent; and yet we grieve not, because we
think not yet whether we shall die. More unwise are we not to consider the
things present, the deadness of our Body, and uncertainty of our death; the
difficulty of Salvation, and the small number of such as shall be saved, and
yet we shame not, because we think we shall not yet die. But most unwise are we
that we consider not the things to come, Death, Judgment, Hell, all to come;
and yet we fear not, because we think we shall never die. But O that we were
wise; then should we understand, then should we consider our latter end, and
considering it, we should both prepare for it now, and more cheerfully
entertain it when it comes, memorare novissims, remember thy end says the
Wiseman, and in aeternum non peccabis, and thou shall never offend, never do
amiss, Ecclus vii. 36. So universal is the goodness of this consideration, and
therefore I have stayed the longer on it. But now I pass from mortality to the
cause of it, from death to sin, that first brought it into the world. The body
is dead because of sin.

derived the contagion to all his posterity; who still continuing to feed on
forbidden fruit as he did, do perpetually strengthen the original Disease and
draw death upon themselves more hastily and violently than either that sin
procured, or the prime corruption of nature for it does enforce. Hence then we
may perceive first how foolish they are, who living still in sin yet never
consider that they are the Butchers and Murderers of themselves, according to
that of the Psalmist, The malice of the wicked shall slay themselves, xxxiv. 21
his own sin which he has conceived, brought forth and nourished, shall be his
destruction. Every Man judges Saul miserable that died upon his own Sword: but
what better are other wretched Men whose sins and iniquities are the cruel
instruments of death, wherewith they slay themselves, Souls and Bodies too?
Thus are they twice miserable; first that they must die; and secondly that they
are guilty of their own death. O the lamentable blindness of Men! who albeit in
their life they fear nothing more than death, yet do they entertain nothing
more willingly than sin which causes their death. In bodily diseases Men are
content to abstain even from ordinary food, when they are informed it will but
nourish their sickness; and this they do to eschew death: only herein they are
so ignorant, that notwithstanding they abhor death, yet they take pleasure in
unrighteousness that brings it upon them. And secondly, which shall be the last
use we will make of this point. Since sin it is, that did first bring and does
still hasten on death, upon wicked Men; what marvel is it, if in these last and
worst days the Lord strike the bodies of Men with sundry sorts of diseases and
sundry kinds of death, seeing Man by sundry sorts of sins does not cease to
provoke him unto anger? He frames his Judgments proportionable to our
iniquities: if ye walk stubbornly against me, and will not obey me, I will then
bring seven times more plagues upon you according to your sins, Levit. xxvi.
25. He has a famine to punish intemperance and the abuse of his creatures, if
the memory of our own corrupt and putrefying bodies cannot do it; he has a
devouring sword to bring down the pride of our hearts. If we have fiery and
unclean affections, he does not need burning Fevers and loathsome diseases to
punish them. And now if the Lord after that he has stricken us with such a
dreadful pestilence shall renew his Plague amongst us; or go on to finish that
former destruction with the Sword of our enemies, what shall we say? but the
despising of his former fatherly corrections, or our stubborn walking against
the Lord our God has procured it justly unto our selves. Quid mirum in poenas
generis humani crescere ir am Dei, cum crescat quotidie, quod puniatur? what
marvel that the wrath of God increase every day to punish Man, when that does
daily increase which deserves that God should punish it? But enough of this
part: it is now time to pass on to the second and most worthy part, as of Man
so of my Text, from the Body to the Soul, from the memory of death, to the
comforts against death: for though the body be dead yet it is but the body, the
spirit (which is the highest consolation of a Christian) is yet alive, Man's
life it self. But the spirit is life.

I cannot now stand to discourse of the excellent Nature of Man's Spirit and the
wonderful union of it with flesh and blood; for Man you see is no simple
creature but compounded of both; both a Body and a Spirit. He is the abstract
and brief compendium of all the creatures of God. The world was corporeal, the
Angels spiritual, and both were united in Man, and made as it were into one
creature; A creature which has being with the elements, life with plants,
sense with beasts, reason and spiritual existence with Angels; that so the
Almighty God first uniting all his creatures in Man, and then uniting Man unto
himself in the person of Christ, might in some sort through Man communicate
himself to all his creatures. Worthily therefore did the Naturalists term him a
little world; and as worthily did St. Austin say of him, that of all the
miracles that were ever wrought amongst Men, Man himself is the greatest
miracle; and that not only in regard of his two substances, but especially in
regard of their mavelous union; that a mass of clay should be quickened by a
spirit of life, and both united into one person. That as God himself has
diverse persons in one Nature: so man has diverse and those contrary natures
in one person. Commonly, says Bernard, the honorable agrees not with the
ignoble, the strong overgoes the weak, the living and the dead dwell not
together. Non sic in opere tuo domine: non sic in commixtione tua: not so in
thy work O Lord, not so in thy commixtion; here the living and the dead dwell
both together: The body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life.

Here then are the high consolations of a Christian against death, briefly
comprised; and they are three, That his death is neither total nor final, but
his life is perpetual: His death is not total, it is only of the body, for the
spirit lives: it is not final, for the spirit is not said only to live, but
that it is life, and that in two respects, first because it shall give life
again unto the body; and that secondly an everlasting life, and therefore it is
not barely the spirit shall live, but in the abstract, the spirit is life. So
you may perceive the reason why the Apostle varies his manner of speech: he
said not the body is death, as he says the spirit is life; neither says he the
spirit is alive, as he said the body is dead; but the body is dead and the
spirit is life: the body is dead and not death, because it shall live again;
and the spirit is not alive but life, because by the virtue of the spirit it
is, that it shall live, and live for ever. The spirit etc. So our life is
perpetuate, our death but short and not total. Amidst these comforts what has
death in it that shall greatly trouble or distress the faithful Soul? why
should it not stand erect in the midst of all the panick terrors thereof, so
long as there is begun in us a life, which no death shall ever be able to
extinguish? Albeit death invade the natural and vital powers of our bodies, and
suppress them one after another; yea though at the length he break in upon this
lodging of clay and demolish it to the ground; yet the inner Man and spiritual
that dwells in the body shall escape with his life. The Tabernacle is cast down
(that is the most our enemy can do) but he who dwells in it, removes unto a
better. The dissolving of the body, to him, is but the breaking up of the
prison wherein he has been so long detained, that he may thenceforth be
delivered into a glorious liberty. For as the Bird escapes out of the snare of
the Fowler: so the Soul in death mounts up and flies away wi^ joy into the rest
of her Maker. The Apostle knew this well, and therefore desired to be dissolved
that he might be with Christ. As in the battle between our Savior and Satan,
Satan's head was bruised, but he did no more than tread on our Saviors heel: so
shall it be in the conflict of all his members with Satan; by the power of our
Lord Jesus we shall be more than conquerors: For the God of peace shall tread
him under our feet, Romansxvi. While he is there, let him nibble about the feet,
it is no great matter, yet it is all he can do, and let him do it. Manducet
terram meam, and dentem carni infigat, let him bite the dust (says Ambrose,)
it was his original curse: let him eat that part of me which is earth, let him
bruise my body, all this is still but to tread upon my heel: my comfort is,
there is a seed of immortal life in my Soul, which no power of the enemy is
able to approach, much less to overcome and extinguish; for the spirit does not
only live, but is life, life eternal. The spirit is life, etc.

But yet that we may more fully understand to whom these consolations belong,
and what spirits they are that can live in death and enjoy the comforts of life
when their bodies can live no longer, it is added because of righteousness. The
spirit is life, because of righteousness, or for righteousness sake. The
righteous then, these are they to whom it belongs, these only are the holy
Spirits that shall revive in the midst of life and live in death, as they died
while they lived: whilst the body lived, they died unto sin; and when the body
dies, they shall live unto God. For as the life of the Soul, is the comfort of
the heart; so the spirit of righteousness, is the life of the Soul. And
therefore deceive not thy self in a matter of such moment, in the business of
thine everlasting welfare, but be most assured that so far forth thou do live
as thou art sanctified, and no farther. As health is to the body, so is
holiness to the spirit. A body without health falls out of one pain into
another, till it die; and a Soul without holiness is polluted with one lust
after another, till it perish eternally: As the Moon has light more or less,
as it is in aspect with the Sun; so the Soul enjoys life, less or more, as it
is turned or averted to or from the Lord of life whose righteousness only can
give life, (as this life, peace and joy) unto the Soul. Miserable are those
wicked ones, that want both, they are as St. Jude speaks, bis mortui, twice
dead; that is, dead both in body and Soul. Their Souls indeed do live and shall
live eternally, a natural life, but there is a life of Grace as well as of
Nature; by the one the Soul lives for ever, by the other it lives for ever in
happiness. This life, they do not, they shall not ever live; and as for the
natural, the Spirit of God accounts that but a death, whilst they live in the
body, he says they are dead in sins; and when they go out of the body, though
they live, yet he calls their life, and justly, an eternal death. Immortality
seems to be added rather to their sorrow, than to their Souls: Since their
Souls are only kept immortal that their punishment might be everlasting. It is
true that so long as Men enjoy this natural life in health of body and
prosperity of fortune, the loss that comes by want of the spiritual life is not
so safely discerned; no more than the defects of a ruinous house are known in
time of fair weather: but when the storm of affliction, when the tempest of
death shall come pouring down upon him; then the decaies and breaches will
manifest themselves. How woeful then must his condition needs be, that has now
no other life but a natural, and must now part with that, and he knows not
whither? In this estate he cannot but die either uncertain of comfort; or
rather most certain of Condemnation. And therefore it is not much to be
marvelled they are so loath to think or so much as to hear of that final and
fatal time. O death, how bitter is thy remembrance unto such, says the
Wiseman. How does the only apprehension thereof even chill the blood in his
veins and kill the very marrow in his bones? Belshazzar's doom is no sooner
written upon the wall, but the joints of his loins are loosed and his knees
smite one against another. How did that one word of the Witch strike Saul
thorough and thorough, leaving him tumbling on the earth in a swoon. To morrow
by this time thou and thy sons shall be with me? so bitter indeed is the
remembrance even of bodily death unto those that have no spiritual life in
their Souls. But what misery may we think will there be in the enduring and
suffering of that whose only expectation is so fearful?

Sad and fearful is the departure of the wicked though it outwardly appear not
in all: the comforts of my Text belong not to them: as their Spirits were dead
whilst they lived, so they shall not live when they die. Where there is no
righteousness, there can be no life, For the Spirit, etc. No, the righteous,
the righteous that is the faithful and penitent Souls, these are they, who as
they have the true spiritual life in present, so in death they shall have the
true comforts of the blessed life which is to come; for however God at other
times brings trouble, heaviness and afflictions on his best servants, yet at
that hour he never fails to assist them, and in the midst of death to make the
life of their Souls appear more clearly for righteousness sake. He may seem to
absent himself from them and to hide his coun^^ (...) but then in that day of
need, in that last and fearful time, which most requires it, they shall be sure
of his comforts, he will not fail then to discover his face and make the light
of his countenance to shine into that region of darkness, and by the gracious
beams thereof to cheer up his people, lighting and guiding their feet through
that obscure Valley and shadow of death into the blessed ways of immortality
and peace. Believe not me, look upon the holy men of God a little and see it
perfomed with your Eyes. Behold the Patriarch Jacob the Father of the
Patriarchs, he who wrestled not only that one time at the River Jabbock, but
all his life long with the arm of the Almighty continually afflicting him: But
see how contrary it fell out in the end, when all the clouds of affliction
being blown over, a calm of contentment follows and he is gathered unto his
Fathers in peace: but first mark how the Lord gave him strength before he went
hence and was no more seen, wherewith he collects his fainting Spirits, raises
himself in his bed, calls his Sons about him, tells them of things to come,
great things to come for many generations, and with an inspired Spirit ready to
expire gives every one his several blessing and benediction in such a
prophetical, so high and Heavenly a strain and style, as if an Angel had sat
on his lip, and I doubt not but many Angels sat waiting in that door of the
body for the coming forth of his Soul (which stayed not long after) to receive
and convey it into the bosom of his Grandfather Abraham there to rest in
everlasting peace. Look upon Joshua that valiant Captain, who having spent his
life in travail and more than Herculean labors, warring against Giants and the
Sons of A^ak: yet at last you may see him sitting down in peace and dividing
the spoil among the Children of Jacob: And in the end death drawing near, see
how he summons the Tribes of Israel together and in a sweet Oration recounts
unto them all the mercies of God which had followed them from Terab the Father
of Abraham that dwelt beyond the flood, to Cheusem that had now gotten
possession of the promised land within Jordan. And being full of the spirit and
spiritual life, with such power of speech he exhorts them to the fear and
service of this merciful God, that the whole Congregation as if they had had
but one heart and one Soul, and both thoroughly affected, jointly cry out, God
forbid that we should forsake the Lord, nay he is our God and we will serve
him, Josh the last. After this manner from the flame of his own zeal, having
kindled a fire in the hearts of others, this great Worthy and worthy Servant of
the Lord, lived in his death, and dyed in peace. See holy Samuel the Judge of
Israel going to his grave as to his bed, and in him consider the power and
virtue of a good conscience arising from the memory of a well acted life, Whose
Ox or whose Ass have I taken, whom have I defrauded or oppressed, or at whose
hands have I received a bribe, says he in the public assembly, and all the
people bare witness unto him, says the Text. Hoc ducit ad f^nus and
sepulturam, this is it that accompanies him to his Grave, and lays him in his
rotten Sepulcher. The like blessed savor of rest did this peace of conscience
send forth in the blessed Apostle S. Paul, who in that wonderful confidence was
bold to deliver up his Soul in the breath of the same words, as it were, his
Savior had done before him, a Consummatum est, I have finished my course, I
have kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for me, a Crown of righteousness
which the Lord the just Judge shall give me in that day: words worthy of a Soul
so near its Heaven. Lastly, view the Protomartyr Steven, blessed with peace in
the midst of a cruel death, for all torments are easy if they have answerable
comforts. The obstinate Jews threw the stones of death at him but he filled
with the Holy Ghost, looks steadfastly into Heaven, where he beholds his Savior
standing at the right hand of God, to whom now dying he speaks as he had done
before to his Father, in manus tuas, into thy hands O Lord I commend my Spirit.
Such have been the blessed ends of these holy men of God, and of many others
famous in their Generations: and such it shall be in all others that faithfully
serve him, though peradventure it is not manifest in all. Their bodies are
buried in the Earth, but they have left a name behind them, and a memory
sweeter than the perfume made by the art of the Apothecary, as was spoken of
the good King Josiah. And what is there now that can more deeply affect an
honest and a good heart: what can a religious mind either so much desire unto
it self, or behold with so great joy in another, as to see a devout and
penitent Soul give a peaceful farewell unto Nature, and in the depth of death,
depart full of the comforts of immortality and life? But it may be far off
examples will be left too far off respects; for likely those that are nearest
do affect us better: if so, you want them not neither, two among the rest more
remarkable you have had of late. The one not long since, the other now before
your eyes: The Mother and the Daughter: of both whom I may truly say, in the
words of my Text, their bodies were dead while they lived, and their Souls
lived in the death of their bodies for righteousness sake. A memorable and
exemplary couple, I may well join them in my speech, they were so many ways
joined in themselves. They were joined in affinity and alliance: they were
joined in affection and love: they were joined in the quality and nature of
their Disease, and would not be severed till death did it: in the time of their
sickness they were joined in the comforts of death, and now they are joined in
the glory of an everlasting life. But the formers rites are passed; yet they
might not be now passed over; I cannot but give her a touch, she desired it
from me, and I am sure she deserved it. For the latter here now in your sight,
I shall not speak much because I can hardly speak enough: with her former times
I have had no acquaintance, and therefore can make no relation of it, only I
assure my self that she who was so patient and penitent in her sickness, so
devout and cheerful in her death, could not but be well and religiously
disposed in the course of her life. But for the latter part of her days them I
have known, and in them been an eyewitness of the expression of more goodness,
than I have often seen, or from a Woman of her quality, could have expected.
The things of note which I especially observed in her and shall commend unto
you are principally these: her willingness to entertain death, and her deadness
unto the world and worldly affairs, her joy in spiritual discourses, and her
frequency and fervency in devout prayer. For the first, if we consider the
impediments, it was much she should do it so cheerfully: she was but young and
entering upon the prime of her years. She had small and tender Infants of her
own, that went near her: she was well bestowed where she found both youth and
love and means too, wanted nothing nor was likely to want: and haec sunt quae
faciunt homines invitos mori, and these are the things that make Men unwilling
to die, could the Philosopher say. Yet notwithstanding all these she gently
submitted her self unto it: she resolutely went forth to meet it, and lest he
should miss her, she called it unto her, Come gentle death, and even held forth
her arms to receive and embrace it. For the second, I was with her often, yet
never heard a word of worldly matter or secular affair, so much as fall from
her tongue: Her heart was bent on Heaven which made it delight so much in
heavenly contemplations; they came down upon her, as the Scripture speaks, like
rain into a fleece of wool and as a shower upon a thirsty land. With what an
open and greedy ear did she suck in celestial comforts, which she shortly after
vented out again in devout supplications, wherein the mercy of the Lord did not
forsake her even to the last gasp? And then at last when her hands forsook her
tongue, and her tongue had almost forsaken her heart, yet her heart did still
adhere unto God in uncessant prayer, and therefore she entreated others to hold
her fainting hands, that her tongue failing they at least might testify that
her Soul did commune with her Maker. It calls to mind the story of Moses having
Aaron and Hur to support his arms, for whilst he prayed, Amalek fled and Joshua
conquered. Sure I am whilst she did in like manner, the true Joshua conquered
all the spiritual Amalekites, and enemies of her Soul, who only could batter
down the prison of her body, that her spirit being loose and at liberty, might
freely clear the air and mount up to the desired place of everlasting rest:
where she now is, and where may she still in peace remain till another day
shall invest both Body and Soul with unspeakable glory. Who can now mourn, who
can weep for such a Soul? if ye do, they must be tears of joy not of sorrow, at
least they must be for your selves not for her. You may bewail your own loss,
you cannot grieve at her death, unless you envy her happiness: foelix iss a
anima, imitationem desiderat non planctum, that happy Soul is no subject of
sorrow but a pattern of imitation. And therefore I now leave the dead, and
conclude to the living, that their Spirits may live in death, as hers has
shown them the example. For this should be the chief endeavor, this should be
the principal care of a Christian in his whole life, that when his life shall
end, yet the life of his Soul may not end with the death of his body. It little
matters how it fares with us in the rest of our time, so it go well with us
here; when if wrath overtake us it shall eleave unto us for ever, but if peace
end our days, our days afterward of peace shall never end. For as the tree
falls there it shall lie. Wretched Men that can willingly think of any thing
save this that infinitely concerns them above all things else! that can wish
with Balaam, let me die the death of the righteous and let my last end be like
his, but never endeavor themselves in the works of righteousness whereby they
may procure it; as if they might be like them in their death whom they refused
to imitate in their actions. But they may wish like Solomon's fool till their
tongue cleave to their gums, for so long as they live the life of Balaam,
loving the wages of iniquity, they shall never die the death of the righteous
nor have their last end like his whom they are nothing like in conversation. No
if the Soul then live, it must be as my Text has it, for righteousness sake.
Set thy self therefore to it seriously and speedily. Wise Princes make many
days preparation for a field that must be fought in one. Beloved, let us be
wise too and lay up something every day, for the last, when we shall wrestle
with death. If we win that skirmish we have enough; but where or when or how
soon we shall be called to the conflict, who can tell? be not secure therefore,
and presume not on the last hour; it may come suddenly upon thee: flatter not
thy self and thy sins, and frame not delay unto thine own Soul. Send not
Religion before thee unto thine old age; whither peradventure thou shall never
come, or else come hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. Give not thy youth
and strength unto Satan, and then when thou art low drawn, and upon the lees,
think to present God with the dregs of thy life. What a folly were it for thee
to adventure thy surest, thy everlasting weal or woe, making or marring, on so
sandy and sinking a foundation? how much better were it for thee to remember
thy Creator in the days of thy youth before the evil day come, and thou say I
have no delight herein; that thy Creator may not forget thee in thine old age,
when strength fails and Man returns to his long home. Sure in these great
water-floods we shall hardly come nigh him, and therefore let us seek his face
while he may be found, and make our prayers in an acceptable time. So shall our
petitions be heard, and we in all our tribulations, in the hour of death, and
in the day of judgment (as we desire) be most assuredly delivered: finding
comfort in our life, and life in our last end. And what is all the wealth and
honor, pomp and glory of the world in comparison of this? They may yield
discontents enough as being gotten with travel, kept with care, and lost with
grief; but can never give any true satisfaction to the Soul, especially in that
last and perilous time which most requires it.

Surely every Man's thought is a secret watch unto his own heart: let him then
ask his own Soul, and it will tell him, versa and reversa in tergum, in latera,
in ventrem, dura sunt omnia, Christus solus requies: muse and forecast, toss
and turn, all the night long from side to side; still, still no true ease nor
true contentment, no perfect joy to be found but in the sweet peace of a good
Conscience sprinkled and washed with the blood of Jesus Christ the Prince of
peace. All other things fail us at our death, and therefore are unworthy of our
care whilst we live. No, no, Thoughts of remorse and joys of sorrow, silent
moans and melting tears, an heart truly humbled, and a Spirit ever settled
cheerfully to live and willing to die, in the loving arms of a gracious
Redeemer, this is the prize, this is the Crown we should contend for; and this
is the way, now to live a Saint on Earth and ever hereafter to enjoy an
exceeding and an eternal weight of glory in the highest Heavens. Which the Lord
of all glory grant unto us for and in the meritorious Passion of his Son Christ
Jesus our Lord. To whom with the blessed Spirit, etc.

Laus Deo in aeternum,
Amen.
FINIS.

