SOME ANIMADVERSIONS AND OBSERVATIONS UPON Sr WALTER RALEIGH'S History of the
WORLD.

Wherein his mistakes are noted, and some doubtful passages cleared.

By Alexander Ross.

LONDON, Printed by William Du-gard for Richard Royston, and are to be sold at
the Angel in Ivie-lane.

TO THE READER.
IN my navigation through the large sea of Sir Walter Raleigh's History, I
lighted, now and then, upon some shelvs and quicksands, which made me strike
sail ever and anon, and cast anchor, and with the plummet of observation to
sound the depth of those places; a few of which I here present to thy view,
that thou may see wherein he was either defective, or mistaken. There are
diverse other passages in his book, which deserv Animadversion, if I had time or
leisure from my other Studies; only take notice of this one, which now com's
in my memory. He undertake's to prove by three reasons that the Flood did not
utterly deface the marks of Paradise.

[1. Because Moses, who lived long after, make's a particular Lib. 1. cap. 3. 5.
description of Paradise. 2. Because one of Seth's pillars was exstant long
after the Flood. 3 Because the trees were not rooted up by it, as appears by
the Olive branch brought by Noah's Dove] How feeble these reasons are, any
man, though weaksighted, may see. For 1. Moses his particular description of
Paradise was from Tradition or Revelation, as all his otherrelations of Genesis
were, both before, and after the Flood; and not from any visible marks of
Paradise after the Flood. He describe's particularly the Tree of Life in the
midst of the Garden, with the Tree of Knowledge; will any hence infer that
these trees were exstant after the Flood? 2. To prove that Paradise was not
quite defaced, because one of Seth's pillars was exstant after the Flood, is a
weaker reason then the former: for these pillars were not set up in Paradise,
nor by Adam, nor before the Fall; but without the Garden by Seth's posterity
about 900 years after the Fall. His third reason, That the trees were not
rooted up because of the Olive branch, is weakest of all; for were the trees no
where in the World, but in Paradise? or was the Olive peculiar only to that
Garden? Surely these three Reasons are of less validity then that of Irenaeus,
Justin Martyr, and Tertullian, who would have Paradise exstant because Enoch and
Elias were there. But indeed Paradise was utterly defaced with the Flood, which
rose fifteen cubits higher then the mountains. It Is true that the place was not
removed by the Flood, yet the beauty, delights, and form of it was utterly
abolished, as a punishment of Adam's sin. I could touch diverse other passages
in his Book, but that I am employed in a greater voyage through the vast Ocean
of History from the Second Macedonian War, to these our Modern times;
containing all remarkable passages of these last two thousand years of the
World; which voyage I hope to end in a shorter time then Drake did his, being
almost within four hundred leagues of our own shore: in the interim make use of
these Observations, which I have caussed to be printed in the same volume with
the Epitome, that they may be bound together. God grant that the end of all
our labors may be to glorisie Him, and to find out the Truth, without which
our knowledge is but ignorance, our light, darkness, and all our meditations,
vexations of mind. Farewell.

A. R.

A short Alphabetical Table of the chief matters here touched.
A
A egypt why called Mezre. page 21. 22 Amazons who, and where. 49. 50 Amraphel
who. p. 21 Angels predestined. 3 Antigonia. 56 Antiochus Epiphanes in Daniel.
59 Ararat where. 8. 9 Ark, where it rested. 8 Armenian hills how called. 9
Artillery when invented. 50 Assyria where. 13
B
Balsamum not Opobalsamum. 35 Belus and Nimrod the same 16. 17
C
Chalybs what. 45 Carthage built by Dido. 33 Crenides. 84
D
Daniel how much canonical. 44 Datu'. 48 Delubrum what. 7 Demosthenes a coward.
46 Diomedes his horses. 37
E
EAST inferior to the WEST. 12 Empyrean heaven. 1 Erythreus who so called. 24
F
Fortune ancient. 4 Fortune what. 59. 40
G
Greek -numerical letters, 24 Greek' s threefold computation. 51. 52 Giants.
53
H
Horeb what. 26
I
Iberia what. 19 Jerusalem when so called 35. 36 Iethro who. 27 Israelites
dominion how great. 31. 32 Italy commended. 11 Ituraei who. 54 Justice of
diverse sorts. 23
L
Lex, jus, aequum, fas, 28 Light what. 2
M
Macedon whence derived, 45 First matter. 3 Mercurius why Trismegistus. 31 The
mind in sleep. 5 Money in Greece when. 36 how called. 37 Moses why so called.
23. 24. his excellency and sepulcher. 29
N
Nebuchadnezar truly transformed. 40 Ninive where. 19. 20 Noah why Prometheus.
6 where he planted his vineyard. 10
O
Olympian games whence called. 40 Olympias what space of time. 41
P
Paganus what. 31 Parthians good archers. 32 subjects to whom. 56. 57 Periander
who. 43 Philippi where. 48 Pison why called Basilius. 6 Prometheus who and why
so called. 25
R
Rains in Egypt. 45 Red sea why so called. 29 Rings how and when used. 54. 55
Romans valor and commendations. 50. 51 defended. 53. 54. their triumphs
moderate. 55 56 they justly pursued Annibal. 56. 57. and fought with Antiochus.
57
S
Salem what. 36 Sangus who. 58 Self -murder cowardice. 47 Sibyl's prophesies.
Selnecia built by whom. 55. 56. true. 57. 58 Septuagints how much they
translated. 43 Sicilie whence. 52. 53 Simon Magus his altar. 58 Sinai and Horeb
one hill. 26 Soul actually in every part. 4 Spain whence. 19
T
Talents what. 38 Tharsis what, 18 Typhon and Typheus. 22
V
Victors their rewards. 41 Vicus what. 12 Virgil vindicated. 34 Urbs and
oppidum whence. 15. 16 Vulcan why the god of mice. 41
Z
Zoroaster not Cham.
SOME ANINADVERSIONS AND OBSERVATIONS Upon Sr WALTER RALEIGH'S History of the
WORLD By ALEXANDER ROSS.
Lib. 1. cap. 1.. 4.
SIR WALTER here speak's favorably of Eugubinus and Mercer's opinion, [That the
Empyrean Heaven is an uncreated light]. A conceit derogatorie to God's
Eternity, and Infinity, as if something which is not God should be equal
with him. Secondly it is repugnant to Scripture which affirm's all things to be
created by God. Thirdly it is against the nature of that light, which whether it
be a corporeal or spiritual substance, cannot be eternal, except it be God,
much less if it be an accident which is always posterior to the substance,
but because at last Sr Walter retract's this opinion, I will say no more of it.

Lib. 1. Cap. 1. 7.
ARistotle calls Light a quality inherent to a diaphanous body, but this,
says Sir Walter, should be rather a vouched of the heat]. Aristotle says
indeed sometimes that Light, or Lumen (for Lux is that which is in the lucid
body it self) is (...), sometimes an act, habit, or quality: (...), but still
(...) of a diaphanous or transparent body. For Light is not the quality
inherent in a solid, dens, or opac body; but in a diaphanous. And if there
were not transparent bodies, there should be no light at all; for the light
we see (or by which rather we see) here in the aer, is not that which is in
the body of the Sun, but the intentional species of that light. Therefore
Aristotle was not in an error, but Sir Walter; who will have heat to be the
inherent quality of a diaphanous body; whereas solid and dens bodies are the
proper subjects of heat intensive, and not diaphanous, which transmit it,
except the diaphanous body be enclosed by solid bodies reverberating the heat.

Lib. 1. cap. 1. 10.
THe Peripatetic Doctrine of the first matter is misunderstood by Sir Walter
and others, [When they suppose it to have no being at all, but potential, and
that it is against reason to make form which is the cause, subsequent to the
thing caussed, and that all forms are in the first mover] had he well digested
Aristotle and his Scholar's Writings, he might have found, that though the
matter was not (...), not the particular entitie which it is to be, when, with
the form it make's the compositum, yet it has its entitie before the form, for
else how could it be principium, and a part of the compositum and basis of the
Form, and subject of material substances, and cause of composition, (all which
Aristotle acknowledges) if it had no entitie. Shall we say there is no
entitie in the brass till it receiv the form of a Statue? Sure the brass has
its entitie before it receiv Cesars form: so has the first matter its own
being, before it receiv's the being of the form -that it has actually; this,
potentially, so that the form it self is but potentially, till it be united
with the matter; and as the matter receives from the form that being which it
had nor, so does the form from the matter that substance or basis in the
compound which it had nor. 2. Though the cause is not subsequent to the effect,
yet the form is subsequent to the matter, for it is not the cause of, but a
collateral cause with the matter of each compositum. 3 Though all Forms be in
the first mover, as inthe efficient, yet they are not debarred from being in
the first matter, as in their subjection.

Lib. 1. cap. 1. 14.
PRedestination is only of Men] then Angels were not Predestinate: But the 1
Tin. 5.
Apostle says, That the good Angels were Elected, and consequently
Predestinate: Election being a branch of Predestination; and doubtless Adam,
if he had not fallen, had been Predestinate notwithstanding to a greater
degree of happiness, as the Angels were to the grace of confirmation, and a
higher degree of glory by CHRIST, and so says In Enchirid. cap. 100. and lib.
retract. cap. 13.
St Austin. The evil Angels also were Predestinate because they were Reprobated,
Reprobation being the other species of Predestination.

Lib. 1. cap. 1. 15.
FOrtune is not ancient, for Homer makes her the daughter of Oceanus] This is
no argument, for by the same reason we may say the floods and rivers are not
ancient, nor any thing else, seeing Iliad. 1. 14.
Homer make's these to be the children of Oceanus.

(...)
(...)
And all things have their original from water, if you will believ Thales. This
we know, that in the beginning the Spirit moved on the waters, that they might
be fruitful in the generation of fishes, which are no less ancient then other
creatures. But if by Fortune we mean God's Providence, we may affirm her to
be as ancient as God himself.

Lib. 1 cap. 1. 1.
THe Soul is wholly in the whole body, and wholly in every part, which that
it is otherwise then potentially true, all the Aristotelians in the world shall
never prove] Any Aristotelian will easily prove it; but prejudicate minds
will not easily assent to it. For if the Soul be the form of every part, it
must be actually in every part, or else every part is not informed, and
consequently some parts are dead, as being without sens, life, and motion: for
how can they have these qualities, without they have the form actually, from
whence those flow? If the Soul be in the foot potentially only, it must
follow that the foot is no essential but accidental part of the body, and that
the matter of the foot is not the second, but the first matter; seeing the form
is there only potentially: and that the heart is only and properly man,
seeing there only the Soul is actually: It is the actual, not the potential
presence of the form that make's the compositum, and give's to the matter
being, and denomination. It is so in physical forms, much more in man's soul
which is metaphysical. For in every cole of the fire, the whole form of the
fire is actually, or else it could not actually be hot: neither can we say,
that a part of the form is there, seeing forma consistit in indivisible.

Lib. 1. cap. 2. 2.
IN sleep the Men's or Mind rests, and not theSoul: during which time it is
but habitual, and in mad men this Men's is extinguished] In sleep, the mind is
not only habitually, but also many times actually operative: for not only in
humane dreams, but in divine, chiefly the mind receives illumination from God
and his Angels, and not the fantasy alone, and to say that the mind is
extinguished in mad men is in a manner as much as to say, the soul is
extinguished: for the mind and soul is one and the same in substance; and if
we take the mind for the faculty of understanding; yet this is not
extinguished in mad men, only the exercise, use or practice is hindered,
because the fantasy is vitiated, from whence the mind receiyeth the species
or phantasmata.

Lib. 1. cap. 1. 13.
TO this river of Pison Ptolomie give's the name of Basilius, or Regius] not to
all the river of Euphrates, or Pison, but to the middle channel thereof, where
it mingle's it self with Tigris, close by the city Apamia, for the river had
one channel by Babylon, the other by Seleucia, and the third or middle was
called the King's River, because it was dug by the King's Command. Ptol. lib.
5. cap. 18. ^^b lib. 5. cap. 18.
(...), and so that river is called by the Chaldeans Naar Malcha, and near
Apamia, (...) says Ptolomie, is (...), the commixtion of the King's River with
Tigris.

Lib. 1. cap. 7. 7.
NOah was called Prometheus, for stealing away Jupiter's fire. Fire being
taken in that place for the knowledge of God] I think rather that he was called
Prometheus from his wisdom and foresight, or because he was an Astronomer, or
by reason of his skill and observation of fiery Meteors: and because he taught
men the use of fire, he was said to steal away the fire of the gods. The
Eagles eating of his heart may signify the many fears and cares he was
subject to both before the Flood, and all the time he was in the Ark, and
afterward: but of Prometheus I have spoken enough In Mystagog. Poct.
elsewhere.

Lib. 1. cap. 7. 10. 3.
Lubra is a Synagogue, whence the Latin word delubrum may seem to he derived]
Delubrum which we take for a Church, or Temple, is rather from (...) to take,
receiv, or contein: for by reason of the Greek's inhabiting Italy, the Latins
derived many words from them. But the ancient Latins having no commerce with
the Egyptians, it is unlikely that delubrum should be from the Egyptian word
lubra. Now delubrum properly is not the whole Church, but that part or Chapel
of it where the image of some god stood, called also penetrale; and because in
that place the Priest used to wash himself, therefore from diluo it was called
delubrum, as polubrum from polluo. From this Cerimonie then of washing, or from
the image of the god which stood there, came the word delubrum, quasi dei
labrum; as candelabrum. For labor or labrum is from (...) as Poet. 3. c. 80.
Scaliger shows, and on Festival days they used in honor of their gods to
crown those Chapels or delubra, with garlands of flowers, but not the whole
Church, as Aen. lib. 2.
Virgil shows

Nos delubra deum miseri quibus ultimus esset
Ille dies festa velamus fronde per urbem.
So Silius Italicus. Bell. punic. lib. 2.

Inque vicem amplexi permixta voce triumphum
Tarpei clamant Javis, and delubra coronant.
Now that the image of a god or goddess stood in this part of the Temple may
be seen in Aen. lib. 2.
Virgil, who speaking of Minerva's Temple in Troie, places the image in the
delubrum, which he calls arcem, because it was the highest and strongest part
of the Temple, for which cause they kept their treasures in those places.

At gemini lapsu delubra ad summa dracones
Effugiunt, saevaeque petunt Tritonidis arcem,
Sub pedibusque deaeclipeique sub orb teguntur.
Lib. 1. cap. 7. 10. 2, 3, 4.
SIR Walter will not have the Ark to rest in Armenia, as the received opinion
is, but in some part of the Indies; because (says he) it is unlikely, that in a
100 years they would stay so long from Shinar, being not above twenty days
journie from the hills of Armenia. 2. Because the East was peopled before any
other Country. 3. Because Semiramis found great resistance by the Indians. 4.
Because the Vine grew not naturally in Armenia, but in India where Noah planted
his Vineyard] But these reasons are not of that validity, as to make us recede
from the generally received opinion, which is, that the Ark rested on the hills
of Ararat, which the Chaldee Paraphrase call's the hills Carduaeni. And so the
Chaldees call Armenia Cardu, where Ptolomie's Gordiaean or Cordiaean mountains
are. This we know that in Isa. 37. and Jer. 51. Armenia is called the land of
Ararat, and here the Ark rested, Genesis 8. and the place in Armenia where Noah
came out of the Ark was called (...) as Josephus says.

Abidenus In Chron. Graec, Eusebius. and praepar. Evan. 1. 9. c. 4,
report's, that in his time some part of the Ark was extant in Armenia. So Nich.
Damascenus lib. 96. that upon the great hill of Armenia called Baris a great
part of the Ark was remaining. And Cartwright in his travels, that there are
many ruins to be seen in the hilly countries of Armenia, which were thought
to be the buildings of Noah's children, who durst not venture to com down into
the lower Countries, fearing they might be surprised by another Deluge. This
hill Baris on which the Ark rested may be so called, either because in the
Armenian tongue it signifie's a going out, for there Noah came out of the Ark,
therefore the Greeks call it Apobaterion: or else from Berith in Hebrew, which
signifies a Covenant, because there God made a Covenant with Noah and his
posterity. These hills also where the Ark rested were called Cordiaei or
Carduthi, which are placed by Xenophon, Pliny and Strabo near Tygris in
Armenia, Xenoph. lib. 4. Plin. lib. 6. cap. 13.
which Country in Jeremie is called Mini also, so that Armenia seems to be
Strab. lib. 16. Jet. 51. 27.
made up of (...) Har-mini, the Hill of Mini. In these hilly Countries both of
Armenia and along toward the Indies, Noah's posterity contained themselves for
about a 100 years: all which time they durst not venture to dwell in the low
Countries, therefore fearing least they might be surprised by another Flood,
would not trust themselves to the low valleys of Shinar, though it was so near
them. We read of diverse Plantations near the Sea coast, where the Planters
contained themselves, and durst not in many years adventure far into the land.
We know how long is was before the Roman Colonies would venture over the
River of Rhene, Danubius, and Euphrates: Therefore to say that the Ark rested
not in Armenia (because Shinar being so near Noah's children would not have
been so long from it) is of no force: nor his other reasons taken from the
populousness of the East, and resistance made to Semiramis. For I deny not but
Noah's posterity might enlarge their Plantations toward the East, but yet
still keeping the hilly Countries, yet it will not follow that the Ark rested
there, or any where else then in Armenia; and as for Noah's planting of his
Vineyard in India, not in Armenia because this Country is too cold for Vines,
is an opinion altogether groundless: For first, how knew he that there were
not as well in Armenia, as in India wild Vines, for of those Noah made his
Vineyard, by pruning, cultivating and dressing of them. 2. We know by relation
of Travelers, Historians, and Geographers, that in Armenia are plenty of
very good Wines, and contrary in India there are no wines, or very scarce,
so that they supply the want of wine, with the liquor of the Palmtree, and
with a drink brewed of Rice and Barlie. 3. It is not altogether the coldness of
the Country that hinder's the growing of Vines, but the nature of the Soil,
and many times excessive heat is an impediment; so is the unseasonableness of
the months of Julie and August by reason of too much rain that hinder's the
maturation of the grapes: for Spain and Italy, which are forty degrees in
Northerlie Latitude from the Line, being forth excellent wines, and yet New
Spain in America, which is nearer the Line by twenty degrees produces no
wine, as Jos. Acosta witnesses. So Chile which is a cold Country in
comparison of those nearer the Line, yields excellent wine, and abundance,
being forty degrees off Southerly Latitude from the Equinoctial.

Lib. 1. cap. 7, 10. 4.
IN Alexander's time Learning had not traveled so far to the West as Rome.
Alexander esteeming of Italy but as a barbarous Countrie] Pythagoras had
planted his Philosophy in Italy almost two hundred years before Alexander was
born, therefore Italy at this time was neither ignorant nor barbarous: nor was
Rome at this time a village, as Sir Walter will have Alexander to esteem of it,
but a great and warlike City, being now above three hundred years old, and
victorious over their neighbors, as the Roman stories can inform us: neither
was it the meanness of Rome, nor barbarousness of Italy that kept off his
conquering Army from thence, but the hardiness of that people, the valor,
prowess, and strength of that Nation, on whom Alexander durst not adventure;
for if he had, he should have found other manner of men then his loos,
effeminate, and unskilful Asiaticks; a people always more fic to serve, then to
command; apter for Venus, then Mars; so that the Romans themselves never made
(...) state in Asia, but they still lost much of their Masculine virtues. That
the ancient Italians were a hardy manlike people the King of Poets tell's us.
Virgil Aen. lib. 9.


Non hic Atrides nec fandi fictor Ulysses,
Durum a stirpe genus, natos ad flumina primum
Deferimur, saevoque gelu duramus and undis, etc.
Omne aevum ferro teritur versaque juvencum
Terga fatigamus have a: nec tarda senectus
Debilitat vires animi, mutatque vigorem.
Caniciem gale a premimus, semperque recentes
Convectare juvat praedas, and vivere rapto.
Vob^ picta croco and fulgenti murice vestis
Desidiae cordi: juvat indulgere choraeis. etc.
And so the same Poet elsewhere shows what men. Italy brought forth. Virg.
Geor. 1


Haec genus acre virum Marsos pubemque Sabellam
Assuetumque malo Ligurem Volcosque verutos
Extulit; haec Decios, Marios, magnosque Camillos,
Scipiadas duros bello, and te maxim Caesar, etc.
Such was the valor of the Italians, that the Romans spent as In Proaem.
Florus shows above four hundred years in subduing them, whereas they brought
in subjection all the rest of the World in the space of little more then two
hundred years. Doubtless had Alexander encountered with the Gauls, Germans, and
Britains as Caesar did, he had found more work for his Macedonians, then he
did among the Perlians. Therefore however Sir Walter preferr's the Eastern
parts of the world, to the Western, in civilitie, arms, magnificence, learning,
etc. yet we find the contrary, and so did Pompeie, whose vaste Eastern Army
was forced to yield to Cesar's small Western Forces. And the Turks know whether
the Asians or Europeans are fittest to make his Janisaries, or to which he is
most beholding for support of his Monarchy. For civilitie and learning we
find that the Western Greeks did civilize and instruct the Eastern Asiaticks.
The Gauls were ever more civil then the Germans, though more Eastward: as for
the stories of China I give little credit to them, nor do I believ that
Printing and Artillery, with other Arts, were so many years among them,
before we knew the use of them, no more, then that the World was created so
many thousand years before Moses his computation which is the belief of the
Chinois.

Lib. 1. cap. 9. 2.
THe joining of Cottages together in one common field or Village the Latins
call Vicus] This word Vicus did not only signify a Country Cottage, or
Village, but also a Street, though in a City. So we read of Vicus sceleratus,
Vicus Cyprius, and diverse others in Rome and the word vicatim by Jullie is used
for going from street to street. And Vicinus was he who dwelt in the same
street, as Vicanus was used for a Farmer, or Countrie-man: now pagus did
signify a Village consisting of diverse Cottages not only from (...) a Well,
which was in common to them all; but as I think from the old word page to
bargain, or covenant, because they covenanted one with another to live justly
and peaceably together or from pango to set, graft, or plant, the proper work
of husbandmen; whence com's the word Paganus, which at first signified a
Countrie-man, then it was used for those in the City which were exempted from
war, or had never used their Arms: hence among Christians paganus signified a
Heathen, such as never fought under the Banner of Christ: or because
Christianity was first professed in Cities, and late received by the Country
people: or because Christianity drove away Gentilism out of all civil and
populous Cities into remote and obscure Villages.

Lib. 1. cap. 8. 15. 1.
ASSURE, the second son of Sem, was father of the Assyrians] This Country was
so called, not only from Assure the first planter thereof, but also from (...)
Ashur, that is, blessed, 2 Kings. 18 ver. 10.
for it was happy in bread wine, oil, and honey; it abounded also with
excellent fruits, hence Assyrium amomum in Virgil; Assyrium gramen in Statius,
and Assyrii odores often in the Poets; and because of the abundance of silk
there, Assyriae vestes are taken for silk garments, and Assyrius tapis is a
kind of Jasper stone. This Country also was called Atyria, from the Chaldee
word (...) Atur, for the Chaldee uses to change the Hebrew (...) into (...),
so they say Cuth for Cush: It was called Adiabene (...), as if the access to
it were difficult, by reason of the many Rivers thereof; some of which are
(...) Impassible: yet this Country was not impassible to Xenophon and
Alexander in their expeditions.

Lib. 1. cap. 8 15. 1.
Lud, the fourth son of Sem, gave name to the Lydians in Asia the less, is the
common opinion, but I see not by what reason he was moved to stragle thither
from his friends] The same reason might move him to plant in Asia the less, far
from his friends, which has moved many Europeans to plant in America, much
farther from their friends; to wit, conveniencie of habitation, sweetness of
aer, fertility of soil, and such like motives. Now the Lydians which came of
Lud were of old called by the Greeks Maeones, and Lydia Moenia, as Lib. 1.
Herodotus Lib. 13.
and Strabo show. And Claudian think's they were so called from Maeon the
ancient King of Phrygia, and Lydia.

-- dicti post Moeona regem Moeones.
Afterward they were called Lydians from Lydus the son of Atys, as Lib. 1.
Herodotus and Lib. 1.
Dionysius Alicarnassaeus affirm. Hence Attalyda, a town in Lydia, was so
called from Atys and Lydus. But the Greeks are children in Antiquity, and
fabulous; therefore doubtless the name of Lydia was more ancient, and either
planted by Lud, or by his Children, who from their Father's name might call it
Lydia, which is ordinatie. Near, or through this Country of Lydia did flow the
winding River Maeander, as Lib. 5. ^.19. 29.
Pliny shows. Lydia persusa flexuosi amnis recursibus Maeandri: and perhaps
the Country might be called Lydia, or Ludia from Lud, which in the Phaenician
tongue signifie's Binding, Winding, or Turning; for diverse Countries are named
from their chief Rivers; and because the River was called Maeon, the Country
might be called Maeania. These Lydians were very ancient among the Greeks.
Attys, Tantalus, Pelops, Niobe, Aracbne, were Lydians; and about the time of
Jephthe 1200 years before Christ, the Lydians were masters of the Sea, and a
war like people, as may be seen in Ezekiel 27. 10. These sent plantations into
Caria, Peloponnesus, and Hetruria; and into Africa too: These are commended for
their Isa. 66. 9. Jer. 46. 9. Herod lib. 4
skill in Archerie, the Asiatick Lydians were good spear men, and excellent
horsemen, as Herodotus shows. (...): but after Cyrus had disarmed them, they
grew effeminate, and gave themselves to all luxury and delight. So that (...)
was to play the wanton; and effeminate voluptuous men were called (...): and
he that sold or made sweet oils was called (...): and because the Lydians were
the Inventors of many games and sports, which the Romans made use of, they
called all plays and games Ludos, and Plaiers Ludiones.

Lib. 1. cap. 9.. 2.
TOwns encompassed with Walls were called oppida, ab opponendo, or ab opibus]
Not one'y from opes wealth which for safety they brought thither; and from
oppono, because they were able to oppose their enemies, but also from open help,
because they were able to help one another I ever being united in a Town, then
dispersed, and living asunder: hence came the word opisices Tradesmen, whose
abode and use are most in populous Cities, as standing most in need of their
help; and because Towns were secured and fenced by walls, trenches, or ditches;
they called these fences muros, or moenia, a muniendo; and the Towns urbes, ab
orb, because they were encompassed with a plough, which by Varro is called
urbare: and the furrow which the plough made, was the foundation of the wall to
be made.

-- humili designat moenia fossa, Virgil. lib. 3, and lib. 5.

-- urbem designat aratio.
Lib. 1. cap. 10. 2.
NImrod was the first King of Babel, and it agrees with reason that Ninus
should be the third] Sir Walter here would make Nimrod, Belus, and Ninus three
distinct Kings of Babel, alleging no reason for his opinion, but contradicting
Eusebius, Hierom, Austine, and the most approved writers upon no ground:
whereas it is generally affirmed that the name Nimrod which signifie's a Rebel,
was changed by his son Ninus and his posterity into Baal, or Bell, or Belus,
which signifie's a Lord, this being a title of honor, that of ignominy:
besides, the Scripture acknowledges no King of Babel before Ninus but Nimrod;
nor do historians mention any before Ninus, but Belus, their manners,
dispositions, and actions are the same: they are both said to live about two
hundred years after the Flood, and to have reigned then in Babylon: both are
said to be the Founders of that City: both the Inventors of Idol atrie, for
the names Beliel, Bielphegor, Beelzebub are from Bell, or Belus; both are
described to be men of cruel, fierce, and warlike natures, and ambitious in
propagating their Empite: And whereas Sir Walter says, that if St Austin had
thought Nimrod and Belus to be the same, he would have rather called him
Nimrod with the Scripture, then Belus with the Gentiles: This is nothing, for
St Austin direct's that work of The City of God to the Gentiles, and confuted
them, therefore he had reason rather to use the name Belus, which was known to
them, then the name of Nimrod which they knew not: and who know's not that
Saint Austin, through all that Work, make's use of the Gentil-Stories, and
therefore had reason to use their own names: It is true there was another Belus
called Belus Tyrius, far later then Nimrod, famous among the Phenicians, of
whom the Poet.

Implevitque mero pateram quam Belus and omnes
A Belo soliti, etc.
Lib. 1. cap. 11. 1.
ZOroaster, King of the Bactrians, Vincentius supposes to be Cham the son of
Noah] This cannot be, though both were wicked men; the one in mocking his
father, the other in finding out Magical Arts. For Zoroaster was King of
Bactria, as is supposed, but Cham's lot fell to be in Africa far from Bactria:
therefore prophetically he was called Cham, from (...) Cham, that is, Heat;
and (...) Chum, that is, Black, as being the father of those black people, who
inhabit the hot Country of Africa; this blackness, and heat, being a part of
his Curs. Again, Zoroaster was the Inventor, as some think, of Astrology, or at
least a great lover of it; therefore they called him (...) a Star-gazer; or
(...) because he honored them, and sacrificed to them. But Cham, as the
Chemists will make us believ, was the Inventor of their Art called Alcbimia,
from the Arabic article Al and Cham, as if it were Alchamia, but indeed it is
from the Greek (...), because they are still pouring, infusing, distilling, and
extracting: or from the Arabic word Chema, to Hide; hence Alchimia is a Hidden
Art, and so it is, if either we look upon their doctrine, or practice, all is
hid; and so was the knowledge, or use of it, till of later years, for the first
that mention's it, is Julius Firmicus to the Emperor Constantine.

Lib. 1. cap. 8. 9.
MOntanus for Tharsis in Cilicia, understand's Carthage in Africa, but he was
much mistaken in that conjecture] This town, which bear's the name of Tharsis
Javan's second son, is by some taken for the metropolis of Cilicia called
Tharsis; which word also signisieth the Sea: Some take it for Ophir, because
Jehosophat's ships were appointed to go to Ophir. 2 King. 22. 48. and in Chron.
20. 36. 37. it is said, They were to go to Tharsis: The like is said of
Solomon's ships, as we have showed upon Genesis. Now Ophir was in the East
Indies, so then Tharsis must be there, which place is likely to be Tapiobona,
or Sumatra, called Chersonesus, or aurea terra; and it is not unusual for one
town to have two names, nor for two or three towns or places to have the same
name; Ophir then, and Tharsis may be two names of one place. Others will have
Tunis and Tharsis all one: but it is most likely that Carthage (not that of
Africa, but that of Spain) was a Colonie of Tharsis, or Tyrus: for the Isle of
Cales, or Cadiz, and Country about Batis was called Tartessus from Tharsis:
and we find that the Phaenicians had great commerce with Spain, because that
Country abounded in silver, iron, tin, and lead, which was the merchandise of
the Tyrians, as may be seen in Ezech. 27. 12. besides the Temple called
Gaditanum, near Hercules his pillars, as by diverse Autors thought to be built
by the Phenicians, and that Country of Spain to be subdued and peopled by
Hercules Tyrius, not Thebanus as the Greeks Appian in Ibericis. Theophrast de
vit. Apollonil lib. 2 cap. 14. Arrianes lib. 2.
would have it: for the Temple that stood there, was built after the Phenician
manner, and after the same manner were the sacrifices, and solemnities
performed. Lastly, the word Iberia, by which Spain was called, is a Phenician
word, from the Hebrew Eber, or the Childee Ebra, which signifies a passage, or
the bound and end of a thing, intimating that Spain is the bound or end of the
Earth, beyond which these was no passage nor navigation; yea, the word Spain is
Hebrew too as Bochartus Geog. sac. lib. 1.
observes: for Saphan is a cunnie, and Spain was called the Country of
Cunnies, for it abounded with them: so that the Islands called Baleares, now
Majorca and Minorca, were so infested with them, that they were not in a long
time habitable. To conclude, I believ there was one Tharsis whither Salomon's
ships went, in the East, another on the Mediterrane Sea, whither Jonas fled.

Lib. 1. cap. 12 1.
NInive was built in the plains of Assyria, on the banks of Tygris long before
Ninus's time] Niniveh, or Ninus, for so this City was called, from Nimrod's
son Ninus; though not he, but Nimrod built it; and the whole country of
Assyria is called in Scripture. The land of Nimrod. Mich. 5. 6. Sometimes
fathers called their Cities, not by their own, but by their son's names; so
Cain called the town he built from his son's name Henoch: and in Hebrew
Niniveh is as much as N^^^nave, the habitation of Ninus, as Geog. sac. l. 4
cap. 20.
Bochart observes, but there is great diversity of opinions among writers
concerning the siituation of Niniveh; some placing it near Euphrates, others
near Tygris, but it is likely there were two towns of this name: one near
Euphrates called old Niniveh, in Philost. lib. 1. cap. 13 and 14. where
Apollonius travelleth from Antiochia to Mesopo^amia through old Niuiveh: the
other, which was the great Niniveh, of three days journie (for the circuit of
it was about threescore miles in compass) stood upon the West side of Tygris:
or else Niniveh stood on Euphrates as Diodorus lib. 2. cap. 1. says: because
Euphrates and Tygris in one place are united, and so have but one name. It is
now called Mosal, and is the chief seat of the Nestorian Heretics. This City
was famous, not only for the magnificence, riches, and greatness thereof, but
also for antiquity, because it was extant in Abraham's time, as Eusebius
witnesses: here dwelt Phul, Tiglath. Pileser, Shalmaneser, Sennacherib, by
whose arms Samaria was exhausted, and the Israelites translated into into
Assyria, and Media, yet this vaste City was at last so destroyed, as likewise
Isa. 47. 7. 8. Seleuc. Nicanor.
Babylon, that thought her self eternal; and Seleucia, built by Seleucus
Alexander's successor in Syria and Babylon, that as Nrh. 1. 8. and 3. 17.
Nahum the Prophet foretold, the place where it stood should not be known, and
as Lucian says, (...), etc. there not any mark or footstep to be seen of it.

Lib. 2. cap. 1. 10.
THis Amraphel was not at this time the greatest Monarch, for the vallie of
Pentapolis was subject to Chedarlaomer King of Elam, or Persis] This
contradict's Scripture, history, and reason, for Amraphel i, still first named
by Moses, as being the greatest Prince. Histories do show us that the Kings
of Shinar, or Babylon, were the greatest Monarchs of those parts, and that the
Persians had no greatness till Cyrus, therefore Amraphel King of Shinar must
be greater then Chedarlaomer King of Elam: And it is not unlikely but this
might be Nimrod as the Jews think, for he might be yet alive; and it is
usual for one man to have two or three names, though Elam here might signify
Persia, as I do believ it does not, but rather it was the name of a town in
Assyria, as Saint Hierom think's; or in Persia, as others; yet Persia at this
time was of no great esteem: as for Sir Walter's reason that Chedarlaomer was
the greatest King, because to him were subject these five petty Kings, or
Majors of towns, it is very weak, for so he might as weil infer that Porus,
was a greater King then Alexander, because he had diverse petty Princes under
him, not subject to Alexander; or that Herod, to whom this lake of Sodom, or
country of Pentapolis was subject, was greater Prince then Augustus Caesar.

Lib. 2. cap. 2. 4.
EGypt is now called by the naturals in their own language Mezre] So the
Arabians at this day call it Meser, and the Egyptian's first month of old was
called Mesori; in Scripture it is called sometime Masor, as Isa. 19. 6. The
rivers of Masor shall be dried up. Kimchi explain's it the river of Mizraim,
or Egypt. So Kings 19. 24 Mich. 7. 12.
in two other places; but we Translate the word Masor Forts, or senced places,
for so indeed the word signifies, and Egypt was naturally fortified from the
North by the sea, from the South by the cataracts of Nilus, and mountains of
Ethiopia; from the East and West by deserts. Or Egypt may be called Masor from
the narrowness thereof, for it is narrow and long from the sea to Syene; and
because Egypt is divided into two parts, to wit the bigher, where Nilus has but
one channel, and the lower, where it is divided into diverse channels, called by
the Greeks D delta, from the triangular figure it make's, hence it is called
Misrajim in the Dual Number.

Lib. 2. cap. 2. 6.
IN the reign of Hercules and Typhon seven years were spent] This was that
Hercules who made an expedition into Spain, and erected those Pillars at Gades,
called by his name, There a temple was built to him, and sacrifices offered,
after the manner of the Phenicians. Typhon, for his wickedness and cruelty,
was called a giant by the Grecians. He made War against the gods: he
traveled into Caucasus, and at last was struck down by Jupiter's thunder, and
died near the lake Serbonis, as Apollonius witnesses,

(...).
Therefore Plutarch relate's, in Antonio, that the Egyptians called this lake
(...) Typhon's exhalations The giant also Typhaeus, who rebelled against
Jupiter and is buried under Aetna in Sicilie is called Typhon, and sometimes
Briareus. For these three are taken promiscuously one for another. Typheus is
called by Pindarus P ithia.
(...), hundredth headed: and by Aen. 6. In vit. Apollonii l. 5. c. 6
Virgil, Centum g'minus Briareus. e Apollodorus make's Typhon to have (...) the
n ture both of a man, and of a serpent: Hyginus make's him the child of earth
and hell, having a hundred dragon' heads growing on his shoulders. e
Philostratus make's Typhon and Enceladus all one, being fast bound under the
hill Aetna, (...). But of Typhon we have spoken more f elsewhere. f Mystagng.
Poe^t.

Lib. 2. cap. 3. 4.
MOy is a voice expressing water, bises as much as drawn out thence] Philo
Josephus, and Clemens Alexandrinus will have Moses to be made up of (...)
water, and (...) preserved,: but indeed he was called (...), because says
Pharaoh's daughter (...) I drew him out of the water; so that the name of
Moses is made up of the Hebrew word (...), which is never used but for
drawings out of waters, as Exodus 16. 15. Psalm. 18. 17. so Isa. 63. 11. Moscheh
ammo, he drew out his people. But though this word be Hebrew, and retained in
the Scriptures, yet it is not likely that this was the name which Pharaoh's
daughter gave him, but rather, she being an Egyptian, would give him an
Egyptian name, whereof M shes is the interpretation; which name, it is likely
Moyses's parents gave him, when he was circumcised; that he might by this
name be put in remembrance of God's mercy toward him who drew him out of
waters, that he might afterward draw his people out of afflictions, which are
called waters in Scripture: and of this history it seems the Greeks were not
ignorant, for by them Moses is called g (...), that is, Aquigena, or
Water-childet and indeed Scalig. de emend. temp.
what they write of Bacchus is meant of Moses: for they say that Bacchus was
born in Egypt, enclosed in an Ask, or Chest, and exposed to the waters: so
that Orpheus call's him (...) for Moses, and (...) Law Lawgiver, and giv's to
him (...), intimating the two tables of the Law: he is called also (...), and
is commended for his beauty, and military valor; he is painted too as
Moses, with two horns, and a dog was said to be his companion: for Caleb
Moses companion in Hebrew signifie's a dog. Lib. 1. strom,
Cle men's Alexandrinus think's that Moses was called by his parents Joachim,
and that now in heaven he is called Melchi; but on what ground this conjectore
is built I know not. They are also mistaken who think that Moses was the same
Mneves in Biblioth. l: 1, p. 59.
Diodorus; for this Mneves is said by him to be the first Lawgiver amongst
the Egyptians, whereas he saie's that Moses received his Laws from Jao or God.

Lib. 2. cap. 3. 8.
THe Greeks write the Sea Erythraeum, from Erythras or Erythraeus a King] I
think rather that this King was so called from the Sea, then the Sea from him;
for princes and people are called from the places where they dwell, ordinarily:
as Mithridates was called King of Pontus, not pontus the Sea, or Country of
Mithridates: though I deny not but sometimes Princes call seas and lands by
their own names: as the mouth of the streits is called fretum Herculeum from
Hercules. Now this Sea is so called in Greek from its red color, and this King
was named Erythraeus from it: and so perhaps might the Phenicians and Edomites
be thus called, not because they were redder then other people, but because they
dwelt not far from the red sea, for Edom signifi th red, (I know most derive
this apellation from Esau's red pottage which he coveted so greedily) and so
the Phenicians are called from the red color, says Strabo, because the sea is
red. (...).

Lib. 2. cap. 3. 8.
FRom these apparences of redness by the shadows of those stones, sands, earth,
and clefts, I suppose it first took the name of the red sea, because in many
places it seems to be such] It is not called the red sea only from the
appearance or similitude of redness, for so the whole Ocean sea is called red,
because it appears so when the sky is red in the morning, or evening; hence
the ^^d sea is called mare purpureum, and rubrum by the Virg. Geo. 4. Aen, 7.
Poets.

In mare purpureum violentior in sluit undis.
Jamque rube scebat radiis mare.
So Euripides call's the sea (...) but the Persian Gulf is called the red sea,
because the water in many places is indeed red, when in a storm the water is
troubled, and mingled with that red earth, sand, and slime which is in the
bottom thereof, and this is oftentimes, because that sea is shallower then other
seas are. So I find that not only the Arabian Gulf is called the red sea,
But also the Persian Gulf by Act. 1. Scen. 1.
Seneca.

Et qui renatum prorsus excipiens diem
Tepidum rubenti Tigrim immiscet freto.
Now we know that Tigris and Euphrates run not into the Arabian, but the
Persian sea. So Plin. lib 6. cap. 24. divide's the red sea into two baies, the
one called the Persian, which is in the East; the other the Arab^an: and if the
red sea was so called from King Erythras, then the Persian should bear this
name; for Curtius and others, place his tomb, not on the Arabian, but on the
Persian gulf. I find also that the dead sea, or Asphaltites is by Hesychius
call. led the red sea, (...), because of the red bitumen which is found in and
about that Lake.

Lib. 2. cap. 4. 3.
Eusebius thought Sinai or Horeb were distinct hills, Hierom to be but one]
They were but one in bulk, but distinct in the tops, and names, the one being
called Horeb, that is, Desert; the other Sinai, that is, a Bush: for it was not
(it seems) at that time frequented, but a desert, because full of Bushes and
trees, or because superstitious people held it formidable, supposing some Dietie
had dwelt there, therefore durst not com near it; this kind of superstition
was called (...), and it was ordinary among the Gentiles to believ that their
gods dwelt on mountains; and in groves, so Virgil. Aen. 8, speaking of the
Capitol.

Hinc ad Tarpeiam sedem and Capitolia ducit,
Aurea nunc olim sylvestribus horrida dumis
Jam tum religio pavidos terrebat agrestes
Dira loci: tum cum sylvam saxumque tremebant
Hoc nemus, hunc (inquit) frondoso vertice collem
Quis deus, incertum est, habitat deus, etc.
And perhaps for this cause Horeb was called the mountain of God, or else for the
height thereof; so tall Cedars are called the Cedars of God, or rather by
anticipation, because God was to reveal his will, and glory there to Moses: and
it might well be called God's hill for this cause, as the place where Jacob
wrestled with God called Peniel, and where he saw the vision of the Ladder,
Bethel, God's house: for not only upon this hill did God appear to Moses at
this time, when he kept sheep, but also when he gave the Law. Here it was
where was that rock which represented Christ, which being struck by his
fathers rod yielded fountains of living waters. Here Moses by holding up his
hands overcame Amalek: here Moses conversed with God without food or drink
forty days together: here Moses broke he two Tables of the Law, and slew the
Calf worshippers; and here did Elias enjoie the sight of God.

Lib. 2. cap. 4. 2.
WHen Moses married the daughter of Jethro, he would not (had he found them
Idolaters) made her the mother of his children] He might have found her an
Idolater, and afrerwards convert her, for doubtless Jethro could not have been
Priest of Midian had he not been an Idolater, for they were such: yet
afterward, by Moyses's means and miracles, he was converted to the true God,
as appears by his own words, Exodus 18. Now (says he) I know that the Lord is
great above all gods gods, etc. Therefore Jethro offered sacrifices unto the
Lord, and therefore, upon his conversion, he received a new name, and was
called Hobee, that is, loving, because he testified by his conversion how much
he loved God, and his Law. Now that Jethro was Priest of Midian is plain, both
by the 70 Interpreters, and Latin Interpreters, by Lib. 1, de vit: Moys. Lib.
2, Ant^^^
Philo also and Josephus, though the Chaldee Paraphrase call him Prince of
Midian; indeed he might be both, for Melchisedec was King and Priest, and
among the Gentiles it was usual for the same man to be both.

Rex Anius rex idem hominum Phoebique saccrdos.
And so the Hebrew word Cohen signifie's both: for David's sons were called 2 Samuel, 8.
Cohavim, that is Princes, as the 70 interpret it; for the Priests were not of
the tribe of Juda, but of the tribe of Levi.

Lib. 2. cap. 4. 4.
THe other Etymology a ligando is no less agreeable to the nature of a Law]
The Etymology will not suffer that Lex should be a ligando, though
metaphorically the Law binde's, and Laws are called bands. But Lex is rather a
legendo, which signifie's both to read, and to choos: for Laws were publicly
read, proclaimed, and proposed for all men to be read: and because Law givers
and people did choos what they would obeie, what avoid, they were called Leges
a legendo; Legis natura in delectu non jus, whether it be from jussum because
commanded, or from Jovis, because all Laws are from God; hence jusjurandum, quasi
Jovis jurandum. I say jus is the rigor of the Law, which the Greeks call
(...): hence Acribodicaei were the rigid exactors, and interpreters of the Law;
but aequum is the moderation of that rigor, or a correction, called (...), and
such moderators were called (...), and (...) to moderate the Law. As for Fas,
it was so called of fando from speaking, whence come's the word fatum, which
indeed is, whatsoever God has decreed and spoken concerning us. Quid aliud est
fa um quam quod de naoquoque nostrum deus fatus est. Min. Faelix octav.

Lib. 2. cap. 5. 9.
NO man knows of Moyses's Sepulere to this day, which happened Anno mundi
2554] God would conceal Moyses's Sepulere, least the Jews, who were prone to
Idolatry, might worship him for the true God: for if they stuck not to worship
a Calf, they would have made no scruple to worship Moses his body; and this
was the occasion of that Alrercation between Michael and Satan, mentioned by
Saint Jude, whether out of Tradition, or out of that Apocryphal book, called
Asscensio Moysis, is uncertain. This is certain, that the Gentiles did usually
deisie their Law givers, and such as had don any memorable acts amoug them;
therefore doubtless the Jews would not have been backward to afford the same
honor to him who had deserved it far better then they, if we consider the
excellency of the man, and of his Laws, his miracles and familiarity with
God: his own gravitie, to whom in this regard, all the Heathen Lawgivers com
far short'n for he lived before their first Divines, Linus, Orpheus, and
Musaeus, about four hundred years before the Trojane Wars; four hundred thirty
three years before Homer; five hundred years before the Seven Wisemen of
Greece, who flourished about the Fiftieth Olympiad above a thousand years:
Pythagoras, and his succeeding Philosophers were much later then the Grecian
Wisemen. The most ancient Historians of the Gentiles do make honorable mention
of Moses; as Berosus the Chaldaean; Ptolomie, and Manetho, Egyptian writers;
and among the Greeks Artapanus, Eupolemus, Trogus Pompeius, Diodorus, Morbus,
Numenius, Pythagoricus, who called Plato the Afric Moses.

Lib. 2. cap. 6. 4.
PRometheus was bound to the top of Caucasus, whose entrails being devoured by
an Eagle, did signify his inward care he had to investigate the natures,
motions, and influences of the heavenly bodies] Though this may be true, yet
I think rather was meant by this fiction that he and his children seated
themselves in the Country about Caucasus, who were much troubled, both with the
barrenness of the soil, and vexed with the multitudes and rapacitie of Eagles
who commonly frequent such hilly and rockie Countries: and it is more likely
that Atlas, who Eupolemus in b Eusebius think's to be the same with Enoch, was
Lib, 9, praeparl Evang.
the Astronomer, then Prometbeus, whom some think to be all one with Magog the
son of Japhet: for to steal fire from heaven, and to animate stones, and
metals, and claie, has no relation to Astonomie, but rather to Mechanical
trades, many of which are helped and effected by fire, and metals are melted
and made into Statues; his animating of claie, may also signify, that he
infused knowledge and civilitie into men, without which they are little better
then dead claie: but of Prometheus we have In my Mystagogo Poe^tito.
spoken elsewhere. Now Atlas in supporting the heavens, in having daughters
called by the names of constellations, Hyades, and Pleiades is more likely to
be the Astronomer.

Lib. 2. cap. 6. 6.
MErcurius was called Trismegistus, or ter maximus, and of the Greeks Hermes]
He was called ter maximus, as being the greatest King, the greatest Priest,
and greatest Philosopher that ever was in Egypt. Also because of all the
Heathens (if he was a Heathen, and not the same with Moses) he had the
greatest knowledge of the Trinity; for his excellency he was deified after
his death, and a City erected to his memory called Hermopolis: he was called
Hermes the interpreter, or messenger of the gods, because of his eloquence and
excellent knowledge in divinity. It was he that first divided the day into
twelv hours, by observing a certain beast which made water so often in a day.
He was said to have wings, to show the fame of his worth, by which his name
was carried every where: of his many arts which he found out In Mystagog.
I have showed elsewhere.

Lib. 2. cap. 7. 2.
BUt for the extent East and West, if Perah be taken for Eupbrates, then the
land promised stretches it self both over Arabia Petraea, and the Desert, as
far as the border of Babylon, which the Israelites never possessed, nor at any
time did so much as invade or attemt] In David's and Solomon's time, the
Israelites both attemted, invaded, and possessed these Countries, as the
Scripture shows. 2 Samuel 8. and 1 Chronicles. 18. For David went with his Army to
subdue all toward Euphrates, and then he subdued the Philistines, Idumeans,
Moabites, Ammonites, Seba, and all Syria, as far as Euphrates. And so of
Solomon, 1 King. 4. it is said, That all the nations and kingdoms, from the
river to the confines of Egypt, were under his jurisdiction, and served him all
the days of his life. And so much God promised to Abraham, G. n. 15. then to
Moses, Exodus 23. and after him to Joshua, Josh. 1. therefore Vadianus was much
mistaken, in thinking that by the river Perah was meant Jordan, seeing Perah is
never used but for Euphrates, neither can be show that Jordan was called
Perah. I confess the Israelites did not possess any long time these countries,
because of their disobedience, Idolatry, and other impieties, but to say they
never possessed them, is to nullify or deny God's promises, and to contradict
the sacred Story.

Lib. 2. cap. 7. 4.
THe people Ituraei were placed in the bounds of Cele-Syria, and Arabia
deserta; they were valiant and warlike men, and excellent Archers, of whom
Virgil.

-- Ituraeos taxi torquentur in arcus].
This passage, as many other, Sir Walter borrow's from Vadianus, and he from
Pliny, who places these Ituraei in Syria: but Probus in Scythia, and Servius
in Parthia, which is most likely, for Ithura, or Ithyra was a City upon mount
Taurus toward Parthia. Now the Parthians were famous among the Romans for
their skill in Arching, and excellent bows and arrows: hence their best bows
were called Parthici, and Ithyraei, and so were their arrows, as their best
bow-strings were called Getici nervi, and their best quivers Sarmaticae
Pharetrae: so Ituraeus arcus in this place of Georg. 2. Eclog. 10.
Virgil is the same with Parthum cornu in another place, for he speak's of no
Archers so much as of the Parthian. Geor. 4. Geor. 2. Aes, 12.


Fidentemque suga Parthum versisque sagittis
Et gens illa quidem sumtis non tar da pharetris
Parthus seu Cydon telum immedicabile torsit.
Of these Parthian or Ithurean arrows Lucan lib. 7. speake's.

-- Creta Cydonas
Misit, Ituraeis cursus fuit inde sagittis.
Vopiscus also g speak's of three hundred Ithyraean Archers, and h Tullie In
Anteliano. 2 Phil.
Cur homines omnium gentium maxim barbaros eum sagittis deducis in forum:
these cannot be understood of people in Palestina, though Antonie had made War
there, but of Parthia against whom he fought; which the Romans always
accounted a most barbarous people.

Lib. 2. cap. 8. 2.
THat fiction by Virgil of Aeneas and Dido must be far out of square]. I do
not see by what Justin, Orofius, Velleius, and others do write concerning the
time of the building of Carthage, that Virgil is out of square, for that part
of Carthage which was built by Dido was Byrsa, so called from the Ox hide with
which she measured the ground, and by by him, as also by the inhabitants, the
out-buildings were named Magalia, or Magaria rather, that is, Cottages, and
this Byrsa was the cietadel, yet sometimes bearing the name of Carthage, by
which the whole city was denominate; and which some derive from Charta:
therefore though that Carthage mentioned by Justin and others was not built
till 228 years after Aeneas, because Alba longa, built by Ascanius, stood 300
years, and Carthage was built 72 years before Rome, which being subtracted
from the 300 there remain's 228 from Aeneas to the building of Carthage: I
say, though this be true, it will not therefore follow that Byrsa, which was
also called Carthage, was not built by Dido 228 years before New Carthage,
which was built 72 years before Rome: neither was Dido the first builder of
Carthage, for De Bellis P^^^^is
Appian tell's us that the Phenicians built it 50 years before the captivity
of Troie, under the conduct of Xorus, and Carchedon; so that she found the
Phenicians there, and perhaps Cadmus was the first builder thereof; for in
Silius the Carthaginians are called gens Cadmaea: but I find three Carthages,
or three parts of one Carthage, the one called Cothon, or the harbor, for all
plantations at first are built upon the shore, near harbors; and it is like that
this part was built before Dido came; the other part was called Byrsa, built by
Dido; at the third, which encompassed Byrsa, was named Magaria, and the whole
city, Carthage, from (...) or Carcabe, which in the Punic-tongue signifie's a
Head, because of the Horse head found there, of which the learned Poet ( Aen. 1.)
was not ignorant, when he write's,

Effodere loco signum quod regia Juno.
Monstrarat, caput acris equi --
Hence then it appears the Prince of Poets was not mistaken when he make's
Dido, who lived in the time of Aeneas as the builder of one part of Carthage,
though the other part might be built long after by some other, whose founder,
because Historians know not, they erroneously asscribe the work to Dido, who was
dead long before.

Lib. 2. Cap. 10. 3.
-- NEar to which are the gardens of Balsamum, the best that the world had,
called Opobalsamum] The Balsamum is not called opobalsamum, for that is
properly the tree, this is the liquor or juice which distill's from the tree.
Juvenal. Sat. 2.

Hirsuto spirant opobalsama collo.
The wood or bark of the Balsamum is called Tylobalsamum, the fruit
Carpobalsamum, and the liquor Opobalsamum: and Balsamum is as much in Hebrew as
the Lord, or Chief-Oil, for so is Baal-shemen. as exceeding all others in smell
and virtue: the tree then is never called Opobalsamum, but the liquor is by
Virgil as well as the tree, or shrub called balsamum.

Quid tibi odorato referam sudantia ligno,
Balsama --
And though some take (...) to signify the fruit, or feed, yet (...) is
properly the hole which the Husbandman cut's in the tree, to let out the
liquor.

Lib. 2. cap. 12. 2.
DAvid changed the name from Jebusalem, the city of the Jebusites, to
Jerusalem] This city was called Jerusalem long before David's time; for it was
so called when Adoni-bezec was King thereof, Jos. 10. 1. and Jos. 18 28. Jebusi
is there called Jerusalem. So Judge. 19. 10. And I do not find that this city
was ever called in Scripture Jebusalem, but either Jebus alone, or Salem, till
it was called Jerusalem. And doubtless Salem and Jerusalem was one and the same
city, as appears by Psalm. 76. 2. In Salem is his tabernacle, and his dwelling
place in Sion: for the Temple, and a part of Jerusalem stood upon Sion;
therefore I make no question but that Salem whereof Melchisedec was King, was
the very same with Jerusalem: for the Chaldee version call's him King of
Jerusalem, and Bell. Jud. lib. 7cap. 18.
Josephus make's him to be the first builder of it. Therefore though S.
Hierom, in his Epistle to Evagrius, by Salem understood Sichem in Samaria where
Jacob dwelt, and John baptized; yet in his Hebrew questions he approv'es of
the common opinion, to wit, that Salem Melchisedec's eitie, was the same that
Jerusalem was.

Lib. 2. cap. 13. 7.
IT is thought that the name of Money was not-heard in Greece, when Homer did
write, who measure's the value of gold and brass by the worth of cattle,
saying, That the golden armor of Glaucus was worth a hundred Beevs, etc.] It is
unlikelie that the name of Money was not heard in Greece when Homer lived,
whereas it was used in countries not far from Greece long before Homer: for
Abimelech gave to Abraham a 1000 shekels as the Chaldee expresses that place,
or a 1000 didrachms, as the Greeks translateth it, Genesis 20. So we read that
Abraham bought for money a Burial-place. It is not likely then that in Homer's
time, Greece being so flourishing a country, and having commerce with
neighboring nations, should want the use of Money, and although Homer speak's
of a hundred Beevs, and not of Money, yet he may be understood to have spoken
of money stamped with the image of an Ox: for at first the usual stamp upon
money was Cattle, hence pecunia a pecus: So Jacob's hundred Lambs, with which
he bought a plot of ground, Genesis 33. may be meant of so many pieces of
silver, bearing the stamp of a Lamb; for money is named from its stamp. So a
hundred Angels signify so many pieces of gold having their picture: the efore
Bos does not only signify an Ox, but also the coin that bear's the picture of
the ox: hence was the proverb, Bos in lingua, for one that was tongue tied,
being corrupted with money. And not only was pecunia called so from the
picture, but also from the skins of cattle; for money anciently was made of
leather: And so we may conceiv that Queen Dido encompassed the ground on which
Carthage was to be built, with an ox hide, that is with money made of the ox
hide: this kind of money was cascalled nummus scorteus (...), for anciently
they called all thing, made of skins scoxtea; hence scortum a where, in which
there is nothing commendable but her skin.

Lib. 2. cap. 16. 6.
THe third was the overtaking of a swift hate. The sixth was the taking of
Diomedes his Mares] I think this was the Printer's fault, not Sir Walter's; for
it was a Heart, not a Hare that Hercules overtook. as for the mares of Diomedes,
I find them only so called in Apollodorus, and Albericus, for in all others,
both Poets, Historians, and Mythologists that I have read they were horses, and
not mares; whose names are set down by Hyginus, cap. 30. Thus Rodarius, Lampon,
Xanthus: and Dinus: And for the Heart, I find in Virgil, Diodorus Siculus, and
others, that it was a Hind, commended not so much for ^^^^tnes, as for
strength: therefore Virgil, in A. n. 6. call's her aerepidem cervam, the brazen
footed Hind, which some have taken for aeripedem aerie footed, or swift-footed,
but the Greeks call her (...), an epithet which Homer also give's to horses,
and Pindarus giv's to the Colchic Bulls (...) brazen. Hoofs.

Lib. 2. cap. 7, 9.
DAvid left to Solomon for the building of the Temple a hundred thousand
talents of gold, and a 1000 thousand talents of silver: a matter, but for
testimony of Sc igture, exceeding all belief] Doubtless the word Checler which
we translate Talent, must sign fie some other piece of money, or else the Hebrew
Talent was less then we usually make it; for the greatness of the Talent was
according to the greatness of the mina, of which the Talent was made up: and
the mina was in greatness and smalness, according to the dram, which in some
places was more, in some less. Now every ordinary talent conceived six
thousand drams, the great talent eight thousand, and the dram was the
eighth part of an Ounce, worth seven pence half penie of our money: the mina
contained one hundred drams: but the talent seems to be of no great value
of old by Homer, in Iliad. 23. who reckon's it amongst those things which are
of no great esteem, as a captive woman, a mare, a kettle, and in the fourth
place two talents of gold: and perhaps the Hebrew talent was of the same value
that the Sicilian was, to wit of six drams: or the Neapolitane, of three
only. De praep. lib. 3. cap. 14.
Eupolemus in Eusebius make's the talents which are mentioned in the buildings
of the Temple to be all one with the Sicle, that is four drams, and so the
Sum mentioned in Scripture is not so vaste as many take it; nor is it likely
that David, whose condition was mean when he came to the Kingdom, who
succeeded Saul, an unforunate and poor King, who lived continually in Wars, and
still had occasions of expending money, I say it is not likely that he should
attain to greater treasures then ever any Prince had before or after.

Lib. 2. cap. 22. 8.
TO asscribe to Fortune the effects of another man's virtue, is an argument of
malice] If by Fortune here is understood that blind Idol of the Gentiles, then
to asscribe the effects of Virtue to Fortune, is not so much malice as madness:
for such a Fortune is nothing. But if, with wise men, we mean by Fortune God's
Providence, then to asscribe the effects of virtue to Fortune, is not malice
but wisdom. For even the Gentiles did acknowledge (I mean the wiser sort) that
Fortune ruled all things. Salust. in Cat^line.
In omni re dominatur Fortuna. And though Tullie in his Oration for Marcellus
does asscribe some of Cesar's succesful actions to Fortune, some to his own
Virtue, yet David asscribe's all his victories to God, not to his own hand, or
strength, or police, or sword,; for indeed of our selves we can do nothing, not
think a good thought; seeing it is in him we live, and move, and have our
being: therefore let us not sacrifice to our own nets, or turn incens to our
own arm, for what have we which we have not received: every good and
perfect gift is from above: which the Heathen Poet acknowledged. Lib. 4. cap. 2.


Quicquid patimur mortale genus, quicquid facimus venit ab alto,
But if it be malice to asscribe the effects of another man's virtue to
Fortune, then is Sir Walter guilty of this malice, for he write's of
Alexander, that Fortune and Destinies found out and prepared for him without
any care of his own, both helps of men that willingly offered their necks to
the yoke, and kingdoms that invited in their own conquerors. And when he
write's for the Romans he asscribe's all their distasters to their carelessness
and cowardice; but their Virtues to Fortune, more injurious to that noble
people then a Cisero was to Caesar his enemy; who though (...) Pro Marcel.
he consesseth that Fortune claimed some share in his victories, yet in his
virtues of mercy and clemency she had not any Interest. Illa ipsa rerum
humanerum domina Fortuna inistiu se societatem gloriae non off^rt: tibi cedit,
tuam esse totam and propriam fatetur; nunquam enim te merit as cum sapientia
tommiscetur, nec ad confi ium casus admittitur.

Lib. 2. cap. 23 5.
THe Olympian games took name not from the hill Olympus, but from the city
Olympia] But indeed these games were not called Olympian, either from the hill
Olympus, or the city Olympia, but from Jupiter, to whose honor they were
instituted by Hercules and his four Brothers: therefore these games were called
Quinquennales. Now Jupiter's name was Olympus, as Virgil in Aen. 10. shows.

Panditur intere a domus omnipotentis Olympi.
And by the Greek Poets Olympius: So Sophocles in Elect. (...). And so Homeria
Iliad. 6. (...): And Jupiter was so called from him that had the government and
Education of him: and these that assisted him against the giants are called
Olympii, from assisting Jupiter, or Olympus; and heaven is called Olympus from
Jupiter, not Jupiter from it: for God is all light as the Word shows, and
that originally the heaven has no light but from him, not he from it; and as
heaven, so the city, was named from him, because there stood his Image and
Temple.

Lib. 2. cap. 23. 5.
THe Rewards given to the Victors, were none other then Garlands of Palm and
Olive] These were not the sole Rewards, for they had also Statues erected to
them, which by Pausanias lib. 5. are called (...); although he shows in lib.
6. that all the Victors had not Statues bestowed on them, except such as were
eminent, diverse of whose Statues he mentions, and it is recorded that the
Olympian Grove was full of these Statues. The Victors also had this honor for a
reward, that with great solemnity, their praises were publicly proclaimed
three times, and they were carried home to their own cities by their
fellow-citizens, not through the gates, but on a bridge made over the walls.
Neither were their Garlands merely of Palm and Olive, but of Gold also
inter-woven between the leaves, or else all of Gold; therefore Pindarus call's
these games (...): except by Golden Garlands he mean's comlie and fair
Garlands.

Lib. 2. cap. 23.. 5.
THese games were exercised from every fourth year complete] They were
exercised every fifth year; therefore they were called Ludi Quinquennales, and
so Olympias is taken for the space of five years. Ovid. de Pont. lib. 4. El 6.

In Scythia nobis quinquennis Olympias act a est, jam tempus lustri transit in
alterius.
So the Poets make Olympias and lustrum, which was the space of five years, to
be all one. By the Greeks it is therefore called (...): but yet in respect
there are but four years complete, the same space of time is called (...).

Lib. 2. cap. 26. 7.
I Think that this Image did represent Sennacherib, and that the Mous in his
hand did signify, the shameful issue of his Expedition] I do not think that
the Egyptian, would honor Sennacherib so far, as to place his Image in the
temple of Vulcan, one of their chief gods, especially he being their immortal
enemy; therefore it is more likely that this was the Image of Vulcan, who held
a mous in his hand, to show, that not only by his help these mice were sent to
defeat Sennacherib, but also to let us see, that the main cause of generation
and multiplication of Mice is heat, whereof Vulcan was the god: for which cause
also, in Apollo's temple, tame mice were kept and fed, and he was called
Sminthius, as Aelian de Animal. lib. 12 cap. 5. shows, which signifies's a
Mous in the Aeolian and Trojan language, because he was held the god of Mice,
for by his heat Mice do engender and multiply.

Lib. 2. cap. 28. 5.
PEriander was one of the seven Sages, but a cruel Tyrant] This Periander that
was King of Corinth was not one of the seven Sages; for there were two of this
name, the one was a Tyrant, the other one of the Sages, as Diogenes Laertius
shows out of Sotion, Heraclides, and Pamphila; but Neanthes says that these
two Perianders were cousin germans, and indeed it is unlikely that the
Grecians, who hated Tyranny as much as any other nation, should so far honor
this cruel Tyrant, as to reckon him one of their so much renowned Wisemen.

Lib. 3. cap. 1. 2.
THe Septuagint, who translated the Old Testament, did also turn this book of
Daniel] The Septuagint translated no more of the Old Testament but only the
five books of Moses, commonly called the LAW: so says Josephus in Prooem.
Antiq. and the Talmudists affirm the same, and so does Aristaeus de 70
Interpret. who was one of those Ambassadors which Ptolomie the son of Lagus (as
Irenaeus thinks) or rather of Ptolomie Philadelphus his successor, (as most
suppose) sent to Eleazer the High Priest about this Translation, some 290 years
before Christ. Of this opinion is Oz. de vita Moysis.
Philo also, and so is Saint Hierom in his Hebrew Questions, and on Ezec. cap.
5. and cap. 2. Micheae: yet sometimes he names the Greek Translation of the
Prophets, and call's it the Septuagints, because it then went under that name;
and so may Justin, Irenaeus, and Epiphanius beee understood, when they speak of
the Septuagints Translation.

Lib. 3. cap. 1. 2.
THe Book of Daniel, so much I mean as is found in the Hebrew, is Canonical]
But the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh chapters of Daniel are
not found in Hebrew, and yet they are Canonical, for they are in the Chaldee
tongue, which is so far different from the Hebrew, that when Daniel came to
Chaldea, he was fain to learn that tongue: and Jeremie, Chap. 5. tell's the
Jews that God would bring a Nation upon them, whose Language they did not
understand. Therefore Rabsaces was desired by Ezecbia that he would no speak
to the Jews in the Hebrew, but in the Chaldee, or Syriac tongue, because they
understood it not: but after the Captivity, the Jewish tongue was called the
Syriac, as being made up of the Chaldee or Syriac, and Hebrew: So much then of
Daniel as is not in Greek is Canonical.

Lib. 3. cap. 1.. 7.
THe numeral notes (...) 5 expressing 26, etc. and (...) standing for 23] Here
the numerical figure 5 is put for the greek letter 5: but this was doubtless
the Printers ignorance: yet I do not find that the Greeks reckoned by their
letters, as Sir Walter set's down here; for they do not write 26 by (...)5 but
by (...), which among them has the valuation of 20, and 5 which is 6, so (...)
is not 23 but (...); for (...) is 2, and (...) 3, which joined together make
but 5; but this kind of joining letters is not used among the Greeks.

Lib. 3. cap. 10. 11.
NEar the river Phasis the Chalybes were seated These were the Chalybes of
Scythia, called by Pliny, Armenochalybes. Sometimes (says Strabo) they were
called Chaldaei, and Halizones in Homer. Chalybes and Alibes are thought to be
the same. These were thought to be the first inventors or users of steel, or
the hardening of iron into steel: but Gregory Nazianzen make the Cyclopes the
first inv ntors; but indeed Vulcan, or Tubal Cain rather was the first, before
the Flood; perhaps after, these Chalytes (from whom steel is called Chalybs)
were the first that made use of it. There were also in Spain a people called
Chalybes, from a river of the same name; of these Justin speak's in his last
book; Virgil and Mela in his first book. These Asian Chalybes are called by
Atschylus (...), workers in Iron, because they prepare it for steel; and the
Country he call's (...).

Lib. 3. cap. 1. 1.
Macedon, so called of Macedon the son of Osiris] I think it was rather called
Macedonia from Makos, or Mekos, that is, Long, and hedone, Pleasure, because of
the long and continuing pleasures of Tempe in Thessalie, which was a part of
Macedonia; hence Macedonia was called of old Edonia: it was called also
Maketia, and the inhabitants Macetae, of whom Auson, declar urb cap. 2. --
Maceturrque attollite nomen. And Philip in A. Gellius l. 9. cap. 3. is called
Terrae Macetiae Rex, King of Macetia, that is Macedon perhaps, from the Hebrew
Chittim; for Alexander of Macedonia is said in the first book of Macab. l. 1.
c. 8. 5. to com out of the Land of Chittim: (...) And Persius, whom the Romans
subdued, is called (...) King of the Citei; and Isaiah tell's the Tyrians,
chap. 22. ver. 1. that their destruction should break out Meeret Kithim from
the land of Chittim, for Alexander overthrew Tyrus. I know also that It lie is
called Chittim in Scripture, but of that I will not now say any thing. This
region of Macedon had other names, to wit, Emathia, and Emonia, from Emus King
thereof, and husband of Rhodope, who both, for their pride, were converted into
hills of their own name.

Lib. 3. cap. 1. 11.
NEbuchadnezzar lived, and fed himself after the same manner, and with the same
food that beasts do; not that he was changed in figure external] If he was
not changed in his outward shape, why should Daniel, writing his history,
relate it so; it is more consistent with an historical phrase and description,
to affirm he was truly metamorphosed in his external figure, then the other
was: it agrce's also more with the omnipotence of God, who when he is
displeased with sinners can change them into beasts, and when he pleases,
restore them again to their ancient shape: This also is consonant to other
transformations in Scripture, as of Lot's wife into a Pillar of Salt: of Moses
his rod into a Serpent: of water into wine: of dust into lice, etc. If we say
that Nebuchadnezzar's change was not in external figure, so we may affirm that
Lot's wife was not truly transformed in her outward shape.

Lib. 4. cap. 3.
THe last act of Demosthene's poisoning himself, argue's some valor in him] This
last act argued no valor, but cowardice in him: for it is a cowardly trick for
a soldier to fling down his Arms, and run away out of the Camp, without leav
of his General. Every man is a soldier in this life, placed in his proper
Station, by Almighty God the great General; which station, if he forsake
without leav, he is a coward. Such a coward was Demosthenes, who never more
deserved the name of Ripsaspis then now. Such a coward was Cato uticensis, as
Saint Austin de civit. Dei lib. 1. prov's: Such was Brutus, and even Hannibal
when he poisoned himself; for these out of pusillanimitie, durst not look
their enemies in the face, and rather then they would show any courage in
enduring the disgraces or tortures that they might be put to, did cowardly run
away out of their life. He is manly courageous that can endure miseries.
Fortiter ille facit, qui miser esse potest. Such courageous champions was
Christ, such were his Aposties and Martyrs. If we would behold a brave
courageous Roman indeed, then look upon M. Attilius Regulus, who rather then
he would kill himself, and die like a coward, did volentarily profer himself
to the Carthaginians to endure all tortures. This cowardly trick of self
murder is more proper for women then men: and indeed we find in histories
more women guilty of this vice then men, as Lucretia, Cleopatra, Dido, and her
sister Anna, Phyllis Amata the wife of Latinus, Iuturna the sister of Turnus;
Sappho, the Lesbian; mad Jocasta, the daughter of Creon; Phaedra, the
stepmother of Hippolitus; Dejanira, the wife of Hercules; Statyra, and Roxane,
the sisters of Mithridates; the Lemnian Virgins who usually hanged themselves,
and multitudes more. And when we read that some valiant men have killed
themselves, we must know that they never did this, but when they had lost their
masculine courage, and were become cowards, and effeminate, as Sardanapalus and
Hercules, who sat spinning and carding among women. This cowardice of
self-murder was so hated by the Athenians, that they did not bestow on such
the honor of burial: and the Lemnians used to drag the naked bodies of
self-murtherers up and down the streets. The Prince of Poets places them in
Hell, bewailing their cowardice, and wishing they were again upon the earth, to
endure all miseries.

-- lucemque perosi
Projecere animas, quam vellent aethere in alto
Nunc and pauperiem, and duros perferre labores,
Fata obstent --
Lib. 1 cap. 1. 3.
He recovered the city Crenides (sometimes Datus) and called it Philippi]
Where this city of old stood, it is much controverted. Florus, Ovid, and
Servius, place it in Thestalia; Pliny, and Mela in Thracia; but Ptolomie in
Macedonia, and so does Saint Luke, Act. 16. nor is it certain whether there
were not two towns of that name in those countries. Near to Philippi were those
spacious fields called Philippici, where Cassius and Brutus were overthrown by
Octavius and Ant nius. But why the Poets should call the Phaesalic field, where
Pompeie was overthrown by Caesar, Philippici, I could never yet understand,
seeing these fields are many miles distant from each other, except there were
two towns of that name: Here at this town Paul and Silas were imprisoned and
whipped: from hence he wrote his second Epistle to the Corinthians, and to the
Philippians he wro^e one of his Epistles. This town was a Colonie of the
Romans, and was called of old Crenides, from the many springs of water, or else
veins of gold it had, which much enriched Philip, whose money, called
Philippici, was coined here. It was called also Datus from the riches; of which
town came the Greek proverb (...) when they meant plenty of all good things.

Lib. 4. cap. 2. 7.
ALl men that know Egypt, and write thereof, affirm that it never Rain's there]
All men do not write so, Seneca indeed write's, Not. quaest. l. 3. that it
never or seldom rain's in that part of Egypt which is near Ethiopia, and that
the rain which falls there does the ground but little good, as being more
accustomed to the waters of Nilus then to the rain water: And whereas all write
that Egypt is subject to clouds, and that it thunder's oftentimes there, it
were miraculous if it should never rain, being there are the same causses of
rain that are in the countries round about it; therefore to say it never
rain's in Egypt, is as true as that of Pliny, who affirm's that it never
rain's in the court of Venu's temple in Paphos, nor near the image of Minerva
by Troas. Lucan indeed write's, that Egypt does not need rain so much rain as
other places because of Nilus.

-- non indiga mercis,
Aut Jovis, in solo tanta est fiducia Nilo.
But Travelers, who have been there, find, that when it rain's there the
people are subject to Catthars, and other infirmities, and likewise that the
Northerlie wind which use to be dry in other places are always moist there:
but Herodotus lib. 3. tell's us of a shower of rain which fell at Thebes in
Egypt in the days of Psammenitus which was held a wonder: But I hold it no
wonder for him to credit this fable whose whole book is full of such stuff, for
Pigafetta says it raineth oftentimes in and about Alexandria. It seems most
have been of opinion that it rain's not in Egypt, because Nilus overflow's it,
and supplie's the defect of rain; but then by the same reason they may
conclude, that it does not rain in those countries of Africa, through which the
river Niger flows, nor in America, where the rivers of Amazones and Guiena
run, which have their yearlie overflowings as Nilus has, and so has Menan in
Pegu, and Sian in Asia, and yet it raineth in all those places.

Lib. 4. cap. 2. 15.
We may give credit to Writers, making mention of such Amazons] I see no
ground why we should give credit to those Autors who write of the Amazons,
seeing they never saw any, but only write upon hear-saie: and we know how
many fictions and fabulous stories are communicated by tradition from one to
another. It is true, there have been in all ages warlike women; but that there
should be a particular race of women, who domineered over their husbands,
commanding them to spin and card, and look to household business, whilst they
did wage watts abroad; that give themselves but once a year to copulation, that
only educated their daughters in military emploiements, and either killed or
maimed their ions, that cut off their right breast and such like stuff, is all
ridiculous, and no more to be credited then the stories of tbe Gorgones,
Harpies, and Sirenes: for to what end should they cut off a pap or breast,
seeing the breast is no hindrance to shooting; for we read of women that have
been excelient Archers, and yet have had both their breasts: neigher do I think
that they were called Amazones from (...) and (...) the pap, but from (...),
and this from the Hebrew Mazzah, which is a cake, or loaf made of meal and
water, or milk, which the Amazones never used, but contented themselves with
Snails, Lisards, and such kind of food; therefore poor people that could not
reach to eat bread, were called Amazones. And the less credit we are to give
to them that write of those Amazons, because they cannot agree where they dwelt:
for Diodorus places them in Lybia, and in the Atlantic Ocean; Trogus, and
Justin make them Scythians; Ptolomie, and Curtius place them near the Caspian
sea; others will have them to dwell near the river Thermodoon: Goropius will
have them to be Cimbrians, or Sarmatians: Lopez will have them to be in
Congo, and in America, where the river of Amazons is so called from this
fiction: others again bestow upon them a great part of the Kingdom of
Monomotapa: but the truth is, they were never any where; and of this mind is
Strabo, lib. 11. Diodorus Siculus, lib. 2. cap. 11. and Palephatus, lib. 1. of
whose opinion I am, That the Amazones were nothing else but Thiacian men close
shaven, and wearing long garments like women, which gave the occasion to this
Fiction.

Lib. 4. cap. 2. 21.
THe Thunder and Lightning with which Bacchus and Hercules were beaten back
from the assault of the City of the Oxydracae, may well be understood of the
great Ordnance that those people had then in use, for the Eastern people had
the use of Canon long before Alexander's time] This is a mere fancy without
any ground, for what ancient writer did ever understand by thunder and
lightning our Ordnince: which was not the invention (as some think) of the
Eastern people, but of the Western, who have been ever more ingenious, and have
found out in a manner all Arts, Sciences, Laws and Religion. For is it like lie
that before Alexander's time yet before Baechus and Hercules, the Indian should
have Ordnance, and neither the Persians their neighbors, nor Alexander, who
went so far into the Indies, and who was so curious and ambitious of all
knowledge of arts, should be ignorant of this art of Artillery, so useful for
his victories; and that the Romans, who extended their Trophies so far
Eastward, should never mention this art, or know the use of it, who were so
ingenious in all military engines. For what is spoken of Claudiana tonitrua,
or Salmoneus his lightning and thundering, is nothing else but brandishing of
torches in the dark, and rumbling with stones or iron upon brass, which will
make a hideous nois. Therefore doubtless this invention, which was never
mentioned by any ancient writer, is not yet 300 years old, found out, as some
say, at Mentz, in Germany, others in Phrisia; but I rather think it was found
out in Italy, the land of all inventions: for I find the Italians have been
ever the most witty people for invention in the world; and that besides
shooting with guns, they have invented diverse other ways of using gunpowder.
Again, the word Archibugio a harquebush, is Italian, made up perhaps of Arco a
bow, and buso a hole, or hollowness, because it is as a hollow bow, or a bow
with a hole, out of which bullets are discharged, as darts flung from a bow. It
is then more probable that guns is a late European invention: not Asiatic; for
the Turks, more Easter; then Germany, or Italy, knew not this art till they
learned it of the Western Christians, and doubtless that Monk the Chemist, who
found it out first, was either a Germane or rather an Italian living in
Germany, for the Germans are better for imitation then invention.

Lib. 5. cap. 1. 1.
I Think it was a great part of Rome's good fortune, that Alexander came not
into Italie] I think it was rather Alexander's good fortune, for he would have
found great ods between Italian and Persian Armies: as good soldiers as
Alexander have com into Italy, but they had better stayed out of it. For
neither Pyrrbus, nor Annibal got any thing by their coming thither, they both
indeed got victories, but they had better been without them; for Pyrrbus in his
last victory, having lost all the strength and flower of his Army, cried out,
That such another victory would be his undoing; so that he was fain to leav
Italy with loss: and when he saw the valor and invincible courage of the
Romans, whose dead carcasses lay on the ground, retaining threatenings in their
countenance, and their swords in their hands, none of them having wounds but in
his breast, he cried out, O! how easy were it for me conquer the whole world
if I had such soldiers: and so little did he trust to his own strength, when
he saw those unconquered spirits of the Romans, that though he was victor,
yet entreated for peace, which notwithstanding was denied him, and a
peremptory command sent from the Senate, that he should depart with all speed
out of Italy. And victorious Hannibal confessed that he had to do with
soldiers (meaning the Romans) that were neither content with bad nor good
fortune, for when they conquered, they prosecuted their victories; and when
they were conquered, they renewed their forces: nay I may truly say, that
though the Romans were many times beaten, yet they were never conquered,
because like the giant Antaeus, the oftener they were flung to the ground, the
greater strength they gathered. Alexander, who chased thousands of Persians
like sheep before him, should have found one Horatiue Cocles who would have
resisted him, and given check to his victories; and I believ, had he seen
Mutius Scaevola burn his own hand in the fire, he would have as much adm red
him as Porsenna did, and would have been glad with him to have made peace with
the Romans. I doubt me, if Alexander, for all his courage, would have rid into
the fiery gulf, to save his country from ruin, as Marcus Curtius did; or
would his Macedons have devoted themselves as the Fabii and Decii did. It is
true that Sir Walter saie's, the Romans were beaten by the Samnites, but he
should have remembered, that a Roman, taken from the plough, beat again the
Samnites, and brought them into subjection. What undanted spirits had these
men, when having lost all, and Annibal ready to enter at one of their gates,
they were then busy in sending an Army away for Spain out of another gate.
And when in the Punic War their Fleet was running away, they ran into the Sea,
laid hold upon their ships, and brought them back: And who could have more
courage then that Roman, who having received many wounds, and lost both his
hands, yet with his teeth so set upon his enemy, that he bit off his nose,
and both his ears. Or that Roman, who being left alone upon a rock in the
British sea, and beset by many Britains, he killed and wounded many of them,
and at last leapt into the sea in his Armor, having flung away his target, and
swam safe to Caesar, craving pardon for the loss of his target. Innumerable
examples might be brought of this sort, even of common soldiers, not to speak
of their great commanders, the Fabii, Marcelli, Scipie's, Camilli, Cesars, and
many others, the meanest of which migbt be equalled to Alexander. Talibus
viris, non labor insolitus, non locus ullus asper erat. Salust. Such little
regard did the Romans make of all Hannibal's victories, that when he was set
down before the city with his Army, they publicly sold that plot of ground,
and a Roman bought it. I believ the Gauls were as stout soldiers as ever the
Macedons were; but what they got by their coming into Italy their posterity
will not brag of.

Tu regere imperio populos Roman memento
Hae tibi erunt arts, pacique imponere morem,
Parcere subjectis, and debellare superbos.
Lib. 4. cap. 5. 7.
THese years of the Greeks were not reckoned in all countries from one
beginning, as appears in the difference of one year that is found between
actions related by the several Autors of the two books of the Machabees] I
find the Greeks had three computations, the one was called Era Seleuci
Alexandrina, which began An. mundi 3638 Martii 15; and because the Jews used it,
it was called Era Seleuci Judaica. Their second Computation began An. mundi
3639, a year after the other, and was much used in Syria; it was called
Antiochena. The third Computation called Chaldaica, because used by the
Chaldeans, had the same beginning with that of Antioch, An. mundi 3639, save
only that the Chaldeans began their reckoning from the Spring, the Antiocheans
from the Autumn of the same year this Chaldaic reckoning, was called also Era
Macedonica, and Era Graecorum, because used by these Nations. Now this word
Era is made up of the Capital letters of A. ER. A, that is Annus erat Augusti,
for so they used for brevitie to write only the Capital letters; but at last
the Clerks, or Secretaries joined the letters leaving out the points, and so
was made up the word Aira.

Lib. 4. cap. 1. 4. 1.
SIcil was first inhabited by Giants; afterward the Sicani, a people of Spain,
possessed it; then the Siculi, out of Latium, invaded them] I think the first
inhabitants of Sicilie, and other countries, were called Giants, not because of
their huge stature and deformity, (though I deny not but some tall men have
been in all ages) but because rheir original not being known, or whence they
came, they were supposed to spring out of the earth, therefore called Gigantes,
and Aborigines; the Greeks also called them (...): but that the Sicani came out
of Spain I cannot admit: for Diodorus lib. 5. a Sicilian born, shows that
these Sicani were natives of Sicilie, which he proves out of Timaeus Siculus,
who lived under Agathocles and others: and these Sicani were said to descend
from the Cyclopes, Lestrigones, who all affirm to be the first inhabitants of
Sicilie. Besides, there is no such river in Spain as Sicanus, of which they
say the Sicanians had their name. There was indeed the river Sicoris, perhaps
the same with Segre in Catalonia, but there was never any such river in Spain
as Sicanus, neither could these Sicani com out of Spain, but either by
shipping, which not was then known to them, or else through many warlike
nations in Italy, which without subduing of them, they could not have free
passage. As for the Siculi which passed thither out of Italy we find no
certainty, but that rather they were the Ligurians, under a Commander whose
name was Siculus, the son of Neptune, and brother of Italas, as we may see in
Silius lib. 14.

Mox Ligurum pubes Siculo ductore novavit
Possessis bello mutata vocabula regnis.
Therefore I think rather with Geog. sac. par. ^^ lib. 1. cap. 300
Bochartas, that the Sicani neither came, nor had their name from Siculi, but
from the Hebrew Sekenim, that is neighbors, because these Sicani were next
neighbors to the Poeni in Sicilie. So from Siclut, that is perfection, is the
name Sicilie, because that I stand for perfection and excellency of all things
was hold the chiefest: So Laestrigon is from Lais tircan, that is a biting
Lion, because perhaps those people were fierce like Lions, and so they were
called Leontini. And Cyclopes is from the Phenician word Coek lub, or Lelub,
that is the Baie of Lybia. for the Baie Lilybaeum, oppositeto Lybia, was first
possessed by the Phenicians and Lybians.

Lib. 5. cap. 2. 4.
THe Romans entertained the proffer of those Mercenaries that were fled out of
Sardinia and they denounced War against Carthage, under a shameless pretense,
that the preparations made for Sardinia, were made against Rome it self] Sir
Walter is too peremptory in condemning this noble people of injustice: he
should have remembered that all Justice, and all Laws are not alike, nor of the
same kind; there are military laws (and yet just) repugnant to the civil law;
there is a justice of dominion in Principalities and States, which among
private men were injustice; it is an unjust thing to punish children for the
father's offense, and yet it is justice in matter of treason: it is injustice
for a private man to entertain another man's fugitive-servant, or a debtor, or
a criminous person; and yet it was not unjust for the Hebrews and the Romans to
have their Asyla, Sanctuaries, or places of Refuge for such. It is not lawful
for private men to carry away maids violently and marry them; yet it was
lawful in the Romans to do so to the Sabine Virgins, being necessitated
thereto, for the uniting of these two nations, and the avoiding of bloodshed. A
private widow may lawfully marry; but not always the widow of an Emperor or
King, because by such marriages, the peace of the Kingdom or Empire may be
endangered. That which in other governments is tolerable, was not tolerated in
the Athenian Democracie; among whom it was lawful, by their Ostracism, to
banish any person more eminent than another in virtue or wealth; because the
presence of such a man might endanger their peace, and form of government;
neither should a wise man take it ill, to be banished even for his
excellency, so long as his banishment tend's to the common good, which he
should prefer to his own private interest. The body natural is bettered
sometime by Phlebotomie, and the tree by the loss of some branches. It is certain
that the safety of the people is the Supreme Law, and therefore it was no
injustice in the Romans to accept of Sardinia, being invited thither both by
the Carthaginian Mercenaries, and the natives. For it was lawful for them to
undertake the protection of the miserable; but such were the Carthaginian
subjects, who endured an insupportable staverie under their tyrannical yoke;
whereas the Roman government was much more gentle and mild. Again, the Romans
knew (notwithstanding there was a League between them and Carthage) how
maliciously that city was bent against Rome, envying her rising glory, and
laboring by all means to suppress it when any opportunity presented it self,
though at this time she could not, being much weakened by her Mercinaries, and
rebellious subjects. It had been madness therefore in Rome to suffer so potent,
so malicious, and so faithless a city as Carthage, to seat herself in Sardinia
so near them; who, upon all occasions, would have been ready to cut the
Roman's throats: therefore it was both prudence in them to prevent such a
mischief, and justice toward their subjects to keep under their enemies, and
to observe their old Rule, Ne quid Respublica detrimenti capiat. It Is true that
the wrong don by Carthage, upon the Roman Merchants, was satisfied in respect
of their goods, but the Romans did not know that their Merchants were drowned
by the Carthaginians, till after the peace was made; therefore in this regard
they had reason to seiz upon Sardinia. I know that the Romans did not always
help those that implored their help after this manner, for when the Campanians
sought their aid against the Samnites, they were refused, because the Samnites
were their old and true friends, therefore the Romans would not force them by
arms, but entreat them by their Legates to abstain from wronging the Campanians.
But the case was otherwise with Carthage, which never was a true friend to
Rome, but still emulous of her greatness, and still laboring to bring her
under, and her power was to be feared, whereas the Samnites had not that power
to hurt the Romans, which Carthage had. Again, if the Romans had been base, as
Sir Walter would have them, they would have accepted of the proffer of
Sardinia, when Carthage was in so low a condition, that she was resdie to be
delivered up to the Mercenaries, which they generously refused, and gave
assistance to Carthage, prohibiting their Merchants to carry any he por
provision to the Carthaginian rebels, as Polybius l. 1. shows. But Sir Walter
says that this courtesy of the Romans proceeded from hope they had that
Carthage either would have submitted to them, or else to the Rebels: but I
wonder how he came to know the Roman's mind so well, seeing Polybius, out of
whom he has the history, speak's no such thing, nor does he give them that
ill language that St Walter does, (which ill beseem's an historian) but he
still mention's them with great respect, which we ought all to do, seeing God
used them as instruments to free us from barbatism, and to cultivate us with
knowledge and civilitie: besides, Dio Diaconus, Orofius, and Victor witness that
Satdinia was the Romans, not extorted by fraud, but yielded by the League made
with Luctatius. Again, Florus tell's that serpente bello, during the war
Sardinia was annexed to the Empire. Lastly the Carthaginian Ambassadors confess
to Scipio that they had unjustly broken the peace with Rome.

Lib. 5. cap. 3. 10.
THe greatness of the Roman calamity appeared, when the golden rings were
powered out which were taken from the fingers of the Roman Knights, whereas the
chief only of that order were accustomed to wear that Ornament] This was no
mark to know the greatness of the Roman calamity; for though at first golden
rings were permitted only to Ambassadors to wear, and that only in public,
not in private houses: and though afterward it was lawful only for the chief
of the order of Knighthood, yet all Knights had this honor at last to wear
rings, whereby they might be distinguished from the Plebeians. But in
Hanaibal's time, even the Plebeians also wore them, as Pliny lib. 33. 1.
shows. Although I do not think that all promiscuously wore them, but such
only as were ingenui: for servants wore iron rings, yet sometimes they were
permitted to wear gold rings, when their masters pleased, as may be seen in
Plaut. in Casina; for Stalino promises to his servant Perdalisca, Annulum in
digito aureum, A gold ring on her finger, which was not ordinary, for servants
might have and possess gold rings, but not wear them: yet the Libertines, or
those that were manumitted, had leav to wear them in the Emperor's t me, as may
be seen in Sueton. in Vitel. who shows that Vitellius bestowed gold rings
upon his Libertine. And Herod. in Sever.
Severus permitted even the common soldiers (...) says Herodian. The
greatness then of the Roman Calamity, could not be known by the rings, nor
was it an argument of so many knights stain, as there were rings taken: for 1.
All used rings promiscuously. Then 2. One man might have many rings, for they
used to have their summer, and their winter rings, of which Journal Sat. 1.

-- aectivum ventilat aurum.
This he call's aurum semestre. 3. When Hannibal plundered towns, he found
diverse rings laid up in cabinets. 4. Livie, out of whom Sir Walter has this
history, make's mention indeed of bushels of rings, but he does not say with
Sir Walter, that they were taken from the fingers of the Roman Knights.

Lib. 5. cap. 3. 21.
IT was a barbarcus custom of the Romans, to insult over the calamity of
mighty Princes, by leading them contumeliously in triumph] Sir Walter cannot
look upon the Roman glory but with a squint eye; had he lived in the Roman's
time, he would have been a fit man to have accompanied the triumphant Chariot,
and to have abused the Emperors with uncivil language, as the custom was then,
to abate their pride in the amidst of their glory. But for the Romans to lead
their captive Kings in triumph, was no barbarous custom, nor did they
contumeliously insult over them: In this custom they showed both justice,
mercy, and prudence: justice, in punishing them after this gentle manner, who
had wronged them or their confederates; mercy, in that they spared their lives
whom they might have slain by the law of Arms, being their captives; prudence,
for by this custom they caussed other Princes both to fear, and love them. For
they did not contumeliously lead them as Sir Walter saie's, but honorably,
permitting them to wear their Crowns on their heads, and to walk along in their
Princely robes; nay, the meanest of their Captives that were led in triumph,
were bravely and richly attired, as Josephus tell's us, de bell. Jud. l. 7. c.
24. What if they had used their captive Kings as Adonibezee did, who cut off
the thumbs and great toes of so many Kings, causing them to gather up meat
under his table: Or as Sapores the Persian King, who made Valerian the Roman
Emperor, his footstool as often as he took horse, and at last stead him alive.
Or as Tamerlain used Bajazet, who carried him about in an iron cage. Or as
Selymus used Tomombeius, the last King of the Mamalucs in Egypt, who first
tortured him, then carried him up and down the streets disgracefully, upon a
poor base Jade; at last strangled him, and hanged up his body on an iron hook,
in the very gates of the city, as a disgraceful spectacle. Or what if the
Emperors had caussed their Kings to draw their triumphant Chariors, as Sesacus,
or Sesostris did; Tzetzes. Chil. J. cap. 69;
(...) (...), etc. using his captive Kings instead of horses. Lucan. lib. 10.

Et Pharios currus Regum cervicibus egit.
If, I say, the Romans had used their Kings thus, Sir Walter might have justly
complained of their barbarousness. What would he have said of Joshua, who
hanged up the King of Ai upon a tree, and trod upon the necks of five Kings:
and how would he have liked of that Scripture phrase, Of binding Kings in
chains, and Nobles in links of iron. Though victory, as Tullie pro Marcel.
tell's us, be of it self insolent and proud, yer I dare say, that never
people used their victories with so great moderation as the Romans did, whose
glory it was

Parcere subjectis, and debellare superbos
Lib. 5. cap. 5. 2.
THis was that Seleucia whereto Antigonus, who founded it, gave the name of
Antigonia; but Seleucus, getting it shortly after, called it Seleucia] Here is
a double mistake: for 1. Antigonus did not found Seleucia, but Seleucus, as all
Historians affirm; who write, that he built one Seleucia in Syria, near the
mouth of Orontes, which is largely described by Polibius: The other Seleucia
he built not far from Babylon in Chaldea; which city was afterward called
Babylonia, as being made up of the ruins of it; and robbing that ancient city
both of it is name, wealth, and inhabitants. The town that Antigonus built, was
called by him, Antigonia, and it stood in Macedonia as Pliny shows,
Antigonus the son of Gonatus built it, Mantinea also in Arcadia was called by
Aratus, in honor of Antigonus, Antigonia. There was also in Syria, near
Antioch, another Antigonia. I read also, that Troas was called Antigonia, and
afterward Alexandria 2. The other mistake is, that Seleucus, getting the town
of Antigonia, called it Seleucia: whereas as Diodorus lib. 20. shows,
Antigonia did not stand long, but was utterly destroyed by Seleucus, who
carried away thence, the inhabitants to that city which he had built, and
which by him was called Seleucia. Appian tell's us that Seleucus built nine
cities, called from his own name Seleucia: The two chief were that of Syria
upon the sea, and that of Chaldea upon Tygris. He built also sixteen Antiochs,
called so from his father's name, and six Laodicea's, from his mother's name;
four from his wive's, to wit three Apanea's, and one Stratonicea.

Lib. 5. cap. 5. 2.
THe Parthians were commonly subjects to those that ruled in Media] They were
not so long subject to Media, as to Assyria, and Persia; for they were under
the Assyrians above a thousand years, under the Medes they were only three
hundred fifty years: For when Arbactus translated the Empire from the
Assyrians to the Medes, then Parthia became subject to Media: but after Cyrus
removed the Empire to Persia, the Parthians were subjected to the Persians for
two hundred and fifty years. After them, they were subjected a while to the
Macedonians, after Alexander had subdued the Persian Monarchy: but shortly
after his death, under Arsaces, they became a potent and free Kingdom; with
whom, both Seleucus and Antiochus were glad to make peace. The Roman Armies
under Crassus and M. Antonie were defeated by them; but at last they were
forced to submit to the Romans, and to send back to Augustus the Roman Ensigns
taken from Crassus, and to receiv what Kings the Romans did name them. About
226 years after Christ, they were subject to the Persians again, till the
Saracens prevailed in those parts: And lastly they became subject again to the
Persian, and so they remain to this day.

Lib. 5. cap. 5. 4.
THe Roman Ambassadors discovered their intended mischief against Hannibal, and
the malice of their Senate] Here again are the Romans bespattered with the name
of malice against Hannibal, the firebrand both of his own Country, and of
Italy. It was no malice, but justice in the Romans, to have that Incendiarie
cut off, who was not content with the mischief already don by him; but his
restless spirit was working new plots, and because he could not prevail with
Carthage, to involv her in a new war with Rome, he entertain's secret
correspondencie with Antiochus, which the Romans knew well enough, and
therefore sent their Ambassadors to Carthage, to have him punished, which his
guilty conscience fearing, fled secretly to Antiochus, showing, that he meant
to put in execution what he had long intended, to wit, the raising of an Army
both by sea and land, to invade Italy; by which he procured his own ruin,
and destruction also, when he solicited. It had been happy both for Carthage,
and Antiochus, that Annibal had never been born: or that he had been delivered
up to the Romans, when he sat down before Saguntum; for so the vast expense,
both of blood, and money, might have been saved. It has been held ever better
policy for one to perish, then unity, Pereat potius unus, quam unitas: and
therefore Hauno was doubtless a better Patriot then Hannibal; for the one
endeavored to preserv his country by Peace, the other ruined it by War.

Lib. 5. cap. 5. 4.
THe Romans were not bound in honor to make War with Antiochus, that sought
their love, and never did them injurie] He sought their love indeed, but it
was to ruin their confederates; and did he never any injury to the Romans?
was it not an injury to invade the towns of Ptolomie their confederate, after
he had received warning from Rome, not to meddle with them. Was it not an
injury to invade and take some towns of Philip, which belonged, by the right of
conquest, to the Romans, who subdued Philip. There was no reason why the Romans
should beat the bush, with such infinite cost, and trouble, and Antiochus catch
the Hare. Was it not an injury to Rome, for Antiochus to keep secret
correspondencie with Hannibal, and to entertain him so roially, that was their
mortal and sworn enemy? doubtless had Sir Walter been a Roman, or an impartial
Historian, he would have acknowledged these to be great injuries, and that
the Romans in point of honor, and justice, had reason to reject his friendship,
which tended only to his own benefit, and their prejudice.

Lib. 5. cap. 5. 9.
NOt only the Prophesies of Sibyl, wherein CHRIST was so plainly showed, but
even the books of Hermes are no better then counterfeit pieces; entertained at
first by the undiscreet zeal of such as delighted to see Christian Religion
strengthened with foreign proofs] The first I find, who questioned these
Prophesies of Sibyl, concerning Christ, was Celsus the enemy of Christ. I
find them here questioned by Sir Walter out of Casaubon; but why they should
be questioned, I find no reason, but only because Idolatry was advanced in
Rome, by the books of Sibyl. This is a weak reason, for though the Sibyls had
been Idolaters themselves, we have no more cause to suspect their Prophesies of
CHRIST, then the Prophecy of Balaam who was an Idolater, and yet none of the
true prophets did speak more clearly of Christ then he did: Because Satan is
the Author of Idolatry, shall we therefore reject his testimony of CHRIST,
when he acknowledges him to be the Son of GOD; or question that piece of
Scripture? But to me it seems strange, that men of judgment should think
those Oracles of the Sibyls to be soisted in, or forged by Christians, seeing
they are mentioned by Tullie, and Varro, who were dead before Christ was born.
Tullie speak's of these Acrostics which contein the letters of our Savior's
name; and Lib. 2. de divinats
shows, that Sibyl was not out of her mind when she made them. He speak's
of a certain King, mentioned in Sibyl's verses, by whom the Romans must be
saved. Besides, how could any Christian insert these prophesies into the
Sibyl's books, which as Suetonius in vita Octav. says, were so carefully kept
by Augustus, that he laid them up in two golden cabinets in Apollo's Temple.
And what impudency had it been in Christians, to foist in such Oracles into
Sibyl's books; for in the time of Justin Martyr, and Lactantius, who set down
these Oracles, the books of Sibyl were generally known, and copies of them
every where; so that such a forgerie could not but be known, and it had been
both a confirmation of Gentilism, and a weakening of the Christian Cause, when it
should have been known that they supported their Religion with such forgeries:
and it had been a vain thing for Christians to confute the Gentiles, who
rejected our Scriptures by their own Oracles, if there had been none such to
be found in their Sibyl's books. See Just'n Mart. Origin; Lactan. Clem. Alex.
Austin. etc.
Again, the Emperor's finding that the Christians had made use of those books
to confute their Idolatry, and that diverse Gentiles, by this means were
convinced, they commanded that none should read those books under pain of
death. And indeed we read that Secundianus, Vecianus, and Marcellinus the
Orator were converted to Christianity, by reading the fourth Eclogue of
Virgil, which he took out of the Sibyl's books: and therefore it stood with
the wisdom of God, to use the testimony of Heathenish Oracles against
themselves, and to beat them with their own weapons, to make them inexcusable.
And no less vanity is it, to question the writings of Hermes, or Mercurius
Trismegistus, so called for his great learning; or from the knowledge he had of
the Trinity; who for his admirable learning, was worshipped as a god among the
Egyptians: I say, to question his writings, which have been received from age
to age, and so often cited by ancient, and modern, Heathenish, and Christian
writers, and give no reason why they should be questioned or suspected,
argue's vanity and self conceit; for so we may question any thing that has
been written, and so all men must become doubtful Academicks. I know the age in
which he lived may be questioned, some making him no older then Diogenes,
others more ancient then Moses, which is likely, because he is by some said to
be the son, by others the scribe of Saturn, and the first that taught the
Egyptians knowledge by Writing; in all which learning of the Egyptians Moses
was skilful: but to question his doctrine without any ground, is not allowable.

Lib. 5. cap. 5. 9.
I Am persuaded that this inscription Simoni de sancto, was by some bad
Criticism taken amiss, in place of Semoni Sango] Here Sir Walter will not
believ that there was ever at Rome any Altar erected to Simon Magus; because
Suetonius, Tacitus, Dion, and Seneca make no mention of it. I would know
whether these mention all the Altars, Temples, or Honors that were given in
Rome to each particular god, which almost were numberless. Shall we say, that
there were no more gods, sacrifices altars, and temples then what they mention,
we should find but very few in Rome; but what if these have not mentioned
this honor, yet many grave and learned Autors have for their sakes, then we
may credit it, till we know the contrary. The Roman Histories make no mention
of Simon Magus at all, nor of his Concubine Helena, or Selene, nor of his
damnable doctrines; shall we therefore conclude there were no such persons or
doctrines in those times. Yet Dio Chrysostom. orat. 21. speak's of one (whom he
name's not) who was entertained by Nero, for promising he would fly in the
aer. And Suetonius relate's of one, who like Icarus would needs fly, but he
fell, and bespattered Nero's chamber, or his pavillion, or chair of state with
his blood. Now that this was Simon Magus, all the Christian Historians do
agree. And surely Irenaeus, and likewise Justin Martyn in his Oration to
Antonius the Emperor, and Tertullian in his second Apologetic had been vcrie
impudent, to accuse the Romans of such gross Idolatry, in erecting an Altar to
Simon Magus if it had been no such thing: it had been easy for the Emperors to
have refuted this lie. As for the conceit of Semani Sango it is vain, for
Justin Martyr in Apol ad Anton. pium shows, that he, to whom the Altar was
erected on the bank of Tibris between the two bridges, was a Samaritan, (...)
born in a village called Gitton. But Sangus was a Sabean, and the first King of
that Nation, as St Austin lib. 18. de Civit. shows; from whom, or as others
think, from his son Saba, the Cures were called Sabeans. And as Romulus, the
first King of the Romans; so Sangus, the first King of the Sabeans, were
honored at Rome in the Palace: Sangus having his Chapel over against the
Chapel of Quirinus, as Livie lib. 8. shows: and it had been absurd to erect
an Altar to Sangus, with this inscription Semoni Sango; for Semones were the
pettle gods of Rome, called Dii minorum gentium a seminibus, because they had
care of Seeds; as Priapus was one of their Semones: so that they had not merit
enough to advance them to heaven. But Sangus, as well as Romulus, were gods of
a higher degree; and if we will believ Festus, Sangus is all one with
Hercules, who is called Sangus; Sancus, or Sanctus, a sanciendis foederibus;
and so it seems by Propertius lib. 4 Eleg. 10. in these verses.

Sancte pater salve, cui jam favet aspera Juno
Sancte velis libro dexter in esse meo.
Nunc quoniam manibus purgatum sanxerat orbem,
Sic sanctum Tatii composuere, Cures.
And whereas in Livie it is written Simonis Sangi, it should be read Sabinus
Sangus; for his name was Sabus, or Sabinus, and from him the Sabins took their
name, as Dempster shows out of Silius Italicus, Punic. l. 8.

Ibant and laeti pars Sanctum voce canebant
Autorem gentis, pars lauds ore ferebant
Sabe tuas, qui de proprio cognomine primus
Dixisti populos magna ditione Sabinos.
Some will have this Sangus to be Dius Fidius. But this conceit of Semoni
Sango, Sir Walter borrow's from Cerda upon Tertullian; yet Cerda leaves it as
a mere conjecture, without farther urging it.

Lib. 5. cap. 5. 11.
-- OF him Daniel gave this judgment, In his place shall start up a vile
person, unworthie the honor of a King, Dan. 11. ver. 2] Here again Sir Walter
is mistaken, in saying that these words were spoken of Seleucus, the eldest son
of Antiochus, whereas they are spoken of Antiochus Epiphanes, the younger
brother of Seleucus; for he was a most vile man if we look upon his
sacrileges, his injustice, and cruelty in murdering innocent persons; his
levitie, and seurril carriage, recorded by Historians; and therefore unworthie
of a Kingdom, though his flatterers called him Epiphanes, that is Illustrious;
whereas he was more justly styled Epimanes, a mad inconsiderate wretch: This
is he that came in peaceably, and obtained the Kingdom by flatteries, Dan. 11.
21. for he cheated young Demetrius, his brother Seleucus's son, and deluded
the people, making them believ that he aimed not at the Kingdom, but at the
tuition of the young King. With the arms of a flood shall they be overthrown
from before him, and they shall be broken, yea also the Prince of the
Covenant. Dan. 11. 22. that is, they that opposed him shall be destroyed by
the force of his arms, as with a flood, even his brother Seleucus, who made
covenant with him to invade Egypt, upon pretense of assisting Pyscon against
Ptolomes Philometor. In the 23 verse his deceitful working with his brother is
foretold, for he poisoned him; and hisgoing up into Syria; and this subduing
of Syria is more fully expressed in the 24th verse: in the 25th verse is set down
his going against the King of the South, that is Egypt; to wit, against
Ptolomie Philometor, his Nephew by his sister Cleopatra: and in that same verse,
and 26th is showed how Ptolomie was overthrown by Antiochus, and betrayed by
his own friends and servants, that eat of his bread. In the 27th verse is set
down the paccht peace, and dissembling love of these two Kingdoms to each
other: in the verses following is expressed his Sacrilege in the Temple of
Jerusalem, and his second invasion of Egypt: by all which it appears, that the
King, described here in Daniel, is Antiochus Epiphanes, and not Seleucus; who
is described in the 20 verse that he should be a raiser of Taxes, and in few
days should be destroyed, neither in anger, nor in battle, for he was
poisoned by Heliodorus, upon the advice of Epiphanes his brother: this
Seleucus, raised heavier taxes, and reigned but a shorttime, not above seven
years says Josephus.

FINIS.

