GODS HOUSE MADE A DEN OF THIEVES. DELIVERED IN A SECOND SERMON In Southampton.
By Alexander Rosse, his Majesty's Chaplain in Ordinary.

MATTHEW 21.13. It is written, my house shall be called the house of Prayer,
but ye have made it a den of thieves. Errare possum, haereticus esse nolo.

LONDON. Printed in the year 1642.

To my Judicious and conscionable hearers at Southampton.
GENTLEMEN.
I Having now spent almost 26. years amongst you, how diligently in my
calling* how in-offensively in my conversation, you all know, and my conscience
^oth witn^sse* and now being to depart from you; I thought good to bequeath
this Sermon as a Legacy on you; and the rather because many do earnestly
desire it. I know it shall receive no worse intertainment, being presented to
your view, then it had, when it founded lately in your ears. God multiply his
blessings on you, and preserve the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace
amonst you, and continue you in your zeal to his service, in your love to hi^
orthodox Ministers, and in your exemplary reverence to his Word; and to keep
you from faction* that dange^ous thief disguised under the habit and name of
Religion; This is, and shall be my prayer, when I am absent, though in spirit,
and affection I will be still present ^ith you, and still ready to serve you,
and

Your^ in Christ Alexand. Rosse.

MAT. 21.13. It is written, my house shall be called, etc.


THe subject of this text is a house* the Tenant prayer, the intruder^,
thieves. Now that prayer, (Which has both jus ad rem, and jus in re, both
title and possession, and besides, long prescription, even time out of memory)
that such a Tenant, should be thrust out by such intruders, prayer by thieves,
it is ^is, non jus, injustice, oppression, and violence in the highest degree*
and to turn such a house unto such a den* is a s^rang Metamorphosis O! domus
antiqua, heu quam disp^ri dominaris domino. we greeve to see thieves
domineering in an honest man's house, and sharing his goods amongst them, every
one, sayng with Maeris in the Poet* haec me a sunt veteres migrate coloni; But
to see thieves swagering in Gods own house, and justling prayers out of doors
(Prayers I say our messengers, Angels, Orators, as St. Austine calls them, our
winged advocates which mount up to the throne of grace, and plead for us in his
presence which is not visible by mortal eyes nor accessable by gross^ and
ponderous bodies) I say to see Prayers either quite thrust out, or else used as
David's servants were by the Ammonites cut short in their garments by the middle,
and so packt away, we must needs lament with Jeremy, and say the beauty of
the Daughter of Sion is departed from her; the Heathen are entered into the
Sanctuary, the Lord has cast off his altar, he has abhor^ed his Sanctuary
Lam. 1. and 2. if the jewish elders who had seen the glory of the first Temple
weeped, when they saw the defects of the second, they would have rored for
grief, if they had lived to see the profanation of this Zim and Zijm* where
heretofore was Vrim and Thummim, desolation of abomination set up in the holy
place: the Place of Cherubin^ become a nest of Owls, Ostraces, Satyrs and
Dragons, to dance where once was Gods pre^ence, the ^weet incense o^ Prayer,
the calves of the lip^, the spiritual sacrifices of thanksgiving either
Devou^ed, or pollu^ed by ^apacious harpies: it is true (as I said before) that
Prayer i^ a tenant* and a tenant at will, but at the will of the supreme Lord
to be thrust out when he plea^eth, but not at the will of inferior officers,
when they please; much less at the will o^ thieves, they must not ^e so
sawc^e, for then, Quid Domini facient, audent cum talia fures?

I have heretofore said somewhat of the House* and somewhat of Prayer, and
somewhat yet I have to say of both, and ^hen I must say somewhat of the
Thieves, not who they are, but what they are* for I aim not at the persons,
but at the vices o^ this age, which In Sacra regnant nullis prohibentibus aula,
have ta^en Sanctuary* and have laid hold on the horns of the Altar, Lam. 2.7.
keeping a revell, and making a noise in the house of the Lord, as in the day
of a solemn Feast. Therefor if I serve these thieves ^s Christ did, scourge
them out of the Temple with the whip of Gods word, I shall do but what is my
Calling, and what my Master practiced before me. If any take it amis^^, it will
be their own mistake; they must not think that I will muzle my mouth, and
keep silence Even from good words, it would be pain and grief to me to
conceal and mince the truth, and not to tell Judah of her s^nnes, and Israel,
etc. Then a woe shall fall on me; you must die in your sins, and your blood
shall be required at my hands. What? shall I see thieves domineering in my
Masters house, and be silen^, then will it be justly said to me, Psalm. 50.
When thou saw a thief, thou consente^st with him. For, qui tacet
consentire videtur, silence is a secret consent. What (says St. Paul) am I
become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? Must I sing placentia, sow
pillowes under your elbows, that you may go sl^eping to hell? No, the God whom
I serve, is the God of truth. This is the ch^ire of truth, and the word that I
speak is the word of truth. Therefore with Michaiah let me protest, as the
Lord lives, whatsoever he will put in my mouth, that will I speak. The
Priests lips must preserve know^edge, and consequently truth, for these two
must go together like Vrim and Thummim on our breast-pla^e. Expect the^ ^o
fla^tering or lying words from my lips, they have been touched with a coal
from the Altar, and if you come for no other end, but to carpe and mock at our
Sermons, as some of our new up-star^ faction have lately done; you shall know
and feel too, that it is not good, Ludere cum Sanctis, nor safe meddling with
edged tools* Gods word is a sharp two-edged Sword, dangerous for fools and
madmen to play with; It is a bright candle, that will burn^ the wings of such
wanton butter-flyes, he that sits in heaven will laugh them to scorn, and will
laugh at their destruction, tha^ laugh at his Ministers; and he will cause that
that which should have been for their w^lfare, shall be the occasion of their
falling* and that Word which we preach, if it does not soften them, it will
hard^n them*; if it does not feed them, it shall poison them; if it does not
cure them, it shall kill t^em; and if it does not save, Is^y 55 11.
it shall damn them; for his Word shall not return to him void, but shall
accomplish the thing which he pleas^th, either to b^e the savor of life unto
life, or of death unto death. I doubt not but I shall be whipped with
scandalous tongue^, for whipping the thieves out of our Temple. But that is my
comfo^t, that I shall fare no worse then my blessed Master did, who was so used
by the Jews, he first whipped them, and they afterward whipped him. Qui
flagellandus e^at a Iudaeis, primum flagellavit eos, says Saint Austin, and
the same Father tells us that slanderous tongues are the fiery furnace, in
which we must be purified. Quotidiana fornax nostra. We are well rewarded for
our pains, w^ pray for them, and they curse u^; we preach to them, and they
revile at us; we enlighten them, and the^ o^scure us, what they can in our
good names; when our mouths are open to feed them, their throat^ are open like
sepulchers to poison us with that venom of Aspes* which is under their lips;
we give them the fish and they give us the Scorpion; and the bread of life
which we break to them, they turn unto stones to fling at us. Three weeks
ago I told you the use of this House, and the excellency of Prayer, which I
hope the best, and most of you, have chewed, ruminated, concocted, and turned
to good nourishment, for I am sure the meat was good, and the fruit wholesome,
being gath^red no wh^re but in the garden of Paradise, viz the holy Scripture*
yet some that heard me then* were so ill dispos^d with Cacochymia, with a mind
full of bad humors, that they have turned that good food unto poison, and that
Manna in them has engendered worms. Henbane or Aconitum, they say is meat for
Stares, but poison to man, even so is Preaching to some the sweet m^lke of Gods
word becomes an undigested and heavy curd in their stomach, and like the
Quails in the Desert, though their flesh in it self was good and wholesome,
yet to the Israelites it was rank poison, that aphorism is true, Hippocrates.
(...) etc. foul bodies full of humors, the more you feed them, the more you
hurt them; for let the meat they eat be never so wholesome, yet in them it
breeds no good blood, but feeds the predominant humor, whether it be choler,
melancholy or phlegm. So some of our hearers having ill disposed minds, have
turned our Sermons unto choler a fretting humor, which having infected their
blood and spirits, has so dis-coloured their eye, that when they look on us,
they think we are yellow as they are, and has so imbittered their taste, and
corrupted their tongue, that it is plain their gall is overflowed; and
therefore let our doctrine be never so wholesome, it is to them bitter as
wormwood. In others our Preaching breeds splenatick diseases* the spleen is a
troublesome evil, sometime by malignant vapors, it causes trembling, and
palpitation in the heart; and sometime dis-torted and distempered imaginations
in the brain, and exorbitant speeches in the tongue, which is an unruly evil:
but the timpany of pride and high conceits, which some (even though they be
most egregiously ignorant) have of their own (but imaginary) learning,
hinders the effect of our Sermons in them. Therefore they had need first to
have a good purge, that their minds may be clear from these humors of pride,
malice, prejudice, selfconceipt, self-love, self-will, before they come to
hear us; and with the Viper in Aelian, (...), to vomit out their poison, as he
does before he couple^ with the Lampreele: and for want of this evacuation of
bad humors, it falls out with many of them, as with young maids troubled with
the green sickness* they loath wholesome food, and will eat ashes, coals, or
any such trash, 2 Timothy 3 3.
for indeed the time is come of which St. Paul prophesied, that some will not
endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall heap to themselves
teachers* having itching ears, and they shall turn away their ears from the
truth, etc. Therefore I wish them to take this admonitorie digression, as the
shaking of the whip over them, otherwise they shall feel the smart of a
sharper rod, as the Jews did, who for slighting that gentle whipping which
they had from Christ, were afterward cruelly scourged be the Romans, and thirty
of them sold as slaves for a penny, as they had sold their Lord and Master
before for 30* pence.

But now having a little digressed, though not (I hope) transgressed, I will
go up again with Christ unto the Temple, and, before I meddle with the
thieves I will look unto the holy place* even unto the Sanctum Sanctorum, and
behold the high Priest in his pontificalibus* offering before the Arc and
Mercy-Seat the smoke of his sweet incense by which is represented our Prayers,
the most nec^ss^ry and no^le exercise of a Chri^tian, and therefore has the
chief place of the Temple assigned for it. Preaching was performed in atrio,
in the outward Court, where Solomans Porch was, but prayer in the holy place*
and once yearly by the high Priest in the most holy, for thither he went not
only (says Phil^ to Caius) odores accensurus sed vota facturus, to bur^e
incense, and to Offer up prayers for the congregation. And so our great high
Priest, who in the days of his humility Preached unto us, now being clothed
with glory and entered into the Sanctuary, Off^reth up Prayers for us, he has
long since left off to Preach, but never gives off to pray, and to make
intercession for us in heaven there is no Preaching, but in heaven there is
praying. So ne^essarie is this excercis^, that without it o^r Preaching is
ineff^ctual. Whatsoever excellency there is in Preaching, the same is in
Prayer, but in a higher degree. Faith comes by he^ring, and so it does by
praying, neither you^ hearing, nor our Preaching, can beget Faith in you
without praying It was not St. Ambrose his eloquencie so much as Monocha's
prayers, that made S^. Austin of a Manichee a good Christian. Aug hom. 17.
It was Saint Stevens and the Churches prayers that conver^ed Saint Paul* and
of a persecutor made him a Preacher, nondum habebant fidem and orationibus
fidelium aocipieb^nt fidem, they that wanted Faith, by the prayers of the
faithful received Faith. We pray for the conversion of Turks, Jews, and
Infidels, who have no Preach^ng at all: nay, prayer goes farther then
Preaching, for this begetts Fa^^h, but prayer both begets* cherishes,
increases, and confirms our ^aith; so that for all our Preaching* we must
pray with the blind man, Lord help our unbelief, and though Christ had
Preached often to the Apostles, yet for all that, he must pray that Peter's
Faith may not fail: Preaching shows us the way to Heaven, but it is prayer
that opens the gate for us to enter, Austin.
Oration iusti clavis coeli, the keys of heaven are the just man's prayers: nay
who is a good and a just man? not he that hears much, but he that prays
much. Ille novit been vivere, Austin.
qui novit been orare. you say that one Sermon of Peter's converted 3000. in one
day, and I say that one prayer of Moses saved above six hundred thousand in one
day. A far greater number sure, neither had that Sermon bin so effectu^^l had
it not bin first consecrated and sanctified by the prayers of all the Apostles,
for before Peter began his Sermon, they all unanimously continued in prayers
and supplications, Act^ 1.14.
which custom we yet retain in the Church, giving to prayers the first
place, and the last too, as being both the Alpha and Omega of divine worship. A
te principium, tibi desinet; standing both in the front, and in the reere, and
like the 2. Cherubins at the two ends of the Arc, or the two Angels, the one
at the head, the other at the foot of Christ's Sepulcher, and such is the
excellency of prayer above all other divine exercises, that the whole worship
of God, (...), is called prayer or invocation. And Saint Austin confesses that
the Church may want sometimes preaching, but it can never want prayer, Austin.
deficit aliquando in ser monibus, nunquam in oratione. Therefore are we so
often exhorted to pray continually and I must tell you, that you were as good
hear a tinckling Cymball, or a sounding brass as to hear a Sermon not
Sanctified by prayer, for as seed cast into the ground without Sun and rain
cannot fructify, so the Sermons which we Preach in your ears without prayers
and supplications will not edify. Was there ever since Christ a more powerful
Preacher then St. Paul? Colos 4.3.^
and yet (knowing his Preaching without prayer to be in-effectuall) desires the
Colossians to pray for him, that God would open to him a door of utterance to
speak the mystery of Christ, that he might make it manifest as he ought to
speak; so then prayer is the key that opens the door of utterance, it is
indeed the key of the whole work, yea the very soul and li^e of preaching,
which without it were but a dead soun^: for as the Prophet by praying over the
dead child restored life to it again; so the prayers of Minister and people
do inlive and animate our Doctrine: you will say that Preaching is the sword that
kills sin, and Satan, etc. I grant it, but without prayers it is a blunt
sword. Prayer is the whe^stone that gives it the edge* prayer makes it s^arpe
and keen, to devide between the soul and Spirit, etc. prayer and Preaching
are like the sling and sword that David used against Goliath, the sword indeed
cut off his head after he was down, but it was the stone out of the sling that
knocked him down and killed him. It Is easy to master the great Goliath with the
sword of the Word, when we have struck him in the forehead, with the sling
stone of fervent prayer: Ambrose. ^
Preaching is the sword that wounds near at hand, but prayer is the arrow
that kills a far off, melior jaculo, and long fallente sagitsa, Virg.
Preaching is a good weapon that can overcome Satan, but prayer is a better
that can overcome God himself, therfo^e we are (...), wrestlers with God by
prayers, as Jacob was, Colo^ 4.
who both wrestled and prevailed. Preaching is like the Angel that smote Peter
on the side, and unloos^d his chains when he was in prison; ^ut the vnc^ff^nt
prayers of the Church for Peter were they that both gave wings to the Angel to
fly down, and hands to unloos^ his chains, and strength to break open the
prison doors. A powerful S^rmon may make a guilty heart to tremble: but the
prayer of Paul and Silas made the very earth tremble, and the prison doors fly
open. A Sermon may inform us of the joys of heaven, but an eff^ctuall prayer
is able to ravish us with St. Paul up to the third heaven. Christ Preached many
excellent Sermons, which made no change in him; but when he prayed upon mount
Thabor his face did shine as the Sun* and his garment was white as the light.
Not whilst he was Preaching, but whilst he wa^ praying the Angel came and
comforted him, and a white cloud conveyed his Fathers testimony to him. In a
word, prayer is the impenetrable armor, the inexhausted wealth, and the most
precious treasure of a Christian, therefore prefer it above all things, for on
it depends the health of thy body the welfare of thy soul, the prosperity of
thy family, the increase of thy wealth, the loyalty of thy Wife, the duty of
thy Children, the obedience of thy Servants, the love of thy Neighbor* the
purity of Religion, the wisdom of the State, the holiness of the Church, and
the hapiness^ of the whole Kingdom; Prayer will be thy best Physician when
thou art sick, thy best advocate, when thou art sued, thy best Pilot, when
thou travellest by Sea; thy guide, when thou travellest by Land, thy watcher,
when thou sleep; thy comforter, when thou art sad, thy companion; when thou
art alone, and thy patron when thou art wronged; what force was ever able to
resist the power of prayer, which has opened and shut heaven, commanded the
Sun and Moon, shaken the earth, troubled the elements, procured thunder,
lightning, hailstones, raised the dead, driven away devils, stopped the mouths
of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, appeased storms, overcome mighty
armies, broken Iron chains, blown open prison doors; and prevailed with God
himself; in all which you may see the excellency of prayer ^bove Preaching,
and yet I d^rogate nothing from the worth of preaching, when I prefer prayer to
it: two things may be both excellent in their kind, and yet the one more
excellent then the other. Preaching and prayer are not like the two bucketts of
a well, that the rising of the one must needs be the falling of the other. when
I commend gold, I despise not silver, nor will any man say that the Moon has
no beauty, because the Sun is brighter. By prayer we speak to God, by
preaching he sp^aks to us, by prayer our hearts ascend to God, by Preaching his
knowledge descends to us, by prayer our Preaching is Sanctified, by Preaching
our prayer is directed, and yet still prayer is before Preaching; for the
excellency of the action depends from the excellency of the object; man is
the object of Preaching, but God is the object of prayer. Now pe^haps all that
I have said of prayer will be granted; but that which some men most stumble at
(and that is but a straw) are the set prayers of the Church. These be the
scar-crowes that keep them back^ from the house of prayer, and yet I know not
what it is that they disl^ke in them: is it the matter? why, that is consonant
to Scripture: is it the form? that is plain, methodicall and easy: are they
the words? they are significant, intelligible, and without affectation. Are
they the compilers of them that they dislike? why, these were our first
reformers, holy men, learned divines, blessed martyrs, who seal^d these prayers
with their blood, they had the honor once to wear the crown of Martyrdom
and now they are crowned with glory, s^all any then be so thanklesse as to
spurn at their prayers? And so graceless as to retaliat their blessed pains
with flow^es and jeeres? I hope they are not offended that these prayers are
established by so many acts of parliament under 3. gracious and religious
Princes Edward 6. Qu. Elizabeth* and K. James, all of blessed memory. What is
it then, that they dislike in these prayers? I think they know not themselves,
only they dislike them; Non amo te volusi nec possum dicere quare, Hoc tantum
possum dicere non amo te. Indeed it is no new thing to establish by authority
s^tt forms of prayers in the Church, for avoiding confusion, babbling,
tautologies, impertinencies, tediousness, and absurdities to which
extemporarie, and unpremeditate prayers are subject. God himself under the
law, prescribed a set form to Aaron, Number: 6.24 25.26.27.
and his sons. So did Christ under the Gospel to his Apostles, Mat. 6.9. Luke
11.2. so did Constantine the first Christian Emperor to his soldiers, as
^usebius records. Can. 23.
It is ordered in the 3. Council of Carthage, that no man shall use such
prayers as are not approved by the choysest of the Clergy, Instructioribus
fratribus, Ca^. 12.
and in the Milevitan Council, held under Innocent 1. in the time of Honorius
and Arcadius, it is expressly commanded that no other public prayers shall be
used in the Church, but such as are approved of by the Council. Nec aliae nisi
quae a Prudentioribus tractatae vel comprobatae in Synodo fuerint, Least by
ignorance or in advertencie some words may be uttered against the true faith.
I do not remember, that there is at this day any public Congregation (of
private conventicles (I speak not) which has not their set forme^ of prayers.
The Jews in their Synagogue^, Turks, Persians, Arabians* in their Mosques,
Christians in their Churches have all set forms, the Greek churches have
their diverse Liturgies of Saint Basil and St. Chrys^st. Not to speak of these
ancient Liturgies which bear the n^mes of Saint Peter, Saint James, Saint
Mark, and the Apostles. The latin Church^s have their set forms* some after
the order of Saint Ambrose, a^ at Millaine, and ot^ers of Saint Gregory, as at
Rome. So all the Christian sects have also their set Prayers; as the Georgians
in Iberia, the Cophti in Egypt; the Iacobits in Ethiopia, the Melchits in
Syri^, the Armenians in Turcomania and Cilicia, the Maronits in mount Libanus
the Christians of Saint Thomas, the Muscovits, yea all the reformed churches
beyond seas have some set prayers before their Sermons, and shall our Church
only be quarrelled with for her set service, or shall her Ministers be
disliked for using rather her forms, and words then their own? It Is too much
temeritie to come before God with rash and extemporarie prayers: Eccl 5.2.
h^arken to Solomon's counsel, be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy
heart be hasty to utter any thing before God, for God is in heaven, and thou
upon earth, therefore let thy words be few. But I will detain you no longer in
viewing of the temple, as it is the house of prayer, let us look on it now as
it is a den of thieves. I will but only point at them, that you may beware of
them, and then I will end.

Our Savior alludes here to the Pharisees name; in Hebrew Ph^rusim, are
Pharisees; and Perutsim are thieves; they were like in name, and so they were
in concition, for they were thieves indeed, They stole from God his glory,
whilst they attributed many things to Fate and Destiny. They stole from the
Commandments their dignity, in preferring their traditions to Gods precepts.
They robbed Religion of it is life, whilst they placed it in washings and other
supe^fl^ous ceremonies. They robbed the Temple of it is hol^n^sse, in ^aking it
a shop of Merchandise, therefore Christ tells them, that they were thieves and
robbers that w^nt before him, ^oh. 10.8.
mean^ng* the whole ^abble of thieves, as Pharisees, Saduces, Essenes,
Gaulonits, o^ Galileans; Herodians, Scribes, Disputers, Nasarites, Rechabites,
and even the co^rupted Priests and Levites, and the false Prophets such as
Judas Galileus, and Thaddeus with all these thieves was the temple pestered and
their Synogogues, but this was only Manipulus furum, a handful to compare to
the legion o^ thieves with which the poor Church of Christ is vexed, robbed,
and wounded. I will only point at some of the chief and will begin first with
Sacrilege a notorious thief, having, most rapatious hands, sparing neither
holy places, nor holy things, nor holy persons, making no conscience to break*
5. commandments at once, which is the one half: As it prophanes Gods honor,
it breaks the third commandment; As it robbs spiritual parents of their
maintenance; it breaks the fifth; as it is a murderer of souls for want of
the Ministers food, it breaks the ^^^th; As it is theft, it violats the eighth;
and as it covets other men's goods, it breaks the tenth commandment* The
Athenians did so much abhor the sacrilegious thief, that they denied him the
honor of burial, Si quis res sacras clepserit, in Artica non sepeliatur. The
second theife which uses to creep^ into Church and State, when men are not
wary and careful to prevent, is Faction, which in the Church is called
Schism, in the State sedition, this is a dangerous thief and a bad guest
where he is entertained, requiting his hosts kind intertainment, as Paris did
Menelaus, who stole away his wife Helena from him. So where this thief comes
he will be sure to steal away wives from their husbands, children from their
parents, servants from their masters, people from their Ministers, and
neighbors one from another, now he steals away not their bodies, but their
hearts and affections from each other, which is worse then Plagiatus, beware of
this thief which cunningly begins to creep in amongst you. Ioh. 10.10
Remember Christ's words the theife comes not but for to steal, to kill, and
to destroy, to steal that which is nearest, and dearest to you, your wives
loyalty which they owe to their husbands, childrens duty to their Parents,
servants obedience to their masters, and our neighbors love to one an other,
and to steal away the sheep from their sheepheards. There are but two golden
pillars that support Church and State, viz. Unity and Order, this theife
steals them both away. Who stole the h^arts of Israel from David? the ten
tribes from Roboam? the peoples affections from Moses and Aaron? and who
steals the peoples respect and obedience from the Magistrate and Minister, but
this thief? Prometheus stole away fire from the Sun, but faction steals away
the fire of love from men's hearts, and not only is he a thief, but a
murderer too, he cuts men's throats as Ionothan did Godoliahs under pretense of
frindship. He never yet set footing in any state or city, but he ruinated it
before he went away, if he was not suppressed in time. Look on the Romans,
Carthaginians, Athenians, Lacedaemonians, and other States invincible by
foreign forces, yet torn in pieces by fact^on, so dangerous is this theife,
that as soon as he began to show his head among the Israelites in the persons
of Core and his accomplices, God made short work, used no delays, but suddenly
caused the earth to swallow them alive, so that they had not so much time as to
repent. The third thief is Idolatry a bold and presumptuous thief, which in
Ezechiels time got into the temple; not only into the secret chambers thereof,
as the Prophet saw through the hole in the wall, Ezech 8.
but advanced himself between the porch and the altar; when this theife gets
into the Church, he will be sure to justle out Gods true worship; this is he
against whom God so often complains, and for whose cause he forsakes his
sanctuary, and plagues a land. This thief steals away Gods honor, and gives
it to a stock or stone, or the similitude of a calfe that eats hay, he
steals away the peoples hearts from God, and gives them to sensl^sse idols; he
steals away also the maintenance of the Lords priests, and gives them to dum^
images and their priests. Bell and his priests stole and consumed every day
twelve great measures of flower, 40. sheep and 6. vessels of wine. God
complains that the corn, wine, and oil, silver and gold, that he had given
to his people, Hosea 2.8.
were bestowed on Baal; let this theife then be whipped out of the Temple. But
Christ must whip him, not the Disciples; the King and Magistrates, not private
people and ministers, it is not their calling to be reformers, they may plead,
and wish, and pr^y for reformation, but of themselves reform, they must no^*
Saint Paul ^isputed against the Athenian Idols but offered not to pull them
down. What got Vigilius B. of Trent for pulling down an image, but his own
death being murdered in an uprore; the old Circumcellions and new Anabaptists
have bin too forward this way, being animated by deceiving Enthusiasmes.

The fourth thief is Symonie, a notable thief standing at the Church door,
like Judas with a bag in his hand. If Simon Magus the Patron be doore^keeper,
he shall be let in, when men of worth shall be kept out. He is worthy of
hanging, that will steal a Chalice out of a Church; what deserves he then,
that will steal away two or three Churches? You say, Symonie is a merchant,
not a thief, but I say, such kind of Merchants are egregious th^eves, that
will venture to buy and sell such prohibited commodities. Judas sold Christ for
30. pence, and even for that he is called a thief* He is a thief, says
Christ, that comes not in by the door, but some other way, and such a thief
is Symonie. Therefore the Temple which Saint John calls a house of merchandise,
the other three Evangelists call a den of thieves. Such money changers then, or
thieves deserve to be whipped out, and their tables overthrown. The fifth
thief is Popery, an old thief, and therefore small reason has he to plead
for his antiquity, even as much as an old robber to plead for pardon, because
his forefathers have been thieves time out of memory; this thief has
feloniously stolen away the cup from the people in the Eucharist, yea, has
robbed God himself, and stolen away one of his Commandments* and by his two
pick-locks of Purgatory and Indulgences, still rob ignorant people of their
money, lands, and livings. The sixth thief is Libertinisme, a lawless thief,
and yet would be thought a good member of the Church he under pretense of an
unbounded liberty, will be subject to no order nor discipline, but what
pleases his own fancy; he steals from God his honor, in making him the
author of sin, he robs the moral law of its use, affirming it to be
needless; He robs Predestination of its means saying, that men shall be
saved without them; He robs sin of its guilt, affirming his own actions though
never so vicious to be no sins; and he robbes good works of their dignity,
thinking to be saved by faith alone. The seventh thief is Hypocrisy, a
cheating thief, who under the mantle of holiness cousins the world, the
nearer he draws to the Altar, the farther he is from God; Like the fox he
lies as if he were dead, and pretends mortification, but it is to cheat the
birds, honest minded men, he can with Proteus and the Camelion, change himself
into all shapes and colors, and with the ratle Mouse in the fable, when he is
amongst the birds hide his feet, and stretch out his wings; but among the
beasts he hides his wings and shows his feet, so deceiving both is hated of
both. Such a cunning thief should have his linsie woolsie garment stripped from
him, and be whipped out of the Temple. More thieves there be, too many indeed,
with which Gods house is profaned: as the slanderous thief that maliciously
steals away a man's good name, and none thus more theevish then they, that
would monopolise all holiness to themselves; There is pride, extortion,
covetousness, Atheism, gluttony, drunkenness, and indeed a whole legion. So
that the poor Church of Christ is in no better case then the poor man that
fell among thieves between Jericho and Jerusalem. With what a multitude of
heretical thieves, even from Simon Magut till these modern heretics has
she been vexed, and now by factious thieves she is stripped, wounded, and left
half dead. Many of her Priests and Levites that should help her, pass by her
on the other side: O thou sweet Samaritan, who was thy self crucified between
two thieves, have compassion on her, bind up her wounds, let the wine of thy
gentle corrections, and the sweet oil of thy mercy refresh and comfort her,
set her on thine own beast, make her to subdue and keep under all beastly
affections, as thou have done before her, bring her to the In^e where she may
rest and be quiet. Defray her charges* pay her debts, and let her enjoy the two
pieces of silver, the two Testaments until thou return; And ^or her enemies
that roar in the midst of her Congregations, and defile the dwelling place of
thy name, scatter them with thy tempest, and affright them with thy storm.
Deliver not thy Turtle Dove unto their hands, but arise and maintain thine own
cause.

Amen.
FINIS.

