THE Bounds and bonds OF Public Obedience OR, A Vindication of our lawful
submission to the present Government, or to a government supposed unlawful,
but commanding lawful things. Likewise how such an obedience is consistent
with our solemn League and Covenant. In all which a Reply is made to the three
Answers of the two Demurrers, and to the Author of the grand Case of
Conscience, who profess themselves impassionate Presbyterians.

London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old-Bayley, 1649,

THE Bounds and Bonds OF public obedience, OR A vindication of our lawful
submission to the present Government, or to a Government supposed unlawful,
but commanding lawful things.
I know not by what fate or misfortune it comes to pass, whence the difficulty
of persuading civil truth.
that in the disquisition of a truth (though a simple uniforme thing) yet the
contests about it, are usually infinite, and it is as difficult a thing to
disincumber it feom errors, as it is a good field from weeds and brambles;
which when the country man has burnt to ashes, and thinks he has quite
destroyed, the next year to his astonishment he sees them return more numerous
then before. Surely our unhappiness in the E^adication of civil errors is,
that we speak more to the affections then to the Judgment, and therefore
offer passion in stead of reason, or make one but the counterfeit of the other,
or else not affecting one another persons, we fling headily into opposite
paths or principles, in which not treading together at first, we cannot
possibly meet together at last, and in this aberration we loose both truth and
our selves.

Thus we find it in these three several answers to the first Treatise, in
which (and the unhappilier, to give foundation to practicable errors) they at
the very entry of the controversy mistake principles, in jure publico, in the
riginall of Magistracy and Government, in the nature of possession,
prescription, right of extreme necessity, of assertory and promissory Oaths,
etc. things which were otherways stated and proved in that discourse to which
they have bin referred; I should not so disertly tell these tripartite
answerers, that they do suponere quodlibet, ut Probetur quidlibet, were it not
but that I see them so Majesterially peremptory to prescribe to others, and to
necessitate us into action of the greatest prejudice that may be betwixt man
and man; that I find one of them give such a loss to his passion, that it
carries him into direct Blasphemy, first Demur.
advising that a Committee might treat with God, yea sentence the blessed
Trinity. Lastly because all the world knows they give that obedience which to
attain public desolation they will not allow toothers; wherefore as the
subtilties of the vop^^rs are so fine and delicate, that they pass upwards on
every hand about us imperciptibly till at last we hear them over our heads
formd into Thunder, Lightning and Tempests, even so the fumes of these private
men's Passions pass so subtly through their soft words, that if we who
converse with them, be not maturely advisd of them, their insinuation will draw
us into fire and flame, into blood and desolation, into the Calamities of a
war, which perhaps may end as distantly from our and their now Covenant
intentions as the two former have already done.

The Question which was first asserted stands still unshaken and almost
untoucht, and in all th^se answers it is evidently granted, That we of the
people may lawfully give obedience to an unlawful power; Demur. p 6. case of
Con. p. 3.7. ^
this only is denied, That it may be not with an acknowledgement of their
authority and right, which is very uncasuistly and unconscientiously inserted
here, because that is not the Peoples present case, but the Governors, these
only asserting that, contenting themselves with simple obedience from us.

The first Argument of the first Demurrer is formed against the incapacity of
the persons governing, Page 2.
and it runs thus:

Ob. That which is now termed a Parliament, is neither formally, materially,
nor effectually a Parliament, such as is requisite for this Kingdom, either
according to the mind of God, or the necessities of the State. First, because
the change which is made in it, is not made by those who first constituted it,
unless it be by conquest. The modern model contains not the whole, nor the
major part of the peoplee Secondly, the alteration is made by the Commons only,
the Nobility as illustrior pars populi, appeared not in it.

Ans. Though this Argument (with the rest) relates more to the Commanders then
to the obeyers, The end of Magistracy, subsevient to the end of our being.
(of whom our controversy only is) and that we of the People have a right to
do lawful things, though there were no Magistrate lawful or unlawful to
oversee us, yet I shall not stop at these advantages, but oppose to the main of
this Argument, the main of our Creation and conservation. For we have nothing
else to do in the world, but to praise God and love our neighbor. The
circumstance of the Magistrate is only to be an encouragement of this, and to
see that it be done with security: and if he do this (whatever he be) we are
beholding to him, and should praise God for him, and then why not obey him?

Though this were granted, That one Magistrate was unjustly ejected by another,
and one government by another, yet that relates only to those who co-operated
in it whilst it was doing. How can such a supposed guilt in them, be in any
part continued upon, and ascribed to us of the low rank of the people? or now
especially that we come into it after it is done, and after we are under the
full possession of a present Power? People by the effects of it, sustain
punishment enough if they lose a good Magistracy, must they likewise be punished
because it is lost, though they were no con-cause of it?

The Author of the Grand Case of Conscience, p. 10. infers Yes, and therefore
makes our new commotions necessary: because we can do nothing just in a State,
where, (through the defect of a legal Magistracy) we can have no justice, yea
though the things we do be in themselves just. For (quoth he) judgment is then
only just, when it is exercised by the higher Powers, the legal Magistracy of
that Kingdom, where it is acted.

I answer, things are considerable, only so far as they may reach the ends for
which they are. All justice or just things relate not essentially to the legal
Magistrate.
The end of every Magistrate is to see justice executed in case it be violated:
Iusto enim non ponitur lex. The end of justice is to be a measure of equity,
that is, of equality. Justice or the proportion of equality is either
comutative or distributive. But neither of these relate so essentially to the
legal Magistrate, that nothing may be done truly and conscienciously just,
without he cooperate in it. As for commutative equality, if Titius lend
Sempronius ten bushels of such a quantity, which bushels have the public mark
upon them, and Sempronius pay him ten other every way of the same equality, Of
commutative justice Vid. p. 26.35.
but that there wants the former mark, or that the said bushels have another
mark, will you say Sempronius has not intrinsically done Titius justice, or
has not justly satisfied him in his quantity? especially if in the mean time
no more of that former mark can be had? As for distributive justice, we know
that St. Paul advised the Corinthians to avoid the Iegall Magistracy and the
judgment of the higher powers of that Country, 1 Cor. 6. of distributive
justice.
and rather to end things by arbitrament among themselves, which had been an
advice unjust, and to the scandal of Christianity, if things in themselves
just might not be done but by the justice of the legal Magistrate. This
therefore is but according to an old Axiom of justice, Provisio hominis tollit
provisionem legis.

Thus much I have thought fit to answer in general to this objection; This
present Parliament is effectually a Parliament.
but now more particularly I answer to its terms. And first, why is not this
effectually a Parliament, seeing it is the Supreme present power of the whole
Nation, no part excluded? Vid p. 18.
which in this controversy is the very term of the question. I hope he means
no Criticisme by the word Parliament; if he does, it signifies only a public
speaking or consulting together for the Public. Moreover, the Author would
be (I am sure) much perplexed, if I should ask him, how he knows so
indubitably that this is not a Parliament or supreme Power requisite for this
Kingdom, according to the mind of God? He must pardon us if we think forms
no more then persons are to last here always; or that the changes which have
been, and still are to be of both, must never be done but according to the
customary formalities of a quiet people, but rather according to the extreme
necessity of a State. For if he ask me, what it is that forms in-organizd
people into a Government, Necessity above forms of, Government.
of what sort soever? I answer, Necessity. If, what makes or takes away a Law
in a Government established? I answer, Necessity. If, what takes away a
Government it self? I answer, according to himself. page 2. that which first
gave it being, viz. Necessity. Of which there are several degrees; for in a
peaceable State a word may take away that which in a disturbd State must be
taken away by the Sword: after which it is but equal that he who gives the
last blow, should in that quarrel give the last word, and leave us to a
peremptory obedience, unless we would have no quarter in the world, or be like
the old servati in bello, who were sold, confind to chains all their lives, or
condemnd to dig perpetually in Mines; All which it seems this Author would
have the conclusion of this argument, or else we are more beholding to the
charity of enemies, then to his. If we will not be persuaded by the States
arguments, yet let us hear what Grotius, among others, determined long ago,
for all the world in this case. If a King have but part of a supreme power
(which consists in making and taking away Laws, in laying universal Taxes)
and the People or Senate have the other, the King may be forcibly opposed if he
invade that part which is not his, because for so much he has no right nor
power. This is to hold, although such a King have the Militia alone; for that
(in his hand) relates only to foreign war, it being unconceivable how they
who share in supreme. Rights, can be exempt from a right of defending them.
When war shall happen betwixt such Fundamental and Supreme parties, the King
may loose all his share by the right of War. Lib. 1. c. 4. 13. de Jubel. and
pa.] Which Right of War betwixt those who divide a whole Kingdom, if it end
clearly to the Reduction of one party, is not called so properly conquest as
victory. The difference betwixt conquest and victory
This Author uses the name of the first only for the hatred every one bears
to it, because it swallows the rights and persons of the whole; Whereas victory
relates only to a part of either, as beginning and ending in Civil Wars,
where disputes of Right arise betwixt those of the same Jurisdiction and
Country, and of the same Common Law.

But we have Arguments more Authentic then these, to show that such changes
may be according to the mind of God; and the Demurrer all his life will never
prove the contrary, Dan. 4.31, 32. Vid. p. 33.
Gods power is an everlasting power, and his Kingdom is from heneracion to
generation; All the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing, and
according to his will he works in the army of Heaven, and in the inhabitants
of the earth, and none can stay his hand, nor say unto him what do thou? That
is, God as Universal Lord, and King of Kings, governes both Angels, men, and
Devils, and all must submit to him, because of his supreme irresistibility.
Psalm. 75.7. God is the Judge, he makes low, and he makes high. It must be
confessed that by him Princes reign; but our Author had rather perpetually
imbroile our bodies and souls, then clearly say, by whom it is that Princes
cease to reign. For then this Controversy would easily he reconc^l'd, and we
as easily one to another.

We have shown how the reason of Constituting, Object.
and of changing Governments, is still one and the same, viz. Supreme
Necessity: But the Demurrer objects that our change has not been done by the
same order of persons, who were in the old, viz. By major part of Lords, and
major part of the Commons.

Although he is again besides the state of the Question, showing only how
they who are the Supreme Power of the Land, Answer.
ought not to command us, rather then that we may not obey them in lawful
things; yet I shall here make another sort of reply, which will be very short
to those who profess themselves Presbyterians, that is, originally
Parliamentarians.

Kingdoms which are Supreme in themselves, The State of Kingdoms as separated,
and as mixed in themselves.
and communicate not in one another Laws, are all of them Iure Gentium, in a
state of War, unless they be mutually bound by Leagues to the contrary; which
Leagues if they come to be broken, usually have the conditions of Invasion
annexed, and the time and places nominated for beginning it; and because there
is nothing any longer due by Law, or League from the party injured, where now
the Sword is only to end the Controversy, therefore what ever shall be
acquired in this state of things from the party injuring, rightly changes all
Titles in Iure publico, and in the right of governing what is acquired; but in
one and the same Kingdom, where the Supremacy of Power and Right lies divided
(as Grotius page 7. states it) there, Of the Ri^ht of War betwixt Fundamental
Parties.
if they differ fundamentally, denying one another Rights and Powers, they are
then immediately in the same state of War with those other separate Kingdoms;
here only is the difference, that these in their Concurrence and Constitution,
making but one, have none of those ordinary Cautions, as Leagues have for their
Right of invading one another by the way of war: a circumstance no more
necessary betwixt them, then that in the marriage of two persons, a Lawyer
should come after the Minister has conjoined them, and tell them in what cases
they may again proceed to Divorce, and after their Divorce, what kind of
marriages they should make next. Even so war is supposed in that case, as well
as Divorce in this; But because War begins there where Law ends, and
reciprocally, and has nothing but necessity for its equity, and that all the
degrees of necessity cannot at first be foreseen, nor where security may at the
end of all be presumed off, therefore there neither is, nor ever was any fixed
rule in any Country, what people should be bound to do at the end of a a War.
I hope the Presbyterians neither of England, nor Scotland intend to deny what
all the world knows, that they concluded the King under the necessity of War,
as well as others who conjoined with them, and having stated his case there,
they of the Kirk long ago frankly declared, that he not satisfying for the
blood of three Kingdoms, was not to touch the Scepter any more, but as Mr.
Hinderson applied in his Newcastle Conference the 4 th. of Hester 14. page 9.
That if his Majesty reform not according to their way, he and no less then
his Fathes House were to perish: by which what could he and they understand
less, then change of Government? a thing, why now so horrid for the other
party to think on, seeing they gave first intimation of it? They jointly
declared, that the King was not to judge any thing for himself, nor upon what
terms his readmittance to simple liberty could stand with their security; *
for, his War when it ended (as they said who imprisoned him) continued the
same necessity upon them, which made them take Arms at the beginning.
Therefore they themselves concluded, that nothing could be changed in the Kings
concernment, according to the old form and constitution of the Kingdom, which
relates to a time of Peace, and not to a time of War.

But the Nobility whom he here styles, illustrior pars populi, concurred not to
this change; therefore it is formally and fundamentally unlawful.

In the first place, Of the House of Lords.
I understand not, and I believe the Lords do as little, what he means by
putting them into such improper Latin. For they always understand themselves
to be rather of the two Comites Regis, then partem populi; and therefore as if
they were an integrant part of the Kingdom, formed to themselves a separated
House, a Jurisdiction over the people, and lay as a Bar betwixt the King and
them; whether that power of their's had any congruity with the other supreme
and Legislative rights of the people or no, is not now the question, but rather
this, Whether according to their mutual engagements, their rights of a
separated house were rightly lost to the House of Commons, or no?

This is by them affirmed, and the state of Venice as profound Platonists deny
the other; for otherwise Noble men would be as difficulty reformed as Kings,
and therefore they rarely confer illustrious Titles of Nobility on any but
those who are in illustrious Offices, things separable from persons, by which
means all Offices with them are questionable: But to return, that which
according to themselves thus excluded the King, by the same Logic excluded
the Lords; and if they either directly or indirectly concurred to the ruin of
the rest of the Kingdom, then the argument runs strong, that the House of
Commons were bound to preserve it, and that the rest rightly owe their whole
protection under God to them* But because I will suppose nothing here, the
argument of matter of fact must judge one as well as the other.

Wherefore if any will ask whether there was not a War undertaken last year
very eminently dangerous to the whole Parliament and their Party; the Army, and
Country Committees, and that by the contrivance of the Royal Party here, the
Scots Nation in the North, Ormond in Ireland, it will be past denying; Likewise
whether the House of Lords in that extremity declared with the Commons that the
Scots were Enemies to the Kingdom, or upon the first or second request gave
their Concurrence for Counties to arm themselves for their defense; The ^oyce
of all parties must needs say no: So that, that House undertook to act a part
as dangerous to the rest of the Parliament, as they did, who were actually in
Arms against their party every where. And how then should they expect to
bestill necessary to them, and to their securities, who had put them into such
apparent extremity and necessities? As for the exclusion of some Members of the
house of Commons, Of Secluded Members.
I hope the sincere Presbyterians wonder not at that act, because the Kirk and
State of Scotland was preserved by such an act last year, and by the
concourrence of the same means which did this here. Yea though they who from
thence invaded our Nation, declared as much for the Covenant and Presbytery as
the Kirk it self, save only that the Kirk had the good luck to speak the
last word.

They who sit at top in the State are tanquam in nubibus, to the eyes of us of
the People. We know not how they manage their Counsels, nor contrive their
tran^actions, that is best determined by and amongst themselves. It is enough
for us if they be of a number competent to act; and be persons who enter by
virtue of free Election, and s^t in the legal place. For in a case where five
are chosen to a businesses, and that any three of them are to be of the Qu^rum,
though two of them be never so accidentally or violently detained, yet what the
other three do is to all intents and purposes valid, which is the present
case. By this Gentleman's favor, The negative when prevalent in equal
partnarship.
we have an Axiom of Law, which says that in Partner-ship or Society (as the
Civil Law calls it) when matter of extreme prejudice is agitated betwixt those
who are of equal contribution either of Art or Money, then Potior est conditio
negantis: nothing ought in this case to be concluded against the negatives,
though fewer in number, which was the Parliaments case when after the equal
provocations of a Prince by War and imprisonment some of the same House
thought he might have been securely readmitted into the Government again, and
others thought it evidently dangerous. In this case the difference was as it
were legal betwixt the Members, but not to be decided any way but by force,
there being no other Tribunal to judge them, and their house might not judge
of it, because there they were parties and judges, a thing allowed no where;
Whither the transactions of the legal number of the house be invaled, when any
members are forct away?
and if otherwise, then the major part might legally vote the other out of the
house at pleasure. But what was at last determined by any number above forty
with the speaker in the legal place, seems not out of form to us of the
people; which was the case of the House of Lords when most of them and many of
the Commons at the beginning of the first War, fled to the King under pretense
of force from Westminster. Yea when the five members were forced from sitting, yet
the rest of the House sat and acted without them, and voted a Committee, Ian.
5. To sit in London, and there to take into consideration the breach of
Privileges, the safety of the King and Kingdom, and preservation of Ireland,
which was accordingly done by virtue of those Votes, made when Members were
thus forct away. All our scruples therefore are concerning things to us
practicably lawful or unlawful in themselves, Of the present consent of the
Major part of the People.


As for the will of the Major part of the people, how will the Demurrer prove
that they had not rather obey this present Power, then seek to be rid of it by
the hazards and calamities of another War.? They usually look after nothing
but their Rents, Markets, and reasonable subsistances, they are the luxurious
and ambitious part only which pretends to new troubles. The peoples question
thereof is not how the change was made, but an sit whether it be so changed or not? For if according to its formality that be not rightly done; it concerns
not their consciences no more then the Thunder or lightning over their heads
does, which are things totally out of their power, much less may they lawfully
desolate Neighbors for them.

Ob.
But he has found one firm Axiom, That when part of any thing is cut off,
the whole qua tale is destroyed quia dum cessat forma, cessat formatum; ergo
the late force on the Parliament has made this no Parliament.

Answ.
I wish he had taken the pains to give either a distinction or an instance in
his Axiom, or have drawn up his inference into a Syllogism; for I fear we
shall find wide impertinence in the first, and a gross non sequitur, in the
last as he has ordered it. The question disputed here is not whither the
denominated Parliament now sitting at Westminster be a Parliament according to
the old form and composure of Parliament or no, but whither tht Parliament now
sitting at Westminster, be the supreme power of the Kingdom or no, and to be
obeyed in lawful things. His Argument runs thus;

The surpeme power of the Kingdom consists in a Parliament of King, Lords and
Commons.

But at Westminster there is not a Parliament consisting of King, Lords and
Commons.

Ergo at Westminster, there is no true Parliament at all nam dum cessat forma,
cessat formatum.

I thought he had been so good a Logician, as to have understood that the
conclusion of his Syllogism ought to have been contradictory to the question,
from which it is as distant as if he would have concluded that two and three
make five, which is very true, but how is it any thing to the purpose?

Whither the present power be the suprem?
However I will do him the favor to deny his Major -- For we speak of powers
which now are, and he himself has all along condoled the e^ection of the
King, and of house of Lords, as things which are not. Sed non entium nultae
sunt affectiones; and so consequently they who are now nothing, make nothing
now at Westminster, or any where else. But does it follow however, that there
can not be now any supreme power at Westminster? at all If he had proved this,
Whither it be a Parliament?
he had proved something. But pe^^aps the very word Parliament poses him, or
else he would thereby impose on others. I must confess words are dangerous,
when they are not fully explained: and possibly the King mistook himself very
much upon the very Alphabet and word of his Title, supposing he could not be
named King, unless he were ab^olute, as he observed other Kings were; whereas
by our constitution he was but one of three, who concurred to the making and
abrogating a Law, and it belonged to the Commons alone, to lay an universal
tax; so that he was in most things rather Prince by office, then King by
power, in tanto, non in toto. Even so the word Parliament, as it has been
popularly understood, signifies the assembly of several houses, deliberating
and concluding what was judged for the good of the public.

But it is a contradiction to say a Parliament cannot at all be truly so
called, unles so understood; we know there are eight Parliaments in France,
which are not of such a constitution, though of the same Denomination. And if
several persons plenipotentiarily deputed to conclude for the public good of
the people, sit now at Westminster, and that the other concurrent powers be
civily dead; why may not we congruously enough still call them a Parliament?
His axiom therefore serves only against himself, and the true English of dum
cessat form^ cessat formatum; is this, That seeing the old form of this state,
as it was in the supremacy of Kings Lords and Commons* has in that relation
ceased to be, and is civilly dead, not being able any longer to act any thing;
and that a civil body as well a natural, cannot live without a head one day;
it follows then by this position, that the Regal Government is gone, and that
we are in the state of a Republique; no other power now informing or actuating
us, besides that which pretends to such a state; and where I pray you is that
to be found now, but at Westminster.

In the next place he offers a case, If the King, when he came to accuse the
five Members, Object.
had detained all but forty and the Speaker; and had forced them to Vote, that
the whole Legislative power resided in himself; would we have deemed this a
valid Vote? Especially seeing some Votes since this Session were adjudged Null,
because the House was under a force. By which it seems (quoth he) that with
some new veritas non est perpetua; and Duo dum faciunt idem, non estidem.

Ans.
To the first I answer positively, That such a Vote attained by the King, had
been no ways duly valid.

The case of the Kings coming to the house of Commons not parallel.
But what is this to the purpose? For the question should have been after the
King had detained such a Vote, and had got us all into his full possession,
whether we of the people might have obeyed him ever after in lawful things.

Secondly, if he would have the people understand this case to be parallel, to
the late exclusion of the Members, he prevaricates grossly again; For he
supposes the very forty in the House, with the King, to have been under a
force; whereas in the Parliaments late case, none but those who were out of the
House, were under restraint; the former were supposed to be forced to a
particular Vote, the latter were kept from Voting at all: Besides they who de
facto Voted in the House, have publicly declared that they past their Votes,
with all wonted freedom, and were rescued as it were from an overawing power,
which concludes against his Argument abundantly. As in this Argument he has
done truth little service; so he has (by his mistake) done Kingly Government
less. For if Princes who have us in their full possession, may be obeyed in no
lawful things, after they acquire an addition of some other powers unlawful;
then he would dislove most of their Governments, and have absolved us from
Allegiance to King Charles long before this Parliament began; by which sort of
arguing the Royallists I see will have no great prise this Gentleman.

But the Parliament has already declared the Votes made under a force are
null; This Vote I suppose he means past, after Boys and apprentices of the
Town, The case of the apprentices entering and forcing the house not parallel.
had entered the House, and made the Speaker propound, and the Members Vote what
they pleased. Here indeed there were forced Votes; But surely this proves not,
that they who Voted, when the Members were last excluded, Voted in that manner.
Besides the Parliament which knows better then we of the people, what their
own disorders within their House are, are only fit to Vote, what Votes have
been forced upon them, and they since that time have declared, they never
transacted things with greater freedom and less overawing. From whence I
easily see that his Axioms will serve him nothing at all. For we acknowledge
Veritatem esse perpetuam, The Parl. votes against force, still observed and are
the same still.
if we speak of natural and Mathematical truths, where there is no medium
proportionis, to vary the thing; as, all number are even or odd; because there
is no middle number, so all lines are either crooked or straight: But moral
and civil things are always in change, because humane actions are invested
with such an infinity of circumstances and accidents; Why actions of
Government must change.
for which reason Duo dum faciunt idem non est idem; For no two men in the
world can act the same thing in all the same circumstances: Thus we hear that
Omnis des^nitio in jure est periculosa; and summum jus aliquando sit summa
miuria, which cannot be but in regard of those various accidents which perplex
our actions, and make them like that famous flower the Marvel of Peru, which
changes the color of it is Leaves every day. His last axiom, That no man ought
to take advantage of his own wrongful act or of another: is impertinent and
no way beloning to us of the people. If he intends it to the present
Governors, he had best to take heed again, that he determine not against
several lines of our Kings: For the clearing of whose titles after
usurpations, the Judges were ancienty sore put to it, How wrong has been
fitted for a title. (...) Bac. H. 7.
to make this one Axiom for all. That the imposition of the Crown takes away
all defects, and stops in blood. And if this be true, then we and our
forefathers for the most part, have live'd under no better Titles then Plenary
possession, to which they submitted, either because they knew no better Titles,
or could have none of better to command them, or because they were resolved
they might lawfully submit in lawful things, which therefore as it now seems,
is not so much our present question as our present passion.

Two principal inconveniences he finds in this present Government, and by
the goodness of the fruit he hopes he may judge of the Tree. where I must
again admonish him, that the civil fruit of a Government is alike in all
Governments, especially as to the Meum and Tuum of a people besides, if the
tree and the fruits here were alike, then a good Axiom were spol'd; Malus homo
potest esse bonus civis, and bonus magistratus, A man bad to himself, may be a
good Magistrate and a good Commonwealths man. His first inconvenience is,

Ob.
That we have now made the basis of the State, a quick-sand; and it stands
like Nebuchadnezzars Image, upon a mixed footing, part iron, part clay.

I answer, that it stands not now on so mixed a footing as before; For the
concurrence of King, Lords, and Commons, for the product of a supreme act, was
a mixture of things very heterogeneous, to enter into one and the same
composition: By reason whereof, supremacy confined as it were on a Battable
ground; and if we will believe Persidents, King sometimes gained upon the other
two, sometimes the Lords topt both, and now all is more united then ever in the
sole sufferage of the people.

Object.
Toleration is the next inconvenience, it being but equitable, That if we
think it lawful to force people to submit to the Orders of the State, the
same people be compelled to adhere to an established confession of faith in
Religion. For it is presumed that Obedience is fully as due to God as to man.

I answer, the Christian Religion is not tolerated amongst us, it is enjoined,
as much as one man can pass it upon another; Of toleration.
For, the final penalty of neglecting it here is not to be required of us
mutually in this life.

Secondly, The confessions of faith, which he would have men forced too, are
(as I conceive he means) but logical deductions out of Scripture, Ergo not
indubitably, true enough to be by force obtruded on men's faiths; It is not
enough to say here, that they who compile them verily believe them true, and
intend not to deceive, which is all that can be said. For then they do no more
but quote themselves, and we are taught that it is a Popish opinion to believe
any company of men are infallible, in what they purpose: wherefore the
Magistrate can do no more safely, then recommend not force, their notions and
Logic on the people. But in a case of meum and tuum, or in a moral thing he
may be more peremptory then in a divine, because those things are certainlyer
known to us as men, then what is of divine revelation and inference.

He fears that by an obedience to an unlawful power, Ob.
he may assert its unlawfulness; and should our servants rise against us, and
command us by threats to perform a lawful Act, which is but transient we
might yield to avoid their force: But if they should affirm that the
Government of the family were theirs by right, and that they intended to
perpetuate it over us; we should think it a great sin to betray that place
and power wherein God has naturally and morally placed us.

This indeed is a very fine subtilty to end in nothing: Ans.
and I am sure what ever the basis of the State be, The magistrate in a state,
not as a Father of a Family.
the Basis of his Argument is put on a quick-sand. For if he intend truth
thereby, he should have proved this maine thing; That the former Magistrate was
our natural parent, and that we all derive from him, as from a Genarcha, which
being so evidently false, is as ill supposed. For in this confusion of Families
in the world, in which the original Families are lost; we owe no natural duty
to any, but to those from whose blood we derive.

Secondly, Though it were true, that the chief Magistrate were our natural
Parent, yet it follows not, but there may be a case wherein he might be
refrained from Government; the law supposes many, which is sufficient to oppose
this Gentleman's single judgment; And if he be indeed a Presbyterian, he has
already concluded as much in the last Kings case, by concurring to invest his
person with the accidents of War, in detayning him prisoner at Holmby, and
Newcastle etc.

Thirdly, I understand not what he means by Gods placing a Magistrate morally
over us. For God he is our Divine and supreme Magistrate; our Parent is our
natural and domestik Magistrate, and those who command the State wherein we
are, are our civil public subordinate Magistrates under God; and every
particular man who is arrived to the maturity of reason, is, (if any such be)
his own moral or private Magistrate. For the principle of a humane or moral
action, is a mind acting freely according to virtue, and those laws which are
written within us. But if by a moral Magistrate, he means such a one only, as
is seated over us, and has a care that we live conformably to virtue, and
honesty in relation to others; then it follows, that whoever has the capacity
so to hold inspection over us, is a sufficient Magistrate; but that can only
be he under whose full possession we actually are. Moreover he is to know
again, that States cannot look so strictly after virtue, as after public
quiet. For moral virtue is a private thing, and by reason of the free
concurrence of the will, cannot be discovered certainly, but by those who are
able to look within a man: Why states cannot look so strictly after virtue,
as after public quiet
But that which is ad alterum, and concerns rather wrong, then right, belongs
to the Political Magistrate, as a thing which cannot without confusion have
redress otherwise. For the chief convenience of a State, is, that people
might be kept from inconvenience, or incommoding one another; and that they may
be conserved in a liberty to do other good things according to Piety and
honesty: So that he who does things in themselves good, though under an
unlawful civil Magistrate, does not by those acts assert any Magistrates
right; but his only who originally gave Law and Rules for those internal acts,
and that is Gods right alone.

Lastly, whereas in this argument, he says a Father of a family so abused
should in his required submission, O^.
sin, if he betrayed his place and power which God had naturally given him. I
answer that there is a difference betwixt betraying a place so given, and
loosing it by force (which indeed is his first supposition) The one cannot be
done without sin, because it is done voluntarily and totally by himself, but
it is not our sin if we be forced out of a place; to which we are compelled by
a principle without us, and totally besides our power.

But there is a lawfuller power visible enough to religious eyes, Ob.
though for the present in an Eclipse, and suspended. It is not lawful for a
man to marry another woman whilst his own wife is in a sound, or for a woman
to marry another man, whilst her husband is in captivity or restraint, and
willing to come to her if he might.

To this I answer; Ans. Of the Ecclips suspention and extinction of supreme
powers.
First, How knows he certainly that the other power is only in an eclipse
or suspended? or if it be only in an Eclipse, does it follow that we of the
People might not do lawful Actions by the suppliment of other lights, whilst
we cannot have that of the Sun? Must we all that while cease to be men for the
absence of that which we cannot help? The Presybterian party would not have
that understood so; when the King was in prison at Holmby. There be no more
suns in the world but one, but there are many Magistrates, and such who give
better light one then the other, for which reason God first chose not Monarchy
for the Jews, certainly in an Eclipse, the Sun is never out of his natural
Orb, though his light and influence may be suspended and intercepted from us,
but when a Prince is in a foreign Country, and lives under the Laws of
another Magistracy, and that all Laws and di stributions of Justice and
Magistracy in the Country he pretends to, are made without him and against him,
will you according to the Laws of Nature, Nations, or Policy, say he alone,
and in that condition, is the supreme power or Authority of that Country, or
rather that we of the People do nothing but sin in his absence, though we do
things in themselves lawful? If you will ask how he came to be out of his
Orb or Country,? The union of people to a GoVernment not like a marriage.
I am sure it was against the advice either of Presbyterian or Independent. It
is easily granted, That a man may not marry another woman, so soon as his wife
falls into a swound. But you must again be reminded that the nature of
Marriage and of Government differ extremely there, where you suppose them most
to agree. For Marriage is not always necessary to every particular man. But
the public body of a people cannot be without Government one day, no more
then a man can be without a Head, because a smalltime serves to the ruin of a
man. Secondly, to take this or that woman to wife, is a thing of free choice;
but it is not so always with the People in relation to Kings, who have many of
them committed great Rapes upon them, as I believe this Gentleman will
acknowledge.

Obj.
A Woman may not marry another Husband, whilst her first is in Captivity, and
willing to come to her if he might.

Ans. A King of England, why not as a husband to the people of England.
These cases of Marriage still makes a very bad parallel with our present case.
For first, we have been taught by all parties in this War, that a King of
England is not as a Husband to the People of England. For a Husband is he who
alone makes and abrogates the Laws of his own Family, as a right of his
propriety, which a King of England could not do alone in this state. Secondly,
where was this Prince ever Crowned by which this Author means solemnly married
to this state? where was the benedictio sacra, the anointing or the Oath of
Contract taken by him? I am sure the Covenant has made no provision for him.

To this purpose is that Argument in the grand case of Conscience, Ob.
[viz.] The Apostle commands Wives to submit to their Husbands, surely qua
Husbands, not qua men But sheuld a stranger come to another Wife and ca^l
himself Husband (having before either imprisoned or slain the right full
Husband) and require submission, surely though she might he forced, yet it
were a sin to submit to him thus as a husband.

I answer, Answ.
to submit in Adultery is a plain sin; but for a Woman to submit in lawful
things to the power of a stranger is no sin, though he please to call
himself her Husband, or exercise the Government of the Family. There is the
same mistake of Husband here, as in the former, so that the Argument built
thereupon, of it self falls to the ground. But if by this he means that in
matter of supreme Command, we of the People may not obey any but the Husband
or the King, Of taking away the Kings life.
why then did the Presbyterian party for so many years oppose, and not totally
submit to their now supposed Husband? Why did they Commissionate so many
thousand Men, who by accidents of War had the power, though not the chance to
kill him? Nay in the Parliaments case it was always conjoyntly argued by them,
that it was he the Husband, that would have killed them the supposed Wife, for
which reason the Kirk of Scotland long ago sent him a bill of Divorce, unless
he satisfied for the blood of three Kingdoms. Which of the two parties it was
that at last killed him, belongs not much to the satisfaction of us the people,
though here questioned because those parties as tot hat act differed no more
(if he will further argue it) then dim n^tio and obtruncatio capitis do, for
they who after a long War, and by long imprisonment dispoyl'd him of that
regal power (here so much argued for) did according to the term of the civil
Law, diminuere caput Regis, and they who in consequence of his civil Death,
took away his natural life, did obtrune are Caput Regis. If he had been
killed in an action of War before, should the Soldier, or he who gave the
Soldier commission have answered for his life? As for the submission of a Wife
to a stranger as to her Husband, which is indeed a sin, I earnestly pray the
Author seriously to consider, whether he can excuse us and all our forefathers
from sin, ever since this Kingdom long ago fell under the power of an
usurping king, if this his way of arguing be true?

As for the second Demurrer, I consider he has given account to another very
worthy Pen, which has left little for my gleaning in such a field; however I
shall see what has escaped his hand, that the world may witness at last, that
truth has lovers, as well as error and passion have Cham ions.

This Author and the grand case of Conscience begin with St. Paul To. 13. Ob.
That we must submit to higher powers, not that we may lawfully submit, and
that not for wrath only, but for Conscience sake, which is of things
necessary, not of things lawful: Wherefore (say they) it is ill said that we
may lawfully submit in lawful things, obedience as a matter of Conscience
being a thing necessary.

Ans. Of obedience for wrath, and for conscience sake.
I grant it either in lawful or necessary things, when obedience is required
from those who actually have the whole Sepremacy of power in themselves. If I
hold this lawful, and he hold it necessary, we are not contrary; He only
makes what I allow more allowable. But the reason wherefore the Apostle
requires obedience to such, Not only for wrath (which is only in regard of
the power which they who are supreme have to destroy us) but for Conscience
sake is, Tyrants in titles from whom.
least by our resisting them we unnecessarily disturb and draw calamity on
others, and likewise in regard of their Authority from God, Tyrants even in
title not arriving to the great Dominions of the Earth, without Gods secret
order, God having clearly stated the Government of the world for ever in
himself as his chief Prerogative, he not being known or feared any way so
much as by Dominio n, which made St. Augus. in C. Dei. rightly say, Potestates
omnes sunt a Deo, non omnes voluntates, so that the reason wherefore God
permits sometimes such Princes to attain to these powers, is the same
wherefore he permits Devils in his Government of the world, a Nimrod, or a
Pharaoh, a Caesar, or a Herod, an Antichrist or a Turk, who as bad, and as
usurping as they are, and seem to us in exercising so severe, though so secret
a part of Gods Justice, yet fulfill several prophecies, which shows they come
not to what they are, merely by humane contrivance by chance or accident.

The grand case of Conscience. P. 3. distinguishes betwixt Authority or Power,
and Rulers deputed to the exercise of that Authority. The first is by Gods
positive Ordinance, the other bu^ by his permission.

Here he grants enough as to our case, Of our lawful submission to a
Magistrate who rules by Gods permissive will
which is of obedience, for if he can assure me that it is consonant to Gods
permissive will that such persons be my Magistrates, I am well satisfied then,
that Gods will is, I must be their Subject, Gods free admission of one being
the necessary exclusion of all the rest, so that subjection is not a thing now
of my choice, but of my necessity.

But the Demurrer, P.3. would know what difference there is in popular
obedience to lawful powers, Ob.
and unlawful powers, if obedience be necessary to both.

I answer, Ans. Obedience necessary to lawful and unlawful powers how
different.
If the powers here supposed by him agree equally in their supremacy, and
absoluteness, and differ only as one is got lawfully, the other unlawfully,
then the difference of our obedience to either, is only in the difference of
things commanded, as they are either lawful or unlawful; neither can the
Author (now arguing so much for a lawful power) conscienciously tell us, that
the lawfulness of the civil power commanding can make our obedience necessary
to an unlawful thing commanded; but rather that it makes that power then
become to us in some manner unlawful, and worse to us of the People, then if
we were under the absolute command of an unlawful power which exacts nothing
but lawful things. The knot of this point lies here, Whither a civil
circumstance (such as is the Magistrate either lawful or unlawful) can
vitiate an Act of moral duty? I believe his distinction P.2. of a Government
constituted or constituting, How we may have a right to take what another may
not have aright to give.
serves nothing for the discovery of a supreme lawful power in it self. For
I hold that whatever was once a sin may always be called a sin, though with
rooting or without rooting. Not but that God and we may make good use of other
men's bad actions if they be such, for which reason poor beggars may in their
extremities receive necessary Alms from those who came to their estates by
wrong and oppression; the receipt whereof they do not justify the Title of such
Estates, much less do we justify the unlawful Title of a supreme
Magistrate, The difference betwixt private Title and public.
from whose care we receive necessary protection. I say much less, because
cases of Estates are juris privati and have Courts to judge of them, but the
other is so much juris publici, that there is no mortal Court to judge of it,
for which reason how will these Authors (what Governors soever they desire)
evidently prove that they originally had lawful Titles, or that they at first
did not forcibly take the people to themselves, but that the people voluntarily
resigned themselves to them which was not in Nimrods Case. Of possession.
From whence this may be inferd to the satisfaction of the grand case of
Conscience, p. 3. That, if he had that desired Governor, yet according to
himself he would not own him long, because he were not sure to have in him a
supreme power, such as the Apostle, To. 13. in his sense understands necessary
for the Kingdom of England. But in our sense of plenary possession, which was
the case of the Apostles time, we can easily see first, how our present power
is the higher (the whole Kingdom now receiving all law protection and
subordinate Magistracy, from them) and how they may be in lawful things obeyed
according to the same Apostle; and to the duty of our Creation and being in
this world.

The case of conscience p. 3. acknowledges that a Government may be altered;
Object.
but it must be done still by the higher powers, whom we ought equally to obey
in submitting to an altered, as to a continued for me* But it is a sin if a
party forcibly lay the higher powers low, and exact obedience as to the legal
authority.

I thought that he who in his sense understood the Covenant in terminis
Eternal, Answer.
would not have allowed a change of Government here; no more then he might
allow the Scots (though upon never so much reason to themselves) to change
their Doctrine or discipline; because we swore during all our lives, to
preserve that which was established among them, at the time of our swearing.
But I now see we may well distinguish betwixt the Covenant it self, and some
Covenanters, the Covenant being as open for one change, as for the other.

Secondly, Of supreme powers altering themselves by joint concurrence.
If a Government though never so reasonably reformed or altered, be never in
any lawful things to be obeyed, (terms which he did ill to leave out of his
Argument) unless by the concurrence of all the higher powers; then farewell
all the old consequences of Solis populi suprema lex, and the Presbyterians
form^. Arms are unjustifiable. How corrupt and Tyrannical are most of the
Governments of the world, and yet how many of those supreme powers has he
observed to reform themselves? or diminish any thing in themselves, to alter
for the better? although the taking away of something in a Government, may be
as necessary, as continuing any old or new thing in it. Certainly these Authors
have read but few of Ionases, who voluntarily renounce themselves to settle a
Tempest.

Thirdly, How seperatly
Our Alteration was made by the present supreme power of the people: and the
reason wherefore both Houses laid the exercise of Regal power aside for some
years, made the Commons as they have agrued it, lay it aside for altogether.
viz. Salus populi suprema lex; The laying of it aside for some years is
argument enough to us of the people; that it might be laid aside for more
years, and that one King might be laid aside as well as another. For to us it
seems effectually all one, Non esse and non operari, for a thing not to be at
all, and in this world to do nothing at all. If they sinned who did this, is
that any thing to any but themselves? It is an Axiom of good Law Noxa sequitur
caput. Thus whilst his Argument should have been against our lawful obedience,
it is against their exacting it, as to the legal authority, which yet is
grossly false; for they exact it not as to the old legal authority, but as to
the present supreme power of the people, Non nomine Regis, sed nominepopuli:
And yet in one good sense it may be still called the same legal Authority,
because we have still under it the same laws for our properties as before, and
continued in life by them, as our lives themselves are.

Ob.
Case of Cons. p. 3. it is objected that this principle of obeying those only
who are in plenary possession of all supreme power, is fit only to destroy
States: for then should none Govern any longer then their swords and strengths
could bear them up.

Ans.
I conceive (according to what is already proved) that nothing can befound,
either more consonant to Christian charity, or to the preservation of States,
then this our principle of obedience; besides he knows no Kingdom in the
world, Demur p. 8.
where people do not obey upon this same plenary possession; Allegiance
always relating to protection. And if according to his consequence, Of non
obedience.
we should suspend all obedience till we have infallibly found out that Person
who derives a known and an undubitable right from him who was the first in
compact (because according to these Authors intermediate intrusions, are
violations of rights, and may not be obeyed even in things lawful) then I pray
you of what can we resolve less, then certainly to extirpate one another?
which will come to pass ere we find what we search for in such a blind
scuffle; and for fear of doing a lawful thing under the inspection of one,
who is supposed to have done another thing unlawfully, must we resolve of doing
all unlawful things by war our selves, and desert unnecessarily, the cares
of Wife and Children, of Church and Neighbor? For non-obedience in a State is
but a Chimaera, neutrality, a State without relation; there is no subsistence
for it in any State, and unless you will allow me to concur with others, and
under others in lawful things, I must leave the world; my subsistence being
only in a conjunction with others here in this jurisdiction.

The two Demurrers p. 3. andp. 7. Ob.
Except against this our present obedience, beeause the present powers is yet
new: neither is there a total cessation of all hopes of recovery.

Philosophers hold that the Definition of a man belongs to an infant, Ans.
as well as to one of many years. Because after the Organization of the parts,
What time makes a formed Government.
he is informed with the same principle of life and reason, as a grown man is;
and having the same form, is the same thing. Even so the present power has
possessed all the parts of this Kingdom gives them life in the administration of
public justice and protection, which are the soul of a State, and the power
which preceded this, what did it infuse more vital then this? And now that
that is taken away, if this other did not presently enter into its place; the
Commonwealth were dead, and each man were left in his naturals, to subsist of
himself, and to cast how he could in such a state of war, defend himself
from all the rest of the world, every man in this State having an equal right
to every thing.

Wherefore let every man, especially, they who would inform consciences, take
heed of affecting popular revenge, which must also reach themselves at last:
for when they have once frighted people from lawful actions, what can they
th^n commit but the un'avvfull? Into what an unhappy transport are we fallen,
that such a principle should be derived from our Church, the very Papists being
ever ready to obey in things lawful, though the State seemed to them
unlawful. These will judge better of the State now then of the Church, the one
inviting and encouraging us to lawful things, the other deterring us from
them. But to return to the Argument; I have already showed, that new or old
powers, never can signify good or bad powers. The uncertain hopes of
recovering in the future, proves that the thing is certainly lost for the
present, and it is our obedience at this time which this Q^estion relates to
However the King of Portugals acquisition, or Usurpation was presently
acknowledged by our King and others, although the King of Spain then had and
still has great hopes of recovering it, he being always Hannibal ad portas,
and never removing out of his own Dominion into another Foreign Magistracy.

Obj.
The first Demurrer p. 7. conc^ives our present condition like that of Israel,
betwixt David and Absalom, at which time (quoth he) the people had grievously
sinned, had they rendrd obedience to Absaloms commands and substitutes, so long
as David was living. Ans.


Our condition different from Isreal's betwixt David and Absalom.
This is very true, but far from the purpose. For Absalom was not a
fundamental legislative party in the state of Israel, as the House of Commons
lately was, and so could not pretend such a right of War. Secondly David had
his Army hard by in the same Kingdom with Absalom. We have none here but the
Parliaments, all the Kings forces and adherents being dissipated. Thirdly the
Israelites scruples are supposed during the time of War in Israel, our after
the War is ended. But if he mean by this fallacious parallel, that the
Israelites ought not to have opposed David at all in the way of War, then how
will he salve the scruples of his own breast, who promoted the course of War as
well as others against the King?

The Author of the grand case of Conscience is very ingenuous in his contest
with his adversary to form a Syllogism with four terms, and their be able to
find them out, and to answer the fallacy: so that whilst he wrastles thus
stoutly with himself, he can have but a fair fall in his own shadow, to
prevent which I shall take the pains to part them both. His Syllogism (as he
imputes it to his Adversary) is p. 4.5.

If the people of the Roman Empire did submit to the power of Claudius and
Nero, who by force were put upon them, then the people of England may lawfully
submit to a change of Government though believed unlawful.

But they did submit. Ergo those of England may.

Here he excepts against the equality of inference made betwixt those whose
persons were without due Title forced upon people, but still in the same
Government; and those persons who without right of Title force themselves upon,
us now in another Government,

But what if the Syllogism be indeed and vertually only this?

If the people of the Roman Empire were required by the Apostle to continue
obedience to Claudius and Nero, then the people of England may lawfully
continue obedience to their present Governors.

But those might, Ergo these may.

His distinction of persons intruding wrongfully into the same Government,
Obedience to false Governors in the right or wrong Government varies not the
sin of obedience.
and into a different Government according to his former position satisfies not
conscience in either, because both are supposed unlawful and differ only
secundum m^jus and minus quae non var^ant speciem so that if obedience were not
a sin in one, it is not a sin in the other. If he say, obedience to intruders
into the same Government is not a sin, then he has dispatched all controversy
concerning the exclusion of the Kings Line, and that the Parliamens fault as to
him was that they rather changed the Government then the Governors, which he
acknowledges more plainly P. 5. where speaking concerning the persons coming
to power, he says it is not material who puts them in, nor what men are put
into powers ordained by God. Wherein Caesar's case and the Parl. disagree
But to come nearer to the point, he cannot say that of the usurping Caesar's,
which may be said of the Parliament. For these are the representers of the
people of England, and were lawfully a third part of the supreme power before
the change of Government. Caesar had no part of supreme right, but what he
rather usurped then acquired by any dicision of right, or fundamental
legislative controversy betwixt the Senate and him. To say as the Demurrer, p.
4. That Caesar had gotten the consent of the Senate, and added compact to his
conquest, is absurd, unless he means he had gotten the Senate so into his
power, that he had them in a condition of Quarter; Wherein Cesars case and the
Parl. agree, as to justify our obedience.
in which case as the Law says principum rogamina sunt mandata, without doubt
if the peoples submission to Caesar were lawful upon his changing a Republique
into a monarchy, after the Senate had for bad the approach of his Army, and
that he had expelled many members from the Senate, why may not a lawfuller
obedience be given to those of a Senate it self, who have changed Monarchy into
a Republique? These two changes are so far alike, that they frustrate this
Authors distinction of persons intruding unlawfully into the same, and into a
different Government.

Obj.
He follows his objection still, p. 5. arguing that though people did de
facto, obey such false possessors, and Usurpers, yet that proves not the
lawfulness of our obedience, nam a facto ad jus non valet consequentia; their
submission should have been proved legal.

Ans.
If he has a quarrel to us for our peaceablenesse, yet why should he quarrel
with St. Paul?

He bad the Romans submit in the same kind; and unless we had Prophets on
purpose to tell Governors, as well as us of the People, who must always
succeed according to the mind of God, then the state of the world, the nature
of politic justic^ of society and Religion is such that we may and ought to
submit in obedience to those who plenarily possess, protect and command us
lawful things. Surely he did not consider his Axiom well, For a facto ad jus
valet consequentia, from fact we infer many civil rights, as custom and
prescription, etc.

Neither is it necessary to prove their submission legal, is it be proved
absolutely necessary and equitable.

And yet we conceive another case (besides that before mentioned) wherein this
submission to a new power may be called legal. In what sen^^ the present
submission (...) legal.
For the end of all law and Government is to preserve our persons and estates;
and they who are in supremacy of power, have power to preserve or destroy both
if they please; and therefore have as great a power over our laws, which are
less, then our lives. So soon as one supreme power is expelled by another,
law, life, and estate fall all into the hands of the succeeding power; and what
it does not actually take away, stands in effect as deriving from it; and if
that supreme power make a sanction for our obedience to it (as always is
immediately done) then we may say our submission is legal, or else the
supreme power cannot make a law.

To that argument where we assert, that the Authority which excluds all other
Authorities must be obeyed, or else all authority falls to the ground; The
grand case of Cons. answers obliquely still, That notwithstaning, such
authority can never illegally get the legal power; nor can it exclude others
from their authority. In which answer he plainly contradicts himself, p. 7.
For Caesar's power was (according to himself) legal, and yet got by a
Circumstance very illegal; the Senate being empty, and intimidated, and not so
much in their own, as in his power.

This argument is so far from concerning us, Of the (...) evidence of (...)
ri^^ts, to as to satisfy con^^^e^ce for actions of w^r upon them.
that it is directed only against those Princes who ab origin, drive from
illegal acquisitions. Of which he will do well to speak largelyer, when he
can assure my conscience by infallible evidence of right, that I may safely
swear or destroy men upon it, that there was ever such a man in England as
William the Conqueror, or any other ancient King, from whom Titles are said to
be derived, either legally or illegally: This is a proposition, which I believe
he in the midst of his peremptorines was not aware off, no more then I now
doubt in whose hands the present possession of the Kingdom; is for which reason
they assert their Authority, and it is his part to show how infallibly it
appears to be another by indubitable right ab origin. But because it is
argued that in the disquisition of a right Title, none are so blind as the
people (who among other burdens have the imposition of other men's judgments
cast upon them) therefore an usurped Title to them is true enough to exact
obedience.

Ob.
Hence the grand case of Cons. answers, p. 10. That then by the rule of
contraries it follows, That when titles are visibly unlawful, people are
disengaged from obedience to them.

To this I reply, that this answer is nothing but a mere repetition of the
question, Ans.
and has no medium of proof annexed to it; the very question being this
conclusion, viz. Whether obedience be lawful to Titles visibly unlawful?

Secondly, It has been shown, that non-obedience and subsistence in a state
are incompatible; every man in a state stands in a Relation, and must either
command or obey; and owes something to him, by whose care he^ sleeps quietly
in his Bed.

Thirdly, If by disengagement from obeying a lawful Title, he means that we
may choose whither we will obey or no, then though disengaged, we man obey.

These answers help us half way over the next dificulty.

Object. Demn. p. 5.
We may not any way affirm the right of the Usurper, or deny interpretatively
the just title of the Heir, without the guilt of treachery, lying and
falsenesse, if not of vow-breaking, In suffering a Theife to take my purse, I
cannot help it; If I must part with that or my life, I choose to loose my
Purse; not for fear least I break the fifth or eight Commandment, but least
I break the sixth, in being guilty of self murder; yet rather then say he
has authority to take it, I must loose my life. In point of protection among
thieves, I may desire some to preserve me from others, yet may I not say their
robbery is just, or join or ply with them in robbing others.

To say no more of the certain evidence, Ans. Obedience some times asserts not
a Title but power.
and of the indubitablenesse of ancient original Titles (which is here the
maine of the Argument) I answer that simple obedience to an established Usurper,
does not always interpretatively affirm his right, or deny another, but
affirms rather the irresistibility of the possessors present power. God is the
supreme magistrate of all the world, and by reason of his Omnipotent presence
every where, we cannot exclude him from the cognizance of, or right to any of
our Actions; but our earthly Magistrates may fall into such circumstances, that
they may have neither personal or virtuall presence with us, and therefore may
be said to be civilly dead, according to the former Axiom, Idem est non esse
and non operari, to do nothing and be nothing is to us the same thing, motion
being the chief evidence of life.

In his case of the Thief, I desire any man to consider whether (as he has
put it) he has not clearly broken one Commandment, besides those which he
has named, viz. the third, because it is an untruth to say the Parliament
requires not obedience from any of us, unless we all acknowledge the
lawfulness of their authority, which is the second false supposition here.

When Officers gather Taxes for the State, they have no commission to demand
our Declarations of the States authority first, but only to receive the money
Taxed, which this Author knows is a truth known to every one. They who obey a
wrong authority r^bbe not the ri^h^^.
As for the peoples conjoyning and complying wi^h the State to Rob another,
by obeying to the prejudice of another; he must mean it in a Robbery either of
power, or of Riches. For power, the people aim not at it, their condition
always is l^rge who ever sits at top. And for getting by the war, I hope the
Presbyterian party which had the authorizing of Taxes, as well as others,
knows as well as the people themselves, that this is a gross prevarication.
Last of all there is difference betwixt willing compliance, and necessary
subjectiion, which is the peoples case.

Obj.
He objects again p. 6. If obedience be necessary then a title once wronged
can never be lawfully righted, it will be sin to help the weaker party, or
to rescue our selves from perpetual slavery.

Ans.
Here he is started suddenly into two other questions. First, how a Title may
be recovered? and secondly, How we of the people may rescue our selves from the
slavery of any Titles? These two relate to the future, which is of Gods secret
disposing; our question is of the present only.

Of the recovery of dubious Rights, and the benefit which people get by most
wars.
But I pray you what do people get when wars for recoveries of dubious rights
are long and calamitous? What are the people of France or the people of Spain
better for the long and hereditary anger of their two Kings? Or what was the
world better for Alexanders Conquering it? The Houses which are burnt, and the
millions of bodies left dead in the field, are the peoples; and Princes
scorning to derive from them, still trample them to dung. We talk of some
Titles wronged, as if their rights were so certain, and so necessary to live
under, as God almighties is, who yet disposes of the changes which are made
here among his chief Officers, and not we; Who is it then that can right
wronged Titles, but he alone who makes all Titles right?

To that case where it is argued, that if the Masters mate had thrown him
overboard, and by power would suffer no other to guide the Ship but himself,
Obj.
if the mariners will not obey him commanding aright for the safe guiding of
the Ship, the Ship must needs perish and themselves with it; It is answered by
the Grand Case of Cons. p. 9 That the case should not have been of a Mate as a
partner (which is false) but of a party of the Seamen, who coming to shore
should bring the other obeying party to punishment, especially for
acknowledging the Usurping Stearesmans right, which is still falsely supposed
in our case.

Here I desire this Casuist to pull off his mask and speak plainly, Answer.
The case of the Master of the Ship thrown over board.
whether he does not plead for his own punishment, as one who at the beginning
of our war principally encouraged us not to be guided by the then pretending
Stearesman, whom they of his party said aside, and stear'd a while themselves;
the Scots declaring that he was not fit to touch the helm again, till he had
satisfied, etc.

Besides, this is true, that they then required obedience from compounding
Royalists, although to them they seemed an unlawful power and Magistracy, as
to the dispencing of public and private justice.

Secondly, the reason wherefore these mariners might not acknowledge him the
right master, (as he has varied the case) is rather because this is in an
inferior thing de jure privato, Master and Mariners being accountants to the
Merchants who have a Court of Justice to judge the fact; but what Court is
there in this world to call that power, which here is the supreamest to any
account?

Thirdly, he supposes the usurper and the complyers to be brought to account by
the others, but not till they come to shore; whereas in our case we can do
nothing but in the ship, that is in the commonwealth, when we leave that, we
go into another world, our true patria where indeed we do not call one
another, but are all called together to an account by our supreme Magistrate,
whose sentence we would feign prejudge here by a confusion of the ship in via.

The grand case of Conscience, p. 9. Advises that seeing we are so unsettled,
Ob.
we should use means for a settlement, though by its procurement we were more
unsettled: If a man be at the rivers brinke he would advise him to keep out of
the water, but if at once he leap into the middle of the river, he would
persuade him to come to the bank, although he wade through much water to come
thither.

Answ.
I see according to this horrid tenent, that if God (as the Scotch phrase has
it) comes not to the whole length of our desire, Whether we be actually in the
unsettlement and deepes which he supposes?
then there must be no peace betwixt man and man in this world. Mr. Ste.
Marshall preached lately, that God was to be thankt for some thing, that Church
doors were yet open to those who had a zeal, and a will to congregate, that
they were not under their enemies swords, nor compounding with them; He saw
how they might be worse if God should through their peevishness let them see
foreign armies at their doors, who have both faces tongues, religions and
affections different from ours; and will not care for firing our houses and
Churches, or for giving us laws again in an unknown tongue, and perhaps
Religion too. Can he think the Notion of our Church government would be a
charm to such swords and consciences? Or rather can he assure us of his
prophecy here, that if we begin new troubles, we shall certainly have victory?
For his argument supposes it must needs end so, and that by his persuasion we
shall wade to the bank. If we were indeed in the midst of the water (that is in
the midst of war and confusion) then being engaged for life, we might
endeavor to wade through, though the stream were running deep with our own
and Childrens innocent bloods, for after all Metaphors, that is the element
which he means. Thus in no diseases but those which are supposeddeadly, may we
use desperate remedies, such as may endanger the destruction of the whole body;
When the whole body may be hazarded for a disperate remedy and when not.
But may a man endanger his whole body, when it is not for the cure of himself
but of another, and by the killing also of others besides himself, wife and
children? I will not name what sort of subtilty this Gentleman has used in
this Argument, nor def^ne with what conscience here he seeks to satisfy
another; For, lest we of the People should bogle at coming on the Stage to
Act our late Tragedy over again, he would impose it on our beleifes, that we
are still in the middle act of it and that we ought to finish it. It is high
time for him to consider whither if we run along with him in this we should not
shut up compassion from our Brethren, 1 John 3.17.
and shut out a great part of our gratitude toward God; although I confess
some scars and haltings may remain yet, after the war it self is ended.
Methinks he should find every thing both in Nature and Christianity more
favorable for our present Peace, then for our third War, especially seeing
all our former wars have ended very contrary to the expectation of those who
were hottest to begin them. But I consider that passion is the last hold out of
which we are beaten, of which the fuller men are, the less do they (through a
great judgment on their spirits) perceive into what deformities they do
transport them, it being the nature of all intoxications that their defects are
better perceivd by any, then by those who are oppressed by them.

THE Second Part, THAT This obedience to the present Government, is not
contrary to, but consistent with our Solemn League and Covenant.
BY these steps we are come at last ad sacras columnas, to those sacred Pillars
on which the holy Covenant hangs almost in every Church, as a sanctum
aeternitati a law sacred to eternity. The hands which hung it there, have not
(they say) power to take it down again. Who therefore may undertake to tell
these persons, that they actually are or else may be freed from it, seeing they
find themselves obliged if they can, to tie all the world with them in the
same sort of knot?

Here is certainly a zeal^ worthy to be ^ixt on that, which should obliege
always; and the world must confess that there has been no public oath
taken by any person anywhere; who have been more scrupulously attent not to
double with their God in relation to his part in contract. But yet let not
these consciences be scandalized if I say it was compild by none but mortal
men, taken only by such, and as a promissory oath cannot possibly be free from
those exceptions, and accidents wherewith time changes the constitution of all
those things, which it does not absolutely destroy, wherefore upon a sober
review of al I doubt not, but as many Oaths and Leagues are transient, we are
still obliged to many things of the Covenant but not qua league or Covenant.
so to show that this according to its nature, and as it is originally a League
or Covenant, that is, as it is a formal compact, relating to the public and
united corporation of several Nations and Magistracies (by which each people
were united together, and without which neither people were respectively to act
any thing separately within and against themselves) I say I doubt not but to
show that such a Covenant, upon what has intervened is expired to us the
People of England, and that without any default of ours; And though our
Magistrate would give it a new life and obligation; yet to many principal
things it can obliege no longer; and for the next we are to consider that
though something of our first end in reformation stream through the Covenant;
yet its spring head rises higher then it; which end we are in all forms to
pursue still, and are now left tied to so much of the Covenant only as we were
obliged to for all our days withal our mights and souls, before we took it
at all. Lastly, if it were granted, that the Covenant is not expired, yet I
shall here show, that our submission to this present government is no way
inconsistent with it.

In which few words, though I have stated the maine of its difficulties, yet
ere I apply my self to answer objections, I shall briefly premise what I have
observed others have omitted, it being hard to find how we may be unti'd from
a thing, till we have found how the knot at first was made.

Of promissory and assertory Oaths.
Whatsoever we can say, affirm or deny, is either assertory or promissory The
first relates to the time past or present ( is if I affirm Titius to be, or
have been at Rome) and therefore upon the very saying or swearing, the whole
truth and obligation is fulfilled, and past with the time which accompanied it.
VVhither a promissory Oath, which always involves a Tacit condition, be
lawful.
The other relates to the time present, as it is then sincerely said or sworn;
and to the future for the sincere fulfilling them, which yet is dubious,
conditional, and not in our powers; As when Titius promises Sempronius 100.l.
when his ship returns.

Ob.
For this reason some say all promissory Oaths ase absoutely unlawful,
because Oaths must be true and certain; but all future effects of things are
uncertain.

Ans.
I answer, that for so much as concerns the form of my Oath here, it is true
and certain, that my mind and words went truly together in the act of
swearing, and that I will make my deed and words go truly together, when the
supposed condition betwixt us (and which, as we mutually consent to, is in
neither of our powers at present) shall absolutely come to pass. This was the
case of Abrams servant, when he swore to take a wife for Isaac; a future (in
several circumstances) very uncertain, Genesis 24.2.34.
both in respect of what might happen to the servant, to Isaac and to the
Virgin we know what hapne'd to Job's Children and Family through the accident
of war, and the malice of the Devil; and how Joseph was shuffled away by his
own friends and kindred.

It is not enough to say, such supposed tacit conditions cannot be in Oaths;
Of tacit conditions in Oaths concerning things possible.
For first, If such conditions be in promises, and that I may lawfully make a
promise to another, then I may lawfully swear a promissory Oath to him, which
we see cannot be separated from such conditions as are not, cannot, and need
not be expressed betwixt us at the beginning. For (to take away the supposition
of fraud betwixt us) we both agree in this that we cannot foresee with what
circumstances our futures may be perplexed. Therefore it is sufficient that we
swore things not necessary, but possible; such as might happen or not happen,
because depending on things which depend not totally on us, nor on our will,
but rather mixtly on the wills of others, and on that which to us is change or
fortune, For which reason he is not forsworn, who effects not always what he
by Oath promises, no more then he sins, who always effects not his simple
promise.

Secondly, This tacit condition in a promissory Oath, and in things naturally
and morally possible, is proved by the very nature and definition of the Oath.
For it is only an attestation, and imprecation of God in such manner, that if
the promiser fail, he would have him to whom he promised, understand, that be
puts himself under Gods severe wrath.

From hence it is to be noted, The obligation of a pact, or promise with an
Oath, or without an Oath, is all one
that the bare promise obliged as strictly before he swore, as after he swore;
and of the reason is, because he was obliged by nothing, but by that which was
in Pact. The investing it with an Oath, or with Gods punishment, relates only
to the Penalty: so that a promissory Oath signifies no more, then such a
penalty upon such a promise: But a penalty (as we know) in law and equity
relates only to that which is unlawful, such as is the violation of a Pact.

The addition of never so many penalties, to a thing in it self unlawful, can
never fasten any obligation on me to do it; Nor can several Penalties to an
obligation in it self lawful, add anything to the first Ius or right of it,
but only to my future fear, least I do injustice.

The Capital question therefore in these cases will be. What the nature of the
things are to which we obliged our selves at first? For according as they stand
or fall, our relations or obligations, to them stand or fall whither we will or
no.

Thirdly, We find such tacit conditions, concealed, and supposed in the
Oaths of Solomon to Bathsheb^^; 1 Kings 2 20. 21.22. 1 Samuel 25.22 Jo. ^.10.
Genesis 24.2.3.4
of David, concerning Nabals house; of God concerning the destruction of
Ninevah, and of Abrams servant concerning Isaacs wife, etc.

By a reflection on all this, viz. That seeing there may be a promise, and
consequently a promissory Oath; and that the nature and obligation of a
promise, and of such an Oath, is one and the same, we have gained a great
point, That the Covenant (which is a promissory Oath) is not in its own nature
of an eternal obligation, but is involved in tacit conditions and accidents
of the world, which may justly incumber us from effecting it, or from being
further obliged to it, as well as other promises may, which yet are made
bonafide at the beginning. The difficulty only is to see, whither de facto
that has intervened, which has now taken away the formal and original
obligation, which we of the people had to it at first, by authority of our
Magistrate; and so taken away, as we may be secure and out of fear of the
penalty, which we then submitted to in it.

I shall not here make use of what others have laboriously argued; Argu.
That the matter of the Covenant is such, as we cannot be obliged to, but let
it be as good or as bad as men please to suppose; The Covenant a political or
State Oath.
I say in the first place, that all the good or bad, was formed into a
Political Oath, authorized upon two Kingdoms, by the sanction of two public
Magistracies; who as collaterals obliged themselves to cooperate faithfully
together, and obliged those of their distinct Nations, to cooperate
respectively and subordinately with them, for attaining a former end in such a
way of Reformation, as is therein expressed; but by such means, as they in their
public and respective capacities, not we in our particulars should judge most
consonate to equity and true to religion. For which reason we happily are
pointed at there, The subordinate conditions of this Oath.
only in our private places and callings.

Here therefore there is a relation of several things concurrent, viz. Of two
Magistracies united as a means for the easier reaching the end of those
respective reformations, which they were obliged to make before they entered in
league, and of two people, who by the union of their respective Magistracies,
pass (for so much as is therein expressed) into an union one with another, and
are to have their private capacities and endeavors managed by them, and never
against them by any virtue of this league. Besides it is a considerable
circumstance in the Magistrates managing the whole, that states or civil
constitutions by reason of the diseases of ambition and avarice, are naturally
as much subject to future changes, as any other things are; and without the
supposition of tacit conditions, we may as little swear to preserve the State
of a public body, as we may swear to preserve the State of our own
particular bodies, or as a parent may to preserve his Child, which when it
shall be taken away by diseases, or by justice, he may be sorry for the loss,
but may not justly complain of it. And indeed so it is come to pass without
any default in us of the english People, or of our public Magistrate (under
whom we were to act in these private places and callings) that neither of us
can be said to have laid the Covenant aside, although we could not keep it
from expiring; because the failing was in that which was never supposed to be
in our powers viz. in many conditional things which camecr osse, and in the
breach of fidelity in another collateral and concurring power.

If you please to object here as an aggravation, Ob.
and an incitement for us of the Covenanted people to rise kill and slay, that
the Covenant is buried not as a thing really expired and dead, but that the
people out of interest must be told so, only because the former Magistracy is
really laid aside and changed, which if people should thoroughly consider, would
quickly make them find matter enough in the Covenant to take arms.

I shall not in the way of answer to this repeat any thing concerning the
cause, Ans.
the means, and the concurrences to this our present change; every Covenanter
both of England and Scotland, knowing well that there was no change of
Government here, O^ change of ^^^^^nment, (...) the (...) cause, or as an
effect of ^^^hers for^^^ breach of Covenant can ^^^her way authorize us to
(...) against this Government.
till the Covenant was Nationally broke (and so many here were ensnared, both
Royalists and Parliamentarians) by the Scots, who thought to have used it for a
change of Government, and as a stratagem to give law in another judicatory:
Neither shall I argue in this place, how compatible any change may be with a
Covenant so conditional, in which Kings as Parties are totally excluded from
judging either for themselves or for others, which point shall be further
argued at last; But I shall content my self to take what is here granted in
the objection, viz. That the Government is really changed; The consequence then
to us of the people will be, that seeing by the fourth Article of the Covenant,
we may not without apparent breach of it, act the sense of the Covenant, but as
we receive it from our respective and supreme judicatory of England only, and
that the said Government which it relates to, is confessed to be gone, have you
not then clearly confessed that the obligation to act any thing publicly by
Covenant is likewise gone? according to an old Axiom, Sublato relat^ tollitur
correlatum.

If this present Government which we are changed to, The Covenant obliges us
not against the ^i^th Commandment.
and which now protects us, should think fit by the way of Covenant to give a
new life, to that remaining part of it, which may be observed, yet you will not
allow any obedience to them, though in things never so lawful; Neither will
that fourth Article allow me to obey any forreigner, nor those without whose
consent the Covenant was made, and consequently without whom it is to be
interpreted, as the late Proceedings of the Scots at the Hague plainly show:
So that after all this, if I in my private capacity be as you say still
indispensibly obliged by it, Page 15.
to begin or assist to public troubles, do you not fall into a worser
absurdity, and maintain an Oath against the fifth Commandment, or against all
Magistracy, which is an impossibility? Nothing ever cautiond in terms more
expressly for our duty of making discoveries, The Covena^^ make (...) eac^ man
a Magistrate.
of bringing to condign punishment, of our supreme respective Iudicatories
and the like then the Covenant did, which are things relating to none but our
supreme Magistracy, unless you please plainly to assert another Absurdity,
that every single man who has taken it, is thereby absolvd from his
Magistrate, and is made one himself to judge of the other, and thereby
authorizd not by way of Toleration to profess but to establish what Religion
he would, to punish at his own tribunal whom he would, and to reform the
state as he would. For he to whom you will allow a capacity of making war,
has also a Capacity of making Peace, and Laws for the security of his Peace.

Thus we see how the Government is changed, and the formal obligation of the
Covenant at an end; But what if I should grant you by the way of supposition,
that in case both the Covenant and the former Government were standing together
in as full force as you desire, and as it was when the Scots first delivered
the King up to the Parliament of England? I would then know of you whither if
our Parliament had then for reasons best known to themselves (and of which we
can never judge competently) declared us of the People, free from any further
obligation of the Covenant, might we justly have thought our solemn League at
an end, and that we ought to act nothing publicly any longer by it?

If you will say we should have been still obliged to act upon it, then I ask
you again under whom? For I have proved it must be always under a Magistrate,
and you have all along proved that it must only be under our lawful
Magistrate, how lawful soever the thing be in it self which is commanded, you
would not allow the King to be the person to be obeyed, whom you thought fit to
keep in an imprisonment. The Parliament (according to our supposition) would
not be any longer obliged to it, or be obeyed in it, and the Scots acknowledge
themselves in the 4 Article to be the supreme judicatory only of Scotland,
and I cannot act publicly by a private Capacity or Magistracy. Ergo in such a
case, the Covenant how good soever, had not obliged any longer, nor is it in it
self eternal.

Obj.
You will not deny perhaps but one man may free another from an Oath when it is
for the worldly profit of him who pleases to release it, as every man may throw
away any thing of his own right; but you will not allow it in Sacred things
where God is a Party.

Ans.
I answer, that though no Parent can dispense his wife or child from the fear
of God and the duties they owe to him, Number 30. How a superior may free an
inferior from ^n Oath even in that which belongs to God.
yet he allowed him to break the child's vow for giving him a sacrifice, and
both to be guiltles; and then why may not we be now absolved, if our public
Parent judges it not fit that we should be any longer tide formally to a
conditional Oath; though it have relation to some sacred things?

You will say no, because the Parent did not as a party solemnly concur to
the Child's vow, and having never consented he might the better dissent; but our
public Parent did concur at a party to our Oath. The Parliament and People
took the Covenant jointly together, and it is said that if the Father hear
the vows, and contradicts them not in the same day, then he confirms them, and
cannot break them without iniquity,

To this I reply, First, that v.16. it is said the Child is free after the
dissent of the Parent, and that the Parent is charged with whatsoever was
amiss in him, which is excuse enough for us of the people. Secondly, the
difference is great in a maine point of the parallel; because after the
concurrence of the Father to the child's vow for sacrificing something to God,
that might be completed in the Temple without his further helping it on; but
we cannot do any thing in our case without the cooperation of our public
Parent all along, neither can he do any thing without the concurrences of many
other possible, but uncertain conditions, and if he in effect find those
conditions have come contrary to his public endeavors, what may we do? will
it be enough for us to rest in having attempted the utmost of our private
endeavors with him? or will you authorize every man upon private judgment or
interpretation to begin a war in his own sense.

A League or Pact authorized betwixt private Neighbors over a whole Nation or
over part of it, The difference btewixt this our league and those of Prince^
for authorizing war
is not as a League betwixt Prince and Prince: because these have conditions
expressed how and when to begin war upon one another in case their Leagues be
broken. But there is no such thing expressed in terminis in that Covenant which
we have made one with another, and which we made subordinately to our
Magistrate: so that if we or the Magistrate fail, we are equally left to Gods
justice solely and to the forfeiture of our own penalties due to him, and every
one is to answer for his own deficiency in his own Station: And being left to
our selves again, we are left to act only so much of our Oath or of the
ancient end of it, as we were bound to before we swore: which is a great deal;
because we were bound by precept before we were by promise all the days of
our lives to do our utmost for the glory of God, and the good of our neighbor.

Secondly, The obligation of the Covenant, how less then the obligation of a
^ra
Princes or States who by the supremacy of their powers, are able to make Laws
for their separated Kingdoms; when they unite their supreme Powers, they are
able to make a common Law for all their Kingdoms together, which is called a
League or Compact; But a law when it comes to be broken (which is a public
thing, and therefore of every man's interest) may be vindicated publicly by
War, and by those who have a posse regni. But I cannot say the same may be
done for the Covenant, for quo jure can it be done?

The Scots indeed by one way of arguing make it greater then a Law, and by
another make it less; which is when they one while affirm it unalterable and
unreformable as a divine text, and another while confess it was not made by
the joint concurrence of all those who with them are essential to the making a
public Law. I conceive we may safely say it is of a Constitution inferriou^
to that of a Law, and therefore its obligation is less, though its penalty be
greater to the failers in it. It was made use of, only as a convenient
instrument or means, for the better attaining some laws as its end. A Law it
was not because it was not made by all the then Legislative powers of the
Kingdom. For the Kings concurrence in England if not in Scotland, was then
held requisite for passing a Law and he ever dissented from this Covenant.
Half the inferior sort of the People have not any Interest in it, War how an
unjust penalty for the mere breach of Covenant.
nor have taken it: And not having any obligation to it, how I pray you can
they justly be drawn into the Penalty due to it? as they must all be, if a
War (which is effectually a Penal thing) be begun though by a part of the
Nation; for the nature of War is such, that it puts a whole Kingdom into
imminent danger of desolation, though but begun in a part, and by a party of it.

Thus far I have endeavored to show the true fast and loose of all promissory
Oaths, and how their obligations cease according to the nature of the things
which they are affixed to.

Object.
The Author of the grand case of Conscience p, 1. Objects, That if
inconvenience may break a promise or disengage an Oath, then many may be
cheated, and David was much mistaken, Psalm. 15.4. Who says he shall dwell in
Gods Tabernacle, who swears to his own hinderance and changes not.

Ans.
I answer, David speaks here of an Oath violated by a change only in the
Promiser, Of the obligation of such a promise as may be fulfilled solely by the
promiser.
who by his Oath has past a right to another: and therefore can no longer
dispose of it again; the party to whom he swore may dispose of it as he
pleases and may dispense him of it; because no man has a right to make
another man keep his own, longer then he please himself. It is a duty to pay
a debt, but not to receive it. Finally, this is nothing to those cases where
the change is not in us, but in other persons, and in things which relate
principally and conjoyntly to the fulfilling of the Oath or Promise. For if I
promise Titius a sword at such a time, and he then chance to be mad, (an
accident not expressed betwixt us at first) am I bound to put it into his hands
in this change because I was the first promiser?

Whereas it is said, that the obligation of somethings end, because they can be
no longer kept, Ob.
as that of the Kings person etc. He ans. p. 11. That if men shall by violence
put an end to the thing, that thereby the obligation may end too, that is a
breach of Covenant. A woman promises to be faithful to her husband so long as
he lives; but if she, to marry another, kills him, she breaks her promise.

I grant it easily that they who use violence to break lawful contracts, Answ.
sin grievously; which is a thing now confessed in every Church of Scotland; but
what is that to those who use no violence to break them at all; nor can help
it when it is done although many be undone by it? Of the obligation for
preserving the Kings person by covenant.
One thing I most earnestly desire to learn in this question propounded (I
guess) concerning the Kings Death; which was a consequence of the others
breach and tamperings. If by the Covenant we were indispensably obliged to
preserve his Person, How came it to pass, that we were obliged by the same
Covenant to wage war against him? I have heard of a distinction betwixt his
power and his person, but never of any betwixt his person and himself. So that
if the Covenant could have dispensed any soldier of England or Scotland to
kill his person by an accident of War (as his life was often in danger before
he came to the Scaffold) his Death had been violent, and the obligation to
preserve him had ended, and yet according to this argument the Covenant had not
been broken. Why then should these men think the world so dull as not to
understand plainly enough, that the Covenant provided for his Death more ways
then one? True it is, that the Covenant held out a faint and a conditional
preservation of him, and after all no man can sincerely stretch it further:
From whence if we will let him judge this one controversy, he has left it
recorded to posterity, in his supposed book Chap. 9. In vain is my person
excepted by a parenthesis of words, when so many hands are armed against me
with swords: Moreover in His Chap. of the Covenant, he feared it provided for
him in a Logic too loose and circumstantiall. From all which what did he
conclude, but that he would not allow of a Covenant-argument for his life?

I know the answer here is obvious, that bullets were not shot directly against
him (as few are against any in a Town or in a Battle) and that if he would
have withdrawn his person, he should have been out of danger; but then I pray
you what advantage had he in this by Covenant, more then any common soldier of
either side? who when they retire, are equally out of danger, Nay he had less
advantage, For by preserving him, they meant keeping him after he was rescued
from others, How the words of preservation in Covenant, provided more for the
Kings suffering, then the words of punishment provided for Delinquents
sufferings.
and by keeping him they meant not him primarily, but something else, to which
all consideration of him was to give way. As for others which were to be
brought to punishment, they had some of them leave to go beyond the Seas,
others to enjoy liberties at home; and of all the excepted persons, there was
never any of them who was here deprived of life, but as our troubles and wars
increast, their number (which was strange) lessened even to six or seven at
last, and most of those out of the Kingdom. I know they have distinctions
wherefore so much might be remitted to those, and not to the King, although he
had on his behalf the word preservation in the Covenant; but these
distinctions are but their strong justifications for that which is the bottom
of this argument, if all Covenanters durst speak plainly alike.

Ob.
He objects. p. 11. That if according to Covenant we should preserve the
privileges of Parliament, against a Malignant party that would have taken away
but five Members; why not against an Heriticall party which took away above two
hundred?

Ans.
I answer, That when the five Membere were in danger, there was a Session of
near all the Lords, and of all the Commons to authorize the People to bring
others before them to condign punishment: How (...) that the excluding member,
ought to be brought by (...) before the excluded.
But where is there now any Session of a supreme power in this Land, before
whom we ought to bring the present Parliament? under what formal supreme
Magistracy can we now cooperate or receive public orders, but from them? who
have commanded no such thing against themselves. Lastly the Covenant makes not
us private men Magistrates, neither does it authorize us to a war disertly, as
to a penalty.

Certainly he does not mean that the remaining Members make no house, because
there are more now kept out, then are admitted into it. For would not such an
Argument clearly determine, that the house of Lords was never a house, since
the Major part followed the King, under pretense, that they durst not sit any
longer at Westminster? Or else if the ^itting of so many Members as are enough
for a legal vote be illegal, after others are forc^t away; How shall we
justify that Session with a new speaker, when the rest were forced to the
Armies protection from the Citizens servants and apprentices, who forced them,
and Indangerd their lives in the House? Or how shall we justify the house of
Commons for sitting, when the five Members durst not appear? Though force
should not be used without a desperate occasion be given (in which case the
preservation of the substance, is always above the consideration of a
formality as has bin argued by the Parliament ever since their first wars
yet they know few or many sitters in the House, is not a thing of our
examination, if they be above forty.

The second Demurrer p. 6. Ob.
Objects that we have sworn by no terror to withdraw our selves from this
blessed union, Ans.
but to continuein it all our lives against all opposition. The Coveant relates
only to a time of u^nion, with and under the magistrate.


If there were nothing else in the world yet these words sufficiently prove
that we are now absolutely absolved from the Covenant; for first, they relate
to a State and time of Union, in which we were according to the united
strengths of two Nations, two Magistracies, and of the respective Magistracies
and People here enabled, yea commanded to make great opposition against those
who then were actually united in arms against the Parliament. But now that we
are supposed by these Authors to be dis-united as our enemies are, and that the
Magistracy is changed, our state of subordination somewhat varyed; How the
league of national union came to be ended
that the Links of our former chain are broken; and that the Commons act alone
without a King, as the Lords and Commons acted before without one, and that the
Scottish Nation by their invasion, and their attempting to divide the King from
us, and us one from another, by their declaration made preparatorily for
division, thereby to favor invasion afterward, have in the face of all the
world broken whatever was of National union and Peace, yea and all that which
was of confidence betwixt our selves at home, and (which was yet more horrid)
in encouraging one principal Army in Ireland to fall off from the advantages
it had against the bloody Rebels, to turn their swords against the Parliament
it self, only out of a by end of ambition, yea now (that the war being ended)
we are to enter into an Union of cohabitation or in cooperation (as they have
done in Scotland it self) with those who during their united hostilities
occasiond our National Union, are we I say after all this, in the self same
Union which they at first hoped might have been continued to them and us for
all our lives? That Union supposed the war which then was, with the rest, of
the circumstances, and if we wish the same effect or Union now, do we not
thereby wish the same cause or war again amongst us? as we were to oppose
arms to arms, so union to union, and certainly that Union of the Parliaments
of both Kingdoms was at an end, ever since the Scotch Army here received their
money, and returned, home, leaving the Delinquents of both Nations dis-united
and clearly reduced to receive condign punishment, (as the Covenant calls it)
at the respective judicatories of both Kingdoms; and if it ended not then, yet
it could not be consistent with their Declaration and divisions presently
after; and if not then, yet I am sure it could not be consistent with their
National invasion, and tampering to divide all in England and Ireland, the
effect whereof has been a change of Government here, and has made them
totally distinct forrainers to us.

The Demurrers premises in this Argument by a new logic, Of bringing those
who would divide us to condign punishment.
relate only to a State of public Union, and his conclusion relates only to
a State of public disunion, of the consequences whereof the Covenant says
nothing at all in any Article; It enjoyn^s the bringing of Delinquents to
condign punishment, and those private persons likewise among our selves, who
should help on, either divisions amongst us, or the invasion of either Nation
first. But whether should they be brought to punishment? The Covenant answers,
Either before the respective judicatories of each Kingdom (who only have
power to judge of what is Condign) or before no body.

It speaks likewise how we should unitedly venture our lives against the Enemy
which then was: The meaning of our utmost endeavors, and of all the days of
our lives in the Covenant.
it does not, or at least ought not to swear us to get the better of them for
ever, nor that we should in a rout or disunion end our lives against all
opposition, and without quarter. If the terms of our utmost endeavors, and
all the days of our lives, are to be understood literally, and that we must
not survive any violation of the Coevnant, then why do these Gentlemen, (who
conclude themselves in the State of the Covenant thus understood) think of
living till to morrow? The terms of forever, or for all the days of our lives
are not in our contracts to be understood naturally, but morally; For we find
it plainly in the Judicial law, that after a Jew had taken a servant, and bored
a hole through his ear he was (as the Text says) to serve him for ever,
although one of them might poss^bly have dyed the next day, and both of them
after a while might have been made captives to others. The law calls the
league of Marriage individua vitae consue^udo, a c^habita^ion for all the days
of our lives. For so it should be ex voto contrahenti^m, in the sincere desires
of the contractors; Yet we know, one ordinarily dies before the other, and that
many conditions may happen to legitimate their divorce afterward, though the
contract was never so religiously made in the presence of almighty God at first.

The Scots in their late proceedings with their King at the Hague page the 6.
interpret the words of utmost endeavor, as morally as we do here? For the
Commissioners of the Kirk said, they used their utmost endeavors to save the
Kings life according to Covenant; but how? They answer, that it was in Papers,
messages, Declarations, Testimonies, and Protestations only; they name not
war, or bloodshed, for they protested against that way last year, as
contrary to Covenant, when the Parliament of Scotland invaded us; and I hope
for the reputation of the religion they profess, they have not altered their
public commentary of that sacred Text contradictorily so soon.

To conclude, Either we are still in the Union of the end of the Govenant, or
we are not: If we be in it, then these break the Covenant, by seeking to
dis-unite us: If we be not in it, where then is the Article for our private
forming a war upon it? and under whom, if not under our English supreme
iudicatory? The Covenant how more then broke by the Scots hostility.
and if they call us not out to revenge that which was more then a bare falling
off from the Covenant last year amongst ourselves, (when the Scots exercised
such high hostilities, and were the first shatterers of all our frame (which
otherwise might by Gods blessing have cemented again) how durst these private
trumpets sound the alarm, and open the wounds of the Nations once more? Though
the respective iudicatory of that Kingdom now cannot make that which was once
done, undone; Yet by the present punishment of the Kirk, it is acknowledged
that they hold the Covenant to have been more then nationally broken, in regard
of the harm and damage which was done to us after it was broken. For there is
a great deal of difference betwixt ceasing to help according to a league, and
acting hostily contrary to it, especially when no such penalty is in such a
league expressed betwixt the parties.

But you will object, Obj.
that if the Covenant were so broken in one or two points by them, yet it does
not follow, that the whole Covenant is broken thereby, and dead in every part.

I have answered before that we are no longer obliged to any thing in it by the
way of League and Covenant; The reason here is, Ans. whither the national
breaking of one part of the Covenant put an end to the whole.
because here in leagues everything is to be observed con^unctively, otherwise
all is broken; which is so true and clear, that if we look upon Gods league
and Covenant with Israel, we shall find the same thing pronounced there. God
said, If ye keep my Commandments, I will be your God, and will maintain you
in your plenty, and in your Land: Yet he said, that if they broke any one
Commandment in their part of Covenant, they were guilty of all, and that all
should be at an end betwixt them: just as St. John in the conclusion of his
Revelation says, Who ever shall diminish but one word of that Book defaceth
the whole, and loses the whole benefit which he might expect thereby in the
holy City, by virtue of the second Covenant.

It is asserted, Ob.
that there is no clause in any Oath or Covenant, which in a common sense
forbids obedience to a present Government: To this the grand case of Conscience
answers, That the Covenant engages to another Government, therefore it forbids
obedience to this, and Oaths ought to be their own interpreters.

Here he at first begs the question, whether the Covenant can now engage us or
no? Ans.
seeing it has been proved, that that which is now nothing, cannot now engage
us to any thing; and conseqently our submitting to, and acting under the
present Government, cannot be contrary to Covenant; because things which are
contrary one to the other, must have actual being together at the same time.
But the very being of this Government, supposes the nullity of the Covenant,
whose death (as it was other where contrived before) gave life to that mutation
here afterward.

The Covenant (of all oaths) interprets itself least, especially in the
positive Government, which it would establish, and in Religion.
Secondly, Though the Covenant were still valid and in force, yet when we were
sworn to it first, it found us actually out of that Government here pointed
at, viz. Of King Lords and Commons. For that is the supreme Government of a
Country, which makes a supreme law there: But at that time the supreamest
humane law, which (according to these gentlemen's opinions) was ever made in
England or Scotland, or perhaps in all the world, was made without the King in
those Kingdoms, and against his dissent. For which reason the Covenant engages
not so positively for King or Kingly Government, as for the Union of the
Covenanters in any form and against any opposition; Though the Covenant were
in Force, yet a change of Government might be consistent with it.
Whereupon the Presbyterians when it was (as most conceived) in their power, to
restablish King or Kingly Government, they omitted both for many days of their
lives, without question; because they conceived it not a Government absolutely
necessary by Covenant. When D. Hamilton entered England so hostilely for that
end, and as he thought by virtue of Covenant, yet he was excommunicated for it
by the Oracles of the Covenant.

Lastly, The reign of the Covenant since the first day of its birth and
obligation, was never yet a R^gall reign, no not for one day anywhere; so that
the change which is, is not determinatly contrary to that principle, out of
which (according to the circumstances of security) any Government may be
molded for any place. For which reason if I should grant you that the Covenant
were not expired, and had not been so palpably broken, as it was betwixt the
Nations; yet Scotland (if they had pleased) might have been Governed by a
King, and England by a free State, and yet both consonantly enough to Covenant
and without any contrariety, because the circumstances of security in one
might have been different from the circumstances of security in the other;
which though different, might as well have been mutually maintained as their
discipline differing from ours might have been preserved by us. From all which
it appears, that that Oath is Cloudy in the positive or set Government which we
ought to have, and so cannot be justly called it is own interpreter, besides a
reformation according to the word of God; and the example of the best reformed
Churches, supposes such a latitude of Logic as would (if all sides should be
heard) give us as much exercise as all our wa^res have.

And certainly the Covenant is alike undefin'd in Religion and in civil
Government. How the Covenant necessarily points at some change of Government.
For we swore to bring the Church Discipline in the three Kingdoms, to as near
a similitude as the constitution of the places would bear, not into the very
same; and as for the civil Government, it was to receive its form in the
security of that, just as water does receive not only the figure of the Pot or
Glass into which it is put, but its conservation from being totally lost and
spilt. But how then will you free your self from this contradiction in
asserting that the civil State is unalterable by Covenant, when that of the
Church which forms the other is so much alterable? and seeing that of the
State receives from this, not only its form and being, but what ever else you
alone please to attribute to your security in it? From whence I conclude again,
that a change of Government is consistent with Covenant, and that a submission
to it in lawful things is much more, and consequently it ingages not to any one
determinate Government, and so is not against this of ours.

I believe it has been a frequent observation of many, who have calmely
converst with our Divines and others zealous for Presbytery, That they have
found them little satisfied with that sort of Presbytery, which our Parliament
modelled for us of this Nation; as having little affinity with the Covenant. My
belief is, that they in that discernd not the consequence of their own
dissatisfaction. Scotch Presbytery fit for any Government but the kingly.
For if their consciences regulated by Covenant, can admit no civil
Government, but the Kingly (which they so much argue for here) and if the
Covenant and a Scotch Presbytery (whose right they hold to be Divine) be
essentially linkt together, Then we and they may all of us learn, not only
from direct inferences, but from the declared experience of the Son, the
Father, the Grandfather, and great GrandMother, that is of the three last
Scotch Kings and one Queen. That if the Scotch Presbitery come out of the
Covenant then Kingly government cannot derive from it, because they are
jurisdictions incompatible and inconsistant in the same place, and if one can
conserve it, then may we say as much of the other. How much Mary Queen of
Scotland experienced of this, The judgment ^^ experience of Mary Queen of
Scotland.
let the world judge by that which she wrote both with ink in her Letters, and
with her blood on the Scaffold. For how came she to be Beheaded in England, but
by Mr. Knox (and the Kirkes having done little better than) put her into the
hands of those who could not keep her long alive with security to themselves?
Of King James.
King James has writ and argued largely concerning his dangers and sufferings
under it, and it is yet remembered in what Dialect they of the Presbytery were
wont to Preach and Pray against him to his face, and he not know how to remedy
it, or by what right to top theirs. When he came into England he professed his
deliverance from that subjection not of small satisfaction to his mind, and
therefore at this di^tance he contrived how to extinguish or check that ^ate
there, and after some progress in that work he himself dyed peaceably in a
milder Country, Of King Charles Vid. Scotch Declaration, 27 July 1649. p. 14.
But K. Charles with that Crown inherited the consequences of that undertaking,
for his first troubles began in the controversy of that Presbytery; and what a
preservation he thought the Covenant (from which it seems their Presbytery is
so inseparable) might be to him and what his fate was and who helped it on, nay
who diverted him from agreement here, all the world knows and in his writings
likewise he has shown to the world that he himself was not ignorant of it;
This only is the wonder, that in the midst of this their specious zeal for
Kingly Government, Of the Prince.
the Covenant should be so silent concerning Royal Posterity, or for their
succession, in case the Scots or English Soldiers had killed the King casually
before he had given them the satisfaction which they required, the
consideration of all this, with some other lately offered to the young Prince
at the Hague, by the Scotch Commissioners, and the satisfaction which they in
their late Declaration require from him, as they did from his Father, have
questionless made him scruple, so long at his adventure into that Country,
though so much invited. For they told him p. 14.15. That for longer then these
eight years, Vid. Decla. p. 8.10.
yea ever since that Queen Mary, their fundamental privilege has been to
assemble in Parliament; and to conclude there of themselves, either without
King or Kings Commissioners; and that if his Majesty refuse those their
reasonable desires, they shall be constrained in so great an extremity, to do
what is incumbent on them, to preserve Religion, Scotch proceed, at the Hague
with the Prince, p. 14.15
and the Kingdom from ruin. Here they plainly acknowledge, and assume that
supreme power and right, which shall be proved here more evidently toward the
conclusion.

But because I intend truth here in the simplicity of my Heart, and no way to
swell this Argument, either with passion in my self, or with scandal to any
man else therefore I shall sincerely unfold what has long been a mystery to my
self, and for confirmation of what I have asserted here so positively, I shall
give the reader the express word of our great English Covenant-champion, and
of Master Hinderson especially the Scotch Champion, betwixt whose fingers the
Covenant it self was molded.

O^^t ^^ind cafe of Oonscience, p. 14, says, But they who are now for the
right of the Son, and continuance of the Government, are as much against the
vices in and about him, as about the Father. And should he do as his Father
has done, they who are now for the performance of this Oath and Covenant,
would as truly join against him as against the Father.

Who can call this Regal Language? which yet will be looked on as the English
Presbyterian-alarum, though but by one man. He had done well in speaking of
the performance of Covenant by us all if he had offered a Catalogue of all that
which would fulfill the Covenant in all its terms without any further
interpretation; But that which is supposed eternal for time is likewise
infinite as to the matter which it may relate to by the application of humane
Logic.

The supreme power in Scotland in whom.
Mr. Hinderson in his Newcastle conference, with the King p.24.25. says, That
the reforming power is in Kings and Princes, Quibus deficientibus, it comes to
the inferior Magistrates, Quibus deficientibus, it descends to the gr^sse of
the people, but yet supposing still (as he says) that they be all of them
rightly, informed. For which reason though he concealed it from the King, yet
he meant, that the reformation of any of those three powers, according to the
Covenant must be judged and reformed afterward, by some other body of men here
not named. For I conceive that he who is ultimatly to judge of the Reformation
and of its public obligation, judges likewise of the reformers themselves
though never so high or never so low; and to this strange opinion he would
feign entitle two English Episcopal Champions Bilson and Jewel.

Here I must confess I was at a stand, concerning the nature and interest of
the Covenant, and was sorry to see that I was no plainlyer told whether it
would carry me (laden with so great a curse) nor where it would set me down.
At last I found in the same Author. 32.33. Speaking of the subordination of
powers, under which people were finally to obey, That he would not willingly
tell his Majesty, whether the Church was subordinate to the civil power,
either to King or to Parliament, or to both: For (quoth he) I utterly desol^ima
such a headship as the Kings of England have claimed, or such a supremacy as
the Houses of Parliament crave, with appeals from Ecclesiastiall Judicature to
themselves.

No man may think but Mr. Henderson meant this for the jurisdiction of
England, How the Scots state the supremacy of England in Scotland.
as well as of Scotland, for he spoke of Houses of Parliament which were
plural in England only; and though it may seem strange at the first view, to
hear one say, that the Scotch Nation state the supremacy of England in their
Country, or that they endeavor a direct change of Government, here, (which
they have indirectly attempted for a long while.) let every man judge not by
our subtilties, but by the Kirkes Declaration, 27 July, 1649, p. 11.12. Their
words are, That their King after his Oath of Coronation in Scotland, shall
assure them under his hand and seal, to injoyne the solmne League and
Covenant, establish and practice the Prerbyteriall Government, Directory,
Confession and Catechism, as they are approved by the several Assemblies of
their Kirk and Parliament, in ALL HIS DOMINIONS, and that he shall never
endeavor any change thereof.

No man will say but States like judges ought to act, How the Scotch
Presbyterians and ours oppose one another.
ex bono and aequo conjunctively. So that though these things which here they
would impose upon us perpetually, were never so good, yet they being
unequitably derived upon us from their supreme judicatory (in whose possession
we are not so fully now, as they were last year in ours) we ought to abominate
their design, as much as they might the like obtrusion of their Presbitery
from hence, without power there to rectify it ever after. For these
Presbiterians with us grant* That good and lawful things may not be practiced
under a power unlawful, as they say the Scots would be here.

However here I at last found who was my supreme right Magistrate in the Kirk^
sense, but then I conceived I was in a great snare, because I saw the jus
publicum of a Kingdom totally though secretly changed. I saw all things of
direct religion, and whatsoever related collaterally to its security, lodged
there, and by the Kirk prejudged from the judgment of all other authorities
in Scotland especially. But because religion and its security draws in all
humane concernments, and that two supreme collateral powers cannot stand in
one and the same place, in the same time, for the same person, but for contrary
actions, therefore I knew not whither of the two supreme powers the
Ecclesiastical or the Civil I should in this case throw away, Two supremacies
in the same place, how in^^^sistent.
for they could not in this contest by the judgment of any be both obeyed
together; and I stood in a miserable case betwixt a Jaylour and a Devil the
Kirk giving me to the Devil if I obeyed the Civil power and the Civil power
giving me to the Jaylour if I obeyed the Kirk, which was (to speak the truth)
the State of the whole Kingdom of Scotland last year, betwixt the the Kirkes
excommunication, and the Parliaments Order which authorized Duke Hamiltons
expedition, in Vindication of the Covenant here: In which difference we have no
reason but to like the effect, however we may dislike such a cause here.

Wherefore to answer this ^scruple, I positively say, That in whatsoever is of
Pact betwixt man and man, or of policy in the Covenant, I ought solely to
follow the civil Magistrate, and the Church here ought to follow the
Magistrate likewise, as a case relating to the disquits to the wars, and to
the recovering the peace of earthly Kingdoms: If otherwise, then the civil
jurisdiction ought clearly to be managed by the Ecclesiastique; which is
stated so no where (that I know of) but in Romagna and Duchy of Ferrara and
the other places belonging to the Pope. This I speak not as desirous to detract
any thing from the sacred function of the Ministry as it contains it self in
its own function, no man being able rationally to object any thing wherefore
some might not ex Officio, be deputed to excite others to virtue and sanctity
of life. But yet who can say they are not subject to the infirmities of
ambition, avarice, and severe passions as well as other men? or have not our
Antagonists (whether they would or no) observed them in these cases of worldly
rights and interests, to have as oppositly, yet as peremtorily differed one
from another, as people of any family ever did? The Devil not being able to
get the Text on his side, by his wiles often got the commentary, so that we are
to be excused, if we hold many things in Churchmen, to be but as an Apohrypha
at best, which yet for esteem sake is alloted a place before anything else,
next after the genuine Text,

Having thus openly stated the scruples of my own and of many more consciences,
and to take off maskes not from the faces, but from the consciences of these
three, and the multitude of other Scotch Casnists, who have talked so speciously
for our Covenant, Vindication of an Heirs just Title, our submitting to it, and
joining with others immediately, Whether atrue Title does (according to
Covenant) authorize obedience
least right suffer wrong one day; I cannot (I say) but ask the same men
plainly; What difference in effect they find^, betwixt the Titles and right of
the Prince of Wales, and of the n^w King of Scotland, notwithstanding all their
obligation of Covenant, to submit to him as such?

It is not enough by Covenant to preserve an aerie Title only to a Prince, and
by the same Covenant, to suspend all the rest of his solid power, and right?
certain^ly his Royal commands (notwithstanding all this talk) are no more
obeyed in Scotland now, then the Episcopal commands of our Countryman, the
Bishop of C^alcedon are now obeyed in Turkey. The King of ^ Scotlands present
case, and the actual change of Government there by their interpretation of the
covenant


But what hinders him from exercising any Kingly right in Scotland as yet? The
Covenant which is not yet satisfied. How is it then, that some of our
Presbyterians say, that the same Covenant indispensably opens the door to him
here? If the ^ing ask the Scots why they put the Law of the Covenant so to his
obedience, (...) the first thing which determines all his other rights
afterward? They can only say, that they swore it in his Fathers reign, and
it is now eternal. Though I censure nothing here, yet I cannot but
conclude-hence; That they of themselves, as well as our Parliament, have made a
Law above all other Laws, (and more then a reformable Magna Charta) For the
Government of the Kingdom which may be exercised according to it, without
Kings, and against Kings.

Against Kings.
The first thing which was ever offered to him from the Kingdom of Scotland,
was an authority by far transcending his own, viz. that of excommunication. For
(as their late proceedings with him at the Hagu^ show) he was by that subtilty
tried whether he would refuse first to acknowledge James Graham (alias
Montrosse) or that great power of the Churches, Page 18.
by which he might be awed to greater things afterward. To back this likewise
the Commissioners of the Synod said (p. 22) that they negotiated with him in a
capacity altogether, Page 22.
distinct from the Commissioners of Parliament, as being persons commissioned
by the Kirk, which is commisioned with a Iusdivinum Our Bishops certainly
never undertook such a jurisdiction and supremacy, and unless these had
witnessed so much of themselves to all the world, no one would believe that in
such a poor Country, and so much form of Religion, there could be such high
passions of ambition.

Besides if it be a true rule, That he who is the maker, ought to be the
interpreter of a Law, then let all the world observe one thing, That the Kirk
having made the Covenant (as the principle of all supreme rights both of State
and Religion) then they alone ought to give the interpretation of it from time
to time; as they de facto did not only last year, contrary to the
interpretation of their own Parliament, but also for many years together have
peremptorily pressed it upon ours: So that it makes a fundamental change of
Government there, though differently from what our Parliament has made here,
the jus publicum both of Religion and security of State with them, lying in the
Covenant, and that lying in the breasts of Churchmen, chosen by one another: and
our's lying in the power of Laymen, chosen by the People, and judging by the
Common Laws of equity and necessity, and of the word of God.

It were in vain to say the Kirk only recommends their interpretation to the
State. The interpretation of the Kirk is not recommendatory to the State
For last year they did it with a Penalty upon the Parliament, their whole
Army, and the body of the people which obeyed them; if it be a penalty to be
given to the Devil, and to be put into a State of eternal death. Wherefore
they there are, (or else none are any where) the true judges of right, who make
themselves judges of wrong and of punishment.

To conclude how practicable soever the Covenant was at first, The conclusion
or how erroneously soever we may now conceive it to be extinct, or to be a
principle fitted to justify a change of Kingly Government, which was actually
made first of all by it and their Presbytery in Scotland; yet it being
originally but a Political or condition all Oath, relating to our former
Unions when War w^, and to our cooperation under our respective Magistrates
only, not in a way contrary to the fifth Commandment; and that all the
Magistracy which we enjoy, and by whom we are now fully possessed, if they have
not laid it aside, yet call us not out to act the remaining part of it; and
that it interprets not it self: so that each private man is not made by it his
own Magistrate; and that there is no penal Article in it obliging us private
men to pursue a public War upon the Magistrates, or any other men's bare
neglect or misinterpreting it to themselves; who therefore can contrary to all
this, peremptorily warrant us now, yea necessitate us to begin, or assist to
the desolation of war and bloodshed upon it? especially seeing it is made
very dubious at least whither we be now tied to it at all or no: Further more
how good so ever it was at first, yea though that other Nation had not given it
it is mortal wound, when they attempted to give us ours, both in England and in
Ireland, (which was the cause of this effect of change of Government here) yet
if when it was in force, it should any other way have received a bad tincture
of passion or ambitious policy among our selves, why might it not by our
Magistrates order, have been as well carried out of our Churches as the brazen
Serpent was out of the Temple, after it was unhappily perverted to its wrong
end? If otherwise, and that it must at all hazards be indirectly made a snare
to peaceable consciences even after it is extinct (as has been proved) I shall
desire any pious spirit to judge, whither it does not in such a case deserve
much of Campanellas censure which he gave upon the Spaniards India Treasury,
that it was gotten in blood, sails home in a sea of blood, and never rests
till it be all laid out in blood.

The Reader may be pleased to take notice that though these replies for the
most part touch but on simple obedience to a Government supposed unlawful, but
commanding lawful things, yet they virtually extend to our acting under such a
Government. It is to be presumed that our adversaries not contesting profestly
what has been publicly argued in that point, do conceive the difficulties of
acting under involved in those of our submission to such a power. The
distinction of Active and Passive obedience, is but a nicety, and if one be not
a sin, the other is not. They are in a manner the same thing, derive from the
same Principle, and differ but gradually, just as the morning and the noone
light do, which derive both from the same planet. For he who takes pains to
furnish in a ^axe, and he who took pains to execute the office of a Judge or
of a Justice of peace in honest things by virtue of Commissions and Orders from
the same supreme (but illegal) Magistracy, do both of them what they do, by
virtue of the same original submission which is a passive obedience. If this
be otherwise, then (according to these authors opinion) we and all our
forefathers have sinned, in obeying those actively or passively, who by unjust
usurpation have come betwixt us and them, who derive from the first who were in
compact, unless the Lapse of time can justify the viciousness of an action
(which is impossible) or that we may lawfully obey those who plenarily possess
and protect us, and command us lawful things.

FINIS.
ERRATA. p. 2. loss, r. loose. imperciptibly r. imperceptibly. insinuation r.
insinuations. p. 2. l. 2. may be not r. may not be, beholding r. beholden. p.
6. heneration, r. generation p. 7. but in one, r and in one p. 9. understand,
r. understood. offices r. officers. p. 10. a businesses, r. business, p. 11.
pretends r. pretend, thereof r. therefore. p. 13. but it is a contradiction r.
is it a contradiction. p. 14. for detained r. attained for dislove, r. disolve.
p. 15. best to take heed r. best take heed p. 16. King r. Kings. p. 17. purpose
r. propose. p. 19. found r. swound. p. 22. at last r. at least. p. 31. drive r.
derive. p. 33. ply, r. comply, for or, r. nor p. 34. large, r. subjection. p.
39. person r. persons next r. rest. p. 4 r. change r. chance. p. 42. true to
religion r. to true religion. p48. dispense him of it, r. dispense with him for
it.


