THE ENGLISH VINEYARD VINDICATED BY JOHN ROSE Gardener to His MAJESTY, at his
Royal GARDEN in St. James's.

Formerly Gardener to her Grace the Duchess of Somerset.

With an Address, Where the best Plants may be had at easy Rates.

LONDON, Printed by J. Grismond for John Crook, at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1666.

TO THE KINGS Most Sacred MAJESTY.
May it please Your Majesty,
BEING by Your MAJESTY'S Grace and Favor advanced to the Supreamest Glory of
our Profession, which is to be qualified Your Majesty's Gardener; I thought it
most agreeable to my Duty, to render Your Majesty this account of my Labor,
and do supplicate as well Your gracious Acceptance of what I Offer, as Your
Pardon for my Presumption; if at least the shortness of the Discourse, or the
meanness of the Author may bring it any prejudice; when the great Augustus was
pleased that Caius Valgius's book of a few Herbs, and Moecenas, that a Pamphlet
concerning the nature of Onions only should be inscribed to them: Sir,
dedicate the Prince of Plants to the Prince of Planters, Your Majesty: This
Royal Title, as Your Majesty's great affection and encouragement to all that is
truly Magnificent and Emolumental in the Culture of Trees and Fruit, has
worthily acquird; so has it given instance to thousands of Your Majesty's
Subjects, whose glory it is to transcribe after your great Example for the good
of the Ages to come.

I know Your Majesty can have no great opinion of our English Wines, as
hitherto they have been ordered; but as I persuade my self it is not altogether
from the defect of the Climate, at least not in all places alike; nor, I am
sure, of the Industry of Your Majesty's Subjects; but in somewhat else, which I
endeavor to encounter in these few Papers; so if by Your Majesty's gracious
Acceptance of the Essay, Gentlemen shall be encouraged to Plant those sorts of
Vines which I here recommend, and to Cultivate them by my direction; that
precious Liquor may happily once again recover its just estimation, be the
product of Your Majesty's Dominions, and answer the ambition of

May it please Your Majesty, Your Majesty's most obedient Subject and Servant,
JOHN ROSE.

THE ENGLISH VINEYARD VINDICATED. THE PREFACE OR Occasion of this Discourse.
BEing one day refreshing my self in the Garden at Essex-house, and amongst
other things falling into discourse with Mr. Rose, (then Gardener to her Grace
the Duchess of Somerset) about Vines, and particularly the Cause of the
neglect of Vineyards of late in England; he reasoned so pertinently upon that
Subject (as indeed he does upon all things, which concern his hortulan
Profession) that conceiving how greatly it might oblige many worthy and
ingenious Persons, lovers of Plantations, and of the noblest parts of it; I was
easily persuaded to gratify his modest and charitable inclinations, to have
them communicated to the world. The Matter therefore of the ensuing Discourse
being totally his, receives from me only its form, and the putting of his
Conceptions together; which I have dressed up in as rural a garb as I thought
might best become, and recommend them for Practice. I have turned over many
both late, and ancient Books (far exceeding this in bulk) pretending to direct
us in our choice of the Fruit, and the Planting of Vineyards: But I do
ingenuously profess, that none of them have appeared to me more rational, and
worthy our imitation, than these short Observations of Mr. Roses, and which I
so much the more value, as I consider them the native production of his own
Experience, without obtruding any thing upon the reputation of others, which is
now become the most pernicious Imposture that flatters us into so many mistakes
and errors; whil^st men follow such Directions as they meet withal in Print,
or from some Monsieurs new come over, who think we are as much obliged to
follow their mode of Gard'ning, as we do that of their Garments, 'till we
become in both ridiculous. I might here add something of ostentation, by
deduceing the Pedigree of Vineyards from the great Oriental Patriarch of them
to this day; But it will be of more encouragement to us, when we shall consider
how frequently they were heretofore planted in this Country of ours, as they
still continue to be in Places of the very same Latitude abroad; so as the
strange decay of them amongst us for these latter Ages, must needs proceed from
no other cause then that of our own neglect, and the common vicissitude of
things. We behold it in that of Timber to our grief, and the several (almost
lost) species of some: Why have we not as goodly Masts for our Ships as our
neighbor Countries? Why is the Elm, the Walnut, and the Chestnut so decayed
and rare amongst us, more than formerly they were? 'But of this I have
elsewhere given an Sylva.
account more at large. The Vineyard is now before you.

Philocepos.

depiction of trees

THE ENGLISH VINEYARD VINDICATED.
CHAP. I. Of the several sorts of Vines, and what Grapes do best accommodate
with our Climate in England.
UPon long, and diligent observation of the Species; I do chiefly recommend
these following, to be the most proper and natural for the Curious in our
Country to exercise their Industries upon, as from whence they may promise
themselves a recompense worthy of their expectations.

1. The small Black grape, by some called the Cluster-grape, a precoce and
early ripe fruit.

2. The white Muscadine early ripe also, and a well known grape.

3. The Parsly-grape, so denominated from the shape and indentures of the
leaf; it bears somewhat a smaller raisin or berrie, but it is of a brisk and
delicious taste, mature betimes.

4. The Muscadella a white grape, not so big as the Muscadine though as soon
ripe.

5. The Frontiniaq, both white and red.

6. A new white Grape, ripe before the Muscadins, which I found in His
Majesty's Garden in St. James's, with a red wood and a dark green leaf: it
ripens as soon in standard as against some Walls, and is a closer bunch than
the Muscadine. These are the kinds which I prefer before any other for the
storing of a Vineyard, although there are several other sorts, which I pass by,
as not so applicable to our design, though very worthy of the Curious, and
those who affect variety, because they will require the artificial reflection
and assistance of walls to bring them to maturity.

CHAP. II. Of the Soil, and Situation of a Vineyard in England.
LEt election be made of a light sandy ground, if it be a little strong upon
the surface it is not to be rejected: and for its situation, I would choose
that side or declivity of an hill lying to the South, or South-west, which if
favored with other hills somewhat higher, or woods on the North and East, would
be so much the better for the breaking the severitie of those pinching
quarters: This light soil having a bottom of Chalk or gravel, under a surface
of two foot in depth, and free from Springs, cannot be too hot, or dry;
provided it be not addicted to health; for commonly nothing grows kindly where
that is apt to over spread; but if given to brambles, it is a promising sign^
and infinitely to be preferred before the other; for most confident I am, (nor
do I speak it upon conjecture only) that there is no Plant whatsoever so
connatural to the Vine for soil and situation as this repent, and humble
shrub: Those who shall please to take notice of the places in which brambles
most flourish; which are for the most part in the driest banks, hilly, stony
and hot places; will easily infer how much they resemble the Vine in this
particular: True it is, they will also come up in wettish and moist places
also; but it is in the other where they grow large and strong, bear goodly
berries and in most plenty; Not that I would hereby advise any to plant their
Vines amongst the brambles; but those places well grubb'd and trenched, are not
to be rejected, because they commonly thrive in such grounds as are apt for
Vines, and where I would make choice of a spot to plant a Vineyard in.

That I have insisted on this remark, and of having a Chalky or Gravelly
bottom, is from much experience, having never found, but that in such hard
Stony or Chalky ground (provided it were not loamy) Vines do exceedingly
flourish; especially if the land have layne a good while in repose, and not of
many years exhausted hausted by the plow, where the green swarth covers those
gentle risings amongst the downs, not too much exposed to the rudeness of the
weather. Nor are Gentlemen to be therefore deterred, because this late age has
neglected the Planting of Vineyards, that therefore it is to no purpose now to
begin; since the discouragement has only proceeded from their misinformation on
this material article of the choice of soil and situation, whilst giving ear
to our foreign Gardners coming here into England, they took up those rules
which they saw to be most practiced in Countries of so little affinity with
ours, and without having that due consideration of the Climat, which is so
necessary and behoveful to Plantations of this nature: Hence they for the most
part, made continual choice of our best and richest land, without regard of
other circumstances; not considering that the deepness and fatness of the
Earth, contributes more to the luxury of the branches, amplitude of leaves and
precipitation of the roots than to the just and natural stature of the stem,
plenty, and excellency of the fruit, for which alone these Plantations are
desirable. In sandy or loamy land Vines indeed grow more abundantly, than where
the sand, gravel, or chalk are ingredients, whose surface of mould is not so
profound, a foot and half being sufficient; but this rock of chalk and gravel,
does in the interim hinder the root from going too deep, forceing it to spread
the more toward the top, by which means the tender and fiberous roots
receive the natural, sweet and benign showers, dews, and influences, which
impart both life and pregnancy to these noble Plantations: By this they receive
the cherishing warmeth of the Sun, impregnated with a certain volatile salt,
which produced near the surface of the Earth only, is drunk in by the delicat
pores and apertures of the latent roots whilst the deeper buried, deprived of
these prolifical advantages, grow only fertile it watery and insipid leaves o^
branches without fruit; the mould or matrix in which they lie, being altogether
flugish and unactive for want of heat and the prolific embraces of the Sun.
Hence it is we find so many Vines, though plentiful of branches, so thin of
joints, and those even of the same kind, planted in better ground, as thick of
knots as a man's finger is of joints, from whence those shootes are produced
which our English Vigneron should preserve at pruning time to set his fruit,
and expect his Vintage from.

But to return to the situation again. Though Land should be so qualified as
we have described it for the soil; yet if it have not also that declivity and
aspect we mentioned, it cannot be so fit for our purpose: for first, hills are
not so subject to the morning foggs and infectious mists as lower grounds are;
besides, flat lands do not so soon enjoy the benefit of the rising Sun, nor
does it stay so long upon them in the evening by some hours in the day; for
since this solar and generous Plant does above all things affect to be dry,
especially, after the fruit begins to be formed and approach to its maturity
there is nothing more noxious to it, then at that season, to be infested with
the cold and heavy damps of these foggs; and it is in that, as much as in any
other thing, wherein other more Southern tracts have the advantage of us, that
these enemies are dispersed and scattered sooner than with us; and which
threfore we must strive to encounter by the advantages we have hitherto
neglected; but which we may surmount by making choice of a more lofty situation.

CHAP. III. How to prepare the ground for the Plantation.
I Have already wished for a turfy surface, and which has not been broken up,
or sowed of a long time, and have alleged my reasons for it: But now in July,
when the Earth is very dry and combustible, plow up the swarth, and when it is
very crusty, dispose the turfes in small heaps, burn, and spread the ashes
over the land, to be trenched in December or the January following. I advise
you to lay your dried materials but in little heaps, from an observation which
I have made in Wilt-shire, and particularly the Downs of Salisbury-plaine,
that where they congest too much together, the excessive fire and heat (which
they require to reduce them to ashes) over burns the earth, to the great
prejudice of those salts and spirits which a more moderate fire would preserve
from evolition and flying away; an Instance of this we have in the Charring of
Wood for Coal, the small dust whereof is a powerful ingredient to the
improving of the roots of Trees, moderately made use of.

The ground thus prepared; when you begin to trench, contrive your ranges so,
as they may run thwart your hill, that is, let the ridges pass from East to
West; my reason is, because the Vines standing thus in ranks; the rising and
setting of the Sun will by this means pass through the intervals, which it
would not do in the common posture of North and South; for the Sun being low at
its first and last appearance above the Horison (and at which time by reason of
our foggs and mists, we chiefly stand in need of his assistance) those rows
which pass from North and South will shade one the other, and so hinder this
material effect. If it be objected that Vines being so planted, lose that at
Noon, which they gain in the Morning and Evening; I reply, that the Sun at the
season of ripening, is high enough for rows of Vines of three foot distance,
to shine with, and dart its beams even over the very Plants without the least
interception: whereas upon its rising or setting, it would be almost totally
Ecclipsed by the Collateral posture of the opposite ranges.

CHAP. IV. How to Plant the Sets.
THe Ground in this order, prepare a measure of three-foot, and by a line
strained, dig the Earth a foot deep or the single spit, cleansing the Trench,
and shouling up the crumbs that the bottom be clean, and the edges sharp,
which you must guide by your measure, that so all the trenches may be of an
equal size. This done, fit your Plants, Layers, or Roots so pruned both roots
and branches, that you leave not aabove two or three eyes of the young wood
upon them. Then Plant them in the bottom of your Trenches, so as the roots
may lie Cross them, and somewhat sloaping on a strait line as near as may be
guessed. In this posture, cover them three or four inches with the mould; and
order it so, as the upper part of your plant be two or three inches lower than
the ground, that when the ridges come to be levelled, the top of your sets may
be even with the area. Thus proceed to plant them at the distance of two foot
one from the other, that so the ranges may have a yard interval between. This
done, take long dung or litter, and strew it in the Trenches, of a reasonable
thickness to cover the Earth, and preserve the roots from those dry and
peircing winds which would otherwise infinitely prejudice them; this will
likewise maintain them cold and fresh in Summer, till they have struck and
taken hold of their Stations: After this they will need no more for the
present, but that you diligently haw, and cleanse them from weeds, before they
come to seed; and in this labor of hawing, work a little of the sides of your
ridges with your instrument toward the roots of your newly planted Vines, to
comfort and establish them. This Diagram refers to the order and distance of
planting the sets.

CHAP. V. How to dress, Prune, and Govern the Plantation.
THe first pruning of the new set Vineyard shall not begin before the January
after, and then cut, off all the shootes as near as you can possibly, sparing
only the strongest and most vigorous to each root, which you should leave with
two eyes of young wood; and so let them rest till May the second year after
planting, and then be sure to clear the roots of all collateral suckers which
do but rob, and exhaust your sets; and leave none but what break out of those
two or three eyes of the young wood above mentioned, continuing your care to
suppress the weeds, and in your hawing to cherish the roots of your plants with
some of your ridgearth as you were taught in the former Chapter. And thus you
shall also govern your Vineyard the third year, cutting off all the shoots very
close in the same Month, and sparing only the stoutest which is next the
ground; yet so, as you leave him not above three or four eyes. This done dig
all your Vineyard and lay it very level; but with great care that in the work
you do not cut or wound any of the maine roots with your spade; as for the
younger roots, it is not so material, for they will grow but the thicker. It is
in this third year that you may peradventure enjoy some fruit of your labor,
which if answerable to your hopes, will admonish you to provide for props,
which must be made of Hazel, Ash, or Oak, about four foot in length, of the
thickness of a broom-stick, which being conveniently applied to the North side
of your plant, you shall in May (rubbing off all the theives which spring from
the Roots of the plant, and leaving only such as come from the stem and like to
bear fruit) bind up the shoots of those three Eyes which you were ordered to
leave, as the most probable to be bearers that year, as in June you will
discover. When the fruit is of the size of birding shot, break off the branches
with your hand at the second joint above the fruit; and tie the rest to the
prop: I say, you must break, not cut your Vines, because wounds made now with
a knife or sharper instrument, are not so apt to heal; and therefore the
season for this work is in the very heat of the day when they are apt for
consolidation, without prejudice to the fruit. But it is not regularly till the
fourth year that you can expect any store of fruit; when governing your
Vineyard as before you are directed, fail not of a due provision of props
sufficient for your whole plantation.

CHAP. VI. How to order, and cultivate the Vineyard after the first four years
'till it needs renewing.
THe following years after the first bearing, you will likely have three or
four shoots to every Plant. In January therefore, or December, prune all away
save the strongest, which you may leave for a standard about four or five foot
high, cutting the rest very close to the body of the Mother-plant; (I mean such
as are small and trifling shoots) reserving such as you find about the bigness
of an handsome reed, to which you shall leave two or three eyes next the
ground. Then apply a prop to every of your Vines, and tie to them the Master
shoots which you were ordered to leave four foot high, with some tender Oziers
about one foot from the Earth, bending the top of these shoots to the next
prop, about two foot from the ground, that so your ranks may stand in form of
Arches, whilst the eyes that you spared now in dressing, shall the May
following, be bound to the props for the next years bearing, to the great
increase of your fruit: Then in May, or the beginning of June (when the little
raisins are of the bigness before mentioned) stop their second joint above the
fruit as you were there taught, but be careful to leave the strongest shoot to
be the standard plant of the year ensuing.

In August, when the fruit begins to turn and ripen, break off such shoots as
you shall find too thick upon those you pruned in May; but this work you must
do with discretion, and only so as to le^ in the Sun for the ripning of the
over shadowed Clusters, which you ought to leave skreen'd with some of the
foliage, as well to preserve your fruit from the scorching of the Sun, by day,
as the dews which fall in the night, to both whose invasions it is obnoxious.

And now observe, that the standards you last tied to the props at a foot-high,
and whose tops were bent to be next, will the following year be grown Old wood:
In the first Pruning season therefore, or January after, remember to cut them
close to the ground, supplying the places with the strongest shoot of your
young wood, which you left four foot high for the purpose, and which you must
order as you have been taught the year before; pruning the restat the very
Earth, and leaving two eyes to each of the strongest shootes as is there
rehearsed: And now give your Vineyard an ordinary digging with the same care of
the master-roots, and till the season of this work, you may permit your props
to stand.

We the more insist upon an early pruning, to hinder their bleeding; though
some are of opinion, that this superfluity of Vines, preserving the young and
forward shoots the backwarder in April, prevents the blasts of May; for this
cause many will not cut their plants till March, but they spend too much of
their Vigor in these late amputations, and are as much in danger of blasting
for want of competent strength to support the tender shoots; whereas pruned in
November or the following month, they never bleed, but being cut before the
rising of the sap, their wounds become hard and dry; and the spirits of the
Plant kept in, makes them break out the more vigorously at the eyes, furnishing
the branches with proud and turgid buds.

CHAP. VII. How, and when to manure your Vineyard with Compost.
WHen through often stirring, you find your Vineyard poor, (which the weakness
of your crop will soon discover) Prune your Vines as you are instructed; and
spread good rotten dung mixed with lime, over the whole ground; let this lie a
full winter, that the virtue of it may be washed into the Earth, and this way
of Stercoration is infinitely to be preferred before the digging, and mingling it
with your mould: But if you will have it in prefection, lay your materials in a
large heap, in some convenient place near your Vineyard: A layer of fresh and
natural Earth taken from the Surface, and another of dung a pretty deal
thicker; then a layer of Earth again, and so successively, mingling a load of
lime to every ten loads of dung, will make an admirable Compost for the
purpose; but your Magazine will require the maturity of two or three years, and
to b^ covered with the former qualified Earth, and somewhat shaded, so as
neither the Sun too much draw from it, nor the violent raines too much dilute
it.

With this Composition, after you have (as we advised) prund your Vines (for
which the months of January and February may be allowed) dung your whole
Vineyard; About thirty Loads I suppose may well dress an Aker; but lay, and
spread it equally, and then you may turn it in, with a slight digging, but not
too deep; and shall in a short time find it as light and tractable as the
freshest Farth, which property we ascribe to the Lime. When this is done,
re-establish your props, and with your foot tread the Earth close to the roots,
to defend their fibers from the dry winds of March, which will even penetrate
the looser mould; but this work should be performed in a dry, not in a wet
season; lest the Earth bind too fast, and for other obvious reasons.

And thus I have showed how Vineyards in England may be Planted, governed, and
perpetuated with undoubted success, omitting theless material curiosities to
the larger Volumes, and those who have more leisure (I fear) than skill.

TO THE READER.
LEt the Reader be pleased to take notice, that I have not only endeavored to
furnish all lovers of these Plantations with the best Instructions I am able
concerning the choice and propagation of Vines; but my self also with so
plentiful a Stock of Sets and Plants of all those Sorts which I chiefly
recommend, that those who have a desire to Store their Grounds, may receive
them of me at very reasonable Rates.

FINIS.

