GODS HOUSE, OR THE HOUSE OF PRAYER, Vindicated from profaneness and
sacrilege. Delivered in a Sermon the 24. day of February, Anno 1641. in
Southampton.

By Alexander Rosse, his Majesty's Chaplain in Ordinary.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1642.

To the Orthodoxe Reader.
GOod Reader, it was the least of my thoughts to publish this Sermon in print,
but that now I am forced partly by the solicitation of my friends, and partly
by the slanderous speeches of some new upstart Sectaries in this Town, whose
unreverent gesture in the Church, disesteeme of Church prayers, and
disgraceful speeches against the outward splendor of Gods house, gave me
occasion to Preach it; and now their ignorant and malicious censures thereof
have necessitated me to publish it, One calls it a pernicious Sermon, another
says it was fit to be preached at Rome, a third, that it is false doctrine. I
have preached many hundred Sermons in this Town, I have spent twenty five
years in this peaceable and well governed Corporation, I have studied
Divinity these thirty six years, and till now I never knew that I delivered
erroneous doctrine; but perhaps I may be blind in my own cause, therefore I
have exposed this Sermon to the public view, that if there be any passage in
it heterodox, I may (being convinced by the judicious and learned Reader)
recant and retract, if there be none, that my credit may be vindicated from
the censorious clamours of such ignorant critics.

A. R.

MATH. 21. 13. It is written, my house shall be called the house of prayer, but
you have made it a den of thieves.
THe first part of the text is written in Isaiah, Isaiah 56*
I will make them joyful in mine house of prayer: and my house shall be called
an house of prayer for all people. The second part is written in Jeremy;
Jeremy
Is this house, which is called by my Name, become a den of robbers in your
eyes? It is written then, and that is more then a bare tradition. And if he
that is the God of truth, and Lord of the house, is content to back his
sayings with a Scriptum est, why should his pretended Vicar obtrude his own
dictates upon the Church without scriptum est, or warrant of Gods word, as
though his (...), or bare word were sufficient. 2. My house, God then wants not
a house. 3. Shall be called, It is not then namelesse: men build houses, and
call them by their names, shall not God have the same liberty? 4. S. Mark
says, shall be called of all Nations; his Churches then in England shall, and
should be called houses of prayer, as well as the Temple of Jerusalem. 5. S.
Luke says, My house is the house of prayer, it is not then nicknamed, for as
it is called, so it is indeed, the house of prayer. 6. The house of prayer, and
good reason for it; By prayer it was dedicated, for prayer it was built and
consecrated, from prayer it is denominated, and our prayers in it are heard and
accepted, he that hears prayer in every place, will not shut his ears when
we pray to him in this place. If the prayer of Jonas was heard, when he said,
he would look toward the holy Temple, shall not our prayers be heard, when
they are poured out by us in his holy Temple. He that heard Moses on the Sea
shore, Eliah in the Desert, Jonas in the Whales belly, Job on the dunghill,
Daniel in the Lions den, the three Children in the fiery furnace, will
doubtl^sse hear them that call upon him in his own house; What place so meet
for preferring of Petitions, as the Court of Requests? and where shall we
honor God better by prayer, then in the place where his honor dwells. Gods
name is fit to be invoked in Gods house, himself has promised, that his eyes
shall be open, and his ears attent unto the prayer that is made in this
place. (...). 7. 15.
For now (says he) I have chosen and sanctisied this house, that my Name be
there for ever, and my eyes, and my heart shall be there perpetually.

Therefore Solomon in his dedicatorie prayer desires, that when the Land is
afflicted with Death, Pestilence, Blasting, Mildew, Caterpillars, or any other
calamity, that God would open his eyes upon, and hearken to the supplications
made in this place, (...). 6.
that he would hear from his dwelling place in heaven, and forgive. This house
then is the house of prayer. But, etc. this But, is the fly that spoils the
Apothecaries ointment, and the Colloquintida that marres the pottage. You, that
is, covetous Priests, captious Scribes, and hypocritical Pharisees, who indeed
are painted sepulchers, whited walls, whose religion consists in large
Phylacteries, broad fringes, long prayers, which devour Widows houses, the
outside of whose vessels are pure and washed, within full of filth and
corruption, under sheep skins are ravenous wolves; But fromi nulla fides,
trust not outsides, all is not gold that glisters. Malice, pride,
selfe-conceipts are never more dangerous, then when shrouded with Pharisaicall
purity. These were called in Greek (...), in Hebrew Paratzim, that is
Separatists, for other men they counted profane, Gam haerets, people of the
earth, but themselves the only holy men in the Land. With others they would
not converse for fear of defilement; therefore the proud Pharisee thanked God,
that he was not as other men, nor like that Publican, who notwithstanding went
home justified: It is easily seen of what religion these Pharisees were, and
their avaritious Priests, they made no more reckoning of the Temple, then of a
stable, a sheepfold, a pigeon house, a counting room, for else what did oxen
and sheep, pigeons and money changers do there? what is that house built for
men, or for beasts? for Jehovah, or for Mercury? Thus you see the quality of
the persons reproved. But what have they done that they must be lashed? they
have not pulled down the Temple and burned it, as the Chaldeans did: nor have
they robbed it of its treasures, as Pompey and Crassus did? Nor have they so
grossly profaned it as Antiochus and Caligula did: nor have they carried away
the Cherubims, the Arc and propitiatory, the golden Candlesticks, the Altars,
and lavers, nor any other ornaments and utensils of it, as some furious
Pharisees of this age have done in some places, where they have pulled down
Chancels, defaced Cathedrals, sold away Organs, Bells, Challices, and the very
lead of the Churches, giving them a warmer cover of thatch, using them as that
profane Emperor used Jupiters and Aesculapius images, from the one pulling
away his golden beard, saying, the gods must always look young, and from the
other his golden cloak, affirming that a frize coat would keep him warmer.
Surely the Jewish Pharisees did not go so fa^re in this impiety, therefore
they were only whipped with cords; But those Christian Pharisees that have
laid violent hands upon the houses of God, have been partly in themselves, and
partly in their posterity whipped with Scorpions. Now though the Jews did not
pull down nor carry away, yet they did profane that holy place, by making it
a den of thieves. Was not now Bethel become Bethaven, the house of God, the
house of iniquity? Dens and Caves sometimes have been Mansion places for good
men; David, Daniel, Elijah, the Prophets in Achabs days, and many more of whom
the world was not worthy, dwelt in dens and caves of the earth; But the Temple
is not made a den for such men, but for thieves, and the worst sort of thieves,
not (...) secret thieves, but (...) open robbers, robbing God of his honor,
the people of their money, and the Temple of its holiness. But I have held you
too long in the outward portch, let us now enter into the Temple, and view
first the use, secondly the abuse of it. As it is a house of prayer, that is the
use, but as it is a den of thieves, that is the abuse of it. In handling the
Use, consider first the general name, an house; 2. the particular name, a
Temple; 3. The possessor, God. 4. The end, Prayer. In handling of which, I
desire not only your patience, but also your charitable constructions, for let
the flowers be never so wholesome, yet Spiders will suck thence nothing but
poison, and some are so uncharitably and superciliously censorlous, that what
relisheth not in the palate is accounted erroneous, but these are of the
ignoranter sort, therefore the less to be regarded, for ignorance will still
be an enemy to knowledge.

1. A house to distinguish it from the Tabernacle which properly was a moving
Tent or Pavillion, but no house. 2. A house in respect of habitation, for the
Lord has chosen Sion to be an habitation for himself, This shall be my rest
for ever, Psa. 132. 14.
here will I dwell, etc. Secondly it is called the Temple, a ^uendo, because God
favorably looks on it, and defends it. or a contemplando, for here men should
with reverence contemplate on the greatness and goodness of God. Templum, was
properly the heaven, as it was quartered out by the Soothsayers staff; a fit
term for Gods house, which is our heaven upon earth, for God dwells there,
his presence makes heaven; And these divine exercises of preaching, praying,
and praising of God, makes it heavenly; Here also we have the dew of heaven in
Baptism, and in the Eucharist, the bread of Life that came down from heaven.
Isay 14. 12, 13.
And so the King of Babel is to be understood, when he says he will climb up
unto heaven, and place his Throne among the stars; he means the Temple of
Jerusalem, and the Doctors of the Jews, Luke 18. 10.
in Greek it is called (...), sacred or holy. Two men went up into the Temple
to pray, in Greek, (...), into the holy house to pray, by which it is
distinguished from other houses, which in Scripture were never called (...),
holy houses. Neither was it ever known that aedes sacra, among the Latins
signified an ordinary house, but still a Church or Chapel being holy. 1. In
respect of God who ownes it, for our God is holy. 2. Of the worship done in it,
which is an holy worship. 3. Of the Ministers which serve in it, who are (...),
holy men. 4. Of the Sacraments administered in it, for they are holy ordinances.
5. Of the Angels and Saints who frequent it, (...) 3. 5
for they are an holy assembly; was God then mistaken when he bid Moses pull
off his shoes, etc. for the ground whereon he stood was holy ground? Or did
the Scripture err when still it calls the house of God the Sanctuary or holy
Temple. Surely if the Temple was holy, that contained the shadows of good
things to come: Much more holy are our Churches, in which we enjoy the
substance of things already come: it is therefore strange divinity to account
your houses as holy as the Church, and yet I hold no inherent holiness in
either. Surely S. Paul knew that the Church was holier then other other houses,
(...). 11. 22.
for he reproves the Corinthians for eating and drinking in the Church; what
(says he) have you no houses to ^at in? despise you the Church of God?
Therefore P. Martyr, a learned and reverend member of the reformed Church,
reproves sharply the abuse of walking, idle talking, bargaining, or irreverent
gesture in the Church, and reproves those Ministers that keep not fast the
Church doors, when there is no divine Service: As there is a time, so there is
a place for every thing. Again, in Hebrew the Temple is called Heikell, from
Iakell to prevail. For the Church is Palaestra a wrestling place, when we
wrestle here with God by prayer we prevail with him, when he wrestles with us
by his Word, then he prevails with us.

3. Consider the possessour or owner of this house, God, in the pronoune my, it
is his by the right of donation. David and Solomon bestowed this house on God,
they could not without sacrilege take it again from God. Our religious
sorefathers bestowed our Churches on Christ, and I hope their Children will not
prove so degenerate and irreligious, as to take them away from Christ, except
they will do as Ananias and Saphira, and then they shall be rewarded as they
were. 2. His house by the right of dedication, it was dedicated to God thrice;
1. By Solomon the 10. of September, the Sun being in the autumn Equinoctial.
2. When it was rebuilt after the captivity in the beginning of March, the Sun
being in the vernall Equinoctial. 3. When it was profaned by Antiochus
Epiphanes. Then Iud. Machabaeus dedicated it again about the 25. of December.
the Sun being in the Winter solsticie, the feast of which dedication was
honored by Christ's own presence, John 10.
and as the Temple, so our Churches are dedicated too. That is, appropriated,
consecrated, and sanctified by prayer, and invocation of Gods name, so that
what is sanctified is his and must not be profaned. 3. It is his house in
respect of the manifestation of his presence more then, then elsewhere, for
not only was he seen thus in shadows and representarions, but his voice was
heard also from off the Mercy seat, Numb 7. 89.
that was upon the Arc of the testimony from between the two Cherubims. Even
so Christ's voice is more heard, and his graces more seen in the Word and
Sacraments within our Churches then any where else. Where should the King be
more seen and heard then in his own house? 4. It Is his house by inhabitation,
for though all our houses be his because the earth is the Lords, and all that
therein is, yet this house is more specially his; for though he dwells every
where in his general providence, yet here he dwells more particularly in his
special favors; therefore we may say of our Churches, what Jacob said of
Bethel his Church then: the Lord is here and we knew it not. How terrible is
this place? this can be no other then the house of God, etc. the Tabernacle in
Hebrew was Hammisken, a dwelling place, and in Greek, a Church is called
(...), because God dwells in it. Therefore Nathan from God tells David, ^am 7 5.
that he shall build him an house to dwell in, for before God had no settled
abode, nor did dwell in any house from the time he brought the childrein of
Israel out of Egypt, but walked in a tent. Again, if the Church be his house,
we must not be so base minded, as to think a barn or stable good enough for
him; Barnes and stables are for threshers and hostlers, not for him whom the
heaven of heavens cannot contain. The high and lofty one that inhabiteth
Eternity, ought to be fitted with a house in some sort, answerable to the
greatness of his M^iestie; Chron.
Of this mind was Solomon, when he said, the house which I build is great, for
great is our God above all Gods, except it be in persecution and cases of
necessity, for then we must serve God, where we can, even in cryptis
subterraneall caves with the primitive Christians: but in the times of peace
and plenty, our Churches should be Basilicae, as they were called anciently,
kingly places, set for the King of Kings to dwell in, and they should be
(...), as they were wont to be called, that is comely and decent places, both
in respect of the structure without, and of the behavior of the congregation
within. I need not tell you, that parents expect from their children, masters
from their servants, Kings from their Subjects a reverent and decent behavior;
and is not the Lord of this house a Father, a master, a King, and we his
children, servants, subjects? If then he be our Lord, where is his reverence?
if our Father, where is his fear? The Lord will have his Sabbaths hallowed,
and his Sanctuary reverenced, Lev. 19. 30. For, says he, I am the Lord, and
this is the Lords house; called therefore of old (...); for he has some
things peculiar to himself, as his own Day, his own Feast, his own Table,
his own People, his own House. So then there is the Lords day, the Lords
table the Lords Supper, the Lords people, and the Lords house. Shall then the
Lords people in the Lords house, when the Lord speaks to them in his Word, or
they to him in their prayers, or when he appears to them in in his holy
Sacraments, behave themselves irreverently, unmannerly, indecently, in his
presence, and that under pretense of avoiding superstition? Dum vitant stulti
vitia, etc. This is to run from one extreme to a worse, ex funio in flammam.
And as you say, out of the frying pan into the fire. Religion indeed is
crucified, as Christ was between two thieves, viz. Superstition and
irreverence, which is a spice of Atheism; and truly of the two extremes.
irreverence is the worst; for superstition is like the Giant of Gath, with six
fingers and six toes on each hand and foot, having more then is required; But
Religion without reverence and outward decency, is like Adonibezec, without
fingers and toes, peccant in the defect, which is worse then in the excess. In
the purest times of the primitive Church, there were Ostiarij doore-keepers, to
debar from entering the Church obstinate Heretics, Idolaters, profane
livers, etc.

Lastly, seeing the Church is the house of our Father, we should delight to be
often in it. David was glad when they said to him, we will go up unto the
house of the Lord. He envies the happiness of the swallow and sparrow, that
make their nests in the Lords altars; he had rather be a doore-keeper in the
Lords house, then to dwell in the tents of Kedar. One thing, says he, have I
desired of the Lord, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord, all the days
of my life, to behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and to visit his holy
Temple. See what titles he gives to the Temple, fair, beauty, holiness, and
sometimes the beauty of holiness. Indeed holiness becomes his house for ever,
and so does beauty too; For as the Temple was the type of Christ's body, which
he himself calls a Temple, and in which dwelt both beauty and holiness, so
our Churches are types of that celestial temple above the new Jerusalem: Now
there is always a correspondencie between the type and antitype; our Temples
then should be beautiful to put us in mind of, and to elevate our affections
to that beauty which is in heaven. Therefore the ancient counsel of Gangra,
held in the purer times of the Church about 324. years after Christ,
pronounced Anathema against Eustachius and his adherents, who held that
Churches should be neglected, and public meetings in them left off, and that
there should be no other Churches, but men's private houses, and no other
meetings but conventicles; Si quis docet domum Dei contemptibilem esse, (...).
5.
(...) conventus qui in ea aguntur anathema sit; It were a shame if we should
not maintain his house, who maintains all our houses. Can we beautify our
own houses, seele them with Cedar, and paint them with Vermilion, and suffer
Gods house to lie waste? David was of another mind, who would not suffer his
eyelids to slumber, nor give any rest unto the temples of his head, until he
had found out a place for the temple of the Lord, an habitation, etc. 132. 3.
There were a sort of heretics about the year of Christ 1126. who would have
all Churches demolished as being needless structures, for God dwells not in
temples made with hands. I doubt me the souls of these heretics by a
pythagoricall transanimation, are entered unto the bodies of some modern
zelots, who in some places thought that Religion could not be sufficiently
reformed, except Cathedrals had been defaced, and the Queeres pulled down, so
that in some places of Scotland are to be seen, the miserable ruins of goodly
fabrics. Amongst the primative Christians Temples were called Martyria, either
because they were built in the places where Martyrs suffered, or because the
bones of the Martyrs were kept there, or because they were dedicated to the the
memory of the Martyrs. But now in another sense many magnificent piles may be
called Martyria, for in a manner they have suffered Martyrdom, being defaced
and ruinate, torn and maimed in their chief parts, and sacrilegiously robbed
of their necessary utensils. Shall not the blind Papists that built them, rise
up in judgment against those that spoiled them? Nay, shall not the very
Gentiles condemn them, who spared no labor and cost to erect proud and
magnificent Temples to their Idol Gods? witness Jupiters temple in the
Capitol; Apollo's temple at Delphos, Diana's temple (the seventh wonder of the
world) at Ephesus, and many thousands more. One city of Rome could reckon 300.
fair Temples in Augustus Caesar's time. Maxima tercentum totam delubra per
urbem. Virg.
I could tell you that the Egyptians spared no cost in building Temples even to
Snakes and Crocodiles. You Will say they were mad, and I say so too, But if it was
madness to erect Temples to false gods, it is far greater madness to destroy
the Temples of the true God. I can tell you sad stories of those who have
either robbed or destroyed even idolatrous Temples. Of Camhyses that spoiled
the Temples of Egypt, of Xerxes and Brennus, who robbed Jupiters and Apollo's
temples, of the stolen gold of Tholousa; Of Pompey, Crassus, and others; But if
these made fearful ends that spoiled the Temples of false gods, surely he
that destroys the Temples of the true God, God will him destroy. Not to cloy
you with multitudes of examples, look upon the end of Balthazar, the prophaner
of the holy vessels. The fearful end of Julian the robber of holy Churches. And
to come nearer home, the tragical end of the Conquerours Sons, Richard Rufus,
and Henry the second, Son to Duke Robert; Look on these, and on all others,
who have either sacrilegiously or irreverently meddled with holy things, and you
shall see vengeance pursuing them close at the heels. Shall Achan for stealing
but a garment dedicated to holy use? And Azariah for but offering to strike the
Prophet a holy man, and Vzza for but offering to put to his hand rashly to the
Arc, a holy Symboll, be so severely punished? what shall become of those that
have pulled down the houses of God, and rapaciously devoured the Shewbread,
the Priests maintenance, leaving nothing but crumbs on the Altar, for those that
must serve all the other? But the greatest mischief of all is, that Religion
is oftentimes made the cloak to cover sacrilege, too holy a garment for so
profane a monster. Shall religion the beautiful and chaste Daughter of the
Almighty, be made a Pander for such heinous impiety? Is Religion and the
outward splendor, or prosperity of the Church so inconsistent, that they
cannot live and dwell together? Is there no avoiding of superstition, but by
falling into sacrilege? No shunning of Charibdis, but by falling upon Scylla?
There is no necessity why a man that runs from the smoke, should fall into the
flame. Thou that abhorrest Idols, says the Apostle, do thou commit
sacrilege? Is there not a mean between both? Is he a Physician that whilst he
goes about to cure a sick man, pillages his house, and strips him naked of all
he has? Sacrilege whilst it cures superstition, it kills Religion, and if
sacrilege be a remedy against the disease of superstition; I must needs tell
you, the remedy is worse then the disease. But how ever sacrilege did pretend
reformation, yet it intended private benefit. Judas pretended charity, when he
would have the ointment sold, which was (as he conceived) lavishly wasted upon
Christ, but indeed he intended the filling of his own bag. The Churches wealth
has ever an eyesore to covetous minds, a morsel that many gape after, a sop
so savorie, that though Satan enter with it, yet with Judas they will swallow
it, it is sweet to the taste, but bitter in the maw. The Crow in the fable
greedily swallowed down the Snake, which in stead of nourishing poisoned him.
Solomon tells us there is a sort of bread, that will turn to gravel, and
though Quails to the Israelites was sweet meat, yet they were seasoned with
sour sauce, even the wrath of God fell on the wealthiest of them, whilst the
flesh was between their teeth; He that with the Eagle will steal flesh from
the Altar, shall be sure a coal shall set his nest on fire: and whosoever
inricheth himself with tithes, or the spoils of the Church, shall find that
he has put Eagles feathers in his bed, which in time will consume all the
rest. How many houses, nay batnes in some places have been built with Church
stones? but there the stone cries out of the wall, and the beam out of the
timber: Woe to him that builds a Town with blood, and erecteth a City with
iniquity, the lands that have been purchased with sacrilegious money, have
proved Aceldama a field of blood, which blood has lighted upon the buyer, or
his posterity. But I will meddle no longer with this sore, it is immidicabile
vulmus, become so inveterate and obdurate, that the oil of preaching cannot
soften it. I will leave it therefore to that great and wise College of
Physicians now assembled, who if they please, they can cure it, and so I hope
they will. And now I pass to the last point, the end why Temples are built,
viz* to be houses of Prayer, of which an observation or two and so I will end.

The house of prayer principally, not the house of preaching but by accident.
Synagogues are the places where Moses is preached and read every Sabbath day,
^ct. 15. (...)
but the Temple is for prayer. ^^k. 2. (...)
Anna the Prophetess knew that, who served God with fasting and prayer night
and day in the Temple. So did the Publican and Pharisee, ^^k. 18.
who went up unto the Temple to pray. ^ct. 3. 1.
So did Peter and John, who went up at the ninth hour of prayer. ^ct. 22. 7.
St. Paul praying in the Temple, was in a trance. ^ct. 26. 1.
When the Jews sought to kill Paul, they found him in the Temple. I never read
that these holy men stood without at the Temple door, whilst the Priests were
praying within, Math. ^2.
as our semi-separatists lately started up amongst us use to do. I wonder what
president they have for this out of Scripture, that whilst we are praying
within, they should stand prating without, except they learned, it of Christ's
carnal brethren, who stood without; but Christ disclaimes such kindred as stay
without. They that come in as the Apostles did, and do his Fathers will* they
be his brethren. Of old Christian Churches were called Oratories, from
praying; And when the Eunuch of Ethiopia came up to Jerusalem, it was to
worship in the Temple, and not to stand without till prayers were done, and
then come in to hear a Sermon, as I showed not long since upon that place,
which words then were traduced by some, as If I had then spoken against
preaching. I will judge charitably of them, I think they speak rather out of
ignorance then malice; but if out of either, or both, all the hurt I wish them
is, that they would be children in malice, and men in understanding; less
ignorance, and more charity, would become them well. But indeed what I said
then, I say now, that (...), or adoration mentioned there is not hearing of a
Sermon; For I never yet read in sacred or profane writer, that hearing is
adoration properly, for hearing being the reception of the sound is merely
passive; Adoration is the action of the mind, expressed by a submissive gesture
of the body, either in uncovering of the head, or pulling off the shoe, or
bending of the knee, bowing of the body, kissing of the hand, etc. Now hearing
being a passion, adoration an action, they are in diverse predicaments,
therefore hearing is properly a part of Gods worship or adoration, though it be
the means by which we are taught to worship. I have, and ever will give
Preaching its just commendations, yet I will not Idolize it, it shall have a
room in the Temple, though I place it not on the pinnacle, it shall be a tenant
there, but an under tenant. The chief tenant is prayer; the Lord of the house
will not take it well, that the under tenant shall thrust the chief tenant out
of doors. Where shall prayer dwell, if it has not room in the house of
prayer? Am I an enemy to Preaching, because I prefer prayer to it? was St. Paul
an enemy to faith and hope, because he preferres charity to them? Let me read
to you this divinity lesson in the phrase of S. Paul; Now remain Preaching,
Sacraments, Prayer; these three, but the greatest of these is Prayer. He that
has but natural Logic knows, that the end is more excellent then the
means, prayer or the worship of God is the final cause or end of preaching.
We preach that you may know how to pray; I will pose these men, as Christ posed
the Pharisees, Whether is the gold, or the Temple that sanctisieth the gold the
greater; Whether the gift, or the altar that sanctifies the gift; So whether
Preaching, or Prayer that sanctifies our preaching be the greater judge you.
There is much more efficacy in a short devout prayer, then in a long tedious
Sermon. What Sermon did ever open and shut heaven, stop the Sun in his full
careere, add fifteen years to ones life, raise the dead, and quench the
violence of fire? and yet prayers have done all these. Moses was a good
Preacher, but by his Sermons he could not prevail against Amelek, his praying
not his preaching got him the victory. There is a devil whom preaching cannot
cast out, but fasting and prayer can. Preaching may prevail with men, but
prayer prevails with God, and overcomes too. The effect of preaching reaches
no further then to the ears of those that be present, but the virtue of prayer
extends it self, Vltra Garamantes and Indos, to the absent though they were as
far distant from us, as the East is from the West. I must tell you, it is not
so much your hearing, nor our preachings, but our praying that must divert Gods
judgments from us, and our brethren; its not preaching, but asking, seeking,
knocking, that shall receive, and find, and open heaven gates to us. I commend
you for your often hearing of Sermons, God bless them to you; but though you
heard never so many, and these far-fetched, and dear bought too* yet without
prayer you shall not prevail: and think not that your private prayers at home
will suffice, you must join with the Congregation; for if the private prayers
of Israel and Judah had been sufficient to divert Gods judgments from them:
Samuel, Iehosaphat, and Ezekiah would never have troubled all the people to
meet together at Jerusalem. I will shut up all with that saying of the great
and holy Patriarch of Alexandria, in his Apology to the Emperor Constantius,
(...), etc. The prayer of the people in the place of prayer is an holy and
decent exercise, by which our affections are the more united, and God the more
easily entreated; In a word, when we have done preaching to you, and you have
given over hearing us; The last anchor that you will lay hold on, in your last
hour, when you are rendering your spirits to him that gave them, will be the
prayers of the Minister, to be your Vade mecum, and to accompany your souls
toward heaven.

FINIS.

