Rome's Hunting-Match for III. Kingdoms OR, The Papists Last Run for the
Protestants Life and Estate too, because this PLOT has even beggared them.
1. London's dreadful Fire: 2. Godfreys cruel Murder considered
And, that the more may view it, to serve the Papal Interest, the Printer
affords you this sheet for 1 d.

Allegorical cartoon depicting Papal hunt for Protestants depiction of hunting
party The Antichristian Crew


depiction of public burning christian
Zech: 2.5 I will be unto her a wall of fire round about



depiction of hounds Thine Mine Self-intrest Treachery Murder. Hypocracy
Strange Ambition Idolatry.






The Whores PRINCIPLES, left behind her, when she began this HUNT, to be
observed by all her spurious Offspring, upon no less penalty than eternal
Damnation. viz.

The Gospel is an empty Cheat,
All our Aim is to be great,
The Moral man's a Wigeon:
Come let us mount on Eagles wings
Above all Emperors and Kings,
State Policy is our Religion.
Reader, There Is a Srange Cur g^ among the Antichristian Crew he is without
his Formalities, o^ Badg of his Order, but his Name and Fire-ball, represents
him to be the Provincial ( i.e. the Chief of the Jesuits here in London when
they burned it; he and another Cur, called Gifford, managed that Fire, hiring
and paying those carrying it on from house to house, etc. But being out of his
Orderly habit, and with a Pen, he may pass for a Lay-brother who prints, sells,
writes or speaks against the Kings Evidence, and for the Popish Faction.

ROME does now a Hunting ride,
With all her Beagles by her side,
In rough tempestous Weather,
On the Top of all the Morn
This Harlot blew her bugle Horn
To call her Dogs together.
This filthy Babylonish Trull,
Whose Charms the enchanted World dos gull,
Is Lucifer's dear Minion,
She sets her self to open Sale,
And like a Spannel wags her Tale,
To the Blind Witch Opinion.
The Virgin Spring was in her prime,
To i e. Protestant Blood.
hunt for Blood they rose betime,
Their Lost Game to recover.
Over the Downs and humble Dales,
The Friars, Monks and Cardinals,
Like hungry Hawks they hover.
This little SPOT stood in their Ey,
Which men do call Great Britany,
So strong is their Devotion,
Let us send forth our Hellish Band,
We Will have it at our full Command,
Or drown it in the Ocean.
Round about this Isle they range,
Their Forest and their hunting Grange,
Here, all her Dogs assemble:
The Nation like a Drunkard reels,
For underneath their Horses Heels,
The Earth does quake and tremble.
On these rich unvalued Grounds
She uncouples all her Hounds,
Ambition, deep-mouthed Jowler,
Self-Interest, a Beagle fierce,
His thundering cry the heavens did pierce,
He wo'ud be Lord Controler.
Murder and Idolatry
Into all corners cast their Ey,
With Nets and Ginns prepared,
In every Town their Game they play,
In every House their Lime-twigs lay,
That Christians.
Lambs may be ensnared.
Treachery does learing stand,
With a keen Dagger in his hand,
Adultery does follow,
They hunt in silence and are still,
And when they do intend to kill,
They neither houp nor hollow.
Hypocrisy clothed all in White,
Like a Cherubim of Light,
The Garland He had gotten
He always sings a double Tune,
With rosy Cheeks, like Rose in June,
His inside is all rotten Let them do, or pretent what they will, etc. believe
Him not; you are forewarned.

Say-well with a fluent Tongue,
A lusty Beagle bold and strong,
Was by this Harlot trained,
This Tumbler had th^^^ning Skill,
Enchanting words and wind at Will,
But DO-WELL he was chained,
Mine and Thine are Beagles fierce,
They challenge the whole Universe,
The poor man is brought under,
A wondrous blind ridiculous Story,
By Masses and by Purgatory,
Heaven, Earth, and Hell they plunder.
LOVE from door to door they kick,
Community's an Heretic,
Their own Paunch only feeding:
Their Hearts are frosen up with frost,
The Lady Charity is lost,
CHRISTIANITY lies bleeding.
Lofty PRIDE does puff and pant,
Riding upon an Elephant,
With outward Pomp adorned:
Exalted to an high degree,
They trample on the bended knee,
HUMILITY is scorned.
Haman mounted into grace,
Would extinguish Abraham's Race,
By sound of Proclamations,
With thundering Cry, this busy hound
To all these Beagles does propound,
To murder three whole Nations 'Twas sworn, They were resolved, not to l^ave a
Protes^^ a-live to te^ of such a Religion as the Protestant Religion.

For, Murder's become indeed
A new Article of their Creed,
Love is an Aerie Notion,
They See the sheet called Godfry's Murder made Visible.
Godfry all who, in their ey,
Do'nt bow with their Idolatry,
So great is their Devotion,
Holofernes is not dead,
Like Grasshoppers his Army's ^^ead,
Encompassed with Fires,
See how they swarm on English ground,
ENGLAND, thou art besieged round
With Jesuits, Monks and Friars.
Esau does this Game pursue,
He is of this hunting Crew,
O miserable Dotage,
That he should love the World so well,
His Heavenly heritage to sell,
For a poor Mess of Pottage.
Indulgences in these rude times,
For hellish and unheard of Crimes,
Are sent to every Nation:
Lust, Pride and Avarice are graced,
And on the Tripple Crown are placed,
As in their proper Station.
Shimei's Tongue is wondrous shrill,
The Echo bounds from Hill to Hill,
Through all the Woods resounding,
This envious Dog does bark and bawll,
But Babse^ah out-rants them all,
In The Language of Romes Brats.
Damming and Confounding.
Doeg, Nabal scold and chide,
Upon a grunting Hog they ride,
Inrol'd among the Swineheards:
Ahab and proud Jesabel,
With Avarice and Malice swell,
To grasp poor Naboth's The Lives as well as Estates of Protestants are now
sought for.
Vineyard.
Achitophel was in this Train,
Goliath, Judas murdering Cain,
Old Dives choked with Treasures,
Mark Anthony came to this Feast,
The Greek that conquered all the East,
With a Regiment of Ceasars.
Mighty Monarks that aspire,
To ruin ALL with Massacres, and burning Cities, as London, etc. are Popish
Mercys.
Sword and Fire,
A Lamentable Story,
Through a Crimson sea of Blood,
Like an overflowing Flood,
They Would wade unto vain Glory.
The Horned Moon wo'ud all control,
He fireth up the Northern Pole,
The Scithian aids his Title,
The Nations he does subjugate;
For this Ambitious Potentate,
The World is too too little.
Dionisius, brisk and brave,
Must shortly come unto his grave,
Did quarrel with the Eagle;
Riding upon a tired Ass,
Through ruinous Cities he does pass;
Is not this a jolly Beagle?
All these Beagles in their Chase
Hunt the Lamb from place to place,
With Hollowing and with hooting,
Over the Downs they dance the Hay,
The Protestant is now their pray,
This Dove can find no footing.
Earthen Vessels clash and knock,
Dashed topieces on a Rock,
The Mighty Hogen Mogen,
Tyrants are by Tyrants slain,
The LORD of Hosts intends to reign,
When all these Pots are broken.
A PRAYER.
Arise, Great MICHAEL, in thy Power,
Pull down proud Babels lofty Tower,
Thy Love is Heavenly Nectar,
Thy little Lambs do bleat for THEE.
Draw thy bright Sword to set us free,
Who art our LORD PROTECTOR.
LONDON, Printed when the Papists were there rampant, 1680. N.B. Lately was
printed a Chronology of Popish Errors, when and by who(...)


