DE VENENIS: OR, A Discourse OF POISONS, THEIR Names, Natures, and Virtues;
With their several SYMPTOMS, PROGNOSTICS, and ANTIDOTES.

BY W. R. M. D.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Speed, at the Rainbow in Fleet Street, near the
Inner Temple-gate. 1663.

TO THE Most High and Mighty MONARCH The Kings most Excellent Majesty CHARLES
The SECOND.
By the especial Grace, and most singularly miraculous providence of GOD, King
of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, with the Dominions and Territories
thereunto belonging, Defender of the Faith, etc.
May it please your Majesty,
SVch are the froward perverse Humors and Spirits of most Men with whom we
Convers and live in these apostatizeing times, and last days described by the
And in 2 Pet. 2.10, 12, 13.
Apostles 2 Timothy 3.4, 5. That truth it self may not be spoken without passing
under the severest censures their Depraved Phansies and Imaginations can
suggest unto them. Yet, having that within me which is a continual Feast, And
which is sufficiently able to Arm and Defend me from the sharpest Arrow their
malicious Tongues can shoot and sputter against me, I shall not forbear to
testify my joy, and congratulate your Majesty's most miraculous Restoration
by this my Dedication; notwithstanding thereby I shall only discover a will to
desire, having no skill to deserve the least Countenance from your Majesty. And
having no better a Praesent at presant, nor other way to manifest that Loyalty
which has for many years kept me under a Cloud, I thought better bestow a
mite, the^ nothing at all: not that I presume I can add in the least to your
Majesty's Virtues, or merit by all that I can, do or have done or said, I am
sufficently sensible that when I have done and suffered to the utmost, it is
but my Duty, and if your Majesty shall so far Condescend as to take the
smallest Cognizance thereof, I must ever brag and boast of superlative favor
and greatest honor that so mean a shrub and unworthy a subject as my self can
possibly be capable of. And for such as weigh me in the false Balance of their
own Judgments to think other the^ my words Declare; or take me to swim down
the stream of Flattery and Time-servingnesse with the major part of the World
(which my Soul ever abhorred) that for secular ends and their own advantage,
turn as the Weather-Cook upon a Steeple; wrong themselves more then me, who to
my familiar acquaintance was ever known to be firm and true, to that of Prove.
24.21. Manger all the Temptations which years of Calamities could force upon
me; Witness my last Dedications to my Quadripartite, Entitled, Astrology
Restored, Published Anno 1653. At which time every one did what seemed good in
his own eyes, there being no King in England; Though at that same time there
arose such a thing as the Phrantick people and the giddy part of the world
esteemed equivolent to Sacred Majesty, verifying that Parable of Jotham, Judge.
9. verse 14. and 15. especally (whereby your poor subjects have been so
scratch't and clawed, that your Majesty can hardly know them, they are so
strangely metamorphosed) Nobility laid aside, and he that ran might read,
Prove. 28.2. in the very frame of our Government: And that in Psalm 12.8. was
found true in all our streets. But blessed be the wise Disposer of all things
that has given us some hopes of a blessing upon our Land, since we may boast
of the next words, Eccles. 10.17. more then any people in Christiandome, no
King for so many hundred of years in Europe, (nay, I think I may safely say, in
the whole world) is lineally Descended from Nobles, nay Kings, As ours. Let us
therefore remember that truth, 1 Samuel 15.23. And to follow the Command of the
HOLY GHOST, Eccle. 10.20. That Job's Reprehension, Job 34.18. may never rise up
against us more. For since there is no Power but of GOD, Romans 13.12, 3. v. 5.
and 1 Pet. 2.13. And therefore we are enjoined to be obedient; much more is our
engagement thereunto when there is so apparent an Hand of Divine Providence,
Justice, Goodness, most singularly and miraculously shown in the Restoration
and establishing of your Majesty over us, even in a time when there was, in all
Human Probability, no hopes; that so we might see the Finger of the LORD, and
that it was he only that could redeem us out of the Egyptian Bondage and
Slavery we groaned under; And by such For in human Reason, Fleetwood, who was
General, and Commanded all the Forces, should have employed them for his
Brother Rich. P. Establishment (his ends being bound up also in his) then for
the pulling of him down. Which was the ^ui^e of both.
unlikely means; By the struggling and striving of a few Ambitious Spirits, that
were blinded therewith, so that they knew not where their own safety lay, was
this happy birth occasioned; And, which is most of all, without the least
Bloodshed. This is Psalm. 118 23. Matthew. 21.42.
mavelous in our And not to be paralel'd in any story Sacred or profane.
Which miraculous providence me thinks, should silence and quiet the Tongues and
Spirits of all Rebbells.
eyes, and should be for a perpetual joy unto us! And, Certainly, GOD does
never work any extraordinary work, but to some extraordinary end, which we
have as much reason to expect, as any people under heaven, if our sins and
wantonness under so great mercies prevent not. For, we see and know, that
since the rising of so glorious a Sun as your Majesty in our Hemisphere, all
the mists of Disorder, Confusion, Discord and Trouble which over spread us, And
those dark and horrid fears of perpetual War, Dissension, Desolation and
Destruction, as Mists and Foggs upon the Souls and Spirits of good Men, are
wholly Dissipated and Dispersed; So that we hope to have Peace and
Righteousness upon their true and Right Basis to all Generations settled. And,
as we doubt but it will be your Princely care in these more weighty matters; So
we can no less then daily expect a Rectification of other abuses, And a perfect
Cure of other evils which are Epidemically Reigning among us. As, to trouble
your Majesty but with the mention of Allthough we might mind your Majesty of an
Infinite many more. Yet we shall only hint at one, which makes diverse of your
Majesty's suffering Subjects and Servants, sick at the very Heart. That they
must be still equally sufferers now under your Majesty's Just Power and
Government, as formerly under Oppressors; Because Mammon the God of the World
is not their friend so much as such who have been your Majesty's Enemies. And
therefore their interest in friends (as friends go now) is as slender. And,
allthough, I, for my own part, can plead no merit, Loyalty being my Duty; Yet,
if your Majesty would be pleased to take notice of such who have been wholly
ruined by the fall of your Majesty's Father of Glorious Memory, (as I have bee^
for one) to whom my Father was not only a Servant, both in the Bedchamber and
Privy-Chamber, but also to your Majesty's Royal Grandfather all his Reign in
England, And likewise TO YOUR MAJESTY WHILST PRINCE, that we be kept from
Ruin, it will be the Highest piece of Kingly bounty imaginable:
one, And that is, the more then ordinary abuse of THAT MOST NOBLE ART OF
PHYSIC, by Illiterates, Quackes, Mountebancks, and Empericks, that have been,
are, and will be, if not prevented, the Ruin of more of your Majesty's Loyal
and Faithful Subjects, then either the Sword or Plague. The Employment is
Weighty, Difficult, and of greater Importance then most of the world are
capable either to apprehend or believe. As our Learned Father of Physicians
HIPPOCRATES most excellently shows in Aphorism Sect. 1. Aphoris. 1. Where he
says, (...). and therefore, as he also very well observes, Lib. De Lege, He
that will be a Phisician, Horum omnium Compotem esse debere. (...). Or, as in
Lib. De Decent. Habitu, it is expressed in short, Medico futuro necessaria sunt
(...), and (...); Natura, Doctrina, seu Scientia Doctrina Comparata, and usus,
seu exercitatio. For, such indeed are worthily called Phisicians, that are both
learned and skillful, and none else. But, that which must give life unto all
(according to Hippocrates) is, A Natural Inclination, Ingenuity, Wit, Fancy,
and Aptness to Learn, sufficient Reason, Judgment, Memory, Ex quovis ligno non
fit Mercurius, Every one thus endued, is not fit to make a Scholar, neither
are all Scholars sit to be Phisicians. What is said of all Disciplines.

Tu nihil invita dices faciesve Minerva, Is likewise verified in Physic, in a
Phisician chiefly. And that withal, he have a sharp apprehension to discover
what will be the event of this, or that, and by the Signs, to discern even
hidden Destempers before there be the least appearance of them; As also to know
the Causes, Indications and Method to be followed in the Cure.

In all which, that a Phisician may be the more complete, It is most requisite
he be well Learned in these Seven Particulars.

1. LANGUAGE or Knowledge of the Tongues, especially Latin and Greek, that he
may the better understa^d the vast Labors and Volumes of our Among which, the
chiefest are, Hippocrates, Theophrastus, Dioscorides, Galen, Aretaus, Rufus
Ephesius, Paulus Aeginetus, Oribafius, Aetius, Tralianus, Philaretus,
Theophilus, Nicolas Mirepsus, Actuarius, Archengenus, Appollonius, etc. which
wrote in Greek.
Ancients, and Donatus Antonius ab Altomari, Alexander Massarias, Amatus
Lu^itanus, Aurelius Cornelius Celsus, Guilielmus Rondeletius, Bernardus
Gordonius, Victorinus Trincavellus, Nicholas Piso, Carolus Piso, Hieronimus
Mercuri^lis, Petrus Forestus, Joannes Crato, Joannes Baptista Montanus, Felix
Platerus, Hercules de Saxonia, Joannes Fernelius, Leonhartus Fuchsius, Duncanus
Liddelius, Joannes Riolanus, Matheus De Gradibus, Vidus Vidius, Valescus De
Taranta Benedictus Victorinus Foventinus, Nicholas Florentinus, Julius
Alexandrius, Valesius, Christophorus A vega, Thomas A vega, Ludovicus Mercatus,
Guallerus Bruel, Zacutus Lucitanus, Joannes Heiurnius, Daniel Sennertus,
Paracelsus, Van Helmont, Lazarus, Riverius, Capivaccius, Stockerus, Weirus, etc.
Neotericks, and, if they had Rhasis, Mesues, Alsaharav^us ( or Albucasses* as
some call him) Avicenna, Averroes, Avenzoar, Serapio, Haly Abbas, Haly
Rhodaham, Rabbi Moses, etc.
Hebrew and Arabic it were not amiss, since many old Writer^ also, wrote in
those Tongues; And, Translations, many times, vastly vary from the original
Copies, whereby many mistakes and much mischief is occasioned.

2. PHILOSOPHY, That so, he may know the subject on which he is to work, man's
Body; with all its parts, the Elements, Humors, Spirits, the uses and
temperament of every part, the Animal faculties and functions, That diseases
may the better be discovered, with their several Causes, And Signs both
Diagnosticks and Prognostics, And the right Method of Cure, which is the end
of Physic; To know how to order, rectify and praescribe, according to the
present Condition, Constitution, and Temper of the Patient, what may prevent
further evils, Conserve health where it is, and restore it where it is lost,

So that without Philosophy a man can never be a good Phisician; Quod enim
optimus Medicus, idem est and Philosophus, Galen proves in a peculiar Book by
it self. For, ubi desinit Physicus, incipit Medicus. As Aristotle well observes.

3. LOGIC is Requisite for a Phisician (Logismus est actus rei in Hominem)
And is, indeed, the first in order of all Arts: for, the (...), in the thing,
must needs be before (...) in it. (...) enim est actus rei ab Homine, in
Hominem. Without which Discipline, he can never be able to give a perfect
Definition of any Disease, or Symptom of a Disease, much less a reason why it
is so.

4. ASTRONOMY, for, the knowledge of the Ascensions, Culminations, and settings
of the Stars, with their Right, and oblique Ascensions, Several Positions and
Declinations, is, also, of great and eminent use. And for the knowledge of the
several Quarters of the year, and such like; But, especially, (as SENNER TUS
thinks who is the PRINCE OF OUR NEOTERICK PHISICIANS) As it is an help,
furtherance, and introduction to ASTROLOGY

The 5th. and most necessary Discipline of all the rest. Not as it is commonly
practiced (and indeed, abused) by broaken Mechanics, and Illiterate Novices
(And has bee^ of late years, when every one did what seemed best in his own
eyes) bringing shame and contempt upon that Noble and worthy Art, which,
because (as the Learned know) it is of excellent use in Physic, they under
that Color, Deceive men of their monyes, and foo them out of their lives,
There being more Empericall Impostors praetending to Astrology, that are very
Idiots, Cheats, Illiterate, and of the vulgar sort; Then of any other kind
whatsoever, (which abuse, it could be wished, your Majesty would likewise
Amend, and restrian this their Licentiousness, which on every Post and Pillar
through all the streets of this City of LONDON, (wherein notwithstanding there
is a COLLEGE OF ABLE AND LEARNED PHYSICIANS) they publish not only to the
seducing, but ruinating of many of your Majesty's poor Subjects.

I say, it is not this I allow, or speak for, in this place; but the Pure
Astrology of the Ancients, without which, Hippocrates and Galen accounted a
Phisian a fool; Advising men not to trust themselves or their lives in such
men's hands. And without which, Avicenna accounted them Butchers, rather then
Physicians; Homicidas Medicos Astrologiae Ignaros. And Thurnesserus,
Paracelsus, with others, will admit of no Phisician without it; Medicus sine
Coeli peritia nihil est. Many Phisicians, I know, are of the Contrary Opinion;
But, as, the one is too nice, the other is too remiss. To mediate, therefore,
between both, I shall, in short, give your Majesty, what may justly be said
for it; In these two propositions. 1. Whosoever is ignorant of the Causes of
the Alterations of the temperatures of men's bodies, by which Diseases are
occasioned, must needs be ignorant in the Cure, and of that which much conduces
and helps thereunto. But men's Bodies alter in their te^peratures with the
seasons, which change according to the Motions and Places of the several
Constellations and Celestial bodies, whence follow many Infirmities and
Diseases. Ergo, whosoever is ignorant of Astrology, that is, that do not know
the Influencies of the stars, which cause Diseases, and alter our Temperatures,
are ignorant of the Cure. And therefore that Astrology is necessary to be known
by all such as practice Physic, will not be denied.

For so Hippocrates stiffly maintains, in Lib. De Aere, Aqua and Locis; And
therefore concludes (in many parts of his works) that Man who is ignorant in
the Natures and Virtues of the Celestial Bodies, is blind and in the Dark.
Referring all Alterations in our Bodies and Diseases, to the Stars and
mutations of the Moon. So does Galen throughout all his works, especially in
Lib. 3. De D^^ bus Decretoriis, Cap. 2* 3, 4, and 5. etc. Secondly, whatsoever
discovers unto us the state and C^^sis of an acute disease, And is the only
true and exact way to the knowledge thereof, is fit to be studied and known by
all Physicians. But Astrology, and it only, by the Knowledge of the Motions,
Nature, Positions, and influencies of the Moon, discovers unto us the true
Crisis in all sharp and violent Diseases (as is abundantly showed by Galen in
his Books, De Diebus Decretoriis, and De Crisibus, Avicenna, Lib. 4. Fen. 2.
Tract. 2. Cap. 2. Joannes Fernelius, Lib. 2. De Abditis Rerum Causis, Cap. 10.
Daniel Sennertus, Pract. Med. Lib. 3. Part. 3. Cap. 12. Et in Methodo Discendi
Medecinam, and in Institutionibus, etc. Andothers) Ergo, Astrology and the
Nature, Motions, Influencies, etc. of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, are requisite
to be studied and known by all Physicians. And, as Acute Diseases follow the
Moon; So do Chronick, the Course of the Sun; As common experience evineeth us:
And it i^ d^^ly seen that Quartain Agues begin with the Autumnal ^quinoctial,
and end in the Vernal. Wherefore, Avicenna Ascribes Health to the fortunate
Stars, And sickness to the unfortunate; In Contie. Part (...). Text 104. Nay,
Paracelsus, De Pod^gra, Ascribes more to Stars, then Humors, st^fly affirming
the Constellation alone, may be a cause of Desea^es, without the mediation of
any Humors at all; Instancing in Lunaticks, which Distemper, As Reason, and
common Experience evinceth, follows the Course of the Moon. As I have noted
in my Astrology Restored, Lib. 1. Cap. 4. And in diverse places of my A Book yet
in manuscript, and not condemned to be pressed.
Mel Medicorum.

Neither is it my Opinion only, that ^strology should be well studied and ^^own
by all that practice physic, to Instruct them in the Nature of Diseases, their
Causes, finding out their true Crisis (which can no otherwise, with Certainty,
^e Discovered) And other most necessary beings, conducible to the persecting of
the Cure; But also, over and above those Authors before mentioned, it is the
Advice of Joannes Crato, Joannes Picinus, Joannes Hos^urtus, Antonius Mizaldus,
Joannes Bodinus, Ber^ardus Gordonius, Magninus, and infinite others, that they
be all Astrologers.

Wherefore, since I have written more ^agrely hereof in a Treatife called A
small Tract not yet Published.
Flagellum Empericorum, I shall, of this Point, add no more, at present: But
proceed to the sixth thing requisite for a Physician, which is CHEMISTRY with
the KNOWLEDGE OF METALLS, STONES, etc. To know how to distinguish between the
true Stones, Metalls, etc. from what are adulterate and false; And, when need
Requires to join Chemical with Gaenical medicines in their proper places,
times, and with parties and Bodies convenient. For, a little Chemistry may
serve the best and greatest Physician. I know Paracelsus, Crollius, Hartmannus,
Querceranus, Severinus, Leo S^avius, Ravelascus, Van Helmon^ and his
Expositors, with all the Brethren of the Rosy Cross, And other Sectarists in
Physic, stiffly maintain it is the only thing a Physician is to busy his hea^
about, that none can be perfect, nor (...) Cure effected without it, that it is
all in all, etc. But Joannes Crato, Thomas Erastus, Joannes Fernelius, Daniel
Sennertus, and others of the more Rational and Methodicall Physicians, are of
the contrary opinion. And, although Paracelsus, ostentatiously, boasts himself
a Monarch in Physic, triumphing over Hippocrates and Galen, as Infants,
affirming he did thereby, more famous cures, then all the Galenists in Europe
besides; Yet Erastus accounts him but an Impostor, an Emperick, an Heretic,
affirming him to do the same in Physic, which Luthe^ did in Divinity: That he
was a drunke^ Rogue, a base Fellow, a Magician, having the Devil for his
Master, Devils for his familiar Companions, And what (...) did, was by the
help of the Devil. In a word, as none will or can deny Chemistry to be of great
use in the practice of physic rightly prepared, and fitly applied; So must
they likewise, that are Ra^^onall, confess, that the rejecting of ^^l other
medicines, Admiring the L^rge Encomiums of their Aurum Potabile's Elixers of
Life, Quintessence's, Panacea's, and universal medicines, and the like, using
these only, without any Judgment, Art, Method, As Women do Receipts, because
they hear they are good for such a Disease, is a madness; rendering such
Practitioners rather Quacks, and Empericks, then Rational Physicians.

Lastly, a Physician SHOULD KNOW THE VEGETABLES AND PLANTS that are to be used,
at least the chiefest and most effectual, And their virtues, etc.

And thus (may it please your Majesty) if such as dare to adventure the
Practic^ of Physic be not endued; And are unabl^ to give an account, workman
like o^ their Actions, where the lives of you Majesty's poor Subjects lie at
stake; The^ are to be accounted rather Cheats, an^ Murderers, And ought to be
proceede^ against according to Law. Such therefore, may, by this Treatise, do
more hurt, then good. Will your Majesty therefore be graciously pleased to
cause such wholesome Statutes as are provided in that Case already, to be put in
execution; And where they are defective, they may be supplied and amended as to
your Grave Wisdom shall be thought fit. That so every one may abide in the
Calling wherein he is called; The Divine not Intrenching on the Physicians, nor
the Lay man on either, nor the Chyrurgion on the Apothecarie's, nor the
Apothecary on the Chyrurgion's, neither both or either, on the Doctors; As they
too frequently take the liberty and boldness, now, to do, even in this City of
London, in the face of the College of Physicians to their great shame: That so
every thing may be done decently and in order. That the GOD of order, ^ay
bless us, and Conf^sion be wholly ^anished from among us. Which is the Hearty
Prayer of him who casts these his unworthy Labors at your Majesty's feet, And
is, As ever,

From my abode in London Die is. 26. Oclobris, 1660. Your Majesty's most Loyal
And Obedient Subject William Ramesey.

TO THE JUDICIOUS AND INGENIOUS READERS.
Reader,
I Desire thee to take notice that this Piece at the first was intended only as
a Digression in another Discourse, viz. in a System and body of Physic, which
for my own recreation and pleasure, I have, at spare times, Compiled. And being
more then ordinary provoked by diverse of my Acquaintance and Familiars to
publish it as well for the benefit of others, as my self. I have, for several
years, notwithstanding, resisted their Importunities, being Conscious to my
self, it is not handled, neither can be, by me, fitting the worthiness of the
Subject, or to be exposed to public view. But, at length I have adventured,
being prevailed with by them, especially by my most Constant, Faithful,
Ancient, and Beloved Friend FERDINANDO GORGES Esquire whom I am willing to pleasure
in an higher Nature, then my Tongue, Labors, or Pen are able to express: As
well for his manifold Virtues, wherein as a Starr of the first magnitude, he
far outshines infinite multitudes in his Sphere; As, for that Ancient
Aquaintance and Friendship which has reciprocally passed between us for above
these Twenty years, even ever since we were Youths together at School; But
especially, for that his affections and love to all manner of Learning is
unparallel, which will not only be his fame here, but eternal For what ever
our Virtues and Knowledges are here they will be perfected hereafter, and that
according to the measure we now enjoy.
Glory hereafter. If it be not so full and satisfactory, as might be, perhaps,
expected; Know, that it was written in the year 1656. in the Nature of a
Digression, with not the least alteration, save only I added the first part of
Poisons in General, and divided the whole into Parts, Divisions, and Sections.
It was, extorted, as it were, out of my Hands. And therefore when it comes into
thine, have the more favorable construction of it; And if it be imperfect, let
it be hid by thy perfections. And let thy Ingenuity pity it that it came out
before it is time, like Phares having given Zarah the slip, And so, I fear, many
faults are therein, likewise, overslipt, which, I doubt not, but the Judicious
will over see; And impute rather to those hasty Midwifes, my friends, then to
me. In the next, I Will promise thee amends.

The Subject on which it discourses is Of Poisons, a Doubtful and a Dangerous
Subject. Dangerous, as the very word imports. Doubtful, so that few Authors
have Defined or Explained sufficiently what Poison is. Cardan, with others
says, that is Poison which has an Aptness to do us much mischief by an occult
quality; Lib. 1. De Venenis, Cap. 1. and Cap. 4. And Avicenna 2. Prim. Doct. 2.
Cap. 15. Says it is that which corrupts Man's Complexion, not only by quality,
but propriety. Others think, that only to be Poison, that immediately
destroyed, and kills. But, such are in an error so to imagine; for there are
some Poisons, that only extremely hurt, but kill not; As Pruna Insania, and
such like, which you will meet with, that makes Men mad, mopish, and foolish for
a time; As also such as cause Epilepsies, Convulsions, etc. others, again, will
admit of hardly any thing, to be nominated Poison, because many things that are
so esteemed may be eaten, in a small quantity, without any hurt, As Nux Vomica,
which as Tabernaemontanus observes, Lib. 3. Cap. 14. That a Dram will only
intoxicate the brain, but two ounces immediately kills. And the seeds of Palma
Christi of America kills, as Costaeus notes in Comment. Mesu, if three be but
taken, but less he thinks may be eaten without any great damage. Many such like
Poisons you will meet with in the Discourse it self; Wherefore, some Conclude
them, I say, not to be Poisons; or, if so, that all other things, as meat, and
drink, which hurt, being taken in excess are likewise as bad Poisons. Gaben
also, Promiscuously using the word (...) and (...), in many places of his
works, has occasioned some to rank Purging Medicines among Poisons; in regard
they kill as well as others, if they be taken in excess; as also diverse other
Medicines, nay and Cordialls, if not rightly and duly administered, as Bezoar,
Safron, and the like. (...), are such as although they sometimes kill; yet they
are at other times, when rightly used, helpful to the Body. (...), on the
other side are Deadly Poison, and such as never help, but ever kill and prove
destructive. The former hurts only accidentally, as it is erroneously
administered, etc. But the latter offends in the whole kind, and is to be
accounted Poison. For that, and that only is to be indeed so esteemed (as may
be collected from Cardan and Avicenna before quoted) that has an occult,
malignant, and venomous quality, peculiarly offending Man's Body, whether it may
be used in Physic sometimes (as Opium Mandrake, Henbane, which have, together
with their narcotick quality, a peculiar venomous property also, as will be
showed beneath) or no. But Purges; Bezoar, Safron, and other Cordialls, do not
thus offend in the whole kind; but by accident taken in excess; And therefore,
falsely reckoned among Poisons. Again, the Idiosynerasis, and custom of some
Men, may make Poison to be food, and hinder the operation thereof. How could it
be possible, else, for those recorded by Agricola, and Sanbarolitanus, to drink
whole pounds of Argent Vive without any hurt? or those people in Thrace to eat
whole handfulls of White Helebor, as Theophrastus notes? Or him in Mercurialis,
that could eat thirty drachms of Hemlock at a time without any damage, and yet
all Authors conclude it a dangerous Poison? or the Turks, who, ^s Georgius
melichinus observes, familiarly eat of Nux Vomica without the least prejudice,
of which, as was said, according to Tabernaemontanus, two ounces is rank
Poison, etc. But such like passages as these, are (...) ^ue^tly Cited in our
subsequent dis^ou^se, too tedious here to recite. Whence, it is apparent, that,
whatsoever Averroes Lib. De Theriaca, Cap. 2. Jacobus Grevinus, Lib. 1. De
Venenis, Cap. 1. And others endeavor to maintain to the contrary, Poison may
become food; and Men may, by little and little accustoming themselves to the
eating of it, become, as Mithredates, Poyson-proof. And I my self knew a
Gentleman about the late Kings Court who would familiarly eat Toades, raw as he
found them, without the least Inconveniency, to himself, being rather nutriment
unto him admitting of perfect Concoction, as appeared by the death of such
Women whom he knew. And Cardan Confidently averrs, he knew one that did usually
feed upon Spiders. So we find Fallopius, De Simpl. ^^ur^g. Cap. 48. Mentioning
a fellow whom he says he saw eat on ounce of Scamony at once without having so
much as a stool after it. But Auhours are ^ull of such like relations not to be
derided, unless we resolve to render our selves ridiculous. So that then, we
see, by what has been said, that Poisons are of different Natures. Some, if
eaten, by degrees, will become nutritive. Some, retaining both a Poisonous, and
medecinall faculty; As those which may be taken in a small quantity, without
prejudice. And some absolutely venomous, ever prejudicial and mortal, and
tota ipsorum substantia aliena est a natura nostra; never being capable of
nourishing, or helping us: As you will find in this Treatise. Of all which, we
are, especially to beware: since, many times, people, unawares, have been,
thereby, not only injured, but absolutely destroyed. For the prevention of
which, I thought it necessary to give a short description of their several
kinds of Poisons, their Nature, Signs, Diagnosticks, Prognostics and
Antidotes. And for the better avoiding those Horrid Mischiefs which I have
known occasioned by the unadvised, and ignorant rash actions of Empericks, and
Intruding Practitioners in the Art of Physic. Which, we hope, the Judicious
and Ingenious, are so sensible of; As that they will make it their endeavor in
their several places, to rectify and amend, by discountenancing and
suppressing of them; And that I shall not need to add any more, but that I am
and shall be, so long,

Die 7.ni ^7^. ^^ob^^; 1660. Thy Servant W. R.

TO THE MORE IMPRUDENT AND RURAL READERS.
THe more prudent and Judicious sort of Men, will not be much Concerned in what
I shall, in this Epistle deliver; Being, for the most part, already, Convinced
of the Truth thereof: But, of this sort, there are but a few; It is to the
major part of our little world, Therefore, I address my words at present. Of
whom, many, if not most, will, (...) know, Conclude, they may, with this Tract,
be able to Cure themselves and other of what Poison soever they have taken;
But, they will find themselves deceived; for although I have indeed, to their
Capacities, showed how many several ways they may, not only be prejudiced,
but also destoyed; Yet the Cures and Antidotes, are beyond the Sphere of their
Capacities; For if al^ the Physic books in the world should be Eng^ished unto
them, there would still be a necessity of having Able and Learned Physicians,
that can, by several signs discover the Causes and Nature of the Maladys, And
thence, know how to administer a proper Agent to the Patient, for effecting the
Cure. Which, the vulgar, being ignorant, can never be Capable of. For, it is
not the knowing of medicines only, that will make them Practitioners, for then,
An Apothecary were most probable to make the best Physician; But, how rightly,
to apply and administer the Remedy, the Disease, Cause, Constitution,
Temperature, Age, Sex, and other Accidents, Customs, etc. of the ^atient ^eing
Considered.

Moreover, To Practice out of Books merely, As many Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen,
And all Empericks and ignorant Practitioners do, is extremely pernicious,
without good Advice: For many times Death and Destruction follow thereupon, as
daily examples evince us; Amatus Lucitanus tell us Cent. 2. Curat. 33. Javinis
quidam ^um s^^^ie unicers^^^ e^^^ Co^^us (...) p^^^e f^^d^^t^r, (...) g^^nto
(...) A^senicum m^^^^m (...) e^at p^^ter med^^^^ium (...) ^^m se i^^everit
(...) in le^^ de^umbentem (...) d^m^st^i invener^^^.
Of a Young Man of his Acquintance, thus meeting with a Receipt of an Unguent
against the Itch, wherewith he was much molested, without further advice,
anointing himself all over with the same, which, having a considerable quantity
of Arsnick in it, a thing whose virtue and force he was ignorant off, was
thereby killed, instead of being Cured, and lying down to sleep, never awoake
more. Another, likewise, is mentioned by Franciscus Valeriola, in his
Observation, who having met with a small Tract of the praise of Hellebor, would
needs practice upon himself, And so, mostaking j for j would have been
Poisoned, had not other occasions accidentally prevented, And Zacutus
Lucitanus, Lib. 3. Prax. Admirand, Observat. 141. Mentions one of a hot and dry
Temperature that put himself in to the hand, of an Eminent Emperick, for esteem
and name among the Rural of the world, by reason of his gray hairs and Age,
his boasting vaunts and the like; was by the unadvisedness of this Quack
(applying contrary medicines to his condition) so tormented with intolerable
pains, Continual Watchings, whereby his malady was increased, so that from a
languishing Condition, Death, in a few days, followed. Whence, the
aforementioned Valeriola affirms out of Damascen. 2. And 3. Aphoris. Operart
e^ librit absque ^^g^^tion^ and sole^ti ingenio. pericun sam est. unde monemu^
quam ^^^pr^um (...) Au^^^^^es (...) pe^i (...)
That to work out of Books, without knowledge, a good Wit and Judgment, is
most perilous; Wherefore we admonish Men to be wa^e; For, how rash and
unadvised a thing it is to believe the writings of the Learned, or, to take all
upon Trust, without Art, Reason, Judgment, may appear by this Patient. And
Penotus concludes, in Praefat. Nar. Med. In libellis quae vulgo versantur apud
literatos incautiores multa.
Many things are found written in our Books, which to the ignorant Reader may
seem excellent Remedies; But when they come to use them, they oftentimes, find
themselves deceived, and take Poison instead of Physic. Thus did that Titular
Physician in the before mentioned Zacutus Lucitanus, Lib. Citat. Observat. 143.
Kill himself, trying Conclusions on his own Body; If, therefore, these Cheats,
be ignorant in their own Condition, how much more in others? But, how can it be
otherwise, being ignorant in those seven Doctrines and Disciplines mentioned in
the Epistle Dedicatory.

Yet there are some who do not forbear to vindicate these Idiots. Affirming
them so careful, Cautious, and Conscientious, as that they will give nothing
but what is safe; And if it do no good, will do no hurt; Have been of long
experience, and known to have cured many, of diverse Maladies, etc. I Answer; As
to their Carfulness, Cautiousness, and Conscientiousnesse in their Practice,
which the ignorant fansy to themselves, is ridiculous, and Repugnant to common
sense; For how can any Man be Careful, or Cautious, in what he knows not? will
all the Care, and Circumspection in the world avail; when they know not what
to take care of, nor what to avoid? Care, and Cautiousnesse, consist not in
administering that which they call safe and good medicines, such as, in
themselves, because, if they do no good, will not poison or kill the Patient;
But in praescribing such as may take off the Cause of the Malady, and may suite
with the Disease, the Constitution, Age, Sex, Temperature, etc. of the Patient.
And, if in these, he be ignorant, And of them knows not how to judge; his Care
and Cautiousnesse is a non ens: And, Consequently, to affirm, him, then,
Conscientious, is Nonsense: For if he had any thing of Conscience, he would not
dare to meddle with what he knows not, especially where the life of Man is
concerned, and at stake.

Neither can he be said to have experience, and to have cured Any: much less
many of Diverse Maladies. This Conception arises from a praved Imagination of
the vulgar; who, being Ignorant, can not judge either of Causes, means, or
effects; But, falsely, take the event, to be the effect of their medicines;
Because an Ignorant boasting Quack (which has only a few Receipts, that have
been recommended for good medicines (and perhaps they are so) which he uses at
adventure, and a like to all infirmities, Temperatures, Ages and Conditions)
gives a medicine to a sick party, And he afterward mends and recovers, All his
Relations and ignorant Acquaintance, presently conclude it was the Emperick's
Physic availed, and produced this effect: when, for ought they, or their
Mountebanck can tell, the Patients own Nature wrought out the violence of the
Disease, and so Recovered; Or perhaps it was the wholesome and proper Physic he
took before, from some Rational Physician that took off the Cause, and was the
Introducer of his Recovery, although, at the present, it could not be so
apparently, discerned: And being impatient of Health, took the Advice of the
Ignorant Practitioner (as many people too frequently do) And then attribute all
to that, it being the last thing he took.

Or, to speak the best of this kind of mad Practice; If the Emperick were
isntrumental of the sick parties Restoration; (As, it is not impossible for
them to hit upon the right means, sometime or other) yet it was but by chance,
accidentally; for he can neither describe the Disease offending, nor the Cause
introducing it, or the reasons either why it works such symptoms in this
party, or why he praescribed such a Remedy. So that, Although he did the Cure,
he can Fubrum sanitatem fecisse accidens est, quonium non est aptus ad
fac^endum sanitatem Faber, sed Medicus. Aristot. Metaph. 5.
not say he did it; because he knew not what he did; And therefore he cannot be
said to have experience; For, as Aristotle rightly teaches, Metaph. Lib. 1.
Experientia singularium, Ars universalium cognitio est. Much less when not
once in a thousand times he hitts the mark, happens on the right Disease,
Temperature, Constitution, and Condition of the Patient that suits with his
Recipts.

If Recipts, alone, were sufficient to make a Physician; An Apothecary were the
likeliest man to become the best Physician, having the Receipts of many Learned
Physicians sent daily unto him; But, as the Bodies, Conditions, and Accidents
usually differ, so that diverse medicaments are, accordingly, praescribed; so
will it be requisite to know, first, where they shall meet with Patie^ts in all
respects suitable to those for which they were first praescribed, before they,
with any certainty, use them again. Nay, and sometimes they will find such
intricate Causes, Symptoms, and Affections, as will puzle and put the best
Physician to a stand. Thus Sennertus that Famous Neoterick Philosopher and
Physician, Confesses of himself Insticut. Med. Lib. 2. Part. 3. Cap. 9. ubi
agit De Epilepsia, who notwithstanding was the great Restorer of the Art of
Physic to the whole world. So does Montanus ut testatur Erastus, Part. 4.
Disput. Contr. Paracels. Victorinus Trincavellus, a famous Venetian Doctor, as
you may see in his Counsels, Consil. 15. and 16. Together with Falopius, and
Francanzanus, two Learned Physicians, being all three Conferred with, at one
time, about one and the same matter, gave each of them their several opinions.
And the same Trincavel, being demanded his advice of a young man oppressed with
melancholy, confessed he was indeed mela^cholly* But knew not to what kind to
appropriate it. Heildishem, likewise, Speciel. 2. Fol* 166. Tells us, that
Paulus Regulinus, being consulted in the like case, was so confounded with a
Confusion of Symptoms, that he knew not to what kind t^ refer it. But this is
common in our daily practice.

Wherefore, if there be this difficulty in one Disease; what is there, think
you when there is a Complication and mixture of Distempers together, As is
frequent in Affections of the Head, and Brain? For, as Marcellus Donatus Cap.
4. De Medica Historia mirabili Lib. 2. Excellently notes, Cerebri affectiones
omnes inter sevalde affines esse, it a ut saepius unum alteri succedere usu
quotidiano percipiamus and quodmirabilius est, pluribus eodem tempore eundem
hominem affici.
Distempers of the Brain are of near affinity one with an other. And, that
oftentimes, one follows in the neck of another, as we daily see, and which is
more wonderful, Diverse do semel and simul at one and the same time altogether
afflict one and the same Man. Felix ^laterus, in Meant. Conservatione Lib. 1.
Tells us of a Patient of his, that was molested with Caro, Convulsio, Memoria
Laesa, and Visus Halucinatio, one upon the neck of an other. Also in Lib. 1. De
Mentis Alienatione, He mentions a noble man who was troubled with the
Hypochondriack melancholy, Palpitation of the Heart, with diverse Symptoms of
the Head and Belly all together. Joannes Montanus, Consil. 128. For the Duke of
Millain, shows, that he was troubled with a Primo Distillationem Catarohi,
quae interdum difficultate^ anhelitus inducit; Assidul. Tussicula infestatur,
non nunquam etiam podagrico delore afficitur, ac praeterea ^^detnate and tumore
cruru^ laborat dolor etia^ capitis and vertiginis non parum vexatur.
Catarrh, a Cough, Difficulty of Breathing, Pain in the Head, Vertigo, the
Gout, And an Hydropicall swelling in the Legs by intervalls; And, sometimes,
with most of them together. And in Consil. 36. He has a Pa^ient both molested
with both the Vertigo, and Palsy at once. Likewise in Consil. 38. He gives his
Advice of one affected with the Vertigo, and Cephalalgia. Scribit habuisse
hominem curandum annum sexagessimum quintum natum qui eodum tempore, Apoplexiam
debilem. Pralysin universale^, and frequentissim^s Epilepsiae Paroxismos
Pateretur.
Valescus also, writes that he had a Man in Cure of 65. years of Age, who at
one and the same time was perplexed with the weaker sort of the Apoplexy, the
universal Palsy, And the Falling. sickness by fits. Joannes Crato, Consil.
73. Lib. 7. Mentions a Woman who with the Vertigo, was also affected with a
Delirium, Trembling of the Heart, An universal leanness, Convulsion, Gnashing
of the Teeth, with an hurting of the Chief faculties* Sometimes, as it were,
taken with the Catalepfie, etc. Of which, examples are infinite.

Thus, Physicians themselves may b^ sometimes Confounded with a mixture of
Symptoms, and in Complicated Maladies, in their Practice of this most serious
and Weighty Art of Phsick; How much more, then, such as are not fitte^ and made
capable of so great a Function?

So that, then, there is no place left for such Men's practice, nor Color, for
their Intrusion thereinto: For, these things being considered, they cannot
choose but do much more hurt th^^ good. Nay, and the meanest Capacity, m^st
needs be sensible, that if it be no more th^^ this, it is mischief sufficient.
That by taking their safe medicines as they call them, and waiting for help
from them, it is most com^^ly seen the Patient neglects to seek out after the
true and right way of Recovery ^ill it be too late; And so mis^rably pe^ishes
through neglect, which is as much ^urt, I think, as if they should give him
^oyson to dispatch him presently.

And, thus, likewise, both Gentle, and ^imple, man, times, kill themselves and
^elations by tampering with medicines from their own Receipts, and trusting to
their own Judgments without the Advice of Physicians that are alone able to
^ustruct them. As also by trying and ^ixing their own fancies whilst they are
under the Physicians hand, whereby they Impede the operation of the right
means, and bring both shame and ignominy on the Physician and whole Art: not
like sober, but Imprudent people; Such is their cagernesse after Cure.

Others are so mad, as to run to Conjurers, Witches, Magicians, as they vaunt
themselves, but, indeed, mere Cheats, pretending to Cure by Words, Philters,
Charms, Amulets, and the like Devices of the Devil. But all Cures thereby, if
any be performed, is by the power of the Devil, and not by any power or virtue
in those conceits; As he did delude the Pagans and Heathen our Forefathers,
making them believe, their Gods (as Verstegan in his Antiquities and others
show) Did this or that Cure; so he does these Practitioners still, and such as
give ear unto them. It is the same evil Spirit that then wrought, that now
works in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience.

I advise, therefore, that all Christian people come out of their snares, lest
they thereby hazard their Souls health for, ever. Let us walk in GODS way, that
profess our selves christians, And shun the ways of the Devil: For, if we
forsake GOD, it is just with him to forsake us who are but Worms, Job 25.6.
Such as he can very well spare, and he without; He has no need of us, that he
should bear with our impieties. Why should we then seek to Angels, Saints,
Devils, Magitians, Conjurers, Witches, Impostors, Empericks, Cheats,
Ignoramusses, when we may walk in GODS way, by using the lawful means he has
appointed by the Hand of the Physicia^. And are Invited, Psalm. 50.15. To come
unto him? (...) Et invoca me in Die Angustiae; It is very Emphaticall in the
Hebrew. Our Translation renders it, Call upon me in the Day of trouble; But the
word (...) Trouble or Affliction, is the Noun foeminine of (...) which
signifies Straightened, or pressed with streights, Afflicted or Oppressed with
Afflictions both of Body and Mind: From the Root (...) He Straightened. So that,
I say, Let us go to GOD who is able to Deliver us, and has promised
Deliverance (...) Liberabote; Allthough we be never so much straightened,
afflicted and Opressed in Mind, or Body by Sickness, he is able to deliver and
ease us of our pains, etc. if we walk in his way, and use the lawful means,
he will deliver us.

Some, again, on the other extreme, are so stupid, and Pharisaically precise,
(whether from this Text of Scripture, or others, I know not) As that they will
use no means at all; Accompting it a vain, if not an unlawful, thing; And
Physicians useless Creatures, refusing all Help when they are sick, saying,
out of a fantastical piece of seeming piety, they trust in GOD, And therefore,
Let him work his will, expecting GOD will work miracles for them.

But; they ought to know, Religion does not teach them, nor any one, to be
Ma^^^l, and to want Common-sense; which shows us, that the LORD has endewed
Plants, Vegetables, Metalls, etc. with admirable virtue for our use. The LORD
has created medicines out of the Earth, And he that is wise will not abhor
them; with such does he heal Men and take away their pains; of such does the
Apothecary make a Confection: Says Jesus the Son of Sirach, Ecclus. 38.4, 7,
8. Whom the Learned esteemed as one of the wisest men (next to SOLOMON) that
ever was. But however, I say, common sense evinceth us of this. Surely, these
men (as Devout as they think themselves) have never read that of Luke 5.31.
where our SAVIOR himself, tells them, The whole need not a Physician but they
that are sick: Wherefore* they who have not their healths, do. Neither have
they considered that in Deuteronomy. 6.16. Thoushalt not tempt the Lord thy God. Of
which, they can never excuse themselves, whilst they neglect the means when it
may be had. Thereby sinning in an high Nature, whilst they account it a sin to
use that means which GOD makes a sin if they do not. For, as he has not
promised to sustain our lives longer then we use the means Meat and Drink; or
to save our Souls, if we do not pursue holiness, use the Ordinances the Word
and Sacraments: So has he not showed us in any part of his revealed Will, any
hopes of recovery out of the least Distemper (in an ordinary way) without the
use of Physic. We are not, therefore, to lie still and say, with the guiddy
multitude, God help us, only; But also put forth our helping hand for relief.
For then, and then only, may we look unto GOD for a blessing, from whom comes
healing, Ecclus. 38.2. And then may we boldly say, The LORD work his will. And
our Consciences will testify unto us, we have not been accessory to our own
ruin and destruction: Of which, otherwise, we must necessarily, be guilty; And
so without GODS infinite mercy, destroy the Soul too, as well as the Body. He
that kills another, kills but his Body; But he or she, that is accessory to
their own deaths, kills both Body and Soul. That is, if it be resolutely and
wilfully acted. And who can imagine any other, but that wilful perverseness is
the cause of any ones wholly neglect of the use of the means to restore*
Health? When they may, as well, and upon as good and rational grounds, hope to
be saved without means (which although it be not impossible, yet it is
improbable, it being the ordinary way) or live without food; as to be well
without Physic.

It is a ridiculous way of Arguing, therefore, that when their time is Come
they must Dye, do all the Doctors what they Can; And, till then, they shall
not, how remiss or careless soever they are in seeking out, or making use of
what is Conducible to their recovery It is true, there is a place in the HOLY
WRIT (from whence many draw that Argument, and on which they ground this their
Frenzy) which to the vulgar Capacity, And common apprehention of the giddy
multitude seems to Jndicate that GOD has appointed a determinate time, some
shorter, some longer, in which they must undoubtedly Dye, viz. in Job 14.^.
Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou
have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass.

For the better understanding of which, we must Consider upon what occasion,
and to what end this was uttered by Job, and lik^wis^ compare it with other
places of SCRIPTURE. In short then, the occasion was Jobs many, and sor^
afflictions; whereupon speaking to GOD, and desiring mercy of Him, he pleads
with the LORD from the Consideration of the shortness of Man's life, which he
terms but Days, and Months at the most, He ascends not up to Years;
Intimating that Man's lif^ was so exceeding frail and short, in Comparison of
GOD and Eternity, that it was not worthy, as it were, to be named; And
therefore at the beginning of the Chapter he says, Man that is born of a Woman
is of few Days, and full of trouble. He comes forth like a Flower, and is cut
down; He flees also as a shadow, and continues not. Days and Flowers and
shadows, are of very short continuance indeed; By which Metaphors he declares,
but the great brevity of Man's life. And therefore, the latter part of the
verse, viz. Thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass; is no more to
be understood literally, then the former. For we may as well conclude from
this Text, that all Men's lives end in a few Days, or Months at the most, And
never attain a year or years; As, from hence to maintain, some Men are ordained
to live Twenty, some Thirty, some Forty years, some more, some less, And
longer, can not. Which, you see, is not the meaning of the Text, but only, I
say, contains expressions to set forth the extreme shortness of Man's life.
And therefore in the second Verse, he says he flees like a shadow and
Continues not. Yet we see many Men live to a very great Age, and therefore can
not literally be said, not to Continue, or to flee as a shadow. So that then,
I take the genuine meaning of the beginning of the words, to show only the
shortness of Man's time here upon earth (As that of Solomon, There is a time to
be born, and a time to dye. Eccles. 3.2. Mentioning no time at all to live,
intimating, it was so inconsiderably short, as not to be worth noting) And the
latter part to teach us, the certainty of our mortality; we cannot pass, or
avoid it; the bounds of life is appointed, it consisting in a mixture of the
four Elements, it must needs and assuredly end in the Consumation of them: As
the same Job has it Cap. 7.1. Is there not an appointed time to Man upon
earth? He puts the matter, by this question, quite out of question, nothing
more sure, clear and true then that there is an appointed time to dye as well
as to be borne. But, that it is limited to this, or that, or the other year,
is not apparent from his words; Nor, as I think, from any part of the Word of
GOD: Nay it rather speaks the Contrary. As in Exodus 20.12. Deuteronomy. 4.40. And Cap.
28.20. Psalm. 101.8. Prove. 10.27. Eccles. 7.17. Isa. 38.10. All which places and
many more, which I might enumerate, clearly hold forth unto us, that the term
of our lives depends rather upon our Obedience or Disobedience to the Will and
Commandments of GOD, sometimes thereupon promising length of Days, sometimes
threatening to shorten it. As in Psalm 55.23. also it is said, The Bloody and
Deceitful Man shall not live out half his Days: That is, not half the Days he
might by his Constitution and Temperature of Body, probably attain unto:
Whence, likewise, that in Eccles. 7.17. It is said Wickedness makes us dyed
before our time, not before the time that GOD in his Divine Providence has
ordained and decreed; That is impious profaneness to Imagine, neither is it
possible, he is unchangeable, Malachy 3.6. And whatsoever he has ordained,
must assuredly come to pass, he alters not his decrees as we do our minds.
So that there is no place left for that conceit that there is just such a time
for every man to Dye, And no sooner, nor later: unless we will make GOD
subject to change, which to conceive is more then impiety.

To return then, I say, to use Prayer only, that GOD would help them without
the means by the hand of a lawful Physician, is a tempting of GOD and his
Goodness: It is to lie in misery and say GOD help us? Wherefore have a Cure.
Again to use the means appointed by GOD for Restoration of Health, and not to
crave a blessing from him is profane, Prasumptious, and a sin in an high
nature. Both together, is, therefore best; Agreeable to Reason and the Word and
Will of GOD. The Prayer of the Faithful, its true, will save the sick; But,
they must likewise be anointed with oil, James 5.4. And Hezekiah, ( 2 Kings
20. And Isa. 38.) Must have a lump of figgs laid to the sore, notwithstanding
GOD had sent him word, he should recover; When yet he might have cured him (As
he did that blind man in Luke 18.42.) without means; But to convince us of its
utility, and necessity. Yet, should we admit, as much as any simple ignorant
body would desire, viz. That there is an exact and set i am for every Man that
he cannot outlive, nor before which he can not dye. I say, if this should be
so, thou being ignorant when the time is that thou being ignorant when the time
is that thou must be dissolved; Thou ought to use thy utmost endeavor for
thy own Preservation, according as thou art bound by the Law both of GOD and
Nature: or, thou can not but be guilty of Self-murder, And be accessory to
thy own destruction.

For Imprudent, Rural, Rash, Conceited and Ignorant People, therefore, I have
not compiled this Subsequent Treatise: nor for Confident Youngsters, and Women,
who think their ownwitts best, And yet want so much wit as to advise with
others better then their own. To all these I desire it may be a Searr-Crow, And
so terrible, that they may avoid meddling with it, as they would with Poison it
self, lest, it prove their ruin, and the destruction of others whom they take
the boldness to ta^uper with; Contrary to the intentions of him who desires
the prosperity of you all; And shall so continue to do, so long as he Remains
to be

Die ne. 29^. Octobris 1660. W. R.

OF POISONS With their several ANTIDOTES, Illustrated by Diverse Histories, the
Testimony of the most Approved, Authentic, and Learned Authors Extant.
PART I. Of the Differences of Poisons, and of Poisons in General.
POISONS are of Various and Infinite Kinds; which, to Describe, Explain, and
rightly understand, that we may the better shun, avoid and resist; It will not
be impertinent to praefix a word, or two of their Differencies in General,
before we come to Particulars: which some Authors have Comprehended under one
or other of these seven Heads.

SECTION I. Of the first Division of Poisons.
AS, First, they are such as are 1. so of their own nature, As Woolf-bane,
Hemlock, Hen-bane, and the like; Or 2. such as are not so of their own Nature,
but become so when they putrify and Corrupt, As Flesh, Fish, Fruits, etc.
putrified. Or 3. Such as were made so by Art, As Aqua Fortis, Aqua Regis,
Mercurius Sublimate, Praecipitate, etc.

SECTION II. Of the second Division of Poisons, and that they act not by
Primary and manifest Qualities.
SEcondly, they are are such, (as some teach) which hurt either 1. by the
primary and manifest Qualities, As Hot, Cold, Dry, Moist. Or 2. by occult. Or
3. by manifest and occult together. Or 4. (As others will) by second qualities,
as they call it, which Corrode, or putrify; As Glass, they say, (which they
number among Poisons) Corrodes the Belly and Intralls, and thereby causes
Death. But, they may as well say splints of Bones, Needles, Pins, or other
sharp thing is Poison, because they also, many times, perforate the Intestines
being swallowed, and Destroy the party. Neither do they rightly teach that
Poisons offend and hurt by primary qualities, if it be taken simply; For that,
which so acts and works, is not properly to be accounted Poison; But by occult
qualities, and by the proper y of the whole substance. As Galen abundantly
teaches Lib. 3. De Temperamentis, Cap. 4. and in Lib. 1. De simplicium
medicamentorum facultatibus, Poison does not act by diverse qualities.
Cap. De abrotano. For, if Poison depended only upon manifest qualities; then,
whatsoever does therein exceed, should be poison, As, Garlic, Onyons, and the
like; which, by Dioscordies, Galen, Avicenna, Serapio, and other of the
Ancients, are accounted Hot and Dry in the fourth Degree; yet are not Poison,
As is Auripigmentum, quod proprietate totius substantiae nocet: The other only
in quantity. Yet we Deny not, that there are Differencies in Poisons; As, some
that hurt only by an occult quality, without exceeding in the first qualities;
Others, do exceed, and hereby, together with an occulte quality operates on the
bodies of men; yet so, as that therein all Authors do not agree, affirming
that Euphorbium (for example) offends sometimes by an occult quality, sometimes
by the manifest and primary. However those which are properly Poisons chiefly
affect by an occult and hidden property. So that although in one and the same
subject there may be both manifest and occult qualities, yet we are not to
confound their effects. For, manifest and primary qualities either Heat, or
Cool, or Moisten, or Dry: occult, either Kill, or Direfully hurt; every
quality acting according to its Nature, Sine alterius Directione, As Antonius
Guaynerius Cap. 1. De Venenis, excellently notes. For, although Avicenna and
other Authors treating of Poisons, affirm opium, Euphoribium, and others,
operate by manifest qualities; they are to be understood, thus speaking,
considering Poison, quantum ad specificam formam, qua una species differt ab
alia; And according to this Consideration, they said that some did work non
quatenus Calidium, aut frigidum; sed quatenus tale, habens scilicet virtutem
humanae vitae and sannitati contrariam, etc.

SECTION III. Of the Third Kind of Poisons, showing that all have not an
aptitude to Kill, but that some are Mortal, others not.
THirdly, Some with Hieronimus Mercurialis Lib. 1. De Venenis Cap. 5. and
others, maintain, that all Poisons are either Mortal, or have an aptitude to
kill. But this is false, as you will see in the Second Part, where we shall
Discourse of Poisons more particularly; for some do only Infatuate, Stupifie,
and hurt for a time; As Philters and Love-Potions, or as the Spider Tarantula
which makes such as are thereby bitten, to dane and be mad, etc. Or the
Torpedo, which stupifies and benums the parts that touch it, etc. For, that
Poison which hurts only such members as are not necessary to life, and does not
hinder or abolish what Conduces to the Preservation thereof, is not mortal,
neither can it have an aptitude thereunto. Wherefore the more Rational, have
agreed, that some are Mortal, others not Mortal, or only very hurtful. And
those that are Mortal, kill either sooner, or later, and are those which
affect the Vital Parts, as Brain, Heart, Liver, Lungs, etc.

SECTION IV. Showing a Fourth sort of Poisons discovered by their effects, and
that some are Enemies to one part, some to another.
FOurthly, Some Poisons discover themselves unto us by their effects and
operations, whilst their forms are hid; For, some, 1. Do more peculiarly
affect and hurt the Brain, as Nightshade, Opium, Hen-bane, Mercury, Torpedo,
Tarantula, the brains of a Catt, and others. 2. Others are Enemies to the
Heart, as all those which suddenly kill; as Scorpions and the like, which
suddenly pass through the Arteries to the Heart. Some also 3. Are opposed to
the Liver, as all those Herbs which evacuate blood, which Galen Lib. de Purg.
med. facultat. Cap. 4. mentions. 4. Others to the Sperm vessels and genitalls,
as Cardan writes of one Lib. 3. De Venenis, who, by Poison, became barren. 5.
Some to the Lungs, as Lepus Marinus. 6. To the Bladder, as Cantharides. 7.
Some, again, cause the dysentery, whence it comes to pass that such who are
bitten by poisonous Creatures or stung, have their Veins, Arteries, Nerves,
and the like, more effectually affected; as the bite of a Scorpion (as we said)
Conveies the venom to the Heart by the Arteries; the bite of an Haemorrhous
diffuses into all the Veins, and causes an expulsion of blood. The bite of a
mad-Dogg, delates neither by the Arteries, nor Veins, but Nerves especially.
And so the infection of the French Pox (or English-Pox, as it may now be termed
for the frequency of it among us) Runs immediately to the Liver, whilst the
Brain and Heart is free. Whence it happens, that some poisons cause heaviness,
dullness, stupidity; Others, Convulsions, Epilepsies, Apoplexies, some excite to
Laughter, Madness, Dancing, Libidiny, Fury, Raging, Sadness, Fearfulness; Some
cause Fevers, Pains, Inflammations, Some bring Death suddenly; Some by
degrees and more slowly, according as the Poison is in property, the Nature of
the Patient, or according as it is used or applied.

SECTION V. Showing a Fifth Division of Poisons, and that there is no Poison to
be prepared that can kill precisely a Month, two, three, or a Year, after it
is administered.
Fifthly, Some Poisons kill sooner, and some later. As, the bite of an Aspe, if
some speedy course be not taken, kills immediately, especally that sort called
Hyrundinaceus, which as Galen, and the Learned think, kills so suddenly, as
that it is thougt to be Incurable; Terrestris within 3. or 4. hours time; and
that sort which is called Pryas, they think is more slow; which it may be, is
that kind which Paraeus thinks destroys in the third part of a day. And a bite
of a Mad-Dogg, lies long as it were hid, and yet breaks forth at the last as
Paraeus writes of Baldus the Lawyer, Lib. 21. De Venenis Cap. 14. Who Dyed four
Months after he was bitten. And sometimes there is no sign of it in six or
eight Months, as Galen holds, the which Codronchus confirms; Or in a year as
others write. Albertus magnus, Lib. 7. de Hist. Animal Cap. 21. Says he saw a
man bitten by a Mad-Dogg in the Arm, and was well seven whole years after, and
then the place began to swell and be inflamed, and so within two Days
thereupon Dyed. Guaynerius also, speaks of some who continued well twelve
years. And Alsaharavius attests, he knew one that lived forty years after he
was bitten, before he was apparently infected, and then Dyed of that bite.
Other Poisons again, although they are of power sufficient to kill presently;
yet by being eaten in a smaller quantity are the longer, as Arsnick; For though
of its own Nature, as Wierus, and Forestus well observe it, is not to be
remedied, it kills so soon, if it be not immediately taken; Yet some have by
eating but little of it, lived a long time after but in great misery and
torment, as Amatus Lucitanus mentions of his servant, that by eating of some
Hen dipped in the sauce wherein Arsnick was, lived and whole year after, Cent. 2.
Curat. 65. And Forestus observat. med. observat. 28. In Scholia, Lib. 18. Tells
us of a woman that lived two years, and of some, that lived many years, after
they eat some of this deadly poison.

Whence it is disputed among Physicians, and the Learned, An venena talia
dentur, qua definito and certo temporis spatio hominem interficiant? Whether
there be any such Poison, or whether any such is to be prepared, as will kill
at such a certain and prefixed time, and no sooner nor later: which tenet is
stiffly maintained in the Affirmative, by several; Instancing and backing of
their opinion, by that of Claudius in Tacitus Annal. Lib. 12. And of Drusus who
Lib. 4. Annal. Is affirmed to Dye in this manner: as also by that practice of
Caesar Borgia in Jovius Histor. Part 1. Lib. 3. Bringing likewise the Authority
of Theophrastus that in 9. D^ Hist. Plantar. Cap. 16. maintains, that they may
so be Composed, as that they may kill in two, three, or one Months time, or at
the years end, or at two years end. Citing that story, from him also Cap. 19.
Of an Apothecary who to restrain hot spurrs, had a medicine so exactly
prepared, that he could make any that took it, as they pleased to agree, have
no appetite in the leas^ to venereall sports, for a month, two, or three, etc.
With several such like stories which forbear to recite. Besides, natura^^
things have their circuits in their actions, and after a time end; as is seen
in the Cri^^ of a disease especially. And because Death is occasioned by a
Consumption of natural heat, and a drying up of the Radical moisture; which
seems feasible sometimes in a month or two, or in a year or two. Diverse such
like arguments are brought by some, to maintain this their false imagination.
But if we rightly Consider; It does not stand with reason that there can
possibly be any such Poison; For although all things have their Circuit and
End; Yet it is not probable any man, in this life, should attain to that
perfection of Knowledge, as to know exactly any ones temperature so, as to
prepare his Medicine accordingly. Besides, to an action, the Agent is not only
requisite, but the Patient also, and the Agent is to act according to the
Disposion of the Patient; Wherefore since the Patient, viz. Man's Body,
according to its temperature, Age, occult qua^ities, Diet, Customs, and other,
Circum^tances, may resist sometimes more and ^ometimes less, the Agent which
is the Poison: It is no wonder it kills some ^ooner, and some later; but it
would be more then a wonder, this being Considered, ^f the Medicine should be
so exactly prepa^ed, as to make the effect when the party who administers it,
pleases. Whence it is, that sometimes it falls out, that diverse who have eaten
or partaken of one and the same Poison, have not the same end, nor at the same
time, some live longer, some shorter, as is evident in Diverse Stories from
Credible Authors; as will be found in aur following Discourse. And Nicolas
affirms, Sermon. 4. Tract. 4. Cap. 35. He saw two bitten by one and the same
mad-Dogg, and one thereby became mad; But the other had no Detriment at all.
And although according to the Consent General of all the Learned, Arsnick be a
most Deadly Poison, killing immediately although eaten but in a small quantity,
yet Cardan, Contradict. 7. Tract. 2. Lib. 2. Tells us of one that eat almost an
ounce of Arsenick without the least prejudice. And Opium, which as Pliny Not.
Hist. Lib. 20. Cap. 8. Records, is of force to bring sudden Death eaten in a
small quantity; And but administed in Clysters, and yet Sextus Empericus 1.
Hypothese^^ Empericorum, Tells us of one who eat four Drachms of Opium without
any hurt. Nay Gartzeus ab Horto Lib. 1. Aromat. Jndia, Cap. 4. Says he knew
one that could familiarly eat Ten Drachms. And the Turks as Historians assure
us, Do familiarly eat whole ounces of it with no inconveniency in the least.

SECTION VI. Containing a Sixth sort of Poisons, according as they are received
into the Bodies of Men; wherein diverse Questions are discussed.
SIxthly, A Sixth Division of Poisons, is, from the several ways they
Insinuate into our Bodies and affect us; As some are taken by the mouth in Meat
or Drink, or instead of them, or by way of Medicine; And some are outward.
Whence arises this Question among the Physicians, whether external Poisons,
are Poisons taken Inwardly, and so whether Internal, be if Outwardly applied;
From that of Galen Lib. 3. De Temperam. Cap. 3. Where he says, Non candem esse
Venenorum rationem cum exterius applicantur, ut cum intus assumuntur.
Quemadmodum enim ait, quae itnus assumpta perimunt, foris administrata, non
nocent: Sic neque quae foris admota occidunt, iutus assumpta idem praestant.
With whom Cornelius Celsus. De Re medica, lib. 5 Cap. 27. And Pliny, lib. 29.
Not. Hist. Cap. 4. Agree. But, this is by sufficient reasons controverted by
Cardan lib. 1. De Venenis, Cap. 18. And our Latter Writers. From the testimony
of the Learned and most Credible Authors extant; We see there are diverse
Poisons which may externally hurt us; As, by the poisoning of Darts, Swords,
and other Instruments of War, the Bodies of Men may be not only Infected, but
wholly destroyed. Nay, and as Ardoynus Lib. 1. De Venenis, Cap 8. Guaynerius
Cap. 22. De Venenis, Pouzettus Lib 7. Cap. 2. And others abundantly manifest,
even Clothes and other necessaries, have been Infected; and by shaking hands
with their Enemies, some have found out a way to poison them by certain
Unguents. Oils, and the like, And so to Infect their Spurts, Stirrop^, Boots,
Saddles, as that they shall thereby be Destroyed. But these are merely
Fancies; and no wise agreeable to reason that any should have to do with such
virulent Poison, and not to be infected themselves, or that, he that shakes his
Enemy by the hand, should be more free then the Enemy that is thereby pretended
to be Infected by the Unguent, wherewith the hands of the Actor is anointed.
Or, that Poison should penetrate through other Vestments to the Skin, as
Scaliger atrests Exercit. 186. One to be poisoned by treading on a Spider,
affirming the venom of that Creature penetrated the sole of his shoe, and so
getting to the Heart suffocated him. I say, these, and the like Stories are
merely Fabulous, not to be Credited, and rather to be attributed to the
Subtilty, Craft, and Malice of the Devil, and his Imps, Witches, Conjurers,
and the like, who, by Gods permission, are indeed suffered to use and practice
many such Feats upon the Bodies of Men, mentioned by Nicol. Florentinus, Sum.
4. Tract. 4. Cap. 5. Guaynerius, Cap. 1. et 2. De Vene^is, Grevinus, Lib. 1. De
Venenis, Cap. 1. Mathiolus in Praefat. in 6. Dioscori, etc. But that such
Mischiefs are to be done by natu^urall means, is not be Credited. But, this
(...) most Certain, that many times Poison (...) Communicated and Conveyed into
Men's Bodies, by the bites of venomous Creatures, (as we shall aboundaly
manifest beneath, when we come to speak of Particulars) Wherein we shall
likewise see, that some Creatures are so poisonous as that they ^nfect not only
by their touch corporally, ^ut also by their breath, and virtually (as ^e may
say) and kill by a kind of spiritual ^nflux. Avicenna to this purpose, has
^any examples, Lib. 4. Fen. 6. Tract. 3. ^ap. 22. That some have been killed by
slaying a Serpent with a spear, coming not nearer then the length thereof;
Jul. Cas. Scaliger also, Exercit. 200. affirms the same; So does Mathiolus in
Praefat. in 6. Dioscorid. And Amatus Lucitanus Cent. 1. Curat. 62. Vidus Vidius
Lib. 1. De Curat. General. Cap. 13. etc. Even as it is credibly affirmed of
the Torpedo, that it benums the Hand and Arm, that holds but the pole that
touches it afar off. Or, as the breath of Catts, as Avenzoar, Praemit^ Lib. 1.
Thenzir. Mathiolus Com. Ad Lib. 6. Cap. 25. Dioscorid. Attest, is known
commonly to be poisonous. And to bring Consumptions of the Lungs, Hectic
Fevers, and the like, as Paraeus notes, Lib. 21. D^ Venenis, Cap. 34. to such
as are familiar with them. And the Basiliske, even with the touch, kills; For
no Creature can touch him and escape Death, as Galen avers, with whom Avicenna,
Aetius, Dioscorides, Panlus Aeginetus, Pliny, Nicander, and others consent.
Likewise, at the second hand, Me^ may be destroyed by Poison from inoffensive
Herbs and Plants, that have been accidentally infected by some venomous
Creature; As Mizaldus relates, of some who have been destroyed by Sage,
poisoned by a Toad that lay at the root of it. Memorabil. Cent. 1. Aph. 1. Et
in Horto. Neither may we be surprised with Death, only by the touch of Poison
and poisonous Creatures, but also by their very looks, smell, noise, we may not
only be infected and sustain much misery, but likewise be sometimes deprived of
life also; As Araeteus lib. 1. De Signis. et Causis morb. Acut. Mentions one
Infected by the Ardent and venomous look of a Mad-dogg. And, as the most
Credible of the Learned maintain, the Basilisk kills even with the sound of his
Hiss, and the rays of his sight. And many have been Infected by the very smell
of a Mad-dogg, as will be showed beneath. Pliny like, wise lib. 8. Not. Hist.
Cap. 21. mentions a wild beast near Nilus called Catablepas that kills any man
that it beholds, and that instantly. Which Relations, although some with
Cardanlib. 1. De Venenis Cap. 16. account as Fabulous; Yet, sounder Judgments
are not of his nor their opinion; But hold, that these and other Creatures may
destroy mankind by their very touch, sight, smell, noise or sound, receiving
the species of the poisonous vapors into their bodies by the Pores, Eyes,
Nose, and Ears. For if one Man, by a malicious and envious look, that is not of
a poisonous Nature, may hurt; disturb, disquiet, and discompose the spirits of
an other; How much more is it possible for a poisonous Creature, by his
venomous Aspect, to hurt or kill? As my Lord Verulam, Viscount St. Albans in
his Not. Hist. Cent. 10 Gives this Reason, why Men in their Trophies, and after
Triumphs, are indisposed and sick, oftentimes; because they have received into
their bodies the venomous Rays and malignant beams of some envious and
malicious Eye: being communicated in forma Atomorum et minimorum Corpusculorum,
et qualitate spiritale. So that with Cardan and the rest, I confess that
neither the sight, nor hearing the sound, not smell, nor the like, do quatenus
tales, hurt or kill; Sed quatenus cum iis vel vaports et Atomi venenatae, vel
aliae qualitates spiritales venenosae conjunctae sunt; But as either venomous
vaponrs, Atoms, or other spiritual venomous qualities are joined thereunto.
For as all Philosophers and Physicians agree, Seeing; is not by emitting, but
receiving in. Wherefore, it is the poysono^ Rays that are received into the
body by the Eye, kills, and not the sight only. And so, of hearing the sound,
and hissing of Serpents, it is not barely that, but the venomous vapors
infecting the Atoms and received, which cause the infection. The same likewise
may be said of smells, and of that wonderful change which happens to such who
lie under the Yew-Tree, which is of that venomous quality in Arcadia, as Pliny
observes lib. 16. Not. Hist. Cap. 10. That diverse have perished by sleeping
under its shadow, (although here in England, as Pena notes, and reason teaches
us, it is not offensive, because the heat of the Sun is not of that force among
us to bring it to its maturity, nor to cause venomous exhalations to breath
forth) And The vetus lib. sing Cap 61. Reports of the Tree Baxama, that if any
stay under it but a quarter of an hour, they are in danger of suffocation. Not
that the shadow is the cause thereof, simply as a shadow, though it be said
such as stay under the shadow, etc. Are so, and so affected, (as Cardan would
fain persuade the world these Learned Authors, and others think, when they so
write, and so labors to prove the shadow of them are not Poison, whereby
indeed, he shows only that he sights with a shadow, and neglects the
substance.) But the venomous vapors which proceed and breath out of those
Trees, and are received into the bodies of such as remain under (...) And so we
free, Colocy this does ^^^^^times purge only by smelling to it: which is not to
be understood simply, quatenus odorabilis, sed quatenus subtilissimos emittit
va^ pores, qui naribus excipiuntur.

SECTION VII. Showing a Seventh Division of Poisons.
SEventhly, a Seventh Division of Poisons is taken from their original, and
bodies in which they are found. As 1. Some are in Mettalls and Mineralls. 2.
Some is Vegetables. 3. Some in Animalls, and Living Creatures. According to
which Division, we shall treat of Poisons in Particular. And thus much shall
suffice to be spoken of Poisons in General.

PART II. Of POISONS in particular, with their several sorts and Antidotes.
THus having prefixed a word of Poisons in General, we descend to Particulars:
(which as has been said) may be divided into these three Classes, as being all
comprehended, either under Mineralls, or Vegetables, or Animalls, of which in
order.

CLASS I. Of Poisons belonging to MINERALLS, or dug out of the earth.
DIVISION I. Of such as may properly be termed Metalls.
SUch Poisons, as are, or have relation to Mineralls, are these 9. chiefly, and
most frequently met with. 1. Aqua Fortis, 2. Antimony, 3. Arsenick, 4. Argent
Vive. 5. Calx. Vive, 6. Vitriol, 7. Aes, Brass or Copper, 8. Dross and rust of
Iron, 9. Lead. For other things that are dug out of the earth, and are no
metalls, they are especially these two: 1. Lapis Lazulus, and 2. The Diamond.
Of all which one word in order, briefly.

SECTION I. Of Aqua Fortis, Aqua Regis, and Aqua Chrysulca; with their
Antidotes,
AQVA Fortis, Aqua Regis, and Aqua Chrysulca as some call it, are put by many
Authors as deadly poisons: The which Bruno Seidelius in lib. De Morb.
Incurabil. page 13. Illustrates by an example of a young Wench who being very
thirsty, meeting with a bottle in which there was Aqua Fortis, and drinking it
off, fell into most direful symptoms, and at length dyed. Bembus likewise
tells us of a certain Legate, in his History of Venice, Lib. 1. that having
swallowed a Diamond that was in his Ring, and drinking some Aqua Fortis after
it, was thereby poisoned: Its Antidote is the Mucilage of the seeds of
Quinces, or of Quinces it self; An example of one the^e by recovered, Petrus
Forestus records in observat Med. Lib. 15 Observat. 30. De aegritudinibus
Gulae, who had drank Aqua Fortis. But in regard these waters do soon diffuse
themselves into every part of the body, the remedy ought speedily to be used. I
find commended also as most effectual, Eclegma ex mucilagine seminum
Cydoniorum, Altheae et gummi tragacanthae, aqua rosarum extracta, ac melle
Rosato, et violato paratum; ut et gargarisma ex semine Cydoniorum, Altheae, et
Cucumeris. Flor. Rosarum, violarum et verbasti, atque ex prunella, pulmonaria,
sannicula, et s. q. Aquae decoctis, and melle rosato, vol exy^^lite scilitico
addito paratum. With which medicines, that Heardsman recorded in Baldwin
Ro^seus, Epist. 9. (That being 'excessive thirsty, imstaking the vessel, drank
a most hearty draught of Aqua Fortis, and thereby molested with many grievous
symptoms) was perfectly cu^ed The story at large you may read in the aforesaid
9. Epist. And also in Schen^kins, observat. med. Lib 7. fol. 996.

SECTION II. Of Antimony and its Antidotes.
ANtimony likewise, if not rightly prepared, and fitly and duly administered,
is deadly poison; Whence Cornelius Gemm^s, Cycl^^nomicae lib. 2. Writes that he
has the Names of above fourscore men and women that have perished by Antimony:
Yet some do sly maintain it to be inoffensive, with Mathiolus, But then it
must be prepared, according to Quercetan, Evonimus, Valentius, Crolius. And so,
it may prove (being also administered by a knowing and judicious Physician) a
good medicine, and no wise dangerous; Joannes Albertas Wimpinaeus, De concord.
Hippocraticor. et Paracelsist. Writes that he saw thirty grains of Antimony
prepared, taken without any hurt in the least. Its Antidotes are, if taken into
the body, syrup of Roses, Treacle, Bole armoniacke, etc. or you may make this
composition, Boli Armeni, ij. et cum pauxillo vino exhibeatur. vel Boli armeni
j. ol. Caryophilorum, gut. iij. cum pauxillo vino Fiat Haustus. vel Pull vis
mastiches, ex Caryophilorum, Chel. Cane: et Boli Armen. Ana j. cum succo
Cidoniorum pauxillo. To prevent the reception of fumes, and to resist tho
poysonons vapors of Antimony, let such as try experiments therewith in the
fire, and refiners of metalls, Drink a little of the water of Wormseed, or eat
a piece of bread and butter with Rue. This following Electuary is likewise very
much commended; Allii, Nucum jugland, Ana Mj. Contundendo contundantur, et cum
melle s. q. misceantur; misturae huic addatur Theriaca j. Zedoariae, ss.
Caryophilorum, nuc. moschat. Ana ij. Mellis dispumati q. s. Fiat Electuarium.
With the which you may anoint the nose and nostrills.

SECTION III. Of Arsnick, its several kinds and Antidotes.
ARSNICK is of two sorts Natural, or Artificial. Natural is likewise two
fould, the first is called Auripigmentum, the other Sandaracha. Auripigmentum
is that Arsnick which is yellow, and in color resembles Gold; Sandaracha is of
a brightish red color. These are not only both of one kind, but also of one
and the same quality. The Artificial Arsnick is likewise of two sorts, the one
is very white and transparent like Crystal, composed of Sandaracha, and
Auripigmentum by sublination. And this is by most, without any distinction,
taken for Arsnick. The other is called Realgar and Risugallum, which is
composed of Sulphur and Auripigmentum, or with the addition of Calxvive, or
Salt, or mixed, and burnt, or Calcined, etc. They are all four rank poison, and
being taken into the body, produce much alike the fame symptoms, only
Sandaracha is not so violent and grievous as Auripigmentum. Wherefore one and
the same Antidotes will indifferently serve for the cure of all: But if speedy
help be not administered all will be in vain, in regard they kill so suddenly;
As Wierus, Forestus, and others abundantly manifest unto us by several
examples: Nay it is of that poisonous quality, that it kills even by outward
application, and that suddenly too; as that young man in Amatus Lucitanus,
recorded likewise by Schenckius, and Sennertus, who, molested with the Itch,
anointing himself with an unguent in which was some Arsnick, running on, and
trusting to his own head, without the advice of any Phisician, was found dead
in his bed the next Morning. Another he likewise mentions, who by the same rash
action, became stark mad, so that he was fain to be bound; but one Day getting
loose, when the people of the house in which he lived, were upon their several
occasions called out of the way, after he had raged about, at length leapt out
of the window and broke one of his legs, etc. Yet sometimes it happens, that
they die not so suddenly, but then they, for the most part live miserably all
their Days after: as the same Lucitanus Cen. 2. Curat. 65. Records one to have
lived an whole year before he dyed, yet was all that while in a most
intolerable torment. And Petrus Forestus, observat. med. Lib. 18. Schol.
observat. 28. Tells us he has known some have lived many years after, but in
grievous misery Et ego novi qui multos annos supervixere, sed in magna miseria,
cruribus resolutis, ut vix incedere possent; et mulierem post dnos annos tandem
vita orbatam; Ita et religiosa quaedam Delphis veneno infecta longo tempore,
sed misere, supervixit. And Cardan Contradict. 7. Tract. 2. Lib. 2 Tells us of
one that eat almost an ounce of Arsnick without the least prejudice. The cure
may be effected if taken in time; first, by vomiting it up if possible, before
it have diffused it self out of the stomach into the parts; and that by butter
and warm water, or the Decoction seminis Rapi, Atriplicis in quo Butyrum recens
aut ol. lini, vel rosace^m sit liquefactum, or any other sat liquor. Forestus
observat. med. Lib. 18. in schola observat. 28. does much commend oil with a
litttle chickin broth for a vomit, Memini ego pueram apud Delphenses, etc. I
remember I cured a Boy at Delph, who had unawares eaten that kind of Arsnick,
which they usually lay for Mice, (commonly called by us Rats-bane) only with a
vomit of oil and chickin broth. Adding a little after, that he has found of
great use (amongst such as he has cured,) oil of sweet Almonds given to
drink with buttered-ale Milk likewise is highly commended by some Authors to
this purpose: whence the same Forestus loco citato, affirms, that in Italy
they use when poison is first taken, to drink Milk perpetually mixed with oil
of sweet Almends, which he says Avicenna had experienc^ of. De cura I^teritiae
in fine decerptum. And M^nta^us will have them drink Milk till their thirst be
quenched (if possible) for this kind of poison does exceedingly cause thirst;
For hereby he attests himself to have cured several that had eaten fish fried
with butter, and rouled in meal wherein Arsnick was mixed: showing farther, that
all such as drank liberally thereof, were quickly well; such as deferred the
drinking of it, grew worse and fell into grievous symptoms and paralytick
sits; and such as refused it wholly, Dyed. Petrus de Apono, Tract. De Venenis,
Commends Asses Milk; who says, he cured a young man that had taken that kind
of Arsnick called Realgar in drink, and was so affected, that through too much
Drought, remained a^ Immovable; First he administered Vomits, as is before
described, then Clysters, but the chief business was drinking of Asses Milk.
Lastly, the specificall Antidotes of this kind of poison, Sunt, in primis,
Christallus Fossilis pulverizatus j. pondere, cum oleo Amygdalorum dulcium
recenti potus. Secundo, oltum e nucleis pini iij. pondere exhibitum. Tertio,
utilis est and lapis Bezoar, quod probat historia illa, quam recenset Claudius
Richardus, in descriptione Bezoartici Lapidis Jordani de peste operi adjuncta;
ut scribit Schenkius observat. med. Lib. 7. fol. 994.

SECTION IV: Of Argent Vive its several sorts, and Antidotes.
ARgent Vive, or Mercury, as our Chemists vulgarly phrase it, is of three
sorts, for it is either 1. Crude, or 2. Sublimate, or 3. Praecipitate. To which
we may add Cinabar, being composed of Mercury; But Natural Cinabar I shall
here pretermit: wherefore then of these in order. And first of Crude Mercury,
which taken rather in substance, or by inunction, or in fume, causes grievous
affections and symptoms, by its weight, and eroding malignant quality: as
intolerable pains in the stomach and bowels, wind, gripings, and erosions, a
general indisposition of the whole body, and sometimes a violent lask. And if
it be retained long in the body, as many times it happens when it is mixed
with some other medicament of a retaining quality, or lies in some cavity
longer then it ought, or some such accident happening whereby it is kept still
in the body unevacuated, there follows a suppression of Urine, and the
passages being stopped, the whole man becomes infected, and all his humors, so
that he turns pale, wan, and of a leaden color: having a very corrupt and
soetid breath; And at length causes Palsies in several parts, and sometimes
the Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, Swounding fits, nay and Death it self: as
that Apothecary recorded by Cardan, de venenis, Lib. 1. cap. 20. who being
exceeding thirsty in the night time, drank instead of beer or other convenient
liquor, very largely of Crude Mercury, in so much that being found dead in the
morning, and dissecting of him to find out the cause, in his stomach was found
almost the quantity of a pint of Mercury, the blood coagulated in his heart,
[yet Alsaharavius Pract. Tract. 30. c. 3. says he saw one who devoured ten
dramgs of Argent Vive, without any hurt at all. Botallus likewise, Lib. de lue
venerea, affirms that he has seen one, and heard of diverse, that swallowed as
many ounces, and yet was thereby no wise damnified. See more in Agricola Lib.
8. Fossilium. Wierus Lib. 4. edit 6. Sanbarolitanus. Comm. Avicen. de cura
casus et offens. Page 189. Which record some to have drank some pounds without
any hurt.] Whence by the way it would argue it of a cold quality,
notwithstanding what some Authors have said against it; much after the same
manner are they affected, that use it outwardly by inunction, of receive the
sum thereof; As is apparent by that young man in Forestus observat. med. Lib.
8. observat. 5. who receiving the vapor thereof into his brain, could neither
sleep, rest, nor be at ease in any place: with an universal trembling over
all his body, extraordinary palenesse, and baldness, his hair thereby falling
off. And Ferdinandus Ponzettus, De Venenis, Lib. 2. cap. 21. Tells us of a man
in his time who by indevouring to convert Mercury into Luna, or silver, being
one day negligent, received the sum thereof into his head, and so fell down
dead immediately, without one word speaking. Likewise several have been killed
by using ointments in which Mercury has been mixed, by its penetrative nature
through the pores, affecting and infecting the blood and humors. Joannes
Schenckins, observat. med. Lib. 7. fol 990. Records one, who by the frequent
use of Mercury, it came to pass, that his veins at length were perceived to be
full of Mercury (being penetrated therewith) so that it was discerned to run up
and down, as his arms were elevated or depressed. Yet there are Antidotes
against all these, as is to be found in the writings of the Learned. Vtile est
valde Lac Copiosius potum, imprimis Asininum ut inquit Sennertus, magnum vero
imprimis auxilium praestat, auri limati scobem, vel folia auri sumere, ut alii
dieunt, atque ita postea argentum viv^m per alvum cum auro egeritur. Nec multum
a veritate abire videtur, cum nihil est, quod argentum vivum avidius imbibat
quaem aurum. Neither does it only help to carry it down, and expel it by the
panch, but also hinders it from dilating it self into the parts of the body,
till such proper means can be administered as will cause expulsion. To purge
and free the body downwards is rather to be endeavored then by Vomits, because
it is of that ponderous nature that it will hardly be brought up by any art.
Quod ut facilius fiat, laudatur Enema ex Hydromelite, cui admixta sit hiera
picra, vel ex oleo olivarum solo, aut misto eum modico pinguedinis gallinae,
vel Anatis, aut modico butyri recentis s. salis, and similibus, intestinis
insunderdus est. Antidoti vero loco variae medicamenta exhibentur. Costum cum
vino sumptum argenti vivi quasi Bezoar esse, scribit Conciliator, and
Guaynerius. Exhiberi potest etiam theriaca. Post Evacuationes, Avicenna laudat
exhibere Myrrham ( Canon Lib. 4. Fen. 6. Cap. propr.) iij. Pondere cum vino,
and postea mulsum superbibere, imperat. Conciliator Myrrham and Castoreu^
decoctae in vino, and salviam, ac rutam tritam, cum aqua in qua nuces cupressi
coctae fuerunt, dart praescribit. Dioscorides vinum cum absynthi^. Apii
decoctum, semen hormini, origanum hysopur cum vino. Rhases etiam Absynthium
tritum cum multo vino. Aut semen Apii, vel Hysopum vel etiam mentastrum
montanum cum vino. Pliny vinum merum remedio esse tradit. Not. Hist. Lib. 23.
Cap. 1 and in Lib. 20. Cap. 5. Commendat siser erraeticum, and in Lib. 22. Cap.
3. Semen urticae siccum fungis. Et Lardum Lupi, in Lib. 28. cap. 10. Denique in
Lib. 29. cap. 5. Columbarum sylvestrium fimum priva^im contra Argenti vivi
potum valere tradit, ut annotat Sennertus. Si vero a fumo Argenti vivi. naribus
and ore recepto, aeger male habeat, conf^rt plurimum, ut aeger haustu^ lactis
Caprini bibat, vel potius, in quantitate magna; vel vini in quo Absynthium and
Hysopum, Decocta sunt; ut ex scriptis Platonis annotat Forestus, observat. med.
Lib 8. observat. 5. Et ipse Forestus praedictum juvenem curavit, jubendo ut
perpetuo uteretur, oro potu, lacte Caprino, and ut ipsum etiam comederet cum
pane qui furfuris expers non esset. Etiam ut hoc decocto uteretur, Imperando..
Rad. Apii ss Absynthii, Origani, Hysopi, Ana Manip. 1. seminis hormini seu
galirici, Antidotes against Mercury received in fume.
and herbae quae tota bona dicitur, ana j. Coquantur in Lib. ij. Vini tenuis
and albi, addendo albae bethonicae, Lib. 5. Ad consumptionem medietatis, and
colatura sacc^aro dulcoretur. Quo, and potis Lactis Caprini cum continuaret, ab
omnibus symptomatis diclis liber evasit, and pili postea creverunt per se.
Laudat etiam Autozes Vinum in quo folia Rorismarini Staechas Arabica, and
Centaur. Min cocta sint utilis est etiam aqua Salviae, et Zedoariae pota, Aeger
quoque in balneo sicco saepe sudet, et post sudorem parts languentes fricentur
sacculo in vino cocto, cui insutae sunt herbae facultatem habentes poros cutis
aperiendi, et nervos roborandi; quales sunt salvia, Chamaepitys, betonica,
lavendula, cum baccis Juniperi. Ut Docet Sonnertus. Perutilis etiam est succus
pimpinellae, ut patet ab Historia illa ex Schenckio, jam citata, quo post multa
srustra tentata, quendam, qui Argento vivo frequenter usus fuerat curatum
fuisse ut ipse, loco citato, refert Schenckius. Si ab inunctione Argenti vivi
aeger mali aliquid patiatur, a Mercurio in corpore relicto; Auri raementa
potanda, vel globuli aut pillulae ex auri foli is paratae deglutiendae.
Imbibitur enim Mercurius ab auro, et cum eo e corpore evacuatur, atque ita, ne
quid mali excitetur, praecavetur. Ad dolorem quoque leniendum, os et fauces
lacte tepido, vel decocto hordei abluantur. Ad inflammationem prohibendam,
decocto vel aquae plantaginis, vel foliorum vitis, cum Diamoro, et syrupo De
rosis siccis utatur aeger. Dentes abluendi decocto vel aqua Salivae,
Aquilegiae, vino austero. Pro caeteris consule Autores.

Praecipitate Mercury causes more grievous symptoms, and is much more
stronger poison; for besides all the preceding grievances, it causes an
inordinate effusion of putride spittle, and that continually; An inflammation
of the mouth, Ulcers in the Jaws and Gummes, looseness of the teeth, Of
Precipitate Mercury, and its Antidotes.
Trembling of the Members, Depravation of strength, Alienation of the Mind, and
Death it self; Most of which symptoms, are recited by Langius, Lib. 1. Epist.
46. Palmarius, De Hydrargiro, Cap. 6. Operis de contagiosmorb. and Schenckius,
Sennertus, and others. But the most grievous and horrid symptoms of all, are
those caused by Mercurius sublimate, consuming like fire every thing it
touches; whence, if it be taken inwardly, the Tongue, Mouth, and Jaws are
immediately exasperated, which no gargarisme or other means can ease or assuage
without great difficulty and much expense of time; it extremely burns the
stomach and bowels, exulcerating them, and the Intralls also, Of Mercurius
sublimate, and its Antidotes.
if it descend so far before it kills, and therefore excites most intolerable
pains in those parts, as also inextinguishable thirst, suppression of Urine,
Difficulty of breathing, and sometimes the bloody I lux, alienation of the
Mind, Madness, and Death it self. As may be collected from those instances
recorded by Sch^nckius, observat med. Lib 7 fol. 990 et 991. from Andrea Baccio
in prol^gemenis venen^rum et Antidtorum Pa. 21. Et a Franc^sco Fal^riolae,
observat. med. lib 1. observat. 7. Yet many Authors have stood up stiffly for
some Chymicall preparations of Mercury to be as wholesome and inoffensive, as
any other medicament whatsoever, whence some have adventured to call one
preparation, Mercurius Vitae, Mercury of life Another, Mercurius Dulcis, sweet
Mercury; Nay and the powder of Precipitated Mercury, they have termed the
Angelical Powder. But other Learned Men have exploded this high applause, as
much on the other side; admonishing men to great circumspection and caution,
how they attempt the taking of them: wherefore Guilielmus Fabricius, in Epist.
ad D. Doringium, lib. 3. observat. annexa, thinks Mercurius Vitae, or that
which they call Mercury of life, may, often times, be well nominated, Mercurius
mortis, and Mercurius vitae aeternae, Mercury of Death, or Mercury of eternal
life; because it does frequently sond such as take it either into Heaven or
Hell. And so I may say of Precipitated Mercury likewise, you may thereby soon
praecipitate your selves: Also Mercurius Dulcis, although it be the most gentle
of all the rest, may, if not duly prepared, and rightly administered, both for
time, quantity, and respect had to the patient, be very well denominated
Mercurius Amarus. How they are to be prepared you may see in Evominus,
Valentius, Quercita^u, Crollius and others. To decide this controversy, shall
not be my work in this place, only thus much I shall add to what has be said;
That when they are rightly and fitly prepared, they are like Scanderbegs sword,
which is either good or bad, strong or weak, As the Physician that prescribes,
or the Patient that takes them; In plain English, they are most excellent
medicines, if by an able and knowing Physician administered to strong bodies, or
such as the Constitution, nature of the disease, or present state of the
infirmity or body can bear: otherwise they are no better then poison.
Curationem quod attinet, Si Argentum vivum non crudum, sed vel Sublimatum vel
Praecipitatum fuerit assumptum, opem far possunt ea medicamenta, quae venenis
erodentibus convenient, Primo ergo statim (ut dictum est) antequam ad intestina
venenum transeat, vomitus provocandus. Vbi vero ad intestina descendit,
Clysteres injicere necessarium est, ex decocto malvae, Altheae, bliti, et oleo
sesami ac rosarum paratos. Postea ut vir^lenta Mercurii erosio fraenetur,
jubent nonnulti ut aeger frequenter bibat lac recens mulsum, in quo, etiam
semina psyllii maceraci possunt, vel aquam tepidam decoctionis hord^i. Confert
etiam multum butyri recentiss. sale e^^tare, ut dococta Sennertus. Contra
exulcerationes stomachi; commendat Vinum rubruns in quo myrobalani dec^ct^
sint; Pinguedine Caprina, vel Hircina, etc. Ita enim exulcerationes
intestinorum Clysteribus convenientibus sunt sanandae. Si (ut saepe sit)
retentio urinae adsit, ut balneo aquae calidae utendum, postea pecten et vesica
saepius fomentanda imposita spongia madida decocto Juniperi, et s^m. Apii, et
regio vesicae inungenda eleo rutae, vel Juniperi, et Vinum bibendum, in quo
radix Cyperi vel acori cocta sit, Laudant plurimi. Antidotum et quasi Bezear
Argenti vivi sublimati, est pulvis Crystaelli subtilissimus j quantitate cum
ol. Amygdal. Dulc. haustus, ut scribant nonnulli. Alii, imprimis commendant
contra Sublimatum, oleum Tartari, vel salis absynthii, ij. pondere sumptum.
Aliqui iij. myrrhae, cum vino calido, vel aqua mellis, aut vinum, in quo ruta,
salvia, semen Apii castoreum, cocta sunt exhibent.

Cinabar being taken inwardly, works much the same effects, as does Argent vive
(I mean the Artificial Cinabar) being composed of Mercury and Sulphur, And
therefore, the Cure and Antidotes are the same.

SECTION V. Of Calx-vive, and its Antidot^s.
CAlx-Vive is likewise a deadly Poison, is appears by that story in Amatus
Lucitanus, Cen. 5. Curatio 91. recorded by Schenkius Observat. Med. lib. 7.
fol. 999. Of a boy of eight years of age, who eating a great quantity of it,
fell into most grievous symptoms; As, he was extremely feverish, thirsty, and
notwithstanding he drank much, yet could never extinguish that inordinate
thirst wherewithal he was possessed, want of appetite and taste, also great pain
in the Jaws, nay, and Death it self: For so he reports of this boy, that he
dyed the ninth day after he had taken it. [Yet Fernelius, lib. 6. De partium
morb. et symptom. Cap. 3. Tells us of a man that eat to the quantity of a man's
fist of Calx-vive, without any hurt at all to his stomach or howells.] Some
Authors likewise affirm it to cause, being eaten, intolerable heat and
drought in the Mouth, Tongue and Jaws, Difficulty of breathing, a Cough, and
roughne ^e in the Throat, suppression of Urine, Syncope, Dysentery, etc.
C^rationem quod attine, (...) mum statim danda opera ut vomitu rejiciatur,
ejusque acrimonia lenientibus et lubricantibus obtundatur, partesque contra
ejus erosionem muniantur, ut antea dictum. Venture quoque iisdem leniatur, ut et
cassia extracta, vel jnjciatur Clysteres ex decocto hordei, fol. Rad. et sem.
Altheae, malvae mucilag. sem. Psyllii, Cassia, Lini, ol. viol. Lini, Nymphaeae
et similibus. Inter Antid^ta, recensetur fell Capreoli a j. ad j cum aqua datum
calida. Vt et fell Cervinum j. pondere eodem modo exhibitum. Item Terra Lemnia
ij. quantitate cum lacte sumpta. To Calx-vive, I may very well annex Mortar,
being chieflly composed thereof, and is no less mortal, as appears by those
relations from Pliny, De Gypso, or of Mortar and its Antidotes.
Not. Hist, lib. 35. cap. 24. And Sabellicus, lib. 4. En. 9. quoted by the same
Schenkius, loco citato, and others; The symptoms are much the same with Calx
vive, yet not altogether so violent, But more moderate and gentle. And the same
cures may likewise serve for a need; Yet Sennertus out of Rhases 8. ad
Almensoar, Cap. proprio commendat scammonii j. Cum Psyllii ij. ex julebo. Item
et Avi. cennas purgare scammonio jubet. Et quia Gypsum sumptum alvi pertinaces
obstructiones sequi solent, ea lenienda Clysteribus ex decocto maluae, Althaae,
Parietariae, flor. Chamaemeli, Cassia extracta, sem. lini. et oleo Anethino.
Inter vera et propria Gypsi Antidota refertur stercus muris j. pondere ex vino
potum, et dictamnus cum oxymelite. Item et Laudantur Theriaca et Methridatum a
ss. ad ij. exhibita cum vino generoso. Guianerius et alii commendant Bezoard.
ij. pondere cum vino dulci, vel vino dec^ctionis Hysopi suniptus, etc.

SECTION VI. Of Vitriol and its Antidotes.
VItriol in regard of its admirable and transcendent use in Physic, may seem
to be impertinently placed among Poisons; Yet because it has been known that
such as have taken it, either Crude, or the Chymicall oil in too great a
quantity, or in any other manner have thereby been grievously molested and
intollerably affected, as that fellow in Joannes Crato lib. 5. Consil. 10.
Epist. et aliorum pagin. 380. et 383. Who being afflicted with the Gout,
thinking to ease himself by drinking some of the oil of Vitriol, in all his
external parts and pores, felt before he Dyed, as it were points of needles all
about him; Nay and the same Crato, in the same place, affirms, he has seen
the Lungs corroded in one who used much this Mineral; And another whose Liver
came away as it were by bits, intolerable pain in their bowels, vehemently
exclaiming their intralls were burnt up and torn in pieces. Moreover I find
others ranking it among Poisons also; and therefore upon these considerations,
I am unwilling to dissent, but readily agree with them, since common experience
and sense evinceth us that if but a drop of that Oil be dropped on Cloth, or
ought else almost, it will soon burn through it. Ideoque Vitriolo sumpto,
danda opera, ut quam primum vomitu plane reijciatur, quod fit decoctae Anethi;
vel Aqua Tepida et oleo Anethi: Sedato vomitu, lac recens tepidum largius
sumatur, cum saccaro et butyro; vel exhibeatur decoctum hordei cum syrupo
violarum. Si erosio and cruciatus in intestinis percipiantur, Clystres
lenientes, ut jam dictum, injiciantur. Antidoti loco exhibeatur Terrae Lemnia
vel sigillata, cum mucilag. sem. Cydonior j. ex aqua hordei; vel corallium
rubrum cum vino detur.

SECTION VII. Of Copper, and such as proceed thereof, with their Antidotes.
Aes, Copper, or Brass, is likewise of a venomous quality, as many of the
Learned think, and experience confirms; and of this arises several other
noxious things; As, Aes ustum, Aerugo, Squamma, et Flos Aeris; Which, being
taken Inwardly, are very poisonous; As, they subvert the appetite, hinder
concoction, and macerate the bowels and intralls, especially, Squamma, and Flos
Aeris; as also Aerugo, or Verdygreece, which are much more violent and
grievous. As, Squamma Aeris, has a particular property in griping and
tormenting the bowels, provoking either to vomit, or causing an intolerable
Flux. Flos Aeris is much of the same Nature, but over and above, contraets and
affects the Lungs, so as that the party is thereby often suffocated. But
Aerugo, which we call Verdigreece, is the most deadly poison of all the rest,
having all their properties; and moreover affects much after the manner which
you have but now heard of Arsnick. Their Cure is all one, and ut hactenus de
aliis venenis saepe dictum, quicquid assumptum fuerit ut evomatur. Postea
accipiatur lac, et praecipue Asininum, Butyrum recens, juscula carnium pinguia,
mucil. sem. fenigraeci, Althaeae, Psyllii, Lini, item syrupus et julebus
violarum, cum aqua frigida. Nonnullietiam valde commendant pinguedinem ovium in
jusculo sumptum. Antidoti loco enecantur a bolo Armeno ij. quantitate cum
hydramelite; vel terra lemnia; aut sigillata j. quantitate cum vino exhibito.
Laudantur et succus menthae; aut succus Apii cum potu Datus, ad quant. ij. vel
in vino sumptus. Item Theriaca ij. quantitate propinata. Vel saltem ij. vel
iij. succi Rad. Acori, Coralliae rubrae preparatae ij. Aut pulvis Zedoariae j.
vel ol. Anisi j. in vino sumpti.

SECTION VIII. Of the Dross and Rust of Iron, with their Antidotes.
IN like manner the Dross and Rust of Iron, or any Chymicall preparation of
Iron or Steel which is made thereof, if either it be taken in too great a
quantity, or be not duly administered, or at least, stay too long in the Body,
may prove very prejudicial, and cause many horrid symptoms; as intolerable
Headaches, grievous inflammations over the whole Body, Drought of the Mouth,
Tongue, and unsufferable pains in the stomach and belly, and sometimes
vomiting. The Cure is effected in the same manner, and with the same
medicaments which you have heard before. Antidoti loco, usurpatur Magnes seu
Bezoar j. pondere in pillulas eum succo Mercurialis confirmatus.

SECTION IX. Of Lead, Ceruse, and Litharge, with their Antidotes.
PLumbum, Lead also, taken in small bits or powder, or continuing long in the
body, and dissolved, causes grievous and intolerable sumptomes, as appears by
that story recorded by Fernelius Cap. 7. De Lue Venerea of a friend of his, as
Schenkins lib. allegato recites it, who being persuaded by an Emperick to eat
the Powder of Lead, as being an admirable preservative and remedy against the
Gout, and rashly follow^ing his Counsel, without any more ado, did, at
certain times, in Broth, Wine, upon baked Pears, and such kind of food,
instead of sugar, in the space of fifteen days, eat about a pound weight
thereof. But (says he) into how many, and horrid symptoms did he immediately
fall? on the 12. day a most greievous Dysentery and Fever seises upon him, with
intolerable pains, not only of the belly, but of the stomach also, and most
sharp gnawings, in that insufferable manner, that he could not endure his belly
or region of his stomach should be touched in the gentlest manner; And
whatsoever he took was immediately vomited up again, and tincted of a Leaden
Color, and so propense he was to belching, that one would have thought he was
even made up of Wind. But these grievous pains and gnawings of his belly and
stomach (the Dysentery ceasing) continued twenty Days and Nights, during all
which time he never slept one wink; coveting to eat perpetually, although not
much to drink: But never went to stool without the help of some Clyster, or
other purging medicine; And then whatsoever he voided, was of a Leaden Color,
at length he became Ictericall and of a nasty hew; nay, and his very blood,
which was drawn to abate the Fever, was of a yellow Color, Choleric, and
strange to behold. The same is to be understood of Minium, Ceruss, Litharges,
and whatsoever else is made of Lead. Nay, and the same may be said of Tinn, if
it be taken into the Body, and there resolved (for otherwise taken in a lump,
it does little or no hurt, nor Lead neither) for it causes such like
symptoms, though not altogether so grievous; The Cure therefore is the same
which is used when Lead is resolved in the Body, viz. And that is, as most
Authors conceive, the same likewise with that of Ceruss, Minium, and Litharge,
in the same method as you have already heard of other Poisons; First by vomit
before it be resolved in the Body, and diffused into the parts; then by
Clysters, and so to use Antidotes, as occasion requires; But Sennertus thinks
vomiting here needless in every respect; for that, Lead is inoffensive unless
it be resolved in the body; The truth is, if it be taken in lumps or in small
pieces, the danger is not much, because it is not likely to resolve, but if in
powder, as in this story which we have heard from Fernelius, a vomit would be
administered as most necessary and requisite to ejecti^, f possible, before it
can be resolved; Ad quem rem ^tilia srut decc^t^m sem. Rapi et Atriplicis,
Radic: maluae, ficuum, cum butyro recenti, oleo Communi, Arnethino, Liliorum,
Irinum, Sesaminum et similia, ut et aqua mulsa. Postea Lac Asininum, ut et
aliorum animalium exhibitum, laudatur. Clysteres parentur ex decocto Brassicae,
Caulium rubrorum, Decoct: Radic: maluae, Althaeae, parietariae, Cardui
benedicti, Centaur: minor. Diaphaenico, gran. Juniperi, ol: communi, Lilliorum
alborum, et Anethi, vel ex aqua Meliti: Si Clysteres non satis juvant, et
symptomata ingravescant, purgantes iniiciendi, parati ex hydromelite, decocto
Centaur: minor. Anetho, Hydromelite, Hyera picra, ol: Rutae, Pinguedine
Gallinarum, Scammonio et similibus. Antidoti loco, exhibeantur grana Cydoniorum
excorticata, et trita ij: pondere cum vino dulci. Et Minium sumptum, exhibeatur
spodium de ebore usto, ij. pondere ex vino; Item utile est quotidie usque Diem
quintum, Theriacae et Methridati ij. cum aqua mellis vel vino propinare. Simul
etiam exhibenda medicamenta, quae malignitat^ resistunt, vimque aperiendi et
urinam movendi habent (precipue cum Lethargyrum fuerit sumptum) In quem usum
imprimis commendatur myrrha eujus duos obolos vel tres ex vino exhibent
Autores, vel j. vel ij. Commendant itaque Absynthium, Hysopum, sem. apii,
piper, Ligustri storem ex vino; item et Hypericum. Rhases hoc medicamentum
dare. jubet. sem: apii, myrrhae: an. Aur. ij. Absynthii. Aur: j. Misce cum sapa
dosis Aurei ij. vel sem: Appii Absynthi, an: part aequal: piperis Dram: ss.
Detur pondus Aureor ij. cum vino. Petrus Aponensis Bezoar Lethargyri sem^n
Kervae vel Cataputiae majoris esse scribit. Laudatur et columbarum et
palumbarum stereus ex vino vel mulso exhibitum, etc.

DIVISION II. Of such as are dug out of the Faith, and are not Mettalls:
SECTION I: Of Lapis Lazulus, and its antidotes:
LApis Lazulus, although oftentimes it be with good success used in Physic,
and by several Physicians applauded for an excellent medicine; Yet if it be
not rightly prepared, and duly administered, is likewise Poison; For if it be
not well ordered, or taken in too great a quantity, or preposterously, it
c^useth vomitings, destroys the appetite, subverteth the stomach, and causes
many pains and gripings. Curatio, ut dictum, consistit in eo, ut primo vomitu
reijciatur, et Clysteribus lenientibus et abstergentibus per alvum educatur.
Deinde ut exhibeantur ea, quae vim corrodendi temperant, ut lac tepidum,
asininum praecipue pro Septem Diebus. Bezoar vero hujus veneni, succinum, ad
ij. sumptum, esse, idem scribit.

SECTION II. Of the Diamond, and its Antidotes.
THe Diamond likewise taken into the Bocy in powder is rank Poison, as most
Authors maintain; Causing grievous pains in the stomach, and Intralls, and
brings at length Death it self. The method for Cure, is, as you have all along
heard, first by vomit before it be got into the bowels, then by lenitive and
clensing Clysters, or purges if they are insufficient, Antidotiloco, postea
dandum, censent nonnulli, sanguinem Hirci recentem vel siccum cum jure Carnium
pingui. Alii Balsamum serum a j. ad ij. exhibendum censent.

SECTION III. Of the Lodestone and its Antidotes.
TO which we may likewise add the Lodestone, which although many are of
opinion it is no Poison, yet in regard I find the most rational concluding in
the affirmative, I can in no wise dissent from them: For certainly if it be
retained long in the Body, it will, no question, as well as other Stones and
Mineralls, be prejudicial. So Sennertus concludes; But if any such thing
happen: Curatio sit per vomitionem in principio: Si vero ad intestina
Descenderit, Clysteribut lenientibus abluendus, aut si illi non sufficiant,
purgantibus evomendus. Deinde exhibeenda quae Antidoti loco habentur; Smaragdus
nimirum, qui Novem Di^rum spatio t^r cum vino propinetur. Cui (...) C. C. (...)
C^^^alia addi possunt utili^ est ^t Th riaca. Nonnulli et Allium valde
c^mm^ndant. And thus much shall suffice to be spoken of Poisons b l^aning to
Mineralls, and such as are d^g ^ut of the Earth.

OF POISONS belonging to VEGETABLES. CLASS. 2.
VEgetables also, afford to us variety of Poisons; but chiefly they may be
reduced to these seven Heads. As, 1. They are either Seeds, or 2. Roots, or 3.
Leaves and Branches, or 4. Flowers, or 5. Trees, or 6. Fruits, or else lastly,
Juyces. First Seeds are again, principally, these Four: 1. Semen Ricini, 2.
Sem. Hyosyami, 3. Lolii, and 4. Granum Nubiae. Secondly, Roots are, especially
these Four also: 1. Ixia, seu Camaelion niger, 2. Helleborus Albus, 3.
Aconitum, 4. Mandragora. Thirdly, Leaves and Branches are in number 7. As, 1.
Napellus, 2. Cicuta, 3. Hyosyamus, 4. Mandragora, 5. Herba Sardonica,
Ranunculus, seu Apium, 6. Esula minor five Tithymallus, 7. Ophiusa. Fourthly,
Flowers are 1. Flos Colchii, 2. Flores Africani, 3. Croci. Fifthly, Trees, are
chiefly these Three also: 1. Juglans Arbor, 2. Taxus Arbor, 3. Buxus Arbor.
Sixthly, Fruits are in number Five: 1. Mandragora, 2. Nux vomica, 3.
Colocynthis, 4. Solanum, 5. Mangas. Seventhly, and Lastly, Juynes are
especially also, these Five: 1. Opium, 2. Euphorbium, 3. Scammonium, 4. Hinccae
Succus, 5. and Lastly, Toxicum, and Pharicum. Of all which, briefly one word,
and so descend to Poisons belonging to Animals, and then conclude.

DIVISION I. Of Seeds that are Poison.
SECTION I. De Semine Ricinae, of the Seed of Palma Christi of America, and its
Antidotes.
ANd first of Seeds, and De Semine Ricina, or the Seeds of Palma Christi of
America, which although in former Ages it was, (and now still perhaps in this
may be) in use for purging Choler, Phlegm, and Hydropicall Humors; yet taken
in too great a quantity, or administered by an unskilful Hand, proves pernicious
and rank Poison, destroying the Appetite, overthrowing the Stomach, causing
most violent and incessant vomitings, etc. Nay, and at length, Death if self:
As appears by that Story recorded by Amatus Lucitanus, Cent. 6. Cura^. 63. Of
some who eating some of these Seeds instead of Pistacias, were not only,
thereby, with grievous symptoms affected, but also destroyed. Dioscorides
allows of thirty Seeds for a Dose; But Costeus in Com. Mesu. is more
rational, allowing but of three, for indeed that is the greatest Dose, and to
strong Bodies too. Yet he does not impute this gross mistake to Dioscorides,
but rather to the Transcriber of his Copy putting 30. for 3. (or it may be the
Printers fault, wherefore this may be a warning to them to be Circumspect,
Careful, and diligent in their Calling) The Truth is four will kill the
strongest Zamzummim or Goliath, that ever was, without flinging them at their
heads, but only ^^ding them down their Throats. Vt in omnibus venenis it a and
in hoc. Medicus imprimis id agere debet, ut venenum, si ore sumptum sit,
quamprimum vomitu reiiciatur, Et si jam ad inferiora descenderit, per alvum
medicamento purgante, vel Clystere evaecuetur. Postea, statim veneni vis
Alexipharmacis propriis expugnanda; qualia sunt Terra Sigillata, Bolum armenum,
etc. Item utile est quotidie usque ad Diem septimum Theariac et Methridati ij
cum aqua mellis, ^ol vino propinare, Simul otiane exhibonda medinamentae, quae
malignitati rosistune, in quem usum inprimis commend tur Lapis Bezoar, cujus j.
vel ij. ex vino exhibent Autores.

SECTION II. Of the Seed of Hen-bane, and its Autidotes.
SEmen Hyosyami: the Seed of Hen-bane, is likewise exceeding dangerous, not
only to Hens, and other Birds, and Beasts, but to Mankind especially; affecting
and setting upon the Brain and Animal spirits: As is evident from that of
Pena, who tells us of a young woman an acquaintance of his, that by using to
receive the sum of this Seed into her mouth for the pain of the teeth, became
so molested in her mind and senses, for 3. days after, that she seemed to be
drunk, reeling up and down as she walked, being vertiginous and giddy. Such an
other Story Alexandrinus Annot. ad Cap. 3. Galeni, quod Animi mores
temperaturam Corporis sequantur, has of a youth which he knew, that by eating
some of these Seeds, was not only inebriated, but raging, and as were mad, at
length taken with a Vertigo, lay so a long time, etc. It causes likewise
difficulty in breathing, insomuch that sometimes the party seems to be in
danger of choking; Likewise an universal trembling over the whole Body,
Dotage, Alienation of the Mind, Phrensies, Madness, and the Fallingsickness,
etc. M. Joannes Faber. De observat. Propriis. Records some remarkable Stories
to this effect; One is, of a certain Nobleman, who being intollerably molested
with an universal pain in his lest side, was persuaded by his Lady, to take
twenty five whole Seeds of Hen-bane, assuring him that it would immediately
cure him, and if it were an Impostum, break it, etc. (with many such motives
she at-length prevailed; But let this be a warning to all rational men, how
they take Physic of that wonderful creature in nature a Woman Doctor; And
likewise be a Caveat to those more curious then wise Creatures, how they
adventure to administer what they are ignorant of: It being ten to one (if they
go upon their own reason and judgment) the Case being dangerous, they rather
kill then cure; and if at any time it happen otherwise, all rational men must
needs acknowledge a more Divine hand, and rather Gods especial mercy and
providence, then the least skill in them: The same may he said of Empericks
and Ig^^^muses.) But it was not long after he had taken this mad Medicine, but
he grow so wild, and fell into such a Frenzy, and Alienation of Mind, that as
my Author says, Ne^ Liberos, nec Fr^^res, nec Sorol^^m, quam bab it unidam,
agnoscere potuerit He did not know either his Children, Brothers, Sister, or
any of his Relations; And was so seized on by Lipothymia, and sounding sits,
that they were out of hopes he would live. An other man he tells us of, that
traveling along the road, and intollerably pained with the Toothach, at length
alighting at a Victualling House to drink, and relating to his Hostess his
grief, was persuaded by her to receive the fume of this Seed into lus Footh, by
a Funnell, (as the common way of that Cure is to do) But he thereupon, fell
into such a Frenzy, that he ran about the Feilds as if he had been stark mad,
etc. Likewise he reports, that a woman by eating of it instead of an other
grain, because thereby Epileptick, and that so grievous, that a fit did usually
continue a whole Day and Night. Of this Hen-bane there are several kinds, as
is described by Dioscorides lib. 4. Cap. 64. Our Parkinson, Theat. Botanic.
Trib. 3. Cap. 13. And other Herbalists; But especially their sorts are reduced
to these three kinds; As being either 1. Black, which is most dangerous; Or 2.
Red or Yellowish, which, is less pernicious; Or else Lastly, White* which is
the least offensive of all; Yet neither of them but will cause all these
aforesaid symptoms and alterations in our Senses and Brains, if unadvisedly
taken; or in too great a quantity: I mean the Seeds of those several kinds. In
Curing of the Body, or freeing it from this Poison, taken thereinto, as you
have most frequently heard, you must first before it be descended into the
Intralls, or diffused into the parts, endeavor to cast it up by vomits, such
as you have heard before described, or in this manner; Flor. Genistae, Sambuci,
An. P ij Cortie. Ebul. ij. Sem. Raphan. Anethi, Atriplic. An. j. Agaric. ss.
Coquantur in s. q. hydromelit is; Colaturae vj. Add ol. Rutae j. misce, Fiat
potio. And such like. But if it be already gotten into the Intralls, you must
endeavor to expel it by Lenitive and cleansing Clysters, which has also been
declared before, or else you may make use of Purges; As has likewise been
often taught, or prepared. Ex electuario Jndo, Diacarthamo, Scammonio,
Colocynthida, Diacatholico, Agarico, etc. And then lastly to administer such
Medicines as are proper and effectual to resist the nature of that Poison,
viz. Antidotes, and such also as do allay the malignant quality thereof. This
you have been often told is the method of Curing, and freeing the body of all
manner of Poisons. So that it will not only he needless, to reiterate the same
thing over and over again, in speaking of every Poison, but also ridiculous:
Wherefore, omitting that, for brevities sake, and to avoid Tautology, I shall
henceforward all along give you only their several Antidotes, and what
Medicines are commanded, and have been approved by the Learned; And that in
short.

First, then, touching this Hen-bane seed. Bezoartica hujus veneni sunt
Pistatia large comesta et imbibita, Castore^m, Ruta, Absy^thium, folia et
baccae lauri. Theriaca, Methridatum. Parkinsonus noster Botanicus Commendat
valde Lac Caprinum, Aq. mellis, sem. Faeniculi, Senapi, Raphani, Vrticae, item
et Allium, etc. ex vino sumptum. Item et Nuc. Pinior. cum vino mulso. Laudatur
and Pulver. Pestilent. Joanni Faber ss. pondere cum vino.

SECTION III. Of Darnel, and its Antidotes.
LOlium Darnel, growing among Corn, is likewise a pernicious Seed; as may
appear by what Galen affirms in Lib. 6. De simplicium medicamentorum
facultatibus, and Lib. 1. De alimentorum facultatibus. Who there attests, that
such Bread that has any of this Seed mixed with it, is of that quality that it
causes such as eat thereof, to be possessed with a trembling over the whole
Body, Stupor, Restlesnesse, Hindering Sleep, etc. Wherefore he advises, they be
carefully picked out of the Corn before they be grownd. And that such as have
the ordering of it, be therewith acquainted, in regard they may be apt to
commit an error ignorantly, they not knowing either the property of Darnel, or
its effects which that they are Direful, causing Vertigo, Dotage, Allenation
of the Mind, and Madness it self, is evident from that of Joannes Wierus, Lib.
3. De Praestigiis, Cap. 18. Edit. 6. As Schenkius quotes. The Cure is the same
with Hen-bane seed.

SECTION IV. De Grano Nubiae, and its Antidotes, Fennel, Linseed, etc.
GRanum Nubiae, another pestilent and venomous Grain, so called by Authors,
from the Denomination of the place in which it grows; It is so strong and
violent a Poison, that One Grain thereof is present Death, if it be taken into
the Body any manner of way; As diverse Authors affirm. Its A^^^^tes are
Theriaca, Methridatum, (...) Armenus* Lapis Be^^ar, Terra ^gillata, Lac
Caprinum, Asini^ um largius sumptum, et similia; That is, if so little be taken
that the Party lives till something can be administered, (as is seldom seen) and
then you may likewise follow the Method before prescribed in Hyosyamo.

To these Seeds, Linseed may be added, which may perhaps seem strange to some,
but if it be taken in any great quantity, or commonly fed on, it is very
noxious; Filling the Bowels and Body with corrupt Humors, and Wind, extending
the hypochondries, bloating and swelling the Face and other parts, and many
times brings Death it self, if we may believe Dodonaeus Lib. 2. Cap. 24. Hist.
Stirp. Who tells us of some poor people in Midleberge in Zealand, who through
want and indigency making Bread of it, and eating it, were not only grievously
affected with many sad symptoms, but also thereby destroyed. And so likewise
Balthazar Pisanellus* (as Schenkius notes,) Libro De es^ ulentorum et
potulentorum facultatibus, interpret Fresag^o, D^ Faeniculo, Accounts Fenel
seed of a malignant quality many times; By reason of certain Worms which breed
in them of (...) very poisonous quality. Their C^res are the same with the
former. And thus much of Seeds.

DIVISION II. Of Poisons belonging to Roots.
SECTION 1. Of the black Camaelion-Thistle-Root, and its Antidotes.
NOW of Roots. 1. Ixia son Camalion niger, the black Camelion Thistle, which,
as Galen accounts, is very pernicious; So that even by the very touch thereof,
the skin is exulcerated. Nay Bellonius goes further, telling us, Lib. 1.
observe. Cap. 35. of some, who handling of these Roots, had their Faces
extremely exculcerated by the very touch of their Hands, as Schen^ius,
Sennertus, and our Parkinson quote. Much more dangerous then will it be, taken
inwardly; As it will cause many gripings and pains in the stomach, difficulty
of breathing, Inflammations, Lipothymia, and fainting; Nay, and Madness,
affecting chiefly the Heart and Spirits. Excitat^ vomitu, etc. Aegroto
propinandum decocium Absinthij, ex ^ino paratum, vel aceto, aut hydromelite;
vel exhibeatur^ide^^ silphij radix, vel Rutae sylvestris semen; vel nardus
Jndica; Castoreum, Theriaca, vel Methridatum, etc.

SECTION II Of White Hellebor, and its Antidotes.
HEll^borus Albus, White Hellebor, (if it may properly be so termed, because
Galen 5. Aphoris. 1. will have it to be understood without the addition of
White) although it has formerly, among the Ancients been, and yet, to this
day, continues, in use for Physic, well prepared, corrected, and discreetely
administered; yet erring herein, it oftentimes proves Poison, [notwithstanding
the people in Thrace, and certain shepherds in those Countries, can familiarly
eat whole handfulls, and two or three Roots at a time, as Theophr. De Hist.
Plant. Lib. 9. Cap. 18. attests.] Causing most grievous wringings and pains in
the stomach, hickope, difficulty in breathing, danger of strangling, as those
in Scoltzeus, who, instead of spice, being sprinkled upon the meat, eating of
it, were all like* to be choked: It soon seiseth upon the Heart and Spirits,
disturbes the fancy, and mind enfeebleth and takes away the strength of the
Body; As appears by that stratagem of Solon, against the City Cy^rhaeus, ^s
Pausanius, in Ph^ciis has it; makes an universal trembling over the whole
Body, causes Lipothymia and sounding sits, and at length suff^cates and kills
the party; As him in Ponz^ttus recorded Lib. 2. Cap. 32. De ^enenis, who took a
Dram and a half. Antidoti loco exhibeatur, pulv. sl. aut Rad. Nymphae albae,
vel s^m. Pastinacae, ij. cum vino ex Absynthio, Scordio, Aniso, Cumino, Nardo
Indica, et Cast^reo paretur pulvis, and cum vino off^ratur, ut et Theriaca,
Mithrydatum. Ad strangulationem inhibendam laudatur Galbani ss. Ad v^ntris
cruciatus et tormina sedanda, sacculus e surfuribus, sale Pulegio, Cumino,
Ruta* Mentha, et La^^i bac^is paratus, and in vino v^l l^cte coctus, extra*
c^lide applicetur. Vel Mithridatij, Castar^i, ^^^nc. moscat. express. An. j.
(...). Rut^c^ (...).^ia^ ^^inimentum Q^^ rati^^e Hyp^^^^^rcharsis, ^t nimia
purgatio ^s^enda ^^t* (...) sing^^^ (...) qu^mo ^o curandus sit, ^t C^nv^l
(...) q^^ (...) ^^de^e sol^nt, vide Apud Fraclic^^.

SECTION III. Aconitum and its Antidotes.
A Conitum is accounted one of the most Deadly Poisons that is: killing not
only Beasts, but men also, with the very touch. Pliny Not. Hist. Lib. 27. Cap.
2. As Schenkius observes, thinks it one of the most pernicious poisons of all
others: Idem refert tactis genitalibus faeminini sexus animalium eodem die
mortem infert. Atque hoc fuit venenum quo interemptas, dormientes a Calphurnio
Bestia uxores. Antidoti loco sunt Ruta, Abrotanum, Centaurium, Origanum,
Marrubium, Chamaepitis, Aristoloch. Longa, Coagulum Leporis, Haedi, cum vino
vel aceto sumptum, Rad. Eryngij, Castoreum, Theriaca, Mithridatum; Sed imprimis
commendatur opobalsamum j. pondere exhibitum. Sed adeo homini adversa est, ut
nisi statim succurratur, hominem subito interficiat.

SECTION IV. Of the Mandrake and its Antidotes.
MAndragora the Mandrake Root, which is of so poisonous a nature, that it
affects in a violent manner, making the Mouth and Tongues of such as have
taken it, dry, and as it were inflamed: It has a bitter taste, and is of a
most offensive smell, causing such a deep sleep to seize on those who has
seized upon it, that it is no easy matter to awake them, stupifying the brain
and senses, making them oftentimes mad; And in the end, if means be not used
in time, it kills. Antidoti loco, aegro Pulegium, Origanum, Absynthi^m, Ruta,
Scordium, Castoreum, seu forma decocti, sen pulveris, cum vino vel accio
exhibeantur. Vtilis est Theriaca, Raphanus domesticus, cum sale per triduum
aliquoties assumptus, Mandragorae Bezoar perhib^tur. Ad aegrum excitandum
adhibeantur Odoramenta et Errhina e castoreo, Ruta, Pulegio, Pyrethro, Pipere
et Sinapi parata. Et reliqua e^^nia quae in Lethargo adhiberi solent; ut,
Frictiones, Ligaeturae, etc. Caput etiam irrigandum est A^eto et Oleo Rosaceo,
item oleo in quo Puleg^um, Calamintha, Serpill^m, Thymus, et alia Medicam^nta
Cephalica c^cta fuerunt. Potus sit virtum dulce, vel vinum Absynthites.

To which Roots, we may well add the excessive use of Garlic, Onyons, and
^^e^kes, since all Physicians* conclude them extreme noxious, ingendring many
gross, corrupt, and malignant humors, inflame the Blood, hurt the Eyes, Head,
Brain, and Stomach, and incline to Lethargies, Sopor Coro, Vertigo, Epilepsie,
and madness it self. Nay and Cardan affirms, That even the Children that are
begotten of such as use to. feed frequently on Onyons, are much inclined and
prone to madness. Arnulfus the Emperor, as Crantzius records, Lib. 3. cap. 3.
Saxoniae, Lost his life by too liberally feeding on Garlic. And if we may
believe Mizaldus, he will show us, in horto, that Leekes are no less dangerous.
The Cures o^ these, are the same with that of Hen -- ba^^ before declared.

DIVISION III. Of Poisons belonging to Herbs.
SECTION I. Of Woolf. bane, and its Antidotes.
THirdly, of Herbs and Leaves, Napells offers it self first to our
Consideration commonly among us known by the name of Wolf-bane; The most
poisonous and deadly of all others, if taken inwardly, either to Dog, Catt, or
any other Creature, as well as Woolfes, nay and unto Mankind also, as all
Authors affirm; And common experience has evinced us, if we may give Credit
to the relations we meet with in: he writings of the Learned: As that Feast in
Antwerp, where, the Leaves of this Herb being ignorantly put into a Sallad
among others, and eaten by several, dyed every one, not without most horrible
and grievous symptoms, at large to be seen in Schenkius, where he recites
several examples of such as have eaten this Herb; As, in brief, they are, (as
appears by those examples) very much swelled in most parts of the Body, their
Mouths are inflamed, and their Tongue swelled, so as that it can hardly be
contained in the Mouth; They are Convulsive, Vertiginous, subject to frequent
faintings, The Face and whole Body pa^e, or, as it were, black and blew, the
Pease weak, the Eyes drawn add, the Legs failing, and the whole man possessed
with a Cold Sweat, and lastly, with Death (...) self, etc. This Napellus, as
Mathiolus up (...) Dioscori^es. Lib. 4. Cap. 73. maintains, ^s a kind of
Aconitum; And the truth is they ^re so near of kin, that I find sew Authors
^learing their differences, most taking them to be one and the same, and so
confound these appellations promiscuously and indifferently, using the one for
the other, or for both. I should be too prolix, (and but to little purpose) to
reconcile the Controversy; wherefore I shall for brevities sake refer you to
the aforesaid Dioscorides, Mathiolus, Dodonaeus, our Parkinson, Gerrard, and
other Herbalists. As touching the Cure, Such is the malignity and venomous
nature of this Herb, that if present remedy be not used, no Antidote is of
sufficient force to allay or resist it, but in short time kills them that have
taken it. Sed Antidoti loco, exhibeatur Lapis Bezoar, Terra sig^llata cum
Butyro et Aqua Mellis, utilis item est et Smaragdus ij. pondere exhibitus,
Bolus Armenus, Syrupus Acetositat. Citr. Granatorum Praecipuum vero adversus
Napellum, et alia venena, Antidotum est istud praestantissimum, in Paena, ^t
Lobel. in Adversariis stirpium, Page 320.. Muscarum quae pastum ceperint De
Napello Number. 20. Aristolecchiae, Boli Armeni, an. j. Dosis est j. in Pulvere,
in Aqua Rutae. vel. Zedoar. j. Thuris; ss. Lapid Bezoar. gra. vij. Mosci,
Ambrae, An. gra. ij. Fiat pulvis. Antidotus Guianer ij. est, Bacci Laur.
Mithridat. Terrae Lemniae, An ij. Muscarum Napelli, Number. 24. Mellis, and olei q
s. Fiat Electuarium. Landantur and Theriaca, et Mithridatum. Ad oris and faciem
Inflammationem, adhibeantur collutiones oris ex Aqua Rosar. Prunell. Plantagin.
Cum Rob. Nucum, Diamoro, et similibus. Cordis etiam regioni sericum succo
boragi^is madidum, vel aliud cordiale imponatur. Refert se quendam a morte
revocasse, Mathiolus, ol^o s^^ de Scorpionibus Cordi illito; Non solum tamen
regioni Cordis, sed et manunum de pedum arteriis, et sub axillis ^lea talia
inungpossunt.

SECTION II. Of Hemlock and i. s Antidotes.
CIcuta, Hemlock, is likewise, as all Authors agree, a dangerous Poison; (Yet
Mercuriaelis Lib. 1. De Venenis, Cap. 6. Out of Empericus, tells us of one that
eat 30 Drachms of Hemlock, without any hurt.) Causing Vertigoes, difficulty of
breathing, Hickop, and sometimes strangles the party; also Trigidity, stupor,
and swellings over all the Body; Likewise Phrensies, Madness, and at length an
abatement of the strength, and Death it self, to such as eat this Herb, as it
has been often known, mistaking it for Parsley, and the Roots for Parsueps
[Vide Dalecampius, Annotat. ad Cap. 13. Lib. 25. Plinij, Lit. H. Cardanus, De
venenis, Lib. 1. Cap. 2. Julius Caes. Scaliger, Of Hemlock, and its Antidotes.
Exercitat. 152. ad subtle. Cardan, Mathiolus, Comm. ad Lib. 6. Cap. 11.
Dioscoridis.] In Curatione, statim Alexipharmaca sunt exhibenda, praemisso
vomitorco, et ut sunt Pulv: Rutae, Dictamni, fol. Lauri, Dauci, Gentianae,
Piperis, Cardamomi, seminis Vrticae, Absynthij, Castorei. Cum vino generoso
exhibend. vel Decoct. Laudatur et vinum merum seu generosum largius sumptum; Si
enim paucum exhibeatur, metus est ne potius vehiculi loco sit veneno, quam ut
id expugnet. Tragus Hist: Stirp. Lib. 1 Cap 159. valde Commendat Acetum
Co^iosius ha^stum; quo mulierem quae B^d Cicutae devorasset, se curasse
affirmati Th^ri^ca quoque et Mithridatium ij. pondere whib^ri possunt.

SECTION III. Of the Herb Hen bane.
HIosyamus, Hen-bane the Herb, as well as the Seed, is Rank Poison; But in
regard it is symptoms, effects, and also Cures, are the same which you have
heard before, where I spoke of the Seeds; I shall not need to add any thing in
this place.

SECTION IV. Of the Herb Man-Drake.
MAndragora, Man-Drake, is likewise pernicious, taken in the Herb as well as
Root, though not altogether so violent; the effects and Cures, see in the
Roots.

SECTION V. Of Round-Leaved-Marsh-Crow-foot, and its Antidotes.
HErba Sardonica, Ran^^nculus, seu Apium, The Round-Leaved-Marsh-Crow foot. By
Lucitanus, Comment. ad Cap. 171. Lib. 2. Dioscorid. And others of the Learned,
is accounted very malignant and Poisonous; Causing the Throats and Stomachs of
such as eat it, to burn, and be as it were on fire; As also their Bowels,
Intralls; And indeed the whole Man is thereby Inflamed; Causing an Alienation
of the Mind, and so draws the Mouth aside, and shrivells up the Face, that they
seem to Laugh. Vnde appellatur Apium risus; Apium, quod agresti Apio simile
sit; Herba Sardonica dicta est, quod in Sardinia Copiose provenit. Unde in
proverbio de homine in calamitatibus ridente dicitur, Risus Sardonius. Itaque
Convulsio Canina a nonnullis Sardonicus Risus Denominatur, etc. In Curatione
valde utilis est emulsio Amygdal. Dulc. sem. 4. frig. major, excorticator. Item
sem. Papav. albi, cum aq. Hordei, Lactucae, et Plantaginis parata. Antidoti
loco est succus melistae cum aceto datus, vel Bolus Armenus cum sero Lactis;
vel Castoreum cum vino Dulci. Extra inungatur Cervix oleo Costino, de Castoreo,
Vnlpino, Hyperici, Vnguento Aregon. and similibus. Laudatur et vinum largius
sumptum.

SECTION VI. Of Spurges and their Antidotes.
ESula Minor, sive Tithymallus, The Smaller Spurge, is by some esteemed as the
most violent; The truth is, there is not a pin to choose, they are all sorts so
bad. For although they have been, and may be used inwardly to purge Choler,
Phlegm, and Hydropicall humors: Yet are they but very Churlish, working
violently, more fit for horses, then Men, or rather, for Devils; For taken
unseasonably, or in too great a quantity, without respect to the nature of the
disease, constitution, strength, and custom of the Patient, may sooner kill,
then Cure; nay and proves Poison it self. Notwithstanding Dioscorides
prescribes to take iij. of that sort called Pityusa, with red flowers, I do
here affirm, peremtorily, it is too much or too great a Dose by far. For who
so shall venture upon half a Dram of the juice, or powder of the Root (as be
advises to prepare it) shall find it sufficiently strong, and enough, and that
one Dram will destroy them. But I would not advise any to go to disprove me
by the Trial of it Many horrid symptoms besides Death, it usually brings to
such as use it; For it is of that venomous quality, that even, by the very
touch, it exulcerateth the skin, making it to burn, and blister an hundred
times more then any nettles can. Besides, it being taken inwardly, inflames the
whole Body, overthrowes the constitution and temperature of the Liver, excites
intolerable pains in the stomach, extreme thirst, vomiting and scowring, it
seiseth violently on the heart, causes oftentimes Convulsions, and sudden
Death. Antidoti, loco exhibeatur Bolus* Armenus, Terra sigillata, Corallia
rubra, Cornu Cervi praeparatum, Theriaca cum vino, vel Aqua Cardui benedicti,
utile est et gummi Arabic. ac Tragacanth.

SECTION VII. Ophiusa and its Antidotes; And Rue.
OPhiusa, An Herb growing in Aethiopia, is no less pernicious; Causing, in
such as eat it, intolerable pains; It seiseth chiefly on the Head, Heart, and
Spirits, making the parts rage, rove, and as Julius Alexandrinus Lib. 3. Cap.
5. observes, runn Phrantick, stark mad, and so Dye. Antidoti loco exhibeatur
Theriaca vel Mithridatum ij. pondere, Item Bolus Armenus, Terra sigillata,
Corallia Rubra, Lapis Bezoard. and similia.

To this Divis. of Herbs, we may add Rue, for its Caustic Faculty; it being
so sharp and corroding, that the skin is easily exulcerated thereby; As appears
by that Gardener recorded by Camerarius, Lib. De Horto, Of Rue and its Antidotes
who by plucking up of great store of this Herb, for certain days together,
his Hands and Forehead were thereby extremely blistered and Erysipelated.
Levinus Lemnius also, De occult. Not. Miracul. Lib. 4. Cap. 12. Tells us of one
that had his upper Lipp and Nostrills most exceedingly exulcerated and
blistred, but with smelling to a glass in which was Rue steept in Vinegar. How
strange soever it may seem, no question, the fume and Aer of Poison is very
noxious, and may prove, sometimes, mortal. Diodorus Siculus, Lib. 2. Informs
us of a certain Herb growing in Arabia Felix, which casts, such as sleep upon
it, into a most sweet sleep, and so at length makes them sleep their Last.
And the same Lemnius in his Herball to the Bible, evinceth this truth also,
where he shows that by the very smell of a Mandrake Aple, which he had set
upon a shelfe in his study, he was so propensed to sleep, that he could not
hold open his Eyes; which so sooon as he had removed into another room, he
became cheerful and lively again. Besides common experience evinceth us that
the burning of Girny ^epper in a room, will set all therein a Coughing; and
Henbane-seed, being burnt in any Heu-house, will cast all the Poultry into a
dead and stupid sleep.

DIVISION IV. Of Poisons belonging to Flowers.
SECTION I. Flos Colchii and its Antidotes.
FOurthly Flowers are in number 3. chiefly 1. Flos Colchi, and not only the
Flower, but also the Herb it self is most Deadly Poison; It is a sort of
Ephemerum growing in Armenia, and so, from the name of the place, is called
Colchicum. If it be taken inwardly, it Corrodes and exulcerateth the stomach,
Bowels, and all it touches, causing the Bloody Flux, and there with expells
the very Intralls themselves, in rags, and an extraordinary itching over all
the Body, nay and Death it self, as appears by that story recorded by Joann.
Agricola Ammonius, Rei Herbariae, Lib. 2. Who tells us of two Boys playing
together in the fields, by eating these Flowers, Dyed most miserably. In
Curatione, Dioscorides valde commendat bubulum vel Asininum Lac, largius
sumptum. Item Laudantur emulsiones ex sem. 4. frigid. major. Et Amygdal. Dulc.
Cum aqua Tormentilli, Plantaginis, Bursae Pastoris, vel, pro Alexipharmacis,
Commendantur, serpillum, origanum; myrti semen et folia; Rad. Polygoni
Rubifolia; Folia and glandes fagi ac quercus, quae in Lacte coqui possunt.

SECTION II. Flos Africanus and its Antidotes.
FLos Africanus, is likewise as pernicious If Dodonaeus may be credited, who in
part. 2. lib. 3. Cap. 12. affirms as much, being of an unsavory smell, dulling
the head, brain and senses like unto Hemlock, etc. Nay and experience (says he)
evinceth instanceing in a Cat, to which he having given some of these Flowers
with Cheese, was there by presently inflamed in an exceeding manner, and so
Dyed immediately: And Mice (he says) that have eaten the seeds thereof, have
been found dead afterward; Nay, and he farther attests, he saw a boy, being
about to eat the Flowees, that had his Lips and Mouth most exceedingly
inflamed. The Cure is the same with Hemlock.

SECTION III. Crocus, and its Antidotes.
CRocus also, if taken inordinately, and inconsiderately, is poisonous;
Although otherwise, viz. given with discretion, and taken in moderation, is a
very good Cordial, and exceedingly exhilarateth the Spirits, as Dioscorides,
Dodonaeus, Mathiolus, and our Hearbalists, unanimously affirm: Nay Lucitanus,
Confirms it byan example, ad Cap. 25. Lib. 1. Dioscorid. Of one who putting a
little too much of these Flowers into broth (in regard they were Cordial) and
eating of them, fell into such a violent passion or fit of Laughter, that one
would have thought he would have thereby instantly dyed, it causes likewise,
most excessive pains in the head, nay, it has been known that some who have
slept upon them, have the next day been found Dead. The Cure is the same with
Henbane.

DIVISION V. Of Poisons belonging to Trees.
SECTION I. Of the Wallnut-Tree, and its Antidotes, Tammerine-Tree, Juniper,
and Baxama, etc.
OF Trees that are venomous, Authors have variously written; Yet chiefly they
are reducible to these Three. 1. Juglans Arbor, the Wallnut-Tree, whose very
shadow is of a poisonous influence or faculty, As Graevinus ^i. 2. De venenis
et De Taxo, observes Cap. 22. Affirming it from his own Experience; For, not
believing what Authors had reported of this matter, he says, that once, in
the midst of Summer, he adventured to sleep under this Tree, but when he
awaked, he attests himself to be most grievously affected with the Headache,
and his whole body refrigerated, which, continued for six Days after. Nay
Sennertus thinks it Causes the Vertigo, Epilepsie, and Apoplexy also; And that
it is the occasion of troublesome Dreams, and other evils, may be Collected
from that of Marcellus Donatus, recorded also by the aforesaid Sennertus, of a
Woman who sleeping under this Tree about noonday, Dreamed she was sighting
with the Devil, or that the Devil was beating of her, who thereby was so
terrified and amazed, that, being awaked and returned home to her own house,
fell into a Burning Fever, whereby all her hair came off, etc. which fancy
in sleep, although it might have happened as well in her own house, as I have
Dreamed the same in my bed; Yet no question the very shadow of that Tree is
very noxious to the Body, Spirits, Heart, and Brain, as all Authors generally
agree. Neither is it to be accounted so strange since we find many others
recorded by the Learned that assert in the same nature. As the Tammeride,
which, as Christophorus A Costa. Arom. Lib. Cap. De Tamarind. Of the
Tammeride-Tree, Juniper. and Baxana, with their Antidotes.
makes mention, is know by experience, to be no less dangerous. And Thevetus
Lib. Sing. Cap. 61. Reports of the Tree called Baxana, that whosoever shall
stay under it but the space of a quarter of an hour, shall be in danger of
suffocation: Many of the same virtue, he says, are growing in Peru and the
Caribe. Islands in India. To which may be added the Juniper-Tree, according to
those in Virgil Aeclog. 10. v. Penult. Recited by Lucretius Lib. 6. As
Schenkius quotes Lib. 7. De Venenis.

Arboribus primum certis, gravis umbra tributa
Vsque adeo Capitis faciant ut saepe dolores:
Si quis cas subter jacuit, prostratus in herbis.
Symptomata veroista tolluntur lotione Capitis cum lixivio in quo Betonica,
Hysopus, Majorana, Lavendula, Pulegium, Rosmarinus, Salvia, Spica, vel Staecas
Cocta fuerint. vel irroretur Cap^t Aqua Rorismarini, Majoranae, Sal^^iae,
Lavendulae. Exhibeantur vero species Diambrae (ut docet Sennertus et Alii)
Diamosci Dulcis, Aromatici Caryophylati, Dianthos, Trochisci Galliae Maschatae,
vel ex Herbis Cephalicis supra dictis paretur decoctum^et addito melle
Anthosato agro exhibeatur. Vtiles etiam sunt Aquae Cephalicae, Epilepticae,
Apoplecticae. Potus sit vinum generosum, etc.

SECTION II. Of the Yew-Tree and its Antidotes.
TAxus Arbor, the Yew-Tree, which although it be, as Petrus Pena notes, ( in
Adversariis ^ag. 450.) inoffensive, growing in England; Yet in other parts, the
Wood, Juice, Berries, and shadow likewise, is Poisonous. As in Spain,
according to Pliny Lib. 16. Not. Hist. Cap. 10. The Wood and Berries are
mortal, especially of the Male Yew; So that it has been known the Wine that
has been kept in such pipes and vessels as has been made of that wood, has
killed those who drank thereof. And in Arabia (he says) it is so pernicious,
that it killsthem who do sleepo, or eat their meat under it. Its Cures are the
same with the Wallnut, Juniper, and the rest.

SECTION III. Of the Box-Tree, and its Antidotes, with the Rose-bays, etc.
BVxus Arbor, the Box-Tree, is put by Levinus Lemnius, in his Herball to the
Bible also, as a poisonous Tree causing Death it self, Fevers, and many other
symptoms, Instancing in one who was destroyed drinking the ashes thereof, out
of a super stitious humor. To which, I may, for a Conclusion, add, that Indian
Tree called Nerium and Oliander, which being likewise taken inwardly, prove
destructive, As Litbantius Com. De venenis affirms. Yet Dioscorides allows of
the leaves and Hours taken in wine to be an excellent remedy against the
stinging of an Adder, or Serpent, But acknowledges it is poison to Dogs,
Asses, Mules, etc. Galen, notwithstanding, Lib. 8. simpl. Affirms positively
it is both to Man and Beast, mortal, taken inward ^y. And with him the most
rational agree. (...) Cures are the same with the former.

DIVISION VI. Of Poisons belonging (...) ^^ui^^.
SECTION I. Of the Man-Drake-Apple, an ^i^s Antidotes.
IN the sixth place, Fruits are to be Considered; And 1. That of the Mandrak.,
for its Apples are by the Learned generally concluded poisonous, Dioscorides,
Galen, Mathiolus, Avicenna, Rhasis, Lemnius, Sennertus, new and old writers,
all agree therein; Causing, in such as have taken it, extreme heat and drought
in both Mouth, Tongue, Jaws, etc. As you have heard before, where I spoke of
the Root, Causing Phrensies, Dotage, Madness, nay and Death it self, stupefying
the brains and senses, and exciting sleep even by the smell thereof, as
Lemnius records (in his Herball of the Bible) of himself, who, having laid one
of these apples on a shelf in his study, was made so dull, heavy, and sleepy
thereby, that he could hardly open his Eyes, but removing of it into another
room, did therewithal likewise remove his Drowsiness (as I noted before where
I spoke of Rue) Rhasis, Lib 24. Cap. 835. Contine^tis. Has a Story of one who
by eating of five of these Apples fell into a Syncope. The Cure is the same
with the Root^s.

SECTION II. Nux Vomica, and its Antidotes, with Pruna Insania, Nux Metalla,
etc.
NVx Vomica, the Vomiting Nut, so called, because it is thought to be very
effectual to provoke vomiting; Mathiolus, and others are of the contrary part,
affirming it not to cause vomit at all, notwithstanding the name; with whom our
Parkinson, Theat. Botan. Agrees, Trihe 17. Cap. 44. But Sennertus proves it is
a strong vomit, Pract. Med Lib. 6. Part. 7. Cap. 20. out of Renodaeus,
Antidotor. Lib. 3. Sect. 1. Cap. 10. So likewise some account it no Poison
mixing it with medecines, as may be seen in the Pharmacopea made by the
Augnstin Physicians, and those in Noriaberge in their Electuary De ^vo; But our
College at London, are of another mind, or were; And therefore did not without
Cause strike it out of the former Ancient Dispensatory, it being very hurtful,
nay and poisonous. It is by all confessed very venomous to Dogs, Catts, and
Birds, as Sennortus affirms from his own experience, and others. Serapio, on
the other side will have no venomous quality in it; But Mathiolus again says
there is, Confirming it by an example, of an old woman that was destroyed by
eating of some which was intended to kill certain Dogs, which by their
continual barking, disturbed them from their sleep and rest. Com. ad Cap. 73.
Lib. 4. Dioscorid. (Yet the Turks do usually eat of it without any the least
prejudice; And the Germans frequently use it in Antidotes, and the Electuary De
Ovo, and that with good success, As Gregorius Melichius Stoli. ad Elect. de
Aromat. Galeni, Antidotarii sui annotat.) Tabernamontanus, Lib. 3. Cap. 14.
affirms ij, weight of it, is poison, and will kill any one; but, a Dram will
only intoxicate a man's brains so as that he will seem to be inebriated; with
whom also, Sennertus agrees, Affirming, that if it be taken inwardly, it
causes presently a loathing, and much vomiting, extraordinary thirst, a
violent flux of the belly, straitness of the breast, an universal weakness
over the whole body, a cold sweat, Convulsions, and at length with out speedy
help be administered, Death it self. Antidoti loco exhibeantur Zedoar. ij.
pondere cum vino, Cortices Citri vel succus ejus, Rob. Myrti, vel Cydoniorum.
Hereunto I may well add Nux Metella, or Methel, and Pruna Insania; Of Pruna
Insania, Nux Metella, and its Autidores.
In regard of their dangerous quality, and affinity one with another, they
being all Nuts; Methel or Metel then, I shall first speak of, which Serapio,
with some others, have confounded with Nux vomica, indifferently taking one for
the other, and mistaking both, as I think; Some likewise will have it be the
Stramonium minus, or Datura; It will not be worth my time and pains to
reconcile the Dissentions of Authors on this matter; the most rational agree
that our Vomica in Apothecaries shops at this day to be sold^, is not the Nux
Vomica of the Ancients, (for that is of that property, that one Dram, will
cause vomiting) but rather Methel. However Methel is also poisonous, as our
approvedest Writers agree, Casting such as take it, into a most profound
sleep, hardly to be awakened, making their Tongue and Lips to swell, their
Na^les to grow blew, the whole body pale, and to fall into a cold sweat, and
Death it self without speedy help. In Curatione exhibeantur decoctum Absynthij,
Origani, Rutae Sylvestris, Radic. Gentianae, Helenii, cum vi^o paratum, vel
Castoreum, Pyrethrum, Baccae Lauri, Cinamomum, Theriaca, Species Diagalangae,
Diazinziberis: Cibi loco utatur aeger Butyro recenti, Carnibus and jusculis
pinguibus, Potus sit vel vinum meracum, vel Lac Dulce Copiosum. Pruna Insania,
the mad Indian Plums or Nuts, etc. Are altogether as dangerous some think; But
I rather conceive this much more temperate, yet they make such as eat them,
extraordinary sleepy, Cause Laskes, seize on the Heart, spirits and Brain,
exciting diverse strange phansies and Chymeraes in their heads; As appears from
that relation of Clusius, Lib. 2. Epotick Page 53. et 54. Touching some Dutch
men that happened to eat some of them after they were steept in liquor and
boiled; where he tells us one cried perpetually, take away the woman, thinking
his Cabin was a Brew house; Another continually made inquiry, who would buy his
Fish, imagining himself to be plentuously stored with them. One thought that
the Devil was catching of Fish at the stern of the ship; Another, that they
were building a ship in his Cabin; A third, that several men were come to take
away his Cabin from him, whereupon bestirring himself broake several China
Dishes; Here lies one Howling and Crying, his flesh was torn from his bones;
An other sees the Heavens open, and exclames, Lord I will, willingly, follow
thee. The Masters Boy thinks he sees many little men dancing upon his Fathers
nose; And one of the Sailers will not be persuaded but that through the bulk
of the ship, he saw the Anchors of the Sea, and the like; Yet, He says, after
they had slept, all these Phansies vanished. Its Antidotes are the same with
Mandrakes.

SECTION III. Of Colocynthis, and its Antidotes.
COlocynthis, The Coloquintida Apple, Taken by it self or in any other Compound
Medicine in too great a quantity is no less mortal then any of the former,
destroying the Conslitution of the stomach, excoriating the bowels and
intralls, causing Bloody-sluxes, and many other direful symptoms, nay, and
Death it self; For Dodonaeus in suis observationibus, as Camerarius in Horto
records, tells us of one who by receiving a Dram hereof with other
ingredients, but in a Clyster, had his intralls thereby excoriated even to
death, causing much blood, some few hours after he was dead to issue out at the
fundament. The Cure is the same with Hellebor. Vtilis est etiam, si aegro
exhibeatur Decoct. War. Passar. cum Oleo Amygdalorum Dulcium.

SECTION IV: Of Nightshade, and its Antidotes.
SOlani Fructus, The Fruits or Berries of Nightshade; Nightshade is very
dangerous of what sor^ soever it be, taken either in the Root, Herb, or
Fruit; All the kinds excite and provoke to sleep; The Ordinary and Common
Nightshade is less pernicious: And those which are called Hortensis, and
Belladonna, are the most poisonous and mortal, especially their Fruits;
Causing terrible Dreams, strange Phansies, Alienation of the Mind, deep
sleep, etc. As appears by that of Joannes Moibanus in symphon. ad Cap. 11.
Lib. 1. Parabilium, Dioscorid. And Mercurialis De Venenis, Lib. 1. Cap. 13.
Says he saw some boys who were killed by eating those Apples of that sort
called Belladonna. Likewise the Berries of ordinary Nightshade are reputed no
less destructive ^or Tragus, Hist. Stirp. Lib. 3. Cap. 24. From the testimony
of Georg. Olinger. Novimburgers. Aslures us they were the death of two Boys
that out of wantonness eat them as they were playing in the Fields. Yet of the
two, Belladonna is by the most rational accounted, the most mortal and
violent; As is apparent from the Writings of the said Tragus Cap. 15. Leonhart.
Fuchsius, Hi Stirp. Cap. 265. Joannes Wierus De Praestigits Daemonum, Lib. 3.
Cap. 17. Joannes Baptista Porta De Mag a Natural. Lib. 14. Cap. 13, etc. In
Curatione laudantur Aqua Mulsa, Lac Caprinum aut Asininum, Dul^e vinum, quod
t^pi^^m cum aniso bibatur: Amygdalae amarae, gallinacea pectora Dec^cta; quin
etiam Conchylia omnia, tam cruda quam cocta, edere salutare est. Convenient and
l^c^s^ae ma^inae, gammari et pota corundem ^usc^l^* Item exhibean^ur Bolus
Arm^^^s, Ter^^ sigillata, Ruta, Theria^a ^t Mit^rtdati^^, ^t reliqua, quae
H^lleb^ro ^lbo s^^p^e milia sunt.

SECTION V. Mangas, and its Antidotes.
MAngas, The Italian honey plum, about the bigness of a quince, full of a milkie
kind of Juice, etc. As Christophorus a Costa, Lib. Aro. p. 70. describes it.
Affirming, withal, that it is a most pernicious and piercing poison, So that
the least quantity thereof being eaten, will immediately kill; concluding, Adeo
celeriter perimit, ut hactenus nullum sit repertum Antidotum ad ejus vim
compescendam. Its of that penetrative nature, that, as yet, no Antidote is
known to be sufficient to suppress or resist its power and force.

DIVISION VII. Of Poisons belonging to Juyces.
SECTION I. Of Opium and its Antidotes.
LAstly, Juyces are especially five that are poisonous; As, Opium, the Juice of
Poppys, a most dangerous Poison, as all Authors unanimously agree. Pliny Not.
Hist. Lib. 20. Cap. 8. Tells us of one that was presently killed with drinking
some of it. And Jacobus Justinianus affected with the Tooth^ach, by dropping
some Oil in which was Opium thereinto, slept to death; as Alexander Benedictus
Lib. 6. Cap. 13. De Curand. Morb. Records. Nay, it is of that force and
poisonous Nature, that even in Clysters and suppositories it is mortal: as
appears by him in Nichol. Ser. 2. C. 11. Who taking a suppository against the
Tenesinus was thereby destroyed. A Lady, in Mar. Gattinaria, Cap. De Soda
Colerica in 9. Rhasis. Having not slept many days together et Medici
decreverunt in sibi supponeretur collyrium quoddam longum Opiatum quod cum silo
communi appenso, ut extrahi possit, which caused her presently to sleep, but
the Maids neglecting to draw it away as the Physicians had given order to do
when she was ^allen asleep, slept her last, never waking more. And the same
Nichola^ Sermon ^. Tr^ct 1. Cap. 15 ^^te^^s himselt to have seen an ancient man,
to whom a Clys^er being a^n in^stred with Opium against that excessive pa^^ e
of the Colic, dyed. And if it be not taken in that quantity as to kill, yet
it causes many horrible, and direful symptoms; As the Vertigo, Sopor, Coma,
a retching and weariness to any thing but sleep, refrigerating the body, and
so seizing on the Heart, Spirits, and Lungs, that respiration is but small and
remiss, the whole body infeebled, and the very blood in the Heart Coagulated;
Nay, and if it be taken in the least manner in excess, without speedy help be
administered, it immediately kills. [ As Fallopius, Tractat. de Composit
medicament. Cap. 8. Instances by example. And yet Sextus Empericus, 1.
Hypotheseon Empericarum, tells us of one that eat 4. Drachms of Opium without
any hurt. Nay, Gartzeus ab Horto, Lib. 1. Aromat. Indiae Cap. 4. Says he knew
one that would familiarly eat ten D^ach^^s.] Op^^ Antidota sunt in primus Asa,
et Castoreum, quae nonnulli Bezoar et Theriacam Opii nominant. Vtilia etiam
sunt R^^ta et Origanum, et quid^m A^a j. vel Castoreum j. vel ij. pondere cum
vino generoso propinatur.

SECTION II. Euphorbium, and its Antidotes.
EVphorbium, or that which our Herbalists call the Burning Thorny Plant, either
in the Juice, Gumm, or otherwise taken into the Body, irregularly, or in too
great a quantity, causes an extraordinary heat in the Tongue, Mouth, Jaws,
Stomach, and bowels, exciting intolerable pains by corroding and gnawing
those parts: it provokes Vomit, nauseousness and Hiccop; inflameth the whole
body, with inextinguishable thirst; brings cold sweats, sownding fits,
grievous Dysenteries, and at length Death it self; As him in Alex. Benedictus
recorded by Schenkius, De venenis, Lib. 7. Fol. 984. Troubled with the Gout,
and taking pills from an Emperick, made of Euphor^ium, was immediately seized
on by the Dysentery, and several other direful symptoms, and so dyed that
very day. Proprium Euphorbij Antidotum est s^men Citri ex vino, in quo radices
h^lenit Coctae sint. Vtilia etiam sunt Terra sigillata, Smaragdus, Crystallus
Praeparatus, Spec. Liberantis, Theriaca, etc.

SECTION III. Scammony and its Antidotes.
SCammonium, a kind of Convalvulus, or Bendeweed; It is oftentimes used in
Physic, especially in Pills, both by Antie^t and Modern Physicians; But yet as
the former, if not warily used and rightly applied, causes exceeding much
Mischief to ensue; As, it destroys the Stomach, gnawes and corrodes the
Intralls, causing Dysenteries and expulsion of blood, and sometimes of the
bowels themselves in rags; Brings also faintings and sowndings, inflaming the
Heart and spirits, so that the whole Body is as it were set on fire, and at
length destroyed, as Amatus Lucitanus, Comment. ad Cap. 171. Lib. 4. Dioscorid.
attests to have often seen at Venice and Ferraria, several that by taking of
it in pills, and other ways in to great a quantity, have changed, thereby,
this life for eternity. [Yet Fallopius de simpl. Purg. Capit. quadragesimo
octavo, says he saw one that took at once an ounce of Scammony, and yet gave
him not so much as one stool.] In Curatione Diascoridii, quod est suce.
Scammonii. Laudantur omnia quae Fuphorbio sumpto utilia sunt.

SECTION IV. Of the Indian Hiucca, and its Antidotes.
HIuccae succu^, The Juice of the Indian Herb Hiucca, of the Root of which the
Indians make their bread Casaver, is likewise Poison, as Cardan, Scaliger, and
other of the Learned, note; as also common experience evinceth; as diverse have
affirmed unto me who have bee^ in those parts where it is frequent to make such
bread; and yet the Juice thereof is rank, peircing, and deadly Poison: So that,
as the aforenamed Cardan, Lib. 12. De subtilitate contends, there is hardly any
remedy sufficient to resist the power thereof. The reason is rendered by Julius
Caesar Scaliger, Exercitat. 153. sect. 5. ^t 8. ad subtle. Cardani. Because the
Juice being a thin body, or of rare parts, soon penetrateth all the parts of
the Body; as also of a peculiar offensive and destructive faculty or property,
naturally Inherent in the Juice it self. (Yet it is reported that the Juice of
this Root not growing in Islands, but in the Continent is inoffensive. And
where it is deemed poisonous, the Inhabitants make a kind of small drink of it,
by boiling it only till half be consumed. It serves them likewise for Honey,
being boiled thick; and for Vinager being set in the Sun without such boiling.)
Illustrating the former reason by an example, Instancing in Leeks, that the
Juice thereof is very offensive. (But Mizaldus in Horto, Affirms the Juice
also to be mortal, and to have killed several who have attempted to take it
into their Bodies*) When as the Roots or Blades themselves eaten are less
offensive or not at all in that nature. The same may be added of the Juice of
Lettice, two ounces whereof being reputed no better then poison, and of a
deadly quality; When, as much Lettice as will yield two ounces of Juice, may be
eaten without any offense: and all because of the thinness of the parts, which
soon diffuse themselves into the Veins, etc. And extinguish natural heat,
nay, and Life it self. The Cure is (you have heard) seldom or never wrought,
so deadly and poisonous is it.

SECTION V. Of Toxicum and its Antidotes, Mel Venenatum, Mushroomes.
5. ANd Lastly, Toxicum; a most violent and wicked Poison, so destructive and
pernicious, that all Poisons have generally been denominated Toxica, and
comprehended under that name. But what this Toxicum is, or formerly was, is not
plainly discovered by any Author that I have yet rancountred; Dioscorides,
Lib. 6. Cap. 20. Says it was a medecin in which the Indians, Savages, and
people of old were wont to dip the heads of their arrows in the time of war, to
make the wound incurable, and mortal. Sunt enim Graecis (...) et (...),
sagittae; Atque hinc Toxicum dictum venenum, quo tela illinuntur. To the same
use likewise in Cap. 19. he names Pharicum to be also in request; so called, as
some think, either because good store of it was wont to be brought to Pharis a
City in Arcadia so called; or from the Witch that first invented it; But what
these poisons were, he does not acquaint us, neither do any since for him, more
then that they were the Juyces of some Herb or Herbs; But whether Simple or
Compound is not concluded among them; neither of what Herb or Herbs, they
were prepared Some think it may be made of Napellus, or Woolfbane; others of
Aconitum; a third of White Hellebor: Pliny Lib. 16. Not. Hist. Cap. 10. will
have it the Juice of the Tree called Taxus or Yew, and that thence therefore it
had its name: But whether it be any of these, or the tree Ga^acum or those
other bearing fruit, (as Thevetus records Cap. 61. Lib. Sing. Idem T. 1. Cosm.
Lib. 10. Cap. 3. in the Indies) about the bigness of a tennisball, the Juice of
which they affirm the Indians to dip their Darts in, or some other. I shall not
adventure to presume to determine, where so many Learned Men have been obscure,
or at least, not clear. It is so deadly and piercing a Poison, that it is
immedicable; killing even with the very touch; Wherefore I willingly omit what
others have affirmed in that particular.

To these Juyces, I may well add (besides Leekes, and Lettice before named) the
Juice of Mandrake, and of Hemlock; Half a Dram of the former being enough to
kill any one; And the latter being reputed the death of Plato in Phaedon.
SOCRATES that famous Pilosopher. Their Cure is the same with the Root, any
Herb before treated of.

There may, likewise, hereunto, also, be annexed, Mel Venenatum, Poisoned Honey;
for so it often happens to be: as appears by that of Galen, Lib. 10. De
simplic. medicament. facultat. circa initium, according as Schenkins and
Sennertus quote, as also that of Pliny, Lib. 21. Cap. 14. Not. Hist. being
gathered by the Bees, Of Poisoned Honey, and its Antidotes.
from poisonous Flowers, etc. And Rhodiginus Cap. 35.25. Tells us of Honey
coming out of Box in Pontus, that makes such as eat it stark mad. Others again
he records, Cap. 30.18. that immediately kills being poisoned by the place in
which it was made. As soon as ever it is eaten any manner of way, or drank in
liquor, it is in the Mouth, and to the Tongue and Palate very sweet and
pleasant; But immediately after, disturbes the Head, causing it to be dull,
Vertiginous, and filled with Chymeraes, as also Deliriums, tremblings
abundantly; hinders respiration, making grievous pains in the sides, and
Breasts, as also gnawings in the Intestines, and abundance of Wind; an
universal trembling over the whole Body; and if speedy remedy be not
administered, Death it self seiseth on them. Its Cures are the same with
Aconitum, before mentioned.

Lastly to conclude this Class, touching Poisons belonging to Vegetables, I may
add that meanest and most unworthy of all vegetables, Mushromes, which although
some are ventured on as food by Fanatic brains; Yet others are poisonous, and
all pernicious; Nay, and none of them sit for food; Whence Seneca did well term
them a voluptuous Poison. Of Mushroomes, and their Antidotes.
Pliny Ancipitem Ci^um Lib. 22. Cap. 23. Not. Hist. Destroying whole Families
at a repast; Claudius Caesar, as Suetonius records, was destroyed by them; And
Cardan Lib. 3. De Sanitat. Tuend. Cap. 47. Reckons up I know not how many more
that lost their lives by this fantastical food. Those are the worst, and most
poisonous, which, as Avicenna notes, are grayish or of a bluish color, which
some think are not only mortal being eaten, but destructive also to such as do
but smell unto them. And the reason is, either 1. Because they are naturally
nothing else but a bundle of cold, moist, and viscous vapors and matter of the
Earth or Trees on which they grow: Or 2. In that they are very apt to attract,
and suck in all manner of poison from Toades, Spiders, and other noxious
Creatures that do, or may converse about them; Whence, such as eat them, (or
such as are naught, or those that are good, in too great a quatity) are as it
were suffocated, strangled or choakt, having their natural heat extinguished,
filling their bellies with wind, causing the Hiccop, exulcerating the Intralls
and Bowels, and bringing an universal palenesse over the whole Body; and
sometimes causes madness; an example of one thus affected Petrus Forestus
has Lib. 10. Observat. Med. Observat. 116. in Scholio, of a Woman so affected
by eating this trash only. Likewise in the same place he tells us of a young
Gentlewoman about Eighteen years of age, quae in Convulsione qb ^utero ex
fungis Comestis incidebat; Lying so Convulst, staring in a most horrible
manner, Continuing thus in her fit for six Days together, etc. It brings,
likewise Sownding ^its, Cold Sweats, ^alling-sicknesse, and deep sleep, Nay,
and Death it self, as you have heard; The which every Physician Confirms.
Malignitati vero hujus veneni resistunt Calamintha Montana, Origanum, Hysopus,
Ruta, Nasturtium, Absynthium, Allium, Aristoloch. Laudantur et Theriaca, vel
Mithridatium cum Oxymelite simplici vel scillitico exhibitum; ut et species
Diatrion Piperion, Diacalaminthae, Diamosci, Diacymini, Diagalanga j. pondere
cum vino generoso Tribus Diebus Continuis exhibitae, etc. And thus much,
briefly, shall suffice to be spoken Of Poisons belonging to Vegetables.

OF POISONS belonging to ANIMALLS. CLASS III.
THus having spoken of Poisons belonging to Mineralls, as also to Vegetables,
It rests, according, to my promise, I speak also to Animalls, which may be
divided into these several ranks; As being either 1. Of Beasts; Or 2. Of
Flying Creatures; Or 3. Of Serpents; Or 4. Of Fishes; Or 5. Of Creeping things.
Of all which, there are diverse sorts: As 1. Of BEASTS; 1. Dogs; 2. Cats; 3.
Woolses; 4. Mus Araneus; 5. Taurus; 6. Vacca. 2. Of FLYING CREATVRES: 1.
Cantharides; 2. Apis; 3. Vespus. 3. Of SERPENTS: 1. Draco; 2. Crocodilus; 3.
Scorpio; 4. Baziliseus; 5. Salamandra; 6. Vipera; 7. Dryinus; 8. Stellio; 9.
Aspis; 10. Natrix; 11. Haemorrhous; 12. Sepedon; 13. Cerastes; 14. Dipsas; 15.
Amphysbaenas and Sytate; 16. Cenchris; 17. and Lacerta. 4. Of FISHES: 1.
Torpedo; 2. Draco Marinus; 3. Pastinaca Marina; 4. Canis Marinus; 5. Lepus
Marinus; 6. Scorpio Marinus; and 7. Muraena. 5. Of CREEPING THINGS, or INSECTS:
1. Scolopendra; 2. Hirudo; 3. Rubeta; 4. Aranenus; 5. Pini Erucae. Of all which
in order one word as I have done of other Poisons, and so Conclude.

DIVISION I. Of Poisons belonging to Four-Footed-Beasts.
SECTION I. Of the biting of Mad-Doggs, and the Antidotes
AND First of such poisons as Four-Footed-Beasts yield unto us; Among which,
Dogs offer themselves in the first place, to our Consideration. Which
Creatures, in regard they are more subject to madness oftentimes then others,
and a raving kind of distemper, and foaming at the mouth; Do, by biting, or
their venomous foame, convey the same raging fury, to Man or Beast which they
wound; As also several other ways, as you may see beneath. Of this Creature,
therefore, I say, we shall chiefly insist: as touching the madness of Horses,
Asses, Mules, Bears, Foxes, and the rest, which are not so subject to
madness, or so frequently raging, or, perhaps, never, unless it be unto them
conveyed by the bite, foame, or other manner, from these Dogs, or Woolfes, I
shall refer thee to Bauchinus, who has written an whole Tract of them. [With
him you may also consult Avicennas 6. quarti, Tract. 4. Cap. 5. and 6.
Aurelianus likewise, Lib. 3. Acutor. Cap. 9. Aristoteles De Hist. Animalium
Lib. 18. Cap. 22. et 24.] For farther satisfaction, have recourse to the
writings of the Learned; But more particularly, read Dioscorides, Hournicus,
Capivaccius, Hieldishem, Forestus, Schenkius, Sennertus, etc But especially he
that is, Instar omnium Codronchus, who has largely, and fully discussed this
subject matter, in Two Treatises.

How Dogs become mad, is a question not fully discussed by our Physicians and
Philosophers. Some render this reason; Because they are of a melancholy temper
and nature: But then other Creatures of the same disposition, as Hares, Coneys,
Cats, and all kind of Venison, sheep, etc. would be likewise in the same
manner affected. Why Dogs are mad, or more adicted thereunto then any other
Creature.
Others will have it proceed ex qualitatibus primis; which likewise is invalid;
for we see these primae qualitates work not the same effect in other Creatures.
Others again, say they are subject and most prone to madness of all other
Creatures in that they feed upon Carrion, and stinking corrupt matter, and
drink faetide and putrified water, which corrupting their blood and spirits
procures madness: But to this neither, can I consent, in that, other Creatures
that feed as foully and more frequently, are less, nay seldom, or never thus
affected, as Swine, Ducks, Hens, etc. Which will eat any, or all manner of
filth without the least inconveniency; Besides, many times we see Dogs run mad
that never eat a bit of Carrion in all their lives, but choicely fed from their
Masters Table. Af, ourth sort, say it is through vexation or trouble in finding
their Master when lost, and smelling to every filthy and faetid thing; But this
argues as little as the rest, in that if he cannot find his Master quickly, he
soon returns home, so that the vexation will not be so violent as to make him
mad, in regard it cannot be imagined the Dog should aggravate his misery and
discontent to heighten any such humor, by conceiving he shall loose his labor
when he comes home, and that then the other people in the house will injure
him, famish, hang, or some other way destroy him, and the like; which might
make him mad, if this reasoning or fancy might be admitted in the Dog I say:
But on the contrary we see that as soon as he comes home, he rests contented
till he by chance again rancounters his owner, seeking no farther after him.
Neither does his senting at every offensive vapor argue he thereupon grows
mad; for then it would be of that efficacy and force to divert his present
intentions, and confound his sense so that he would be disinabled to follow his
appetite: But we see by common experience, that, notwithstanding all these, he
constantly pursues his game or his desires without the least disturbance from
those vapors, retaining still the sent of what he seeks or pursues. Many,
again, are of opinion, that sudden heats and colds may be the cause of this
their frenzy, they being Creatures much subject thereunto, whereby their
blood is inflamed, melancholy increased, and madness it self excited: But
this, likewise, is of as little force as all the rest, since we are, by common
eperience, evinced that Dogs are as mad in winter as in summer; in cold
weather as in the Dog-dayes. So that among these various opinions, what to
determine, is no easy matter; The Controversy I shall not presume to decide;
only thus much, I hope, I may without offense deliver; that they are more
addicted and propence unto this Delirium, then other Creatures; out of a
peculiar inherent or innate property in themselves; which, in plain English, is
as much as to say, I am ignorant of the cause. Neither am I ashamed to confess
it, since, I find the most approvedst Authors, herein, to seek, or obscure;
but wish heartily other men may have a more clear understanding in this matter
then my self.

But however they become thus; yet this is most certain, that they emit such a
Poison, when they are thus mad, which destroys both Man and Beast, by a
secret, not manifest property. And that several ways; As, 1. By biting; Thus
Baldus the Lawyer was destroyed by a small bite of a little Dog which he kept
and played with, How the Poison of a Mad Dog is communicated to Man or Beast.
gave him in the Lip, as Ambrosius Paraeus De venenis, Lib. 21. Cap. 14.
Records; Every Author affirms their bite to be most dangerous, and that they
thereby most frequently destroy both Man and Beast. [Yet Nicholus affirms
Sermon 4. Tract. 4. Cap. 15. That he saw a Man who being bitten with a Mad
Dog, became mad; and another that the same Dog bit, had no more hurt then if
he had been bitten by another Dog which ailed nothing, or had not been bit at
all; wherefore there is more in it then the mere bite; Nay some conceive the
venom is but in one or some certain teeth, and that all the rest are
inoffensive as any Dog that is not mad.] 2. By scratching; And thus Caelius
Aurelianus Lib. 3. Cap. 9. Acut. morb. reports of a Woman who being lightly
scratcht in the face by a little Dog that was mad, became, not long after,
distracted. 3. By the touch; for so Galen Lib. 6. De loc is affectis, teaches
that their very foame being touched, is sufficient to make a man mad, and breed
that raging disease called Hydrophobia; which Mathiolus confirms, attesting he
himself saw two thus affected without the least bite or hurt, but only having
some of their slaver sprinkled, by chance, upon them; Com. ad Lib. 6.
Dioscorid. Cap. 36. Likewise Mathaeus De Gradibus, Consil: 82. affirms Joannes
Coqueranus to be thus infected with only putting his hand into the mouth of a
Mad Dog, although he was not at all bit thereby. 4. By the smell of a Mad Dog
it has also been known some have been infected, as him in Aurelianus, loco
citato, etc. 5. By sucking or biting that which they have bitten; As I have
heard of a fellow who meeting a Mad Dog, not knowing he was so, came so near
him that the Cur, in his transient Journey, bit off a piece of his Cloak and
let it fall, the which, the fellow (being somewhat saveing) took up, and had it
sowed on again, but, as it was thought, bit off the ragged threads before he
sowed it to the other, whereby he was infected, and at the next full Moon,
Dyed: But lest my relation may not be worthy the crediting, take the same from
the aforenamed Caelius Aurelianus, loco Aligato, who tells us of such an other
action, verbatim. 6. By eating such Creatures as are bitten by them; An
Instance of much mischief in this kind may be seen in Fernelius Lib. 2. De
Abditis rerum causis Cap. 14. Nay and 7. And Lastly, by their very looks, as
Arateus Lib. 1. Cap. 7. De signis and causis morb. Acut. Instanceth in one who
was thus affected by the ardent, venomous, and fierce aspect of a Mad Dog,
earnestly looking him in the face, neither biting or touching him any manner of
way.

And this Poison does sometimes manifest it self sooner, sometimes, again,
later; for what reason we are as yet left in the dark; neither is the time
exactly known, when the effects begin to manifest themselves; some say within a
Week, others nine, or Fourteen days after; A third sort, say, about the
seventeenth or twentieth; but most hold, Of the time when the efects appears.
about the thirtieth, or fortieth day after the bite. Nay and sometimes there
is no sign of it till 4. Months after, as Galen holds; As also Codronchus, [
Baldus the great Lawyer, as Paraeus notes, Lib. 21. De venenis, Cap. 14. Dyed
four Months after he was bitten] some not till the 6. or 8. Month or a year,
as others will, Albertus Magnus, De Hist Animal. Lib. 7. Cap. 2. Says he saw a
man that was bitten with a Mad Dog in the Arm, and yet was well for seven
years, after which, the place began to be inflamed, and so within two day
dyed. And Fracastorius says five years; but Gnianerius, twelve years: Amatus
Lucitanus gives instances of eight months; and of three years; But Petrus
Salius of five, seven, and twelve years. [As also eighteen years; Nay and
Alsaharavius attests he knew one that lived 40. years before he was apparently
infected.] I shall not presume to correct so worthy, so learned, Whether that
Poison which causes this madness may be generated in Man's Body.
so able Physicians as these are which thus affirm; but I may acknowledge my
self ignorant in the reason hereof without prejudicing any man, as also take
that liberty as to think my pleasure, and not conclude with all I hear,
especially since there are so many poisons that may accidentally interveane and
be eaten unawares, that may cause Death, in such a manner as will be very
difficult to determine whether was the Interficient dosse: (And so, as some
think, There be many posons which being taken, will kill at such, or such
certain times after. Qua de re consule Galeotum De promiscua disciplina, Cap.
12. Iobertum paradoxo 3. Lib. 27. Amatum Lucitanum, Cant. 2. Curat. 65. Julium
Alexandrinum Annotat. Ad Galenum 680. Cardanum Lib. 2. Tract. 5. Contradict. 9.
et de subtilitate Lib. 2. Mercurialem, De venenis Lib. 1. Cap. 21. Francisc.
Valeriolam loc. Commun. Page 633. Vidum Vidium, Tom. 2. Page 13. And Baccium
Lib. 1. De venenoruns prolegomenis, etc. But, as to this Tenet we spoke our
opinion in Part. 1. Sect. 4.) Besides, the same Poison and venomous matter of
which this madness arises, may be generated in the Bodies of Men and Women,
without any infection from Dogs at all. To this purpose Marcellus Donatus, De
Historia medica mirabili, Lib. 6. Cap. 1. De Hydrophobia mira affectio, gives
us five several examples of such as were so affected and fallen into the
disease called Hydrophobia without the least communication of the said venom
from any Dog or thing: but purely from some innate seeds thereof inherent in
themselves. Likewise the same aforequoted Petrus Salius, De affect. Partic.
Cap. 19. Has such an other instance. So has Felix Paterus obser. Med. Lib. 1.

Touching the nature and temperature of this Poison, many arguments are among
the Learned; Some maintaining it to be Hot, others Cold, with Enstathius
Rudins, Lib. 4. De Morbis occultis, Cap. 12. who labors by several arguments
to maintain this Paradox. But the most Rational and Learned are of the
contrary Judgment, affirming it to be Hot, and Dry of quality. As Fuchsius,
Fernelius, Sennertus, etc. Hildesheim, Speciel. 2. Confirms it by several
examples, in such as have been infectected by the bite of Mad Dogs, and dying
madd, being opened, had no water, or blood scarce; or any other moisture left
in them. And Capivaccius, Fract. med. Lib. 7. Cap. 12. Concludes it not only
Hot, but Hot in the fourth Degree; which from his own experience in a certain
Monck whose Body being defected (dying in this sort of madness from the bite of
a Dog) He observed these three things clearly evincing the truth thereof; First
that there was no moisture in the Pericardion (in the least) but all wasted and
dried up by the fiery Poison; Secondly the Cells or Ventricles of the Heart
were dry, and destitute of blood; Thirdly, That some part of the Pericardi^ on
was so dry, scorcht, and burnt up, that it was fit to be pulverized. Besides,
their inordinate Draught evinceth, putting the matter quite out of Doubt, and
makes it evidently appear to be Hot. And yet, notwithstanding, they will rather
choose to Dye then Drink, out of a peculiar inherent property, or occult
quality, which, as yet (to tell you the truth) is not known to Physicians and
Philosophers even as they who are bitten with the spider Tarantula (as you will
hear beneath) are in more ease, Of the nature of this Poison, and why such as
are affected abhor water, and all other liquid things.
pleasant, merry, and Dance when they hear Music, nay, and are oftentimes
cured thereby. And those who have eaten of the Sea Hare abhor all Fish: So, I
say, does they who are infected by the bite of a Mad Dog, (or otherwise) from
an occult quality in the Poison, naturally abhor all water; whence, by the
Ancients, as Dodonaeus obs. medicinal Cap. 12. notes, it had it is Denomination
Hydrophobia; And that it is thus, Rhasis has a notable story to this effect,
Lib. 8. Ad Almansoar. Cap. 10. we had once a patient in an Hospital affected
with that Disease called Hydrophobia, by the biting of a Mad Dog, who whould
usually bark in the night time; Calling often very earnestly for Drink,
especially water, out of the extremity of his Drought; But when we gave him
Water, he abominated and rejected it, saying, it was full of filth and
pollution; And being demanded what filth he saw there; He replied, the intralls
and garbidge of Dogs and Catts, entreating he might have some other Water
brought him: So, accordingly, other Water was fetched; But, as before, he
continued in the same story, and began to be angry. Beseeching us earnestly
that we would let him have some clear, good Water. So that, hence we may
Collect, that this may likewise proceed from some Depravation of the Fancy
the Brain being principally the part affected in this Disease, as all
Physicians unanimously agree) And it being incident to all who are therewith
infected, to have the representation of a Dog ever in their minds, and
therefore shun Looking-glasses, Polite Bodies, and Water because they imagine
they see a Dog in it, of which, examples are frequent in Authors. And not
only of Water are they thus afraid, but of all other liquours and Drinks
whatsoever, as the same Dodonaeus loco aligato, observes. So does Vidus Vidius,
Part. 2. Sect. 2. Cap. 6. Medecin. Illustrating the truth thereof by an
example of a certain young man being bit by a Mad Dog, at first neglecting the
wound, Did after four Months time, begin to rave, abhorring all manner of Meat
and Drink, and at length Dyed miserably through hunger and thirst. Of the same
Judgment is Petrus Salius, and the aprovedest Authors; Hercules De Saxonia,
Forestus, Sennertus, and every one.

Thus, by what has been said, you may Collect diverse Signs of such as are
bitten, or any other manner of way infected with this Poison; yet there are
several other worth your noting, which I shall nominate, that so you may
discover and know it the better; As, Signs of such as are bitten by a Mad Dog.
In regard in principally seiseth upon the Brain and Spirits, it makes them
pensive, sadd, solitary, desiring to be alone, refraining all Company, and the
Light; Likewise they are very fearful of every thing, but especially of Dogs
and liquid things. As him in Florentinus Sermon 4. Tract. 4. Cap. 15. who being
bitten by a Mad Dog, and finding no pain extraordinary in the wound, neglected
it and followed his business 35. days after; but on the 36. day, he began to
stand and bark like a Dog at his wife, and being, by her reprehended, he fell
a laughing; yet persisted to practice this foolery, several times that day, at
night he was wholly deprived of his reason, and Dyed the 40. Day; Casting
himself upon the ground many times (as the nature of that Disease is) to avoid
Dogs, if possible, by running as it were into the earth: Such like instances,
as also that they are prone to bark like Dogs, is frequent in the writings of
the Learned; As that before quoted from Rhasis, Lib. 8. Cap. 10. Ad Almans.
Another he has in Lib. 20. Cap. 2. etc. That they are excessive thirsty, and
yet will not drink, is apparent from that of Forestus observat. med. Lib. 10.
observat. 25. of a Woman of Delfe that miserably perished thereby; And of the
young man or youth in the same Town, recorded likewise by him in the same
Observation, qui bibere not potuit. They are likewise froward, waspish, and
testy, seldom answering to any thing in question; they grievously grate with
their teeth, especially at the beginning of their Distemper, and fancy
strange Chymeroes in their Dreams: Their Fancy, Memory, Reason, nay all the
senses and faculties of the Soul are generally Depraved and Disturbed; So that
they often times; fall foul upon their dearest and best friends, biting,
scratching, and beating them, raving and mad some times, like that Woman
before mentioned in Forestus, that could not be scarce held down in her bed,
biting at, and spitting upon the standers by, foaming at the mouth, etc. Yet
they do not always rage, and become furious, as Petrus Salius, Lib. De affect.
Partic. well observes in several, that he says did not rage at all to their
dying Day. Sometimes also, as he likewise notes, Page 358. Loc. Citat. They are
subject to a Fever, but this is rather to be attributed to the aptness and
disposition of the Body and humors, then any peculiar property in the venom
it self as he thinks, and Sennertus agrees. They are frequently troubled with
cold sweats; And from the wound or bite, issues a green faetid matter. The
Urine pale, clear, and like fair water, if the distemper be at any highth; And
many times wholly suppressed, by the strength of the Poison and extraordinary
Drought under which they intollerably labor, partching up the Heart and
Vitalls, powerfully subverting and suffocating both Vital and Animal Spirits,
and consuming the Brain, do at length dye frantic, mad or moped. These are
such like sumptomes commonly follow the effects of this Poison according to the
consent general of the most approvedst Authors extant. As touching that of
Avicenna that small pieces of flesh in their Urine are to be discerned in the
form and shape of Dogs or whelps, and such other Phansies, I willingly
pretermit, being as I conceive rather the product of his Fancy then of reason
or experience.

This only I shall here, by way of advice, add; That if any be either bit, or
infected any other way which has been before related; that they seek out for
speedy remedy, and defer not till it be too late; Let that of Baldus the Laywer
be a warning to them, who neglecting that small bite of his little Dog,
miserably perished, notwithstanding when it was too late, he had used all kind
of medicines. Forestus in that Observation so often quoted, where he mentions
that Woman of Delfe, advised all those whom she had spit upon to be ducked over
head and ears in water forthwith, and thereby, they were all saved, preventing
what might otherwise have happened, for indeed few who have used remedies in
time have perished. Leaping into the water and ducking themselves in this
manner, is the Common Cure in the Country; But the best way is to have recourse
to the writings of the most approvedest Physicians; For this, as Ponzet. to the
Cardinal Lib. De venenis notes, has been used many times to little purpose;
Although sometimes it will effect it; As Cornelius Celsus, Petrus Salius, and
others attest, and as we may see by that Philosopher in Aetius, who being
infected, and fearful of water, leaping courageously into a Bath, and in the
water beholding the shape of the Dog that bitt him, at first made a stand as
being terrified, but after a little pause, being ashamed thereof, he
immediately cried out, Quid Canicum Balneo, and so threw himself forcibly into
the water, Drinking some of it without the least fear; And so was freed from
his distemper and depraved Fancy. And the rather do I admonish all such as
have cause to suspect the infection of this Poison to seek out for present
remedy, in that the bite or part venomed, for the present, does not rage or
pain the Patient, more then an ordinary wound, which may make them apt to be
careless of themselves; lying lurking in the body, and no wise manifesting it
self till it have reached and seized upon the noble parts: So that, indeed, it
is not an casie matter, at the first, to know whether one be bitten or
infected; Yet, for the discovery thereof, Rhasis and Avicenna have advised,
that a bit of the crommy part of bread be wet in the blood and matter of the
wound, and so given to a Dog to eat, the which if he refuse to eat or smell
too (being hungry) or grow mad or dye after he has eaten t, It is a most sure
token (they say) that the party is infected: whereby you may discover the
malignity of the Poison although the wound be not extraordinary painful, nor
swell, nor burn, etc. As wounds from other venomous Creatures do. Neither for
this reason only, have you reason to be cautious; but also, for that, when once
it has seized on the Brain, Heart, and the more noble parts, so that the party
become phrantick, grovelling upon the ground, epileptick, swound, howl, bark,
snarle, and apprehend strange phansies, rage, and the like, it is past remedy;
And all medecines, will prove ineffectuall; Dying sooner, or later, as the
symptoms are more or less prevalent, and apparent, as Delirium, want of
sleep, Convulsions, etc. And if the Hickop take them, they for the most part
dye the next Day after; but many times that same Day, However an assured token
it is, that Death is at hand. If the wound or bite be not deep, or have
offended the Nerves, Veins or A^teries, there is more hope of life, provided
present help, be administered, If the wound be large, some think it a greater
sign of health then when the wound is the smaller, because it thereby is more
capable of evacuating much of the venomous matter. The which if it abundantly
evacuate, or send forth much blood thereby when it is first made, or afterward
when it is curing; or the Body of its own accord sweat freely and in any
quantity, emit much Urine, and it black, they are very good signs all of
health, if Rhasis and Avicenna may be credited. The same Avicenna likewise
affirms, that it is a good sign if he be afraid of water (which by most is
thought a token of death) provided he can behold his face in a glass. But these
Aphorisms are not infallible; for we see that Philosopher in Aetius before
quoted, was cured by Drinking and Ducking himself in the Bath, notwithstanding
he feared the Dog that bit him was in the water: other examples you may find,
in the writings of the Learned, contradicting most of the other assertions
likewise, which for brevities sake I willingly pretermit.

Wherefore then as touching the Cure in general, not only of this venomous
infection, but of all other wounds received by the biting of Serpents, or any
other poisonous Creature whatsoever, There are 2 things principally to be
considered. First, when any one is bit, Of the Cure in general of the bite of
a Mad Dog, Serpent, or other venamous Creature.
or any other ways infected, to prevent the raging and raving madness: And
Secondly, when they are therewith Captivated, to cure as much as in Art is
possible to be done. In the former of these, there are three things a Physician
must be careful to perform. 1. That the Poison may be hindered from entering
into the Body; and not only so, but that it be also drawn forth of the wound or
part affected, and expelled. 2. That the Poison be hindered from spreading and
delating it self, or entering into the inward parts and principal members; And
the parts, rather, corroborated and fortified against it. 3. That the Poison
and the malignity thereof be extinguished.

The first of these is performed by Ligatures, if the part be such as will
admit of them, having a care that it be not bound too hard. And if it may not
by any means be tied about, the best way is to apply restringent medecines,
such as are Bolus Armenus, Belaustia, Sanguis Draconis, cum ovi albumine
vicinis locis imponenda, etc. Attrahentia sunt varia, quidem sunt calida and
sicca in secundo gradu, quae moderate attrahunt; Alia vero in tertio. quae
magis; Alia etiam in quarto, quae maxim attrah^nt, and ardore C^tem in tum^ore
attolunt, ac rubore suffundum, Tand inque vesicas excitant. Talia sunt
Cylamini, Radices Aristol^chiae, Dracuaculi, An^mones, Gentianae, Ranunculi,
Ari, Narcissi, Pyrethri, Arundines, Th^psiae, Vri^a, Flammula, Seinen Sinapis,
Allium, Caepe, Nasturtii, Fermentum, Anacardia, Gummi, Galbanum, Opopanax,
Ammoniatum, Sagapenum, ^iae sicca, Propolis, Cantharides, fimus Anscrinus,
Gallinaceus, Columbrinus, etc. Q^ibus C^mmode admiscetur Theriaca, V^ile est
and ^mplastrum v l Cataplasma De Angelica. Commendatur plurimum ex Dioscoride
d^sumpt^m, and sapecum felici successu usurpatur, ex Allio, Caepis, and semine
Tritici mastic^to paratum, Galenus Lib. 2. De Antidot. Cap. 11. Commendat valde
emplastrum paratum ex Pic^, Opopanate, and Aceto. sic.. Picis L^b j. A^eti
Acer^^m Lib. j. viij. oppopanac. iij opopona ^prius in Cyathis 4. Aceti
dusolvitur, Acetum quod suprest cum Pice coq^itur, et coquuntur, ^avendo ne
efferveant: ser bi^que ^cem G. l n^s, se neminem vidisse, quo ino us^s mo^u ^s
sit. In Lib. i^e^ De (...) a Ad P^s number etiam cum felici successu Th^rina^ c^m
ol: Rosar. liquatam imponi testatur. Aetius Tetr. 3. Sermon Cap. 10. Hoc laudat,.
Spum. Argent. Ceruss. resin. Pini, An. Lib. j. ol. veter. Lib. iij. vij.
Amononiat. Thymiam. Galban. An. iiij. Cerussae and Argenti spumam ol. Coquito,
donec manus non inquinent, deinde liquefacta adducito and unito. Laudatur et
emplastrum Diadictamnum, quod Galenus Lib. 5. De Compositione medicamentorum
secundum genera, Cap. 4. Sic describit.. olei veteris, heminas ij. Lythargyri,
ij. aeruginis rasae, viij. Squammae, vi. Colophoniae liquidae, j. manuae xij.
Ammoniaci Thymiamatis, xxvj. aeris Combusti, viij. Diphrygis vj. Gentianae,
tantundem, Aloes, viij. Galbani, xij. Propolis, viij. Cerae, xxv.
Aristolochiae, x. Dictamni Cretici, tantundem. Conficito accuratissime.
Capivaccius Lib. 7. Pract. Cap. 12. sequens commendat,. Ciner. Cancr. fluviat.
Allii, Menthae, Gentianae, Aristolochiae Rotundae, Ana. ij. Baccar. Lauri, Boli
Armenij, Ana. j. Misce cum succo Menthae q s. Fiat Emplastrum; vel potius,
Cataplasma. Those, and such like medecines may be fitly applied to attract, and
draw out the venom; or the same may be used as is requisite in the second
Rule, viz. which hinder the Poison from diffusing and penetrating the Body.

Vt, Si partis conditio ferat, Cucurbitulae imponantur, et quidem cum magna
flamma venenum immissum extrahatur. Et si vulnus sit exiguum scarificari debet,
et quidem si aliquod temporis spatium a morsu praeterlapsum sit, saepius
adhibendae sunt, et partibus vicinis altiora vulnera inftigenda. Sed vulnus
antea si satis sit magnum, non opus est scarificationes adhibere, ne
inflammatio excitetur, quae postea impediat, quo minus alia remedia, quae
venenum evocant, adhiberi possint. Si vero pars sit, ut Cucurbitulae commode
affigi non possint, scarificatio sola adhibenda, ut sanguis effluat, qui sicca
spongia e vulneri^us exsugendus, non vero vulnus aqua abluendum, id est
fontana, sed potius cum Aqua Marina, aut Vrina, vel Aqua Vitae, aut vino, vel
Aceto in quo Theriac. aut Sinap. fuerit Dissolut; Et sic vulnus diu apertum
servandum est, non solum usque ad diem quadragessimum, sed per integrii annum,
praesertim in morsu Canis Rabid. Cum observatum sit (ut antea dictum) quosdam a
rabidis Canibus morsos etiam post annum, imo etiam longius temporis spatium in
Hydrophobiam incidisse. Licet etiam Animalia viva, ut Columbas, Gallinas,
plumis prius evulsis, podice vulneri admovere; et si and moriatur, statim aliam
adhibere, vel pullos Gallinarum, Aut Columbarum per medium dissectos adh^c
calentes laesae parti impon^re. Expeditissim^ vero via est ad^ibere Caute^ia
actualia, q^ae et venenum absumunt, et diuturnum ul^us, per quod virus essluat,
relinquunt. Vstione peracta danda opera, ut Crusta quam c^lerrime moveaour, ut
venenum qua citissime per ulcus evacuari possit. Nam Crusta ulceri inh^rens
facit ut venenum retineatur, et ad Corpor is interiora penetret. Amoveatur
autem alias, si illinatur vitello ovi, et recenti Butyro. Verum cum periculum
sit in mora, si locus sit Carnosus, etam manuali opera Crusta d^mi inde potest;
Si antem locus ustionem non f^rat, aut aeger ignem actualem admittere nolit,
adhibenda medicamenta Ca^stica ^t escharatica dicta, inter quae etiam Mercurius
Sublim^^us et praecipitatus utiliter usurpatur. Sunt nonnulli, qui, si partis
conditio id ferat partem demorsam statim amputandam censent, exemplo illerum,
qui ab aspide ant viperis demor si aigi os amputaverunt, et salvievaserunt; ut
refert Galenus Lib. 3. De locis affectis, Cap. 7. Venaefectioni hic nullus
locus est, ut pote quae venenum non evacuat, sed vires debilitat, venenumque
exagitat: Et ergo potius obest quam prodest. Purgationem quod attinet, ut ab
initio ea instituatur, nihil est, quod eam indicet. Imo si exhibeantur
purgantia, metus est ^e venenum ad interiora trahatur, et humores, ac corporis
parts inquinentur. Si vero malum jam progressum sit, et venenum ad interiora
penetraverit, tum purgatio non inutilis est, camque tantum auxilii afferre
scribit Dioscorides, ut quidem qui jam Hydrophobiae propinqui essent sumpto
Heleboro sanati fuerunt; Ideoque non semel atque iterum, sed frequentius ante
diem 40. Ea it a uti praecipit. Humores tamen prim. praeparare non inutil^
fuerit Calefacientibus, incidentibus, abstergentibus atque veneno simul
resistentibus; ut sir. scord. de Cortic. Citri, Betonic. De^omis De succo
bugloss. Epithymo, Decoctionibus paratis e semine Citri, Rad. Gentianae,
Angelicae, Dictamni Albi, Scordii, Vinceroxico, Bugloss. Melissa, Hippolapatho,
etc. Reliquis scopis, nimirum ut veneni ad interna pregressus prohibeatur,
parts principes roborentur quo sacilius venenum a se propellere possint, ac
malignua (...) humoribus et Corporia a veneno impresso aboleatur, iisd^m fere
medicamentissatis fieri potest, scilicet Antidotis, et i^s quae deculiari vi
his venenis resist^nt; ut in singulis reperiuntUr. Item et 3. ^^t venenum ^t
malignitas extinguatur. Of which bene^^th, in their several places; And first
of such Corroboratives and Antidotes as are convenient to be used again the
Poison of a Mad-Doggs bite; or of the Cure of this venom.

Quod ad Curationem attinet. Primdanda opera, ut venenum Corpori Commu^ catum
for as eliciatur, iis modis, qui bacten^ sunt propositi. Imponantur plagae
Emplestrum e Galbano in Aceto Dissoluto, et fari^^ hordeacea paratum; vel e^
Allio, Of the Cure of the bite or Poison of a Mad Dog.
foliis ficus et Cym^ no Contusis ac cum oleo mix^tis. Fiat Cataplasma vu^neri
imponendum. Vel, Emplastrum ex Pie^ oppopanace et Aceto paratum jam descriptum
Aut Emplastrum Diadict amuum ex Galen sumptum; vel illud Aetii, aut Capivaccii,
et Purgantia, quae in Rabie Canina conveniu^ sint omnium consensu validiora, ut
elleborimus, Hiera, Diacatholocynthid. Russii, Archigenis, Logadii, Pachii,
Pilul. ex Hell bore Antimonio, De Lapide Lazuli, Cochiae, D^ Nitro, Faetido,
etc. Si aetas, temperamentum vires, vel aer dissuadeant talia; eligant^^
mitiora, ac mediocria, ut est Sena, Epithymum Polypodium, Helleborus Niger,
Mirabol Nigri, et Agaric, trecipue, qui simul venen, resistit. Composita sunt
elect. De Dactyl, Confect. Hamech, Elect Indum majus, ac benedicta Laxativa. Ad
parts principes Roborandum, ab omnibus commendatur Alysum. Laudantur et Cancri
fluviatilis, cum little Cinis, tum decoctum, multo Anetho admixto, Scordium,
Chamedrys, Radix Gentianae, Rutae Agrest is semen, Chamemalum, Centaurium
minus; Artemisia, Aristolochia rotunda, Rad. sylv. Radicem Cynhorrhodi
Commendat precipue Plinius, Not. Hist. Lib. 8 Cap. 41 and Lib. 25. Cap. 2. ut
oraculo patefactam, camque aliis omnibus igitur remediis Prefert. Laudatur et
vinum generosum statim potum et Allium Comestum.

Inter Composita, Antidotus e Cancris pluribus Commendatur et a Graecis, et
Arabibus, scribitque Galenus neminens unquam mort n^m esse, qui Canc^orum
pulvere recte usus sit, et quidem Lib. 11. De simpl. medicamentorum
facultatibus, ex praeceptore suo A^schrione, sumit Cancros sluviaetiles post
ortum Canis Captos, quando Sol Leonem transit, Decima octava Luna et tos vivos
in sartagine aeris rubri Comburit; Cinerum sumit Duo Cochlearis, vel ij. pulv.
Gentianae Cochlear. j. seu. j. vini meraci iiij. Cyath. quae in modum polentae
dilutae miscet, et quotidie bibenda exhibet. Deinde ex Asclepiade, recipit
Ciner. Caner. Praepar. Pare^x. Thuris Part. 1. Gertianae, Part. v. et exhibet
hujus pulv. Cochlear. j. bibendum X L. Diebus, aut si jam a morsu aliquot Dies
processerint, Duo Cochlearia propinat. De hec t^amen medicamento observandum,
Cancr^s veres usurpandes esse qui sunt Corpore ro^undo, non nostros Gammaros
aut Astacos. Nonnulli tamen nostros usurpant. Commeadatur, Item, a plerisque
adversus mors^m Canis Rabidi Theriaca, ut r^medium efficacissimum. Item
laudatur a nonnullis et hoc Antideti^m,. Methridat. elect Pulv. Rad.
Aristoloch. ^otund. Ana ij.. Terra^ s^gillatae, ss Muscarum, quae de Narelli
fructibus victum quaerunt Number xx. Cum succi Citri ^^cent. q. s. F^at Mistura;
Cujus Dos^s a j ad j. ss. vel Accipe experimentum nostrum, ut. Cervisia
Prin^ariae seuoptimae Lib ij. Theriac. iiij Ru^ae, M^j^ss. Alli^ quassat i. seu
Stanni in pulvere redacti Cochlear. j. simul Decoquantur ad Consumptionem
Dimidiae partis, et usui serva. Dossis est Cochlear. ij Calid man^ and vesperi,
Dum durat. Et Antidota propinentur in dupla quantitate, quam in praeservati^n^,
singulis Dicbus, mane Theriac. vel Mithridat. ij. in vino potenti, vesperiante
Caenam Antia^t. De Cancris, Gentia^ae, Helichor Albus pr^tinus exhibendus;
Hae^^que A^tid^ta ad 40 Di^m exhib^ri debent. Q^^am suddent, ut ager in anno,
quater purg^^ar, et ^^^gulis 15. Di bus sumat Theri^c^m. N^^^l as Florentinus
ut perintegrum Annum Antidota usurpentur. Aetius, ut singulis Annis
Appropinquante morsus tempore per hieram ager purgetur, et instante Die per
tridunm Theriacam sumat. Inter Recentiores Alexipharmacum prastantissimum
proponit Palmarius, in Lib. De Morb. Contagios^s Quod so^^m neglect is
purganti^us, et emissa^^am vulneris Cura, qu^^unque a morsu tempore usurpatum,
certissimum ac tutiss^mum remedium existat; et quo nullum unquam animal ^sum
fu^ris, quod non mali hujus peri^ulum evitaverit, cum quacunque vic^us ration^,
illaesis tamen capitis partibus, et modo vulnus inflictum capitis parts ^re
superiores non attigerit, aut aqud clotum fuerit. Has enim parti^ us
vulneratis, aut part vulnerata statim a morsu frigida clota, parum spei
superest. Est autem tale.. I ol. Rut. Verben. Salviae, Plantaginis, Polypodij,
Absynthij vulg Menthae, Artemis. Melissophyll. Beton Hyperici, Centauri minoris
singulor. a^quale pondus. Colligantur singula, quo tempore magis virib.
pollent; deinde papyraceis charus inclusa s^ccentur seorsum in loco, ad quem
neque Sol, neque pluvia pertingat, ne vel nimium exare^cant, vel ^^^m
contrahunt. Post redigant^r in pulverem: De quo j. ss. vel ij. ^^ngulis diebus
demorso exhibean ur, vel cum saccharo, vel cum vino, vel jusculo, vel alio modo
jejuno stomacho, horis tribus ante Cibum. Si tamen tempus aliquod a morsu
inflicto praeterierit iij. Exhibeantur. Extra vero vulnus prius spongia, vel
linteolis siccis ex siccatum vino aut hydromelite, in quo pulveris hujus ss.
soluta sit, bis velter quotidie foveatur, deinde Emplastrum, vel Magnetum,
quale in aliis vulneribus, admoveatur.

Post Alexipharmaca, et^ Purgationem etiam exhiberi possunt sudorifera, ut
venenum dissipetur. Efficaciffim^^ autem est visc. querc. lignum sumptum,
viscus autem ipsum extrinsicus applicatum. Sudorifera simul alexiteria sunt
talia; ut,. Ligni visci querci, Dictamni albi An. ij. vel iij. Aqua
Chamamaemel. Lib. ij. Coq. Ad medietat. Dosis viij. vel x. vel. Ligni visci
querci ij. Dictamni ss. Sem. and Flor. Cardui Benedicti, An. j. ss. F. Pulvis.
Cujus Dosis (...) j. ad ij. vini Albi generosissimi jss. Aqu. Card. Benedict.
ij. vel iij. mixta exhibe. Prater sudorifera convenient etiam Diuretica
Antidotis mixta, quae utraque vi polleant; Inter quae praestant spica Celtica,
Valeriana, Asarum, Scordium, et alia, quae eodem tempore quo sudorifera
convenient.

Pro Amuletis commendantur dens Canis Rabidi humero suspensus et substractus,
Cereum ursa, Phocae. Plura vide apud Scribonium Largum, Lib. De Compos. Med,
etc. and pro curationibus Divinis and miraculosis, vide Col. Rodesi^. Jovian.
Pontan. Mathiol etc. And thus much briefly to be spoken of the biting of a
Mad-Dogg, and of its Cures and Antidotes; And of the Cure in general of all
other venamous Creatures bites; which I have, for brevities sake, here, in the
first place, prefixed, to avoid repotition and tautology in what follows.
Touching the Cures of which, we intend only to mention in short, their several
Antidotes, and for what else is requisite to be known, refer you to what has
been already spoken.

SECTION II. Of Cats Poison and its Antidotes.
2. FElis, a Cat, a Creature no less frequent and familiar with us, then the
former; yet thought, by some, to be of that poisonous quality, as the very
sight or presence of it, is sufficient to make a man swound, tremble, sweat,
and become speechless. But what reason such have as thus conceive, I know not.
If as Paraeus, Sennertus, and most apprehend, there is some venamous quality in
these Creatures, be cause many are affected in that manner aforesaid; How
comes it to pass then all in the Company are not likewise moved thereat? And,
if their presence so poysoneth and infecteth the Aer that it being drawn into
the mouth puts men into a sweat, and into swounding fits; Why are not all thus
molested thereby? Wherefore I rather believe this proceeds from some secret
Antipathy: else, by the same reason, we must conclude Mutton, Beef, Ducks, nay
and most food to be poison, there being almost nothing in the world, but is, by
one, or other, Distasted. A Gentleman one day at Dinner at my Fathers I
remember, fell down from his Chair in a swound at the serving up of a Custard;
Another Gentleman grew extreme sick by eating only a bit of a shoulder of
Mutton minc'^ among other meats in an H^sh, etc. Authors are full of such like
examples; And yet to conclude these Poisons, because they work such effects in
this, or that party, were ridiculous.

But of these Creatures if the brain be eaten, it proves assuredly
destructive; as Schenkius Lib. De Venenis, Fol. 953. And Sennertus Pract. Med.
Lib. 6. Part. 8. Cap 31. Prove out of Pouzettus, Lib. 2. De Venenis, Tract. 6.
Cap. 3. And Mathiolus, Comment. ad Lib. 6. Cap. 25. Dioscorid. For, it makes
such to rage and grow mad, It being very dry potentially (especially the male)
Comparing it with Man's, It obstructeth the passages of the brain, so that the
Animal Spirits cannot pass to the hinder part; whence the Memory becomes
depraved and lost, They become Dolts, grow moped, and vertiginous, etc. Neither
is it safe to eat of the Brains of several other Creatures; In that diverse
Men have thereby had their Natural Dispositions quite changed into the Nature
of such Creatures, as Sennerins instanceth in those who have been changed into
the very habit and disposition of a bear, by eating the Brains of that
Creature, Instit. Med. Lib. 2. Part. 3. Sect. 2. Cap. 4. But no more of this,
in this place. Quod ad Curationem attinet, Primo si sciatur Cerebrum ^elis
adhuc in ventriculo haerere, vomitu reijciatur; Si vero in Corpus sit
distri^utum, expurgandum est, inprimis Extr. Hellebor j. Possea Antidoti loco
exhibeatur Moschi, qui proprium hujus veneni habetur Antidotum ss. Idque
singulis septimanis aliquandiu continuetur. Utile est etiam saepe sumere
Confectionem Diamoschi Dulcis, vel de sequenti electuario aliquid exhibere.
Conserv. Anthos ij. Pulv. Sem. Paeon. Carni, Cubebar. Ana ss. Spec. Diamosch.
Dulc. j. Cum Syrup. De Betonica. Fiat Electuarium. Item Curatur, ut inquit
Pouzettus, Loco Aligato, Propinando bis mense j. Terrae Lemuiae cum Aqua
Samphuchi; Aromata etiam Cibis miscenda sunt, recreandi spiritus gratia. Vinum
bibendum Clarum, and cum eo quandoque ss. Diamoschi Dulcis ( Mathiolus, Loco
Citato, vult ut aegri sumant mane quotidie Confectione Diamoschi tribus vel
quatuor horis ante Cibum) sed forte sat fuerit bonam victus rationem
instituisse.

The Blood of Cats is likewise extremely pernicious, as appears by that of
Martinus Weinrichius Comm. De Monstris (recorded also by Laurentius Scholzius,
De suis nob is adeoque posteritati communicatis observationibus; As also by
Schenkins, Lib. 7. De Venenuis, And Sennertus, Institut. Med. Lib. 2. Part. 3.
Sect. 2. Cap. 4. And in Pract. Med. Lib. 6. Part. 8. Cap. 31.) Who tells us of
a Maid that by seeing a Theif executed publicly, by severing his Head from his
Body, fell into the Epilepsie, being extremely terrifyed by this Object; And
for her recovery having frustrately used diverse medicaments and praescripts,
was at length persuaded by some of the twatling Gossips about her to drink some
Cats-blood, assuring her it was a present remedy; But not long after she had
followed this mad Direction, she degenerated into the Nature of this Creature,
and, by fits, would Mew, Leap, Scratch, and play as Cats use to do, as also, in
private, catch Mice, and contract her self so as to pass through holes, that no
body else could of her bigness. Touching the unwholsomnesse of the blood of
Creatures for food, especially Swines-blood, which is commonly and most
frequently eaten by the vulgar, I shall not in this place insist, having
treated thereof in other pieces as yet in manuscript.

The very breathing likewise of Cats is by many of the Learned accounted
extremely dangerous, consuming the radical moisture of the Body, Lungs, and
the whole Man, as Avenzoar Praemito, Lib 1. Theuzar, attests to be commonly
known; As Schenkins and Sennertus in Locis Citatis quote him. And Mathiolus,
Comm. ad Lib. ^ Cap 25. Dioscorid as the same Schenkius and Paraus Lib 21 Cap.
34 De Venenis, have it, also affirms as much, attesting himself to have known
some who delighting so much in Cats, that they would even take them to bed with
them, that, by often drawing in the Aer of their breathing, fell into hecktick
Fevers, Marasmus, Consumption of the Lungs, and at length thereby dyed. The
same Paraeus, Loco Citato, likewise confirms it, saying; that Cats by lying at
the mouths of Children, hinder, by the weight of their Bodies, the evacuation
of the fuliginous vapors, and the motion of the Chest, whereby their Spirits
are suffocated and stiffed, by the pestiferous Aer received from the expiration
of these Cats. But, whether, this likewise, proceeds from a secret Antipathy,
or by the hairs of these Creatures received into the throat, which, as Gesner,
Johustonus, and others think, as Aldrovandus, Aristotle, etc. are sufficient to
choke one: I shall not here dispute. This, however is certain, that by all
Authors they are condemned as very noxious to Mankind; And therefore I shall
not presume to Correct them, notwithstanding experience and examples are Common
of such both Men, and Women, and Children, who have been very fa^n ^ar with
these Creatnres lying with them, playing with them in the day time, and
stroaking of them at meal time and letting them walk upon the board, their
arms and shoulders (As the late William ^and, Archbishop of Ca^^^^^^ was won^
to have them) and all without the least prejudice. But let every Man use his
own Reason and experience.

SECTION III. O Woo^^^ Poison, an^ (...) Anti^^ot^s.
L^^^^, all (...), whose bite, likewise (being madd) intecteth a man with the
same madness; And, as the madness con^eted by the bi^e of a Do^^, is (as you
have heard) called Hy^^^phol in, so is (...), commun^^ated by the poy^onous
fo^me, or breath of a W^^^, termed (...); As ^^^x Plater. Pra^^. (...) Cap 3.
D^m^m^^ Ali^nation^, well notes, Q^a (...), it being a distemp^^ in which they
not only unitate Wo^^es, but likewise ^un howling about in their manner o^v^^ce
and ^oane, frequen^^^ Sep^^^e: and Grave^, imagining themselves (...) ^^lly
(...) as L^^th (...) 3. S^^^ 1. Cap 11. and every (...) C^an a^^unne. Whence,
by the vulgar Lati^^, this kind of madness is termed Lupina Insania. Hence,
perhaps, as the same Fuchsius and others note, Pliny Not. Hist. Lib. 8. Cap.
22. with Virgil in Eclog. And Ovid De Arcadia Rege, quem a love in Lupum ob sua
s^elera mutatum ^inxit.
Lycaone, and other Poets write that men have been Metamorphosed into Woolfes,
and from Woolfes to Men again. An example of one thus affected is recorded by
Joannes Wi^rus in Libro 3. De praestigiis Daemonum, Cap. 18. Running about
Churchyards, Graves, and Sepulchers; howling, and would be by no persuasions
made to believe he was other then a Woolf; which afterward recovering again,
it might, in some sense be said of him, the Woolf which was formerly a Man, is
become a Man again; or he who had his Reason and Intellectualls so depraved, as
that he thought himself a Woolf and degenerated into the actions and habits of
that Creature, is now again restored to the Reason and Understanding of a Anima
enim humana non potest informare Corpus brutu^, nec anima Lupi, Corpus
humanuin; Cum quaelibet forma certam, a^ sibi convementi modo dispositam, and
peculiarem requirat materiam.
Man. Nicholas Remigius, Damonolair. Lib. 2. Cap. 5. Has diverse instances of
the like seeming Metamorphoses, or of such who have been affected with this
kind of madness. Nay, and Nebuchadnezzar in the prophecy of Daniel, as some
Expositors conceive, was only affected with this melancholy distemper. Little
better were King Praetus Daughters, recorded by Hippocrates, Lib. De la^an^t,
who thought themselves Kine. So Jupiter transmitted (...) King of Arca^^a, as
Ovid note M^^. (...). Lib. 1. into a Wo^lf for his sins. ^^^h ha^^ ^o^es are
frequent almost in every Author what has but mentioned this Lyc^^^^^^pia, As,
M^zald^^, ^ildesh im. For st^^, (...), Remi^ius, Spran^perus, Wi^^^, (...),
Olaus Ma^^us, V^, P^u^^^us, N^^^^chius, Platerus, G^^ma, Marcellus, D^^tas, Se^
norta^, etc. It a^^seth also as well from a Melancholy humor generated in
Man, as from the bite of any Woolf, and therefore we find Parlus, M^ginetus,
(...) 3. Cap. 16 And Aetius, T^^r. Scr^^. Cap. (...) Terming it a hand of M^^^^
(...) most, soating higher, make it a for ^^^^dn^ss, although many w^ll not
^d^^^ (...) Disease, but merely by the force of this Poison, or by a possession
of the (...). But though these Men that this (...) un, are so far from hu^ing
the mark, that they shoot quite beside the Bu^^; yet I do, and must
acknowledge, the Devil can, and therefore, may delude the senses of Men, so as
to make the appearance of such a Creature in the room of the Man affected, or
other ways, so that thereupon may be concluded a real transmutation of the
Man into the shape of the VVoolf; or that it is occasioned from the Possession
of the Devil, and not from any humor, or Poison by a bite from these Creatures
when mad, of which you may see more in St. Augustine, De Civitate Dei, Cap. 18.
Lib. 28. Some affected herewith, do somewhat differ in their actions from what
you have heard already described; not howling or running up and down like
VVoolfes, or frequenting Graves, Churches, Churchyards, or Sepulchers, neither
do they desire to hunt sheep, or to raven any manner of way; But rather
imitate the actions and customs of Dogs, imagining themselves to be really
Dogs, Like him in Forestus, whom he says Observat. Med. Lib. 10. De morbis
Cerebri, observat. 26. He saw himself at Alchmar in Holland, A poor Husbandma^
of a pale countenance, hollow eyed, black, ugly and fearful to behold, having
his Legs and Thighs scabbed, very dry and scurffy, etc. Carrying a stick in
his hand, with which he used only to beat away Dogs, not offering to strike at
any Man or other Creature. And these same Symptoms are common to both kinds*
For I find Donatus Antonius ab Altomaro Lib. De Medend. Corp. Mal. Cap. 9.
Reciting the same signs in Lycanthropia; Neither are they otherwise delivered
by any; This latter kind is termed commonly by Physicians(...), se^ Canina
Insania, and proceeds rather purely from a Melancholy humor in the Body,
molesting the brain; then from any poysonon^ bite of a Madd-VVo lf, as (...),
oftentimes, does; Having, besides those before recited signs in the Face, Body,
Legs, all the actions and manners of a Woolf, howling, ravening, and tearing
all that comes near them, Sheep, Dogs, Men, etc. The Cure, is the same with
that of a Madd-Dogg, wherefore, for brevities sake, I shall thither refer thee.

SECTION. IV. De Mure Araneo, and its Antidotes
MVS Araneus, It is so called, as some ^hink, Quod est Animal exiguum Aran^i
forma and Muris dicta; qu^d ejus morsu Aranea interimitur; because it is like
unto that Spider in shape called A^an^a, and^. Others say it is thus called,
because it is thought to eviscerate it self and to climb up upon any thing
thereby as Spiders usually do: Many take it for a (...) and some for a ^ish;
Others that it is a vermin like unto a Weesel, having two row, of teeth,
poisoning by the v^ry bite, together with us spittle or so^n^^ con^e^^^g it
into the Bodies of such (...) b^^th* And therefore others will ha^^ it called
Mus Aran^us, because it poysoneth as does that Spider ^^rmed Aran^^^ Animal
simile Mustelae, (...) eyes m^^s^s venenatus, unde Ar^^^^ (...) It is not a
Creature vulgarl^ known, (...) w^ll observes. Yet (...), I th^^. Cap. 2. And
C^^^inus, (...) Venenis, Lib. 1. Cap. 27. Treat of (...). Such as are bitten
with this (...) may be known by these signs; As, (...)* pression (...) of
those several ^ow^^. ^^eth, out of which, first, blood (...), the^ matter
corrupt and filthy, besides it tormenteth them with grievous pa^^e, the part
affected being inflamed, exulcerated and pu^^ifyed: and about the wound usually
ari^e many small pustules, ^ull of ^urrulent corrupt matter; Sometimes also the
patient is grievously tormented and macerated with a griping in his bowels,
^oppage of the Urine, and Cold, Clammy sweats; and at length death it self, if
not timely prevented. Quod ad Curationem ^tti^^t, Primo danda opera ut venenum
Corpori communicatain for as eliciatur, iis modis, qui hactenus sunt propo^^i^^.
(...) ponantur Plagae, Emplastrum e Clalban^^a A^eto Dissoluto, and sarina
Hord^^cen paratam, vel ex Allio, F^lii^ Ficus^^ Cymin, cantusis, ac cum Oleo
mixt^s, Fiat Cataplasma vulneri imponendum. Ulcera e pustulis ruptis oborta,
Acida M^ria eluere, et Hordeum ustum, vel mali punici d^le is coriu ^^^ctum
tritum imponcre, atque ulcera codem ^^c^^^to, vel potius Decoclo Myrti, sovere
Jubet Aetius, Tetrab. 4. Sermon. 1. Cap. 14. Morsum a Mure Aranco instictum,
Arenam, sin terram ex rotacian transitu sess orbita sumptam, and ^^l^eri
Cataplasmatis modo impositam, Illico sanare scribit Paulus Aeliae. nus, De
Animal. Lib. 2. Cap 37. Interim slatim simul Alexipharm^^^ sunt sumenda. quae
hactenus sunt proposica; vel paret^^ ^ale Electuarium Cortis. Radic. Cappar
Radi Gentianae, An j. ss. Aristeloch. long. Bacear. L^an^i, Terre sigillatae,
Rutae, Ana. ij. Cosii Amari, Spicae Indicae, Ana. j. Flor. Salphuris, ss.
Croci, ss. Cum M^lle, ^iar Electuatium. Cujus Dostis quotidie bis (...) j. Ad
ij. Sunt qui Congulum H^^^i, Laporis, vel Agni ex vino sumptum valde
commendant. Pl^ra vide apud Pra^^i^^s.

SECTION V. Of Bulls-blood ranked among Poisons by some of the L^arned.
TAurus, a Bull, a Creature commonly known among us, even to the meanest
Capacity; The Blood of which, notwithstanding, is, by many of the Learned,
ranked among Poisons, if it be drank in too great a quantity, giving diverse
instances of several that have thus lost their lives, as, Joannes Schenckius.
Lib. 7. De Venenis, and Sennertus, Pract. Med. Lib. 6. Part. 8. Cap. 33. from
him, record. Midas King of Phrygia, by drinking freely of Bulls blood expired
this life; as Caelius Rhodiginus, Antiq. Lect. Lib. 14. Cap. 12. Ex Plutarcho
Lib De superstitione Strabonis Lib. 1. Et Eusebio De Temporibus note. Likewise
Psamentius King of Egypt, being vanquished by Cambysis, killed himsef by
drinking of Bulls blood, as Herodotus Records, Lib. 3. The same does Plutarch
report in Themislocle of Themistocles. Et cum ob insperatum Argonautarum
reditum Pelias Aesonem Jason^s patrem obtruncare decrevisset, Aeson
sacrificans, Hausto Taurino sanguine satis concessit, Natalis Comes Mythol.
Lib. 6. Cap 7. Ex Diod. Sioul. Lib. 4. Cap. 3.

Yet, this proceeds not out of any inherent property of the blood; But as
Sennertus proves out of Grevinus, Li. 2. De venenis, Cap. 10. a ratione tantum
quadam adventicia, It having no venomous property in it; the which Eustachius
Rudins Lib. 3. Cap. 6. De morb. ^^cult. Consirmes; But being drank coagulateth
in the stomach, and so, is only Cur autem hic sanguis sit venenosus,
percontaberis? Respondet Martinus Rulandus, lib. 1. Pross. Medicophy. 253.
hurtful, and no otherwise, which Grevinus approves; adding, that after the
blood is concreated in the stomach, and Converted into lumps, it putresies, and
so sends malignant vapors to the Brain, whence men oftentimes loose their
senses; Swoundings and Suffocations likewise follow, in reregard those Lumps
and Clotts of blood growing great, can be neither upward nor downward expelled,
whence the passages of the stomach and Lungs are choked up. But Sennertus
rather ^^nceives it to arise from a consent of the stomach; which, whilst^^ is
repleat of this Concreated blood, presse^h down the Diaphragma and Lungs,
hurting also the orifice of the stomach, which being nervous, may likewise by
consent affect the neighboring parts that have nerves. However and Concreted
in the stomach, it must needs affect in a direful manner; the stomach being
all together unable to digest it, as is clear from common experience; for we
see the blood of this Creature does glaze, and as it were petresie the very
earth and pavements on which it is spilt. As it ^^^^i re^^^er jug^^ ni sangumem
ep^^um (...) ^^^s^^n esse, v^terii and ju^iorum vn^ni^^s senten^tia sirmat, ex
cujus ^su Difficultas spirandi, distentio ne^v^ram, fau^^u^^ prae^lus^^, lingua
^ubor^, ^^^^wn nigr^^^^ (...) alia (...) sympt^^^ta subj^q^^ntar.
causes a a difficulty in breathing, and swallowing, sends forth much
spittle by the mouth, and froathy substance, pains and nauseousness in the
stomach, sowndings, faintings, and senselessness, and almost such invasions as
are incident to Epilepticks, and at length Death it self, if not timely
prevented. In Curatione, nota; quod ut reliquorum venenorum intra Corpus
assumptorum; Ita Sanguinis Taurini quoque Curatio vel a Vomitorio, vel a
Clystere, prout vel in ventric^lo, vel intestinis venenum latet, Cura
auspicanda. Verum primo, Quia ob grumos sanguinis Concretos vomitus Citra
suffocatio^is per^nlum provocari non potest, auspicanda et a medicamentis
sanguinem concretum solventibus; qualia sunt Acetum, O^^ymel, and Acctosa alia,
Hydromel, Sperma C^^i, Mumia, Coagulum Leporis, Haedi, Rad Gentianae,
Laserpitij, Pinipinellae, semen Brassicae, Conyzae folia cum Pipere, Nitrum,
Vng^entum Ruborum potabile, Magisterium O^^l rum Cancri, and similia. Ac^tius,
Tetrab. 4. Sermon. Cap. 74. Ramulos etiam fici trit^s c^m nitro and ^osca prae^et
fructusque vitis syl^ estris, etiam sicces, c^m^stos, statim grumos sanguinis
dissolvere asserie. Sanguine hoc modo dissoluto vomitus provocetur, and si ad
intestina jam descenderit, Clysteribus injectis per alvum educatur. Medicamenta
quae ad malignit atem utilia esse videntur, sunt Terra Sigillata, Bolus
Armenus, Rad. Tormentulae; Aeger saepius comedat ^icus Maceratos in Ac^to, in
quo aliquid Nitri dissolution sit: Potus si^ Hydro^el, vel dec^^lum ficu^^^
ping^ium.

SECTION VI. Of Cows Milk, by some among Poisons.
VAcca, a Cow; whose Milk if it Congulate likewise in the stomachs of such as
eat or drink it, is no less noxious, and no better then Poison, As most
maintain; yet that it has any poisonous quality more then other Milk, I find
none of the Judicious affirm; only, that it being Coagulated in the stomach,
thereby, for want of Concoction, obstructing the lower orifice, mesentery
veins, etc. Causes many horrible symptoms, As Animi Deliquium, fainting and
sownding sits, suffocating, shortness of breath, and all those other effects
which are produced by blood Concreat, or Coagnlated, or by any other thing
oppressing the stomach, for want of Digestion; And thus (I say) it rather
offends then any otherwise by a venamous property; for that cannot be admitted
off; yet because others have ranked it among Poisons, I would not prefume to
deviate from their steps in placing it with them, although it offend no
otherwise then has been said. To insist upon the Nature of Milk, or to show
what manner of food it is, whether wholesome or unwholsom, or what Milk is best,
etc. shall not be my work at this time, because I have done it already, in a
Treatise sitted for the press elsewhere:

In Curatione, Danda imprimis opera, ut Lac Coagulatum Dissolvatur et vomitu
reijciatur. Quam ad rem utile est Acetum simplex; vel sciliticum, Hydromel,
Oxymel simplex and compositum vel sciliticum, and reliqua medicamenta in
Sanguine Concreto Comendata. Laudatur and succus Menthae recens expressus,
Baccae Juniperi, Thymus, Artemisia, Sem. Nausturij, ficus cum vino vel Aceto
propinatum, etc. And thus much of Poisons appertaining to four footed
Creatures, or, more properly, to Beasts. The rest follow.

DIVISION I. Of Poisons belonging to FLYING CREATVRES.
SECTION. I. Of the Hye Cantharides, ^na^ts Antdotes, Bupressus.
SEcondly, of FLYING CREATVRES there are certa^n ^oysons also; as 1.
Cant^^ri^^s, A Spanish or French Hye o^ ha^^^ ^n inch long, beautiful and
sta^^^g, commonly known by our Ap^th^car^^, and ^ould i^ their shops. It is of
a sharp, ac^ide and ^orroding nature, and a great enemy to the Blauder,
poysonou^, (...) being taken inwardly in any quantity, or have then ^s fi^ting;
As appears by several example^ in the writings of the Learned. Ambrosi^^
Pareus, De venems, lib. ^1. Cap. ^8. Tell^ us of an Abbot; who loving a young
Serumpet, that she might have her fill of pleasur^ with him, invited him to a
Banquet, on which she had sprinkled Cantharides pulverized, the which he eating
in too great a measure, the next Day fell into the Dysentery, and evacuated
nothing but blood, both by the Fundament and Yard, which continued still
erected; And so, at length notwithstanding he had all the remedies the
Physicians could administer or prescribe, miserably died in that condition.
Bralavola, Com. ad Apher. 17. Lib. 2. Also relates one, who by taking of a
Potion mixed with Rubarb, and other Powders in a Mortar, wherein Cantharides had
been pulverized, was along there by exulcerated from the mouth to the Bladder,
and so down to the Fundament. And Pliny, not. Hist. lib. 29. Cap. 4. Records
Cantharides drank, to be the Death of Cossonus that Roman Knight: And so it
was of that rich man in Andreas Baccius Prolegomenis venenorum and Antidotorum,
Page 23. By which stories, if you peruse them, you will find a full relation of
those horrid syptomes that attend the taking of this sort of Fly into the body.

As, it exulcerateth not only the stomach, bowels, bladder, and those parts
wherein it shall reside, but also all other parts by which it passes; As from
the mouth by which it enters to the Bladder and Fundament by which it is
evacuated: neither does it only exulcerate, but also burn and inflame the
parts, whence follow, burning fevers, nautiousnesse, Dysentery, And Inflation
of the hypochondries, vertigo and madness; In their mouths they usually savor
the taste of Rosin or Pitch; Lastly, It affects (as has been said) the
ureteries chiefly, burning, inflaming, and exulcerating them, causing a
constant effusion of blood and erection of the Penis, strangury, Ischury,
Intolerable pains, At length it causes a Gangrene in the ureteries, and
finally brings Death it self.

Nay it is of that violent force, and quality, that, as some Authors maintain,
Being but even outwardly applied, it will not only affect the Ureteries and
Bladder, but also cause an effusion of blood from those parts. Paraeus, loco
all gato, has a notable story to this effect, of a certain Gentlewoman, who
having her face very much Deformed with red, fiery, and filthy pustules; so
that she was shunned by all Company, and abominated by every man that saw her
as if she had been Leprous, in a sad perplexity, at length came to Paris the
Metropolis of France, to seek help; where she consulted Hollerius, and
Grealmus, two eminent Physicians; and, with them, made use likewise, of the
said Paraeus, and Caballus, approved and skillfull Chyrurgions, who concluded
together to apply over all her face a vesicatory of Cantharides, as the most
probable and speedy Cure; But not full 4 hours after the application of this
medecin, Her Bladder began to burn intollerably, and the neck of her womb to
swell, with Gripings, continual Vometings, Evacuatings with blood, both by
Urine and stool, with a general exagitation of the humors, and Disturbance
of the whole Body, And a violent burning Fever. And Langius, Tomo 1. Epist.
47. out of Montaguanus tells us of one who evacuated by the Yard above five
pound weight of blood, by only applying Cantharides to the knee. Andreas
Baccius, in Prolegonis venenorum, and Antidotorum, Page 22. Also affirms that
outward applications of this Fly, will work such effects, as effusion of blood,
intolerable pains, inflammations, exulcerations, etc. whether applied to the
Head, Arms, Legs, Feet, etc: Nay, which is more wonderful, Joannes Michael
Paschalius, Method, Curanmorb. Cap. 41. has a story of a Chyrurgion of
Millaine in Italy that was twice grievously affected with pissing of blood,
only by carrying Cantharides in a purse about him. Adolp^^s Occ^ in his
observations, has such an other example also.

But the truth hereof I shall leave to the Judgments of the Judicious; I shall
not presume to correct these so worthy writers, neither in the one, no^ the
other; only acquaint you, that all the Learned do not hereunto agree; Nay
Sennertus, Pract. Med. Lib 6. Part. 8. Cap. 20 Does give no credit at all to
these assertions, where he has these words, V^r^^^ et si s^xcenties ve
sicatori^ loco i^s usus fuerim; nunquam tamen tale quid ob^e^^^^^ potia: That
he could never find any such e^^^ct by outward applications, although he had
six h^ndred times applied them by way of ve^^^^ory. And I my self had once a
patient that applied, of her own head, a ve^^^ ^ory of Catath^^rid^s to her
Knee, for a pain she had there, and yet suffered not the least damage thereby
any other way. But, I say, however, let every Man use his own Judgment and
Reason.

Qu^d ad C^^^a ^^^m at^^^^^, Primo danda oper^ quod Commod^s^in^ sit vomitorio
ex Aqua tepran vel Die ^^o Capiti^ porci^i, aut Agnini, Cum Oleo Violarum
parato: Et Vomitus aliquoties repeti debet. Post Vomitum Clystres per anum
inijciendi, ex hordeo, Malva, Parietar. etc. sem. lini faenigra. ci, ol.
lilior. albor. vel violarum, sevo hircino, et Elect. Diaphaenico Parati. Item
non inutile fuerit, si Decoctum Althaeae, Maluae, sem. lini vel lac solum. cum
Ol. Violarum mixtum, per anum vel meatum urinarium infunderetur. Postea ad
Acrimoniam and Maleficam Cantharidum vim obtundendam, aeger sumat Lac Caprinum,
juscula pinguia, Ptizanae Cremorem, Butyrum recens, Oryzam cum Lacte Caprino
Coctam, Carnes pingues, porcinas scilicet and haedinas, cum hordeo, Portulaca,
Lactuca, and Violaria Coctas. Laudatur et vinum copiose sumptum a Pareo De
Venenis Lib. 21. Cap. 28. Alij etiam valde Commendant Lac Amygdal. Dulc. vel
emulsionem ex sem. 4. frigid. majorib. Cum Aqua Lactucae parata. Vel emulsio
Consiciatur e Nucleis pini, sem. papaveris albi, et baccis halacacabi, cum Aqua
Violarum, etc. Peculiari vero vi venenum Cantharidum expugnat Pulegium, sive in
substantia sumatur, sive decoctum ex eo paretur. Commendatur and terra Lemnia
ij. pondere, vel Fructus Alkekengi, Number. x. si cum vino sumantur. vel.
Trochisc. de terra sigillata, Alkekengi, An. ss. Et aegro Cum Ano d^lci, Ant
lacte muli^bri exhibea^tur. B^lnea quoque parantur ex Deco^^o m^lu^, Altha^,
^^i^lari^, Portul^cae, Sem* ^^ini, ^aenugr^^i Gemtal^a, a^^a membra Dol^n^^^,
and Lumbi extra, J^ungantur ung^ento R^sa^^o, (...) Popul. Cum Oxycrato mustis
^^^li^ ^un^ and Epithemata e^suc^^ L^ctu^^, P^rtulac^ C^cumeris, Cu^^rbi^ae,
(...) Violarunt mixtis parata, et d^pli^^ti^ lint^lis locis D^lentibus impos^ta.

To this we may well add Bupres^is, being very like unto Canth^^i^s for Color,
not shape, although may Authors traditionally so write from Galen Lib 11. De
Simpl. Med. Facultat. Can. 40. For this sort of Fly is in form more like a
Beede, though much smaller; Called Bupres^is, because, Of the Fly ^^p^estis,
and us Antid^tes.
being swallowed by chance by any Beast, it swells them up l^ke a ^unn. It is
likewise, as all un^^^^ously agree, no less pe^mti^^^ and off^^sive to men ^f
eaten any manner of way, puffing and swelling their bellies, ^^^^^ing and
grievously tormenting the stomach and bowels with pain; Cauling a supp^^^^^ of
the Urine, Strangury, I^chury, and death it self; till when, the party
affected, imagines he tastes And smells naught but a kind of Nitrous savor. The
Cure is the same with Cantharides.

SECTION II. Of the Sting of Bees and their Antidotes.
APIS, a BE, a Creature commonly known among us of great use and profit; yet
the Sting of it is reputed Poison, Causing, in the part affected, great pain,
anguish, inflammation, and swellings; or blisters to arise, etc. Yet seldom
proves mortal if it proceed only from one simple Be, unless the party be set
on by many. Yet some maintain that if they be taken into the body, the mouth,
palate, tongue, throat, stomach, and other parts will be pained, pricked, shoot,
and be inflamed, causing a most extreme heat over all the body; But I cannot
agree herein with them.

Quod ad Curationem attinet, Si Aculeus in vulnere fuit relictus, ille ante
omnia extrahendus; ubi vero aculeus extractus est, vel si nullus adfuit, plaga
abluenda Aqua Salsa: Hinc Cataplasma e farina hordei, Malva, et Plantagine cum
Aceto paratum, vel Stercus Bubulum cum Aceto, vel Bolus Armenus cum Aceto et
Oleo mistus imponendus: Nasturtium etiam aquaticum tritum et impositum dolorem
sedat, ac tumorem d^scutit. Imprimis vero ipsa Animalenla (ut ai^ ^araeus Lib.
21. Cap. 26. De Venenis) quae plagam intulerunt trita imposita ^mnem
virulenti^^m extrahunt. Prodest and sulphur vivum salvia humana subactum; Item
Ruta, Lac, Ficuum, loco affecto imposita Caler in toto Corpore Curatur ut feb.
Malig. A^doynus Lib 8. De Venenis Cap. 11. Jubet ut Coriandrum cum saccharo
exhibeatur, scribit enim puncturae Apis, item and Vespae esse Bezoar.

SECTION III Of the Sting of Waspes and their Antidotes.
VEspa, a Wasp, a Creature no less commonly known then the other; but more
noxious, their stink being accounted more poisonous; And that the rather,
because it is thought, by some Naturalists, that this kind of ^ly does usually
dip its sting in the venom of Aspes and Adders if they find them Dead, whence
the Indians learnt to dip their Darts and Arrows in poison when they went to
war.

But the worst of the three, are Hornets, nine whereof are thought to be
sufficient to kill an Horse; and therefore not unfitly may they be added
hereunto.

The Signs and Cures are the same with the Be, wherefore, for brevities sake,
I shall shun repetition.

DIVISION III. Of Poison belonging to SERPENTS.
SECTION I. Of the Dragon and its Antidotes.
THirdly of SERPENTS there are likewise Diverse poisonous; As 1. Draco the
Dragon, a Creature not much known in our parts or Regions, nor in ma^y other
parts of the world, and therefore not worth spending much time about;
Especially, since most of the Learned will not admit it to be ranked among the
number of poisons; yet some think otherwise, in regard it is a Serpent;
maintaining, it therefore, poisonous no less then the rest, especially in hot
Countries, whence Lucan thus sings Lib. 9.

Vos quoque, qui cunctis innoxia numina terris.
Serpitis, aurato nitidi fulgore Dracones,
Pestiferos ardens facit Africa.
Such as are bitten therewith, are usually Cured in the same manner as they who
are bitten by other venomous Creatures, as Mad Dogs before treated of, etc.

SECTION II. Of the Crocodile and its Antidotes
CRocodilus the Crocodile as we likewise, ^erm it, an Outlandish Creature also,
and venomous (although some have conceived otherwise, and therefore have
omitted to mention it among Poisons) for it fills such as are bitten by it,
with intolerable pain, inflaming the place extremely, and causing it to swel,
as also several black pustules to arise, It causes likewise Fevers, Cold
Sweats, Lipothymia, and such like direful symptoms, and at length Death it
self, if not timely prevented.

The Cure is after the same manner as you have heard already where we spoke of
the bite of Mad Dogs; Wherefore, for the Method, as also Medicaments, I shall,
here, for brevities sake, thereunto refer thee.

SECTION III. Of the Scorpion and its Antidotes.
SCorpio, a Scorpion, as we vulgarly phrase t; of which there are diverse kinds,
some being smaller, some greater then others, some likewise are yellow, others
brown, a third sort reddish, a fourth green, a fifth ash color, a sixth black,
a seventh white, etc Again, some have no wings, and others again have wings,
whence, perhaps, that part of A^thiopia was depopulated, which Pliny mentions,
by these winged Scerpions, which fly about in flocks like so many Birds,
driving away the Inhabitants of such places in which they pitch; The common
color usually of them is a dark brown or musk Color. For other differencies
consult Authors, especially Ardoynus and Grevinus, De Venenis. Our business,
in this place, being rather to speak of their venomous quality, then of their
diverse kinds. They hurt by a prick or sting in their tails most commonly, and
some think they have two stings; But however, whether it be so or no, or
whether some only are thus furnished; Yet this is most true, one they have, and
that so venomous as it causes an extreme pain, not only in the part stung, but
also over all the Body, infl^ming and swelling such as are any wise therewith
struck, causing likewise an universal paleness, trembling, clammy, cold
sweats, sometimes burning and extreme hot, at other times so cold, that they
think they are environed with Ice; Like him in Benivenius his Family, recorded
Cap. 56. De Abditor. as Schenkius Lib. 7. De Venenis, ^ol. 964. And Sennertus
Pract. Med. Lib. 6. Part. 8. Cap. 14. quote. Their hair stands an end, as
Paraeus notes De Venenis, Lib. 21. Cap. 25. Amatus Lucitanus, Cent. 6. Curat.
31. Tells us of a man who being stung in the finger by a Scorpion, was affected
with an universal pain over all his Body, and prickings in his skin, as if all
his skin were run through with Needles. Such also as are stung thereby, are
usually molested with Bubo, and Impostumes in the groynes, and under the arms;
are prone to vomit, have an hickope, their face is often drawn aside, their
eyes run with water, and in the corners of their eyes is much purrulent faetid
matter, they foame at the mouth, and sometimes, have many black spotts
sprinkled in most parts of their Body; As him recorded by Marcellus Donatus,
Hist. Med. Mirabil. Lib. 1. Cap. 9. As Schenkius Loco Citato has it. The part
affected or stung, also, is usually red, emitting certain pustules in form of
warts, the whole Body (in short) is distempered and feverish, and at length
destroyed if not timely prevented.

These are the symptoms usually attending the stinging of a Scorpion; Yet many
times they are hurtful by entering into peoples Bodies, as Omnibonus Ferrarius,
Lib. 2. De Art. Med. Infant. Cap. 9. Reports of a Child that was grievously
affected by a Scorpion that entered into its Body by the Mouth while it was a
sleep, and so dyed the same day, notwithstanding it was vomited up again. How
this kind of Creature should get into the Body of an Infant by the Mouth,
especially, if (as some Naturalist hold) they are much of the same magnitude
and shape with a pigeons egg, I shall not here dispute; whe^efore why this
that Ferrarius mentions, may not be generated in that Infants Body, as well as
that which Hollerius records to be bred in an Italians brain by the frequent
smell of the Herb Baziliske, whereby he was not only much tormented with an
inveterate Headache for a long time, but at length with Death it self, I know
not. Gesner has likewise such a like instance of a certain young Wench in
France that by often smelling to the same Herb, fell into a most insufferable
Headache, and incurable; At length dying, and opening her Head, there was found
certain Scorpions in her Brain.

Ambrosius Paraeus, De Venenis, Lib. 21. Cap. 25. Affirms they are more or
less deadly, according to the Countries they inhabit. Sennertus, Pract. Med.
Lib. 6. Part. 8. Cap. 14. Says that in temperate Regions, and especially in
cold, they are less venomous, and that in Italy they are very dangerous; Yet,
Pouzettus in Lib De Venenis, will have those in Italy to be less pernicious
then those in France: So does Pliny likewise attest, that they in Italy are
very harmless, and in some parts of Egypt, and other places. Likewise about the
Alps as Scaliger in subtilit Cardani, exercit. 198.5. Contends.

In Curatione Danda opera (ut supra dictum) ne venenum in Corpus penetret, sed
e vulnere extrahatur, and ut Cor a veneno muniatur. Ideo membrum, si fieri
potest, supra puncturam Arcte Ligandum, vel cucurbitulae parti imponendae, aut
saltim medicament. Adstringent. applicand. Aut alio modo ante praescript. Vel,
quod Certissimum remedium est (ut Docet Paraeus, Sennertus, and alii Autores)
and multiplici experientia comprobatum, ipse Scorpius vivus captus and
contritus imponendus, aut vulnus Oleo Scorpionis illinendum: omne enim simile
attrahit ad se sibi simile. Unde videamus etiam ab aliis venenis venena
extrahi; ut Bubonibus and Carbunculis pestilentibus, ad venenum extrahendum
bufones sicci imponuntur. Aetius, Paraeus, and nonnulli Cochleam hortulanam
praecipue cum testa tritam, and plagae impositam confestim Dolorem sedare
aiunt. Laudantur etiam, Calamintha Aquatica, Lumbrici, Allium. Item Aetius,
Tetrab. 4. Sermon. 1. Cap. 19. Hoc mirabile pharmacum nominat. Rutae sylvestris
j. in Aceto trit. Cerae, tantundem; and resinae Piniquadrant. liquefact. and
affuso oleo, q.s. imponat. Laudatur and Herba Scorpioides si eodem modo sit
mist. and imponant. Dioscorides, Lib. 6. Cap. 44. scribit Lac ficulneum in
vulnus instillatum percussis praesenti auxilio esse. Vel E rad. Bryoniae coct.
Rutae trit Sem. Vrticae, q. s. cum pauco sulphur and Ol. Veteri. Fiat
Cataplasma, plagae imponend. Antequam Topica reitdrentur, id quod saepius fieri
debet, abluatur locus affectus aqua, in qua Ruta syvestris, Sulphur, lauri
folia, and alia supra enumerata cocta sint. Daniel Sennertus, vult, Dum haec
ita vulneri applicantur, statim simul Alexipharmaca, and quae veneno huic
adversantur, exhibenda sunt; ut Salvia, Scordium, Absynthium, Agrimonia,
Taraxacum, Serpillum, Ocymum, Elaphoboscum, Verbenaca recta, Gentiana,
Aristolochia, Baccae Lauri, Sem. Pastinacae sylvestris, ^rifolij, Ocymi,
Faeniculi, Raphani, quae vel in substantia, vel in Decocto exhibeantur. Aetius,
loco citato, Antidotum sequentem plurimum ad Scorpionis ictum conducere, eaque
seipsum usum and servatum fuisse scribit; ut annotat idem Sennertus.. Castorei,
succi Cyrenaici, Piperis. An. ss. Cocti, spici nardi, Croci, succi Centaurii,
An. ij. Mellis Despumati, q s. Misce; Datur nucis ponticae magnitudme. Vel.
Asae faetidae, Rad. Gentianae, An. ss. Aristolochiae longae, Rotundae, An. ij.
Sem. Rutae, j. Castorei, ss. cum Melle Despumato Fiat Electuarium. Dosis a j.
Ad ij. cum vino vel Anethi decocto.

SECTION IV. Of the Baziliske.
BAziliscus, A Creature which we commonly know by the name of Bazilick,
mentioned by Galen, Avicenna, Aetius, Dioscorides, Paulus Aeginetus, Pliny, and
by an infinite many of our Neotericks.

Some Question whether there were ever any such Creature in the World; Others,
on the other side, affirm it. And not only so, but that there are two sorts of
them; The one proceeding from the Egg of an old House-Cocke (as they say) and
thence is term a Cockatrice. The other is a kind of Serpent, which comes
within the verge of our Discourse at this time. And this latter Galen
mentions in his book De Theriasa ad Pisonem, Fol. 1273. As Lacuta in his
Epitomie of Galen Delivers it in these words, Baziliscus belua subflava, and
triplici frontis apice munita, etc. Affirming, moreover, that the very noise of
his hisling, or rays of his sight is of sufficient force to kill a man
outright: And that no Creature can touch him and live. Nay Pliny goes on
further, not only attesting such a Creature to be in the World; but also that
he is so pernicious, that he destroys and kills even Vegetables, as Shrubs,
Herbs, and Trees, not by his touch alone, but likewise by his very breath, or
steame of his Body: Not. Hist. Lib. 8. Cap. 21. whence, in the province of
Syrene, where it is thought by some, they are produced, by the Barronnesse of
the soil, and deadness of the Trees. Busnes, and Grass, Men know themselves to
be near their Dens. A^icen^a likewise mentions this Creature and Des^r^bes
it, ^^lding, that if Birds fly but over ^im within the verge of its steeme,
they immediately fall down Dead. Grevinus, affirms the same Lib. 1. De
Venenis, Cap. 18. So does Nicander, and Aetius, insomuch that all Creatures,
Serpents and all, that are likewise venomous shun him as most obnoxious and
deadly, so that, by some, he is termed, The King of Serpents; in regard he
overcomes them all, and Est enim Bazil scus ommum Serpentum venenatissimus,
unde procul dubio etiam nemen accepit.
slayes them with his very touch although he be dead. Whence the people of
Pergamus in Grace (as Selinus records, and, from him, diverse other Authors)
gave a large sum of moneys for the dead Carkats of one, to hang up in the
Temple of Ap^llo to drive away Spiders, Birds, and other Creatures from
polluting that sacred place. Erasistratus also acknowledges such a Creature to
be in rerum natara, where he affirms the part affected, or bitten, will turn
of a yellowish and golden color. Paraeus is of the same belief, undertaking
(as if he had seen one) to describe it in this manner, He is of the lergth of
twelve fingers, with a white spot in his Head resembling a Crown. Sennertus in
like manner is persuaded there is such vermin in the World, and the reason he
gives, is, because he is Ceterum dari Baziliscum Serpentem negari non potest,
cum a tot. Autoribus describatur.
described by so many Authors.

On the Contrary Opinion, notwithstanding are some others; which at this
instant, I shall not spend time nor pains to insert; only show you Cardans
reasons against it, deriding all that has been already said, and accounting
them no better then so many Fictions. Lib. 1. De Venenis, Cap. 16. And he gives
these grounds for his assertion.

1. That Galen confesses in Li. 1. De simpl. Med facultat. Cap. 1. That he
never saw any such Creature, nor any Man else that could ever assure him he had
seen one, neither did he ever hear of any such Man.

2. He says it does not stand with truth or reason, that Nature should produce
so noxious, so destructfull a Creature, that might devour and consume all
others.

3. If it be true that with the very sight or sound of its voice, it kills,
what man is there can bring news of either its description, or that, indeed,
there is any such thing. 4. Rhasis that sc^ntinous, fearcher into natures
mysteries, who, notwithstanding he lived in Africa (where it is reported these
Creatures are bread) yet never makes the least mention of them

But I shall not presume to decide the Controversy; All that I shall say, is,
that these reasons may seem to be rational; And on the other side, that many,
nay most writers take most (I will not say all) things upon trust, not the
least inquiring into the verity thereof. Whence we have such voluminous works,
when a little said with truth, is much more to be preferred.

I shall therefore add only this, that if there be no such Creature, or if there
be, according to those places in the Holy Writ, Isa 11.8. and Cap 14.29. and
Cap 59 verse 5 Jer. 8.17. we, in these parts, shall never be troubled with the
danger or cure of it. And if there is such a thing Erasistratus and Dioscorides
(who consents with Cardan,) affirm it not so pernicious as they report, since
they have prescribed a remedy for it: As,. Castorei, j. cum vino, vel papaveris
liquore, and exhibeatur. Or, on the other side, if it be true, that there are
such Creatures, and so pernicious; Then, with Aetius, I may well conclude it in
vain to prescribe, or think of any Cure against the poison of the Bazilisk,
since it kills so suddenly and effectually: and that by the very fight breath,
or noise thereof alone.

SECTION V. Of the Salamander, and its Antidotes.
SAlamandra, or, as we commonly thence phrase it, the Salamander, described by
Pliny in his Not. Hist. Lib. 29. Cap. 4. And Isidorus, Lib. 10. Cap. 47. To be
a small Creature, like unto An Ewt, Gesnerus, Ulysses Aldrovandus, and others,
say, It is like a Lizard, but every way a little bigger, having its belly
white, its back and other parts of the body, black and yellow, spotted and
glistering.

Touching that fond conceit which some have, that it will live in the fire and
receive no prejudice; It being condemned See Sect 1. Subsect. 3. Memb. 3. This
relates to a Book in Manuscript, which although it was intended first for the
press, yet this like Pharez has brokeno^t first.
elsewhere, I shall not spend time, in this place, to make any repetition
thereof.

However, it is a Creature reputed no less poisonous then the rest, not only by
its bite, but, as Pliny, Nicander, Paraeus, and others maintain, by a secret
property, infects even the every fruit of such trees as it climes, so that if
any chance to eat thereof it proves unto them Mortal, Sennertus therefore (who
from those Authors, likewise, affirms the same) accounts it no wise less
pernicious or destructfull then the Aconite, before mentioned. It is attested
also, by some, that it poysoneth all Herbs and other things over which it
chances to creep: And Paraeus, the which Sennertus seems to confirm, with
many more, writes, that it is no strange matter for whole families to be
destroyed by drinking (or eating the meat which has been Dressed with) the water
of such a well or spring in which they have casually fallen.

Such as are hereby affected, or rather infected, if Death do not immediately
seize upon them, are usually molested with unusual Inflammations over the
whole Body, natural heat by Degrees decays, and is at length extinguished,
especially in the member or part affected, and thence it becomes black,
patresies and emitteth a certain faetid, purrulent matter. Aetius says, at
first there appear many white spots over all the Body, then ^ed, and afterward
black, putrefying the parts so that at length they fall away by peice-meale (as
we say) The Hair generally over the whole Man, is made to fall off, especially
if the poyso^ continue long in the Body, the speech impedited, the
ratiocination, fancy, and all the senses obfuscated, the whole frame, and
Constitution subverted, and, at last, by Death confounded and destroyed.

In Curatione, animadvertendum, Si Salamandrae venenum ore sumptum fuerit, and
tum vomitus aqua calida, and oleo, and aliis medicamentis hactenus propositis,
provocandus, Vel, Si demorso insertum, and tunlocus quamprimum scarificandus,
venenumque vel cucurbitulis, vel aliis modis ejiciendum, aut vulneri cataplasma
ex Allio, Saepis, Ruta, sale and melle Confectum calide imponendum. In utroque
Casu Alexipharmica necessaria sunt, ac propterea and Mithredatum exhibendum,
and Theriaca, In specie ad Salamandrae morsum Paraeus, Lib. De Venenis, Cap.
20. Laudat a Dioscoride Lib. 6 Cap. 4. quae Confirmat Sennert. Resinam pini,
aut Galbanum ex melle tinctum, Item grana pin. foliA cupressi, and sem urticae
^^^ino, Decoct^^^que exhibeatur. Praeterea Commendat Sennert. Hectuarium
sequen. ut. ^acear, Juniperi, Assae faetid^, Paperis nigri, A^^^^j. Cast^rei,
fol Rutae, Radic. Py^ethri, A^ j. Cum mill sp^mato. Dos^is, a j ad ij. ^um
b^^^tu vim veteris exbubendam. A^g^r in Ci^^^^pe sumat nucleos pini, ^^b^que
^hi condiantur cinamomo, Cariophylis, etc. Potus fit vinum vetus, vel lac vac^
number cal^dum.

SECTION VI. Of the Viper and its Antidotes.
VIpera, a A reliquas Serpentibus duobus diff^^t; P^^num est, qu^^ (...)
rel^^ui serpents eva pariant, Viperae vivum faetum exd^dunt, nen quod and
nonnulli ex Aristotele, lib^^-De Hist. Animal. Cap. ult. Male inteliecto exist
mant, vent^e matris perforate nas^^tur cum so^^^ membranis, quibus m^^lvi^ur,
corrosis prod^at. Altetum est, quod Aristoteles, lib. 8. Hist. Animal. Cap. 15.
Se^bit; Caeten serpents Hy^me in terra V^^e a in saxis latet.
Viper or Adder, as some call it, a Creature no less noxious and poisonous
then any of the former by biting; for in their Mouths (as our Naturalists
unamously agree) they contain their poison in certain small bladders between
their teech, so that when they bite, the force thereof cau^ing an eruption of
those bladders, the poison is thereby conveied into the wound or part bitten.
The female Viper is reputed the more dangerous of the two, having more large
tusks then the male, and so makes the larger wound; Whence some Authors from
Nicander, and Galen, have presumed to affirm the male to have but two tusks,
and the female four; But the more rational agree with Angelus Baldus Abbatius
that scrutinous searcher into the Nature of that Creature, that both male and
female have four tusks, only the females are more firm, long and strong then
the males: They may therefore know whether the part affected was bitten by a
male or female Viper by the largeness of the wound, but not by the number of
the orifices made by the teeth; For the smallness of the males tusks causing
the wound to be more obscure, occasioned some to affirm they had but only two
tusks. However, if it were so, that were enough to do much mischief; For, such
as are therewith bitten, are (as the most Learned and Authentic Authors
conclude) molested with intolerable pains, and prickings over all their Body,
as also an universal swelling, but first in the part affected, out of which,
when the wound is green and newly made, issues pure blood, then a purrulent
filthy matter, and certain blisters arise about the part, as if it had been
burned, which argues this Poison to be hot, not cold as some have endeavored
to maintain, because this Creature is actually cold, which argument, if it
might be admitted, might as well serve to prove Mercurius Sublimate, Antimony,
and other Mineralls and poisons Cold, which to affirm, were ridiculous, when
all rational Men know they are potentially Hot many of them, although
actually, and to the touch they seem to be otherwise. All the parts are
generally, especially the Liver, inslamed, and dried, whence they are
unsatiably desirous to drink. Some think the whole Body becomes yellow or of a
pale color, Caelius Aurelianus, Antiq. Lect. Lib. 6. Cap. 13. says of a Leek
like green, and gives instance of a Courtier so affected by the bite of a
Viper. Sennertus, Pract. Med. Lib. 6. Part. 8. Cap. 13. says, according to the
disposition of the poison it is sometimes redd, someties, pale, sometimes,
purpleish, sometimes, black, etc. Adding withal, that sometimes there appears
certain black pustules in the member bitten. Brasavela. Com. ad Aph. 62. Lib.
4. Hippo^ratis. Affirms he saw one that was (hereupon) speckled all over his
Body with black, and blew spots. Moreover, the patient bitten by this Creature,
is usually molested with intolerable pains, and gripings in the bowels,
frequent vomitings of Choler, the stomach is affected with Hickops, the Head
with vertiginous and unusual pains, the nose with eruption of blood; the
bladder and ureters with suppressions and obstructions, so that there is but
little emission of urine; The Lungs with difficulty of breathing; The Heart
with faintings and swoundings; The whole Body (in a word) with a burning
fever, tremblings and cold sweats; And lastly (if not timely prevented) with
Death it self. Especially if the patient bleed at nose, his hands grow cold,
his nails pale, his lips greenish, if he tremble over all his Body, be
molested with sownding fits; If the wound be large, in summer time, and in an
hot Country (for it is thought they are more poisonous in such places then in
others) or given when the Viper was enraged or angry, etc. You may assuredly
conclude Death to be at hand, and that the patient will not live long,
sometimes within seven hours time after; they seldom linger out to the third
day; Nay, the same Brasavola, in loco allegato, tells us he saw one that dyed
by the bite of a Viper within three hours after. And Ambrosius ^araeus, Lib.
21. De Venenis, Cap. 16. records out of Mathiolus a remarkable story of a
Country man, who as he was mowing a meadow by chance, cut an Adder in two with
his sithe, which perceiving, and thinking it to be slain, took up that end on
which was the head in his hand, fearing nothing, but the enraged Creature
turning about its head, bit him by the finger, the which, he immediately clapped
into his Mouth (as the unadvised Custom of Men is to do, if ought hurt them)
and sucking out the blood, Immediately, fell down dead-Such an other story is
to be found in Amatus Lucitanus, which Gesner of Serpents, Schenckius of
poisons, and others record. A certain boy seeing a Viper or Adder in the
fields, boasted to his Companions, he could take it up in his hand, and receive
no hurt, but they not believing of it, or telling him he durst not, the Lad
rather then be thought to speak more then he would do, put forth his hand to
take up the Viper, but the venomous Creature, extending its neck, bit him by
the singer very sorely, the which (as you heard before of the Country fellow)
he presently put into his Mouth to suck out the blood, and thereby bought his
rashness and folly at a dear rate, for not long after, he changed this
miserable life for death; there being no medecin, as my Author adds, that
could do him any good: yet if he had not put his finger into his mouth he might
have been recovered.

In Curatione, quod de aliorum Anim^lium venenorum morsu dictum, and ^^e
faciendum. Tamen hoc venenum u^ a^^ peculiar. Antididot. habet. Ardoynus. De
Venenis, Lib. 6. Cap. 1. Veneni Viperarum, Bezoar Costam esse scribit, a ss. ad
j. Cum vino Absynthite, vel Decoctionis Absynthij exhibitum. Laudantur and
Scilla sub cineribus cocta, Alliis, Porrisque tritis and impositis, Hordei
farina cum Accto, Melle and stercore Caprino subacta, impositasque
cataplasmatis instar. Quibusdam ex Dioscorid. Lib 6. Cap. 47. exhibent Coaguli
Leporin. obol. iij. vinumque frequenter bibendum mandant. Et ita Gesner. Hist.
Serpent. Lib. 5. De Vipera, ex relatione Gerardi Bauman. quoque affirmat,
Puclla quaedam cum carnem, cui venenum Vipera exemptum erat, forte gustasset in
opisthotonum aliasque gravissima symptomata incidit; Sed mox vinum copiose ei
propinatum est, and liberata puella. Nonnulli satis est exemplo lavisse and
fovisse plagam Aceto, Sale, and pauco Melle. Mtilis est and radiX Asphodeli,
Gemianae, Bryoniae, Aristclochiae Rotundae, Item and Terra sigillata ne^ non
Radix tormentillae quorum quodlibet vel seorsim, vel plura simul mixta dantur
j. cum vino veteri. ^racastoreus De Contagiosis Morb. Libro 3. Capite. 2. Sic
de Radice Tormentillae attestat. Conslat Rusticos quosdam dum forte secarent
herbas demorsos fuisse a Vipera, ac repent inslatos, apposita autem
Tormentilla vocata herba supra lo^um, statim liberatos fuisse. Cui si aliquid
Rutae addatur, efficacius medicamentum evadit. Galenus Lib. 2. De Antidot. Cap.
14. Ad Viperae morsus, haec epithemata tradit; Sagapeni, Piperis, liquoris
Cyrenaic. opopanicis, An. Part. j. Galbani, Sulphuris vivi, An Part. ij. Arida
pulverisetur, liquoris in Aceto solvantur, and aridis inijciantur, F.
Emplastrum Vel.. Centaurij, Aristolochiae, Rad. Puced. An. Par. Pondus;
Pulverisentur, et Aceto ac Galbano excipiantur. Vel Sagapen, Asae faetidae,
Piperis, Opopanicis, An. jj. Galbani, Sulphuris vivi, An. j. Gummi Aceto
Dissolvantur, atque iis reliqua pulverisata inspergantur: F. Emplastrum. Item
Galenus, De Locis Affectis, Lib. 3. Cap. 7. Scribit se vidisse Rusticum,
Cujustotum digitum Vipera momorderat, qui salce, quod tum forte habebat, ab
ultimo articulo ictam partem resecans deinde inducta, usitatis pharmacis in
cicatrice nullo sumpto medicamine sanatus est. Inter Composita Paraeus Loco
^^tatato, valde laudat Theriacam Antiquam in Aqua Vitae Dissolutam, vel,
Methridatium: ubi sic scribit. Cum Rex Carolus nonus Monspessuli esset, ac in
Fargij Pharmacopolae officina Viperam unam tractarem, ipsa extremum indicem,
qua inter unguem carnemque hiat, morsu mihi praehendit, unde statim subortus
est acer dolor tum partis exquisitissimo sensu praeditae veneni efferi
occasion: e vestigio digitum supra vulnus arctissime constrinxi, ut sanguinem,
venenumque ne se latius in corpus diffunderet exprimerem. Theriacam Antiquam in
Aqua Vitae dissolvi, ex qua intinctum imbutumque bom bycem vulneri imposui,
atque intra paucos aies he uno remedio plane convalui: Licet uti and
Mitheridatio loco Theriacae. Item and inter Interna exhibentur ab Autoribus
Theriaca quae inter composita primas ob^inet, j. vel, ij. pondere, cum vini
generosi, iiij. Cui succedit, Mithridatium: ut Docet Sennertus. Vel.. Radic.
Aristoloch. Rotund. Bacc. Laturi Cassiae ligneae, Piperis, An. ij C^storei, j.
Anisi, ss. folior. Rutae sylvestris, j. ss. Pulverisentur omnia, and cum Melle
despumato redigantur, in formam Electuarij. Dossis a j. Ad ij. cum haustu vini.
Mathiolus, in Com. super praefat. Lib. 6. Dioscoridis, ex Antidoto quadam, quam
ibi describit, aquam parat, cujus tantas vires esse praedicat, ut ea non solum
a demorsu Viperis, quod duabus Histories probat, sed etiam a quocunque Animali
veneno ictos sanare; Imo in tanto mortis discrimine constitutos, ut visum,
vocem, et reliquos sensus amiserint, ingenti Astantium admiratione, a longo
veluti somno excitare, et a morte ad vitam revocare possit. Dossis illius Aquae
sunt iiij. vel per se, vel cum Aquae alicujus distillatae Cor^ialis, vel vi^a
Oderati pari quantitati.

SECTION VII. Of the Dryinus and its Antidotes.
7. DRyinus, is a most hurtful and venenious Serpent or Worm, bred as some
think a^ ther^o^ of an Oak. So pernicious that, as Galen, Lib. De Theria^^, ad
Pisonem contends, if any chance at (...) war^s to tread upon it, it excoriateth
the so^le of the foot, and causes the leg to swell, nay and hurts the hand no
less that touches it; the which Sennertus confirms, Pract. Med Lib. 6. Part.
8. Cap. 11. Adding that it offends also by biting, nay and so forcibly, that
Men are killed thereby; Likewise that the very savor thereof is of sufficient
power to deprive Men of their senses. The common signs of such as are poisoned
by the bite of this Creature are these; There usually issues (as the Learned
have noted) out of the wound a kind of black, faetid, and purrulent blood,
after which the part or member affected swells exceedingly, and about the wound
arises certain blackish pustules, grievous pains accompanyes, and macerates
the whole Man, the skin is generally, Dry, rough and hard. The stomach is
molested with vomitings, and hickops, and that which is cast up, is, for the
most part Choler or Blood; Extreme thirst, likewise tormenteth the party, and
intolerable pains and gripings in the bowels; All the natural actions are so
impedited, and destroyed, that there is no emission of either urine or the
feces of the belly; Neither are the Vitalls less affected, for they can
neither breath nor speak without great difficulty; and the Heart is subject to
swoundings and faintings: and the Animal faculties, also, are so confounded
and molested, that there follows not only a depravation and dimness of sight,
but likewise Frensies, Dotage, Delirium, and madness. In a word the whole Man
Body and Soul, with all its operations Vegetall, Vital, and Animal, are
thereby destroyed, so that the whole lump becomes odious, and the very
exhalations and breathings through the ^ores extremely offensive. And lastly,
if not maturely prevented, brings Death and utter Destruction.

Curatio Petatur ex iis, quae supra De Viperae morsu dicuntur. In specie tamen
ad Dryini morsus commendantur Origanum, ut Docet Sennertus, item trifolium and
marubium, vel e^rum succus; Radix item Aristolochiae, nec non glandes
cujuscunque quercus concisae, et cum vino generoso sumptae; Eaedem quoque
Contusae et cum Melle mixtae, extra, plagae imponantur. Dolorem leniunt etiam
ilicis radices tusae et applicatae.

SECTION VIII. Of the Serpent Stellio and its Antidoces.
STellio, is a kind of Lizzard; which, because it has certain spots upon its
back like stars, it has its name Stellio, a Stella a Star De Stellione, Ita
scribit Galenus, in Libro De Theriaca ad Pisonem; Stellio visus a Scorpionibus,
substringit ipsos et perimit. It is, likewise, very pernicious to Mankind, as
well by biting them, as by being eaten by them, or the water, Drink or other
liquor in which they are by chance drowned. For either of these ways it
causes in Man, no less, but the very same symptoms, as you have heard before
of Cantharides; Wherefore, for brevities sake, I shall not here make the least
Repetition.

Et in Curatione, sive venenum Stellionis haustum, and ore sumptum, sive morsu
Communicatum fuerit, Alexipharmaca nullo modo negligenda, sed ea, quae contra
Serpentum morsus hactenus proposita sunt, usurpanda.

SECTION IX. Of the Aspe and its Antidotes.
ASpis, an Aspe, a Creature so poisonous that Nicander affirms it to be the
most venomous of all other Serpents; whence perhaps it is Sennertus when he
treats of the Poisons of Serpents, begins with the Aspe. But however, whether
compared with the rest it be the worst or no, this is most certain, it is a
Deadly Poison; or, as Moses ^^ut. 32.33. Terms it, a Cruel Venim. For, if it
chance to fall upon any member of a Man or Woman (although they were not ^^ten)
i^ becomes thereby immediately inflamed, ^ed and angry, molests the whole M^n,
and causes Death it self if not timely prevented; nay and all the symptoms
that follow upon their bite, though not altogether so for^^able. As, their
heads that are herewith i^^ten, are, for the most part, heavy, and ^ail, their
foreheads molested with convulsive switchings, their ^lyes and sight is
obsu^cated and darkened; their ey-lids and theeks tremble; they are sleepy and
drowsy, subject to ^upors and soporificall distempers: Their whole senses are
perverted and confused; their face is generally pale; often yaune and reach;
Their whole Body is possessed with frigidity and chilness, and at length slain
by the King of fears, if not immediately prevented. So dangerous, so cruel, so
deadly is this poison of the As^e, that many think it is incurable; Paraeus and
others, think one wounded herewith can continue with life but the third part of
a Day; But this, Sennertus, and the Learned, say is various according to the
nature and difference of the kind of Aspe: for Galen Libro Citato Ad Pisonem,
speaks of three sorts of Aspes, the one he calls Hirundinaceus; the second,
Terrestris; the third, Pryas: The first of which kills so suddenly and
effectually, that it is thought to be incurable. The other in three or four
hours time: The third, a little more slowly. The truth is, the most mild, is
sufficiently malignant and mortal; and that the rather, because its wound is
so small, that it is hardly Discernable. As, some write no bigger then the eye
of a needle; insinuatingly hurting and destroying the lives of such as they
wound, and yet hardly seem to make any impression or breach upon the Body; As
backbiting, slandering, and flattering people do their Neighbors: whence the
Apostle Saint Paul alluding to the nature of this Creature, Romans 3. And
speaking of the wicked seems to strike at such malicious tale-bearers and
slanderers, Verse 13. Where he says, Their Throat is an open Sepulcher, with
their Tongues they have used deceit, the poison of Aspes is under their Lips.
The wound that is made by these Creatures, does commonly grow angry and
inflamed, but does not swell, little blood issues out of it, and that of
Color black. It affects the stomach also with pains, The speech and sight
is presently lost, the whole Man immediately languisheth, a cold sweat
possesses all the parts, palpitation of the heart, and Death it self, as has
been said, in a very few hours, as that good man was in every particular taken,
recorded by Schenkius, Lib. 7. De Venenis, Fol. 962. And so within four hours
Dyed.

Curatio in g^nere, petatur ex ijs, quae supra De Viperae morsu Dicebantur. In
specie tamen commendatur Theriaca, vel Mithridatium in vino vel Aceto dissolut
ad vuln. Abluend. Item pars Aspidis sputo infecta urina puerorum impubium, v^l
spiritu vini, in quo Theriaca disso luta sit, frequenter abluenda. Vel.. Folia
thap si barbari Caryophilatae, Leucoij rubri, pari pon^^re, quae in Aceto
acerrimo, and sani hominis urina bulliant, ad partis laesae fotum.

Quanquam si ab ictu multum tempus jam sine remedio exactum sit, omnino satius,
and certius esse, si aeger ejus decocti iij. je junus duabus ante pastum horis
hauriat. Aegyptij, ut scribit Sennertus in frequenti usu contra venenum hoc
habent, Acetum vini copiose sumptum. Utilis est and Gentiana ac Castoreum cum
vino vel Aceto propinata. Item Celsus De remed. Lib. 5 Cap. De Aspidis ictu.
Valde laudat Acetum, ubi scribit; Puer cum ab Aspide ictus esset, and parti^n
ob ipsum vulnus, partim ob immodicos aestus siti premeretur, ac locis siccis
alium humorem non reperiret, Acetum quod forte s^cum habebat ebibit, and
liberatus est. Cre^^ quoniam id, quamvis refrigerandi vim ^abet, tamen habet
etiam dissipandi. Q^o fit ut Terrae respersa eo sumet. Eadem ^^go vi verisimile
est spissescentem quoque intus humorem hominis ab eo discuti, and sic dari
sanitatem. Idem sentit Hyronimus ^^crc^rialis ut patet in Lib. 2. De Venenis,
Cap. 3. his verbis; Marcus Varro dum 83. aetatis Annum ageret, scripsit, urinam
commorsi ab Aspide potam singularissimum esse remedium Adversus venena Aspidis.
Sed illud certissimum est Aegyptiorum inventum et experimentum Acetum, quo
copio sius potetur utilius esse ^e^ in genere ven^^i. Et narrat Plinius Lib.
23. Cap De Aceto, fuisse quendam ab Aspide commorsum va^ Aceto plenum
gestantem, quod quam primum deposuisset, statim incipi. ebat, illico omnis
dolor and malum cessabat, ut intelligi possit Acetum esse singular remedium
adversus h^e venenum. Vel, si velis a Sennerto, Radic. Aristoloch. Rotund
Gentianae, Ana j. f^lior. Rutae, Pug. ij Castorei, Cassiae Lign. Ana j Sem.
Anisi, Citri excortie. Ana j. ss. F. Pulvis. Dossis a j. ad j. cum vino, vel
Aceto. Veneni Aspidis Bezoar Rutam else, seribit Ardaynus ^b 6. De Venenis,
Cap. 4.

SECTION X. Of the Serpent Natrix and its Antidotes.
NAtrix is likewise a most pernicious and destructive Serpent, for the most
part and commonly called by An hours Hydrus; yet many name it according to the
place and time of its appearance; As, if it be found upon the earth in the
Summer or Autumn, it is called Chersybres, in the Winter or Spring, in the
water, Amphybium^ of which, the former, is much more poisonous and dangerous
then the latter: or, more plainly, when it is found upon the earth it is
reputed more venomous then when it is found in the water. For Chersydri, or
such as are found in the earth, are recorded, by several, from Apollodorus, to
be of force sufficient to kill any Man that touches them even when they are
dead. The symptoms that usually follow upon the bite of these Creatures is
much the same which you have before heard of the Viper, only they kill more
suddenly or as soon, within three hours time Ardoynus Contends. The Cure is
likewise the same with that of the Viper; wherefore to avoid Tautology I shall
thither refer thee.

SECTION XI. Of the Serpents Amphysbaena and Scytale, with their Antidotes.
AMphysbaena and Scytale. These are Serpents so called by the Learned; And
because they are so like one the other, And therefore Authors have joined them
together, I shall not here, at this time, put them assunder: especially since
they are, also, both alike hurtful. Herein only they differ, Amphysbaena moves
both forward and backward (whence by some) it is thought it has its name; But
Scytale moves only forward, and is something thicker then the Amphysbaena. It
is reported also of this latter, that if a Woman with Child do but cross it she
shall miscarry or be in great danger in Childbed. Such as are bitten by either
of these kinds of Serpents, are molested, in the part affected, with grievous
and intolerable pains, inflammations, redness, swellings, and sometimes
impostumes, Nay and there follows all those horrid signs and symptoms which
you have read before where we spoke of the Viper; which, because the Cure is
likewise the same, I shall not here again reiterate, but, for brevities sake,
refer thee thereunto.

SECTION XII. Of the Haemorrhous and its Antidotes.
Haemorrhous or Haemorhus, as Galen has it, in Lib. De Theriaca, ad Pisonem,
adding it to be so pernicious and such an enemy unto Mankind that whosoever is
bitten thereby, bleeds not only by the wound, but also by the Mouth, Nose, and
all other evacuations of the Body; whence it is thought by most it had its
name. Paraeus, Sennertus, and others say it causes the member to grow black,
by extinguishing natural heat, and to swell; then follows a pain of the
stomach, and difficulty of breathing; Depraving of the voice, hindering the
passage of the urine; Hurts the memory; putrifies the gumms; and causes the
teeth to fall out of the Jaws; and at length pours out the Soul, that Death
it self ensues. Moreover, according to those Verses in Lucan and Lucretius,
recorded by Gesuer, Schenkius, and Sennertus, blood does not only issue as
Galen notes, out of the Mouth and Note, but out of the Eye, also, Ears, and
every other passage and hole in the Body; nay from the very Gummes, roots of
the Nails, and sometimes from old wounds, etc.

Impressit dentes Haemorrhois Aspera Tullo,
Magnanimo inveni, miratorique Catonis,
Vtque solet pariter totis se effundere signis
Corycij pressura Croci: sic omnia membra
Emisere simul rutilum pro sanguine virus.
Sanguis erant lachrymae: quaecunque foramina novit.
Humor, ab ijs largus manat cruor: ora redundant,
Et patulae nares, sudor rubet: omnia plenis
Membra fluunt venis: totum est pro vulnere Corpus.
Of the same accident Gorgius Pictorius thus sings,

Impressit dentes: Haemorrhois Aspera Tullo,
Magnanimo, fluxu sanguinis et periit.
Over and above all which, there follows vomitings, Diarrhaea, and deadly
Convulsions.

Curatio ut Docet Paraus primo quidem membrum laesrm, si absque vita dispendio
id fieri potest, abscindendum; Aut s^ id sacere non liceat, Cucurbitula
scarificata adhibenda, vel Canterio actuali pars adurenda. Postea etiam
medicamenta venenum ex alto evocantia, applicentur. A^tius impone^ Cataplasma
ex foliis vitis coctis tritis cum Melle, and foliis portulacae cum polenta. Vel
e porro, urtica and ruta coctis and contusis, addita farina hordei it Albumine
Ovi, Fiat Cataplasma parti demorsae imponendum. Laudantur and medicamenta
sanguinis impetum sistendi vim habentis, qualia sunt Tormentilla, Bursa
Pastoris, Portulaca, Plantago, Bolus Armenus, Lapis Hamatites, Terra sigillata,
quibus, semper aliquid Theriacae adijcere utile est. Commendatur and praeterea,
Allium et Theriaca praesertim recens; Item and uvae passae, ac rubi fructus.

SECTION XIII. Of the Serpent Seps, and its Antidotes.
SEpedon, or Serpent Seps, so called, as Paraeus and the most rational agree,
because it immediately putrefies the part it biteth: so violent and noxious is
its poison; Nay Sennertus affirms, that most Writers think it to be the
Deadliest venom that is, putrefying any member of a Man, that does but touch
it; And kills within three or four Days, as common experience evinceth.
However all agree, that it causes, by its bite, extreme pain in the part
affected. Pausanius, and, from him Sennertus, Paraus, Grevinus, Ardoynus, and
the rest, affirm, that when the wound is green, or newly made, there issues
forth pure blood, but afterward, most filthy, corrupt, purrulent matter,
exceeding faetid. The part affected and putrefied becomes white, and within a
short time the whole Body, so putrefying along as it goes, that it consumes the
very skin, and flesh, causing the hair to fall off by peice-meal, resolves the
spirits, and destroys life, if not timely prevented.

The Method for Cure, both in general and particular, is the same which has
been showed of the Viper.

SECTION XIV. Of the Serpent Cerastes and its Antidotes.
CErastes, a Serpent so called by the Greeks (...), a (...) Cornis signifying a
Horn, because it is reported by our Naturalists, to have two horns upon its
head, like unto a Rams; a very poisonous and dangerous Creature it is also; but
not so bad as the former two: yet the member thereby bitten swells in nobs
and nodes, not unlike to the head of a tenpenny nail: out of the wound made
thereby, there issues a purrulent matter, sometimes, pale and whitish, and
sometimes, again black: the whole Body becomes black and blew; The Mind and
Fancy become disturbed; The Eyes wax dim; The Lips swell; And about the
Groyne is intolerable pain, through retraction of the Nerves: genitale
intenditur; The whole strength of the Body is at last wasted, and Life it self
subverted. Yet, many times, they linger out till the ninth Day.

De Curatione, ea quae contra Serpentum morsus, hactenus proposita sunt,
usurpanda. Ut Consistit in m^mbri laesi Amputatione, si locus membri and
conditio id patiatur; quod si sieri non pos^it, omnis caro circa locum affectum
abscindatur, vel, ad minimum, profunde scarificetur; cu^urbitulisque appositis
sanguis copi^sius eliciatur: Et ^laga Aqua Vitae, in Aqua Theriaca dissoluta
sit, abl^atur; vel Cauterio Actuali locus Aduratur, etc.

SECTION XV. Of the Serpent Dipsas and its Antidot^s.
DIpsas, it is a kind of Snake called (...) by the Greeks, a (...), sitio, to
thirst; because, by its bite, it so dryes up and consumes the moisture, and
humors in a man, that they become exceeding thirsty that are thereby offended:
And so Dye thirsty, as Galen notes, Lib. De Theriaca ad Pisonem. Sennertus,
thinks this extreme drought arises from the ardent quality of the poison,
above measure inflaming the whole Man, growing so much the more thirsty, by how
much the more they drink, for the uretery passages being so dried and shriveled
up, that the dri^k they receive cannot pass through, it is conveied through and
into the Veins, throughout the Body; or into the Cavity of the belly, whence
it becomes thereby so extended, that sometimes about the groynes, it breaks.

In C^ratione nota; Dip^^^^ morsui eadem quae reliquorum Se^^^^tum ac Vipe^atum
morsui, conven^^^ ^^^^^^me^^a and externa, and interna. Tamen p^^^ter illa,
quia demorsi plu^^^^^ bibunt, ^t potus ille per vias urina^ non ev^^^^^,
Diuretica exhibenda e Sem. 4. srigid. ^a^or. Radic. Aperientib Resta b^vis,
Ch^^^^ lio, B^^sa pastoris Fragis, N^c^^is, ^^^co^. Horde^, and similibus.
Plura vide apud A^t^m Tetrab. 4. Sermon. 1. Cap. 22. Ardoy^^m Lib 6. De Venenis,
Cap. ^ Gr^vinum l^b. 1. De Venenis, Cap. 14 etc.

SECTION XVI. Of the Serpent Cenchris and it Antidetes.
CEnchris, which likewise, is a Serpent extremely venamous and permtious,
killing, by the very poison of his bite, without speedy remedy be applied, in
three days time; Causing moreover, curing the time, diverse grievous and
fearful symptoms; As, the Belly is filled with water, the nature of the
Poison being to dissolve, and pour out the humors thereinto, whereby it is
swollen, and puffed up; The flesh languisheth and flaggeth; the head grows
heavy; all the senses are propense to sleep; and an alienation of the mind
follows; The part affected swells; out of the wound there issues a faetid,
purrulent matter, sharp and acride, whereby the soar spreads, and the skin is
exulcerated, etc. Besides, most of the Ancients maintain, from the testimony of
Erasistratus, it has a peculiar property in offending the Liver; the Intrall
called the Jejunum which is the second Intrall of those they term Small; and
the Neck. Curatio petatur exiis, quae supra De Viperae morsu dicetur.

SECTION XVII. Of the Lizzard and its Antidotes.
LAstly Lacerta, a Lizzard, a Creature very frequent and common in the Iudies,
as Acosta, and others note; and reputed by diverse to be inoffensive; and no
question, some sort of them are altogether harmless, as common experience
evinceth, and the unanimous assertion of all Travelers into those parts: who
will moreover tell you of their strange love and affection which they bear to
Men; But I shall not insist on that in this small Tract. Another sort there
are, which Sennertus thinks to be (though not to be so bad as the rest before
mentioned) pernicious, and something poisonous, as appears by the symptoms
that follow upon their biting of Men. As, the part affected is grievously
pained; out of the wound, which is newly made issues pure blood at first, but
afterward most abominable corruption; the flesh about the bite turues pale,
and putrefies; And also exceedingly swells. And that you may know the bite of a
Lizzard from other Creatures, there following many times the same symptoms,
take notice they always leave their teeth in the wound or member bitten, as
the Learned teach.

Curatio in genere perficitur, ut antea dictum est De Vipera. In specie tamen,
ut dentes in vulnere relicti ^acilius excidant, locum Oleo and Aqua calida
fricare oportet; postea Cucurbitulas ei applicare, etc. Prodest etiam Spongiam
Aceto calido imbutam morsui imponere, Locumque Butyro, Sale and Melle mixtis
inungere: Emplasirum ex Allio and soliis Maluae coclis and contusis,
furfuribusque cribratis, and oleo Rosaceo paratum; vel Cataplasma ex panis
Triticei medul^ la, cum dec^cto Rutae, Calaminthae, Alu et Gentianae confectum,
applicare. And thus much of the Poison of Serpents.

DIVISION IIII. Of Poisons BELONGING TO FISHES.
SECTION I. Of the Torpedo and its Antidotes.
FOurthly, there are certain Poisons proceeding from Fishes, As, 1. T^rpedo, a
Fish so called, eo quod Corpus torp^scere faciat, si eam quisquam viventem
tangat, because it benumeth and astonieth the Body or member which touches it
whilst it is ^live; Although when it is dead, As Galen ^^res, Lib. 3. De
^limentis, Cap. 34. it may be eaten: through a secret property in this
^reature. Nay it is of that numming quality, that it not only aston^eth the
Body or member touching it, but even the Arms of the ^ishermen that strike
them with their long Poles, and come no nearer them, as Galen evinceth, Lib. De
usu Res^irationis, Item in Lib. 6. De locis affictis, Cap 5. Et in Lib. 11. De
simplicium medicam^^^^^m sac ultatibus, Cap 49. The which is confirmed by every
Writer. And over and above this they are no less dangerous to them that take
them accidentally with other sisi m nets; As Sennertus demonstrates, out ^f
Ar^st^tle, Lib. 9. De Hister. Animal. Cap. ^7. Adding withal, that it dilates
into the whole Body, overthrowes the st^ength, brings an universal trembling
over all the Body, and he ^iness; which Scaliger, likewise confirms, in
Exercitat. 218.8. Ad Subtilit. Cardan. And Gesner, Lib. 4. Hist. Animal. Cap.
De Torpedine, from Albertus, tell us of one that was scarce well again in half
a years time, notwithstanding all convenient means was applied and daily used,
so as to have the use of his hand and arm, only by touching one with his singer
a little, although he twitch't away his hand again suddenly.

They futher report of this Creature, that have adventured to speak of it, that
it catches the ^^sh it delights to eat, and preyes upon by hiding it self in
the mudd from them and stupefying them, not being able otherwise to catch them
through the slowness of its motion, wanting sins; And that this is so apparent,
since, as the Learned contend, it is often seen the mullet has been found
whole in their bellyes, notwithstanding it be a Fish of admirable Celerity. Si
quis liquorem Cyrenaicum manu teneat, eum nihil a Torpedine mali pati.
Aelianus, De Histor. Animal. Lib. 5. Cap. 17. Author est* Quae si ita sese
habent, procul dubio etiam hic liquor ad torporem and stuporem a Contactu
^orpedinis inducturu, utilis erit. Alexander Aphrodisaeus, initio problemat.
Trigli, quam mullum vocant, carnem hujus veneni remedium esse docet. Ad
Torporem ctiam a Torpedine inductum utilis est Theriaca, si ij. pondere, cum
vino Absynthite exhibea^ur. Vel, Coquatur Absynthium; Ruta, Gentiana, folia
lauri in vino, decoctumque exhibeatur. Vel,. Sem. Vrticae, Nausturtij, Dauci.
Ana j. ss. Piperis nigri, Castorei, An. j. F. Pulvis. Cujus j. Cum vino
generoso exhibeatur. Aeger quoque in balneo saepius sudet. Membrum stupidum
fricetur pannis Asperis, and fomentetur vino, in quo Salvia, Calamintha, Ruta,
Chamaemelum, Hypericum cocta sint. Ex eiisdem etiam balneum parari potest.
Postea illinatur locus affectus oleo rutaseo, Costino, quibus aliquid spiritus
baccar. juniperi admixtum sit.

SECTION II. Of the Sea-Deagon an^ its Aatidotes.
DRaco Marinus, the Sea Dragon is likewise a ^ish that may be eaten, astording,
As, Sennertus written, no unlaudable nourishment; yet, as most, nay all Authors
agree that have adventured to mention, or have spoken of this Creature, It has
certain pricks, especially in the gills under the throat (and back as some of
them contend) that are poisonous, causing most insufferable pain in the part
assected, inflaming, and swelling of it, And, if not timely prevented, causes
it to Gangreene; Moreover it puts the party into a leaver, brings swounding
sits, and Death it self, if proper means be not forthwith applied; As
Lieutenant Monsieur Barg^l^rmes wife did, mentioned by Paraeus; wherefore, as
the same Author notes Lib. 21. De V^n^nis Cap 31. recited also, from him, by
Schenkius ^^i. 7. De Venenis, fol. 955. The ^ishmongers at Roan in France use
not to lay them upon stalls till they have cut off their heads: neither, in
that Nation, if any come to the Hands of a Cook with their Heads on, do they
serve them up to Table till they are beheaded: The better to prevent those
horrid symptoms before related that usually follow upon a prick from their
gills.

In Curatione, ut venenum immissum, eplaga eliciatur, membrum laesum Aquae
Calidae immergendum, scarificandum, eique cucurbitulae, vel Hirudines
applicandae. Hunc piscem dissectum, suoque vulneri impositum remedio esse
scribit Dioscorides; Idem praestat Mulli Caro ut annotat. Rondeletius, De
piscibus, Lib. 10. Cap. 11. Utile est et Cataplasma ex Caepe sub Cineribus
cocta, fermento, vel Serpillo trito, and pauca Theriaca paratum. Vel Aqua Vitae
in Aqua Theriaca dissoluta sit, linteis duplicatis imponenda. Fursures tritici
cum Aqua Calida in massam redacti, et loco laeso saepius de die impositi,
Dolores in hoc Casis mire mitigant. Ut Docet Sennertus. Idem affirmat Paraeus
ubi scribit his verbis; Non ita pridem uxor Fromagetij, Curiae libellorum
supplicum scribae, hujus piscis A^ul^oicta est in digito medio; istum subsecuti
sunt partis tumor et rubor, sine non magno dolor. Cum videret tumorem in horas
augeri, vicinae suae ^voris Praegelonij rerum privatarum juridici comitialis,
quae ex simili casu neglecto paulo ante interierat, periculis facta cautior, me
accersit, ego intellecta morbi Causa digito dolenti totique pariter manui
Cataplasma imposui ex crassiore caepa sub prunis Cocta, Fermento, et pauca
Theriaca. Postero die jussi ut manum totam demergeret in Aquam Calentem, ad
venenum for is eliciendum, mox multiplici scarificatis, sed superficiario,
eutem in ambitu divisi, divisionibus hirudines apposui, suctu detracto
sufficienter sanguine, Theriacam in Aqua Vitae dissolutam admovi. Sequenti die
detumu^rat manus dolor plane expers, paucisque post di^bus plane convaluit.
Dum Haec circa partem affecta peraguntur; Statim etiam Alexipharmaca
propinanda. Dioscorides, Lib. 6. Cap. 45. (ut contendit Sennertus) Absynthium,
Salviam, and sulphur cum Accto mistum exhibet. Prodest etiam Theriaca ad
Mithridatium cum Absinthii Aqua aut decocto exhibitum. Pastillos ex Bryonia et
eruo, cum vino potos Aetius, Tetrab 4. Sermon. 1. Cap. 39. a Dracone Marino ictis
mire Conducere scribit.

SECTION III. Of the Sea-Ray, or Pastinaca and its Antidotes
PAstinaca Marina, the Sea Sting-Ray, A Fish, that as Galen in Lib. 9. De
Alimentis, Lib. 8. De simplicium Medicamentorum facultatibus, And other places
of his works, notes; is fit for food and may be eaten: yet their heads and
tails are poisonous, at least the sting in their tail, and their gills or
sp^ikles about their head; Of the Sea-Ray, or Pastinaca, and its Antidotes.
for gills (to term properly) they have not, being shaped flat like a flownder;
Some of them have two stings, if we may believe the testimony of many Writers:
However, I shall not insist upon that, one is enough to prove extremely
destructive and pernicious, killing not only Men, but other living Creatures;
Paraeus tells us of from Aetius, and others they kill fish with their sting,
and so prey upon them: And Vidius Vidus, Med. Pract. 2. Sect. Libr. secundo
Cap. 8. Tells us of a Woman that unadvisedly washing this fish, and pricking
her hand with its sting, did in a short time dye therewith: Nay it will kill
even the largest and biggest, as also the most flourishing Trees, if they be
but touched therewith or pricked, causing the leaves to fall off, and the body
it self to waste by degrees, as Aelianus, De Animal. Lib. 8. Cap. 16. observes.
And Oppianus writes, that the sting of this fish is more venomous then the
Persians Arrows: affirming, moreover, that the force of the poison remains
after they are dead: whence it is that such as catch them bereave them
immediately of their sting. Yet Pliny, Not. Hist. Li. 7 Ca. 48. Confidently
assures us, that it is good against the pains of the teeth, by scarifying the
gumms therewith; nay, and, that the powder thereof alone, or mixed with white
Hellebor, being laid upon any tooth will cause it to come forth. But I will
not here make Digression, wherefore to our business. Such as are thereby stung,
or prick^, Have, as Aetius, and others from him conclude* intolerable pains
in the part affected, and numness over the whole Body; The member is much
extended and swelled; very black about the wound, issuing forth, if it be
crushed, purrulent, black, thick, and saetid matter; especially if there be any
Nerve touched, there followe^ frequent Convulsions of the whole Body,
weariness, stupor, and Death it self.

In Curatione, nota, quod omma quae Viperarum morsibus medentur, etiam
Pastinacae Marinae vulneribus adhiberi possunt. In specie tamen Aetius, Tetrab
4. Sermon. 1. Cap. 37. furfures Aceto Coctos, and pro Cataplasmate impositos, ut
and Acetum affusum pro foru valde prodesse scribit. Item vulneri, vel Hepar
Pastinacae, vel Radij Cinis cum Aceto, vel ipsa Pastinaca divulsa imponatur.
Rondelentius and sic curavit Rusti^um, de quo mentionem facit ex eo Gesnerus
Lib. 4. De Historia Animalium, Page 801. ut annotat Schenkius Lib. 7. De
Venenis, fol. 954. Item narrat Sennertus, Pract. Med. Lib. 6. Part. 8. Cap. 41.
Applicentur alii, Cataplasmata attrahentia, quae parantur ex Sulphur vivo,
Radic. Bryoniae, Marubio, Foliis lauri, Salvia, and similibus, cum urina veteri
subsubactis. Vel imponatur fermentum acidum cum pice liquida emollitum, vel e
nitro sinapi, Sale Ammoniaco ex sulphur, ac Acet^ forti, Fiat Linimentum,
Plagae inungendum. Plinius, Contra Pastinacam Marinam, and omnium Marinorum
ictus vel morsus, Libro 28. Cap. 11. Not. Hist. Coagulum Leporis, vel Haedi,
vel Agni, j. pondere prodesse tradit. Item in Libro 32 Cap 5. Contra eundem
etiam prodesse Mullum in Cibo sumptum, scribit. Vtilia etiam sunt Scordium,
Rosmarinus, Salvia in vino cocta, vel e Myrrhae, Piperis, Costi Amari, Rad.
Bryoniae, Partibus aequalibus, siat Pulvis, Cujus j. ex vino exhibeatur. Vel
propinentur ij. Theriacae Andromachi cum vino. Vel (ut Docet Sennertus) Costi
Amari, Myrrhae, Rad Gentianae, Aristoloch. Long. Zedoariae, An. j. Sem.
Pastinacae sylvestris, Anisi, Ammios, An. ij. Granor. Mastiches, Spicae,
Piperis, Rutae, Croci, An. ss. Cum Melle despumato, F^at ^lectuarium. Et nota
quod simul cum externa applicentur, Alexipharmaca exhibere oporter.

SECTION IV. Of the Sea-Dogg and its Antidotes.
CAnis Marinus, the Sea-Dogg, a Creature carrying a Gall, no less dangerous and
destructive then any other part of those Creatures before mentioned. For, it is
so deadly a poison, that even one grain weight, is of weight enough sufficient
(being taken into the Body), to deprive a Man of his Life within seven days
time, if not opportunely prevented; As Sennertus Contends out of Ardoynus, Lib.
4. De Venenis, Cap. 17. and others confirm it: Concluding, that, in the
Interim, it causes, likewise, these horrid symptoms following. As, a most
grievous stinking mouth and breath, an universal Ictericious Color,
oryellowness over all the Body; And a kind of gonorrhaea, or unvoluntary
effusion of the sperm, etc.

In Curatione Laudantur Gentianae Rad. sive in substantia ij. pondere cum
Butyro suma^tur, sive decoctum exea paretur, and Butyrum in eo dissolvatur, and
singulis diebus bis iiij sumantur. Corpus inungatur Oleis vel Balsamis
Aromaticis suaveolentibus.

SECTION V. Of the Sea-Hare and its Antidotes.
LEpus Marinus, the Sea-Hare, an ugly deformed and poisonous Creature; as most
Authors contend. Nicander, Dioscorides, Galen, Paulus Aeginetus, Aetius, with
the rest of the Ancients; And, from them, Rondeletius, Sennertus, Paraeus, and
other Neotericks, all unanimously agree it not only to poison and destroy
people that eat it, but likewise such as do but look upon it, are strangely
affected. Instancing in Women that are with Child, who fall immediately into
vomitings, and go near to miscarry, if they do but look upon one steadfastly.
Such as have eaten or drank this poison, as Dioscorides notes, are extremely
tormented in their Bellies, their urine is stopped for the most part, and if any
be evacuated, it is bloody, Their sweat is offensive, stinking, and smells of
fish; They vomit many times Choler, and that mixed with blood. Aetius adds
their Bodies are generally yellow and as if they were ictericall, and then
turns of a Leadenish Color; their faces swell; and their feet, but especially
their genitalls, and has a peculiar property, as Galen Lib. 1. De Compositione
Medicamentorum secundum genera, in initio, observes, to exulcerate the Lungs
especially, and at length brings Death it self.

In Curatione, primo danda opera, ut venenum Corpori communicatum for as
eliciatur, iis modis, qui hactenus saepius sunt proposit^. Ut quamprimum sit
assumptus vel Vomitis, si adhue in ventriculo ressitet, reijciendus, vel si ad
intestina descenderit, vel injecto Clystere, velpurgante medicamento ore
assumpto, citiam paulo fortiore educendus. In quem usum co^mendantur pillulae e
Scammonij, Elebori nigri, Agarici, sueci Glycyrrhizae and Tragacanthae
aqualibus partibus paratae, and j. poudere exhibitae. Antidot. Loco exhibeatur
Lac Asininum, vinum cum melle paratum, vel decodum e malua. Laudantur and
sangis. Anserum et Galli, Resinum Cedri oboli pondere cum vino sumptum Leporis
Marini Alexipharmacum esse tradunt; Alij, hujus veneni Bez^articum, Triglam
esse aiunt. Vtilia sunt and mala Punica; decoctum item e virga pastoris,
Plantagine, et Calamintha montana paratum, etc

SECTION VI. Of the Sea-Scorpion and its Antidotes.
SCorpio Marinus, the Sea-Scorpion, so called, not that it is of the same form
and shape with the Land-Scorpion; But because it stings and conveyes the poison
as the Land-Scorpion does, though not out of the same part, for the Scorpion
offends by its sting in its tail, but the Sea-Scorpion by its prickles about
its Head and back, the Head especially, so that it can hardly be touched without
much danger; wherefore Men are usually forc'r, that take them, to lay hold of
their tail, or the lower part of their back.

Such as are wounded by any of these pricks, do usually sustain insufferable
pain in the member hurt, which afterward dilates it self; As Alsaharavius
records of himself, Tractat. 30. Pract. Sect. 2. Cap. 21. that unadvisedly
offering to touch the Head of this Creature, received immediately a wound in
his little finger, which did not only swell and inrage, but his whole hand, up
to his elbow, then dilating it self up to his shoulder, etc. The same story is
likewise recorded by Schenckius, Lib. 7. De Venents, fol. 955. And Sennertus
Pract. Med. Lib. 6. Part. 8. Cap. 42. Whence, sometimes, ensues Death it self;
sometimes they lose the member or part affected; sometimes, there is grievous
Convulsions occasioned, and weariness over the whole Body, especially if a
Nerve be hurt.

Quod ad Curationem attinet in genere, nota, Quae in aliorum venenatorum
animalium morsibus and ictibus curatio adhiberi solet, ea and hic locum habet
in specie. Rondeletius, Lib. 6. Cap. 19. De Piscibus, refert se puerum ab hoc
pisce misere ictum, dum eum in sinu recondere vellet, curasse Mullo dissecto et
imposito, cum ejusdem Scorpionis Nullum enim venenatum fere est animal, quod
veneni sui Antipharmacum in se non contineat: duplex autem Antipharmaci genus
est, Antipathia and similitudo substantiae, ut Hepar venenatorum Animalium
vulneri impositum similitudine substantiae venenum retrabit maximeque confert
ea part, qua fell continetur: Carnes vero impositae idem praestant per
Antipathiam, ut Viperarum caro morsui Viperarum medetur. Terrenus Scorpius
totus ictibus suis remedium est. Sie Mullus, Marini Draconis, Aranei ac
Scorpionis morsibus medetur, si crudus dissectus admovetur, Autore DIOSCORIDE,
Lib. 2. Cap. 25.
Hepate, adhibito ad vulneris Ambitum lentisco contuso.

Galenus Lib. 9. De simpl. medic. facult. Piscarores docuit, ut sulphur ad
venenatorum Piscium morsus uterentur; seu sicco vulneri insperso, seu cum
salvia misto, seu cum urina Macerato, seu cum Oleo veteri et Melle et resina,
Terebinthina subacto. Dioscorides Percussis a Marino-Scorpione, Absynthiy,
Salviae, aut sulphuris ex Aceto triti potionem subvenire scribit.

SECTION VII. Of the Lampron and its Antidotes.
MVrena the Lampron, a sea fish much like the Lamprey, but thicker, bigger, and
larger every way; Had in great esteem in former times, and now yet to this day
fancied, by some, as a choice food, yet their teeth are poisonous, long, sharp,
and bending inwards, causing the wound to be very dangerous, making not only an
effusion of blood, but grievous and intolerable pains to follow; The member
to swell and exulcerate; whence arises most symptoms before recited of the
Viper; And Death it self. But, that you may know this Creature perfectly, the
better to avoid it, Authors describe it to be about two Cubits long, of a
duskish color and whitish spots, etc. Nicander reports of this Creature, that
it will leave the Sea often, and at the times of Procreation seek out the Den
of the Viper, and engender therewith. The Care is the same with that of the
Viper.

DIVISION V. Of Poisons BELONGING TO CREEPING THINGS.
SECTION I. Of Scolopendra and its Antidotes.
FIfthly and Lastly, there are several Poisons among Creeping Things; As, 1.
Scolopendra, a kind of worm, which creepes both backward and forward, offending
with its bite no less then any of the former Creatures, causing grievous pains
over all the Body; The flesh about the part affected becomes black and blew,
and putrefies, Some times, likewise, it is red and fiery; Hard to be Cured, and
unless timely prevented brings Death it self, and many other effects which you
have before heard in other venomous beasts.

In Curatione omnia quae Viperarum morsibus medentur, etiam Scolopendrae
vulneribus exhiberi possunt. In specie tamen Antidota quod attinet, Dioscorides
Lib. 6. Cap. 43. a Scolopendra demorsis cum vino exhibet Aristolochiam, aut
Serpillum, aut Calamintham, aut Rutam sylvestram; quibus Aetius, Tetrabil. 4.
Sermon. 1. Cap. 15. Absynthium and Mentham adjungit. Vinum quoque in quo
Asphedeli flores, and semen, aut Mentastri solia Cocta sunt, utile est.

SECTION II. Of Horse-Leeches, and their Antidotes.
HIrudo, an Horse-Leech, a Creature although oftentimes used by Physicians,
kept in fair water and cleansed from their impurity and malignant quality; yet,
being taken from muddy, filthy waters, they are oftentimes poisonous; proving
very dangerous to Phlebotomize by them: Likewise if they fasten their teeth in
the flesh, or leave their heads in the wounds by plucking them off too
violently, or other ways, they exulcerate the part or member unto which they
were fastened: And oftentimes causes Death it self, as Pliny instanceth in
Messalinus, that so perished, by laying the^ to his Knee, Schenkius Lib. 7. De
Venenis, Fol. 962 Sennertus, Lib. 6. Part. 8. Cap. 20. And others, from him,
records the same. Likewise most Authors, especially our Neotericks,
acknowledge as much. And moreover, that many times by drinking of impure muddy
water where they are found, have become grievously affected, by their fastening
on either Throats, or Mouths of their Ventricles or Oesophagus. But Sennertus
and some others (from the aforesaid Schenkius, who, from Wolphius, taking it
from Gesner, and Scholdzins, etc.) have affirmed (adding to the rest) that
Leeches being venomous, or else if not rightly applied, do not only cause
Ulcers, but also Gangreens; Two examples of the like accidents, the before
quoted Authors give us, who, by being bitten by Leeches whilst they were
swiming, had their flesh gangreened, whereby their Bodies became repleat of
gross and praved humors, their flesh corrupted, and by peice-meale fell off,
etc.

In Curatione; St vulnus ab Hirudine inflictum non been cadat, Imponantur folia
lauri, vel centaurin contusam cum vino mixtum; Vel ex Allio, Ruta, Galbano,
Maj^rana, Castoreo and Oleo veteri, Fiat Cataplasma; quod plagae imponatur.
Imprimis utilis est Agrimonia contrita and Cataplasmatis modo imposita, vel
illinatur plaga Testudinis marinae sanguine, Oleo Cestino, de Pyrethro. Si
Faucibus adhaereat Hirudo, saepe gargarismatibus e Sinapi, Allio, Aceto,
alisque acribus and Acidis, adjecto Sale paratis, utendum. Ventriculo si infixa
sit, aeger Muriam tepidam vel Acetum bibat; quibus aliquid Aloes admiscendum,
ut eo citius refrigatur, vomituque qui cum Oxymelite simplici, vel scilitico,
Decocto Anethi provocari potest, excludatur. Si Sanguis reijciatur,
Astringentibus, sanguinemque sistentibus utendum; qualia sunt Conserva Rosarum
Rubrarum Antiqua, Radic. Tormentillae, Bolus Armenus, Terra Sigillata,
Trochisci de Berberis, De Spodio, Syrupi Cydoniorum, De Rosis siccis, De
Agresta, Myrtillorum, Granatorum, Aqua Plantaginis, Portulacae, Bursae
Pastoris, and alia. Rejecta per vomitum Hirudine, ejus malignitati resistentia
exhibenda; ubi Commendatur Absinthium Nasturtium, Salvia, Gentiana,
Pinipinella, Baccae Lauri, Scilla, Radic Cappar. Myrrhae Galbanum, e quibus
tale potest fieri Electuarium, ut docet Sennertus.. Aristolochiae Longae,
Gentianae, Baccar. Lauri, Cortic. Radic. Capparum, Myrrhae, Ana ij. Sem. Rutae,
Piperis nigri, Castorei, Ana j. Cum Melle dispumato. Fiat Electuariu^, Cujus
Dossis a j. ad ij. Cum vini generosi iiij.

SECTION III. Of the Toad and its Antidotes, with Frogs, etc.
RVbeta, a Toad, a Creature extremely poisonous, and no less pernicious then
any of the former Creeping Creatures; offending by the emission of their venom
by urine, spettle, and breath, as also by the bite, although they have not
teeth, yet such is the hardness of their gumms, and roughness, and so violently
do they pinch, that thereby they make such an impression that the venomous
puality of their poison is conveied not only into the part affected, but
likewise through all and every part of the Body, by the pores; causing most
horrid symptoms. As, the Vertigo, loss of sight, Synchope, and mi^t by fits
with Convulsions, for the most part they stammer, their Lips and Tongue become
black, their Countenance furious, horrid and gashly, subject to vomitings,
universal swelling, and environed with a cold sweat, and at length Death it
self possesses them. As appears by those recorded by Ambrosius Paraeus, Lib.
21. De Venenis, Cap. 24. who drank Wine in which they had infused a little
sage, that they gathered in the Garden from a stock, under which at the root
lay several Toads; by the urine, and spettle of which it was infected.
Mizaldus likewise, Memorabil. Centur. 1. Aph. 1. Et in Hort. Med. Camp. 3. Area
a Joanne Bocatio records, that one walking in a Garden, plucking a little Sage,
therewith rubbed his Gumms and Teeth, and so sell down suddenly dead; which
proves that these kind of Creatures do and can infect Herbs and Fruits by
their breath, spettle and urine, as was showed before. But over and above the
former symptoms many of the Learned, write, such as are affected, or poisoned
any manner of way by this Creature, are molested with a ^eaverish distemper,
the external parts become inflamed, the sperm to shed of its own accord, the
Hair, and sometimes the Teeth fall out; the Mouth and breath stinks, the breath
is short, and drawn with great difficulty.

In Curatione nota quod Rubetae venenum si ore sumptum sit, ut vomitu
quamprimum reijciatur, Curandum. Hinc, ut alias etiam, quocunque modo in Corpus
admissum sit, Theriaca vel Mithridatium Tribus Diebus Continuis, Cum decocto
rutae vel vino exhibendum: vinum meracum Copiose propinandum; motus vehemens
aegro imperandus, sudor Copiosus aliquoties in Balneo provocandus, aegerque
Aqua Calida abluendus. Qui cum e balneo egreditur, de speciebus diacurcumae,
Dialaccae, Diarhod. Abbat. Trochisc. De Erupator. De Rhaburbar. aliquid sumat,
vel ex his cum Conserv. Capil. Veneris, Diacoro, et syrup. Byzantino. Fiat
Electuarium, de quo quoudie bis, hora una ante Cibum ij. vel iij. exhibeantur;
vel testudinis marinae sanguis, Cum Leporis Coagulo cum Cumino ex vino
praebeatur. Cutis sputo vel urina Rubetae inquinata mox Lavetur urina humana,
vel aqua et sale; Posteaque Ol. Vit^l. Ovor. Vel Rosaceo illinatur.

Frogs likewise are often times pernicious, by their quality and cold juice
which they yield to such as eat them, dilating it self into all the Body,
put^efying and corrupting the good humors, Of Froggs and their Antidotes.
perverting and destroying the healthiest constitution, and intoxicating such
as eat them, if we may believe Andreas Baccius, in Prolegomenis venenorum et
Antidotorum page 38. and 39. It likewise has been known to extinguish, and
suffocate natural heat; Nay Paraeus, Lib. 21 De Venenis, Cap. 24. Affirms that
Frogs in the month of May are rank poison; Wherefore not fit to be eaten at
that time of the year above all others; And his reason is, because they then
engender with Toads.

The Cure is the same as you have heard but now of them.

SECTION IV. Of the Araneus and other sort of Spiders, and their Antidotes,
Tarantula, etc.
ARaneus, a Spider so called; whether all Spiders are poisonous, I shall not
here dispute; that some are, all Physicians and the Learned affirm. Especially,
1. That sort of Spider which is called Rhagium being in shape round in color
black, whose bite is as painful as the sting of a Scorpion; Its Mouth is under
the midst of its belly. 2. That which is called Mymecion, in color likewise
black, but in form somewhat resembling an Ewnet, especially about the head, but
somewhat a larger Creature, and having whitish streakes, or spots toward the
back. 3. That which is termed Lupus or the Woolt Spider. 4. That sort which is
denominated Vesparium, because setting aside the wings, it much resembles a
Waspe, but is of a reddish color. 5. That which is known by the appellation of
Tarantula, so called as Mathiolus notes Comment ad Lib. 2. Cap. 57. Dioscorid.
from the City Tarantus in Apulcia, about which, in Summer time, there used to
be multitudes; Others think it has ^s name from its effects, because such are
stung or bitten thereby, do perpetually sing or delight in Music, or racher,
are cured by Music, or yet rather, by dancing and leaping about, occasioned by
the Music, So evapourating the virulency of the venom by sweat. These sive
forts of Spiders, among othors, are by all. Authors accounted poisonous, more
especially. To insist upon every one distinctly, and apart, would be too
teadious, at this time, or to particularise all that Authors have recorded of
them; Wherefore, in brief, know, that such as are either bitten by any of the
four former, or have accidentally swallowed any of them, are usually molested
with these following symptoms. The part affected will be seized on with a
stupor, with horror and cold, the belly is filled with wind and swells, the
face grows pale, the eyes drop tears involuntarily, the extreme and remote
parts of the Body tremble, and are, in a manner, convulst, a continual
inclination and desire to evacuate by urine follows them* the privy part is
extended and pained, if the party be young; relaxed, if old; a cold sweat
universally possesses them, and, sometimes, they void by urine some what like
unto a Spider.

In Cura^ione, nota, Si morsu Araneus nocuerit; saepius spongia Calido Accto,
aut Aqua Salsa abluendus. vel Decocto Maluae, Origani, Serpilli, aliorum supra
commemoratorum madida fovendus. Inprimis laudat Monardus, lib. simpl. novi or
bis, cap. 62. Lac e foliis ficus manans instillatum utile etam ad ictum Araneae
percanae Cataplasmata quoque ictui imponenda patari possunt e foliis Lauri,
Ruta, Porro, Farina Hordeac^a, cum Aceto C^ct^s. Prodest etiam Allium et Caepas
Contusas. Stercus item Caprinum cum vino, ut and ficus pingues imponere.
Simulquisurpentur Theriaca et Methridatium, item Alaexipharmaca supra
proposita, aegerque in Balneo saepius sudet. Allium etiam fraequentius comedat;
vinumque liberalius bibat. Si vero Aranaeus intra Corpus sumptus fuerit, Cura a
vomitorio Auspicanda. Ut,. Radic. Esulae, Asari, Ana. ij. Flor. Anethi
Genistae, An. Pug. j. Coq in Aqua pura, Col. v. Add Mellis j. Fiat vomitorium.
Post voinitum offerenda Alexipharmica, quibus sumptis aeger vel in lecto sese
ad indorem componat, vel, puod melius, baseing rediatur and Copiose sudet.
Utilis est hic Theracae ij. pondere, Cum Aqua Cardini bene^i^^i, Scordii, aut
vino al^o sumpta. Contra Aran^i veuenum laudatur medicamentum sequens.. ^ol.
Scordii, Menthae, Rutae, Cupressi, An. M. j. Sem. Errsae, Anisi. 4. Calidor
minor An. j. Coq. in s q. vini, Colaturae quotidie bis, mane and vesper^, iiij.
propinentur, donec corporis tumor evanescat. Vel. Asae faetidae, iij. Myrrhae,
Allij, Piperis, Castor^i, An. ss. F. Pulvis pro 4. Dossibus, qui exhibeatur cum
vino. Antequam aeger balneum, quod quotidie fere, cum magna in hoc Casu ejus
vis sit, repetendum ingrediatur.

Touching the Tarantula and the symptoms following upon its bite, should I
enumerate what is recorded by the Learned, it would seem incredulous, and
altogether fabulous. Wherefore, in short, not to insist on every Circumstance,
such as are bitten by Of the Tarantula this kind of vermin, are and its
Antidotes. affected with intolerable pain in the part offended, causing it to
swell and putrefie, the Body is universally seized with cold, and wind,
especially the belly: Virgae in quibusdam erectio et priapismus, an universal
nu^ness over all the parts, trembling, and a Convulsion and resolution of the
members, so that even the youngest and strongest Bodies, are, thereby, soon
dejected; a general pain possesses the Arteries, Depravation of the voice,
overwatchings, Vertigo, Dilirium, redness of the eyes, and an universal cold
sweat captivateth the^, etc. which are more, or less, according to the nature
and temper of the party; For, as Wine makes some laugh, some cry, some
melancholy, some madd, etc. that are thereby intoxicated; so does the bite and
venom of this Creature cause some to sing, others to laugh, a third sort to
weep, a fourth to rejoice, a fifth to sleep, a 6. to awake, a seventh to vomit
all they take in, an eighth to dance, an ninth to sweat, a tenth to tremble, an
eleventh to be passionate; Others, other ways; as, to be phrantick, swound, to
rave and the like: and which is more, if they hear any Music they immediately
fall a dancing, although, before, they lay as if they were dead, and if the
Music chance to cease, they immediately fall down in the like stupidity they
were before; as the aforequoted Mathiolus in Loco Citato Contends. For further
information in this matter. Consult Nicander, Paulus Aeginetius, Aetius,
Cornelius Celsus, Aviceunas, Rhases, Epiphanius Ferdinandus, and others.
Praeterea, a Tarantula morsi quidam circa sepulchra versantur, et in feretris
mortuorum cubant, virgins obscaenas parts ostendunt, evellunt sibi crines:
Alij pensiles in cunis moveri, Alij terra obrui cupiunt; Nonnulli etam alios
morsu impetunt: magna quoque appetentia laborant, praecipue dum salant, variis
coloribus delectantur, and si quem colorem aversantur, eum, qui vest ^o color
infecta indutus est, insectantur; Aquam abhorrent, Vinum bibunt, and merum
^tiam potum ^os non inebriat, and alia admiranda patiuntur. All which is to be
referred to occult qualities and causes both in relation to the place, viz.
Apulcia (although some to show their wit, will affirm it to be chiefly more
incident to that place then any other, because of the heat, when other places
that are hotter are free) as also to the nature of the poison to work so many
strange, and various effects in people, when other poisons work the like
effects in all parties; and to conclude, that Music should be the instrument
of so remarkable a Cure, etc.

In Curatione danda opera, ne venenum in Corpus penetret, sed^statim o Corpore
extrahatur; deinde ut per interna medicamenta (...) Corpore expellatur. Ad
praeservandum (ut and ad curandum) commendatur Anchusa comesta, and decoctum
ejus potum, Artemisia, Allium, Bolus Armenus, Theriaca, and Antiphalangium,
quod postea proponetur in Curatione. Deinde si quis a Phalangis morsus sit,
curandum, ne venenum ad interiora penetret, sed sta^im ad exteriora revocetur,
and e Corpore extrahatur, eo modo ut antea saepius dictum. Deinde ut venenum a
partibus interioribus repellatur; Ut. Flor. Rutae sicc. Costi, Mentastri,
Pyrethri, Ana Part. aequales, Asae faetidae. Par tem quartam ad pondus omnium,
Mellis, q. sufficient. Fiat Electuarium. Dosis j. Epiphanius Ferdinandus, qui
dillige^s fuit in observandis ijs, quae circa demorsos a Tarantulis evenerunt,
quinque remedia experientia comprobata commendat. Primum est Aqua Vitae, seu
spir. vini. Cum enim omnes Autores ad Curandos Tarantatos vinum commendent:
multo magis spirit. vini utilis erit, qui felicissime ab j. ad iij. pro ratione
aetatis exhibetur. Secundum est, Quinta essentia Rorismarini, quae ipsa etiam
contra ictus Tarantulae prodest. Tertius, Aqua vitalis ejusdem, quae ita
paratur;. Flor. Citranguli, boni quantitat. fol. tenerorum quereus, Cardui
benedict. Scabiosae, Acetosell. Souchi, Salviae, Majoranae, Flor. Lavenduiae,
Absinthij, Rorismarini, Tussilaginis, Rosar. Rubor. Scorzonerae, Melissae,
Pimpinellae, Boraginis, Fol. Arbuti, Lenticularis, Rutae, Ana M.iiij. Cyperi
nostrat. Radic. Angelicae, Baccar. Lauri, Juniperi, Cortic. Citri,
Tormentillae, Zedoariae, An. j. Cinamom. Caryoph. Ana ss. Distillentur in
Balneo, Quartum est. Electuarium Antiphalangium, quod omnia fere simplicia
contra Tarantulae, morsu^ Co^mendata coplectitur: ut. Fruct. Myrti. Tamarisci,
Ana j. Sem. Pastinacae, Nigell. Agni Casti, Danci, Anisi. Cymius, Origani, Ana
j. Terrae Sigillatae, Beli Armeni orient. praeparat. Ana ij. Centaur. n^inor.
Aristolech. rotund. Ana ss. Fol. Meliss. Trifolij, Bituninosi, Chamipisyos
abrot. Ana P. ss. Theriac. opt. Mithridat. Ana j. ss. succ. Caepar. Allii,
Plantaeginis, Atriplicis, Haederae depurator. Ana q. l. Cum Melle fiat e succis
syrupus, in quo fiat Electuarium, Addendo spir. vini, q. s. Dossis j. ss. ad
iij. Cum vino. In praeservatione j. Verum nullum certius remedii genus est,
quam Musica; ut enim side digni Autores. Sed Pena and Lobelius in Adversariis
stirpium, Page 320. Valde Laudant medicamentum sequens.. muscaru^ quae pastum
ceperint de Napello xx. Aristolochiae, Boli Armeni, Ana j. Item praestat contra
omnes Epidemicos morbos. Dosis i.

SECTION V. Of Pini Erucae and its Antidotes.
AND Lastly, Pini Erucae, a kind of worm so called which the Learned have
esteemed as very noxious and venomous, offending three manner of ways, 1. By
its bite. 2. By its touch upon any naked part, causing the part bitten or
roughly touched, to swell, ach, grow red and fiery, as also to putrefie. 3. By
being accidentally swallowed or taken into the Body, and then the palate of the
Mouth, Tongue, and all other parts of the Mouth, Likewise the Stomach,
Intestines, etc. Are affected with intolerable pains, inflammation, and
extraordinary heat over all the Body, etc.

Parti Erucae morsu aut attritu laesae remedio sunt Caepae, Aceto tritae, Ruta
item cum Melle et Sale trita, vel cum Aceto et Pice Cocta et Imposita. Intra
Corpus assumptae Erucae, quamprimum vomitu reijcienda sunt, and si jam ad
intestina descenderin^, Clysteribus eluendae. Et ut veneni bujus acrimonia
retundatur, Propinandum Lac Caprinum, vel emulsio e sem. 4. frigid. major,
Amygdall. Dulc. Sem. Papav. Albi, cum Aqua Hordei parata. Aeger comeda^ Oryzam
cum Lacte Caprino Cectam; Cremorem Ptisanae, Amygdal. dulces, Juseula pinguta,
Antidotus Erucarum Pini, est Terra Lemnia, et Corallia rubra praeparata, Cum
Mucilag. Sem. Cydoniorum, exhibitae, etc.

And thus have I, as brief as may be, given you the Names, Natures, Symptoms,
Prognostics, and Antidotes, of all poisons belonging to Mineralls, Vegetables,
and Animalls. Qui Monet, Amat, Ave, and Cave.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Index of the most Material matters contained in this small
Treatise.
Wherein you are to take notice, that Refers to the Epistle Dedicatory; To that
directed to the Judicious Readers. To the Imprudent and Rural Readers. And
what is without these signatures, to the Book it self.
A.
A Conitum Its symptoms and Antidotes, 65 Aerugo Its symptoms, 43 Antidotes, 44
Aes its symptoms, 43. Antidotes 44. Amphysbaena its symptoms, 198. Antid^tes
185 Antidotes of Aqua-sortis, Regis and ^rysulea, 2^, 23 Of Antimony, 2^. Of
Arsnick, 6, 27, 8 Of Argent-Vive, 31, 32, 33, 34. Of Praecipitate M^reury,
Ibid. Of Mercurius Sublimate, Ibid. Duleis, Ibid. Virae, Ibid. Of Lead, 48. Of
Ceruse, Ibid. Of Litharge, Ibid Of Lapis Lazulus, 50. Of the Diam and, Ibid, Of
the Loadstone, 51 Of the seed of Pasma Christ^ of America, ^5. De sem. Recinae,
Ibid Of Hen^an seed, 59 60. Of Darnill, Ibid. Of Fennel-seed. 61. De G^ano
Nubiae, Ibid Of Linseed, Ibid Of Ixia, or the Camelion-Thistle-Root. 64. Of
White Hellebour, 65. Of Aconitum, 66. Of the Mandrake-Ro^re, 61. Of Woolf Baue,
70. Of Hemlock, 7^. Of the Herb-Hen-Bane, 59, 60. Of the Herb-Mandrake, 67. Of
the Herb-Round-Leaved-Marsh-Crow-Foot, 74. Of Spurge. 76. Of Ophiusa, Ib^d Of
Flos Coschii, 78. Of Flos Affricanus, 72. Of Crocus, 59, 60. Of the Walluth
Tree, 83 Of the Juniper Tree, ibid. Of the ^ama^^d Tree, ibid. Of the Tree
Baxima, ibid. Of the Yew Tree, ibid. Of the Box Tree, ibid. Of the Mandrake
Apple, 6^. Of Nux Vomic^, 88. Of Truna Insania, 67. Nux Metella, 89. Of the
Coloq^^m^ida Apple, 65.62. Of the Fruit and berrys of ^^^g^^-shade, 93. Of
Mangas, ^0. of Opium, 96. Of ^^uphorbium, 97. Of Scammony, ibid. Of the Indian
(...), ^0 Of Toxicum, (...). Of Poisoned Honey, 66 Of Mushromes, 106.106. Of the
Bite of a Mad-dog, 129, 1^0 etc. Of Cats Brains, 141, 142. Of Woolfs Poison,
129, 130, etc. Mus Aranaeus, 150, 151. Of B^ll^ bl^^^, 154, 155. Of Cows Milk,
156. Of Canthandes, 1^^, 1^2. Of the Fly Buprestis, ibid. Of the Ring of Bees,
16^, 165. Of Watps, ibid. Of the ^rag^^, ^29, 130. Of the Crocodile, ibid. Of
the Sc^^pion, 191, 152, 173. Of the Basilisk, 00. Of the Salamander, 180. Of
the Viper, 180 187, 88. Of the Dry^^s, 191. Of the Serpent Stellio, 186, 18^,
etc. Of the Asp, (...) and 195, 196. Of the Serpent Matrix, 186, etc. Of the
Hamorhous, 201. Of the Serpent Amphy^^^^, and Scytale, 166, etc. Of the Serpent
Sep^^, ibid. Of the Serpent Cerastes, ibid. and 204. Of the Serpent Dipsa^,
186. and 203 Of the Serpent Cenchtis, 80. etc Of the Li^^^^d, ibid. and 207. Of
the ^orpedo, 210. Of the Sea Dragon, 213. Of the (...) a Ray, (...) Pastinaca,
18^, etc. and 215, 216. Of the ^^^a ^^og, 219. Of the Sea Hare, ^19. Of the Sea
Scorpion, 83. and ^21. Of the Lampron, 86 etc. Of the Scolopend^a, 186, etc.
and 12^. Of the Horse ^ecch, 225, 226 Of Toads, 228 Of Froggs, ibid. Of the
Sp^^der A^anaeus and either Spiders, 231, 232 Of the Ta^an^la ^^^, 236, 251. Of
the Worm called Vina Fa^^^a, ^^8. Antimony and as Antidotes. Apoplexies may be
caused of Poison. 7.81. etc. Apothecaries not (...) to make Physicians, (...)
10 Aqua Forris, Regis Crys^les, and then anti^ot^^, 2.3 Argent-V^ve, its
several sorts and antidotes, ^9 If ^^nceived in fume, 38 By Inn^^ction, 34.
Assaick to deadly poys^ni^ taken it a small quantiity 9 nor, sometimes in a
great, 12. To served sort, and antidotes, 25.89 violent is ki^^s by outward
application 26 The Poison of an Asp kills inw^d^^^s 8. Its symptoms, 193, 9^
Antiletes, 80, etc and 1^^, 96 Astrology Requisite to be known by a Physician
16, 1^, 18, 19 Astronomy Requisite to be known a Physician, ^ 1^.13 By the
mediation of Aromes, many times poisons are ^^nv^^d to our Bodies. 18
An^^pagu^entum what, with its antid^tes. 29 Aurum potabile of the Chemists
justly censured. 23
B.
BAsilisk kills by the touch, 16.174, 17^. sound of his Hiss and sight, 17 174
How 18. why called the King of Serpents, 17^ Antidotes 00 The Tree Baxima, very
h^^tfull to such as stay under its shadow, 19.82. And how 19. Antidotes. 83.
Bees their symptoms, 164. Antidotes, ibid. Poisons affecting the ^ladder. 7
Blood of ^^ts poisonous, 142. Of Swine censured, 148. accounted, by some,
poisonous, 192. but ta'sery, 153 Books of Physic can not mak^ an ^^hatumus
capable of practicing Physic 1, 5, 4, ^ Box Tree its symptoms. 85. Antid^tes.
83 What poisons chiefly molest the Brain, 6. (...), of a Cat or other Creature,
if eaten, may prove noxious, 141 Brass its symptoms, 43. Anidotes 44 Bulls
blood not poisonous, 153. Its symptoms, 152, 153. Antidotes 154 Buprestis its
symptoms, 163. Antidotes 162 Burning-thorny-plant, its symptoms 97. Antidotes
9
C.
CAlx-Vive a deadly Poison, 39. Yet may be eaten in a great quant ty, ibid. Its
Antidotes 40 The Black Camaelion-Thistle-Root, a virulent poison, 63. Antidotes
ibid. Cantharides by a peculiar property affects the bladder. 7. Its symptoms
and poisonous quality 157, 158, 159. Does not always prove noxious by outward
application, 161. Antidotes, ibid. and 162. Catablepas what, kills by its very
sight, 17. And how 18 Casaver what, how made. 99 Cats brains in a peculiar
manner affects the brain. 6. Their breath may cause Hectic Fevers, 26. Their
presence not poisonous, 139, 140. Their brains are, 141. Its symptoms, ibid.
Antidotes, ibid. and 142. Blood poisonous, ibid. Its syptomes 143 Cenchris, its
symptoms, 206. Antidotes. 186, etc. Cerastes its symptoms, 20^. Antidotes,
186. etc. and 204 Ceruss its symptoms, 47. Antidotes 48 Chemistry requisite to
be known by a Physician, and how fa^r used * 20 Cicuta its symptoms, 71.
Antidotes 72 Artificial Cinaber what* 29. symptoms and Antidotes 38
Colocynthis of force to purge by the smell, 20. and how ibid. Its symptoms,
91. Antidotes 65 Consumptions of the Lungs may be caused by the breath of Catts
as some hold ^6 Convulsions may be caused of Poisons 7 Copper its symptoms,
43. Antidotes 44 Cordialls although they sometimes kill are not to be accounted
Poisons 6, 7 Cows-Milk its symptoms, 156. Antidotes ibid. Creeping Things
poisonous 223 Crocodile its symptoms, 167. Antidotes 129 Crocus its symptoms,
80. Antidotes 58, 59, 60 Crude-Mercury and its Antid^tes 29, 30 Cures by
Magicians, Witches, Conjurers and unlawful, Censured 15 16
D.
DAncing may be caused of Poison 7 Darnel its syptomes, 60. Antidotes 58, 59,
60 De^cription of the hum^^^r of most men * 2 Diamond its symptoms and
antidotes 50 Differences of Poisons, from Page 1. to 21. Dipsas its symptoms,
201. Ant^dotes 186, etc and 20^ Doctrines and Disciplines requisite for a
Physician, * 7, 8, 9, etc. Of the Sea Dog what part poisonous, 217. symptoms
ibid. Antidotes ibid. Dotage may be caused of Poyso^, 56. 86. etc. Of the
Dragon and its symptoms, 1^^ An id^^es, 12^, etc. Of the Sea Dragon and its
symptom^s, 211 Antidotes 212, 213 Dross of Iron its symptoms, 44. Antidotes 45
Dryinus its symptoms, 189, 190. Antidotes, 186, 191 Mercurius Dulcis how good,
or bad, 36, 37. antidotes ibid etc. Dullness may be caused of Poison ^^, 1^3
E.
ELixers of Chemists censured * 23 Empe^ick may do much hurt unawares, 36, ^7,
44 45, 57, 97. 3, 4, 5 Cannot be careful or cautious, as some fondly dream, 6.
nor properly said to have experience, or to have cured any. 7, 8 9 or to give
safe Medicines, 14 Not to be suffered in a Christian Common wrath * 23 English
Pox affects chiefly the Liver by its Poison 7 Epilepsies may be caused of
poison, 7. 56, 58, 81, 105. By Terror 142 Esula minor its symptoms, 35, ^6.
antidotes 76 Eupho^^ium its symptoms, ^7. antidotes ibid. Experience what 9
^^ignorant Woman, Emp^^ick, R^^sh Practitioner of Physic can be said to have
it 7, 8, 9. etc.
F.
FAlling sickness may be caused of poison, 7. 56, 58, 81, 105 Fearfulness may
be caused by poison 7 Fevers may a^^e of poison ibid Fennel seed sometimes
poisonous, 62. antidotes ^1 F^^^es of Antimony to resist, 24. of Mercury 33
Flos Aff^icanus ^s symptoms, 79. antidotes 72 Flos Colchi its symptoms, 78
antidotes 79 Flowers poison 53 French pox by its ven^m affects chiefly the
Liver 7 Froggs how poisonous, symptoms 229. antidotes 2^8 Fruits poison. 53.
^ury may be caused of poison 7^ etc.
G.
GAtlick taken in excess any noxious 68 Poisons affecting chiefly the Cen^^alls
7 Poisons affecting strange property 5^ Glass no poison ^ Granum Nubiae its
force and antidotes ^^ Gyplus its antidotes 4^
H.
Haemorrhous diffuses its venom by the ^oines 7. Its symptoms, 1^9. antidotes
^01 The Sea Hare kills with the very loo^^^, 218. symptoms, ibid. antidotes
219 Poisons more peculiarly offending the Hea^ 6 Heaviness may be caused of
poy^^^ 7. White Hellebor-Root, its symp^^^, ^4 (...) the appellation White, is
not (...) ^4 Hemlock its symptoms, 71. antidotes ^^ Hen-bane a peculiar enemy
to the (...), 6. Its symptoms, 56.57.7^, antidotes 58, 59 ^^, ^1. Its feel
being barnt in an Henhouse has a strange property, (...) symptoms, 59, 57
sort or ^and. 5^. (...) Herbs poison, 53. such as (...) peculiarly affect the
(...) ^ Hi^cca what, its won^^^ (...) Hornetts the symptoms, ^^5. (...) ^^^ Of
the Horse-^eech its symptoms, (...) poisonous 221. antidotes ^^^ Hurtful
poisons which, (...) Sem Hyosiami its symptoms, 56, 57. Sorts 58, antidotes
58, 5^, 60 Hirundinaceus a deadly poison, 8. 104 symptoms 194, 195. antidotes,
186, etc. and 195, 196
I.
IGnorant Practitioners do much hu^t, 36, 37, 41, 45, 5^ 97 3, 4, 5. Can not be
careful or contious, as some, fondly dre^m 6. nor properly said to have
experience, or to have cared any, 7, 8, 9. or to give safe medicines 14. Not to
be suffered in a Christian Commonwealth * 23 The Indian Hiucca what, its
wonderful Nature, 99. Antidotes 00 Inflammations may be caused of poison, 7
Iron its symptoms, 44. antidotes 45 Juglans Arbor its symptoms 81, 83 Juniper
Tree its symptoms, 83. antidotes ibid. Joyces poison 53 Ixia a virulent
poison, 65. its antidotes 64
K.
KING CHARLES the Second, surnamed La Bon, and Pious, our most gracious
Sovereign, the most nobl^st Descended Prince in Christendom, * 4. Therefore in
him blessed, ibid. Restored to his Crown and to be the glory of his People by a
miracle, and the Immediate finger of GOD; And therefore may expect happiness
and blessings are toward us whilst he is continued among us, * 5, 6, etc.
L.
LAmpron what part poisonous, its symptoms 222 Antidotes 186, etc. Lapis
Lazulus its symptoms and Antidotes 50 Laughter in extremity may be caused by
poison 7 Lead its symptoms, 45, 46. antidotes 48 Leaves poisonous 52 Leeches
when poisonous, 224. symptoms, ibid. 225. Antidotes 226 Leeks eaten in excess
very noxious, 68. its juice also, 100 Lepus Marinus by an occult property
offends peculiarly the Lungs, 7. kills with the very looks, 218. its
symptoms, ibid. antidotes 219 Lettice its juice very noxious 100 Libidiny may
be caused by poison 7 Linseed sometimes poisonous, 62. antidotes 61 Lipothymia
may be caused of poison, 57, 63, 65, etc Litharge its symptoms, 47. antidotes
48 Poison peculiarly affecting the Liver 6, 7 Lizzard its symptoms, 207.
antidotes, ibid. and 186, etc. Of the Lodestone and its antidotes 51 Logic
Requisite to be known by a Physician * 12 Poisons peculiarly affecting the
Lungs 7, 42
M.
MAd-dogs bite poisonous, 108. And how 109. Dilates and Diffuses its venom by
the Nerves, 7 Lies hid in the body sometimes whole months without any
appearance, 8. 115, 116. sometimes years, 9. 116. and sometimes hurts not all,
12. 113. sometimes infects by the very looks, 17. 115. smell, 17. 114.
scratch, touch, 113, etc. How they become mad, 1^0. not known, 112. How many
ways they infect, 113, 114. when the effects appear, 115, 116. The nature and
temperature of the Poison, 117, 118. why such as are infected abhor water, and
all liquors and polite bodies, 119, 120. their symptoms, 121, 122, 123. The
Cure must not be delayed, 124, 125, 126. How the Patient shall know if he be
infected, 126. Prognostics, ibid. 127. Method of Cure ^28. 129, 130, 131, etc.
Madness may be caused by poison, 7. 35, 56, 58 63, 71, 86, etc. Mandrake-Roote
its symptoms and antidotes, 67. The herb, ibid. The Aer of the Aple offensive,
7^. Its symptoms, 86 antidotes 87 Mangas its symptoms, 94. antidotes 00
Round-Leaved Marsh Crow-Foot its symptoms, 73, 74. antidotes 74. The Juice
thereof Poison, 102. Universal Medicines censured, * 13. Knowledge of
medicines not sufficient to make a Physician 2 Mel venenatum its symptoms,
10^. antidotes 66 Mercury a peculiar enemy to the brain, 6 Its several sorts,
19. and antidotes, ^2. hurts by fume and outward application, ibid 31.
Precipitate its direful symptoms, 35. antidotes 37.. Its symptom s 35.
antidotes, 37. vitae how good, or bad, 36, 3^. Dulcis, how good or bad 36, 37
Milk has no venomous Property in it 155. But is an excellent antidote against
Arsnick, 28. and against Mercury taken inwardly 31 Mineralls poison 21, 22
Minium its symptoms, 47 antidotes ^8 Miracles not ceased * 5 Mischief
occasioned by the malicious beams of a malignant eye 18 A Monster in nature 57
Mortal poisons which 6 Muraena what part poisonous, its symptoms, 22^.
antidotes 186, etc. Mus Araneus its description, 149, 150. symptoms, 150 ant
dotes 151 Mush oomes many poisonous, which, and why, 104. then symptoms, 10^.
ant dotes ibid. 106 Mymecion what, its description, 230. symptoms 131
antidotes 232
N.
NApellos its symptoms, ^9 antidotes 70 Natrix its symptoms, 19^. antidotes
186, etc. Ne^^um what, its symptoms and antidoes 85 Night shade a peculiar
enemy to the brain, 6. 92. symptoms, ibid antidotes 93 Granum Nubrae, its
force and antidotes, 61. symptoms of the fruit, 92. antidotes 93 Nox Vomica
its symptoms, 87, 88. antidotes, ^^. Metella seu Methel its symptoms, 89.
antidotes ibid Eaten in a small quantity, does only intoxicate the brain, not k
ll 5
O.
OLiander what, its symptoms and antidotes, 8^ On ons eaten in excess very
noxious, 68 Oplimsa its symptoms, 76. antidotes ibid. Opiom a peculiar enemy
to the b^ain, 6. accounted a violent poison taken in a small quantity 1^. and
yet sometimes does not happen so although liberally eaten, ibid. 90. its
symptoms 94, 95 antidotes 96
P.
THe seed of Palma Christi of Ameirca, its symptoms, 54. antidotes 55
Pauace'as of the Chemists questioned * 23 Paracelsus justly censured * 21
Pastinaca what, which part poisonous, 213. symptoms, 214, 215. antidotes 18.
215, 216. Pharicum what 101 Philosophy requisite to be known by a Physician, *
10 Physician how he ought to be qualified, * 8. 9, 10, etc. Who are only fit to
be such, * 23. A requisite and necessary Calling, 2. may in some cases be
puzzled, 10.11, 12, 13. why their Patients many times miscarry 14.15 Physic by
whom abused, * 7. how they ought to be qualified that practice it, * 8, 9, 10.
who are only fit to practice, * 23. not to be neglected or rejected in time of
sickness 17, 18, 19, 20, et 27 Phrensies may be caused by Poison, 56.58, 71 Of
the worm Pini Erusae, how it conveies its Poison, 238. symptoms, ibid
antidotes, ibid. and 239 Poisons generally treated of with their Differences,
from Page 1. to 21. Natural, Accidencall, and Artificial. 2. Hurt not by
manifest or second qualites; but by occult, or manifest and occult together, 3,
4. All have not an aptitude to kill, 5. Some are mortal, others only hurtful,
6. Some principally affect the Brain, some the Heart, some the Liver, some the
Lungs, some the bladder, 7. Whence they become of diverse effects; As to cause
Madness, Sadness, Laughter, Dancing, Raging, Fearfulness, etc. ibid, Can not be
so prepared as to kill at a certain presixed iime, 9. Nor to penetrate through
Boots, Spurrs, Clothes, etc. to the skin by any natural means, 14. may be
conveied into the body by the bite of Creatures, touch, breath, etc. 15.16.
smell, 17.77. sight, noise, 1^, etc. And how, 18.19. Belonging to Mineralls,
21, 22. To Vegetables, 52 53. To Animalls, 107.108. Definition of Poison 4.6.
may become, sometimes, food, 8. Is of Diverse Natures 9 Praecipitate its
direful symptoms, 35. antidotes 37 Ignorant Practitioners do often and may
unawares destroy men, 36, 37, 44, 45, 57, 97. 3, 4, 5. Can not be said to be
careful, or cautions, as some fondly dream, 6. nor properly, to have
experience, or to have cured any, 7.8, 9. or to give safe medicines 14. Not to
be suffered in a Christian Commonwealth * 23 Pruna Insania, its symptoms,
90.91. antidotes 67 Pryas his poison kills in a short time 8 Purging medicines
not poison because they sometimes kill 5.6, 7
Q.
THe Quintessence's of Chemists justly censured, * 23.
R.
RAgings and Ravings may be caused of Poisons, 7, etc. Rats-bane what 27 Sea-
Ray what part poisonous, 113. symptoms, 214.215. antidotes, 186, etc. and
215.216 Realgar what, with its antidotes 25 Receipts alone, not sufficient to
enable any to practice Physic 10 Sem. Recini its symptoms, 54. antidotes 55
Rue its venomous quality 76.77 Rhagium what, its description, 230. symptoms,
231 antidotes 232 Risugallum what, with its antidotes 25 Roots poisonous 52
Rust of Iron its symptoms, 44. antidotes 45
S.
SAge accidentally poison 16.222 Salamander its symptoms, 179. antidotes, 180.
Lives not in the fire 178 Sandaracha what, with its antidotes 25 Sardonica
herba, its symptoms, 73.74. antidotes 74 Scammony it symptoms, 98. antidotes
97 Scolopend^a its symptoms, ^^3. antidotes, 186. etc. and ^^3 Bite of (...)
Scorpion conveies the venom to the Heart by the d^t^^ies, 7. Is an enemy t^^^.
Heart in a peculiar manner, o. ^t^ symptom s. ^68* ^69, 170. antid tes,
571.572. symptoms of the S^^^corp^on 2^0 what part poisonous, ibid. antidotes,
186. etc and 221 Scytale its symptoms, 198. antidotes 186, etc. Seeds
poisonous 52 Seeing how occasioned 18 Seps o^ Sepedon its symptoms, 222.
antidotes 168 etc Shadow of the Yew Tree ^^^y noxious, and how 19 As also the
Tree Baxima 19 Poisons peculiarly affecting the Sperm vessels 7 Spiders then
several sorts poisonous, 230. symptoms 231. antidotes 232, 233 Spurdge its
symptoms, 75, 76. antidotes 76. Steel its symptoms, 44. antidotes 45 Stellio
its symptoms, 192. antidotes 186, etc. Strength of the body may be abated by
poison 69.71 Stupor may be caused by poison 60 Sublimate Mercury its symptoms,
35. antidotes 37 Poisons killing Suddenly are enemies to the Heart more
especially 6.09
T.
TAme^ind-Tree its symptoms, 82. antidotes 8^ Tarantula an enemy to the brain
especially, 6. why so called, 230. symptoms, 233, 234. etc. antidotes 235 236,
etc. The Aspe Terestris deadly poison ^8 The black Camelien Thistle Ro^t, a
o^^bulent poison 63. antidotes ibid. The Thraciaus familiarly eat whole
handfulls of white Helelior, (...) ^^^ny ^^art 64 Time of (...) determined,
beyond which he cann^t (...) Tha^ servingness ever abo^^^^ted by the Author,
4. Times we live in Described ^^. Toad its symptoms, and how poison, 227.
antidotes 228 Torpedo a peculiar enemy to the Brain, 6 strangely affects the
Hand and Arm of such as but hold a long Pole that trucheth it, 16. symptoms
208.209. antidotes 210 Toxicam a violent Poison, 101. what it is is not clear
from the writings of the Learned 101.102 Trees poison 53 Tythymallus its
symptoms, 75.76. antidotes 76
V.
Poisonous Vapors of Antimony to resist, 14 Of the ^ew-Tree and the Tree
Baxima noxious ^9 Vegetables poison, 52.53. The knowledge of Vegetables
requisite for a Physician 23 Verdigreece its symptoms, 43. antidotes ^^.
Vertigo may be may be caused of poisons 81.103, 141 Vesperium what, i^s
Definition, 230. symptoms 231. antidotes 222 Vespis its symptoms, 165.
antidotes 164 Viper its symptoms, 182. 183, etc. antidotes 180. Mercurius
Vitae, how good or bad 36, 37 Vitriol and its antidotes 41, 42 Universal
medicines justly censured *23 The Vulgar and ignorant can never put the art of
Physic in practice 2
VV.
WAllnut-Tree its symptoms, 81. antidotes 83 Waspes their symptoms, 16^.
antidotes 164 Watchfulness may be caused of poison 60 Woolf-bane its
symptoms, 69. antidotes 70 A Woolfes bite poisonous if mad, 145. its
symptoms, ibid. 146.147.148, 149. antidotes 129.130, etc. A Woman-Doctor a
monster in nature, 57 many times does much hurt, ibid. 143. 3.14, 15
Y.
YEllow Hen-bane seed 58 The Yew-Tree in Arcadia kill such as sleep under its
shadow, 19. as also in Spain 84. and how 19. why it is not offensive here in
England, ibid. its symptoms, 84. antidotes 83
FINIS.

