THE LATE ACT OF THE CONVOCATION AT OXFORD Examined: OR, The OBIT of Prelatique
PROTESTANCY: Occasioning the Conversion of W.R. (Sometimes of EXETER College
in OXFORD) to Catholic UNION.

PSALM. 118.59. Cogitavi vias meas, and converti pedes meos in Testimonia tua.

St. Ambr. Ep. 31. ad. Valent. Erubeseat senectus, quae se emendare non potest:
nullus pudor est ad meliora transire.

Printed at Roven, 1652.

A NARRATIVE Of the Motives and Effects of this Treatise,
Learned READER,
IT has been a no less famous then celebrated Custom amongst the Ancients,
for Converts to write Apologies, or some kind of Literary Expressions of their
Inductives to Matriculation into the Womb of Christ's Church, as St. Justin
Martyr, Arnobius and the rest, who of Heathens, became Christians. Great
Origin, and St. Augustine, who from siding with Herctiques, became Catholics.
Hence I esteem it my duty to address some Reason to the World, why I left
that Body of Christians, where I had been Baptized, and Educated, and now
incorporate my self to the Roman Catholic Church, from which our Nation had
this last age divided it self.

After my younger Studies in the University of Oxford, I endeavored to season
my self in our greatest Authors, as Bishop Juell, Bishop Morton, the last
Archbishop of Canterbury, Bishop Usher, with Field, White, and the rest; whose
Apothegmes I received, as Oracles without dispute; and by the poursuite of
them, I began much to admire our Doctrines, and no less to disesteeme the
Roman Catholic; But upon further growth in years, with Themistocles, I
attempted to reach higher, and entering, though with great tenderness, to
examine our Tenets and Proofs very speciously alleged out of antiquity; I
found so many adulterated Texts of holy Fathers, especially in Bishop Jewel,
and Bishop Morton, so many (to speak modestly) misinterpreted in the rest (of
which I may opportunely give a list) that I could not but blush to find our
main Pillars so stramineous in their very foundations.

Hence what curiosity had first invited, now Conscience enforced me earnestly
to a serious and deeper search, wherein I resolved with Cato, not to be ashamed
to Learn, as he Greek, So I Latin, not according to the vulgar style, but
the old pure Roman Language, expressed in St. Hierome, St. Augustine and the
rest of those Professors of Christian Rhetorique; neither did I omit with old
Plato to peragrate Greece, Egypt and the Eastern parts to find any holy
Gymnosophists, who could embowell, not nature, but the Sacred Mysteries of
Christianity, which I found not sufficiently dived into at home.

In my return from this Sedentary Pilgrimage, (wholly settled by the
re-searches of Antiquity in the truth of the Roman Church, and her Tenets) I
fell upon this Act of the Convocation-House, the Discussion whereof I present
to all understandings, not bias'd with the Praejudice of Customs, Education,
or Ambition, that they may judge, out of this Summary, what might be said, if I
should expatiate upon this subject.

I blush not to publish the impulsive cause of my actual Conjunction to our
old Roman Mother Church, to be from this Act of the Convocation; for though I
was before fully satisfied of those old Tenets in a Speculative sense, yet in
reduceing my self to the Practical part or profession of them, I found many
Phanatique Bug-beares, till happening upon this Act, (composed by a great Body of
our most learned men) and evidently seeing the inconsistency of the Doctrine
here asserted (especially concerning the necessity of Traditions) with our
former Tenets, and Positions against Catholics, I was inavoidably compelled
to an actual, and humble Submission of my will, as well as of my judgment, to
the obedience of the Church: And in this my voluntary retirement from the
World, I found un^xpectedly in these Foreign parts diverse of both our
Universities to have taken the rise of their Conversions from the same ground,
and to have prevented me in their Resolutions herein, which made me more
thankfully to admire the Divine Providence, in the secret conduct of Souls,
culled out for himself.

Master Gregory (a very learned person, and my contemporary in Oxford, in his
Preface to his Opuscula, page 17.) has this ingenuous acknowledgement; I am
sorry (says he) I have so much to accuse my Natition of, that ever since the
Times of Henry the eighth, they should go about in a Maze of Reformation, and
not know yet how to get either us, or themselves out: And truly who ever does
well consider this Act of Convocation, and the sad consequences of it, will
conclude with me, that there is but one way to get out of this Maze, and that
is by an humble return to our Mother, the Catholic Church, which the dazzled
Eyes and selfe-bias'd Judgments of the contrivers of that Act could not then
discern; But this short Examination of it may I hope contribute something
toward their illumination.

From Paris this 1. of July, 1652. Stilo loci. W. R.

The OBIT of Prelatique Protestancy; OR The last dying words of Episcopacy,
faintly delivered in the Convocation house at Oxford, 1. of June, 1641.
Containing their reasons against the Scottish Covenant and Presbytery.
Chemists amongst Physicians desire so far to reform the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Galenists, that they neither observe the same Method nor
druggs in their Cures, as appears in Paracelsus, Crollius, Helmontius and
others; nay they would willingly so far be thought to differ from them, as that
out of that respect they assume another name, and therefore commonly style
themselves Phylosophos per ignem, Fiery, that is, hot spirited Philosophers.
And truly when I look upon this Consult and Result of the Convocation house,
Consisting of Masters, Scholars, and other Officers and Members of the
University, as you profess, I conceive you have endeavored so far to reform
the Doctrine and manners of all others, that you neither agree with them, who
would be esteemed reformed Churches, nor with their and your Mother Church of
Rome, either in Doctrine or Disscipline.

Nay ye have gone so far with the Chemists, that ye will not retain the common
name of all the Modern Reformers (as your later Masters profess) in which all
your Progenitors vaunted; namely under the Notion of Pretestants, but ye style
your selves here Christians or Protestants (with this distinctive appellative)
of the Church of England; Others deny the name wholly, as in our daily
congresses we experience, so that the more Unigenious name is Puritan, which is
also more uniforme to the Chemists hot spirited Philosophy. As therefore ye are
separate in place, so in nature and name, from all, who rightly, or falfly
acknowledge Christ, whence at the most (according to your own principles) ye
are but Anologically (I fear I might better say equivocally) Christians, as it
signifies a body of people uniformly professing Christ, with the Universal
Church. So that what Celsus improperates in Origens third book, would surely
come home to you: Nec jam quicquam preter nomen eis commune superesse, si tamen
vel hoc prae pudore relinquitur.

Let us proceed to particulars.

Your first Paragraph is of the first Article of the Covenant.
1. Wherein first we are not satisfied, how we can with Judgment swear to
endeavor to preserve the Religion of another Kingdom, whereof, as it does not
concern us to have very much, so we profess to have very little understanding.

2. Which (so far as the occurrents of these unhappy times have brought it to
our knowledge, and we are able to judge) as in three of the four specified
particulars, (viz.) Worship, Discipline and Government, much worse; and in the
fourth, that of Doctrine, not at all better, then our own, which we are in the
next passage of the Article required to reform.

Blessed Saint Paul was much of another spirit, he earnestly professes a most
hearty sense of the welfare of all Churches, he has a Sollicitous care of all:
he cries out, Who is weak, and I not weak, who is offended and I burn not? 2
Cor. 11.28. He is highly sensible not only of all Churches, but persons. See
him, 1 Cor. 1.10. how careful he is to have all speak the same thing, and that
there be no division amongst them: but that they be perfectly joined together
in the same mind and in the same judgment. Read him in all his Epistles, see
how he and his fellow laborers, even anxiously esteemed themselves concerned
in all the Churches progress in true Doctrine and practice. See what he says
to the Romans. Chap. 12. the aim of his Doctrine is, that we must rejoice with
the joyful, weep with the sad; we must mutually feel each others passions: we
must be deeply concerned in our Brethrens spiritual affairs chiefly, but ye
contrariwise profess, not to be so much concerned, in preserving the Religion
of your Neighbor Church.

Solomon would have judged your title surreptitious, with the pretended
Mothers, who was contented to have the Child quartered, so that she might rob
the true Mother of her infant; ye caused indeed the breach in Scotland from
their Mother of Rome, having done that, you profess your selves now not much
concerned to preserve her in any Religion. Ye could not have used any Arguments
more forcible, to prove your selves not true lively Members of Christ's great
Spiritual body, since it is clear by your profession here, that you are not
vegitated with the common spirit of it, for ye are not concerned, etc. Contrary
to Saint Paul's teaching, 1 Cor. 14.33. where he professes to teach peace of
Doctrine in all Churches.

Ye profess also, that you differ from them in Worship, Discipline, and
Government.

The Philosophers at Athens (however different in their Schools touching their
opinions of the Deity, Providence, etc. as appears in the tenants of the
Platonists, Stoiques and Peripatetiques, yet) in their Temple, touching
Worship, Discipline and Government, did far more agree, then you, meeting
quietly at their common oblations to God, which ye profess not to be amongst
you.

Have ye not in this undeniably abolished one Article of the Creed; which is,
Communion of Saints, and consequently taken away your very pretense to a
Church? External Communion consists in uniformity of Worship, Discipline, and
Government, most especially indeed in Worship, and in this, as you are
separated from Rome and their whole Communion, so ye are, (as you profess)
from your neighboring Churches, whence it follows you are not a true Church
of Christ.

I speak not this, as if I were at all scandalized at your breaches: Aristotle
treating of Beasts, calls a Wolf (though a Pestilent creature) animal
generosum, because it will not be made tame: I can say no less of you, it is
generous not to degenerate, all your predecessors disagreed with each other,
as Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, and the rest. Tertullian not far from the end of
his treatise of Praescriptions, will rub you hard upon the gills. Mentior, si
non etiam a regulis suis variant inter se dum unusquisque proinde suo arbitrio
modulatur quae accepit, quemadmodum de arbitrio ea composuit illi quae
tradidit, etc. It has been always the custom from the beginning that you
thus vary from one another, and yet Tertullian speaks of it, as a thing most
ridiculous. I lie, says he, if it be not true, that they differ from their
own rules, etc. he was afraid that future ages would not believe so prodigious
a thing, but succeeding ages make it appear even to children. Ye have
therefore just title not only to the Wolf in this point of generosity, but to
the Foxes under Sampson, in biting each other with all virulency, and yet agree
in your tails by firing all behind you, which is Gods Church.

It Is Cato's aphorism, opertet mendacem esse memorem: You have been also
observed to have been in diverse tales. At the first under Henry the 8. your
rule was to adhere to holy Scriptures, determination of the Primitive Church or
General Counsels, held before the last 600. years, as appears in the
Articles of union betwixt you and the Germans; In B. Jewels time, you confined
your selves to the first 600. years. After in Perkins time to the first 400.
years, and now in D'allie to the Apostles only: And so by degrees you creep to
your invisibility, where every one is (...), a Son without a Father.

For the Doctrine you add as follows.
Wherein if hereafter we shall find any thing (as upon farther understanding
thereof it is not impossible we may) that may seem to us savouring of Popery,
Superstition, Heresy or Schism, or contrary to sound Doctrine, or the Power
of Godliness; We shall be bound by the next Article to endeavor the
extirpation, after we have bound our selves, by this first Article, to the
preservation thereof.

Wherein we already find some things (to our thinking) so far tending to
superstition (in accounting Bishops Anti Christian, and indifferent Ceremonies,
unlawful) and Schisms (in making their Discipline and Government a mark of
the true Church, and the setting up thereof the erecting of the Church of
Christ) that it seems to us more reasonable that we should call upon them to
reform the same, then that they should call upon us to preserve it.

Here you have touched the matter again more deeply to the quick, your quarrels
in Doctrine are of no less nature, then of Superstition and Schism: Thus
Presbytery and Prelacy are at open wars. We heard of the Heralds at arms
menacing mutual defiance at the Scotts first entering our Country, yet there
were hopes of an atonement, but this Covenant has rendered them
irreconcilable. Tertullian in his book of Prayer propounds a question worth
your knowing. Quale sacrificium est, a quo sine pace receditur? No peace, no
Sacrifice. He indeed insinuates an old and constant custom of the Catholic
Church in a religious embrace of each other in time of Mass, which he here
calls Sacrifice, signifying the charity which should be amongst Christians, but
you have professedly cast away Mass and Peace together.

The causes which each of you already allege are true enough, but I leave
your selves to prove them; its more then sufficient for all good Christians,
who tender their salvations, not to adhere to either of you, since you are so
far from unity in Doctrine, that your bodies respectively need Reformation, as
ye confess of them and they of you; wherein ye have destroyed your selves
wholly; First, from the pretense of being one Christian Church, and
consequently any Church, according as the universal Church teaches us, I
believe one holy Catholic and Apostolic Church. If therefore no unity, no
Church. And with no less evidence ye have Secondly destroyed either of you to
be a Church, having declared your several errors in Superstition and Schism;
For according to Holy Scriptures, and the consent of all, especially old
Christians; A Congregation, which should generally and solemnly teach and
profess Superstition and Schism, neither is nor can be a Church of Christ,
this would render it inconsistent with the light presented in Saint John's
Candlesticks, and consequently alienate it from Christ. This needs no further
proof to a man who has observed the hinges of Christianity.

Does not the whole world also know by your voluminous writings, that ye have
condemned the very Ceremonies of the Roman Church, as unlawful, and made that
amongst the vulgar people a maine argument of our Superstition, and now ye say
it is Superstition in the Presbyters to condemn them in you. I Will not press
you, for I should presently cast you into Democritus his Well: Ye wholly forget
the force of an Argument called in the Schools ad hominem, drawn from a man's
own principle, as here against you.

Ye go on.

Secondly, we are not satisfied in the next Branch, concerning the Reformation
of Religion in our own Kingdom, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, how we can swear to endeavor the same, which (without making a
change therein) cannot be done.

It is very well noted, that ye cannot reform without a change. Philosophy
would laugh at you to attempt a Reformation without a proportionable mutation;
whence it follows, that you have changed your Doctrine, whence it further
follows, that its false; you know Gamaliels rule, if it be of God, it will
stand, ye know then whence yours comes, for if it change, it is not of God. You
pretend to reverence the four first general Counsels, hear what the
Council of Chalcedon says, Act. 1. Sic sancivit sancta synodus, etc Si quis
innovat, Anaethema sit, sanctorum patrum fidem servemus, etc. you see your
sentence, if you change you are gone, and yet you must change. If your
Proselites would without prejudice observe, how you tumble and toss one
another in reciprocal recriminations, in matter of these high inconsistencies
with Christianity, they would relinquish such communion. Your reasons to the
contrary in order to you, are important, for it cannot be done.

1. Papists and Independents are equally rejected by the Praelatique party.
Without manifest scandal to the Papist, and Separatist, by yiedling the
cause, which our Godly Bishops and Martyrs, and all our learned Divines ever
since the Reformation, have both by their writings and sufferings maintained,
who have justified against them both, the Religion established in the Church of
England, to be agreeable to the word of God.

2. By Justifying the Papists in the reproaches and scorn by them cast upon
our Religion, whose usual objection it has been and is, that we know not what
our Religion is, that since we left them, we cannot tell where to stay, that
our Religion is a Parliamentary Religion, (let us not be blamed, if we call it
a Parliament Religion, Parliament Gospel, Parliament Faith. Harding Consul. of
Apology, part 6. cap. 2.

These are very home, let me a little dilate them.

To your first. You have indeed scandalized all the world, and most of all
those whom ye call Papists, by yiedling the cause, and showing, that hitherto
ye have persecuted them to blood, to all manner of cruelties for not adhering
to that, which now is confessed to be Superstitious and Schismatic. Trajan
was a Heathen and a professed enemy of Christian Religion, yet he came not near
your cruelties: He made a law that no Poursivants should search the houses or
look after Christians or their Priests, but only apprehend them, if they
should happen to meet them. But under your reign, all our houses (against the
liberties of free borne Subjects, as was declared in Master Pims case) were
disquieted by the very dregs of mankind, continually infested with Saint
Ignatius his Leopards, who the better he treated them, the worse they were, but
as he said, Iniquitas eorum mea doctrina est, their iniquities taught us
patience.

This permission even of assemblies in point of Religion, especially in the
exercise of a Religion which was not newly taken up, though different from that
which was then in vogue, was by the Senate allowed, as that of the Jews at
Rome; Nay Suetonius tells us, that even the Christians were tolerated to
assemble. Eusebius Hist. lib. 5. cap. 20. says, that Commodus the Emperor
punished even by death, such who accused Christians, by reason of their
quietness. And in his third book, cap. 15. he tells how Nerva the Emperor
did set Christians at liberty generally by public Proclamation, and hence
Saint John was freed from Patmos. In fine, he recalled all power given to
Poursuivants by his predecessors. How much more should Christian Senates allow
of innocent meetings in celebration of a Religion, which all our forefathers
professed. But ye persecuted both new and old Religions; I fear the blood of
all those, who have suffered death either by hanging, Loaplanding (as the Dutch
call it) famishing or starving for Religion, will call for revenge, but we pray
with our blessed Savior and his Protomartyr, Saint Stephen, ne statuas illis
hoc peccatum.

Saint Paul has also taught us Romans 12.5.21. Be not overcome of evil, but
overcome good with evil. Nay Aristotle himself in 4. Eth. cap. 3. says, it
is a sign of magnanimity to forget injuries. For as it is a mark of a weak
Stomach not to be able to digest hard meat, so it is of a pusillanimous Soul,
not to be able to endure a harsh word or harder threats. Cicero. lib. 2. Tusc,
ques. (speaking of wise men's patience) says, si fortis in perferendo, officii
satis est: ut laetetur, non postulo. These Christian wise men have gone further
even to joy in Persecutions. Aristotle, when the Athenians were consulting to
proceed in judgment against him, upon suspicion of some impiety in his
opinions, departed from Athens and removed his School, saying to his
Scholars, Discedamus Athenis, ne prebeamus iis secundam occasionem sceleris,
quale prius perpetraverunt in Socratem, neve iteru^ per impietatem violent
Philosophiam, Thus tender Aristotle was of Philosophy and of their innocence:
but our Christian Philosophers here have gone further, they think it necessary
to confirm what they teach by their blood, and therefore will not desist. This
Paraphrase comes not yet home. Ye are ambitious to challenge Martyrs in
confirmation of your Prelatique Protestancy, but how unhappily, let all men
witness even by Master Foxes adulterate Monuments.

For first, never any dyed for the whole complex or the Encyclopedia of your
39. Articles, the confession whereof renders an adequate Praelatist, this is
clear in all Histories: the truth is, it would have argued a frenzy to
maintain those Articles by death, which were only made to maintain you in
life; Again, no man in his wits would expose himself even to danger of death
for matter of opinion, which must needs involve uncertainty, neither do your
Articles mount any higher, as Chilingworth ingenuously confesses and therefore
ye all profess a fallibility in your own decrees, which is consequent enough.
In some of your Articles you agree with us, so that if any of yours should dye
for those, we might, if it were worth the while, challenge such as well as you,
but Saint Paul to the Cor. 1. Chap. 13. Tertul. against Marian, lib. 4. Saint
Cipr. to Antoniatus, Ep. 52. To Cornelius, Ep. 54. etc. S. Aug. against the
Donatists and all the rest assure us, that, Esse Martyr non potest, qui in
ecelesia dei non est. No member of Gods Catholic Church, no Martyr, and
hereupon the Novatians, though sharply persecuted by Macedonius for the same
Doctrine concerning the Blessed Trinity, for which the Catholics also were,
yet the Christian world never esteemed them Martyrs.

Out of this ground it arose that none could be acknowledged or venerated, as
Martyrs, except the Bishop of the place had fignifyed by writing to the Primate
all particulars in the process, and then he declared them to be such, as
appears in S. Aug. Brevic. Collat. diei 3. cap. 13. where he shows how
Secundus Bishop of Trigisitan in Numidia signified to Mensurius Bishop and
Primate, of Carthage, the particular passages of such, who had been put to
death, because they would not obey Dioclesians Proclamation, in delivering the
Sacred Books into their profane hands, and Mensurius declared them worthy to
be celebrated, as Martyrs: but to others who had suffered under the same
pretense, yet for other defects, he denied that honor, as appears there.
This solemn Act of Declaration was afterward transferred and limited to the
Pope, being conceived a business of high concernment to the whole Church.
Truly, the Church has been always so tender in this, that Councels, as
Eliber. Can. 60. assume this authority to themselves, and prescribe Rules in
it, as there, if a Christian should be put to Death for having broken Idols, it
is forbidden that he be accounted a Martyr. It must be done with due
circumstances.

And the case of St. Abda comes home to it, he had pulled down an Idolatrous
Temple, for which Christians commended him not, but his refusal to rebuild the
Temple was judged cause enough of Martyrdom, as Theodor. l. 5. c. 38. shows.
There might be rashness in the first, but surely the re-building of an
Idolatrous Temple, had been impiety, and therefore was noble to die for it.

But if you will know what is required to be esteemed a Martyr in the sense of
Catholics, advise with our Authors especially, St. Thomas 2.2. q. 124. a. 40.
and 50. and our other Divines. If you will further know the great tenderness
the universal Church has used in recording and admitting the Gests of her
undoubted Martyrs, read the 6. Genesis Council Can. 63. which will tell you that
the Roman Church will not permit the Acts of Martyrs to be read, which have
been written by Heretics, nay the council will have such Records to be
burnt.

In some Articles you agree with the Presbyterians, in others with the
Independents: If any have dyed for either of these, each of them may come in as
well as you, and yet these (consequent to your Principles) ye esteem
Separatists, that is, not capable of being Martyrs.

Again in some Articles you differ from us and them, which are the peculiar
Tenants of Praelatisme, and for these, they and we know, that never any Man
dyed, namely for your Episcopacy; and the adherent Doctrines, Therefore without
doubt ye have no Martyrs, no not so much as Pseudo-Martyrs.

Secondly, you your selves in time of your Espiscopall Reign cast many
(besides Catholics) Presbyterians, and Independents into Dungeons, where they
dyed, beggard Families with oppressures, wherewith they famisht, cut off Ears,
and banished such, who adored not your Episcopal Idol; And may not these join
issue upon a far greater title to Martyrdom, then you? That the Prelatists
had almost entreated the common people into a belief of this Fancy, I wonder
not; For if we look back to the Donatists, who most of all represent them, as
being zealous Prelatists, they were so ambitious of this honor, that many cast
themselves into Precipices, and other ways sought their own Death, upon this
pretense, as Optaetus Milevitanus, St. Augustine, and diverse others relate. I
leave you to tell us, whether some of your party have not done the like in our
memories.

The renowned Apollinaris in Eusebius l. 5. c. 15. says of the Cataphrygeans
or Montanists, that when all their Arguments were confuted and they driven to a
non plus, they left disputing by way of Reason, and produced their Martyrs, as
proof enough of their errors; Truly the Prelatists being reduced to a loss
in point of reasoning, for they have already confessed their domestique
inconsistencies, now (as ye see) they begin with them to challenge Martyrs,
whom they would take up from all hands, but if we deplume them, by giving to
each part their own, as I have touched, we shall leave them as naked in point
of Martyrs, as Plato's Cock in point of being a man.

We might wonder that in every clause, even in this your fainting condition,
you still strike at the poor Catholics, (Worms trodden will show their
heads, for defense) truly you seem to be much of the nature of Foxes, whose
antipathy is so great against innocent Lambs, that their Skins made into
Drums will by invisible beams or spirits, endeavor the breaking of a Drum
made of Lambs Skin; But it recoyles upon you, this Drum being well beaten, will
with innocence destroy your rangling and jangling dissonancies. You force us to
sharpen our Pens, and against our inclination to give our Ink a tincture of
Gall, lest we should not seem sensible of your frequent scorns in this Act.
It was S. Hierem and S. Augustines case in their conflicts with the Donatists,
Pelagians and the rest.

S. Augustine tell us of a House infested with evil spirits, for remedy
whereof he sent some of his Monks to say Mass, which presently dispelled the
Devils, it would be no less efficatious now against all ill spirits, who
infest Gods Servants in their quiet attending to his Service. The holy Mass is
able to humble those fictitious Priests in Iamblicus in his Treatise of
Mysteries, who threatened the Gods to break the Heavens, and reveal Isis her
Secrets, to stop the Egyptian Sacred Ship, etc. you seem to threaten Gods
Ship, which is his Church, etc. but all signify your imminent destruction.

Your second Reason is also considerable, that we know not what your Religion
is, since you your selves cannot yet agree on it, nor indeed know where to
stay, since ye left us, you rightly conclude this, and the changes of your
Articles of Belief even in the highest mysteries of Doctrine, as of
Predestination, final Apostasy from grace and the rest, etc. too too
abundantly declare, that hitherto you have wandered in false and strange
Doctrines. A miserable condition for all your Proselites, now after so many
years to be to seek Reasons in point of Doctrine, why ye left us, and yet
severely punished us to blood for not following you.

Ye assumed to your selves a magisteriall power of dictating Divinity to your
followers, and yet you are not agreed upon your own Tenets, this is like Peter
Martyr in Oxford, who sent to the Parliament to know how he should expound,
Hoc est corpus meum to his auditors; Thus your own practices discover and
destroy your designs, every proposition used in your Pulpits against us was
Demonstratio (...), no reason durst be offered against it, and yet now you have
destroyed all your selves.

Touching your additionall Reason of our charging you with embracing a
Parliament Religion.
Can you your selves call it any other, then Parliamentary? I wonder ye boggle
at this, did not a Parliament lay the first Stone, when Hen. the 8. made his
breach from Rome, which ye cite after in your Paragraph to the Oath of
Supremacy? did it not in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth augment that breach
in abolition of Mass, etc.? Is not the Supreme power over all Doctrines by
several Acts transferred by Parliament to the Imperial Crown of this Realm,
cited in the same Paragraph? was it not also re-established by King James in
the Parliaments? and so ever since continued to your great griefs. All men
know the passages of this. Is there any thing believed to this day any further
then settled by Parliament, as you in your next ( number 2.) confess? Nay, do
not your posteriour Writers profess, that settlement of Religion is solely to
be had from the civil Power? And upon this ground, they teach that Inhabitants
in any Country should follow the Religions, how often soever changed there,
which was the antiquated impiety of Celsus, strengthened by him in many
examples, and strongly confuted by Origin, fol. 484. c. 2. Upon which
supposition, we might come at last to worship a (...) instead of GOD, as the
Egyptians did, by Origens relation fol. 485. c. 1.

But to prevent such absurdities, the Prophet Isay 49.43. foretelling the times
and Method of Government under Christianity, and the Churches Supremacy, as
condistinct to temporal principality, says, Kings shall bow down to her with
their Face toward the Earth, and lick up the dust of her Feet, which surely
will reach to a submission in Doctrines; but this concerns not your imaginary
Church; the Prophet, who foretold Christ's coming, and his true Churches Birth
and Progress, never dreamed of such a Hypocentaur, as you had framed, which
neither was Catholic nor Protestant.

I conceive it therefore the noblest pretense you have to plead your Origin
from a Parliament, which being supposed, you will easily find the way of your
Reformation and destruction to be equally authentical, because by Act of
Parliament; warranted by that Rule Per easdem causas aliquid resolvitur, per
quas componitur, but because this is a Rule amongst Lawyers; whom you esteem
no Friends to Athens, I do not urge it; only remember it is the same way, and
as far from your Colleges to the Convocation House, as from thence to your
Colleges, and all is done.

You go on in your Reasons.
3. By a tacit acknowledgment that there is some thing in the Doctrine, and
worship, whereunto their conformity has been required, not agreeable to the
Word of God, and consequently justifying them both, the one in his Recusancy,
the other in his separation.

You well conclude this, for indeed it follows very evidently, being
necessarily and virtually included in the premises: If your form of Faith must
be changed, surely it convinces that we, not you, have been in the right,
agreeably to Gods Word, which can not change. So that it is clear that you are
the Separatists being changed in Doctrine and worship, yet here you very
prodigally call others Separatists, as not agreeing with your fancies.

Why the Independent party should be styled Separatists by you of the
Prelatique, I know not: The Independents indeed justly Separated from you, and
you unlawfully from us; Why a just Separation from you should make these to be
Sectaries (as you often style them) or Separatists, and your unlawful
separation, not more strongly conclude against your selves, who first separated
from your true Mother, they from an Adulteress; Let all men judge. I fear you
have forgotten the Ante-Predicaments, and the Rules of denomination: you have
hitherto done with us, as the Gentiles did with old Christians, when they
appointed some upon their Theaters, to imitate their Religious Acts in derision
of Christians, as Eusebius and the rest relate; But God sometimes even
miraculously turned their jests into earnest, as Baron. To. 2. a. 303. and
elsewhere shows in the case of Ardalion and Genesius, and S. August. Ep. 67.
of Dioscorus. You have acted our parts at your pleasure in your Pulpits
hitherto, and ye have taught others to do the like to you: many of yours with
Genesius and some of your Dioscorists, the Arch Players, of deriders, have
become serious imbracers of Catholic truth. It is the greatest harm we wish
you all.

Nicetas Choniates in his Annals under Manuel Comnenus, tells of a Magician,
who had so far dementated a poor Waterman, that he broake in pieces his
Boat full of Pots and Pans, and such like Vessels of Earth; The poor man
seemed to see a horrible Serpent creeping toward him, which he endeavoring
to kill, broke all, and then the Serpent vanished. This was done in sight of
all at Court. Methinks much after this manner, you have been dementated to
break your selves off from all Communion with others, esteeming all
Separatists, where as indeed you made all the breaches, and even in all our
sights and at the Court, as that poor man did, still thinking to preserve your
selves by that which was your ruin.

But you go on.
4. By an employed Confession, that the Laws formerly made against Papists, in
this Kingdom and all punishments by virtue thereof inflicted upon them, were
unjust, in punishing them for refusing to join with us in that form of
worship, which our selves, as well as they, do not approve of.

Thus far you rightly observe; And surely it concerns you to think sadly upon
it: how many have lost their Lives, others their Estates for not conforming to
your unsound Doctrines, which all your Brethren, and almost the whole Country
are weary of, and therefore urge for change in your Doctrine and Worship, as
not agreeable to the Word of God. Julian was more visibly punished by God then
many Heathen persecuting Emperors, by reason of his Apostasy, the crime seemed
greater in him; I doubt you will be the like examples of Gods Justice, and
confess with him, when it is too late, Vicisti Galilaee. When we are first
entered into Aristotle's School, we are taught to proceed in due form, lest an
acute adversary should reduce us ad impossible, that is, to some inevitable
absurdity. Truly, you have argued so preposterously that though your Adversary
would not, ye have intricated your selves in a sad labyrinth.

It was accustomarily given out that Catholics were not in time of your
Reign punished for Religion, but for nonconformity in points of State. But
here ye have taken away that Vizard, in holding forth to all the World, that
the Laws were made, and the punishments, (in order to those Laws) inflicted,
for refusing to join in your form of Worship. You see into what a Dilemma you
are unadvisedly plunged, me-thinkes you might have made provision in your
Convocation Acts against cornuted Arguments. The truth is your proceeding
against. Catholics, argued the whole Roman Church in your judgments to be
(...) a City of Rogues, not civitas sancta, Gods Church, and therefore we were
in all things used like and numbered with rogues and thieves.

The Cynicks, that they might be like to Hercules, fighting against the Lions,
assumed for their Dress, a Staff, instead of his Club, and an old cloak.
Hence the Donatists and their offspring the Circumcellians in Afrique used
just the same: you have been indeed very formal and more Ecclesiastique-like,
then your neighboring Scots in your Canonical cloakes, but you agreed in your
club-law in persecution of Catholics and all others, who could not conform
their consciences to your Ganons, and behaved your selves very cynically
toward us all, unhappily following your old Friends the Donatists; though
Lactantius says, that nothing is so voluntary, as Religion, which without the
wills consent, is nothing. It was therefore esteemed high gallantry in the
Roman Emperors, to impose only such commands upon the Jews, as were
consistent with their Religion, as Vlpian Records.

None of you are ignorant how much, and how long we have suffered under the
heavy imputation of the Gunpowder Treason, a crime so highly opposite to our
Tenets, that to assert it lawful, were heresy with us. Nero, when he had set
Rome on fire, could not easier turn the horror of it upon any, and free
himself, then to lay it upon us, as he did, according to the testimony of all
the Roman Historians, though they themselves discover his falsnesse in it: Even
thus when the Plot was laid for that horride attempt of the Gunpowder, it was
easily cast upon us, and to that end a few young desperate persons overreached
and drawn into it, that under that color, we might all be traduced, whereas
the very memory of it is odious to all Catholics; but time discovers the most
secret machinations, and will clear all calumnies.

Yet you adventure to go on:
1. Without manifest wrong unto our selves, our Consciences, Reputation and
Estates, in bearing false witness against our selves, and sundry other ways:
by swearing to endeavor to reform that as corrupt and vicious; Which we have
formerly by our personal Subscription, approved as agreeable to Gods word, and
have not been since either condemned by our own Hearts for so doing, or
convinced in our Judgments, by any of our Brethren, that therein we did amiss.

2. Which in our Consciences, we are persuaded not to be in any of the four
specified particulars (as it stands established) much less in the whole
four against the Word of God.

3. Which we verily believe and (as we think upon good grounds) to be in
sundry respects much better, and more agreeable to the Word of God, and the
practice of the Catholic Church, then that, which we should by the former
words of this Article swear to preserve.

4. Whereunto the Laws (Stat. 13. Eliz. 12.) yet in force require of all such
Clerks as shall be admitted to any Benefice the signification of their hearty
assent to be attested openly in the time of Divine Service; before the whole
Congregation there present, within a limited time, and that under pain (upon
default made) of the loss of every such Benefice.

5. Without manifest danger of perjury, this Branch of the Article (to our best
understanding) seeming directly contrary

1. To our former Solemn Protestation which we have bound our selves neither
for Hope, Fear or other respect ever to relinquish. Wherein the Doctrine,
which we have vowed to maintain, by the name of the true Protestant Religion
expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England. We take to be the same,
which now we are required to endeavor to Reform and Alter.

2. To the Oath of Supremacy, by us also taken according to the Laws of the
Realm, and the Statutes of our University in that behalf, wherein having
first testified and declared in our Consciences, that the Kings Highness is
the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, we do after Swear to our power to
assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences, and
Authorities granted or belonging to the Kings Highness, his Hairs and
Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. One
of which Privileges and Preheminences, by an express. Statute so annexed, and
that ever In terminis in the self same words, in a manner with those used in
the Oath, is the whole power of Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction for
the Correction, and Reformation of all manner of Errors and Abuses in matters
Ecclesiastical (such Jurisdictions, Privileges, Superiorities, and
Preheminences Spiritual, and Ecclesiastical, as by any, etc. for the
Visitation of the Ecclesiastical State and Persons, and for Reformation, Order
and Correction of the same, and of all manner of Errors, Hevesies, Schisms,
Abuses, Offenses, Contempts, and Enormities, shall for ever by Authority of
this present Parliament be united, and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, as by the words of the said Statute more at large appears. The Oath
affording the Proposition, and the Statute the Assumption, we find no way how
to avoid the Conclusion. The Statute is entitled, An Act Restoring to the
Crown the ancient Jurisdiction, etc. 1. Eliz. 1.

To these in brief thus.
I doubt not but many of your weaker Proselites esteem this Discourse so
harmonious, as to have power to make Stones dance, as they followed Amphion to
the Theban Walls, or to toss the lofty Offa and Banchaia, and take us all off
our Legs, as of old at the hearing the Odrysian Harp: But we will ponder your
Music.

1. If it be not lawful for you without manifest wrong to your selves,
Consciences, Reputation and Estates to reform your Doctrine. How was it
lawful for the first Broachers of your Articles, to pretend Reformation of the
Doctrines they had sworn unto under us, did not they bear false witness
against themselves, and are not you their issue conceived in Perjury? It is
ingenuously done of you, to confess you had a very considerable Eye to the
loss of your Estates, in refusing the Covenant, though experience now teaches
you, that the Covenanters themselves are not exempted from that loss. Non est
consilium contra Dominum, your policies did not succeed. How free were
Catholics from this Avarice? They prodigally exposed all, rather then to
grate upon their Consciences. This was not obstinacy but constancy, like the
old Christians in S. Basiles time, who would not admit the change of a
particle, superest disserere de Syllaba, oum unde caeperit, etc. No change of
Faith with them.

2. Catholics were forced (as much as in you lay) to condemn what they were
not, nor yet are convinced of in their Judgments, that the former, that is,
the old Catholic Doctrines are not agreeable to Gods Word; We must therefore
cry aloud with Tertullian (de Pres. c. 3.) against Hermogenes. Scriptum esse
doceat Hermogenis officinae, etc. Show us where it is written that we must
forsake stated truths for your variable conceits, altogether disagreeing from
Gods word. This plea will destroy you wholly, and with all Justice restore us at
least to a quiet condition under the Profession of our old Tenets. Ptolomey
(though of a different profession to both parties,) was thought capable to
determine the Schismatic Controversy of the two Temples of Jerusalem, and
Garizim.

3. Catholics did not only believe, but knew that their Doctrines were much
better, and more agreeable to the Word of God, and the practice of the
Catholic Church, then your fancies: And yet were compelled either to swear
to them, or lose all. Wise men do not only provide for the present in making
Laws, but foresee and prevent future, and as much as may be even possible
dangers. Had ye consulted with old Lycurgus, he found other ways to
perennize his own Laws, and persuade an Opinion of their Divine Origin: but
your Eutopia has destroyed it self by your own Fundamental Laws, they are
now with full force retorted upon your selves, as all men see, and consequently
enforce your ruin for want of Foundation.

Besides the falsity of your Doctrines in themselves, you have all the outward
Habiliments of Sectaries, by which the old Church of Christ discovered their
Novelties. Athanasius destroys Arianisme in his Tract of the Synods of
Arimine, and Seleucia by this most certain Argument. Vrsacius and Valens,
Geminius, cum caeteris suis Gregalibus id fecere, quod antea nec factum nec
auditum est apud Christianos. Cum enim Scripsissent eam fidem quam voluerunt,
addidere and Consulatum and mensem, diemque ejus temporis, ut omnibus
prudentibus palam facerent, non olim sed nunc demum eorum fidem sub Constantio
initium accepisse. Thus S. Basil (Ep. 82.) and the rest confuted Heresies even
by this Extrinsecall consideration, and it was always amongst Christians
esteemed sufficient to assign the Consulship, the time and day of their
Subscriptions. Which of you or us cannot retrive your form of Faith not only
to the reign of which Prince, but of the Lord Major under whom it began, even
with as much ease as this Act of the Convocation? The Pithagorians did use to
build Hearses for such, who should apostatize from Philosophy, esteeming them
no better then dead men; How much more should some such course be taken for
those, who forsake Christian Philosophy, and turn to Heresies and Errors!

I wonder you do not blush to pretend the practice of the Catholic Church:
Here is repugnantia in adjecto as Logitians speak, a Catholic Church
confined to England, you pretend no further then England, for you say true
Protestant Religion expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England; Indeed
this Island has been styled Orbis Britannicus, a World by it self, but it is
a very little Catholic Church, which encompaseth not this very Island. (For,
Scotland is excluded by your own Confession.) So that if this Island were the
World, it is not Catholic.

The reason why at Antioch the Name of Christians was added as a Surname to the
Believers in Christ; St. Athanasius in a Disputation against Arius sets down
to be, because they were before called Disciples, which Name also Dositheus,
one Judas and others (as well false as true Teachers) gave to their Disciples,
and therefore the Apostles, for distinction would have their Disciples to be
surnamed Christians, which was prophesied by Isaias e. 62. Servientibus mihi
vocabitur novum nomen, etc. yet afterward Heretics abusively took this Name
also, and rendered it execrable to the Pagans, by their ill lives and abominable
Doctrines, as Tertullian demonstrates in his Apologetico. Whereupon the
celebrated adjunct of Catholic was taken up and appropriated to Orthodox
Christians against the Marcionites, Harpocratians, and after the Donatists, and
the rest; of which also they were ambitious (as appears often in St.
Augustines Collations with them) even by as much title as you, peruse him, and
acknowledge your selves non Suited: the reason of this attribute was
universality, as Origin declares in his Dialogue, and all the ancient testify:
Pacianus wrote a whole Treatise of the very Name Catholic, which is yet
extant, though he lived somewhat before St. Hierome. Out of these examine your
Title, and you will find it vain, try it by this test, and learn to
renounce, what ye have unjustly usurped.

Your last plea of perjury was not admitted to Catholics, who adhered to
their first Tenants in the general revolt of this Country, yet you urge it
handsomely to convince all your Brethren of high perjury, in taking such an
Oath, which you your selves judge to be false, since ye deny that there is
such a power in Parliaments, as ye said above, and consequently in the Crown,
being all the pretense you allege; for it was from Parliaments.

This point of forcing men's Consciences with Oaths in matter of belief, is
excellently declared (in a Letter written by Sir Alexander Irving a Scot, dated
the 20. Jan. 1651. to the Presbytery of Aberdeen, and since Printed by
authority) to be greater then any other tyranny, namely to make men swear
that they believe, what the imposers know, or may presume they do not think:
This is a sure way to send the swearers to the Devil, especially if (to
complete their Malice) the Imposers should presently kill them, as I hear of a
Varlet, who out of revenge made a wretch first forswear his Religion, and then
instantly stabd him, lest he should live and repent.

I could wish you and others would vouchsafe to read, not our Schoolmen, that
were too much labor, but our Summists at least, to learn what conditions are
required in a Lawful taking, or imposing Oaths.

You proceed. The SECOND ARTICLE OF THE COVENANT.
First, is cannot, but affect us with some grief, and amazement to see that
ancient form of Church Government, which we heartily and (as we hope)
worthily honor, as under which our Religion was at first so orderly without
Violence or Tumults, and so happily reformed, and has since so long flourished
with Truth and Peace, to the honor, and happiness of our own, and the envy
and admiration of other Nations, not only

1. Endeavored to be extirpated, without any reason offered to our
understandings, for which it should be thought necessary, or but so much as
expedient so to do; But also

2. Ranked with Popery, Superstition, Heresy, Schism and profaneness, which
we unfainedly profess our selves to detest as much as any others whatsoever.

3. And that with some intimation also, as if that Government were some way or
other so contrary to sound Doctrine, or the power of Godliness, that whosoever
should not endeavor the extirpation thereof, must of necessity partake in
other men's sins, which we cannot yet be persuaded to believe.

To your first.
Was not England reformed from Infidelity to Christianity without violence or
tumult, and so continued till Henry the Eights rupture, both in body and mind?
did it not continue in admiration of all Nations, because it never admitted any
Heresies? was it not endeavored to be extirpated without any reasons offered
to our understanding, and? yet let me also tell you that your pretended
Reformation came not in, nor continued without violence. At the very first, was
there not violence offered in the first Parliament which began it in Edw. 6. time,
what course was then taken in the choice of Parliament men? again what violence
in keeping out the Bishops, who then were necessary Members, that the Vote
might be carried for suppression of Mass, and establishing your Common Prayer
Book. And did it not continue by blood? The only argument used to induce
Catholic to adhere to your new Schismatic Prelacy, was that, which began
and continues the Alcaron, which is the Sword, or (which is more ignominious)
the Gallows, Yet you live under those Governors, who promise not to exercise
violence upon Consciences, which is your happiness. But if they should make
use of your Laws, and argue with you ad hominem, that way out of your
principles, there would be title for cruelties enough: ye hare very closely
followed the steps of your predecessors the Donatists, whose bloody proxagation
of their Heresies St. Hierom in his Treatise against them toward the end of
the third Book, shows: So does Orosius also and St. Augustine, (of the City
of God) which he dedicated to Marcellinus, who was murdered by them. God
forbid that any Phalaris should put you to Perillus his punishment, recorded in
Ovid.

Et Phalaris tauro violenti memb a Perilli Torruit: in felix imbuit auctor
vpus. What a number of penal Laws were in your time and by your promotion,
made against tender Consciences? and how rigidly put in execution? How many
tyrannical Sentences and Censures did you pass in your high Comm ssion court,
for mere Peccadillo's? What Forfeitures and Mulcts were imposed on all such as
refused to be present at your adored Service of Common Prayer? which is now
become so nauseous to the generality of People, that it is not to be heard of
in the whole Nation, unless in some occult or remote Crany, and of whose
Origin, continuation, and Exit, you may take this as a sure record, that it was
established by a Parliament on the 29 of May, 1549. and was abolished on the 26
of November. 1644. by the like authority; Thus long did it, and your Religion
continue, without flourishing, either to the happiness of our own, or to the
envy or admiration of any other Nation.

But on the contrary, is it not most apparent, that these and such like your
unchristian actions and fanatique Innovations, were the only cause of all our
late troubles?

Hinc illae Lachrymae.
From this Source has issued a stream of blood, and a fountain of tears in the
late wars; Nor can it seem strange, that Almighty God should at length
unsheath his sword to revenge the innocent: You know Haman was hanged on the
Gallows, which he erected for Mardocheus: But we pray, that you may find
mercy.

To the Second.
Was not Catholic Religion by you called Popery, and ranked with Superstation?
etc. and has it not by your selves to this day been so calumniated amongst the
common people, that they do yet take it to be really so? In so much that one of
your learned Prelates (whose name out of civility I spare, for I fight not
against persons, but causes) being asked by a grave gentleman of your Prelatick
Church, why you did accuse the Church of Rome of such crimes, as Superstition
and Idolatry, which she had suppressed in this Nation, and in the whole world,
as all Histories witness. Your Bishop answered ingenuously, That this Prelatick
Protestancy began with lies and so it must continue. Hence this Gentleman took
his rise to become Catholic, Credidit and domus ejus iota.
and all his Family. Let not any man much wonder at this private confession of
the Bishop, for it is very well consistent with what others have taught in
public. Mr. Gregory in his Opuscula page 145. has these words; We make
Religion but a politic engine; which being supposed, the Bishop would not have
had much labor to prove his Thesis.

It Is pretty to observe what strange devises Bishop Bancroft and others used to
raise schisms amongst Catholics, as was confessed in Parliament; as S.
Augustine says of Julian, By this means he thought to destroy the Christian
name, when out of his envy to the Churches unity, whence he had fallen, he
permitted sacrilegious dissentions, to be free from censure. You see whence
they derived their Machiavelisme; but all in vain, we all stick to the rock,
when their sandy foundation fails. And question less it had failed as soon as
conceived, if the people had not easily been carried away with any, though mere
appearances of Reformation, and the hope of gain, by the suppression of
religious houses, according to that, Sparta diu stetit, non quod Rex been
imperabat, sed quia populus been parebat. You are well read in the history of
Perkin Warbeek, he had so long lied in personating a King, that the Lord
Chancellor Bacon says, he did at last verily think himself to be the King.
And really I do believe you had so long told this untruth of Catholics, that
many of you began to believe, that we were superstitious indeed; your serious
manner of speaking would almost make us think so, were not the thing so
ridiculous; that we should be superstitious, who only have destroyed
superstition, to the astonishment of the world.

Who could believe that D. Usher should not blush to preach so impudent an
untruth, as that Catholics hold Fornication to be lawful; against
Scriptures, Fathers, and Counsels, and the very Catechismes wherewith we teach
our children yet this he said on Sunday the 25. of Jan. 1651. at Lincolns-Inne.
I would not mention so high a crime to his dishonor, if it had not been
committed in that public Theater and so first published by himself. And by
this we see what ground the other Bishop had for his ingenuous Confession.

To your third.
Still it runs right. Here is poem talionis, which God inflicts upon you.
Reflect upon this well, and se^ how justly God has retorted upon you, what
your Pulpits belched constantly against us for so many years, and through our
sides against your and our parents, and against the whole Catholic world, in
respect of which, ye deserve not the imaginary title of a Shadow.

But you go on.
4. And we desire it may be considered, in case a Covenant of like form should
be tendered to the Citizens of London, wherein they should be required to swear
they would sincerely, really, and constantly, without respect of persons,
endeavor the extirpation of Treason, (the City Government by a Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, Sheriffs, Common Council, and other Officers depending thereon)
murder, adultery, theft, cosenage, and whatsoever shall be, etc. left they
should partake in other men's sins; whether such a tendry could be looked upon
by any Citizen that had the least spirit of freedom in him, as an act of
justice, meekness and reason.

How still it runs alike, and justly to be retorted upon you from Catholics,
and with some notorious advantage: for this plea of yours is but a pretty
fancy, and ends in words, but you have gone further with us, we have been
publicly and ignominiously hanged with murderers, thieves, and reputed
Traitors; and these have been looked upon by you, as acts of justice, meekness
and reason; as appears in my L. of Canterbury his Epistle to the late King. But
we will hear you further.

Secondly, for Episcopal Government; we are not satisfied how we can with a
good conscience swear to endeavor the extirpation thereof; first in respect of
the thing it self; concerning which Government we think we have reason to
believe;

1. That it is (if not Jure Divino in the strictest sense, that is to say,
expressly commanded by God in his Word) yet of Apostolical Institution, that
is to say, was established in the Churches by the Apostles, according to the
mind, and after the example of their Master Jesus Christ, and that by virtue of
their ordinary power, and authority derived from him, as deputed by him
Governors of his Church.

2. Or at least, that Episcopal Aristocracy has a fairer pretention, and may
lay a juster title and claim to a divine justification, then any of the other
forms of Church Government can do; all which yet do pretend thereunto (viz.)
that of the Papal Monarchy, that of the Presbyterian Democracy, and that of
the Independents by particular Congregations, or gathered Churches.

How feebly do these (however learned) men argue in this radical point, which
cuts the very sinews and heart strings of their Idol: their motions are
unequal, like a hen, when her head is struck off, they skip and leap
inordinately with If's and Ana's. B. Usher at the Isle of Wight gave a short
come off, saying, that the Government by Bishops was not so necessary, as to
break the peace for it; yet he scruples not to break the peace of the
universal Church, for things which they all confess less necessary. In fine,
all of you are very short in this fundamental point; I love Lypsius his
Laconisme, rather then Cicero'es Dilatations; but this must be considered
promateria substrata: this matter needed all possible to picks to strengthen
it, if you had them; but I see your pantry is slenderly provided, forasmuch as
concerns your title to Episcopacy, which is your aim to defend, I will
afterward show the weakness of your title.

Had you consulted the Archives of the University, and retrived the business
now in hand to Wickliffs time and Tenets, you would have found another kind of
solution registered of the Convocation house, and I believe much more savouring
of well-grounded Divinity, as applied to Episcopacy in it self, not to yours.
For the comparison you make of Episcopal Aristocracy, and Papal Monarchy, are
terms, which your young Sophisters call Oucategorimaticall, they signify
nothing as to this purpose; For the question is not which is best, but whether
the first can be without the last; you must first secure us de re, then de modo.

For example, there is a controversy betwixt Aristotle and Galen, whether the
seat of the soul is in the head or heart: it were little to their purpose to
assert one of these to be better then the other, as separate from the other in
its own nature; but the way to determine it, is from the operations of the
soul, to see first if it will give life to one without the other; and
therefore Averroes says, that he saw a ram walk a little when the head was
struck off: Truly this proof will hold in you; you have made a great bluster
for a time, since the Popes head was taken off by Harry the VIII but ye see now
you could continue no more then Averro's ^^am, because your life was from the
Pope; and upon this supposition, the second question cease.

Ye go on.
2. But we are assured by the undoubted testimony of ancient Records, and later
Histories, that this form of Government has been continued with such an
universal, uninterrupted, unquestioned succession in all the Churches of God,
and in all the Kingdoms that have been called Christian throughout the whole
world, for fifteen hundred years together, that there never was in all that
time any considerable opposition made thereagainst. That of Acrius was the
greatest wherein yet there was little consideration beside these two things;
that it grew at the first but out of discontent, and gained him at the last but
the reputation of an Heretic. From which antiquity and continuance, we have
just cause to fear that to endeavor the extirpation thereof, etc.

Excuse me that I tell you here again you speak high words without sense, as
they are applied to your pretense of Episcopacy. It is a great truth, that Gods
Church was universally governed by Bishops; but this is not the question, but
whether your Schismatic Bishops succeeded lawfully from that old Episcopacy;
that is, whether the Church of God acknowledged Episcopacy lawful, which
erected Altar against Altar, which stood in division from all Bishops
throughout the rest of the world, and could not give letters Communicatories to
Rome, or to the other Patriarchs.

Your Proposition I deny not, being in it self true; as in the Council of
Constantinople, where under Arcadius, Origen's books were questioned; the
Fathers rejected not such books as were found Orthodox, notwithstanding his
others were full of err^^s; and ^oth S. Hierome Ep. 75. and S. Aug. Ep. 9.
followed the same method in them, and after the Se^ Apostolic. But as ve^
quivocally use the term Episcopacy, as signifying your nothing, so I must deny
it, and connumerate it with your errors.

Again, you strike upon Tradition for your Episcopacy, wherein you commit a
great soloecism in Divinity. If it had been for Episcopacy in it self, without
restriction to your Idol, you had come home indeed; but as it was presented in
your pide-coloured tincture, it was never amongst the Ancient, except Colythus
and his accomplices might be admitted into the head of your list, from whom you
have an Jschyrian generation of Priests; which S. Athanasius, and (as he
assures us) the general Council, and (I am sure) the whole Church ever since
condemned for spurious.

But in good earnest, it is strange to see with what modesty you esteem a mere
pretenses for as much as concerns your Episcopacy of fifteen hundred years
possession, to be an invincible plea in this point, and a real and clear
prescription for so many ages shall not hold for all others, as most
undoubtedly there was not any considerable opposition against Mass, till
Calvin's time; ( Luther was not so impudent as to take it away,) and how he
fared in the sense of the whole Church, we all know; and so for many more high
Articles (of which I speak afterward) wherein you are fallen: All men, careful
of their souls, will sadly consider this.

It was truly and usually said of an eminent Bishop of your Order, that he was
Puritanus tantum non in Episcopatu. The same is as truly said of these
pretenders to Episcopacy; that they condemn Antiquity in all things except
Episcopacy: If novelty be not lawful in this, why in all other doctrines,
which you relinquisht against Antiquity? It Is not Antiquity, but fancy and
ambition you follow, else a true Syllogism in the same form will always conclude.

You put me in mind of the Ass, who wresting Orpheus his sharp out of Apollo's
hand, played so ill-favouredly, that the very dogs barked at him. I will not be
thought to apply this to you, yet I must needs say that you begin to wrest our
divine Arguments out of our hands, and ye handle them so unhandsomly and
jarringly from all our and your principles, that all sorts of men will see,
whence, and how injuriously you take them.

You go on.
1. -- Would give such advantage to the Papists who usually object against us
and our Religion, the contempt of antiquity, and the love of novelty, that we
should not be able to wipe off the aspersion.

2. Would so diminish the just authority due to the consentient judgment and
practice of the universal Church; the best Interpreter of Scriptures in things
not clearly expressed; Reader, observe what necessity there is for all sorts of
Christians to recurre to Tradition.
(for, Lex currit cum praxi) that without it we should be at a loss in sundry
points, both of faith and manners, at this day firmly believed, and securely
practiced by us; when by the Socinians, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, we
should be called upon for our proofs. As namely, sundry Orthodoxall
explications concerning the Trinity and Coequality of the persons in the
Godhead against the Arians and other Heretics; the number, use, and efficacy
of Sacraments; the Baptizing of Infants National Churches; the observation of
the Lords day; and even the Canon of Scripture it self.

3. In respect of our selves, we are not satisfied, how it can stand with the
Principles of Justice, Ingenuity, and Humanity, to require the extirpation of
Episcopal Government, (unless it had been first clearly demonstrated to be
unlawful) to be sincerely and really endeavored by us.

To the first.
Indeed you cannot wipe off the aspersion, no more then a Blackmore his color.
You have given us a strange advantage; and in this one passage put an affront
upon all your former abettors. An eminent person of your order, (being urged
with the antiquity of our tenets) replied, that if things were to be salved by
antiquity, then sin would challenge great pre-eminency. Thus far has this plea
been derided by you. I could fill and foul many sheets, in giving a syllable of
your Authors for this. Yet all ancient Fathers and Counsels esteemed this an
infallible Plea; and therefore the Nicene Fathers, as appears in Athan. his
Epistle of the Nicene Decrees, cried, Ecce nos demonstramus istiusmodi
sententiam, a patribus ad patres, quasi per manus traditam esse. They esteemed
it enough to show a constant descent of their faith, and this is our challenge
against you.

To the second.
I see you forget that your 6.20.21. Articles exclude all orall Traditions, it
has been the maine pretended cause of scandal, and (as ye have judged it)
most fundamental, that Catholics plead a necessity of Apostolical I
raditions with the divine Scriptures. Have not all the books of your Writers to
this day been filled in proof of the sufficiency of Scriptures? and yet now
even in the highest points of Christian Doctrine, you acknowledge a necessity
to have recourse to Tradition: what man could have read this your second
reason, and not have conceived that this Praelatike slip had been again
inserted into the old incorruptible Trunk or Body of the Catholic Church? but
the truth is, that self-interest compells you to speak truth against your old
Doctrines: this blow has struck you under the fifth rib; and like the poor
Pilgrim of Hiericho, laid you wholly on your backs, as objects of pity.

You specify here many of the highest mysteries, and to omit the rest; you
acknowledge, that the Orthodox explication of the B. Trinity cannot be had from
the Scripture alone without the Church. Have not we then reason to confess the
Scripture alone not sufficient? If you did stand to this truth, there had not
been such subdivisions of sects, who deny the B. Trinity, amongst you. I have
not indeed heard of many who embrace Arrius his Tenet, that is, that the Son is
God, but not co-eternall with the Father, nor equal to him, as Athanasius
shows that he held; but there are under the latitude of the Praelatique party,
who with Paulus Samosatenus, Corpocras, etc. call in question his Deity, and
restrain him to his humanity; and hence some eminent persons, taking scandal,
left you, and are joined to the Catholic Church.

Nay, you are not ashamed to run, though vainly, to Traditions, for the
chiefest grounds of your own Praelative Sect, herein confessing, that,
Scripture cannot reach them: But to leave this to your selves, let me instance
more of our Doctrines which you most calumniate. What more universal Tradition
was extant then Mass? that is the propitiatory Sacrifice of the Body and Blood
of Christ, offered daily and perpetually for the living and the dead. Read Mr.
Perkins his Problemes, he tells you, that it was universally believed, that
Christ gave his true Body and Blood at his last Supper. Ask all the Liturgies
since Christ. In like manner read them for Jnvocation of Saints, and Prayers
for the Dead.

Nay that you may be assured, ask a Heathen Historian Ammianus Marcellinus, he
will secure you, that Christian Religion teaches Cultum Sanctorum, and to make
addresses to them, as he writes to Valentinian. If you bad yet rather have a
Schismatique of your own stamp, ask Lucilla a Patroness of the Donatists in
lib. 1. of Optatus Millevitan.

As for prayers for the dead in order to remission of debts after this life,
before that great day of general jail-delivery, or last fiery purgation, it
was (as I conceive) practiced always according to the sense of the Church
universal by the East and West, and judged very profitable by them all. To
omit particular Greek and Latin Fathers, it seems in the Council of
Florence to be the sense of the Greek and Latin Church, as appears in the
narration of the whole dispute, printed at Leiden in Holland; and the
definition of the Council it self seems to come exceeding home, where, in
defining what souls come to heaven before the day of Judgment (for that is the
question there decided) the Fathers spoke thus: Illorum etiam animas, qui post
baptismum susceptum, nullam omnino peccati maculam incurrerunt, illas etiam
quae post contractam peccati maculam vel in suis corperibus, vel eisdem exuti
corporibus (prout dictum est superius) sunt purgatae, in coelum mox recipi,
etc. Here they suppose some souls to be purged before the last day, else the
discourse is not consequent, nor to the purpose: Which also is clear in Pope
Benedict XI. his Extravagant, which begins Benedictus Dens, etc. where,
defining the same truth agitated under John 22. his words are, Si tum erit
aliquod purgabile in eisdem, lamen post mortem suam purgabunt, etc. etiam ante
resumptionem suorum corporum and judicium generale, etc. erunt in coelo, etc.
He defines that some will be purged before the retaking of their bodies, and
the general judgment, and will go to heaven.

This definition opens fully the sense of the definition of Florence, which is
made in conformity to this, and almost in the very same words: so that I do not
easily see what can be desired more. The sense of the old Church S. Augustine
declares in his Enchyridion to Laurence, where speaking of such souls, he
says, quanto magis minusve bona pereuntia dilexerunt, tanto tardius, citiusque
salvari. This clears all: Its true, he leaves the fire of Purgatory somewhat
disputable, (which is not yet desined) but he clears the meaning of Christians
in their durance there; and indeed tells us, what the old Fathers, and
Liturgies, and Counsels, signified in their degrees and practices of helping
the dead by suffrages, which was, that answerably to their demerits, they
might, tardius citiusve salvari.

There were many Foundations in this Nation made piously by your and our
Predecessouis for the dead, which you perverted to profane uses, as
maintaining wives and children with manifest neglect, and even professed
contempt of praying for the dead, as holding it unprofitable and useless,
contrary to all antiquity; wherein you committed theft and sacrilege according
to the Canons Concilii Vasensis; Amico quippiam rapere furtum est, and
ecclesia^ fraudare sacrilegium: and the Canon spea ^s of this very matter
largely. And the fourth Council of Carthage c. 95. says, Qui oblationes
defunctorum aut negant ecclesiis, aut cum difficultate reddunt tanquam egentium
necatores, excommunicentur; They are excommunicated as murderers. Other Synods
are as severe, which I omit, these signifying sufficiently the sense of the old
Church.

See your friends of Magdeburg, for these and for the rest of the Doctrines,
wherein you differ from us, whether antiquity did not ackdowledge them. Ask B.
Usher and the rest, who have any ingenuity amongst you, whether the Popes
Supremacy was not acknowledged? Read the history of the famous Dionisius Bishop
of Corinth, in Eusebius and S. Hierome, who lived under Antoninus Verus; you
know how near this was to the Apostles, you will conclude of how great
authority the Popes of Rome were in those first days, when their commands
(signified in their Epistles) were (even amongst the Greeks) published in the
Churches in time of Divine Service by the Bishops; and S. Epiphanius (in Panar.
heresi. 30. against the Ebions) witnesses, that S. Clement his Encycles were
solemnly read in Churches, which was an act of high reverence, far from your
scorn of that Supreme Seat. See for this and all other points, even all true
General Counsels to this day, they will let you see clearly. Ask Perkins, and
your most eminent Writers, whether almost all the Tenants, for which you
separte from us, were not held above 1300. years.

If Traditions prove Episcopacy, they will as well prove the rest. Truly this
sole Paragraph destroys all your Praelatique Protestancy, and renders you to
your first condition of invisibility, where ye lay for 1500. years hidden, not
in Abraham's bosom: But if you can feign any existence, it must be in some
occult receptacles, or crany holes of your own fancies. Plato's Ideas, though
fanatique enough, never reached you, but Luther being in drink, and his fancy
weakened, first began to dream of you, though confusedly. I know many of you are
well acquainted with Gyges his Ring, which renders you invisible at pleasure,
but you have not the perfect use of it, else you could as well make your selves
visible to all the world. Your old friend B. White and B. Usher labored much
to get this art, but unsuccessefully, I must needs touch this main point a
little farther.

I more commend Monsieur D'ally, Chillingworth, and all his schools ingenuity,
who though they enervate the grounds of Christianity, yet they far more
consequently deny the Fathers to have that authority, which Catholics and the
General Counsels universally give them, in clearing points of faith (as in the
first four, where they were alleged, examined, and accordingly Faith declared
by their authorities, and so in every Council hitherto in point of Christian
Doctrine) then you, who play fast and loose. Here you pretend necessity and
high authority for Tradition, which must needs be conveyed by them to us, and
in all your works (as I have noted, and as all know) you have cried out against
it, as not being necessary. Thus you fight and contradict each other, and your
selves in these fundamentalls.

I remember Plato in his Timaeo tells of an Egyptian Priest, who thus spoke to
Solon; O Solon! Solon! vos quidem Graeci pueri semper estis, senex autem
Graecorum nemo, nulla est enim apud vos disciplina quae senio incanuerit. Will
not this come home to you? if your years are to be numbered with the continuance
of your doctrines, surely you will never be very aged.

Since you have touched this point of the Fathers, let me put in one
observation, whereby any ignorant person may judge, whether the Fathers (of how
great or little authority soever they are with you) were Protestants or
Catholics, without discussing their many volumes, which only learned men can
master; that is, look upon their persons, see what they were in themselves,
peruse their lives, without their books; was not S. Augustine confessedly a
Priest? l. 9. Conf. c. 11, 12, 13, etc. Vita ejus a Possidio. De moribus
eccles. Cath. Ep. 90.92.45. and aliis.
unmarried? did he not say Mass? that is, offer up the body and blood of
Christ in sacrifice for the living and the dead? was he not Bishop of Hippo?
did he not institute a religious order of Monks? did he not in fact acknowledge
the Pope to be Head of the Church, and his Superior? etc. Whether could he
with these be a Protestant? Nay, whether were not many upon far less grouds
often convicted at Newgate for Popish Priests, and in your reign hanged and
quartered. Take the same course with S. Hierome, Vita ejus Ep. 25. ad Aug. and
alibi.
was he not a Monk, a Priest, unmarried, said Mass, a subject of S. Damasus
Pope? Vita Ambrofit ante ejus opera. to. 5. collecta ex operibus ejus. See his
Dialogue and Register. See his life.
etc. Take S. Ambrose, was he not a Bishop, and in the same sense a Priest,
that is in your language a Sacrificant of the body and blood of Christ,
unmarried, subject to Rome? etc. Take S. Gregory, See S. Gregory Nazianzen in
his Oration of S. Basile.
he was not only a Priest unmarried, but a Pope, and began a Religious Order.

If you go to the Greek Fathers, S. Bafile was a Monk, instituted a religious
Order, a Priest, a Bishop unmarried, made a form of Mass, used this day by the
Greek Church, etc. and all these and the rest lived and died in the communion
of the Church of Rome: Ask your selves, whether these could be other then
Papists. Take twelve men from the Sessions in the Old Baily, put them upon the
same test that you did our Priests, tell me what the Verdict will be. This
consideration alone is sufficient to compel any reasonable man to become
Catholic; and to see that your Praelatique Protestancy is a Bull in
Christianity, involving manifest implicancy.

I should advise you therefore to leave the Fathers, renounce them; nay, you will
do well to make an act of your Convocation for this; and as you have new
Doctrines, get new Patrons, your own fancies will be best, colored with the
name of reason, though abusively, as your more elevated wits of late have done
with your allowance, as appears in the public approbations of Chillingworth.

S. Gregory Nissen writing the life of Gregory the Wonder-worker, comes home to
this, saying that there were Nonnulli qui piam and sinceram religionis
doctrinam adulterarent, ac per probabiles argumentationes se penumero etiam
doctis and prudentibus viris veritatem facerent ambiguam. There were some who
would adulterate the sincerity and piety of Christian Doctrine by apparent
probability of reason, insomuch that even learned and prudent men would be
caught by them. I would that too too many were not taken with this gilded
engine to the prejudice of Christianity.

Examine whether this warrants not all Catholics from consenting to your new
Articles, and all your Proselites to leave you, for them? was it ever clearly
demonstrated to be unlawful to continue in the Roman Faith? nay has not the
contrary been demonstrated by arguments, and confirmed by suffering death for
it, by learned men. You would seem here to have a sense of the principles of
justice, ingenuity and humanity, though they are not proportionable Pleas for
persuasion of Christianity; neither did the Apostles by civilities court men to
become Christians; yet some respect might in the beginning of your revolt, and
now also be used to Catholics upon these titles, since England received their
first knowledge of Christ from the Pope, and all Church endowments from them,
they should not in justice, ingenuity, and humanity, be persecuted for these
good deeds, as they have been by you, though some of you I know were of milder
spirits, and disliked such cruelties.

After in the numbers ensuing you bring more motives, but they are domestique,
within your own walls, as some of the former were; but as far as they have any
force, more strongly convince a necessity for the continuance or re-assuming of
Catholic Religion; though many of them are rather drawn from the kitchen then
the Church; there is little Christian Philosophy here, but much of Praelatique
policy, as from Deanaries, fat perfonages, etc. which are also glanced at in
the former Article. I omit also the joined Paragraphs, being very extrinsecall
to our purpose, and indeed to the business, only ye seem to strike at the
present Parliament, wherein we leave you, desiring you may be comprehended in
the Act of perpetual Oblivion.

You are indeed in the pursuit contented, that Princes have Papal rights, upon
condition, that you may have Episcopal honors and benefices; you speak it very
plainly, and join them as closely, you plead hard also for Bishops out of
another topic, namely, because (as you say) King James had learned by
experience, that no Bishop, no King. Our former histories I believe could give
some strength to such a pretense, but this kind of argumentation ever since
your time was antiquated in England, for you were ever in true Logic, in the
judgment of all the Church-Praelates (beside your selves) no other then
equivocally Bishops, that is idem nomen, and ratio diversa.

So that it was always (since you were concerned in it, and now much more)
acknowledged by all other divines to be subjectum non supponens, that is a
subject which signifies nothing: I discuss not here at large, whether it was
for lack of true form, or matter, or Ministry, which are all required in true
Ordination; yet you know it is hard enough to prove that you had either: your
form, especially of Priesthood, as used in the sense of your Authors, in the
more general opinion, is not valid any more then the Arrians Baptism; of
Episcopacy also it is dubious, however if Priesthood fails, Bishops fall, matter
ye reject, as not necessary, and therefore you keep imposition of hands, as a
ceremony only, as many among you teach; so that it cannot be cleared, that you
had any, much less all necessaries.

Wherefore it must be presumed, that here was some essential defect, and
consequently no Ordination, if no Ordination, no Sacraments, by your ordinary
Ministry. And from hence how many have we known, who (without your note of
Apostasy) have left your pretended Priesthood and became Lay-persons; as
Soldiers, Physicians, and the like, according to that of Tertul. de Praescrip,
Alius hodie Episcopus, cras alius: hodie Diaconus qui cras Lector, hodie
Presbyter qui cras Laicus. Some of you have indeed strugled hard for your
succession from us, as the Donatists did, and therefore they supposed a Bishop
at Rome, from whom they might seem still to descend, wherein they did more
wisely then you, who judge him Antichrist, who is your Head, according to your
own Tenets; but you could never clear this imaginary title even of your
Ministry; For first, though your Record were true, as touching the matter of
fact in the Ordination of Archbishop Parker, which will never be cleared, for
it is gathered out of Stow, 1. Eliz. Holinshed, and other Protestant
Historians, that Parker and the rest of your first pretended Bishops were
Bishops in your account before these Consecrators returned into England (having
run away in Q. Mary's reign) therefore not ordained by them, and by consequence
the Record cannot be true; Yet if it were, there are many titles will render
all invalid, especially as touching the pretended Ordainers Ordinations.

Hodgkinson was one of the 26. who were instituted in the time of Henry the
8th. his Schism; if he were ordained, it was by the new form, which ( Sanders
says) the King newly prescribed to Bishops, and consequently of no effect:
Barlow was elected of Asaph, and nominated Menevensis, but no man has hitherto
proved, that he was at all ordained; Scory and Coverdal were elected under Edw.
6. but not ordained by a lawful Bishop, as that diligent and near neighbor to
those times (Sanders) shows. Landaff indeed was a true Catholic, though
pusillanimous Bishop; but being threatened excommunication by Bonner, Bishop of
London, if he should ordain them, he feigned himself sick, and declined the
matter. And it must be highly considerable, that Bishop Oglethorp, Bishop of
Carlisle, Kitchen, Bishop of Landaff, and other Bishops never acknowledged
them, as validly ordained: Yet if all were true, (since some eminent Divines
hold, that to ordain is an act of jurisdiction; and almost all hold, that
jurisdiction, at least in the exercise, is lost by deposition or
excommunication) the title of your succession cannot be certain.

Secondly, You should be well read in the opinion of Armachanus, Panormitanus,
Delphinus, which Scotur is thought to hold probable, and Durand will not have
to be erroneous, out of S. Hierome, which if supposed, would crush you wholly.
I only propound this to you, as being consonant to your doctrine in this Act,
in the Paragraph concerning Episcopal Government, and destructive to your
succession, because by this opinion all titles except divine, which your Act
challenges not, are surely lost, because as Tertul. in the place cited says,
Ordinationes eorum temerariae, leves, inconstantes: wanting divine foundation,
they must needs totter.

Thirdly the confusion at the Nags. head, witnessed by such who were present
and afterward suffered severe imprisonment, for their conscience, must needs
make a considerable argument for your nullity, these aver'd that Landaff having
withdrawn himself, Scory was suffected Ordainer, who laying his hands over
their heads with the Bible, said; Take power to preach the word of God
sincerely. So that he doing it alone, and in this only form, nothing was done,
which will convince a nullity in all your first pretended Bishops, and
consequently in all those who have been ordained by them, which renders the
whole to be invalid, because it cannot appear that the sequent Ordainers were
not descended from these Parliamentary Bishops, as Sanders calls them, in that
they supplicated the Parliament to confirm them, and to supply what was
wanting, according to holy Churches Doctrine and practice.

Lastly, Christian Divinity teaches us, that in the matter of Sacraments, all
are obliged to follow the more certain opinions, and to leave the less
probable; whence it follows, that all your Proselites are bound, though there
were some probability for your Ordination, to leave you, and return to us,
where it is unquestionable, according to your confessed Principles.

Hence it appears in what a dangerous praecipice all souls are, who depend on
you for Sacraments, since your title at the best is uncertain; and how secure
are those of our Communion, even according to your principles, since all you
pretend is from us: yet I know not whence, somewhat you seemed also to have in
point of Jurisdiction, which belonged to true Episcopacy, and this you
exercised with unexemplar severity, by imposing Oaths ex Officio, and the like,
not only praeter but contra, Canonical burdens, extremely hard to all, who
did not even superstitiously adhere to you, and these your proceedings, were
judged highly prejudicial to the last King.

But to return to your proposition: it would admit a greater truth being
modified according to your intention with that which Logicians call a simple
conversion, thus, no King, no Bishop, and for this you need not argue ab
authoritate, al of us will grant it in order to you, and out of this
self-interest I should almost conceive you wish the one with the other, but not
a King, without a Bishop: Your whole discourse inclines to this. And for the
former Aphorism, indeed your reformed Episcopacy had no such influence upon the
people, as to conclude no Bishop, no King; their uxorious complexion rendered
them too vulgar and contemptible: You pretend indeed much zeal for the late
King, especially lest he should be perjured in violating his oath of preserving
your Privileges: But it is conceived to be a fallacy of non causa, pro causa,
and grounded not upon amor amicitiae, but concupiscentiae, that is, you loved
him for your own sakes, you would not have him forswear, lest you lose all. So
you are tender against sacrilege, whereas none are ignorant that your
Reformation was grounded upon it, the ruinous walls of houses dedicated to Gods
service witness it, and the Bishoprics of Oxford, Peterborough, Bristol,
Chester, and Gloucester were wholly founded upon Church-rapine: But as in the
former, so in this, you are suspected to seek quae vestra sunt, non quae Jesu
Christi.

Finally ye add.
We hope we shall be the less blamed for our unwillingnesse to have any
actual concurrence in the extirpating of Episcopal Government, seeing of such
extirpation there is no other use imaginable, but either the alienation of
their revenues and inheritances, (which how it can be severed from sacrilege
and injustice, we leave others to find out) or to make way for the introducing
of some other form of Church Government; which whatsoever it shall be, will (as
we think) prove either destructive of, and inconsistent with Monarchical
Government, or at leastwise more prejudicial to the peaceable, orderly, and
effectual exercise thereof, then a well regulated Episcopacy can possibly be.

These were the last words of the dying Praelacy, and Praelatique Protestancy.
And truly the conjunction of them is so weak, as being drawn a Posteriori, and
from very remote and extrinsecall topics, that they declare your cause
desperate. Alas, why would you trouble your selves, us, and the world with a
tedious contrast about a pure fanatique Idol, which as in this upshot appears,
had never any real foundation, but only civitas solis, a pretty invented
Eutopia in the Sun, where none but Knights Errant appeared in battle, and like
high-drawn Meteors vanished in the midst of the ayery combat, leaving some
ill-savours behind them, which require suffumigations of sacred incense, or at
least aspersions of holy Water.

These last words being pronounced, you quitted the stage; the Chorus replying
sadly.

How truly may we apply to you our blessed Saviors inculcation to the Jews;
Quoties volui, etc. you have murdered his Prophets and Apostles lawfully sent
to you for above 80. years, you have had their examples of Christian fortitude
in undergoing cruel deaths for the ancient Religion of Gods universal Church,
and of this Nation from the infancy of Christianity here, and you would not be
advised by them. Wherefore you are now dissipated, and none will receive you:
The Catholic Church declines you, all Protestant Congregations disclaim you,
which the B. of Cant. at the Council table confessed, when (upon a false
rumor of his flying beyong Seas) he said, If he were minded to leave England,
he knew not whither to go.

All that now remains of your Religion within the whole Dominion of this
Nation by authority, is, that among the Articles upon the surrender of Virginia
to the Parliaments navall forces dated the 12. of March 1651. The 11. Article
is this, That the use of the Common Prayer Book be permitted there for one
year ensuing, etc.

God in nature, in all ordinate motions to corruption, never cease, till the
subject be reduced to materia prima, that is to your first invisibility,
wherein you now are; therefore you must content your selves to be numbered,
inter non entia, for the Law says, De non existentibus, and not apparentibus
eadem est ratio.

Truly I am of opinion that future ages, which shall read your history, will
take it to be a Romance; it seems so full of prettily contrived implicancies;
like the old Romans, who endeavored by a tumultuous noise of kettles to
enchant the Moon; you have entertained this little world with high noyses in
Pulpits, in hope to enchant the Inhabitants, but the curtain being opened all
vanishes.

What God will work out of this (for generation certainly follows corruption)
we yet know not, only we learn (according to Aristotle) that the more imperfect
form is first produced, and then the more Noble; as in man, first the
vegetative, then the sensitive, and at last the intellectual.

The Synagogue had three States even after Christ's coming first it was
obligatory til Christ's Passion; it was lawful, not profitable till Pentecost:
but from thence (after sufficient promulgation of the Gospel) it was unlawful
every where: By these descents, it was degraded, and honorably buried. And
truly somewhat after this manner, though not so handsomely in the close, your
Episcopal Idol was to be adored under obligation from 1. Eliz. till the
beginning of this Parliament, when your Bishops came to their purgation: Then
the Idol was reduced to the second state of being lawful, not profitable or
obligatory: this continued til the Covenant was established by Parliament in
Sept. 1643. From thence it became unlawful, and so ingloriously expired, yet
was not publicly exposed in order to interment, till the Common Prayer Book
was (on the 26. of November. 1644.) voted down by Parl^an ^nt, and the
Presbyterian Directory established in its room (which is since also vanished;)
Moving and inviting all Catholics, Presbyterians, and Independents to sing
the Dirige of O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, quae occidis Prophetas etc. they shall
not leave on thee one stone upon another, Luke 19.

All passengers will easily see the reason of the ruin of this highbuilt Babel
to be, because they made the walls without Mortar; they neither had unity,
community, nor antiquity, which only can cement a Christian structure.

The Roman world was astonished to see the Pompeian faction, having the
conscript Fathers of Senate joined in and with them, to be so often, and at
last totally routed: their answer which Cicero celebrates, was, Nemo mirari
debet humana concilia divina necessitate esse superata. The same answer in a
Christian sense may be given, as cause of your ruin, Gods decrees have
evacuated your ayery policies.

Let me with all possible instance, and charitable seriousness conclude to all
our Country men with S. Augustine in his seventeenth chapter, de utilitate
credendi, written to Honoratus, wherein he first shows the power and prejudice,
which habits and customs work in us, as if he would admonish all to suspect
themselves; and therefore since Religion is a business of so high concernment,
as upon which our salvation radically depends, you will do well to examine,
whether it is not custom, rather then Christian reason, which keeps you where
you are, without duly weighing the grounds.

Be pleased seriously to read and ponder S. Augustine, who had deeply studied
(in this Treatise against the Manichees) your very case: see a summary of the
grounds of true Religion, you need read no more: truly this sole chapter well
pondred and the great truths therein well observed, are able to satisfy all the
world, and powerfully to compel your relinquishing an ill-drawn picture of a
Church, which hitherto you have exhibited to the world, his words are these;

All customs have such virtue and power to win the love and affection of men,
that we sooner can condemn and detest even the things that are naught and
wicked in them, then forsake and change them; and this for the most part comes
to pass, when our unlawful appetites and desires have gotten a Dominion and
predominancy over us. Do not thou think that great care has been taken
about the affairs of mankind and that they are put into a good state and
condition, that not only Divines, but most learned men do argue and contend,
that nothing that is earthly, nothing that is fiery; finally nothing that is
perceptible by the corporal senses ought to be worshipped and adored for God,
but that he is to be prayed unto, entreated and supplicated only by the
understanding or intellectual power; but also that the unskilful multitude of
both sexes, does in so many and so diverse Nations, both believe it and publish
it? that there is continency and forbearance of meats, even to the most slender
diet of bread and water, and fastings, not for one day only, but also continued
for diverse days together; that there is chastity even to the contempt of
marriage and Issue; that there is patience, even to the contemning of crosses
and flames; that ^here is liberality, even to the distribution of Patrimonies
to the poor, and finally so great a disesteem and contempt of all things that
are in this world, that even death it self is wished and desired.

Few there are that do these things, fewer that do them well and prudently: yet
the people do approve them, hearken to them and like them, yea they love and
affect them, and not without some progress of their minds toward God, and
certain sparks of piety and virtue: they blame and reprehend their own
weakness, and imbecility that they cannot do these things: this the divine
providence has brought to pass by the predictions of the Prophets, by the
humanity and Doctrine of Christ, by the voyages of the Apostles, by the
Contumelies, crosses, blood, and death of Martyrs; by the laudable and
excellent lives of Saints, and by miracles done at convenient times, in all
those things worthy of so great matters and virtues. When therefore we see so
great help and assistance from God, and so great fruit and increase thereby;
shall we make any doubt or question at all of retyring into the bosom of that
Church, which, even to the confession and acknowledgement of mankind, from the Sea Apostolic by succession of Bishops, has obtained the sovereignty and
principal authority? Heretics in vain barking round about it, and being
condemned, partly by the judgment of the people themselves, partly by the
gravity of Counsels, partly also by the majesty and splendour of miracles, unto
which not to grant the chief place and pre-eminence, is either indeed an
extreme impiety, or a very rash and dangerous arrogance; for if there be no
certain way for the minds of men to wisdom and salvation, but when faith
prepares and disposes them to reason; what is it else to be ungrateful unto
the divine Majesty for his aid and assistance, but to have a will to resist an
authority, which was gained and purchased with such labor and pains? and if
every art and trade, though but base and easy, reqires a teacher or Master
that it be learned and understood; what greater expression can there be of rash
arrogance and pride, then both to have no mind to learn the book of the Divine
mysteries from their Interpreters, and yet to have a mind to condemn the
unknown? Thus far this glorious Saint.

Here we see how highly necessary blessed S. Augustine judged it for all
Christians to adhere to the Catholic Church in all points of belief, which he
declares here to be the Roman Church, that is to say, that universal multitude
of Christians, which acknowledges Rome for their head; whose authority, as he
says, is confirmed by consent of Nations, Counsels, and Majesty of Miracles:
Was ever your fictitious Church thus adjusted?

Here great S. Augustine pulls down sails, and of a Master glories to become a
Scholar: Whence we learn, that if an Origin (the crumbs of whose plenty rendered
Clemens Alexandrinus rich in the esteem of all) or an Apollinarius (with his
conquests against Porphyry and other enemies of Gods Church) or any other
prodigious Comets of wit and learning, or whatsoever posteriour Masters (who
can be but pedants to the former) should presume to teach the Church, or to
question her Magisteriall Dictates or Conciliary Decrees, we must say with
Vinc. Lyr. ca. 10. that with the Church we ought to receive Doctors, and not
with Doctors to forsake the faith of the Church.

Could we attain to S. Paulins contempt of our selves, we should not at so
high a rate, as to the prejudice of Gods Church and his divine truths, sell our
raw conceits: S. Hierome and S. Augustine made high esteem of his learned and
pious Epistles, and S. Amand kept them as Diadems in his Storehouse, whereof he
sent to S. Paulin a fardle, to which he replies, Legimus in tergo epistolae
annotationem epistolarum, quas meas esse indicatis: nam vere prope earum
omniumimmomor eram ut meas esse non recognoscerem, nisi vestris literis
credidissem, unde majus accepi documentum charitatis vestrae: quia plus me
vobis quam mihi, notum esse perspexi. If he had been tickled with our vanity,
he would have kept a better bed-roale of his writings in his memory, then to
borrow, and even unwillingly, from S. Amand a knowledge of his own works. Here
is no danger of recalcitration in order to the holy Churches great treasury
opportunely dispensed, and humbly received by her learned children.

S. Paul (our Grand Master) puts all Doctrine and Doctors to the test thus: If
any preach unto you otherwise then you have received, be he accursed? It Is high
time therefore to leave Pope Celestine his golden rule, celebrated in
Lirinensis; let novelty cease to molest antiquity; for whosoever he is, or of
whatsoever eminency for learning or sanctity he seems to be, if he introduces
novelty; alienus est, prophanus est, hostis est; he is a wolf in a sheeps
clothing. What greater expression can there be of rash Arrogance and pride,
etc. as S. Augustine has taught us.

FINIS.
A cursory Animadversion upon Henry Fernes Treatise, of the Division between
the English and Romish Church upon the Reformation.
IF I had not seen the two Capital letters D. D. in the title page of his
Treatise, I should have esteemed (...) not worthy taking more notice ^f then of
a scurrilous Pamphlet, neither dare I play the Cabalist to ^ive the diverse
significations of those Hieroglyphics, but reading them without notes they
import Doctor of Divinity, the Preface, a Country Sermon, which ever must have
a fling at the Papists; neither that nor the ensuing discourse is ad Clerum,
else they would more savor of the Doctor, according to the antientstle of the
University.

In his said preface (to take notice first of some of his calumnies there) he
falls into these expressions. All the Christian world sees how long the poor
distressed E^stern Church has lain under that heavy condition, unpitied by them
of the Romish Communion, and how they have stood affected to us since our
Reformation, has sufficiently appeared by their several practices against us;
what hand they had in our present troubles, is not unknown to some; what joy
they now take in them, let their own hearts tell them, etc.

His chief aim in the book is to show, that the arguments which they use to
condemn the Independents are not retortable upon themselves by us; and what
greater use of reason they grant to their Proselites, then we: All which he
labors for in the seventh, and the ensuing Sections, till the thirteenth,
wherein verily he is so unhappy, that any child may return his arguments with
great advantage; His result being this, that private judgment, or judgment of
discretion (which he allows to private men) must submit to the public, else
the power of Jurisdiction must proceed to judge, censure, and cast out the
disobedient; and therefore he exacts (even in case of error) all external
peaceable subjection. Did ever the Roman Church go thus far? was there ever
challenged any higher captivation of understanding, then that every one should
submit to the public? Was ever external subjection exacted in point of
error, which this D. D. will have in his Church.

Further the Independents (whom he involves with Sacrilegists) he will have
inexcuseable in their breach from them, because it was not warranted by a
National Synod, as theirs, which how untrue it is, all know; for all the
Bishops of this Nation were excluded and imprisoned when the Doctors party
first decreed the breach from their old Mother Church, as the very Acts
testify; so that they had no more National Synod, then these, who can when
they please, congregate as many of their party, and style it a National Synod,
especially if warranted by Parliament, as the Presbyterians have lately done,
whom he equally rejects.

Secondly, he says the Independents, or Sectaries (as he calls them) have not
plain and evident Scripture, but places unlearnedly wrested: Who knows not that
the Prelatists could never hitherto bring Scripture or antiquity, except places
unlearnedly wrested? have not we demonstrated this 100. times? do not they
stand registered upon this accusation in all Courts of Justice, equity, and
reason, and yet are not able to wipe off the least part? These are D. D. his
peculiar Aphorisms, which by a little redargution, rise up in judgment
against himself and his faction.

The other Sections are built upon Topics, as common as Robin Hoods Song, and
answered by every Stationers Catalogue of Frankfort Mart, therefore I trouble
not the judicious Reader with the rehearsal.

But to return to the words cited out of his Preface, it is most evident to all
who read histories, what pains the Roman Church has, and does take, in
maintaining Colleges and sending Missionaries for the reducing of the Eastern
Church; and with what affection and solicitude she labored the recovery of
England to her pristine Religion, does clearly appear by the innocent blood of
many of her Priests shed at Tyburn, and other places of public execution,
merely upon that account, which is the only practice he can justly accuse the
Roman Church of: and what hand we Catholics have had in the present troubles
of the Land, cannot be unknown, but to those that are truly simplicians, and of
very short consideration, when our Priests, being every where throughout the
Country since the beginning of the late wars, imprisoned and persecuted to
death, and our Layty ransackt almost to utter ruin in point of temporal
estate, only upon the score of their old Recusancy, no one of them could be
hitherto convicted of Incendiarisme, notwithstanding the extreme eagerness of
their enemies to accuse them upon any cavil that malice could surmise; let the
D. D. convince me of the contrary by any particular instance, if he can: On the
other side, what hands and heads, what pens and Pulpits those that were not
Catholics have had in their own and our late troubles, the Parliamentary
Records, Scaffolds and Gallowses do make so evident, that none can pretend
ignorance, but such as have their sculs stuffed with Fern.

That we joy in our Adversaries troubles, is another unproveable calumny of the
Doctors. We do extremely pity them, and hope that the Divine permission of an
infinity of Sects, and subdivisions among them, may sooner bring them to
reflect on their common Schism, and of their own accord to endeavor a
reunion with the root, whence they separated themselves.

But I presume, when the Doctor has read the foregoing discourse, he will
ingeniously confess, who were the only cause of our late troubles; or if he
will still seem to be wilfully ignorant, let him inform himself further of the
Scotchwomen of Edenborough, who flung their stools at the late Archbishop of
Canterburies Legat's head, that came to put in practice his new Service Book,
and other innovations there in the year 1639. I his bred the first disturbance,
and gave the Alarm to all the sad ensuing troubles in both Nations, as our
modern histories unanimously agree.

It would seem strange that a grave D. D. should nor be sensible of the sin of
calumny against so celebrated a Church, but to reproach her with want of
charity, or rather excess of malice, (in joying at their neighbors spiritual
ruins, which by all possible solicitude she has labored to prevent,) and to
accuse her Members, as Boutefeus of State: But this is the Prelatists constant
style, since they were dispossessed of true charity by embracing Schism; neither
do I know what should move them thus to detract from the innocent, but
desparation.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 89. line 19. for salved read valued. p. 96. l. 15. r. Decrees. p. 106. l.
16. r. Parsonages.


