THE Royal Cuckold: OR, GREAT BASTARD.

Giving an account of the Birth and Pedigree of LEWIS le GRAND, The First
French King of that Name and Race.

A TRAGY-COMEDY, All it is Acted by his Imperial Majesty's Servants, at the
Amphitheater in VIENNA.

Translated out of the German Language, by PAUL VERGERIUS.

There is nothing more dangerous than a vindictive and double-minded Enemy.

Hug. Grot. Licensed, and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford Arms
in Warwick Lane, MDCXCIII.

TO THE Right Honorable EDWARD RUSSELL, Lord High Admiral OF ENGLAND, Under
Their Present Majesty's King William and Queen Mary.
Right Honorable,
PEace being the chief Jewel of the Treasure of Temporal Happiness, as common
Disturbers ought to be stigmatized with some Signal Disgrace and Satyr, so
ought the Promoters thereof to be extolled with all Encominums and Applause
imaginable. Hence it was that those, who among the Ancient Romans, had done
great Things against a Foreign Enemy, for their Country's Good, were on their
Return to Rome, convoyed to the Capitol with all Solemnity, and with great
Entertainment, received all the Honor Rome could bestow: Which being denied to
Julius Caesar, bred the Civil War 'twixt him and Pompey. Neither was any
Attempt among them reputed too hard and desperate, when the Public Interest
lay at Stake. Thus Mutius Scaevola, that resolute Roman, having designed to
kill Porsenna King of Hetruria, in his Tent, mistaking one of his Lords for
him, burnt his Right Hand that had committed the Mistake, in the Fire, in the
King's Presence, with these Words, En quam vile sit Corpus iis qui magnam
Gloriam appetunt! The King being amazed at his undaunted Courage, dismissed him
without Harm, and strait made Peace with the Romans. Epaminondas, that Noble
Theban, who overcame the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, by his Conduct and
Courage, made Little Contemptible Thebes the Mistress of all Greece. And
having, at last, received his Mortal Wound in the Battle at Mantinea, betwixt
the Thebans and Lacedaemonians, in the great Joy of his Victory, his Blood and
Soul issued out of the same Wound together; whilst it was said of him at his
Death, That he left only Two Daughters to continue his Name to Posterity, viz.
the Victories of Leuctra and Mantinea.

Worthy Sir, I repute it neither Arrogance nor Flattery to compare the Heroes
of past Ages with the Ornaments of the Present, and say, that though you should
leave no other Memorial to perpetuate your Name, but your late Signal Victory
obtained over the Disturber of Christendom, at Sea, it were a sufficient
Monument, to immortalize your Memory, more than the Two Daughters of
Epaminondas. Thus since, for your Countries Interest, you have, with so good
Success against the Common Enemy, appeared on the World's Stage, every one who
reap the Fruits of your Care, Conduct, and Courage, ought to pay Tribute to
your Praise, though the whole Nation be not able to pay the Interest of your
Warlike Deserts. I, among the rest, throw in my Mite, to strew the way to your
indebted Capitol, presuming that you, who have been Victorious over Monsieur at
Sea, do not fear to second a Quarrel against him on Land, Thus, relying on your
innate Goodness, Candor, and Clemency, begging your Acceptance, and Pardon for
my Boldness, I heartily acknowledge my self

Your Honor's most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, P. V.

PROLOGUE.
PLays are the Pictures of the former Times,
Which represent both Virtue, Vice, and Crimes:
They are the Breath of History; for they
Restore to Life what is ready to decay:
True Emblems of Contempt, Love, and Disdain,
Which famous Acts do bring to life again.
This present Play does set before your eye
The eclipsed Map of Royal Majesty;
A Dark Eclipse, that all the World confounds,
And Europe stains with cruel Blood and Wounds:
It bred a Basilisk, whose killing Eyes
Does tann the Earth, and spot the very Skies.
Religion is his Bane, Bloodshed his Love,
Abhorrs all Mankind, slights the Powers above.
The Widows Tears, and bleeding Orphans Cries,
Ascend to Heaven against his Villainies.
When he was proved base born, and was put by
The Throne, the Crown, and all his Royalty;
His Heretics (for so he terms them now)
Opposed his Foes gave him the Kingdom too:
But he, with Mah'met soon a League did make,
And then devoured them for Religion's sake.
What Monster of Ingratitude was he,
That did requite them thus for Loyalty!
But let him Reign; the lofty Cedar falls,
And so must he, with other Cannibals.
Dramatis Personae.
Clodius Capo, King of France. Orlinus, Brother to Capo, and Apparent Heir to
the Crown. Pontaeus, Cardinal of Richlieu, and Chief Minister of State in
France. Arnusius, a Nobleman of France, and Favorite of Orlinus. Pedro
Marcellus, Father Confessor to the Queen. Meander, a young Spark of Hononr, and
Gentleman Usher to the Queen. Hixius Doxius, a pretended Physician come from
Padua.
The WOMEN.
Stratonice, Queen to King Capo. Licosta, Pontaeus's Niece, the Queen's Bosom
Friend, and great Favorite. Pandora, An old decayed Lady, Sister to Pontaeus,
in love with Meander.
Messenger, Waiting-Maid, Midwife, Child, Ghost, Jesuits, Monks, Friars,
Executioners, Guards, and Attendants.

THE Royal Cuckold: OR, THE GREAT BASTARD.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Licosta, sola. Licost. AM I descended of such Pedigree?
So great, so fair, and yet from Suitors free?
What spightful Planet did eclipse the Light,
Or what prodigious Comet ruled that Night,
When I was born? Did Via Lactea run
With bitter Wormwood, to overflow the Sun?
No Female Star did usher in that Morn,
To influence my Fate, when I was born:
It rather seems that Leo, void of Care,
About the Northern Pole, did whip the Bear.

Enter Pandora. Pand. What Is the matter? You're never well pleased:

You're sick of the Simples: You want a handful You-know-not-what, to cure you
I know not when.


Licost. I Am troubled, and you augment my Grief.


Pand. And what is your great Trouble, Madam?


Licost. That which you cannot help.


Pand. And why so? Are you in a Love-Fever?
Perhaps the weight of your Maidenhead may trouble you?

Licost. I do not say so; but I have lived till I am Seventeen Years of Age,
and cannot yet have a Husband.


Pand. Oh, is that your Grief? A pain in the Mind! I thought so; but had not you
been so proud and saucy, you might have been eased of your Burden before now;
but I my self was not married till I was full One and twenty.


Licost. Shall I believe it? Did you live a Maid till One and twenty? O Monster
of Lies! I wonder that you are not ashamed: Persuade me to it, if you can. I
shall rather believe that you lost your Maidenhead at Eleventeen -- But pray,
Madam, be ingenuous, and tell me -- Was you married a Maid at One and twenty? O
horrible! a Maid at One and twenty! that is within two degrees of a Thornback.


Pand. I will not tell you; you may find it out: You are too bold to ask me
such Questions. I do not put upon you; nor do I say that you must live a Maid
so long. And, if I lost my Maidenhead before I took Matrimony, I had Wit enough
to conceal the Loss, and behave my self cunningly toward my Husband, when
first I entered Wedlock, which perhaps you have not.


Licost. Scold on; I thought you were a Physician.
A Doctrix for the Devil;
And all your Receipts bitter as Gall.

Pand. I tell thee, Licosta, If thou were wise and courteous, as thou art fair
and handsome, thou might deserve the best Nobleman in France. But since thy
Wit is destitute of Discretion; thou may live Seventeen Years longer
unmarry'd; and as for me, I will never bespeak a Husband for thee.


Licost. And what do I care? I will bespeak one for my self.


Pand. I will not keep you company longer.

Exit Pandora in a passion.
Licost. Get you gone, get you gone, imperious old Hagg; walks frowning in a
passion, calls me saucy, yet I dare not tell her her own, for giving offense to
my Uncle and the Queen -- Oh to be thus confined, I could tear my Hair.


Enter Orlinus. Orlin. Your Servant, Madam.
Your Eyes have an attractive Virtue.
I could not see and admire you, without coming at you.

Licost. Royal Sir, I humbly thank you; for a Jeer from your mouth is
legitimate to a Complement, and metamorphos'd from a Complement to a real
Truth. I am admirable, indeed, but for a dull Soul and Homeliness.


Orlin. No, no, worthy Madam; I admire you for the external visible Perfections
and Beauty of your handsome Body, and internal invisible Faculties and
Accomplishments of so noble a Soul.


Licost. Thank you, Royal Sir; but I do not merit so great Applause.


Orlin. Madam, believe me, I have long, though impatiently, waited for an
opportunity to present you with my hearty and passionate Respects; and give
vent to that irresistible Fire, which has hitherto been smothered within my
scorched Breast. And to speak without Dissimulation, from the first period of
time I fixed mine Eyes on your conquering Face (where all the Stars both of
Beauty and Virtue meet, and make up a Constellation of Perfections) I have
still carried your lovely Idea in my Bosom; for, like Achilles's Spear, nothing
can cure my Malady, but the Sovereign Eyes which at first gave me the Wound.


Licost. I humbly than your Royal Highness for your loving Address; but cannot
persuade my self, that a Star of the first magnitude will so much eclipse
himself, as to stoop to, or court a Meteor of so low a Sphere.


Orlin. The full Orb of your Endowments, can darken all the Celestial
Luminaries; and influenceth me more with the ardent Rays of your Beauty, than
all the Planets beside: Fair Helena to you was but a Gypsy, Lucretia but a
Courtezan, Penelope but a Changling, Minerva but a Fool: And what Prince, though
never so puissant, can but admire and adore that Lady, wherein all Perfections
are so concentered?


Licost. Royal Sir, you are the Apparent Heir to the French Crown, and
therefore there must be great Disparity between your Grandeur and my Meanness:
And as for these Airy Complements, they are fitter to persuade a Miss, than
court an honest Mistress; and you had gained more Ground on my Affection, had
you plainly said, you loved me.


Orlin. Love ye? I do by all that is good.

He that has seen you, and does not love you, is not Master of his own
Humanity.

And, as for me, my Love is turned to Admiration, my Admiration to Adoration;
and if ever I was guilty of Idolatry it is now.


Enter Stratonice in Grandeur. Strat. What Is here to be seen? --
What Heavenly Powers do influence us now?
Uniting the two greatest Glories of the French Court within so close a Circle.

Orlin. Great Madam, I am enchanted within the Circles of Love, by the charming
Spangles of this incomparable Beauty, the Phoenix of Women, and Wonder of Men:
Yet grudge not my Destiny, for I am in love with my Chains, and glory in my own
Confinement.


Strat. Brother, Cupid has been more than ordinary kind, in directing his
Arrows so much for your advantage. And if you be as loving to make her your
Wife, as I am willing to embrace her my Sister, you will speedily prosecute
your Pretense; and (if the Lady give consent) make us all three happy at once.


Licost. Madam, his Royal Fancy is but on the Ramble, and intends to have a
little Pastime on me in his Transit. However I take all well, since from a
Person so far above me, and so near related to my Royal Mistress.


Orlin. By my Interest of France, by my Honor, and all the Prerogatives of
Royalty, you are the Idol of mine Eyes, the Delight of my Soul, and the Object
of my Affection.

Exit Orlinus.
Strat. Thank your Stars, Lady, Cupid has emptied a whole Quiver in your Cause,
and made the Loftiest Cedar in France stoop to your Beauty. -- The Prince is
passionately in love with you; but you should not be so diffident, when you see
him so deeply engaged.


Licost. His Love is more a Flash than a Flame.
It Is destitute of all solid Substance.
Neither has he spoke any thing of Marriage,
But striven to blow me up with a belief of Incredibles, by his vain and airy
Complements.


Strat. It is below the Candor, Greatness and Royalty of so Noble a Prince, to
be a Hypocrite or Formalist in Love, to so worthy and deserving a Lady.


Enter Pontaeus. Strat. See how the Fates favor us.
Welcome, dearest Friend:
You have prevented my sending for you.

Pont. I am glad I have saved you the Trouble, Great Madam, and (as I Am bound
in Duty) I am ready at all times, and on all Occasions to serve your Majesty.


Strat. My Brother Orlinus's Love to your Niece, which has long been kept
secret, in his scorched Breast, is now broke out in a Burning Mountain, and if
he meet not quickly with the sure Remedy of Matrimony, to quench his prevailing
Flames, he will be ready to sink in the Sea of Despair, therefore was desirous
to consult with you, how to bring things to a right Period, with all possible
speed: For a lingering Love is commonly dissolved in Air, and at last turns to
nothing.


Pont. I humbly thank you, Great Madam, for your Kindness toward my Niece. It
is by the sweet Influence of your Celestial Aspect, that she makes such a
Figure at Court: For till she enjoyed the Beams of your undeserved Favor; she
could not presume to entertain a thought of being the Queen's Sister-in-Law, by
marrying to the Apparent Heir of the French Crown.


Licost. I have sufficient Cause to suspect the Great Monsieur's Amorous
Pretenses; for they are too much airy to prove a Solid, Well-grounded, Settled,
and Durable Love. Neither has he seriously proposed to me any thing of
Marriage, but only striven to enveigle my Ears with passionate Protestations of
an impatient Love.


Strat. My Brother is a Person of so great Honor, innate Candor, and so many
Years Experience, that he scorneth to make so public and so serious a Suit to
a young Lady, and not be really in earnest.


Pont. Rallery and Amusement are so notorious a Prejudice to the sacred
Reputation of a Virgin Lady, that a Person of so great a Spirit, Valor, and
Royalty, cannot be guilty of so notorious and shameful a Crime.


Strat. My Brother has sufficiently displayed his Respects for so deserving a
Lady: But being a Prince of the Royal Blood, peradventure, makes a stop in his
Proceedings, expecting that you, in Paternal Care, will make a tender of your
Niece, in Marriage to him. And, considering the high Extract of his Birth, it
is nothing below your Eminence to be the first Aggressor.


Pont. It may be so, Madam; and to find a favorable Opportunity, I will make a
splendid Ball at my own House, to which I will invite your Majesty's, the Royal
Monsieur, with all the Nobility at Court, and in the midst of the
Entertainment, lay hold on some convenient Minute to make the proposed Tender
under my own Roof: And this will I perform with all speed.


Strat. We shall quickly then know the result of our Designs, and I wish all
may turn to the right Center.


Licost. The Monsieur's Love is but an incensed Vapor, it will quickly
consume, and be extinguished to nothing.


Strat. Are you wiser than your Uncle, and all who are acquainted with the
Matter? There is none of your Opinion but your self.


Enter Clodius Capo, groaning, coughing, and spitting, with a Doctor of
Physic. Licost. Who comes here?


Strat. It is the King.
How now-dear Husband? I am glad to see you strong again.

Clod. I am far from strong; but by good chance, have met with a Paduan Doctor,
who is like to do us both a Kindness, and make me as able for Generation as you
are for Conception.


Strat. And is this Gentleman the Doctor?


Dox. Yes, Great Madam, I am the Man.


Strat. You can never make my Husband capable to get me with Child, he is an
Eunuch from his Mothers Womb; all your Art cannot correct his Defects of
Nature. I am well satisfied with my Condition: but all the loss is in the want
of an Heir to the French Crown, which in reason cannot be expected from the
Veins of the unhappy Stratonice.


Dox. I have done as much in my time as all this comes to: and I earnestly
request your Majesty, not to question my Ability; for I am no vain Pretender,
neither do I profess more than I can perform. Three Parts of the World know me,
and wonder at my Miraculous Cures. Fando, Duke of Trehuny, having seven
Daughters and no Son, was loath to leave his Estate to one of the Female Sex,
and therefore had concluded to make his Brother's Son Heir. But I, to
ingratiate my self in the Duke's Favor, took the eldest Daughter aside, into a
private Room, before her Father 'rose; where, by a secret Art, which none
knows but my self, I metamorphos'd her from a Woman to a Man, sufficiently
able for Generation.


Strat. How do you know that he was able?


Dox. I persuaded his Mother to put him to Bed with one of her Waiting Maids,
to give proof of his Ability; and he was so active, that he begot Eight
Children in one Night, and had not his Foot slipped, he had made them up half a
Score.


Strat. You are a fine Man indeed, if this be not a Paradox in Nature and
absolutely incredible; yet I Am glad my Husband met with you: for he who can
turn a Woman to a Man, can undoubtedly mend one Defect in him who is a Man
already.


Dox. Never question my Skill, Madam; for there is no part of the Body of Man,
but I have made. The Duke of Arkos had but one Son, and that a Fool, without
Brains; but I, by squirting a wonderful Coddle through his Ear into his empty
Skull, made him a wise Man, and a State Politician. Therefore, being conscious
to my own Skill, and sure to perform what I promise, I desire to make a
positive Bargain before I go about a Cure of so great Consequence.


Strat. And what must you have then for this great Cure?


Dox. Fifty thousand Crowns; the one half in hand, and the other when the Cure
is accomplished.


Clod. I will rather continue as I am; for Fifty thousand Crowns is more Money
than I shall willingly bestow.


Strat. Do not grudge it, Husband; an Heir to the French Crown cannot be bought
too dear.


Clod. Well, well, Stratonice, thy Will shall be a Law. Doctor, you shall have
your Desire, so soon as the Cure is perfected.


Dox. But it is necessary that I have Twenty thousand Crowns before I begin the
Cure; for my Medicines are composed of very costly Ingredients, which come from
Egypt, Arabia, and other remote places.


Clod. Come along then, Doctor, and you shall have your Money.

Exeunt Clodius, Doxius, and Guards.
Strat. I shall be glad if this honest Doctor perform what he promises.


Licost. The performance of his Promise will be a Miracle; but if he do as he
says, he will gain your Affection for ever, and conferr an universal Favor on
the whole Kingdom of France.


Strat. I will go now and give him Ten thousand Crowns, which my Husband shall
not know of, to encourage him to do his Work well, and with all possible speed;
for my Expectation is become impatient, and my Appetite is set a-longing.

Exit Stratonice.
Enter Pandora, in a gaudy Dress, convoyed by Meander. Pand. What? still musing
on a Husband!


Licost. What Is here now? December and June? Hot and Cold are united. Sure we
shall shortly see some new Constellation of Meteors, since the Torrid and
Frozen Zones are come together.


Pand. I am neither Cold, nor December; but a good active Gentlewoman, not
inferior to any young Lady at Court.


Licost. But prithee, Aunt, where have thou picked up this young Spark? He is
fitter for my Converse than thine.


Pand. Why are you so desirous to know?
Perhaps you design to cheat me of him.
I have done him a Kindness with my Brother the Cardinal, and he is resolved to
do me another.


Licost. What Kindness is it? prithee tell me.


Pand. He resolves to be my Husband.


Licost. O brave Aunt! live a Widow forty Years, and now long for a Husband at
Fourscore and Ten!

What Fool will believe you!
Not the young Gentleman, I Am sure.

Pand. What Is the matter, Confidence?
What if I have a Colt's Tooth in my Head still?
But did you ever see any Wantonness by me?
Threatens to beat her with her Staff.
Licost. That Is long of your gray Hairs, wrinkled Face, and stinking Breath.

Retireth a little to shun the old Gentlewoman's Blow.
Pand. Did you ever hear such an impudent lying Girl!
You, Monsieur Meander, am not I a very handsome Woman?

Meand. You are, Madam, a very handsome Lady in my Eyes.


Pand. Ay, and in every bodies else -- O thou tempting young Boldness!

I have been admired all my life time for a Beauty, and now am set at naught,
by my own prodigal Neice. You little Hussy, this is enough to set my intended
Husband and me at variance, and cause him alter his Mind, if he were not of a
more noble and steadfast Resolution.


Licost. I dare pass my Word he will not alter his Resolution; for he never
resolved to marry you; no, nor never will.


Meand. Madam, do you think that I pretend to more than what I really intend to
perform.


Licost. Pray, Sir, satisfy my Aunt, and I have done: I will not spoil your
Design; but there has not been a Bride in France of Fourscore and ten these
hundred Years till now.


Pand. You lie too, Hussy, I am but Fourscore and nine.


Licost. I have reason to believe you, for you have told me so these six years
past.


Pand. Whatever be my Age, I shall make as good a Bedfellow as if I were but
Sixteen -- And have a little Money too.

Takes a handful of Gold, puts it in Meander 's Pocket, and kisseth him. Dear
Love, does my Breath stink?


Meand. No, my Love, it is as sweet as a Rose.


Licost. Ay, ay, it is perfumed with Gold: Gold makes all things glister, and
makes a good Scent where there has been a noisome Smell. It cures the Cracks of
decrepit Age; but the Breach soon breaks out again, and must be made up anew.


Pand. O thou spiteful Little Slut, that have no more respect for thine own
Aunt, and so virtuous a Lady as I have been, and so kind to you, Hussy -- O if
Youth could be bought for Money!


Licost. I Will put you in a fair way to be young again.


Pand. So you say; but it is more than you can do.


Licost. There is a Doctor lately arrived here from Padua, who is the Wonder of
the World for Experiments in Physic, and restoring decayed Nature; and is now
about a hard piece of Work for the King.


Pand. Prithee, what work is it?


Licost. He is to make him capable of Generation.


Pand. I wish he may for the poor Queen's sake.


Licost. Were the Doctor here, he could tell you whether he could make you
young again.


Pand. I would give him a thousand Pistols to make me a Maid again.


Licost. O wonderful! a Maid again! a Maid of Fourscorce and ten, that has had
seven Husbands in her time! O Paradox in Nature! Come, come, you must leave off
your youthful Thoughts now, and think on your Grave and the World to come; and
resign all your Interest of this young Spark to me.


Pand. To you! to you! not for all the Gold in France; I rather the Devil had
you.

Monsieur Meander, am not I as pretty a Woman as she?


Meand. You are both pretty Women; but I am obliged to love you most.


Pand. Then love me as I deserve.


Licost. Yes, yes, he will love you so long as you can fill his Pockets with Gold.


Pand. You little Hussy, Love cannot be bought.

He loves me freely with a pure passionate Love, and was never obliged to me
for one Sous.


Licost. O thou old lying Sinner! speak no more.

Enter Dr. Hixius Doxius. But who comes now? Speak of the Devil and he appears.

Welcome, Doctor; I have got you a new Customer.

Dox. I want a little more Money of the Queen.


Licost. That Is none of my Business.

But this old Gentlewoman intends to be married to a young Man; and will give
you a thousand Pistols to make her a Maid again?


Dox. That Is no hard matter, Madam.


Pand. Did you ever restore a lost Maidenhead?


Dox. Yes, a great many.


Pand. What wonderful Cures have you done? What Decays of Nature have you ever
restored? If I find you ingenious, I well set you to work, and nobly satisfy
you for some profitable Experiments of your admirable Skill.


Dox. The Grand Signior promised, by Proclamation, Ten thousand pounds to any
Person that would bring in, dead or alive, Bassa Fatanti, the seditious Usurper
of Grand-Cairo; and I being intimately acquainted with him, and he knowing my
wonderful Skill in Physic and Surgery, trusted me with his Head to the
Ottoman Court, where on sight I received the Money: And having begged the Head
from the Grand-Signior again, I brought it back to Grand-Cairo, and set it
again on the Bassa's Neck; so that he was as sound as formerly. I cut his
Cataract of Conspiracy, and with a Plaster of Privacy, I cured him of all
Treason and Infamy, made him a Loyal Subject, carried him back to the Grand
Signior, who (wondering at my unparalleled Skill) pardoned him all his Crimes,
received him into favor, and gave me Ten thousand pounds more for my Trouble.

The Pope's eldest Son was so deaf, that he could not hear a Cannon shot within
six foot of his Ear; but I bored his Head with a golden Wiar, in at one Ear,
and out at the other; and restored his Hearing so well, that from the Capitol
of Rome, he could hear what Psalm was Sung in St. Mary's Church in Vienna.

With a Radamantean Water, of my own composing, I restored the Duke of
Landora's Daughter's Maidenhead, after she had brought forth three Bastards at
one Birth.


Pand. O for such a Doctor, he is worth a whole Stage full of Mountebanks. O,
to be young again; then I shall cut a Caper half an hour high.

She jumpeth on her Staff.
Meand. And was the Cheat never discovered, Doctor?


Pand. And why a Cheat? an Arcificial is as good as any other Maidenhead.


Dox. Her Husband took her to be a very good Maid, and never questioned his
Wife's Virginity: But this my Skill is become common in that Country; so that
it is hard to distinguish betwixt a Maid and a married Woman.


Licost. Prithee, Doctor, tell me what is a Maidenhead, that People talk so
much of?


Dox. A Maidenhead is a Trifle of Treasure.
A Sieged Fort, a Minute's Pleasure,
A Hug, a Smile, a Blush, a Kiss,
A fond imaginary Bliss,
Love's Passion blown up to a Fire,
Both quenched and flaming in desire.
And this is all that Mortals prize,
And Princes so Idolatrize.

Meand. Come, come, my Love, if a Maidenhead be a Trifle of so small Moment, we
shall do well enough without it.


Pand. What you please my Dear.

Exeunt Meander and Pandora.
Licost. Now Doctor I have a Secret to impart to you, and you must keep it as
close as your own Capital Crimes.


Dox. I will be as secret as Silence it self.


Licost. I expect shortly to be married to Orlinus, the King's Brother. Now, if
by your Means his Majesty should have a Son, no Child of mine can expect to
succeed to the Crown. Now, if by your Art you can give satisfaction, without
Generation, you will greatly oblige me, and I will not prove unthankful.


Dox. Madam, give me but some small Gratuity, and I will oblige my self to do
what you desire.


Licost. That I will, Doctor.

Gives him a handful of Gold.
Dox. Now, Madam, if you will promise to keep my Secret, as I have yours, I
shall tell you my Mind freely.


Licost. I will keep your Council as close as my Maidenhead, and perhaps a
little longer too.


Dox. There is no hope of Generation; for Art can never supply the Defects of
such natural Impotence.


Licost. I am glad it is so, all is well. Now we are both bound to keep one
another's Secrets: But you are a cunning Man for Money.

Exeunt.
ACT II. The Scene Pontaeus's Palace.
Enter Pontaeus and Pedro Marcellus. Pont. NOW honest Bosom Friend, Pedro,
I am near the Pinnacle of Promotion;
For my Niece is shortly to be married to Orlinus.
And I shall be the only Grandee in France.
I have already conquered three Parts of the Tripple Crown,
And would not give two Pistols to secure me the fourth.

Pedr. Orlinus is a, reserved and very hallow Man, if I dare say so;
And one whose Pretenses and Intentions seldom agree.
You can hardly feel the motion of his Pulse Politic,
Though you be the most famous Statesman in Europe.
As for the Tripple-Crown and Popedom.
There are so many Cardinals at Rome in chase of it, that you can never, in
reason, expect to attain the Dignity, unless you shake off the Trouble of
State Affairs in France, remove to the Court of Rome, and cast behind your
back, the care of a good Conscience.


Pont. Conscience shall not stumble me
In the attainment of so great Honor.
But as for the Great Monsieur, I have felt his Pulse, and he is in a
Quotidian Ague of Love.
I shall by and by know the result, though at a distance;
For I have invited the Court to my House:
And now is the time of their coming.
Here they are, -- stand off.

Enter Clodius, Stratonice, Orlinus, Licosta, Meander, Pandora, Dr. Hixius,
etc. -- with Guards and Attendants. Clod. I am as good as my word, Cardinal.
I Am resolved now to be merry with you.

Pont. Your Majesty is more than heartily welcome.
My Royal Master under my Roof!
This is a Favor beyond my Merit.
But thus to enjoy a Visit from the whole Royal Family and Court-Worthies at
once, will give me occasion henceforth to boast of my good Fortune, and the
Royal Honor conferred upon me.


Strat. Come, come, Cardinal, forbear your Church-Complements.
The King and I must have one merry Jigg.
Come, Husband, I Will warm your Blood with one brisk Dance:
And that is good for your Cough.

Clod. Prithee let me alone, I have not dane'd these twenty Years.
Neither am I now in a dancing mind.

Strat. Be not so backward, we came to be merry.
What a dull Visit is it where there is no Cheerfulness?
Better we had stayed at home at some mean Recreation.
What say you, Cardinal?

Pont. I am of your mind, Madam.

And will rather take one turn, in my Pontificals, with honest Pedro here, than
murder our meeting for want of a little Mirth.


Strat. You may freely do it; for Pope Hildebrand used to dance like a Ghost,
in a White Shirt and Surplice, to animate his Cardinals, and raise their
drooping Spirits above the Sphere of a dull. Melancholy: And I think so may a
Cardinal serve his King.


Pont. Madam, your Argument is very strong.
And Pedro and I will try what we can do.

Strat. Bravely done.
The Music plays, Pontaens, and Pedro dance in their Potificals. It Is a pity
you should ever have been Church men.

Pont. And why so, Madam?
Church men may be as free as others;
Yea more; for His Holiness dispenses with their Venial Faults, winketh at
their Errors, and beforehand pardons all their deadly Sins. I have a Pardon
from the present Pope Alexander, for all Sins past, present, and to come: But
it cost me more than it is worth.


Pedro. Their Holinesses, Pope Alexander the Sixth, and Pope Paul the Third lay
with their own Daughters, and begot Children with their Grandchildren. St.
Alanus de rupe was as intimate with the Virgin Mary, as ever were Man and Wife.
-- Such small Faults will never break Squares.


Strat. I am afraid it has not been the B. Virgin, but some circumventing Devil
in her Shape.


Pedro, Madam, you must believe as the Church does,
Else you cannot be saved.
The holy Story of St. Alanus's Conflict with the B. Virgin is Hieroglyphically
painted on our Lady's Chapel at Loretto.


Strat. We have Divinity enough for one Church-dance.


Orlin. But, Madam, we are all ambitious to see your Majesty's Royal Motion.


Strat. Come, let us to it then, four in one Courant.
But what young Gentleman is this?
Pointing at Meander.
Licost. That is my Aunts intended Husband, Madam.


Strat. Husband! Husband! rather her Great Grandchild.
But why do you mock your Aunt?
She is a Woman past the desire of a Husband.

Licost. She will tell you otherwise, Madam.


Pand. What am I past, Madam?
I am made of Flesh and Blood as well as other Women.
I am not so old but that I may outlive him.

Strat. If it be so, and Parties be agreed,
You shall have my Consent, and Assistance too.
But you, young Spark, can you love this old Gentlewoman?

Meand. I love her very well, Madam.


Licost. Yes, yes, but you love her Gold better.


Pand. Hold your Peace, Hussy, I deserve to be married as much as any Lady in
France.


Strat. I do not approve of the Match, but now let us be merry.
You young old Cent lew oman, may I take one turn with your Spark?

Pand. Yes, Madam, but if it were another, I would hardly trust her.


Strat. I am much beholden to your good Nature, old Grannum.


Pand. I am neither old, nor Grannum.


Strat. But, Brother, Why do you stand;
To Orlinus. You and Licosta must make up the number.

Orl. I Will do any thing rather than spoil good Company.

Stratonice danceth with Meander, Orlinus with Licosta.
Strat. I have done Husband, you and I will pass one Visit more and then be
gone.


Clod. As soon as you will; for my Patience is worn out.


Strat. But, Doctor, how goes on your Business? are you like to accomplish your
Cure?


Hix. Yes, Madam, and that very speedily,
You see the King looks with a more cheerful Countenance than formerly.

Strat. Well, Doctor, if you do, you will gain great Credit to your self, and
infinitely oblige me.


Hix. I do not question it at all, Madam.


Strat. Now, Licosta, I will see what fine Kick shows thou have got in thy
Uncle's House; for I have danced my self to an Appetite. Come, let us go.

Exeunt, Clodius, Stratonice, Meander, Licosta, Pandora, and the Guards,
Orlin. This airy Divertisement is over, Gardinal.
Can you treat your Guests with no greater Entertainment?

Pont, I must acknowledge that your Highness's generous Smiles and Inclinations
to what is so near to me, both in Relation and Protection, as my Niece, loadeth
me with so vast a Sum of Obligations, that I am not able to pay the Interest of
what is due: Yet in discharge of Part, I do heartily resign to your Royal
Pleasure both my self and her. And, in further Gratification of your honorable
Proposals, by Virtue of my Authority over her (to which she must acquiesce) I
humbly tender her to your Highness in Marriage, hoping her Virtuous
Disposition, joined with the full Orb of your Worth and Royalty, will make up a
complete Luminary in our Gallick Sphere.


Orlin. Marriaged Thou proud ambitious Priest.
How dare thou be so bold?
Gives him a Box on the Ear with great Indignation. Your Niece and you might
have come to a right Understanding,
Without reading so hard a Lecture as Marriage;
And Honor enough too done your Reverend Church-Blood,
For all your big Looks.
Exit Orlinus with his Attendants.
Pedro. This is your worthy Orlinus, I told you what a Spark he was.

Take this blow, to Seal the truth of that Character I gave you of him.


Pont. My Soul is full of Fury, and I Will be
Revenged on such a little Pimp as he.
His Crime is Sacrilege --
He has robbed a Virgin Lady of her Requtation,
And given an impardonable Affront to the Roman Church:
I Will send to Rome and have him condemned before he die,
That the Devil may have his Right without Let, or Controversy.

Pedro. That Is but little; bend your Wits to a greater Revenge.
Find out some way to frustrate his Expectation of the Crown.
By that means you make him sensible of his Error,
And kneel before you Nieces Feet.

Pont. Well, well, I Will think on it.
By all that is good I Will be revenged.
This Blot has cancelled all his Right to the Crown of France.
I have a Contrivance in my Head that will accomplish my Fury.
My Revenge is hatched already, and he shall feel the Vengeance of my
implacable Indignation.


Pedro. What is the Contrivance?


Pont. The only way to be revenged, and put him by the Crown is by begetting
the Queen with Child.


Pedro. That Is a harder way than Hannibal had over the Alps.
For we have loaded her Conscience with so much Practice of Piety,
That we our selves have broke the Neck of our own Designs.

Pont. I Will transform my self to an Angel of Light,
And play the Devil in the Shape of a Saint?
I have outwitted all the Kings of Christendom;
And doubt not to deal with such a Shallow brains as him.

Enter Clodius Capo, Stratonice, Licosta, with Guards and Attendants. Clod. Now
Cardinal I am come only to bid good Night.


Strat. But where is my Brother?


Pont. He Is gone, Madam.
But he has paid his Reckoning.

Strat. Why, what is the matter?


Pedro. He has box'd the Cardinal to some purpose.


Strat. Box'd the Cardinal! was he mad?
What was the Quarrel?

Pont. For tendering to him what in the World I love best;
And what he, a disguised Hypocrite, has courted these several Years,
But seems had no thoughts of Marriage,
But of some base and impious Design,
To satisfy his Carnal Apperite,
Without going to Church;
And tells, That it had been honorable for you, Niece,
To have given him a little Divertisement at his spare Hours,
Without any Priest-Ceremony.
But this I must needs take very kindly, considering what good Service I have
done both to King and Kingdom.

I expected a Reward of another Nature.

Clod. I am amazed, and know not what to say:
A Blow! a Blow! O thrice ungrateful Wretch!
He shall forfeit my Favor, and feel the brunt of my Passion.
It Is a great Provocation that thus incenseth me.

Licost. Monster of Men! have I been courted thus?
All this while, only to be made a Whore?
The Traitor, Villain, Devil, and Cannibal,
Reserved me a Toy to play with all.
The Great Orlinus did design that I,
Poor and contemptible, should be made high,
By his most gracious condescending Favor,
Decreeing me a lewd Divertisement
For his spare hours: But despicable I,
Suspected still his Love was but a Lie.
But all the Affront and Stain I have received
Does not so much torment my Mind and Soul,
As that my dear and reverend Uncle (whom
The greatest Kings respect) should thus be beat
On my account. I Am weary of my Life;
I rather die than be Orlinus's Wife.
But 'pray, great Sir and Madam, pardon me,
If I encroach upon your Royalty.
I Am mad to think that he who did adore
Me by his Words, designed me for a Whore!

Pont. Forbear, Neice, you're too much in a passion;
Know in what Company you are.
Their Majesty's have never found a Blemish in me,
Nor never shall, for all this great Affront;
Yea, the greatest that ever Man received,
Which my Royal Master does undoubtedly know.

Clod. An Affront! It Is beyond an Affront.


Strat. I Will never own him for a Brother more.

O inhumane Brute! to beat the Reverend and Wise Church-States-Man, to whom we
and all our Subjects owe our Peace; for tendering that to him in Marriage,
which in the World he loves best, after he had courted her so long, with so
great Passion, and pretended Constancy. Had the Reverend Prelate been an
impious Wretch, like himself, and proffered him his Neice, not as a Wife, but a
Prostitute, they might have parted good Friends. O Beast! wicked Man! Brother?
Brother to Brutes, and not to Men.


Licost. What Shame and sad Confusion is ordained
For poor, dejected, miserable me!
Had he at first the bare faced Villain played,
At first spoke out his lewd lascivious Suit,
I could have met him with a furious Look,
And struck defiance in his hardened Face;
And made the echoing World a Witness
Of Indignation and Innocence.
But, oh! the base, unprincely, poor Impostor
Has worn the Vizor, and betrayed me;
Deduced my Ear with that perfidious Sound
He termed pure Love; not once, but over and over.
Now what will babbling Fame proclaim of me,
That loathed no sooner his lascivious Suit?
And thus my Virgin-Innocence must stand
The blast of each polluting cruel Tongue.
My Honor now to Infamy must canker,
When common Story, and each laughing Varlet,
Will jest on my Contempt, feast on my Shame,
Smother his Vice, and my Disgrace proclaim.

Strat. Forbear, my dear Licosta, no Mistakes,
Or vulgar Errors shall thy Virtue stain;
Your Uncle's Conduct, joined with yours and mine,
Shall soon remove all Shadows of so mean
An Imputation; and the World convince
Of thy unblemished Candor; and no danger
Of Slander, or Reproach, shall threaten thee.

Licost. Suppose the World do me the right to clear
My Innocence and Virtue from all scandal,
And, in their Justice, give me but my due,
And publish me but Shallow bubbled Fool,
That could an insolent, proud, vain Impostor
Hear so long, buzzing, without interrupting,
So loud, so often, without Wit or Sense,
To understand his impious Designs.
If I escape this Calumny, what then?
Surmounting Waves, the Billows pull me down,
Whilst Inundations of immortal Shame
Me overwhelm: And I must ever bear
About with me, and carry to my Grave
A Name so little, hissed, laughed, and pointed at,
Poor, despicable, course born, and only sought for,
To be a Harlot: O thrice cursed Thing,
That I Am reputed fit for nothing else,
Than the loose, lewd Pleasures of the Monsieur!
O cursed Shame! O fixed eternal Stain!
Which not the Blood of that ungrateful Man
Can ever wash away --
The Subject's Beauty often has conquered Kings;
And Daughters of Common Nobility have been
Promoted to the Beds and Thrones
Of greatest Monarchs: But the poor, hard-fated,
Humble, and little Neice of Richlieu, has
No Beauty, Blood, no Merit worth one Thought
From the Impostor, Monster, Devil of Pride,
Orlinus; though a younger Brother.
She so much undeserved so great a Favor,
That its first motion could be thus repulsed,
With no less Shame, Disgrace, and sharp Contempt,
Than the Indignity of Grooms and Varlets;
Treating the Great, Renowned Richlieu with
An impudent, vile Blow, that is only fit
For Vagabonds.
But, Sir, I hope such Injuries as mine,
Acted upon a Virgin's bleeding Fame,
(So near in Blood, and nearer to your Heart)
To Pontaeus. Will be revenged by the Heavens and you.

Strat. I Am vexed, perplexed, and nothing have to say,
Poor injured Soul, and yet my Fever burns
As violent as thine; though I suppress
The flaming Fury, 'till I do redress
The Injury --
For this Barbarian (as thou justly call'st him)
Has acted Outrage on my Honor too.

Pont. Thy Credit, Neice, I Will rescue soon again,
Nor shall' my Protestation be in vain.
I have a Score of Justice to account
And balance with the Brute, which will amount
To many Millions; and if I pass thee
One Mite of mine, Heavens never pardon me,
Thou cruel Monster of Ingratitude.

Licost. My Guardian Angel, Father, best of Friends,
My sacred Champion: Now my Transport flies
From deep Abyss of Sorrow to the Skies.
I Am elevate in Joy, my Torments cease,
The anguish of my Soul relents, and I,
'Twixt Grief and Joy, am forced to laugh and cry.
Your glorious Resolution of Revenge,
Is Divine Music to my troubled Ears.
The sound of Vengeance, O thrice happy Sound!
Dispels my Sorrow ere it him confound.

Clod. I Am sorry, Cardinal, at this Affront:
My Blood is hot, and Passion fills my Veins,
That you, the Safeguard of my Self and Crown,
Who by your Wit have conquered all my Foes,
Should thus be served. Tell what you would be at:
Whatever is your Desire, I Will propagate.

Strat. Banish your Brother from the Court, that all
Your Subjects may learn Wisdom from his Fall:
This is the way to brand him with Disgrace,
And print his Villainies upon his Face.

Clod. It shall be so; for I can better live,
Without a Brother, than a bosom Friend.
A famous States man that out-wits the Wise,
Keeps peace at home, and blinds my Neighbors eyes.
Exit Clodius, with his Guards and Attendants.
Strat. I cannot wonder how the Monsieur durst

Profane my Ears, with so many false Protestations, and seducing Sounds,
directed to so bad an end. How impudent has he been in making his Addresses, in
my presence, I pressing forward his Suit.

But, my Licosta, be not quite cast down;
For though thy Merit be but prized low
In Monsieur's Balance; yet thy precious Worth
Is greater in esteem than heretofore,
With thy Stratonice; whilst all thy Wrongs,
Like Diamond foil, but make thy Virtues shine.
Rest then contented, and thy Grief lay by;
Thy Quarrel I Will revenge, or else I Will die.
Exeunt.
ACT III.
The SCENE, A Gallery in the King's Palace.
Enter Orlinus and Arnusius. CUrse on this Church-States-man;
He leads the whole Kingdom backwards, by the Nose;
I must absent the Court within three days,
And come no more there, 'till the Cardinal please.
Arn. Does the King love his Priest better than his Brother?


Orlin. So it seems: But the Cardinal makes the greatest Figure;
And whatever he and the Queen say, the King must do.

Arn. O brave! Then it is the Cardinal, then Queen, and the King.
But what is the Quarrel?
For you and the Cardinal have ever been good Friends.

Orlin. I lately pulled his leather Ears for him;
And this is Holy Revenge.
Because I would have gone to Bed with his Neice,
Without going to Church.

Arn. I heard you had great Pretenses of Kindness for the Lady,
And that you was like to die for love of her.

Orlin. Die for Love! O brave! what Man that was Master of his
Senses ever died for Love?
No, no, there was no occasion to die for Love:
My passion must not run beyond my Reason;
Nor I so much undervalue my self to think of Marriage with such a little
inconsiderable Church-born Brat as she.


Arn. Though I must acknowledge that your High Birth entituleth you to a more
dignified Choice, than the Neice of a Prelate for a Wife to the Royal Orlinus:
Yet, as Princes have often dispensed with meaner Deserts than hers (with
submission to the Royal Monsieur) I think at least, that after your former more
Princely Choice, of more Illustrious Quality, it had been little or no Blemish
in your Royal 'Scutcheon, to have been once overruled more by pure Love than
rigid Honor, in this Second Election: And therefore, what through the
consideration of her Alliance to the High and Potent Richlieu, her Interest in
the Friendship of the Queen, but above all, the Recommendation of so much
Youth, Wit, Beauty, and Virtue, I am of Opinion, That your Dispensation, in
this Case, had been no impardonable Condescension.


Orlin. 'Pray, Sir, forbear; no Beauty, Virtue, Wit,
Nor Interest in the Queen can blind my Eyes:
The old He-Goat, that Pharisaick Cheat,
The Cardinal (her Uncle) told you so:
But if I had an itching small design
For private Recreation, and to act
A Gamester's part, I might have had my Will,
Without a Relic hung about my Neck,
In an Ecclesiastic Collar, during Life.
No, no, I must not, for so small a Prize,
Turn Errant Knight, though you be pleased to grant
Dispensing Power in favor of the Saint.

Enter Messenger from the King. Messeng. The King my Master, Sir, desires that
you
Remove from Court, and make no more delay:
The Cardinal, our Minister of State,
Is much offended that you're so long here:
He Will meddle no more with any great Affair,
'Till to another dwelling you repair.

Orlin. Go tell the Letcher, that I Will soon be gone,
That Mountebank of State, that juggling Knave,
Who plays his Pranks, and blinds my Brother's Eyes:
Yet let him know from me, the time may come,
Wherein I may his Injuries pay home.
Exit Messenger.
Enter Stratonice and Licosta. Strat. Are you a Prince, the Brother of a King,
Of Royal Birth, and so ignoble a Mind?
How could you be so cruel to design
A Virgin-Lady's Ruin, in pretense
Of Marriage? whilst your aim was base and ill,
Loss, Shame, Disgrace, and Lewdness to fulfill.

Orlin. Madam, I cannot stay, I must be gone:
The Cardinal Commands, I must obey;
I have no time to answer Questions now:
I never muse ou Marriage, nor on Maids;
But will resolve you, if you will rest content
Of all, when I return from Banishment.

Licost. Had I a Gorgon's Aspect, and the Eyes
Of Basilisks, the Tresses of a Fury,
The Throat of Cerberus, I would devour
Thee, cruel Monster, Cockatrice of Hell.
Had I ever given the least Affront to thee,
I had not grudged to have born my Injury.

Orlin. Ill take no notice what a Magpie talks,
But will remember all your Uncle's Faults,
That cruel Dragon of Revenge and Spite,
The Kingdom's Scarecrow, Comet of the Night.
Exeunt Orlinus and Arnusius.
Licost. Cursed be thy Convoy, Furies thee attend;
May Life unhappy lead thee to thy end.

Strat. Love turned to Hatred, burns with greater rage
Than Jealousy: Yet though Revenge be sweet,
Vindictive Minds with adverse Fortune meet.

Licost. O I could suck his Blood, his Body sear
With Burning-Irons, Veins and Heart Strings tear,
Boil him alive; yet I shall never fulfill
My wrath, till I both Soul and Body kill.

The Scene, The Queen's Bed Chamber.
Enter Pontaeus and Pedro. Pont. Madam, I Am come to tell you of your Loss,
Which is no more than I at first expected;
Your Doctor, that Impostor's sneaked away,
Without performing what you did desire:
His Promises are now dissolved to Air;
But no Man knows when he did go, or where.

Strat. And is the Monster fled, that impious Cheat,
That did pretend to work such Miracles?
He has obtained his end, and made a Prey
Of our Credulity; for we might thought
That his Pretenses would but turn to naught.

Pont. They were so great, and so irrational,
That they the Course of Nature contradicted.
Reason such Fopperies never could allow;
But yet the King's more blamable than you.

Strat. He had of Money what he could desire,
Yet had not grudged it, had he kept his Word:
But natural Strength (as I have often been told)
Could never be bought with artificial Gold.

Licost. Great Madam, grieve not, though your Loss be great;
Kings, Queens, and Monarchs meet with adverse Fate:
What Nature in your Nuptial Bed denies,
Promotion in your Majesty supplies.

Pedr. Riches and Honor, Greatness, Beauty, Birth,
Are much desirable, and of great worth;
But yet the Joys of Wedlock are so prized,
That nothing can be with them equaliz'd.

Strat. Wedlock's the Honor of the Femal Sex;
The want of which each Virgin does perplex:
But should not grudge my Fate, if I but had
Either a Child, or Husband in my Bed.
Exeunt Stratonice and Licosta.
Pedr. You have put the Queen in a longing Disease:
I shall know something more at her next Confession.
I must think on some moderate Penance, to keep her insulting
Flesh from an Insurrection.

Pont. What is this to our purpose?
I am thinking on a more serious Matter;
How to regain my Reputation, and be revenged on the audacious
Monsieur for my late Affront.

Pedr. Were it not dangerous I could put you in a fair way to it.


Pont. Dangerous, dangerous! What Danger is it but I can Antidote?
My Power's above the King's, and that you know.
If I but speak the Word, the Work is done.
I steer the Helm both of the Church and State.
The King and Queen my Force cannot withstand;
And both must needs obey when I command.

Pedr. You say there is no way to frustrate Orlinus of the Crown, unless the
Queen be got with Child. Now, if this could be done, you have your Aim. And I
know by her last Confession she is in love; but I dare not discover it: For, by
the Canon of the Church, it is death for a Father-Confessor to reveal the
Secrets of any, though of more inferior Rank than a Queen.


Pont. I from all Danger, sure, can set you free;
I Will lose my Life ere you shall injured be.

Pedr. Swear then.


Pont. By the Pope's Great Toe I will.


Pedr. Swear deeper.


Pont. I swear by Purgatory.


Pedr. Deeper yet.


Pont. By our Lady's Girdle I will.


Pedr. It Is enough.


Pont. Then I conjure you by Bell, Book, and Candle,
And all the Relics of our Mother Church,
To tell me all the Secrets of your mind,
And henceforth me your Friend, you still shall find.

Pedr. Did you not observe the young Spark Meander, of whom the Queen made
choice to dance with at the Ball.


Pont. Yes, I did; and he is a Gentleman of a comely Gesture, of good breeding,
and a noble Behavior.


Pedr. She is desperately in love with him, and knows not how to suppress her
Passion.


Pont. Now my Work is done, my Revenge is conceived, and a Bastard shall enjoy
the Crown. Now I will shoot Furies at the proud Orlinus.


Pedr. But unless they be tipped with Policy, they will never hit.


Pont. Yea, and Hypocrisy too, rather than miss.


Pedr. We must open to the Queen under what Inconveniences and dangerous
Circumstances the Kingdom lies, for want of a Royal Heir, and persuade her to
supply her Husband's Deficiency, with a more Potent Consort; at which the King
will certainly connive, if not condescend too.


Pont. It Is well spoke, honest Pedro.
Rather than our Design should prove in vain,
I Will sacrifice my Conscience to my Spleen.

Enter Meander and presents Pontaeus with a Letter. Which he reads thus:

May it please your Eminence;
THE Bearer is my Nephew, whom, for his better Accomplishment, I desire to stay
a while at the French Court: If you will prefer him to any place during the
time of his Abode, I shall requite you with the like Favor at Rome, when you
lay your Commands on

Your Eminences most Humble, and Devoted Servant, SILVONA.


Sir, you are very welcome, and your Letter is very acceptable;

Your Uncle may freely lay his Commands on me, who am ready to serve him at all
Times and on all Occasions.

But what place, Sir, would fit you best?

Meand. Your Eminence knows better the Places at Court than I who am but a
Stranger.


Pont. What do you think of being Gentleman Usher to the Queen?


Mean. A very good place, but I am afraid that I cannot bear it out.


Pont. Why so?


Mend. I am but one of a small Fortune, and have not Money always at Command.


Pont. Money: For the Respect I owe your Uncle, I shall provide you with Money,
if I find you a deserving Person, and grateful to your Friend.


Meand. Let me live no longer than I prove ungrateful for so great Favors --
I Will not only be thankful, but hazard my Soul to serve your Eminence.


Pont. It Is enough, and if you will call at my Chamber the Morrow Morning,
I Will freely present you with 20000 Crowns.
And as you behave your self you shall find me your Friend or Foe.

Meand. I Will prostrate my Soul at your Eminence's Feet, to serve you to the
utmost Limits of my Power.

Exit Meander.
Pont. Now. Pedro, we may see how the Fates favor us,
And the Stars concur with us in so just a Revenge:
All things fall out better than we can propose.

Pedr. This Spark is very fit for what we design him.
I doubt not but ere long he will make the King a Cuckold,
And furnish the Kingdom with an Heir to the Crown.

Pont. And what is best of all, the Queen is in love with him.


Pedr. O here she is, speak of the Devil and he appears.


Enter Stratonice alone. Strat. Ha. Cardinal, you are still a musing.
State-Politicks will break your Brain.
What serious Considerations are now the Object of your Thoughts?
Come, let me know.

Pont. I am not serious, Madam, only have been discoursing with a young
Gentleman, one Meander, lately come from Rome, in whose behalf I was a coming a
Suitor to your Majesty in the behalf of Merit.


Strat. Merit, my Lord, and such an Intercessor for it are very prevailing
Orators in any reasonable Suit.


Pont. The reasonableness of my Suit I Will refer to your fair self; when telling
you I have Occasions of State, to remove an Officer, now in Service under your
Majesty to another Post.

I would entreat your Gracious Acceptance of a Supply, to fill his Vacancy, in
the Person of a Gentleman, one Meander; who, besides Noble Friends, has nobler
Virtues his Advocates.


Strat. And what is he, that Meander?


Pont. Truly, Madam, he is a young Gentleman, whom Nature has endued with all
the Accomplishments that can attend one Man. It Is true, he is somewhat a
Stranger at Court, and I suppose unknown to your Majesty, though I confess your
Majesty has seen him once at least; and if, among your numerous Donations, of
the like Favor, at that time, your Majesty might chance to take notice of him,
I could recall him to your rememembrance, by reminding you, that your Majesty
did him the Honor to dance with him at the Ball the other Night. And though as
young a Courtier as he is, yet being a Person of that remarkable Appearance,
that not only the Approbation of the Court, in that fair Assembly, gave him
some Respect; but my own Testimonials of his complete worth can more fully
answer for him: I am emboldened to present him to you as one of your Menials,
in the Capacity of your Majesty's Knight of Honor, your Gentleman-usher.


Strat. Your Eminence speaks very favorably of him.
He must be a well accomplished Gentleman indeed,
Who obtains so high a Commendation from the famous Richlieu.
Here a little Vermuion rises in the Queen's Face, which the Cardinal takes
notice of.
Pedr. And so he is, the best aoccomplish'd Gentleman that ever I saw.


Strat. Cardinal, I do not mind well accomplished Gentlemen. You needed not to
have given your self all this Trouble, but to have used your own Pleasure: for
the Choice of my Servants being always the least of my Care, you know what
Persons are fittest for me.

But I am more troubled that this pretending Quack, who promised to cure my
Husband's Deficiency, should have thus cheated me out of so much Money, and set
my Expectation a longing.


Pont. Sure, Madam, you're a Lady of greater Judgment than to think, that Art
could make up the Defects of Nature. All the Doctors in the World cannot make
an Eunuch able to beget a Child. But I heartily wish the King had been like
other Men. For without an Heir from the King and Queen, the poor Kingdom is
undone, for many great and weighty Reasons, which are not convenient to be
mentioned.


Strat. There is no help for that now.
The Kingdom must be contented.
A Crown can never want an Heir.
And there are several, if one fail, whose Right it is to inherit this.

Pont. There is not one of those fit to Rule.

But one from your Majesty's Bowels, endued both with your Wit and Virtue,
would certainly make the Kingdom happy.


Strat. And what way, Cardinal, can I have Posterity?
Is it possible to beget my self with Child?

Pont. No, no, your Majesty knows how Sarah and Rachel brought forth Children
on the Knees of other Women: So may his Majesty beget you with Child, by the
help of some well-wishing Friend.


Strat. Pray be pleased, Cardinal, to make choice of some other Discourse, or
some other Object for your Divertisement.


Pont. I am really serious with your Majesty;
And earnestly request for an attentive hearing.
For the good of this poor drooping Kingdom is my real and only Design.

Strat. O, you would have me to play the Whore.
You are Holy Churchmen indeed.

Pont. No, Madam, in such Cases, there is no Whoredom played: For I believe you
are as free from all lascivious Thoughts as Chastity it self: But to promote
the Interest of the Nation by a Royal Heir, as the Case of the Kingdom now
stands, is as lawful as formerly it was to raise Seed to the Dead.


Strat. Since you will not leave off your provoking Discourse, I must leave
your Company: Neither can I imagine what can be your hidden Design in so bold
an Attempt.

Exit Stratonice.
Pont. This is bad indeed.
And I Am afraid that all our Machines will prove but in vain:
And it is all long of your Superstitious Doings, that has made her so much a
Devoto.

Pedr. Never fear. I Am the Turn-key of her Conscience:
I Will warrant you I Will let the Devil in.
Well have another Bout, after I have given her a little Enlargement at
Confession. But we must be sure to keep our new Monsieur in her Eye, with all
the Splendor imaginable: For if once her Love begin to be lukewarm, all the
Wheels we can turn will hardly bring our Project to perfection.


Enter Licosta. Pont. VVelcome Niece, we want a little of your help to forward
our Designs in your own Quarrel.


Licost. My Uncle may command my Assistance, what ever be the Design.


Pont. You are not ignorant of our Intentions; for I have already given you
sufficient information how I intend to be revenged on Orlinus, and frustrate
him of the Crown, by the help of Monsieur Meander, the Idol of the Queen's
Eyes, and the Phoenix of her Affection; whom I have made Gentleman Usher to her
Majesty. Therefore be sure, that with Father Pedro and me, you lay hold on all
Opportunities of extolling the Person, Wit, and Gallantry of the Chevalier
before the Queen; there being no better Instrument to whet Love than Praise.


Licost. Dear Uncle, though the Design terminates in downright betraying the
Honor, and rifling the Chastity of my kind and dearest Mistress; yet all the
sacred and binding Ties of Friendship shall be swallowed up in the insatiate
thirst of Vengeance against the cruel Orlinus. But I should heartily wish that
at first you had bended your Wits for a Revenge some other way.


Pedr. A Love-Plot is no unfriendly Design against your dear, and loving
Stratonice (as you term her) after her Abstinence these twenty and three long
Years.


Licost. My zealous Revenge against Orlinus bends all my Sinews, makes my Blood
boil, and my Heart to leap within me. Nither can any Opposition come in my way
but I shall step over it, so I can but rain a Deluge of Mischief and Vengeance
on the top of the deceitful Monster. I Will blow the Bellows of your Fury, and
(rather than fail) lend my helping Hand to the Hammer to hasten the Work of
your Contrivance.


Enter Meander. Pont. I see you're as good as you Word.
I Am glad you are come, for we have been talking of you;
And I intend to have a short Discourse with you in private.

Meand. I am still ready to receive and obey your Eminence's Commands.

Exeunt Pedro, and Licosta.
Pont. As I told you at our last parting, I have placed you near the Person of
the Queen, in the Quality and Post of her Majesty's Gentleman Usher, and that
you may make your Entrance not unworthy your self, I desire your acceptance of
the 40000 Crowns which I promised you, Leads him aside, and shows him
several Bags of Money, under the Hangings.
which will afford you some little present help. And for the Respect I bear to
your Relations, there shall no Person appear at Court in greater Splendor than
your self: And to encourage you to be no ways sparing in any Equipage necessary
thereunto, I assure you my Hand shall never be shut to you, but a constant
Assistance shall daily flow from the same kind Fountain, to support that Figure
I intend you shall make. But one Injunction I must lay upon you, which is, That
as my Favors are never sullied with the Affectation of Vanity, for this
Reason, and some other private ones of my own, I conjure you to make at least
this part of my kindness an inviolable Secret.


Meand. I am so surpised and confounded with the pouring Torrent of your
Eminence's Bounty, that I am neither furnished with Language nor Posture, to be
thankful for the Reception of such accumulated Favors heaped upon me, which
shall be kept as secret as Confession, and as silent as the Grave.


Pont. Well, well, my noble Monsieur, never fear Riches and Honor, so long as
I stand your Friend; which I assure to do so long as you prove real and
ingenuous to me.


Meand. Real! and Ingenuous! I have covenanted with my Heart, to be as real and
ingenuous to your Eminence's Shadow as to my own Soul.


Pont. It Is enough; but I must go about Business.
Send for your Money to your Chamber.
Exeunt.
ACT IV. The Scene a Chamber.
Enter Pandora. O Unhappy Fate! O I could put an end to my Days,
Meander, Meander, Oh my dear Meander!
Thou art not to blamed for leaving thy loving Pandora.
But a bad Advice, bad Advice, O, the Queen, the Queen!
Enter Licosta. Licost. And what of the Queen?


Pand. What? do you heaken, Hussy?
You ill-bred little Slut;
I could brain thee, thou bold Confidence.
Proffereth to strike her with her Staff.
Licost. What is the matter, Aunt?
Why are you in such a Passion?
I believe you are troubled with Love Fits.

Pand. I must tell you, must I, Impudence?


Licost. If you please you may, Aunt;
I can keep a Secret.

Pand. I have no Secret but what I desire the World to know of. The Queen, the
Queen, O the Queen! She has, by her ill Advice, made my dear and sweet Meander,
who loved me as his Life, to leave me; for now he says he is not minded, as
yet, to marry.


Licost. But how do you know that the Queen is the occasion of all this?


Pand. Oh I know, I know.


Licost. It Is but the Devil that puts this vain Imagination in your
Head; for I believe Meander loves you now as much as ever.
Love! how could he love you, the dry Trunk of an old Tree?
You are fit for nothing but to make Tinder of.

Pand. And what are you good for?
I hope to be married yet, for all this, before you.

Enter Stratonice and Meander. Strat. What News now, old Gentlewoman?


Pand. I have no good News.


Licost. My Aunt is still in love Madam; but Monsieur Meander is not so kind as
he has been formerly.


Strat. You, Monsieur Meander, why are not you kinder to Madam Pandora?


Meand. I know not what kindness she would be at.


Strat. You must hug her, and kiss her, and be so sweet upon her, as if she
were but fifteen years of Age.

Is not this your Desire, old Gentlewoman?


Pand. I love his Company now and then; and I think I Am no less deserving now,
than when I was but fifteen Years old.


Strat. And do you think you could make as good a Bedfellow?


Pand. And why not?


Strat. Why do not you take her to Church, and marry her, Monsieur Meander?


Meand. The old Gentlewoman now, does not think of Marriage; only she intends
to be merry.


Pand. Yes I do.


Strat. You see she is real: Why do not you marry her, as you promised.


Meand. I never designed it.


Pand. Why did you promise then, what you did not design?

O you wicked Wretch! what, did you love me and court me for all this time? Was
it to make a Whore of me?


Meand. I courted you, but could not love you.


Pand. O you double hearted Man! O the Deceit of Men!
Pay me my Money that you borrowed of me.

Meand. I know nothing of your Money; for none I borrowed, and none I Will pay.


Pand. O Monster of Ingratitude! O Paradox of Nature!
O wicked young Man! Is this your pretended Love?
O the Devil take such Love.
Exit Pandora, in great Passion.
Strat. Monsieur Meander, you ought not to scoff and jeer an Old Gentlewoman
so; Age should be reverenced; and, if you pretended to marry her, you ought to
have been so good as your Word.


Licost. Madam, I am sure he never loved her; for all her Joints shake, and are
as cold as Ice: Her Breath stinks and her Face is full of Wrinkles. Love her!
she is fitter for the Grave than Love or Wedlock; and yet the Worms would have
but a sorry Breakfast on her. Marry her! A young, proper, handsome Gentleman
marry an old Chronicle? No, no, Madam, Monsieur Meander has been a Traveller,
and knows Trap: He has been in Italy, Germany, Spain, Barbary; yea, and at the
Holy Grave. He has often (I believe) pretended a burning Love, when his Pulse was
quite cold; and I suspect he has served the old Gentlewoman so.


Strat. Have you ever been in Love, Monsieur Meander?


Strat. Once, Madam.


Licost. Ay, a hundred times.


Strat. And where lived that Dove that sat on the Pinnacle of your Affection?


Meand. Truly, Madam, since your Majesty is pleased to ask me so earnestly, I
will be free; she was and is one of the Pope's Misses.


Strat. Was she handsome?


Meand. Yes, Madam: Her Hair were Tresses of Gold, far beyond the Rays of a
rising Aurora; her Eyes were Di monds, her Cheeks Roses, her Lips Scarlet, her
Skin Alabaster, her Breasts Mountains of Snow, etc.


Licost. Did you enjoy her under the Moon, Meander?


Meand. I never took but one Vow, and that is, Not to kiss and tell.


Strat. I commend thee, Meander; but had His Holiness known this, he had
certainly made thee a Cardinal.


Licost. He was liker to have made him one of his Eunuchs.


Strat. Did you ever draw your Sword for a Mistress?


Meand. I have often drawn my Sword in Vindication of my Honor, Madam, but never
for Love. Yet a Lover can never be a Coward; for what Man will deny to fight
for what is dearest to him, and what he most desires to enjoy?


Licost. Madam, there is no necessity for Monsieur Meander's fighting for a
Lady; his Presence is enough to conquer her Affection.


Meand. I own indeed, that being once invited to a Gentleman's House in Spain,
I chanced to cast a careless Eye and Smile on his Lady, which she returned with
a cheerful Blush; which the jealous Gentleman perceiving, drew upon me
immediately: But having disarmed him, and made him know himself, I kissed the
Lady, and bade farewell. But this, Madam, was to vindicare my Honor, and no
Love Combat.


Licost. But what were your Thoughts in the time of your Smiles?
I believe they have been amorous enough.

Meand. No matter; thoughts without a further progress, made never any contest.


Strat. O yes, yes, I believe so; you're an innocent Saint; but your Eye and
Complexion betray you.


Enter Pedro. Strat. Had you not come in time, I had sent for you, Old Father.


Ped. I Am glad I am so fortunate as to prevent your Majesty's Trouble.


Strat. There Is a young Gentleman here, lately come from Spain, who wants a
Father Confessor to unload his Conscience of several Tuns of amorous Sins.


Meand. No, no, Father, there is no necessity yet, I have not been so long at
the Court of France.


Pedr. Truly I look upon you to be a worthy Gentleman, and molested by no Vice,
unless it be with a Thorn in the Flesh.


Meand. No, nor with that neither.


Strat. I believe you are an old Sinner, though a young Man.


Licost. Truly I look upon Monsieur Meander to be a well-accomplish'd Gentleman
every way; though I must acknowledge that he is Flesh and Blood, and may love a
Lady as well as other Men.


Strat. No doubt but he does: But you and I must be gone; we will leave him
with his Father Confessor. Be sure you confess all or none, and make a clear
Conscience; be sure to lighten it quite, or else not at all.

Exeunt Stratonice and Licosta.
Licost. exiens. This is the finest Gentleman that ever I saw.

They whisper.
Strat. He is a very fine Gentleman, give the Devil his due; Only he wants a
little Confidence.

They whisper.
Licost. Oh, my Uncle will teach him that.


Pedr. Monsieur Meander, I see you are in favor with the Queen; She talks so
intimately with you, as if you were of the Race Royal, and had been her
intimate Acquaintance these several Years.


Meand. It Is the Queen's Goodness; and I swear upon my Honor I never saw any
thing I admire more.


Pedr. You must learn Confidence, and by degrees you may come to be in her
Favor.


Meand. I must not suddenly aspire too high, lest unawares I fall from the top
of my Expectation, and be in a worse Condition than if I had never known what
it was to be Great.


Pedr. You speak well; but there is no fear, so long as the Cardinal and I are
resolved to pillar you up against all the Machines of Envy that Fury can invent.


Enter Pontaeus. Pont. How now, Meander? how are you pleased with your new
Preferment? and, How do you like your Royal Mistress?


Meand. Like her, and please your Eminence! It Is impossible but every thing
that is Humane must kneel to such Divine Goodness; nay, her very Guardian
Angels must be in love with her.


Pont. Now you speak like a passionate Servant indeed: But I perceive you are
rightly qualified for a Courtier; you can play the Flatterer so expertly.


Meand. Nay, my Lord, (whatever other Qualifications of a Courtier I may justly
mourn the want of) I am no ways desirous of that common Court trapping
Flattery, as fashionable as it is now worn. Besides, I believe your Eminence is
sensible of that Royal Merit in the Person of the Queen, that deserves a better
and abler Panegyrist than my self; the highest Character I can give such
sublime Excellency, being only the universal Duty of all that have the Honor
to be blessed with the umbrage of it, and that I am no more than one of the Crowd
that pay it her.


Pont. Well, well; the Queen is not ungrateful for the kind Character you give
her; for she is pleased to return you as kind a one. But to put one Question to
you; Could you love the Queen?


Meand. Love her, my Lord!


Pont. Yes, love her; love that Divine Goodness you have painted so beautiful?
Examine your Heart, and faithfully answer me that serious Question.


Meand. My Lord, there is something so amazing in the Question demanded, that I
am unprovided with Sense enough to understand you: But since your Eminence's
absolute Command requires my Answer, and I dare not be so insolent as to ask an
explication; I can only reply, That had Providence, the Great Disposer, debased
the Quality of the fair Stratonice, level to the poor Meander, or advanced mine
up to here is; and the Divine Dispenser so ordained to lodge such Beauty in my
Arms, I could out pride my self in such a Prize, above the famous Alexander
with his conquered Universe; Lord of a fairer World than his Sword ever
conquered, or his Ambition wept for.


Pedr. If then for the Safety and Glory of the Nation, in furnishing the Crown
with an Heir, the Royal Grace of the Queen, and the Interest of your assisting
Friends, by planting so fair a Grove of Laurels for you, in the stolen
Pleasures of so sweet a Paradise, I hope you are not of too strait laced a
Conscience, but so fair a Lady --


Meand. Conscience, old Father! No; there is that higher Divinity in the Fair
Stratonice's Charms, that all things move a Sphere below it. The enjoyment of
such Bliss, carries its own Consecration; and I could mix my Oraisons to such
Beauty, even with my Prayers to Heaven.


Pont. I find, Meander, that you are a passionate Soldier, and would hazard all
to storm a Citadel under a Lady's Banner: But there are a great many
Pallisado's, and Barricado's, of rigid Virtue and Chastity in the way; but let
not these dishearten you; the surmounting of these Bars shall be the Work of
Father Pedro and me: For as thick a Mass of Ice as Honor has hardened about
her Heart, we have Incense and Altar-Coals ready to thaw it: And Religion it
self shall be the ministering Instrument to soften her most obdurate Scruples of
Conscience; and therefore your Business is only to be assiduous and officious
about the Person of the Queen, your silent Services being all the Address you
must dare to make; for the distance of a Crowned Head will admit of no bolder
approach; your Province being no more than to attend the Consummation of your
destined Felicity. But above all things remember (and that with a religious
observance) that you are pushing for that Conquest which will admit of no
Triumph; for there is more than Fairy Treasure in the Blessing designed you; a
Secret to be sealed up in eternal Silence, and prized as valuable as your Life.


Meand. If every I proffer to reveal so weighty and noble a Secret, let my
Blood suffer for it; let my Life be at an end, and my Memory be hateful to all
Men living.


Pont. It Is enough; go attend the Queen's Person, and leave the rest to us.

Exit Meander.
Pedr. This young Spark is a hopeful Knight Errant, and fit enough for our
Business. I hope ere long our great Machine shall go.


Pont. Orlinus did but put my Ear a little aside; but I hope ere long to put
his Nose out of joint.


Pedr. You are in a fair way for it: And what is more than all, your Neice by
her Wit in recommending the Monsieur to the Queen, has augmented her
Love-Wound; for scarce a Day passes over, but she artfully, insinuates into
the Queen some Good Thought, with a kind Eye for the Monsieur Meander. She
finds him more than ordinary access, and magnifieth with all the little Arts of
her Menage, and applause his careful Service and constant Attendance. And more
than this, she cunningly engages him in those pleasing Narrations, before the
Queen, of his Travels and Adventures, as infinitely contribute to the Queen's
divertisement; which he relates so ingeniously, that he discovers such a
Treasury of that rich Wit and Sense, as must needs plume new Darts from this
new Quiver, and heighten the impending fatality of those more than dangerous
Charms, which truly before were too Mottal.


Pont. You find it so by her Confession?


Pedr. I do, and it will be no hard matter to accomplish our Design: For the
poor Queen came lately to me, with such a big and lamentable account of her
Female Weakness, and a disinal Violence committed upon her Heart, by the more
and more prevailing Influence of her bold and formidable Encroacher, as
requires no small expiatory Contrition. I being well pleased with her
Confession, told her it was more her Virtue than her Sin, took a very gentle
Cognizance of her Frailty, and gave her so easy an Absolution, that by the
cheapness of her present Balm, she had reason to believe that her Offense was
not altogether so frightful as her own strait-lac'd Conscience had represented
it, if her Ghostly Father's Spectacles saw true.


Pont. If the Dimensions of her Wound be such, the Iron is hot enough; and if
ever it be malleable, this is the time; therefore let us go presently, and
desire a private Audience of the Queen.


Pedr. There is one thing lies in the way; which is this: Though I question not
our Ability in furnishing a great many sinewy and forcible Arguments, the
necessary Artillery toward a general Storm; yet we shall be found very
unqualified Orators on this Theme. For in spite of all the pretended fair Face
of Zeal and Religion, designed for our purpose, I am sensible tha the Queen's
piercing Judgment will discover the Vizor, and detect the rooted and gangreen'd
Malice and Revenge against Orlinus.


Pont. Where have thou been all this time? shut up in a Cell? By my private
Agents (utterly to stifle all suspicion of the least remaining Dreg of Spite,
or Resentment against Orlinus) he is recalled to Court; and I have appeared so
cool, so easy, and so Gall-less in the Remission of so heinous an Affront, and
in hushing up of so noisie a Storm, in so sudden and unexpected a Calm, that I
am the Subject of Universal Wonder.


Pedr. I Am glad to hear it, and you have done very wisely: For your Lenity
herein, will not only breed Astonishment, but declare you as meek as a
Cloistered Saint, resound your Christian Moderation, and conceal the Cloven
Foot of our present Design.


Enter Stratonice. Strat. What Is the matter now? you look both as if you had
been doing Penance.


Pedr. No, an't please your Majesty, we have been but at Prayer.


Strat. Devotion's good Exercise: But what have you been praying for?


Pedr. We have been praying for you, and the good of the poor languishing
Kingdom, that Heavens may yet be so kind as to furnish the Crown with an Heir
from the Veins of the illustrious Stratonice.


Pont. O what Calamities hang over the Head of this Nation, occasioned all by
the Childless Bed of the Unfortunate Capo! O how much groans this Kingdom under
this Affliction? and what inexpressible Delight and Transport would the
Subjects be in? If Heavens would yet hear the Prayers of an Age, and relieve
the Distresses of a People, in opening a Gate to their Bliss, by raising them a
Branch from so Divine and so Dear a Sovereign Stock.


Strat. I am highly obliged both to you and my kind People Wishes: But since
the immutable Will has otherwise ordained it, you must all acquiesce in the
Divine Pleasure, and cease those fruitless Prayers, which Heaven has
manifestly decreed to be in vain.


Pedr. In vain, Madam? why so? who can fathom Providence, or know the Measure
of our Mercies? though our worldly Felicities be all formed for us above, our
Study and Industry may prove the effective Means in receiving them.


Strat. By what Study and Means can I Heir the Crown of France? and how can I
have a Child, whilst my Husband is an Eunuch born?


Pedr. We your nearest and faithfullest Servants, beg your Majesty, on the
Knees of our Compassion, to lay aside all Scruples of Conscience, and propagate
the Royal Seed, by one who may personate and act for your unhappy Husband, in
this lamentable Scene. My Lord Cardinal (like the Rope himself) can make that
which is Sin, no Sin, when the work is designed for a good end.


Strat. Oh, now I find where you are: But could Conscience be laid aside, I
should still be the same; for my Honor is to me of more worth than a Kingdom.


Pont. Consider, Gracious Lady, how the natural Orb of this Kingdom's Glory is
totally shaded: Therefore let your pitying Goodness supply some borrowed
Luminary, or all the Light of France must set for ever. Therefore let no sudden
Fantom assume a shape to fright you from the Performance of so advantageous an
undertaking.


Strat. How can you delude and persuade me, that Conscience is but a Fantom?
whilst the Law prohibiteth all Uncleanness, under the danger of Eternal Death:
Yea, and the Breach of the Seventh Commandment is reckoned among the deadly
Sins, even by the greatest Clergymen of the Roman Church.


Pont. If any Personal Defect render the Nuptial Consummation impossible, the
Conjugal Bed cannot be defiled. Now since by the fatal Wants of the lamented
Clodius, all our Hopes are excluded; what Injury, what Injustice to her
Husband, can the fair Stratonice commit, under so urgent a Call?


Strat. I perceive the Interest of France, and the benefit of an Heirless
Kingdom is the chief Object of your Design. But you are a Church man, and
should know that we ought not to use pernicious Means, for the attainment of a
seeming good End: For what profits France to me, or all the World beside, if
I lose my own Soul?


Pont. No, no, Madam, never fear, there is no Scruple in the Sacred Counsel I
have given you; for when extraordinary Occasions call, we are permitted the use
of extraordinary Instruments. Look back, Madam, but to the Creation of the
World, and you will see the first Original of Mankind raised even by Incestuous
Beds, a Generation betwixt Brother and Sister. And if so Universal a dispensing
Power was exercised; for the benefit of Mankind, shall one singular dispensing
Act, for the Benefit of a whole Nation, be Capital? especially where that
Dispensation infringes no Law, violates no Right, and breaks no Command, as has
been so fully proved to your Majesty.


Strat. The Peopling of the World by Incestuous Beds, is a very foolish
Argument; and but polisheth the Brass of your Diabolical Drift: For there was
no Incest till the Law was given. But Adultery was still Adultery, since the
beginning of the World: Neither can you say any thing of force to this purpose;
but run to and fro in a Circle of Nonsense.


Pont. Alas, Madam, it is the Intention makes the Sin: The Gratification of a
Lust may be Criminal, whilst the preservation of a Kingdom shall be
unblameable: Therefore stagger not your Royal Reason there; but examine the
practice of Imperial Policy, in innumerable Examples. How many of the great
Roman Caesar's have adopted Sons, to inherit the very Empire of the World? And
if adopted Heirs, utter Aliens, and Strangers to the Blood, were so publicly
let in to rise up in Bar of all the nearest Imperial Demandants; and so
notorious (...) Exclusion of Lineal Right, justified by those strict and
critical Observers of Moral Justice, the Roman Administrators. How much more
Righteous will an Adoption to the Crown of France appear, when so far from an
Alien, it shall challenge, at least half the Royal Title, in the rich Veins of
the fair Partner of the Throne, the fair Stratonice? and the other Additional
borrowed part, only a charitable Supply of Indigence, and support of weakness.


Pedr. A Prophesying Martyr could not have delivered more Oraculous Truths than
the profound, and Divine Reason the noble Cardinal has uttered.


Pont. Madam, what I have uttered has been delivered in all Truth and Fidelity,
without a Taint of the least malicious or sinister Thought. I confess, indeed,
I have received Wrongs from Orlinus, and perhaps crying Ones, but have freely
from a real Heart forgiven him.


Pedr. Forgiven him? yes, and so Exemplar a Forgiveness, as the admiring World
resounds it even to your Reproach.


Pont. Believe me, Madam, I have given you Counsel, and perhaps may have
surprised you in it; but must answer for it at my last breath; neither can your
greatest Confident bear his Charge more faithfully than Richlieu. Better a
thousand sinking Kingdoms Mourn, than the fair Soul of the Celestial Stratonice
should trip, even into criminal Thoughts, by the misleading Counsel of
Richlieu. I would not have so black a Sin to answer for at my last Audit of
Eternity, as the betraying of my Royal Mistress, for twice that Kingdom's
Price, for whose Glory I am so sollicitous.


Strat. Where shall I hide my blushing Head! Or how shall I be able to look Day
in the face, to think that two such Reverend Professors of Christianity durst
ask me such a Question! No, my Lord Cardinal, I will not enter into dispute
with you; for I am too weak to play the Casuist against such Learning; but
answer you in my own Province. Had you been a sensible Judge of that worldly
Honor you mentioned, you would have sooner bit that Tongue out, than have
dared to motion such Profanation to your Royal Mistress, as you term her.


Pont. Madam, pray have a right Understanding, and be not rash; for --


Strat. For shame, for shame, no more: Flatter me not, blind Guides; cease this
fruitless Suit; for when you can move the Globe, hope to shake me; for the
Attempts are equally impossible.


Pedr. May it please your Majesty to hear me but one Word.


Strat. No, no; eternally forbear the repetition of this Day's Folly, or see my
face no more.

Exit Stratonice, in great Passion.
Pedr. This will never do.


Pont. Curse on her Obstinacy and Perverseness.


Pedr. If this will not do, I know another way how you may be revenged on
Orlinus.


Pont. No less Revenge can expiate my Fury, than the loss of a Crown and
Kingdom.


Pedr. Then we must rally again, and raise new Batteries, and must manage new
Mines and Trenches for carrying on our Approach: And what think you, Sir, if
the Queen, by some Stratagem or other, at some unguarded Minute, should be
snared into Meander's Arms? Consider, poor harmless Creature, a mere Virgin as
she is, how insensible she is of the unexperienced Felicity; and her Ignorance
is the only Rock against us. Oh you cannot imagine, upon such a surprise, how
presently her Ice would melt before him; the Offender, with his short-lived
Guilt, would quickly play that ample Peace maker, that after the relish of such
a riotous Feast of Sweets, undoubtedly the Taste would soon create the
Appetite: And I assure you, you need not doubt fixing him the entire Lord of
her Ascendant, and producing a prosperous Revolution of your utmost Designs.


Pont. I like your Proposal so well, that I will steer to the golden Coast of
all my Hopes by no other Chart; and my Niece Licosta, the Queen's bosom
Favorite, shall be the chief Actor in this Scene of Vengeance.

Exeunt omnes.
ACT V.
The Scene Licosta's Chamber.
Enter Stratonice and Licosta. Licost. AH, Madam, I am the unhappiest of my Sex.


Strat. How, my Licosta! What new Cloud dares shade that Brow? Has Fortune any
more envenomed Shafts against that envied Beauty, after so many extravagant
Bolts of her Malice, in the Insolences of the ungrateful Orlinus?


Licost. Yes, Madam, she has new Vengeance, and the same Orlinus, to pour it
down upon me: For, after all my Load of Injuries from that vile Man, to
complete his Villainies, he has, this morning, bribed one of my Women to admit
him into my Chamber this night, when I am in Bed.


Strat. How, my Licosta! After all his impious Barbarities, has he a new
Reserve of Execrations? Is his Mine of Mischief inexhaustible? But above all,
after so wondrous a condescending Mercy of the forgiving Cardinal, is this h^^
kind return?


Licost. Yes, Madam, to so generous, I might, rather say shameful a remission
of so many notorious Insolences, this is his Gratitude.


Strat. Rather than such Wickedness shall be unpunished, I my self shall be thy
Champion; and not only all my Interest with the King, but also my whole Power
in the World shall be armed against him.


Licost. Ah, great and worthy Madam, I have not Expressions to thank you for
your Royal Goodness.

Licosta falls on her Knees whilst the Queen raises her up again.
Strat. Fear not the wicked Orlinus, for I my self will be your Guard; and you
may cause your Woman appear publicly against him, and confront him with his
wicked Design, to the open face of the World: And if he be past all Shame, and
the Disgrace of so unprincely a Design, so loudly detected, be not punishment
sufficient, then leave his further prosecution to me.


Licost. Alas, Madam, pardon me when I tell you, That such a proceeding against
him, would be the most ill-manag'd Policy imaginable: For as the treacherous
Monsieur had hardened Guilt enough to hatch such a piece of Treachery, he has
no less hardened Confidence to deny it too; and what would the single Breath of
a Creature of my low Quality signify in so heinous a Charge against a Prince
of the Blood? And how much would the Reputation of the Monsieur, in the popular
Balance, outweigh the Credit of so poor an Accuser? And so the whole
Impeachment, instead of punishing the guilty Monsieur, would rather retort and
wound the innocent Licosta; when the mis-judging World, upon such a Defeat,
might be too apt to lay the original Malice of the Accusation, not at the
Servant's, but at the Mistress's Door. No, Madam; if I would make some able
Justice in my Cause, the only means of gaining that point would be, by having
the Monsieur caught at the guilty hour in my Chamber, with some more authentic
Witness planted there, to confront his intended Wickedness (if such a one could
be obtained) whose not only Credit, but power also, should be able both to
publish and avenge my Wrongs.


Strat. Since the Train is laid not only against the Honor of you, my dear
Licosta, but the very Scene of his Treachery is most audaciously laid under my
Roof, and so near my Bedchamber, I my self will be that confronting Testimony
against him; for I intend this Night to lie in your Bed: Therefore let the
Monsieur, at the hour, be admitted -- I will not stay two Minutes.

Exit Stratonice, in haste.
Licost. Now I hope the Business is done. I received the Injury, and my Hand
shall open the Sluice of Vengeance, which shall flow a Deluge of Loss,
Distraction, and Madness, on the Head of the ungrateful Orlinus -- Pelanda,
Pelanda.


Enter Licosta's Chambermaid. Maid. Did you call, Madam?


Licost. Yes: Let all my Servants go to bed, and my Lodging be kept quiet; for
I am much indisposed, and have taken Physic: But you may attend 'till after
Twelve a Clock; and when the Doctor comes to the Door, be ready to let him in.


Maid. Yes, Madam.


Licost. Go then, and mind what I have said. I cannot yet go to bed, but must
walk in my Chamber 'till the Doctor come.

Exit Maid. O cruel Fate! O cursed unhappy Man!
That I should thus, for mere Revenge, trapan
My best of Friends, my Mistress, and undo
Her Name, her Honor, and her Virtue too,
But since I swore to be Orlinus's Foe,
I Will do it; for my Revenge will have it so.

Enter Stratonice. Strat. I have not stayed long.


Licost. No, Madam, it is but Ten a Clock.


Strat. Is it so late?


Licost. Yes, Madam.


Strat. Then I must go to bed, and wait for my Spark.


Licost. 'Pray do, Madam; for his coming is uncertain.

Licosta conveys her under the Hanging, and returns.
Enter Meander, and whispers Licosta in the Ear. Meand. Is the Queen gone to
Bed?


Licost. Yes, yes; but you may hold a little, for she is not quite undressed.


Meand. Is there any body with her?


Licost. No, no; our Design is more private.


Meand. I cannot stay longer.


Licost. Come then: And be sure you behave your self like a Lover: It Is Now or
Never.


Meand. I do not doubt but I shall.

She leads him near the Queen's Bed, and returns.
Enter Pandora. Pand. How now, Niece? How does the Night pass away with you?


Licost. What do you want; why are you not a-bed? (...) not fit that an old
Woman, like you, should turn Night-Walker, and be on the ramble about Twelve a
Clock at night.


Pand. My Business is of great weight; it is upon Life and Death: I must speak
with the Queen, who came in here. I am to beg for a poor Man's Parlon, who is
like to suffer to morrow.


Licost. This is an unseasonable time, therefore go to bed: You cannot speak
with the Queen to night.


Pand. Ay but I must and will speak with her.


Licost. Prithee go ask for her then: She is not here.


Pand. But I Am sure she is.

She looks under the Hanging, and sees Meander and her a-bed together.
Licost. You're an uncivil old Fool, more confident than the Devil. Get you to
he Door, you amorous old Beast.

She pusheth her to the Door.
Pand. I Will fit you as well, you bold ill-bred Puss.


Enter Pontaeus Pont. What Is the matter between you and your Aunt?


Licost. She comes in here now, for all it is so late, and will needs speak
with he Queen, when she cannot be spoke with.


Pont. Where is the Queen?


Licost. In my Bed, with Monsieur Meander.


Pont. I wish them ill rest: But does Pandora know?


Licost. In spite of my Heart she pried within the Hanging, and saw them --


Pont. There Is the Devil on it; we are all ruined: It Is a hundred to one but she
is gone to tell the King; for she is as envious as the Old Serpent, and cannot
endure that one should but smile upon Meander.


Licost. Sure she will not be so much a Devil.


Pont. Though she by my Sister, if she do such a thing, I Will confine her to a
Dungeon, where she shall lie for term of Life, to feed upon Bread and Water,
without the least glimpse of Light, deprived of the Company of Man, Woman, and
Child.


Licost. O sad! here is the King: We Are all undone.


Enter Clodius Capo, with a pair of Horns on his Head, attended only with
Pandora. Clod. Came my Stratonice in here?


Licost. Please your Majesty, she was here, but she is gone.


Clod. But I believe she is not gone.


Pont. I have not seen her here since I came.

Pandora looks under the Hanging, whilst Clodius peepeth in too.
Pand. But she was here just now.
Come look here, if it please your Majesty!

Clod. No truly, it does not please my Majesty, old Gentlewoman.


Pand. Treason! Treason!


Clod. Treason! Treason! Call the Guards.

The Queen comes frightened out under the Hanging, in a disguised manner.
Strat. O thou impotent, old, jealous Fool! Monster of Humanity! Paradox of
Royalty! and Stain to all Kings! Do thou court the Horns, and glory in thy
own Disgrace? Sound the Trumpet of thy own Insufficiency, make thy self a
Cuckold, and me a Whore? Come, come, I have hitherto concealed your Defects,
and intended now to have put the scoffing World to silence, by furnishing you
with an Heir, and to have taken away all suspicion of your Inability: But since
it is your pleasure to ruin your own Reputation, and stain my Virtue, go on,
and see what will be the result of your Folly. But (since I can make it appear
before the World, that what I do is for your Credit, and the Interest of the
poor afflicted Kingdom) all wise Men will conclude me a virtuous provident
Woman, and repute you a foolish impotent Coxcomb; and that is more than ever I
hitherto said: Put up your Horns then in your Pocket, and proclaim not your own
Shame and Weakness: Get you to bed, and trouble not a Gentlewoman's Chamber at
such a time of the Night.


Pont. Your Majesty is much blamable in this; for the Queen speaks like a
good Woman, and is very tender of your Credit.

He puts up his Horns in his Pocket.
Strat. I have kept his Secrets these one and twenty Years, and endured a long
Abstinence; and now to prevent all contest in Succession to the Crown, and stop
the Mouths of all Kings and Subjects in Christendom, who begin to mutter of his
Weakness, I intended this, not out of any wanton Design, but even to the hazard
of my Soul to serve him and his Subjects, now take this for my Pains. O what a
Cloud of Grief, Loss and Disgrace has your Foolishness brought upon my Head.

Licosta slips in under the Hanging, to see what is become of Monsieur Meander,
where she stays with him all Night.
Pont. The greatest Project of Wit is soon brought to nothing, if it be not
assisted and supported by wise and Secret Contrivances, and carried on with
real and unanimous Proceedings, without Juggling, Discord, Contention and
Brawling. Husband and Wife are but one Flesh; and if one be divided and rise up
against the other, both come to ruin.


Clod. If I have given my Wife and you any Offense it is your own Fault,
because you did not acquaint me sooner with your Design. It was well contrived,
and intended for a very lawful End. And I assure you, dear Wife, I will never
henceforth give you the least Offense upon this account; and I beg Pardon for
what I have already spoke.


Strat. Be kind to your self, and as careful of your Credit, as I am provident
for your Good. I run all Hazards to do you a Kindness; and if I happen to have
a Child (as I heartily wish I may, to serve you and the poor longing Kingdom)
your young Heir, (for ought I know) may happen to send me to the other World.


Clod. Well, well, speak no more, but hope for the best. If we be but one Flesh
(as the Cardinal says) the Child will be mine as much as yours.

This Impudent, Tale-bearing, Flattering, Old Amorous Devil has bred all this
Discord betwixt my Wife and me, but it shall never be so again.

To Pandora, who sneaketh to the Door.
Strat. She deserves to be broke upon the Wheel, for she would have broke the
whole Interest of France, which now lies at Stake; and I Am afraid the old
Fool's Tongue will run yet.


Pont. No, no, Madam, I Will secure her from talking: but I Am ashamed to own her
for my Sister.


Clod. I judge it best for me to go to Bed.


Strat. I Will go with you.

Exit Clodius.
Pont. You told him his own, and I commend you.
But I vow his Horns become him mighty well.

Strat. Ay, ay, let him wear them; but he never had that which can make us both
one Flesh: I know better things now.

Exeunt Pontaeus and Stratonice, whilst Meander, and Licosta soon follow after.
The SCENE Capo's Dining Room.
Enter Orlinus and Arnusius. Orlinus. Methinks in my Absence from Court, it is
changed, as it were, to another Scene; it looks strange: Yet all things seem to
be in good Order, and performed in great Decency.


Arn. All things seem to me as they were formerly.


Orlin. But what is he, this Monsieur Meander, who is termed Le Grand, the
Queen's Gentleman Usher, he makes a great Figure, and is much in the Queen's
Favor.


Arn. He Is a little poor Spark, that lately came from Roan, who now, by the
help of the Cardinal, is come to that height of Favor and Promotion, that he
dares to huff, and set light by the best Nobility of France.


Orlin. So; I Will take him up ere long.
Enter Pontaeus. How now, Cardinal?

Pont. O Fate be praised, I Am overjoyed to see my dear Son, and most faithful
Friend; That which I so much longed for, is at last come to pass. Why should a
trifling Word, or a transient Blow in Passion, breed any contest between my
greatest and best Favorite and me?

Hugs him in his Arms, with Hypocritical Tears in his Eyes.
Orlin. Truly, Cardinal, had I not been a little tipsie that Night there had
been no Controversy betwixt you and me. However, to make you amends, I find
you so much a Christian, that I will marry your Niece now, (if she will be
pleased to accept of me) and make her Sharer in my Fortune, though it were
tripple the Conquest of Alexander the Great.


Pont. Royal Sir, my Niece was so much concerned with her own misfortune and
mine in the last proposed Tender, that now she is quite averse from any purpose
of Marriage; and if I could persuade her to throw by her rigid Resolution, I am
not sure but the result might be all one, there still being the same distance
betwixt your Royalty and her Meanness: However, Sir, if you think fit I Will
acquaint her with what you say, and return you her answer.


Orlin. Do then, and tell her, I Will make her Satisfaction for her Wrong, and
make up all her Loss with Advantage, and really perform what, at present, I
proffer.

Exit Orlinus.
Pont. Pray, Sir, will you resolve me one thing?


Arn. If I can I will.


Pont. Is the Monsieur real in his Proposal? or is it only to banter me and
vent his jealous Passion in an undeserved Revenge?


Arn. No, truly, I am persuaded he speaks his mind really with an honest
intention, and it has troubled him much, since he has been from Court, that
ever things fell out betwixt your Niece and him as they did: And Pedro's
Brother, his Father Confessor, plainly told him in public, that Marriage was
the only Satisfaction that could make up your Niece's Wrong.


Pont. And you think so really?


Arn. Yes, really and I know as much of his mind as any Man else, unless it be
his Father-Confessor.


Enter Licosta. Arn. I am a little in haste, and will leave you with your
Niece, but wait upon your Eminence at some other time.

Exit Arnusius.
Pont. What will be your Resolution now, Niece? Orlinus's Love is become real
indeed, and will make you his Wife, though his Fortune were greater than the
Conquests of Alexander the Great. He is told by his Ghostly Father, that
nothing less can make you satisfaction for your Wrong.


Licost. It is all one to Licosta.


Pont. Why so, will you not have him?


Licost. Have him now? when he has so much slighted me, and is himself put by
the Crown.


Pont. How so?


Licost. The Queen is with Child by Monsieur Meander.


Pont. Curse on Misfortune: This confounded Revenge has ruined us all. I could
give her Physic, and make her miscarry; but Meander and she will be at it
again, and so it will be all one.


Licost. Ay, so they will: But alas, Uncle, why should I speak of marrying the
King's Brother, when I am undone?


Pont. Undone! how undone?


Licost. Through your Contrivance, and in Obedience to your cruel Commands, I
have betrayed my Royal Friend; I have debased my self to the acting even of the
vilest and most despicable Office of the most sordid of my Sex; and worst of
all, I Am undone, I Am undone, I Am undone.


Pont. Your Words, Niece, are Mysterious, I know not what to make of them: How
are you undone, undone, undone?


Licost. Alas, when the Queen was surprised by the King's coming into my
Chamber, where Monsiur Meander was a Bed with the Queen: After she had made up
the Breach with the King, I went in to see how it fared with poor Meander; but
from one degree of Love to another, we came to that height, that he had no
Power to forbear, and I had no strength to resist. And thus my poor Mistress
and I are now both with Child by Monsieur Meander: Therefore it is the greatest
of Follies to think on my matching with Orlinus now -- Curse on Revenge.


Enter Meander. Pont. How now, Monsieur Meander?


Mend. How do you do, Cardinal?


Pont. You speak more boldly than heretofore; one Night's Lodging with the
Queen has taught you Confidence enough: But yet be not ingrate, nor unthankful
to your old Friends.


Meand. But one Night's Lodging? ay, twenty.


Pont. You may thank me for it.


Meand. O, yes: But I thank my Stars, and her good Nature: For no sooner had
she seen me, the Idol of her Soul so near her, than the Ardence of my burning
Lips and twining Arms around her (a Circle that soon conjured up a strange
bewitching Demon that hushed all other interposing Powers) so totally
enchanted all the Reason and Resolution about her, that she had scarce a Hand,
a Look, a Breath, or a Murmur to resist me; whilst the uncheck'd Rister played
the lawless Rioter, and made the yielding Sacrifice all his own.


Pont. O brave Meander! But what past betwixt you and my Niece that Night,
after the Queen was gone?


Meand. Why, she slept in my Arms; I hope there was no ill in that.


Pont. She is with Child by you.


Meand. What if she be? the Cardinal is able to keep it.


Pont. Is that all? will you not marry her? I think she is only fit for you now.


Meand. If once I kiss, farewell Marriage: The Queen is enough for me.


Pont. Is that your Conscience?


Meand. A Church-States Man speak of Conscience!


Pont. And why not?


Meand. O brave, a Cardinal's Conscience! one may roll a Wheelbarrow backwards
in it.


Pont. I have done very well, to bring up a Bird to pick out my own Eyes.


Meand. As you bred me, so you have me: You taught me that Confidence, which I
could never have had; and now I Am become a greater Favorite than your self,
and value neither you nor your Niece.


Licost. O cursed day, when first I saw thy Face,
No Shame before; but now comes my Disgrace.
A Whore, a Whore, I did abhor like Hell:
No loss like mine, since Lucifer did fall.
A Whore to such a mean born Slave as thee,
So much below my Race and Pedigree.
I could have married those whom thou would served;
And yet no better than I have deserved.
My Uncle was your making, Sir, and I
Will find a way to make your Grandeur die.

Meand. Farewell.

Exit Meander.
Pont. Thy Blood shall pay thy Debt, cancel thy Score,
What made the Great, shall likewise make the poor.
Return, my Furies from Orlinn's Chase,
And to the Ax and Grave Meander trace.
My Wrath's not ended, tho it be begun,
But shall in a swift gliding Channel run.
Dark, still, and muddy, lest the Monster know,
That I Am, for base Ingratitude, his Foe.

Enter Stratonice, whilst Licosta conveyeth her self away privately. Strat. How
now, in a Passion, Cardinal?


Pont. I have reason, Madam, to be in a Passion.


Strat. And what is your Reason?


Pont. It Is a Secret, Madam.


Strat. Let it rest so. But where is your Niece, Licosta?


Pont. She was here, just now, Madam, but is gone I know not where.


Strat. I believe's she is gone, she is ashamed to show her Face, after what
she is done.


Pont. My Niece carry's the greatest Burden of Misfortune, for she is with
Child by Meander. She is ruined. But your Majesty has saved the King's Credit,
and done the Nation an unspeakable Favor.


Strat. The Devil is in this Meander; but you may thank your self for it. You
were his first Promoter, and all this is long of you -- Licosta with Child! --
misfortunate poor Wretch. The King and I had resolved that Orlinus should marry
her, under the pain of our eternal Displeasure.


Pont. Now, Madam, I design she shall go to a Nunnery, and do Penance by a long
Abstinence.


Strat. Then I must contrive to come off with Orlinus the best way I can. But
see, Cardinal, what the gaining of your wicked End has brought with it. Look to
it Churchman, look to it, and see there be that Mercy and forgiving Goodness
in Heaven for the unhappy Stratonice, that your Religious Sophistry flattered
me with. Have a care of my Soul, I charge you, for I have given my self away.


Pont. What your Majesty has done, is a Work of Charity, and the greatest that
ever was done to an impotent King, and a poor Heirless Kingdom.


Enter Arnusius. Strat. How does my Brother?


Arn. He is well, Madam.


Strat. Who is with him?


Arn. Only your Majesty's Gentleman Usher, Monsieur Meander.


Strat. And what are they about?


Arn. They are private in your Brother's Closet.


Strat. That Is well.


Arn. I came to know when your Eminence will be at leisure to speak with
Orlinus.


Pont. I am ready to wait upon Orlinus at all times; but I suspect his Business
with me is concerning my Niece, which is over, she intending, after her late
great Affront, to run no more hazards of danger, but make choice of a single
and solitary Life in a Nunnery.


Arn. I shall acquaint him with what your Eminence says.

Exit Arnusius.
Pont. I do not like that Orlinus and Meander should be shut up in a Closet:
Orlinus is an insinuating Man, and may soon draw out of Meander that which I
would not have the World to know for the Pope's Triple Crown, and my own Red
Hat.


Strat. Heavens forbid; then I were ruined for ever.


Pont. Well; I Will pump him, and know the Design. of the Closet.


Strat. Do; and let me know, and I will find an Antidote against Taletelling.

Exeunt.
The Scene Orlinus 's Chamber. Enter Arnusius and Orlinus. Orlin. Now,
Arnusius, what says the Cardinal to my proposal of Marriage with his Niece?


Arn. He is much averse from it now, as you was when you box'd his Ears.


Orlin. Sure it is not so bad with him.


Arn. I assure you it is; for he gives you an absolute denial, under color of
sending her to a Nunnery.


Orlin. Does Rome's proud Fop, the juggling Fiend of France,
Slight me, who strives his Priest-ship to advance?
Farewell his Niece; for she will never be
Courted again by such a Prince as me.

Arn. I can inform you more: The uncertain Report of the Queen's being with
Child, is certainly true; for though she has concealed it all this time, she is
now almost ready to lie in.


Orlin. Sure the Devil is not so great with her, as to make her self a Whore,
my Brother a Cuckold, and put me by the Crown.


Arn. You have no need to doubt but she is with Child; but all the doubt lies
in whose it is.


Orlin. That cursed vindictive Fury of the Cardinal has contrived this Mischief
for the Affront I gave to him and his Niece.


Arn. I know nothing of that; but this Monsieur Meander and she are mighty
familiar; and some talk as if they were too familiar.


Orl. I shall find that out.


Enter Capo, Stratonice, big bellied, Meander, and Pontaeus. Capo. Brother, we
are come to pay you a Visit.


Orlin. Your Majesty's are heartily welcome; and I am glad, Brother, you have
done that the whole Nation has so long wished for.


Capo. What Is that?


Orlin. Got the Queen with Child.


Capo. Yes, Brother; but I have been a long while about it.


Strat. No matter; a thing well done, is soon done.


Orlin. You look, Madam, as if your Time were nigh.


Strat. So nigh, that I have not an hour to reckon on; neither dare I hazard to
stay long from my Chamber.


Capo. Do not stay then, but go and wait for the good Hour.


Strat. I will

Exeunt Stratonice and Meander.
Orlin. Brother, there is great talking concerning this Birth before it be
brought forth.


Capo. What talking?


Orlin. Some talk as is you had got help in begetting the Queen with Child.


Capo. Yes, so I did; for my Wife helped me.


Orlin. Brother, if you will have it so, it must be so.


Pont. Let not your Majesty take offense at your Brother's Discourse; for he
intends only to make merry.


Capo. No, no, Cardinal; I know that.


Arn. The Queen's a more virtuous Lady than to give occasion of such a black,
disgraceful, and undeserved Suspicion.


Pont. And especially when it brings along with it so high and heinous a
Reflection and Disparagement on his Majesty.


Capo. I desire, Brother, that neither in jest nor earnest you talk to me of so
impertinent a Subject, under the pain of my eternal Displeasure.


Orlin. Let it so rest, Brother; what is your Will I must submit to.


Enter Meander. Capo. What good News now?


Meand. The Queen is in Labor.


Pont. I wish her a happy Delivery.


Arn. 'Pray Heavens she may.


Orlin. But we'll go and see how it fares with her.


Capo. Go then, without further delay.


Orlin. The Birth of a Royal Heir is of great weight.

Exeunt Orlinus, Meander, and Arnusius.
Capo. What meant my Brother by this impertinent Discourse, Cardinal?


Pont. Some Fop has been buzzing him in the ear with an idle Discourse, and now
he casts up the Froth of a groundless Suspicion.


Capo. I would advise him to be more cautious both in his Words and Actions,
lest he run himself headlong in an evitable Danger.


Pont. I cannot but highly commend your Majesty for your Patience, when he so
far encroach'd on your Majesty's Honor and Manhood. But to speak without Guile
or Dissimulation, your Brother is swelled to that magnitude, that he seems to
eclipse both your self and Queen, the two celestial Orbs that illuminate this
flourishing Nation.


Capo. He shall not henceforth find me so patient.


Pont. Your Majesty is to be commended, to be either King or no King.


Enter Orlinus and Meander, with a Midwife carrying the supposed Prince;
convoyed by several Noblemen and Ladies, Jesuits, Monks, and Friars; with a
Spirit in a white Surplice walking last. Capo. What good News?


Midw. Good News for your Majesty and all your Subjects.


Pont. A Prince! a Prince!


Meand. Heavens be praised.


Capo. Come, let me see him.


Orlin. He Is as like you, Brother, as a Cub is like a Lien's Whelp. I think,
Meander, he favors you. Look and see, Cardinal.


Pont. No, no, (and please your Grace) he is like his own Father.


Capo. Forbear your airy and tempting Reflections; your jealous Pate is not fit
to wear a Crown, though I had no Heir.


Orlin. No sure, Brother, you have one: I saw it come out, but the Devil knows
how it came in.


Capo. Absent my Presence, and let me not see your face, 'till you learn a
better Behavior, and more Breeding.

Exit Orlinus.
Pont. I have my Wish; for now the Royal Heir
Of France is born, and dissipates to Air
Takes the Child in his Arms. The groundless Hopes that once Orlinus had,
Which all the Joys of France once smothered.
The Spirit stops him, and takes the Child after a daring manner, and
speaks thus:
Spirit. But suffer me without offense to tell,
That he will prove a Cocatrice of Hell.
He Will be a Man of Prey, and home will bring
His Triumphs, through his Subjects suffering:
Not only swelling France will he undo,
But neighboring Kings, and mighty Princes too.
He Will dip his Foot in Blood, and do the Work
Of Apostates, and turn Most Christian Turk.
Truce-breaking Brute, who with his Villainies
Will tann the Earth, and spot the very Skies.
Unhappy France, the Basilisk that bred;
His Birth's thy Bane, his Death will make thee glad.
He Will dote when he grows old, despise the Pope,
And bring all Kings of Europe in his tope.
He Will hate all Men, and all Men will abhor him,
No Monster such was ever born before him.
His Name will stink, his Memory will rot;
His cruel Acts will never be forgot.
He Is Deo datus; for from Heaven he is hurled,
Like Lucifer, to plague the Lower World.
Live, live, young Serpent, 'till thou come to age,
Hard-hearted still, and Pharaoh like in rage,
'Till, like Di'clesian, thou be forced to fly,
Ashamed to live, and terrified to die.
Avaunt then, Viper, though thy Life's but small;
Thy poisonous Eyes presage thy Father's Fall.
He gives back the young Prince to the Midwife, and vanishes, whereat all
present are amazed.
Capo. Heavens! who is here?


Pont. A Devil! a Devil!


Arn. An Angel, an Angel.


Pont. Why did not he stay then?


Arn. Cardinal, you are not Company for White Angels; your Troop are of another
Livery.


Pont. Be he Devil, be he Angel, I believe he will prove a true Prophet.


Capo. Heavens forbid: But be what he will, he has so frighted me, that I will
stay no longer.

Exeunt omnes, in a hurry.
The Scene, Stratonice's Bedchamber.
Enter Stratonice, sola. Strat. The Danger's past, my Abstinence is over,
And grumbling France will taunt the King no more;
He has an Heir now to his Royal Crown,
A hopeful Spark, as any in the Town.

Enter Licosta, and falls down on her Knees, crying, before the Queen.
Licost. Great Madam, I must acknowledge my self too bold to intrude your
Majesty's Presence, after such a vile Act of vindictive Impudence, which has
justly ruined me in all respects. But your Majesty's Virtue and Innocence,
guard you from all Stain, and danger of Disgrace; and what is past upon your
Majesty's account, tends to a profitable End, and the infinite Advantage of all
your Subjects. Now, dear Madam, since Fate is so much your Friend, and your
Guardian Angels so protect you, be so kind, out of your Goodness and Candor,
to pardon my Weakness, and receive me again into your Majesty's Favor;
otherwise my Heart will break, my Spirits sail, and I shall be ready to put a
period to my wretched Days.


Strat. My dear Licosta, 'till the Sun, at Noon,
Stratonice raises her up, pulls her in her Arms, and kissethher. Give over
to shine, and suddenly go down;
'Till Fishes live in Woods, and Bears at Sea,
My constant Love shall never depart from thee.
I pardon thee what ever thou have done,
And love thee now as when it was begun.
Forbear, forbear, thy Loss is more than mine;
Yet if I live I Will make thy Virtues shine.

Enter Pontaeus in haste, with an angry Countenance. Pont. O Misfortune!


Strat. What Is the matter now, Cardinal? You seem to be troubled in Mind.


Pont. We are all ruined and undone.


Strat. How so.?


Pont. O this unhappy Meander, that ever I saw the Face of him!


Strat. What is the matter, Cardinal?


Pont. I cannot speak. O this Meander! this unhappy Meander! We are all
betrayed.


Strat. Prithee speak out.


Pont. He has promised to discover to Orlinus the whole Intrigue of the young
Prince.


Strat. How do you know?


Pont. I had some information of it from a certain hand. But Arnusius knows the
whole proceedings, yet will not tell me one tittle.


Strat. O cursed Wretch! O ungrateful Monster! I Will be revenged.


Enter Arnusius. Strat. Whence are you come, Arnusius?


Arn. From Orlinus, Madam, to enquire for your Welfare.


Strat. I Am in the way of recovery. But who is with my Brother?


Arn. None but Monsieur Meander.


Strat. They are soon become acquainted.


Pont. Ay, too soon to contrive Mischief.


Strat. And what are they about.


Arn. They are serious in private.


Strat. But do you know what they are about?


Arn. Not I, Madam.


Strat. Do not deny it; for I know you do: And if you will not tell me, it
shall be the worse for you; but if you will, there is nothing in France shall be
too good for you.


Arn. I would willingly serve your Majesty, but am quite ignorant of what you
speak.


Pont. Did you ever hear Orlinus speak disgracefully of the Birth of the young
Prince?


Strat. Speak the truth; for if ever I find out that you hear and conceal so
deep a Treason, you shall be judged as a Traitor, and receive Justice
accordingly.


Arn. Madam, if you will vow and promise never to discover what I say, but
prosecute your Design in another Channel, I Will tell you all I know.


Strat. I do vow and promise, and will reward you to your Mind.


Arn. Meander has promised to put Orlinus in a fair way to be King; to discover
the whole Intrigue of the Young Prince, and prove that he is no lawful Heir to
the French Crown; and, for reward, he has bound himself by Oath to make him
King of Navarr.


Strat. Here are fine Doings: But be sure, Arnusius, you speak nothing; and do
not stay; but go back, and present my Respects to my Brother; and take an
opportunity to tell Meander that I would speak with him.

Exit Arnusius.
Pont. What course, Madam, do you intend to steer in this prodigious Scene?


Strat. I intend to take the nearest cut for my own Security.


Pont. What is that, Madam?


Strat. Cut off the Rogue's Head.


Pont. There can be no sure Remedy found out so long as he is alive; and if a
speedy course be not taken, the whole Kingdom of France is ruined; and we are
undone if once he discover his Mind to Orlinus.


Strat. If he has not done it already, I Will do my best to secure his
discovering for the future.


Pont. What Measures must be taken?


Strat. You know, Cardinal, you have been the First Mover in this ill-look'd
Business; therefore I besire you to bend your Wits for our Security, since your
Credit and undoing lie at the Stake no less than mine.


Pont. What do you advise me to, Madam?


Strat. You must arraign him for High Treason; and sweeten him with the
Assurance of my Favor, and that he is in no danger of losing his Life; but
that he is brought to a Trial, to effectuate some Design of State Policy, and
compose some dangerous Animosities of envious and ambitious Men; lest in spite
he reveal my eternal Disgrace.


Pont. Truly, Madam, if it be as Arnusius says (as I am apt to believe it is)
he is guilty of the highest of Treasons; and in showing Mercy to him, you
murder your self.


Strat. I know it; and he shall never enjoy my Favor again. His Crime is
unpardonable; and nothing can expiate his Guilt, but his Heart's Blood and last
Breath.


Enter Meander Strat. O, your Majesty's welcome.


Meand. And why your Majesty, Madam?


Strat. I hear you have got the Kingdom af Navarr from your Friend Orlinus, for
discovering to him some seeret Intrigue of State Policy.


Meand. Truly, Madam, your Informer is mistaken.


Strat. He is not mistaken, he will say it to your Face. Therefore I advise you
to be ingenuous, to tell the Truth, and acknowledge your Error; if not, it
shall be the worse for you.


Pont. The Wisest of Men may be overseen, and speak a rash Word, which may
repent him afterward, yet not be guilty of any Capital Crime; therefore,
Monsieur Meander, I earnestly request, and humbly beg you to speak the Truth,
for the Queen's Satisfaction, especially knowing what Favor and Respec^ (...)
has for you.


Meand. To be real then; and acknowledge my Error: It is as your Informer says:
And I have promised to give Orlinus an account of the Pedigree of the young
Prince.


Strat. It was very unkindly done; but you know that you are the Idol of my
Soul; and so from thence you take the liberty of doing what you please; but I
request you, Meander, proceed no farther to ruin my Reputation, in expectation
of that which you can never enjoy.


Meand. Madam, I Am wounded at the very Heart, that I should be so much
overseen, or rather enchanted by the sugared Breath of that insinuating
Serpent, Orlinus, as once to entertain a thought of being guilty of so black
and Monstrous a Crime: But I Will rather die than proceed any farther.


Strat. Be sure you keep no Correspondence with him; for if ever you do, and
hear of it, I shall never be reconciled with you again: I shall hate you as
much as ever I loved you.


Meand. It shall be so, Madam, and I heartily beg your Pardon for what is
already past.

Exit Meander.
Strat. Perfidious Wretch, Confounder of my Fate,
My Blot, my Shame, my Ruin, and Disgrace.
Pontaeus go, go soon, now while it is time,
Cut off his Head to expiate his Crime.

Pont. Madam, I Will go, in haste, at your Command,
And make the Traitor feel my weighty Hand.
Exeunt.
The SCENE A place of Execution.
Enter Arnusius and Licosta. Arn. How comes Meander off with the Queen?


Licost. We shall see by and by.


Arn. But pray, Madam, let me know.


Licost. This is the last day of his Life.


Arn. Is he to die to Day?


Licost. I hope to see him shorter by the Head to Day.


Arn. He has been an ambitious and perfidious Man, but I Am heartily sorry for
him.


Licost. Sorry! for a Villain, a Varlet, a Rogue, that had all that the Court
could afford, in respect of Delight, Riches, and Honor, and strove to ruin for
ever those who were his Promoters. Hell take such Impostors; they are not
worthy to live.


Arn. And is it certain that he is to die this day?


Licost. Yes; but it is more than he knows.


Arn. It Is a pity so lewd a Liver should not know his Doom.


Licost. No pity, let him die, and double die;
With his Hearts-Blood I Will write his Elegy.
I Will treat my Soul, and Feast my Appetite,
With Blood and Wounds, in Vengeance take Delight.
(...) Body buried in some Dunghill lie.
(...) all his Vitals into Vapors fly.

Enter Meander guarded, with Father Pedro; the Executioner following with an
Ax. Meand. What need I thus be gazed at, as if I were some Traitor or Villain,
And were brought here to die for some reeking Crime?

Pedr. Ay, and so you are like, as I can understand; therefore pray think on
another World; make Friends in Purgatory.


Meand. Tell your deluding Fables to some ignorant Fop like your self; for I
shall Tup this Night with the Queen.


Enter Messenger, and speaks to Meander aside. Mess. Sir, the Cardinal will
send your Pardon within this quarter of an Hour; therefore desires you not to
be afraid of the Circumstances you are under.


Meand. go, and desire him to make haste.


Pedr. If you will confess, I Will cleanse your Soul from Sin;
That Saints in Paradise may take you in.

Mess. The Queen commands his Head to be cut off with all speed.

He whispereth the Captain of the Guards, and Exit.
Capt. Pray, Sir, make haste, we have no time to delay; be pleased to lay down
your Head, and receive the stroke of Justice.


Meand. Sure it is not so bad with you.


Capt. Ay, but it is with you; and you shall and must; for it is the Queen's
Command.


Meand. Is it so?
Curse on the Queen: Is this my Pardon sent?
Am I thus served in Jest, that did prevent
The Kingdom's Contest for a Royal Heir;
And have not time the Truth now to declare?
Pedro and the Captain of the Guards push Meander toward the Execution Block.
Pedro. Cut off his Head, cut off his Head.


Licost. It Is time the Villain should be dead.

Some of the Guards pluck him down to the Block.
Meand. Curse on Promotion, Honor and Ambition.
Once I was high, now in a low Condition.
His Head on the Block.
The Executioner cuts off h^^ Head, whilst Licosta pulls it up in her Hand,
beating it on the Nose, and thrusting her Bodkin through his Tongue. Licost. O
Blessed Sacrifice, I Will treat this Tongue,
That of my Shame in open Triumph Sung:
Dissembling Lips that often have kissed my Mouth,
Betrayed my Heart but never spoke the Truth.
I Am glad to see the Stain of Mortals fall,
The Kingdom's Curse, O cruel Canniba!
So may all false deceitful Lovers be
Cast down by Fate, and die in Infamy.
Exeunt.

