SAINT PETER'S General Petition to our SAVIOR, For Himself and his fellow
Sufferers.

LONDON, Printed by Peter Lillierap in the year 1661.

To the KINGS Most Excellent Majesty, CHARLES THE SECOND
By the Grace of God of Great Britain, France and Ireland KING, etc.
SIR,
THis Sermon I present your Majesty with, was not intended by me for the Press,
but for the Pulpit, where many Imperfections of it might have past with the
time of its delivery

Sed eundum qua via patet. Trees that grow amongst Rocks, must be shrubs,
because they thrust out their branches only as the Rocks will give them leave.

Vt monstrent se enecari. I have been now above 30 years upon your public
service, standing by custom upon your Catalogue of preferments, and I hope I
shall not stay till all be preferred, as the Country man did waiting to see
the River run away that he might go over.

Rusticus ex pectat dum defluat amnis at ille,
Labitur atque labetur in omne volubilis aevum.

Your Majesty's most humble and obedient Subject, JOHN ROWLAND Rector of
Foots-Cray in Kent.

MATTHEW. 19.27. Then answered Peter and said unto him, Behold, we have forsaken
all and followed thee: What shall we have therefore?


THe words are an Answer and a Question.

The Answer, Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee.

The Question, What shall we have therefore?

The Answer is the ground and Reason of his following Petition;

Behold, We have forsaken all and followed Thee?

The Question is the Petition it self: What shall we have therefore?

The Text may be called St. Peter his General Petition to our Savior for
himself and his fellow sufferers.

Wherein there are four things chiefly to be considered.

First, That the Answer was made to Christ for something he had said before:
Then answered Peter and said unto him.

Secondly, The Person that made the answer, and that was S. Peter; Then
answered Peter and said.

Thirdly, The Answer it self, which is the ground and Reason of his following
Petition; Behold we have forsaken all and followed Thee?

Lastly, The Question, which has the nature of a Petition, and seems to desire
a speedy answer, because they had forsaken all for his sake: What shall we have
therefore?

Of these in their Order, And first that the answer was made to Christ for
something which he had said before.

An answer cannot be well understood whether it be pertinent or not, unless we
first know what was said before to which the answer was made, wherefore we must
have recourse to the occasion contained in the precedent History, as it is
recorded by S. Matthew, S. Mark, and S. Luke.

S. Matthew says at the 16 verse. of this 19 chap. that one came to Christ to
know what he should do that he might have eternal life, and at the 20. and 22.
verse. that he was a young man.

S. Luke at the 18 chap. 18. verse. calls him a Ruler.

S. Mark 10. chap. 17. verse. sets down the manner of his coming, and his
behavior. That he came running very earnestly: And delivered his Petition very
humbly, for he kneeled, and the form of his Petition was very ceremonious: for
he said, Good Master, what good thing shall I do that I may have eternal life,
verse. 16.

He was no Saduce, for he believed the immortality of the soul, and a
resurrection of the body to eternal life, which some of our new Lights have
denied, and published in Print that the soul dies with the body.

Nor was he that Lawyer we read of, Luke 10.25. who preferred the same Petition
tempting Christ and saying, Master what shall I do to inherit eternal life?

But he was in some points a Pharisee, because he thought a man might keep the
Law, and do some good thing whereby he might deserve and obtain eternal life.

Our Savior therefore opposes an other question to his and seems to correct
the formality of his Petition v. 17. Why call thou me good! there is none
good but one, that is God. As if he had said, a man cannot do any thing of
himself that is good, by which he may merit eternal life, but when he has done
all the good he can, he must wholely cast himself upon the mercies of God in
Christ.

But our Savior not staying for his answer, prevents him by way of
anticipation, because he knew wherein the strength of his confidence lay,
namely, in the Covenant of Works, do this and live, and though he require Faith
in all that will be saved, yet he brings this man to the Test of the Law,
saying, If thou will enter into Life keep the Commandments, verse. 17. He
supposing because of his political and external performances toward men, that
none could pose him there, asks which of the Commandments? as if it were all
one to him by which he should be tried. Like a young Scholar who has learned
his Lesson by wrote, and thinks he understands it all, when he knows not one
word of it as he should know.

Our Savior therefore repeats the Commandments to him verse. 18. Thou shall do
no murder, Thou shall not commit adultery. Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not
bear false witness, Honor thy Father and thy Mother. And lastly he adds the
complement of them all, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

From hence some erroniously strive to establish the Doctrine of Works, or else
they say the Law was given in vain.

But there are many good uses of the Law, though we are not able to keep it.

First, it serves to teach us what the will of God is.

Secondly, It is a glass to show us our deformities, and so is our
schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ.

Thirdly, To keep us under obedience, that we do not, as too many lately have
done, abuse our Christian Liberty, and pretend our Faith when our works are
abominable, to the public scandal of our Christian Profession.

But the young man thought if this were all, to keep the Commandments, that
were an easy matter, for he replied, all these have I kept from my youth, what
lack I yet? But hence it is evident that he supposed there wanted something,
and that his civil performance of the Commandments, could not assure him of
everlasting life.

He had bent the Rule to the square of his own actions, and thought they agreed
very exactly: but our Savior sets the Rule right again us it should be, and as
he has expounded it, Matthew. 5. where he shows that God requires both the
outward and inward conformity of the whole man to the keeping of the law, and
then he tries this young man's actions by the Rule, and there appears a vast
difference betwixt them.

Wherefore Jesus says unto him, as we find it Luke 18.22. ver: Yet lackest
thou one thing, If thou will be perfect, go and sell th^^ th^^ ha^, and give to
the poor, and thou shall have Treasure in heaven, and take up thy Cross, says
S. Mark, and come and follow me.

Our Savior was now come to the depth of the wound. But when the young man
heard that saying, he went away sorrowful for he had great possessions, ver,
22.

Great possessions he might have, and yet not be very Rich, if they lie so far
a sunder that the charge of keeping them and the casualties may oftimes amount
to as much as the yearly Revenues come to, and as some say the King of Spains
do. But S. Luke takes away the scruple, saying, he was very rich. A rare
example indeed, for a young man, a Ruler, and a rich man, in the midst of all
the pleasures of his youth, the great employments of his Magistracy, and the
abundance of his wealth, to lay all thoughts aside, and to take care for
eternal Life. His very external performances are worthy the imitation of the
best men; for although civil honesty cannot merit eternal life, yet it is very
commendable, and acceptable to God, and is oftimes rewarded by him with
temporal felicity. And S. Mark tells us that Christ loved him for it, and
although he went away sorrowful at that time, it is to be presumed that he
came again some other time, when God gave him a more, through call, and never
went away from him sorrowing any more.

But for that time doubtless all that were then present, wondered to see him
come so cheerfully, and then to depart so sad. It not being the custom of our
Savior to send away any one sad, from him who came to him in sincerity: as
Historians record of Titus. the son of Vestatian who was therefore called
Delitiae Mundi, because he would suffer no man to depart grieved out of his
presence: When this young man was gone, S, Mark says, Jesus, l^oked round
about him, and said unto his Disciples Mat. ver. 22. verily I say unto you that
a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven, and again I say unto
you, that it is easier for a Cancel to go through the eye of a Needle than for
a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. When the Disciples heard that,
they were exceedingly amazed, saying who then can be saved? ver. 25.

But there are some men since who are little amazed at it, for they are so much
taken with a Metaphor, that they will not believe our Savior meant a Camel,
but a Cabel, because the Greek word (...) a Cabel, and (...) a Camel differ but
one letter. So Theophylact and others that follow that exposition. Atque id
sane magis quadrat ad foramen acus says Erasmus, a Cable will better fit the
eye of a Needle: and the impossibility is not so great to humane Reason. For a
Cabel is twisted together of many small thread, and if it be untwisted into
small threads again, those small threads may in time be past through a Needles
eye. So rich men who oftimes twist themselves together a great estate out of
many poor men, estates: If God shall give them Grace to repent and to make
restitution as Zacheus did, it is not impossible for them to be saved. But the
Syrian Interpreter expounds it to be a Camel, a living creature that our
Savior then shake of in the Syrian tongue, and so the impossibility seems the
greater, yet he takes it off by adding; With men this is impossible, but with
God all things are possible, ver. 2^.

Here S. Peter having found a fit opportunity to prefer his Petition steps in
with his Answer,

Behold, we have forsaken all and followed thee? What shall we have therefore?

So I come to the person that made the answer, S. Peter.

Then Peter answered and said; There has been a long and eager Contest between
the Reformed Churches and the Church of Rome Concerning S. Peter's Supremacy
over the rest of the Apostles; and some of the Reformed in heat of dispute, to
the undervaluing of this excellent Apostle, have bespoted him with all those
faults they find of his Recorded in the new Testament. As that our Savior
rebuked him, saying, Get the behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me,
for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men.
Mat. 16.

That he denied and forswore his Master Mat. 26.

That S. Paul withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed. For he
withdrew and separated himself from the Gentiles, fearing them which were of
the Circumeision, Gal. 2.

But these men consider not, what he said of himself to Cornelius, When he fell
down at his feet and worshipped him; Peter took him up saying, stand up I my
self am a man Acts 10.

As S. James speaks of Elias James 5. Elias was a man subject to the like
passions that we are.

The Reasons for him are not so easily answered, for he is set first, and said
to be the first of the twelve Apostles Mat. 10.

Now the names of the twelve Apostles are these: the first Simon, which is
called Peter, S. Peter is called (...) the first, but S. Andrew, the next, is
not called (...) the second, as if it were only done for matter of order, nor
yet was it by reason of his age, or because he was first called, for S. Andrew
first followed Christ, and is held by some to be the Elder brother from John
1.40 ver. And one of the two which heard John speak was Andrew Simon Peter's
Brother; He first finds his own Brother Simon, and says unto him, We have
found the Messiah, Which is being interpreted the Christ, and he brought him to
Jesus. And when Jesus beheld him he said thou art Simon the Son of Iona, thou
shall be called Cephal.

He of all the 12 Apostles had his Name first changed, which is a universal
observation, that God never changed any man's name but for some fingular end and
excellency. So Abrams name was changed, Genesis 17. And the Reason is there given
for it. Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram but thy name shall be
Abraham, for a Father of many Nations have I made thee. As for Sarai thy wife,
thou shall not call her name Sarai, but Sarah shall her name be, And she shall
be a mother of many Nations.

And Genesis 32. Jacobs Name is changed: Thy Name shall no more be called Jacob
but Israel: For as a Prince have thou power with God and with men, and have
prevailed.

So Simon he Surnamed Peter, Mark 3. and it is done by Christ with that
Solemnity and exactness, that no Public Notary could be more exact in a
conveyance to be drawn by him.

For Mat. 16. when S. Peter made that noble consession in the name of all the
rest, For Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art Christ the Son of the living
God, Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Jona, and I
say unto thee that thou art Peter. There is his own Name Simon, his Fathers
Name Jena, and his Surname Peter.

And though he surnamed James and John Boanerges the Sons of Thunder, Mark 3.
yet Bellarmine observes that Simon was afterward almost continually called
Cephas or Peter, but James and John were never called Boanerges, but James and
John as they were before, as if it had been rather their Title or an addition
then a Change of their Name.

Again I do not find ten times in the Evangelists that our Savior spoke in
the singular number to any of the rest of the Apostles, or that any of them
spoke to him, and one of those times was when Sim n Peter beckned to the
Disciple Whom Jesus lived, that he should ask him who it should be of whom he
speak that should betray him. Joh. 13. But usually he spoke in general to them
all, and so they to him, As Mat. 13. His Disciples came to him saying, declare
unto us the Parable of the tares of the field. He answered and said unto them
ver. 37. And Mat. 14. His Disciples came unto him saying this is a desert place
etc. But Jesus said unto them ver 16.

Yet it is not likely that they all shake at once but rather that S. Peter
commonly answered and spoke for them all, because we read sometimes where his
Name is conceald which is by some other Evangelist declared that it was S.
Peter, if we shall compare John the 18. with Matthew 26. But as for S. Peter,
our Savior still speaks to him ^y Name, and he only makes the answer, and he
speaks to our Savior, and that so frequently that it is most Remarkable, as
Mat. 14. And Peter answered him and said Lord if it be thou, bid me come unto
thee on the Water. And, Mat. 16 And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art
Christ the Son of the living God. And Jesus answered and said unto him ver. 17.
And I say also unto thee ver. 18. And I will give unto thee the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth shall be bound in
Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth shall be loosed in Heaven. So
Christ in his Transfiguration: when he took with him Peter James and John Mat.
17. Then answered Peter and said unto Jesus ver. 4. Again Mat. 18. Then came
Peter to him and said, Lord how often shall my brother sin against me, and I
forgive him. Jesus says unto him ver. 21. And Mat. 26. Peter answered and said
unto him, Though all men shall be offended because of thee, Yet will I never be
Offended. Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily I say unto thee. ver. 34.
Peter answered and said unto him, Though I should dye with thee. Yet will I not
deny thee, ver. 35. And John 21. Our Savior after his Resurrection speaks
thrice to St. Peter saying, Simon son of Jonas love thou me more then these,
and Peter answered and said Lord thou know that I love thee. And this is so
frequent in all the four Evangelists that I have not time to repeat them all.

Add to this that his privileges Recorded by them are for greater and more
than any of the rest had. For he is sent to take the Fish to pay Pole money for
his Master and himself Mat. 17. Christ goes to his House and cures his wifes
mother of a feavour Mat. 8. Enters into his Ship to Preach, Luke. 5. prays for
him in particular that his faith fail not, Lvke. 22. Washes his feet first, as
it is probable, John 13. Foresheweth his death in special, John 20. Apears
first to him of the twelve after his Resurrection, Luke. 24. The Lord is risen
indeed and has appeared unto Simon.

That he was seen of Cephas then of the twelve 1. Cor. 15.

Again he wrought more memorable Acts and miracles than they all did. He walks
upon the Waters to Christ. Mat 14. He passes sentence as Judge upon Ananias
and Saphira Acts 5. He preaches first to the Jews when 3000 were converted by
him at one Sermon Acts 2. He Preaches first to the Gentiles, Act. 10. His very
shadow in passing by cured all that were sick Acts 5. I cannot stay to run over
all that might be said in his behalf.

But I hope here not to be misunderstood as if I had left my Religion beyond
the Seas. We all bless God, who has preserved your Majesty amongst so many
and dangerous provocations to for sake it, to hold fast to the Church of
England as it was Established and maintained by King Edward Queen Elizabeth,
King James, And King Charles, Your Martyred Father, all of ever blessed Memory.
And your Subjects that have not done the like, cannot say. Behold we have
forsaken all and followed thee.

As for S. Peter's Supremacy over the rest, were it granted that he was a
Metropolitan amongst the Apostles, yet the Minor Proposition, But the Pope is
S. Peter's successor will be hard to prove, because it is not so clear that S.
Peter was at Rome, much less Bishops there. And if the Pope did Succeed him
Locally, it does not follow that therefore he does succeed him in his piety and
Privileges. But the conclusion is to large by odds for the Primises, that
therefore the Pope is supreme to all Kings and Emperors in all causes
Spiritual and Temporal S. Peter preached the contrary 1 Epist. Peter 2. chap.
ver. 13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man, to the King as Supreme.

But amongst all the Arguments brought to prove S. Peter's supremacy I do not
read this of my Text, which may be alleged to confirm it as well as any of the
Rest. For it show in what great Authority he was about our Savior, that the
petition for them all must be prefered by him, and he does it so vigorously and
effectually that he deserves to be ownd as the Christ amongst them for it.

There are 5 Circustances very remarkable which he observed in this presenting
of it.

Two are concealed in the Text,

Fust that he did it spontaneously, and of his own accord; we do not read that
any of the Apostles did move or solicit him to undertake it for them; but
knowing their sufferings he goes about it of his own free will, Contrary to the
course of the world, where men must be continually solicited, though it be but
for recovering what is a man's own, and the following of it is commonly so
tedious and chargeable, that a man were better often times leave it off then
spend his money and time about it.

Secondly, he does it gratis and without reward, we do not find that he either
asked or received any thing for his pains; He knew that they had forsaken all
to follow Christ, and therefore it were not reasonable to expect any thing from
them. For if long Soliciting and money must do it, then they who never did
forsake what they had were fitter to procure it.

To these two we may add one more, that there is some probability that S.
Peter was appointed by our Savior to promote their common interest: or at
least received a hint from him when he should do it, for our Savior never left
pressing the Argument he was upon until S. Peter took occasion thence to
prefer this Petition.

But there are three other Circumstances expressed in the words, which are
required in all that will promote a Petition to the best advantage.

First, he takes his best opportunity for it, all times are not proper to
exhibit Petitions for rewards.

S. Peter therefore waited his fittest time, and when he had found it, Then
Peter answered and said unto him, Behold, we have forsaken all and followed
thee, etc.

Secondly, he did it not coldly and jejunely, as the manner of most men is: not
caring whether it speed or not, so they may be well paid for it, in so much
that one petition begets another, and men's business is never at an end. But S.
Peter does it affectionately, with an (...) Behold, I pray take notice of it:
that we have forsaken all and followed thee.

But some may say, what needs this Emphasis and note of observation to our
Savior; for he knew their sufferings before, and needs not that any Man should
Ask him. John 16.

God indeed knows all our works and wants, Yet he commands us to pray unto him
to help us. Call upon me in the time of Trouble and I will hear thee Psalm. 50.
It is our duty to pray unto God for what we need, and our own wants call upon
us for it. Great men will expect that inferiors should make their Addresses
unto them by way of petition; and we are also constrained to do it, to put them
in mind of us. For though God needs no rememberancer, yet men do: And be they
never so willing to help us, they may be ignorant or forgetful of other men's
wants, and it is requisite that some body should put them in mind. But because
we shall hardly find any man like minded as S. Peter was who will do it for us
upon such easy conditions, it were very convenient that some eminent sufferour
should be appointed by them for such a Public concernment.

Lastly, S. Peter does it generally for them all, He does not say, Behold, I
have forsaken all and followed thee, But we have forsaken all and followed thee.

Though he were the chief and the chiefest sufferer, yet does he not put so
much as one Grain to weigh down his own scale. And so I pass from the
Circumstances to the Answer which is the ground and reason of his following
Petition;

Behold, we have forsaken all and followed thee.

This answer has two branches.

First, Forsaken all.

S^condly, Followed thee. And these two are so united with the root and within
themselves that they cannot be separated, faith and works must grow together,
to forsake all, there is our faith, to follow thee, there is our works, and in
vain do some men strive to part them.

Yet an actual forsaking all, nor a local following is not always here meant.

For a man may forsake all and not follow Christ, and he may follow Christ and
yet not forsake all. Many may follow him locally who do not follow him
cordially.

But to forsake all and not to follow Christ, is lost labor, and to follow
Christ cordially and not to forsake all is impossible whosoever will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me, Mark 8.34.

Had Christ had the young man ^ed, part of his possessions and follow him, it
is likely he would have done it, for Ananias and Saphir^ sold their possession,
out they kept back part of the price, Acts 5 God will have all or none, not
part to God, part to the world, part to the flesh, (...) to the devil, like
them who ^ay to all (...) We cannot ^erve two Masters, We (...) serve God and
(...), Matthew. 6.24. The wisest men of the Nation would if they could have
^erved King and Parliament, which is but one politic body, but it was not
possible to be done, when the King had an Army in the field, and the King and
Parliament had an Army against him.

Again it must not be loft all, but left all, (...), We have forsaken all.

Many lose all by plundring of soldiers, by shipwreck, or fi^e or other
causualties, who would not forsake any thing to follow Christ, they lose it not
for conscience sake. But in fork^aking all their is a willingness to (...) with
it. As S. Paul says of himself Philip. 3. (...), For whom I have suffered the
loss of all things. Wha^ things were gain to me these I counted loss for
Christ, yea doubtless and I count all things but loss, for the Excellency of
the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but d^^g that I may win Christ. And Heb. 11. we read
of the Saints not accepting deliverance. They would have accepted it, but they
would not do it upon such conditions as the Enemies of Christ put upon them.
The^e (...) a kind of willin^ unwillingness in it, as there was Acts. 27. When
to save their lives they Cast the Wheat into the Sea.

Here I might pass particularly upon all the Apostles, and examine their loses
severally what they had forsaken and how long, and how far, they followed him,
because S. Peter lays it down as an argument, and ground of a Reward. S.
Matthew he forsook his place in the Custom house, Math. 9. S. Peter and the
rest forsook their Ships and Nets, Matthew 4. and they followed him from
Jerusalem to Gallilee and other parts, but I should be too tedious.

For these two Branches Forsaken all, and Followed thee, may be varied many
ways

Some forsake all and do not follow Christ, but their own Fancies, as Crates
the Theban threw all his Goods into the Sea, because he would not be troubled
with them.

So the Anabaptists and Quakers and the Phanatick Crew, many of them were
content to forsake all they had that they might enjoy there own fond Opinions;
dangerous persons, yet men that deserve to be pitied for their folly, if they
would but keep within the compass of the Laws.

Others there are that follow Christ, and yet forsake nothing: So Judas
followed him as if he had forsaken all, when he could have found no place where
he could have gained more; yet he followed him only to betray him and those
that did follow him truly, and to drive them from him; some will neither
forsake any thing for Christ nor yet follow him these are Neuters, neither hot
nor cold, who care not what becomes of all so they may keep what they have,
some forsake nothing nor follow Christ, but openly follow his enemies; yet
these are not so dangerous as those that seemed to follow him and kept
correspondence with his Enemies.

But must all that follow Christ truly, actually forsake all that they have?

I marvel why Beza says that the Apostles so left their ships that they never
afterward returned to Fishing; for Scultelus observes, that the same word is
used 1 Samuel 17; when David left his Fathers sheep with a keeper until he had
fought with Goliath, but he returned to them afterward.

Christ does not require of all men the same conditions he propounded to the
young man: so some he sends home to their houses to take care of their
Families, where they might live there with a safe conscience, as we read Mark.
8.26. Nor did the Apostles forsake all, but sometimes they returned to their
Vessels and went a fishing. John 21.3. verse.

(...) fignifies not to lose all, but to abate the love to all, as it is used
Rev. 2.4. The Church of Rome has her Votaries who take upon them a vow of
poverty, and they say they forsake all to follow Christ. But Charles now Duke
of Lorraine, as I have been credibly informed, when some of his soldiers had
plundered a rich Monastery, and the Friars complained to him, hopeing to find
reparation, he desired to know of them, which went easiest to heaven, the Rich
or the poor! They replied, Doubtless the poor; then says he, I have sent more
to heaven then you all; for I have made many poor, and I mean to make you all
so before I have done.

Now though our Savior in his speech to his disciples before my Text, did show
the great danger of Riches, yet he expounds his meaning, Mark. 10.24. it is
only so for those that do put their trust in Riches.

For we read of many Rich Kings and Princes, as David, Solomon, Hezekiah, which
have been great Saints; as also of Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob, Job, Zachary, and
others very Rich men; and Christ tells us Matthew 8. speaking of the Rich
Centurion, That many shall come from the East and from the West, and shall fit
down with Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven; always
provided that they be willing to forsake all as Abraham was, who when he was
called to go out obeyed, and he went out not knowing whether he went Heb, 1.1.
But if such rich men live in such a happy age of the Church where no
persecution drives them to it, yet they may say, Behold, we have forsaken all
and followed thee.

By forsaking all, is not so much meant the forsaking of our possessions if we
can hold them with a safe conscience, as the forsaking of our sins.

Many during the late troubles, forsook their friends and Estates to preserve a
good conscience, who yet did not forsake their cursing and swearing, and some
other gross sins, which might cast a cloud over the suceess, but yet their
Adversaries who forced them out of their estates by pressing strange Oaths and
Engagments upon them, by plundering, sequestring, and Imprisoning them, were
not free from the same vices; yet they will commonly be the men who shall first
come upon change of times, when they have only fallen out in parting stakes,
and cry with open mouth, Behold, we have forsaken all and followed thee, What
shall we have therefore? Men that can sail with any wind; a true Hieroglyphick
of of the Netherlands.

And these will oftimes outvye the rest, as Mercury out acted Socio in
Amphitruo, until such time as the Play was ended, and his Vizard and disguise
was taken off.

Sed postquam fictas inclusit Pagina parts,
Vera redit facies, dissimulata perit.
Of such our Savior foretold, Matthew. 7. Many will say to me in that day, Lord,
Lord, have not we prophesied in thy Name, and in thy name cast out devils, and
in thy name done many wonderful things? and then will I profess unto them I
never knew you? depar from me ye that work iniquity;

We acknowledge with everlasting thankfulness, and to One above all the rest,
that there are many noble Hushais that can be of Absaloms Counsel, and yet do
the greatest service to King David; and such were some of those by whose
virtues and Endeavors next under God and your Majesty, we enjoy our present
happiness. These have great Reason to say, We have forsaken all and followed
thee; What shall we have therefore?

And it is for their sakes that your gracious Act of Indemnity has made us
all equal in your future favors; and it will not be well-constroed by any of
our reconciled friends, who stood in need of it, to be a title to them, or a
bar to us.

So I come to the Question, which is the Petition it self. What shall we have
therefore?

A very rugged and blunt Petition at the first hearing, and will be thought by
some, better becoming a soldier than an Apostle, because Soldiers bred in the
Camp, are not usually well verst in the smooth language of the Court.

It is true, of all the Apostles S. Peter was most the soldier, for he ware a
sword, John 18. and when his Master was betrayed and taken, he drew it, and
smote the high Priests servant and cut off his right ear; and had not our
Savior menaced him, and commanded him to put it up again, because he drew it
against Authority, he might for ought we know, have cut out his brains with it,
as well as he cut off his ear, though that were the Sword which I saw at Paris
above 30. years since, which the Friars maintain to be his, which was little
above a foot long, if it were so much.

And now I am thus far upon my way, it will be no digression to go one step
further to encounter our modern Chiliasts, such as call themselves Fifth
Monarchy-men, who would persuade us, that all the Apostles were of their Creed,
ready to fight for Christ's temporal Monarchy; and then their gloss upon S.
Peter's Petition here will be, that he petitioned only for some great places at
Gourt, when Christ should reign upon earth; which were a fowl error in our
Apostle, when as the young man had so lately petitioned our Savior in his
hearing for eternal life.

But it is apparent by our Saviors. Answer to S. Peter's Petition, that S.
Peter petitioned only for the same thing the young man did; Even everlasting
life, because they had forsaken all to follow him, which the young man refused
to do when he might enjoy it.

I deny not, but that some of the Apostles might sometimes have had an eye to
Christ's temporal kingdom, because their question to our Savior immediately
before his ascension into heaven seems to look that way; Lord, will thou at
this time restore the kingdom again unto Israel? Acts 1. But they preached no
such Doctrine after his Ascension into heaven; when the holy Ghost had once
descended upon them in the feast of Pentecost.

Nor did our Savior teach them any such lesson when he was conversant among
them, but the contrary in his answer to Pilate, John 18. Jesus answered, My
kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this world, then would my
servants fight for me that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but now my
kingdom is not from hence.

In which Words are two Enthymems.

First, Christ's kingdom is not of this world.

Therefore may not his servants fight for it.

Secondly, Temporal Kings have kingdoms of this world. Therefore it is lawful
for their subjects to fight for them.

If then the Fifth Monarchy-men will fight for Christ's temporal kingdom
against his command, all subjects are authorized by him to fight against them,
in defense of those Kings and Princes whose subjects they are.

As for the (...) they insist upon, But now my kingdom is not from hence, it is
but an ill consequence they would infer from it, that therefore it shall be
hereafter.

For (...) now, is not only an Adverb of time there, but a stronger
confirmation of what he had said before: namely, My Kingdom is not of this
world.

The Papists would enforce the like conclusion to maintain their Purgatory and
forgiveness of sins after this Life, because our Savior said Matthew. 12.
Whosoever speaks aagainst the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this world, nor in the world to come Therefore, say they, some sins
shall be forgiven in the world to come: whereas they should conclude directly,
Therefore the sin against the holy Ghost shall never be forgiven. Christ never
promised his disciples any earthly kingdom. But this is the promise that he
has promised us, Even eternal life, 1 John 2.25. S. Paul says the same, 2 Timothy 4.18 And the Lord will preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom, not unto any
earthly kingdom.

See 2 Cor. 5.1. We know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building with God, an house not made with hands eternal in
the heavens. Where then is this kingdom of Christ upon earth, which the
Millenaries so much contend for.

Fuerunt olim e Chiliastarum opinione magni in Ecclesia very, There have been
formerly very learned men in the Church of their judgment; but this Heresy
has been so fully confuted, that there are very few now but the ignorant
Rabble, and some turbulent spirits who are their Leaders, who will live quietly
under no government, that hold any such opinion.

It is not possible that such a temporal Monarchy of Christ can be, that these
men dream of, but it must overthrow the Scripture.

For S. Paul exhorts that prayers be made for Kings, 1 Timothy 2. And S. Peter
says,, we must obey and honor them, 1 Pet. 2. And this is to be the
Christians Rule so long as this world end^eth. Now the Fifth Monarchy-men,
under pretense of Christ's temporal kingdom, pray for the destruction, and
attempt the ruin of all Kings and Prince: That I rather think this to be a
cloak for their Rebellion, then that they believe it to be true, because they
refuse to say the Lords Prayer, whereof one Petition is, Thy kingdom come.

I am confident that this Doctrine of theirs is that Eating Canker or Gangrene
S. Paul condemns in Hymeneus and Philetus, 2 Timothy 2. who concerning the Truth
have erred, saying, that the Resurrection is past already, and overthrow the
faith of some. For these say that their fifth Monarchy is begun already, which
is as they interpret it, after the first Resurrection.

Secondly, These are questionless the false Teachers S. Peter speaks of, 2 Pet.
2. But there were false Prophets also among the People, as there shall be false
Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies, even denying
the Lord that bought them, and shall bring upon themselves swift destruction;
swift destruction many of them have brought upon themselves. They certainly
deny the Lord that bought them, who is the King of Heaven and Earth, when they
would have him to be an Earthly King; and at the 10 verse. he comes home to
them, but chiefly they who despsie Government; presump^u^us are they,
self-willed; they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities. S. Jude points at
them ver. 8. These filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despite Dominions, and
speak evil of Dignities.

But I have done with them, and come briefly to examine the Petition of S.
Peter more nearly, which S. Mark and St. Luke leave out, as though there were
no need for them to Petition him, who had forsaken all to follow him. But S.
Matthew sets it down so that S. Peter continues his request in the Plural
Number, as the ground of it was first laid. He asks no more for himself, then
for the rest; He does not first draw up a General list of them all, and then
leave them out in the Reward; it is not, What shall I have? but What shall we
have therefore?

Secondly the Petition, though it sound harsh at the first hearing, yet it is
very modest and humble; For he does not come to Indent with our Savior before
hand, What shall we have, and we will forsake all and follow thee? if we may
have the greatest commands and places about thee. No, but behold we have done
that long since, We have forsaken all and followed thee.

Thirdly, he does not prescribe as the sons of Zebedee did, Mat. 20. Grant that
we may sit, one on thy right hand, and the other on thy left in thy Kingdom.
But he commits that wholly to his Arbitrament.

Fourthly, He says not? What shall we have presently? But in the future Tencee
What shall we have therefore?

1 Also our blessed Savior in his most gracious Answer to his Petition, does
not find fault either with the Form or the matter of it, because it was so
homely dressed.

2 Nor does he charge, them with an (...) or will worship, as perhaps some of
his followers would have done, who followed him only for their own profit,
saying, Who required this at your hands? who bade you forsake all and follow
him? You might have staid at home and kept what you had.

3. Nor does he question them what they had forsaken for him, as he might have
done; a few Nets and Angles and Fishing Boats; or how far they had followed him
in all matters to expect great Rewards for, As if only those who had forsaken
great possessions, as the young man had, must look to be Considered. No the
widows mite is as well accepted with Christ, as the greatest, Treasure of the
Rich; a poor man's Life and Estate and Family, are as dear to him as the Rich
man's are.

4 Nor does he say, You did it in hopes of a Reward, For God always holds out a
Reward to encourage us in our duty, even eternal life: So Christ told the
young man, if he would forsake all and follow him, he should have Treasure in
heaven; as the young man called him, Christ is a good Master indeed; for no man
ever followed him in vain.

5 Nor does he say, as he might and did say, Luke 17. You have done only what
was your Duty to do.

6 Nor does he put them to find out something as the manner of men is, where
some may seek long enough and be never the near.

7 Nor does he turn them over to others to take care for them, as Alexander
would have done one of his soldiers, until the soldier told him that he had
not served him by Proxy but in his own person.

8 Nor does he object the Insufficency of their performances, but accepting the
will for the deed, He returns him a most Gracious, speedy, and fully
satisfactory Answer for them all, verse. 28. Verily I say unto you, that ye
which have followed me in the Regeneration, when the son of man shall sit on
the Throne of his Glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve Thrones Judgeing the
twelve tribes of Israel.

And every one that has forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father,
or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Londs for my name fake, shall receive an
bundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life.

I conclude with my Text,

Then answered Peter and said unto him, Behold we have forsaken all and
followed thee, What shall we have therefore?

THE END.

