THE BLESSEDNESS of Departed SAINTS In their immediate enjoyment of GOD in
glory. Propounded and improved in a Funeral-Sermon, upon Revel. 14.13. March
3. 1651.

By JOSEPH ROW, Minister of the Gospel, and Pastor of Buckland-monachorum in
Devon.

2. COR. 5.1. We know, that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens.

LONDON, Printed by W. Bentley, for F. Eaglesfield at the Marygold in S. Paul's
Churchyard.

Anno Dom. 1654.

To the READER.
Courteous READER,
THe plain Meditations hereunto annexed, conceived at first for the Pulpit, and
from thence delivered at the Funeral of a gracious M.C. Wife to E.C. Esquire.
Gentlewoman to the ears of a few, are now [providence so disposing] made
public, and in the same Attire presented to the eyes of many.

This short address humbly be speaks thy kind acceptance of them, and a lodging
for them in the treasury of thy heart. The common good of souls is [I assure
thee] the great design of the Author, and of the present undertaking. And if
God be pleased to witness to his own precious Truth, managed in this little
discourse, and by it convey light to any soul, I shall account my self a rich
gainer by this adventure, whatsoever hazards I run in it.

My prayer is; that GOD WHO QUICKENS THE DEAD, would put life into these dead
papers, and by his own holy SPIRIT lead into the ways of blessedness they
direct unto; and in the end of thy earthly pilgrimage crown thee with
blessedness in the kingdom of glory. This is the earnest desire of him who is,

Thine to love and serve in the Ministry of the Gospel, JOSEPH ROW.
March 15. 1653.
THE BLESSEDNESS Of Departed SAINTS, In their immediate enjoyment of GOD in
Glory.
REVEL. Chap. 14. Verse. 13. part of it. Blessed are the dead which die in the
Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the spirit, that they may rest from their
labors, and their works do follow them.


THere is controversy amongst Interpreters concerning the cohaerence and
dependancy of this verse. The context cleared.
Most refer it to the foregoing, Mede Cla. Apocalipt.
Some few to the following verses, but it is not much material how we state the
relation of the words, so we carefully inquire into, and retain their sense,
and meaning.

The scope, and drift of the Text is, The scope of the Text proposed.
to comfort the Saints against the fear of death whether natural, or violent.
The consolation held forth in it, is drawn from the happiness that departed
Saints enjoy upon the very moment of their dissolution. And herein the Lord
deals like a wise Physician, who applies cordials, to revive, and keep up the
spirit of his fainting Patients. So does our gracious God! He here tenders a
rich, and Sovereign Cordial, to revive, and heighten fearful, and dejected
Souls against the dreadful threatenings of the evil day. Assuring them by a
voice from heaven, utte red by the spirit of truth, that the greatest evils,
yea death it self, do but make way for the speedier passage of Saints to
eternalfelicity.

Though believers die either in, or for the Lord, yet herein they are blessed,
and that instantly upon their death, in resting from their labors, and in
receiving the reward of their works. Blessed are the dead which die in the
Lord, from henee forth, etc.

In the words are two general parts. Division of Text


First A Point propounded; [ Blessed are the dead which etc.

Secondly, A proof fit exhibited, and laid forth [ yea says the spirit that
they etc.]

In the former of these are three Circumstances. First Genesis subdivided


First, A privilege, Blessedness [Blessed.]

Secondly, the persons to whom it belongs; The dead which die in the Lord.

Thirdly, the time when this glorious Privilege comes to be enjoyed. This is
carried under those expressions [from henceforth] Blessed are the dead which
die in the Lord from henceforth.

In the second General are two Particulars. Second General subdevided
1. The Person asserting the former Truth; The spirit. 2. The Reasons alleged
for confirmation of the Truth, and they are two.


The first is taken from the rest of departed Saints. They are blessed that dye
in the Lord, that they may rest from their labors; that is because they rest
from their labors (...) that Pareus in locum.
being put for (...) because.

The second reason is grounded upon their reward. Their works, that is, by a
Metonymie the Piseator, Napier, Junius, Bullinger Diodati, Leigh, Gerhard.
reward of their work do follow them.

Both reasons (as Pareus observes) are taken from racer^ who having attained
the mark, enjoy a twofold benefit, rest, and reward.

These Particulars being too many to be all dispatched at this time, the first
General shall (by Gods permission) be the boundary of my speech, and your
attention.

(...) Blessed are the dead dying, or which dye in the Lord from henceforth.

I shall first explain the terms that are shadowed with any difficulty; First
General explained.
and next give out such Doctrines as may warrantablely be erected upon this
Scripture-foundation. That which is to be handled by way of explication is.

First the meaning of the word [Blessed.]

Secondly, who they are, that are here said to [die in the Lord.]

Thirdly, what time is especially intended by these particles of time [From
henceforth.]

We begin to open the privilege held forth under the term [Blessed] and to
show what is meant by it.

There is (as Divines distinguish) A 3 fold Blessedness. What is meant by term
[blessed]
1. Naturae of nature! This Adam had during the short time of his abode in
Paradise. 2. Gratiae of grace! Thus the Saints are happy even in this life.
This blessedness our Savior speaks of in that excellent Sermon of his upon the
Mount, Matthew. 5. Chap. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. verses. This is called most
often by Polemick Authors, Beatitudo viae, the blessedness of the way. 3.
Gloriae of glory! This appertains only to departed Saints, and is in other
terms called, beatitudo patriae, the blessedness of the country. This again is
2 fold.


Inchoata, inchoate, or initial. This is that blessedness, which is bestowed
upon the soul immediately upon its separation from the body; and of this
blessedness is our Text to be understood. Or,

Consummata, consummated, and perfect, which is that high and eminent degree of
blessedness, and glory, which is to be given forth to the body, and soul at the
last day. The next expression to be opened is!

Who they are, 2. Dissiculty opened who they are that die in the Lord.
that are here said [To die in the Lord?]

The greek is (...) we render it, The dead which die in the Lord.

1. There is a double exposition given of this clause! Some interpret, dying in
the Lord, of dying for the Lord, that is, for the Lords sake, or for the Lords
cause. Thus the Martyrs, who suffered death, for the maintenance of the Lords
truth, dyed in the Lord. This interpretation is favored by many Beza. Piscator
Mede in loc.
Protestant, and by some Ribera in loc.
Popish expositors. And to say truth, The words (...) are in some few
Scriptures to be thus expounded. That place is plain for this, Ephesians. 4.1.1
Paul a Prisoner (...) we English it [of the Lord] but according to the Letter
of the Greek it is [in the Lord] That is, Chrysostom. Musculus. Diodat. in locum.
For the Lord according to the Hebrew manner of speaking. Thus Divines of the
Assembly in their notes upon the place. Pareus in Romans 16. verse. 2. and 12.
some also interpret that place, Romans 16.2. Receive Phebe our sister (...), in
the Lord, that is, for the Lords sake. So verse 12. Persis is said to have
labored much (...), in the Lord, that is for the Lord. And thus you have an
account of the first exposition of these words [dying in the Lord] restraining
them to the Martyrs dying for the Lord.

2. There is another interpretation of a greater latitude, and extension, given
forth by several eminent Divines, who expound this clause ( which die in the
Lord as of the Martyrs dying for Christ, so of all Believers also, dying in the
faith of Christ. Bullinger Pareus Gerhard Synod. Annot. in locum.


This fence I prefer, as being most genuine and proper to the present
Scripture. Forl (as One well observes) S. John does not here speak of those sad
times of Antichrist, when he raged in full Fury against the Saints, but of the
more happy age of reformation, when the power of Antichrist shall in many
places be broken, and the Martyrdoms of the Saints, not be so frequent as
before. So that there is no reason why dying in the Lord should be limited to
the Martyrs, when it may be enlarged to all believers, who do as live, so dye
in the Lord. The Scripture dialect much favors this interpretation. Some of
the family of Narcissus, [professing the faith of the Lord] are Romans 16.14.
Said to be (...), in the Lord. Again, to live, and persevere in the profession
of the faith, is John 15.4. called an abiding in Christ; and Col. 2.6. a
walking in Christ. Diodat. in locum.
And to die in the faith (whether by a natural, or violent death) is 1 Cor.
15.18. expressed under the terms of sleeping in Christ. And those who thus die,
are 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. expressly called, the dead in Christ. Musculus in 1 Thessalonians.
4.16.
To close up all, to die in the Lord, is an expression answering to that of
dying in the faith, Heb. 11.13. Thus they do, who either die for Christ, as the
Martyrs, or in the faith of Christ, as all believers, whether Martyrs or
Professors. Nevertheless, that the Martyrs are chiefly meant by those that die
in the Lord, I readily grant; but that they are only meant I resolutely deny;
All those, whosoever they are, that depart in the faith of the Lord, die in the
Lord; and to these, as well as to the Martyrs does the privilege of
blessedness appertain.

The time specified for the obtainment of this blessedness comes now to be
opened. The third oarticular opened; The time for the obtainment of blessedness.
This is held forth under the Greek particle, (...), we render it From
henceforth.

There is great contention amongst the Learned, about this little word,

Their strife concerns;

First the place and situation of this particle. Secondly, the Syntax and
Construction of it. Thirdly, the genuine sense and signification of the same.
As to the first:

The vulgar Latin, and some others, 1. The situtation of (...).
seat this word in the front of the following sentence; thus, Amodo jam dicit
spiritus ut requiescant a laboribus suis, and opera corumsequuntur illes. that
is, from henceforth now says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors,
and their works do follow them. The learned Divines, employed in our last
Translation of the Bible, have so pointed the verse, as that we may
indifferently conjoyn either with the precedent, or subsequent words. But most
Greek copies, yea all, (as Pareus asserts) that of Montanus only excepted, and
most Translators and Interpreters, fix (...) in the rear, as the concluding
term in this proposition, [Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from
henceforth.] And so I shall look upon it in the present discourse.

Touching the construction of the word (...).

Some join it with (...) blessed! Beza in loc.
As thus, Blessed from henceforth are the dead. A skillful Heinsius exercit.
sacr. in cap. 26. Matthew. and verse. 64.
Critic passes his judgment upon this; as seeming the best construction of
the word, although he acknowledge it may profitably be referred to the last
clause. Brightman and Piscar. in locum.
Others construe it with (...). die, to which word it is (as they say) purposely
subjoyned. And this construction, is in my apprehension, as more clear, and
Grammatical than the former; so more serviceable for the discovery of the mind
of God in the present expression. The right meaning of which, is of most
concernment; and that we are forthwith to inquire into.

There is a threefold signification of this word (...) given sorth by the
Masters of the Greek tongue, each of which, is taken up by some, or other of
Divines, in their translations and commentaries upon the present Scripture.

1. The word is sometime used as a note of asseveration. Heinsius in 26. Matt
ver. 64.
Heinsius in his exercitations upon the New Testament, observes, that (...) is
with the Greeks as much as (...) verily, verily I say, or I speak most truly
and faithfully. And thus (as I take it) is the word rendered in a very ancient
English translation, which I have seen; wherein the Text is read after this
manner, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord; Even so says the spirit,
that they may rest from their labors, etc. Here the Original words (...), and
(...) are translated (I suppose) as an ingeminated asseveration by [evenso.]

2. Again, Vide Bud. Lexic. See those Bibles with notes.
(...), signifies fully, or perfectly, And in this sense is the word rendered
by some Latin Authors, and in some English Bibles, in which the former part of
our Text is thus read, The dead in Christ are fully blessed.

3. But most Interpreters conceive the particle (...), to be in this place an
Adverb of time, representing to us, not the beginning of the Churches
sufferings, as Piscator conjectureth, but that very point of time, in which the
blessedness here propounded to the Saints is to commence and begin. Howbeit,
about the particularitie of time intended by this expression, there are
variety of conjectures amongst the Learned.

Some (as Pareus reports) make the time when this voice was proclaimed from
heaven, 1. Opinion.
to be the time for the beginning of this blessedness. And they give out their
meaning to this effect; From henceforth, that is, from this very instant of
time, in which this voice is beard from heaven, the dead in Christ are blessed.
But this interpretation cannot be admitted, because it seems to exclude from
happiness all those that before this time died in the Lord, to whom, as well as
to others, blessedness appertains.

Others adjudge the time of the Churches reformation, 2. Opinion. Pareus.
Diodat. in loc.
and deliverance by the three Angels, to be the time, in which the happiness
promised in the Text, is to take its rise, and beginning. From henceforth that
is (say these) from the time the everlasting Gospel began to be preached,
blessed are those that die in the Lord.

These that thus die (says Pareus) not only are, or shall be blessed, but the
three Angels shall publish, and Preach the same, refuting the heatheninsh
fiction of purgatory, satisfactions and indulgences. This exposition, although
favored by eminent Authors, seems not clear to me, but lies open to many
exceptions: and two much narroweth the mercy of God toward deceased Saints;
for out of all doubt, they are happy, and blessed that died in the Lord in the
sad times of the Churches deformation, as well as those that died since in the
more light some times of reformation. Therefore I shall crave leave modestly to
pass it over, without building upon it.

A Third sort referr the Adverb of time from henceforth, 3. Opinion. Lyra in
loc. Bellarm. Ribera, etc.
forward to the time of the last judgment, and make that the time for the
beginning of the blessedness held forth in the precious Scripture. This way go
many Papists that so they may establish the tottering Doctrine of Purgatory.
The great reason urged by Bellarmi nus loco praed ^to.
Bellarmine, and other Papal writers for this, is; because the last judgment
is treated of throughout the Chapter. But this is most apparently untrue. The
last judgment is only (if at all) treated of in the last part of the Chapter:
And begins to be spoken to, in the verse following my Text.

In the former part of it, is a representation of several great things; as the
promulgation of the verse. 12.
everlasting Gospel: the prediction of verse. 8.
Babilons down fall; The dreadful proclamation of indignation, and vengeance
against the verse. 9.10.
worshippers of the beast. All which are to be transacted by the 3 Angels some
considerable space of time, before the time of the last judgment. A late Mede
in locum.
Interpreter of our own nation, pleades much for this opinion: But his reasons
have not strength enough to work up my faith to close with it, since the voice
from heaven (as is most evident) proclaims, not that blessedness, that
departed Saints shall enjoy hereafter; but the blessedness which for the
present they are possessed of, and enjoy. It is not said Blessed shall be the
dead, but blessed are the dead which die in the Lord. For this and other
reasons, (too many to be now propounded) this interpretation is also to be
rejected.

The 4. and last opinion is of 4 Opinion.
those, who make the particular time of every believers death, to be the very
time intended by the spirit in these words from henceforth, for the
Commencement of the blessedness of the departed Saints, proposed, and promised
in this most sweet, and soul comforting Text. Blessed are the dead which die in
the Lord from henceforth, that is (say the Authors of this exposition) from the
very instant of their death. Such as die in the Lord, upon the very moment of
their dissolution enter into bliss. Upon the very instant of their death, their
Souls enter into glory; and from thenceforth this their happiness takes its
beginning, and arise. The Beda Gerhard Bullinger in locum.
Souls of those that die in the Lord, are forthwith without any delay, or
interval of time, received of the Lord.

This exposition I incline to, and shall insist upon, as suiting well with the
Text, and plain by many parallel Scriptures.

Thus I have at length waded through the difficulties of this Text. The
doctrines come now to be observed: And two only (of many that might be noted)
I shall propose, and prosecute.

The first is employed, and is this!

True believers must submit to death as well as others. Doctrines 1 Doct.


These are in the Text accounted amongst the number of mortal creatures, and as
such who must one day go down to the dead.

The second is clear, and express, and gives forth the very Pith, and Marrow of
the first General, and is to this effect.

True believers immediately upon death are called unto, 2 Doct.
and crowned with blessedness in the Kingdom of glory.

They are blessed that die in the Lord from thenceforth, that is from the very
instant of their departure.

I beseech you lengthen out your attention while I discourse briefly, and
plainly upon both these Truths.

Of the first Doctrine in the first place.

True believers must submit to death as well as others. First Doct. bandled


All that live must one day die, and meet together in the grave. This is the
house appointed for all living Job. 30.23. The Patriarchs, and Prophets could
not obtain a Protection against the arrests of death. Your Fathers where are
they, and the Prophets do they live for ever? Zech. 1.5. No they did not. They
are all laid in the dust. Abraham is dead, and the Prophets are dead, Joh.
8.52. Lazarus the friend of Christ, falls asleep, that is, dies, John 11.
verses. 11, 14. Genesis 23.2.
Sarah. Genesis 35.18
Rachel; and other holy women that trusted in God, at last gave up the ghost,
and died. Dorcas a Disciple, full of good works, and of alms-deedes, at length
gave way to nature, falls sick, and dies, Act. 9.36, 37. Yea, Christ himself
being found in fashion as a man, humbled himself, and became obedient unto
death, Phil. 2.8. There is a death due to every He or She that happens to be
born. Manchester Contempt.
Yea. it is as natural (says one) to die, as to be born.

Death is called Josh. 23.14. The way of all the earth. All men and women,
believers, and unbelievers, must walk in this path; What man is he that lives,
and shall not see death? Psalm. 89.48.

Death is via regia, the King of heavens highway to the other world. Thou
shall die (said a Philosopher to a friend of his,) not because thou art sick,
but because thou live.

It is the glorious privilege of the Saints in heaven to die never; the
dreadful punishment of the damned in hell to die ever; the Law, Charter, or
Custom of men on earth to die once. The Saints themselves are not able to
challenge an immunitie from death, but must, when their turn comes, give way to
it as well as others. And that for these Reasons:

First, because of the decree of God omnipotent.

Gods Statute Law of Death, reaches all; good and bad, believers and
unbelievers. It is the decree of the living God, that all men must once die,
Heb. 9.27. It Is the standing Law of heaven, that all on earth must die. If any
find exemption, as did Enoch and Elias, this comes to pass through the singular
dispensation of God the King of heaven: and does not at all impeach the credit,
truth, and authority of this general decree. Cajetan. in 9. Heb. 27.
The Statute is regular, that all must die the dispensation singular, that some
have not died.

Again, true Believers must submit to death as well as others.

Secondly, by reason of sin inherent. Believers have sin in them as well as
others, and by means of it come under the guilt of death as well as others. The
bodies of believers are dead (that is subject to death) (...), because of sin,
Romans 8.11. Death is the brat of sin; and sin is the parent, a mother of death.
By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed
upon all men, for that all have sinned, Romans 5.12. sin made way to death.

Finally, Believers die as well as others.

In regard of matter constituent: Their bodies are made up of perishing
materials, as well as the bodies of others. The bodies of all, holy, and unholy
are made of the same dust, and must alike in their several courses return to
the dust from whence they were taken.

The Saints have in them rich treasures of grace; but their bodies which are
the cask containing these treasures, are (as the Apostle styles them) earthen
vessels, or vessels of shell, as the Greek signifies, 2 Cor. 4.7. Vessels of
earth, or shell are liable to breaking; so are the bodies of the Saints to
perishing and death. The body in the 2 Cor. 5.1. is called (...), an earthly
house. It is called a house because of its use and beauty; an earthly house
because it is made of the earth, and must to the earth again. The bodies of
Gods dearest servants are made of the same brittle metal, that the bodies of
other men are, and therefore are alike liable to breaking and death.

Our own sad experience does give abundant evidence to this truth. I pass
therefore from the confirmation, to the application of it. And this is two fold.

First, for commination and threatening to all wicked men. The Uses of the 1.
Doct.


Secondly, for Admonition, and counsel to the Saints. For the first.

This Truth sounds an allarm of vengeance against all wicked men living, and
dying in sin. Use 1.
If Gods friends must die! let not his enemies dream of escaping death.

They may with the rich fool in the Gospel, Luke 12.20.
sing lullaby to their souls; but (except they repent) in a time ere they be
aware, will death arrest them, and then without bail, or mainprise remain they
must in the black prison of Hell. It can be no comsort to sinners, that the
righteous die, as well as themselves, Although both die, yet death is not the
same to both. Death is a mercy to believers, a curse to unbelievers. Death like
the Angel plucks the Saints out of Sodom, and conducts them to Zoar, a City of
refuge, but as a Bailiff, it draws wicked men from this earth, to the dungeon
of Hell. Death in a word brings Deliverance to the Saints; but destruction to
all wicked, and impenitent sinners. The Saints live in death, but incorrigible
sinners are destroyed, and die by it. I will kill her children with death, was
Christ's threatening against the followers of Jezabel Rev. 2.23. This will be the
doom, and downfall of all such as are workers of iniquity. The Lord give
sinners hearts to consider this, before the warrants of death be issued out
against them.

Secondly, 2 use.
this truth holds forth advice to you that are the friends of Jesus Christ and
profess faith in him. This concerns 3. duties.

The first is. Duty 1.
Timely preparation for death. You must die, as well as others: learn, I
beseech you, to prepare for death, that ye may be happy in, and after death. To
labor not to die (says one) is to labor in vain! They only are happy that
think of death, and prepare for it in time of life. The end of this life, is no
other than the beginning of sorrows to such as are unprepared. Oh let me
prevail with you, to fit your selves for your journey toward your long-home.
The Prophet Esaias advises Hezekiah to set his house in order, because he should
die, Iss. 38.7.
and not live. You must one day die, and not live: be advised to set your
estates, your families, above all your selves in order, that so ye may find
mercy in the day of death.

In order to the better discharge of this duty, Be ye pleased to observe these
following directions.

Make it your daily practice more, Directions in reference to preparation for
death.
and more to destroy sin in your mortal bodies. If ye will live, when you die;
you must die to sin while you live. He that dies in his sins without
repentance, shall to his eternal woe, ever find sin living in himself, Prepare
therefore every day, for your dying day, by dying unto sin: this is the way to
live after death. If ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if ye through
the spirit mortify the deeds of the body ye shall live, Romans 8.13. Ye shall
live, (destroying sin) both before, and after death; before death, the life of
grace; after death, the life of glory. This daily preparation for death, was
the Apostles daily practice, Diodat. in locum.
1. Cor. 15.31. I die daily, says he. That is, as death hangs over my head
continually, so I daily prepare for it.

Secondly, Lay up treasures for your selves in heaven every day while you are
upon earth. This is as your duty, so your crown. A holy life is the best
preparation for death. If you build upon Christ the rock, the storms of
sickness, and death shall do you no annoyance. Live to Christ now, and he will
receive you in death; yea ye shall live with him after death. He will save the
souls of his servants, Psalm. 34.22. Living religiously, you may die
comfortably. The righteous has hope in his death, Prove. 14.32.

Thirdly, Meditate frequently upon death. Frequent acquaintance with death,
takes away the bitterness of death, and fits a man the better to under go it.
As the flight of a bird is directed by her train; and as the course of a ship
is steered by the belm; so (to use a common and familiar comparison) is the
life of Christians rightly ordered by a daily consideration of their latter
end. It is reported in Histories of Philostates, that he lived seven years in
his Tomb, that so he might be thoroughly acquainted with it. The all-wise God,
Deuteronomy. 32.29. commends the serious contemplation of our latter end, as an act of
spiritual wisdom. Oh that they were wise, that they understood this, That they
would consider their latter end. Thus of the first duty. I can but hint at the
following duties. The next of which is, Duty 2.
A careful using of religious kindred and acquaintance to the best advantage.
They shall not always remain with you in this earth; while you enjoy their
company improve it to the utmost, Religious and godly persons are as lights in
the world, Phil. 2.15. While we enjoy this light, it is our duty to work by
it. The light of their company and counsel, will shine upon us but a while:
Therefore (as our Savior advises in reference to himself and Gospel, John
12.35.) While we have the light, we should walk in it. Godly persons are but
lent us for a time: Oh let us receive what good we may from them before the
Lord call them hence to himself by death. It will be the condemnation of many
wicked ones, that they have godly friends and make no good use of them.

The last duty commended to the Saints from the former Doctrine is:

Cheerfulness, and resolution, under the assaults of, death the King of fears.
Dwy 3.


When we are to encounter with death, let us consider, we are to do no other,
than what the Saints have undergone before us. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, yea,
all the holy men, and women that trusted in God, (our Savior himself not
excepted) have encountered with this enemy. We should (methinks) boldly look
death in the face, since so many of Gods Worthies have skirmished with it, and
so made way to themselves for an immediate passage unto glory. And this bring
me to the last and principal Point of the Text.

True believers, Doctr. 2.
immediately upon death, are called unto, and crowned with blessedness in the
kingdom of glory. The Saints, instantly, upon their leaving of the earth, go
to live with God in heaven. Though they are not fully glorious, or so
gloriously happy as they shall be when both body and soul shall shine with
glory, yet immediately upon their respective deaths they enter into glory; and
have such a measure of it given forth to their souls, as they in that condition
are capable to receive. There is much in Scripture for the confirmation of this
truth. I shall refer the quotations to, and draw them from several Topic
places. And so The Doctrine may be confirmed;

First from Scriptures declaring the immediate reception of departed Saints
into the kingdom of glory. 1. Argument of Scripture to prove the Doctrine.
It is said of faithful Abraham, Genesis 25.8. That he gave up the ghost and
died, and was gathered to his people. As soon as he was dead, he was gathered
to his people. This is spoken, not in regard of his body, he being buried
where few, or none of his Countrevmen, and kindred lay interred, but in regard
of his soul; and the phrase intimates, that his soul straightway upon its
coming forth of the body, was carried to that place of happiness, where his
pious contrymen and predecessors were before him. And this place is no other
than heaven, which is the congregation-house for the receiving of the spirits
of just men made perfect. We find this also affirmed of Isaac, that he died,
and was gathered to his people, Genesis 35.29. The same is said of Jacob. Genesis
49.33. He gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was
gathered to his people. The meaning of these expressions is; that as soon as
these holy men died, their souls went to the mansions of eternal felicity, and
to the company of glorified Saints in heaven.

So much may evidently be concluded from the now recited texts, compared with
Matthew. 8.11. where our Savior says, that many shall come from the East and
West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of
heaven. Taking it for granted, that these Patriarchs were already in heaven.

And (to remove all scruples) this Christ spoke, long before his death, and
ascension into heaven, by which (as Popish sophisters imagine) he opened these
everlasting doors, and made entrance for his Saints who were before shut out.

The Scriptures upon which they build thi^^ idle fancy, are wrested, and
misapplied. These words of Heb. 9.8. [The way into the holiest of all was not
yet made manifest, while the first tabernacle was standing] are grosely
mistaken. For it is not said (as one well observes) that the way to the holiest
was closed, D. in Heb. 9.8.
or shut up; but that which is affirmed is, that the way to the holiest, which
is heaven, was not yet manifest while the first tabernacle was standing; that
is, was not so clearly revealed, as it was afterward by the light of the
Gospel. That of S. John 3.13. makes nothing for it. The place cannot be
interpreted so, as if no man ascended heaven before Christ's ascension; the
foregoing allegation from S. Matthews Gospel, and many other Scriptures plainly
contradict it. We are therefore to unsterstand that verse, not in a literal,
but in a spiritual, and figurative sense. Calvin. in locum.
By ascending up to heaven, is meant a pure knowledge, and a spiritual light of
understanding in, and about the mysteries of God. To ascend heaven here, is
with an understanding eye, Piscator ad locum
to pry into the mysteries of heaven; and to be admitted as privy to the
counsels of God.

Another wrested Scripture Heb. 11.39. These All having received a good report
through faith received not the promise. From hence it is (by some) inferred,
that these worthies went not to heave when they died. To this we say, that the
present place, speaks not of the Cameron in locum.
condition of these Saints after death, but of somewhat concerning them before,
and at the time of their death. They died and received not the promise; that
is, the great promise, Christ incarnate, and the happy, and gloriousestate of
the Church under him. They had Christ only in promise, dying ere they received
a real exhibition of this promise. They died in expectancy of Christ to come,
whom we now enjoy in life, and death, as come. Thus you see, notwithstanding
these cavils, the Patriarchs upon their deaths forthwith entered into glory. So
did the poor Lazar also; He died, and forthwith upon his death, the Angels
carried him into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.22. That is to the happy society, and
fellowship of Abraham, and other Pescator Diod ati in Lib. 16.22.
believers in the Kingdom of heaven. Although the body of this Saint had not a
pompous funeral, as the rich man's had, yet his soul was attended by the
glorious Angels, and by them instantly conveyed to the glory of heaven,
represented under these tropical expressions (...), Rom, 4.11.
Abraham's bosom. This happiness is represented by the bosom of Abraham, rather
than of any other Saint; because he is the Peter Matt. in 2. reg 2.
Father of all those that believe: and the head as it were, of all those men,
whom God takes into covenant with himself, The phrase is borrowed, either from
Cameron. Mytoth in locum
Mariners, who carry their ships, out of the tempestuous Waves, into the good
harbor, or quiet bosom of the sea: or from the Capel Spicil. in ocum.
custom of the Eastern Nations, who at their banquets use to lean, on lie in
each others bosom: or rather. From the practice of tender parents, hugging, and
embracing their little ones into their bosoms. Even so the souls of the Saints
immediately upon death, are carried by the Angels, who are Gods Pilots, from
the troublesome sea of this world, to rest and safety in the harbor of heaven;
and to sit down, as at a banquet, with Abraham, and other believers in that
glorious place; where they shall be honored, not only with the fellowship,
and embraces of the Saints, but of God himself their tender Father, in whose
Psalm. 16.11.
presence there is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures
for ever more.

Thus was it with Lazarus; and thus shall it be with all the Saints; the ending
of this life, will be to them, the beginning of happiness in the next. When
their faith ends, as it does when this life ends, then shall they receive the
salvation of their souls, 1 Pet. 1.9. There is a passage in the 12 of Eccles.
7. fully declaring the condition of souls in, and after death: and I hope I may
(without A rigid censure) place it, under this Topic place. The words are
these; Then (meaning the time of death) shall the dust return to the earth, as
it was, and the spirit shall return to God who gave it. As certainly, as the
dust, that is the body, goes down to the dust; so certainly the spirit that is
the soul goes up unto God to be judged, and to receive Either of his justice,
in a sentence of immediate condemnation, or of his mercy in an instantly
beginning, and everlasting salvation. The soul without delay, upon its
separation from the body repairs to God, to receive according to her demerits,
either chains and torments in hell the prison of disobedient spirits; or
frcedom, and blessedness in heaven, the mansion of glory. And this is the first
Scripture Argument.

Secondly, the truth of the former Doctrine may be demonstrated, The second
Argument of Scripture to prove the former Doctrine.
from such Text of holy Writ, as hold forth, the knowledge, and faith of Gods
people, in, and about their immediate happiness after death, and their desires
to depart hence, that so they may be with Christ, in happiness, and glory. We
may read the knowledge, and faith of the Saints about this truth, in that
excellent portion of Scripture, 2 Cor. 5.1. We know that if our earthly house
of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made
with hands, evenal in the heavens. In this verse our Calvinus in locum.
body is compared to a tent, or tabernacle, the glory of heaven to an eternal
house. When the soul is called away from sojourning in the tabernacle of the
body, she instanly goes to dwell in that eternal house of glory above. This the
Apostle, and other of the Lords people knew, and believingly received as an
undoubted truth. And upon this account is it, that death has been so earnestly
desired by them. I have a desire (said S. Paul) to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, which is far better, Phil. 1.23. Yea, this is the defire of all the
Saints, 2 Cor. 5.8. We are confident and willing rather to be absent from the
body, and to be present with the Lord. The souls of the Saints straightway upon
death, enter into the society and fellowship of Christ in glory. As Soon as they
depart hence, they go to Christ; and are present with him instantly upon their
absence from the body. Now the knowledge and faith of the Lords people
concerning this, was it, that made them so desirous of death. Did their souls
die, or sleep, or pass through the penances of Purgatory, before they went up
to heaven, death were not so desirable, as the Saints, guided by the unerring
spirit, know it to be: neither yet should they be with Christ upon death, which
they fully know, and firmly believed, but in an estate of further distance from
Christ, then whilst they were here upon earth, which is expressly contradictory
to the word of Truth.

The last Scripture-Argument, The third Scripture-Argument for probation of the
Ductrine
I shall urge for confirmation of the former Truth, is deduced from Scriptures
representing promises from God to the Saints of immediate entrance into glory,
upon their respective dissolutions; and the prayers of dying Saints, that God
would (according To his promise) receive up their souls to himself in glory. We
may see these promises in the following quotations. The first is Esaias 57.2. He
shall enter into peace; they shall rest in their beds each one walking in his
uprightness. In these words we have a gracious promise made out to all those
that walk uprightly before God, that upon their deaths they shall enter into
peace, and rest in their beds. These expressions [He shall enter into peace]
import and hold forth that happiness, which upon death shall be bestowed upon
the souls of the upright, in their immediare enjoyment of God in glory; the
last clause [they shall rest in their beds] shows, that as the Synod Annot.
in locum.
souls of the Saints go unto a place of rest, and bliss, so their bodies are
laid to rest in the grave, as in a bed or bedchamber until the general
resurection.

The other quotation is Luke 23.43. To day (said Christ to the penitent thief)
thou shall be with me in paradise. That is, this very day in thy soul, thou
shall be with me in Paradise, Christ means not the earthly Paradise, for that
is supposed destroyed by the flood; neither can the soul which is spiritual, be
affected with earthly delights; but the caelestial Paradise, which is no other
than heaven, as is plain by 2 Cor. 12.2, 4. verses. The Greek word (...), Paser
lex. Graecolat.
signifies a most pleasant garden, set forth with fruitful trees of all
sorts. And by a Diodati in 23 Luke 43.
figure taken from the garden where Adam was put, when he was in the state of
innocence, is here used, as elsewhere in Revel. 2.7.
Scripture, to signify The place of eternal happiness. So that in this
scripture, there is as a promise of heaven made to the penitent thief; so also,
a present enjoyment of it, upon that very day of his death. And this promise
(as Origin. hom. 15. in Genesis
Origin notes) concerns not him only but all the Saints of God.

The shift of Smalcius, and other Heretics to evade the force of this
Scripture is weak, and absurd. They say that [(...). to day] has dependence
upon the former words, and relates to the instant in which the promise was
made, and not to the future in which it was to be performed. And they thus read
and paraphrase the verse. And Jesus said unto him; verily I say unto thee to
day, [ that is, I now tell thee,] thou shall be with me in Paradise, [to wit
after the time of the last judgment. But this gloss of theirs, renders Christ's
answer sapless, and unsavory; fathers battology upon him, John 7.46
the infinite wise Savior of the world, who spoke as never man spoke; and is a
gross corruption of the sacred Text.

The Greek and Syriack copies read, and render it otherwise; referring [(...),
to day] to the latter words, as representing the time in which the promise of
being with Christ in Paradise, was to be made good to this penitent Thief. The
[to day] of the Lord Jesus in this verse, answers to the [when] of the thief in
the former verse; and shows, that the time when Christ would remember him,
should be that very day. Thus (notwithstanding the exceptions of adversaries)
this promise of Christ to the repenting thief, is a full, and convincing proof,
for the passage of gracious souls unto glory, and that, immediately upon their
separation from the body. Finally, upon this account is it, that dying Saints
have by prayer commended their fleeting souls to the mercy of God. Thus did
the blessed Martyr Stephen, Lord Jesus (said he) receive my spirit, Act. 7.59.
So did our Savior; Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit, Luke 23.46.
These petitions show plainly, that God does take care of the souls of his
Saints in death, and forthwith upon death receives them unto himself in glory.

This Truth is also, The uses of the Doctrine
very profitable in application, and may serve;

1. For Refutation. 2. For Exhortation.
The present Truth speaks to the refutation, Use 1.
and overthrow of two soul-sadning opinions. The one, an opinion of the
Papists. The other, of Mortalists, and Soul-fleepers, a loose sect among our
selves.

The first opinion resuted by this Truth is, of the Papists, who dream of a
Purgatory, or place in which, (they say) some of those that die in the Lord,
are for a time to be purged, and punished before they arrive to the blessedness
of glory.

This opinion is a mere fancy and device of giddie brains; having not the
least countenance from the Word of God, but directly opposing it; terrisying
the Saints with anguish and pains, even horrible and hellish; when the spirit
promises nothing but blessedness and rest in the kingdom of heaven, and that,
as it is in the text, from henceforth after death, that is, instantly upon
their departure. Purgatory (as one well) is a fiction invented purposely to
make the Popes Kitchen smoke. And is an invention not known to the Greek Church
for the space of 1500 years after Christ, and but of late known to the Latin
Church. We read in Scripture as of two sorts of persons, good and bad; so of
two places only for the receiving of these after death. Wicked men die, and
immediately go down to hell; the righteous die, and straightway ascend heaven.
For a third place, God made none, the Scriptures mention none, the Fathers
believed none, acknowledging only two places heaven and hell for the receiving
of souls after death.

The second opinion resuted by the present Doctrine, is of some amongst our
selves; who say, the souls of Saints, do not upon death partake of glory in
heaven, but either die, or sleep until the time of the resurrection. Augustine
in his book of heresies, calls the authors of this wicked, and drowsy
opinion Arabici, from the place of their first original, and abode. The
confirmation of the former Truth, is a sufficient confutation of this monstrous
error. The souls of the Saints immediately upon their separation, are called to
the enjoyment of blessedness in heaven; therefore they neither die, nor sleep.
If separatesouls were either dead, or asleep, they could not be happy, and
blessed: Since according to the maxim in the Schools; all blessedness consists
in action.

Death may kill the body, but it cannot kill the soul. The soul is by the
immortal God honored with lastingness, and immortality. Though the soul had a
time in which it began to live, yet there is no time, in which it shall die.
Yea, let me say, that the judgment of eternal death upon unbelieving souls,
does not consist in a privation of life, but of happiness, and glory. Eternal
death is not an annihilation of being to wicked souls, or a privation of life
in them, but an infliction of everlasting torments upon them. Everlasting death
is inflicted upon the souls of sinners, not by killing, or annihilating their
souls, but by tormenting them with infernal punishments. The unbelieving soul
(to use an expression of Augustines) is immortal unto death. Ever dying, and
yet never dead, under the deadly strokes of the second death. As for the
believing soul, she is immortal unto life; and lives in, and after death. Hence
is it, that God (who is not the God of the dead, but of the living) is said to
be the God of Abraham; Isaac, and Jacob: Matthew. 22.32. Abraham then is alive,
Isaac is alive, and Jacob is alive; but how? Not in their bodies, but in their
souls. Their bodies were long since dead, and perished; but their souls live in
glory. Hence again is it, that all dead Saints are said to live to God, Luke
20.38. Even because they live with God in their spirits, although they are dead
in respect of their bodies, or in the account of the world. Furthermore, the
appellations by which the death of the Saints is described, are plain
discoveries of the life, and immortality of the soul. Holy Job calls his death
a change, chap. 14.14. Death is not to the Saints, an absolute privation of
life, but only a change, or mutation, of place and condition. The body goes
to rest in the grave; the soul leaves the earth, and goes to heaven. Aged
Simeon speaking of his death, calls it a departure, or a setting at liberty, as
the Greek signifies. The soul is not destroyed by death, but only set at
liberty from the prison of the body; and obtains a let-pass to depart from
the miseries of the earth, to the joys above. The Apostle Peter calls death,
a laying down of his tabernacle, 2 Pet. 2.14. The Metaphor is taken from
Shepherds; and the Apostle by it signifies; that, as shepherds, when they
leave their tents, do go home to their houses: so we that are the Lords people,
when by death, the tabernacles of our bodies are taken down, do in our souls
depart hence, to dwell in houses not made with hands, but eternal in the
heavens. The soul then does not die, ^ Cor. 5.1.
but live in, and after death. Touching the sleeping of the soul, which some
affirm, and hold forth to the world, chiefly upon this pretext, because death
is in Scripture resembled to sleep, and under that notion commended to public
view, give me leave, to drop a word or two.

Death indeed is a kind of sleep; and is often in Scripture expressed by that
sweet, and lovely name. But we are to know, that death is so called, not in
reference to the soul, as if it slept in the body, as some dream; or were cast
into a dead sleep being separated from the body, as others imagine; but wholly
in regard of the body, which by death is eased of all its pain, and travail
under the sun. In Rev. 6.9, 10, 11. The life, actions, and glory of sanctified
souls in the state of separation are visionally represented to S. John; The
words are these, I saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for
the word of God, and for the testimony which they held. And they cried with a
loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the earth. And white robes were given unto every
one of them. This Scripture holds forth to our purpose.

1. That the souls of Saints, in the state of separation, are not dead, but
alive; not asleep, but waking, and watchful They cry unto God against the
wicked; not for any particular vengeance, but of zeal to Gods justice, and of
desire of the full coming of his kingdom, in the total ruin of the wicked, and
in the last and finaljudgement. 2. This Scripture imports, that the separate
souls of Saints are not in Purgatory, but in heaven. They are under the altar;
that is, they are in the presence, and under the protection of Christ, who is
our altar. Lastly, it shows, that these souls partave of Christ's glory. They
have white robes given to themt and this is an emblem of that glory, wherewith
they are dignified. Thus of the first use.

In the next place this truth is profitable for exhortation, Use 2.
and that to several Gospel-duties; I can (through the want of time) only
touch upon them.

1. The first duty is; A willingness to die when God calls to it. Death makes
way for life, and glory. To die once well, is to live eternally. Immediately
after our dissolutions we go to Christ, which is best of all. This (me thinks)
should sweeten the bitterness of death, and make the thoughts of it pleasing,
and delightful. The gain of death, has made many of Gods people, not only
willing to die, but also earnestly desirous of its instant approach. The
Apostle Paul had an earnest desire to be dissolved. He did not only desire to
die, but desired it, with A vehement affection, as Some give out the sense of
the Greek terms, Phil. 1.23. And that which heightened, and imflamed his desire
was, the glory, he knew, would attend him, immediately upon his dissolution. He
desired to be dissolved, that so he might be with Christ which is (...) much
mmch better, or far much better. Meditate I beseech you upon the gain of
death; and by this work up your spirits to a willingness for death, when God
summons to it. It Is one part of dying well, to die willingly.

Secondly, learn hence, So to dispose of your selves in life, as that ye may
die in the faith, and fear of the Lord. This is the way to be happy after
death. A sunshine day may be closed up with a stormy evening; but a gracious
life shall never end in an evil, and unhappy death. Such as the premises in
life are, such will the conclusion in death always be. Psalm 37.37.
Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is
peace. On the contrary; although death be gain to the Saints, yet it is a
plague of plagues to the wicked. They that die in sin, shall die eternally. The
wicked [that is such as live, and die thus] shall be turned into hell, Psalm.
9.17. You must make it your business to live, and die to the Lord, if you
desire to be blessed after death. Bldssed are they, all they, and only they
that die in the Lord.

3. For a conclusion of all; Do believers enter into glory, immediately upon
death? Let us not mourn immoderately for our departed Friends, who are deadin
the Lord. They are now, with the Lord, they now rest from their labors; and
have received in part the reward of their works. Oh far be it from us to mourn
excessively, since these friends of ours whom we bemone, have gained so
exceedingly by their departure from us. We should not so much mourn over the
bodies of the Saints, because their souls have left them, as over the souls of
sinners, because God has forsaken them. Excessive mourning for the dead is a
practice most unbeseeming those that profess the name of Christ. It may be
tolerable in Heathens, that have no hope: but it is damnable in believing
Christians. I would not have you ignorant, brethren, concerning them that are
asleep that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope. 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. It
is a very great sin in those that believe the rest; and resurrection of
departed Saints, immoderately to lament for those, that are gone to their rest.
It is A heathenish practice, and calls for detestatien, not imitetion. Abraham
Genesis 23.4. Treates with the sens of Heth for a burying place, that so he might
bury his wife Sarith out of his sight. He chose rather to forget her, then
forget himself by a lavish, and over-abounding sorrow. And it is observeable
that our Savior Christ when he came to the Rulers house Matthew. 9.23.
Reprehends smartly the musicians, because (according to the 2 ^^rm. 33 25.
(...) ^.17
custom of these times) they played their sad tunes to increase sorrow, whereas
they should rather have mitigated, and allayed it. Nature is of it self too
prone to exceed the bounds of sobriety.

I beseech you all that hear me now; but all you more especially, that
sympathize in the sorrow of this day through the death of our departed Sister,
that ye mitigate, and moderate your sorrow, and grief, Do you bound, and limit
it, least it hurt your selves, dishonor God, bring the profession of the
gospel into contempt. You have all lost, (I know) by this deat-stroke; Oh know,
know; 1 That God is able to repay your losses, and will do so if you wait upon
him. None of them that trust in him shall be desolate, Psalm. 34.22. Secondly It
was the will of the Lord to have it thus, and you should willingly submit to
it. It is the Lord (said old Eli) let him do what seems him good 1 Samuel 3.18.
1 These, 4.18.
Thirdly comfort your selves with this: her gain is infinitely beyond your
loss. She (we hope is gone from earth, to heaven; from a vale of misery, to a
hill of joy; from the company of us weak, and sinful men, to an innumerable
company of Angels; to the general assembly, and Church of the first born, which
are written in heaven, and to God the jugde of all, and to the spirits of just
men made perfect; and to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, Heb. 12.22.
In a word she is gone, from the Church militant, to the Church triumphant; from
sojourning here in Gods tabernacle, To dwell upon his holy hill; from laboring
here in the kingdom of grace, to rest and blessedness in the Kingdom of glory.
For this rest and blessedness, O blessed Father, fit, and prepare us To this
rest, and blessedness O blessed Jesu, lead, and direct us: Of this rest, and
blessedness: O blessed Spirit, certify, and assure us; and with this rest, and
blessedness, O most blessed God, who art three in person, and but one in
essence, in thy due time crown, and comfort us, even for thy mercy sake. Amen.
Amen.

FINIS.

