THE SAINTS TEMPTATIONS, WHEREIN The NATURE, KINDS, OCCASION of TEMPTATION,
And the Duty of the Saints under Temptation are laid forth.

AS ALSO The Saints Great Fence against Temptation, viz. Divine Grace:

WHEREIN The Nature, Excellency, and Necessity of the Grace of God is displayed
in several Sermons.

By John Row, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Tyton at the three Daggers in Fleet Street. 1675.

TO THE READER.
WHat the Power, or rather Impotency of Free Will is, may be clearly seen in
the Angels that fell, who being at first created with perfect freedom of will,
did not yet keep their first estate. And also it may be seen in our first
Parents, who by ill using of Free Will, lost themselves and their Free Will, as
Austin expresses it. Appareat itaque nobis in nostro capite ipse fons Gratiae
unde secundum uniufcuju que mensuram se per cuncta ejus membra diffundit.
August. de Praedest. sanct, cap. 15.
On the other hand, what the Power and Efficacy of Divine Grace is, and the
transcendent excellency of it above the will of man, does no where more clearly
and illustriously appear than in our Head the Lord Jesus, who, as he was Man,
depending upon the Fountain of Grace in the Deity; and living not merely upon
the stock of created principles: Joh. 6.57. Propter unionem Divinitatis vitam
vivebat gratiae and Gloriae, etc. Tolet. in Joh. 6. In Christ anima quidem est
(...) carnis, sed tamen (...) a Ve^-Destate. Damascen.
But (as Himself tells us) living by the Father (his humanity in its
operations being influenced and governed by the Divinity inhabiting in him) was
kept from all sin, and the least inclination to it, and carried on in a way of
perfect obedience unto the end of his life. And as the holiness and happiness
of Christ as he is man slows from the union of his humane nature with the
Deity, and the Grace which it receives from it: so the holiness and happiness
of Believers and their perseverance in both depends upon their spiritual and
mystical union with Christ, and the influence of Grace they receive from him.
Of his fullness have all we received, Joh. 1.16.
and Grace for Grace. And the Text before in part hinted, Joh. 6.57.
speaks fully to this; As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the
Father; so he that eats me shall live by me. Hence also is that of Paul,
Christ lives in me. Gal. 2.20.
And also those other words of our Savior, Joh. 17.23.
I in them, and thou in me.

It is too natural unto the sons of men, as to seek a Righteousness in
themselves, so to suppose some strength and ability in themselves to work it
out, and to attain unto it. But the Gospel is directly opposite unto this
humor of corrupt nature; the whole scope and design of it being to show, that
both man's righteousness and strength lies perfectly out of himself: Isa. 45.24.
Romans 1.17.
In the Lord have we righteousness and strength. And, In the Gospel is the
righteousness of God revealed from Faith to Faith. And, 2 Cor. 3.5.
We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, but
our sufficiency is of God.

The principal thing intended in these Sermons is to commend the Grace of God,
and to set forth the excellency and necessity of it; and what is treated of in
the former Part of the Book is preparatory and leading thereunto.

And this I may say, That what I have Preached, and is here represented in
these Sermons, I have had experience of the Truth of, throughout the greatest
part of my life; especially in several sicknesses, and many infirmities, with
which the most wise and holy God has pleased to exercise me in the course of
my Pilgrimage. For what ever we may suppose our own strength, ability, and
seize to be, when we come to be under exercise and affliction, then shall
we soon perceive that we are Nothing without present actual Grace. When the
hand of God is upon us in any special Trial, then shall we find that we cannot
fetch in that comfort from former experiences, as we would think we might
easily do, nor support our selves under such a Trial, nor put forth any one Act
of Faith or obedience, without new supplies of present actual Grace. And thus
does Christ's strength come to be perfected in our infirmity.

It is confessed by a sober moderate Papist, Alvarez de Auxiliis Gratiae, libr.
6. Disp. 54.
That Man in his fallen estate cannot resist greater temptations, without the
special help of the Grace of God. But the Scripture goes much farther when it
tells us, That without Christ we can do nothing; Joh. 15.5.
No, not so much as the least thing. And when we are taught to pray, Lead us
not into temptation; it is supposed that every Temptation will be too hard for
us, if Divine Grace do not help us. Let no man therefore presume on his own
sufficiency, when an hour of temptation comes, he may soon experiment what his
own strength or rather infirmity is. He that trusts in his own heart is a
fool: Prove 28.26. Joh. 17.9.
But Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord; our greatest strength and
security lies in dependence, and he will be found the happiest person at last,
that depends most. Abide in me, is the Counsel of him who is, Joh. 15.4.
and is called the wisdom of God.

The Doctrine of Grace has met with many Adversaries; and many Controversies,
both formerly and of late, thorough the malice and subtilty of him who is the
Arch-enemy of Grace, have been raised concerning it: I have not lanched far
into any Polemicaly Discourse about it, but contented my self for the most part
with asserting the Doctrine of Grace in General, endeavoring to accommodate it
unto practice, this way of Handling it, being most suit-table to the Auditory I
was to Preach unto. What is here Delivered in a plain and familiar manner, such
who are acquainted with their own hearts, and who have their Senses exercised
in spiritual things, will, I trust, find to be the Truth of God; And what ever
Benefit any may receive by these Sermons of Grace (the Design of which is to
Commend and Illustrate the Grace of God) that it may be wholly Ascribed to the
Glory of Grace, is earnestly desired by him who is,

Thine, in the Lord Jesus, John Row.

ERRATA.
PAge 102. line 28. read Sovereign, p. 106. l. 9. for joyed r. joined, p. 138.
l. 22. r. might depart, p. 143. l. 29. r. proper, p. 149. l. 23. r. apt to
think, p. 163. l. 28. r. actually, p. 212. l. 15. r. elevates, p. 241. l. 14.
r. so vast a, p. 242. l. 3. for do r. does, p. 357. l. 23. for cause r.
caused, p. 366. l. 11. for you r. your, p. 380. l. 5. for on r. once, p. 393.
l. 14. for Sperm r. Spring.

SERMON I.
2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. And lest I should be exalted above measure through the
abundance of revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the
messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure.

For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.

And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made
perfect in weakness.


IN this whole context we have four things observable:

1. We have Paul's exercise, the Temptation and Conflict that he was under;
there was given unto me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet
me. These words describe unto us the exercise or conflict that the Holy Apostle
was under.

The second thing remarkable in the words is this, We have the ground and
occasion of this exercise and conflict of his, and that was the danger that he
was in of being lifted up, lest I should be exalted through the abundance of
revelations, there was given unto me a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan
to buffet me.

3. We have Paul's carriage under this temptation, and the course he took when
he was tempted, at the eighth verse, For this thing I besought the Lord thrice
that it might depart from me.

Fourthly and Lastly, We have the gracious answer that he had to his prayer at
the ninth verse. And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee, for my
strength is made perfect in weakness.

There are several Observations that do naturally arise out of the Text.

The first Observation or Doctrine is this,

That it is the lot of the holiest men, Observe. 1.
and of the most eminent servants of God, to be exercised with grievous and
sore temptations; there was given unto to me a thorn in the flesh, the
messenger of Satan to buffet me.

The second Observation that arises out of the words is this,

That men of the highest grace, Observe. 2.
of the greatest holiness, are yet in danger of Spiritual Pride, and of being
lifted up above measure.

Lest I should be exalted above measure, says the Apostle, there was given
unto me a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet me.

Paul was an Apostle, a man of more than ordinary grace, and yet he was in
danger of spiritual Pride; lest I, should be exalted above measure, there was
given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me.

The third Observation that arises out of the Text is this,

That the principal end why God permits it, and orders it to be so, Observe. 3.
that his people should be tempted and undergo sore conflicts, it is to keep
them from being lifted up. Lest I should be exalted above measure, there was
given unto me a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet me.

It is observable that the end of this exercise of Paul is repeated twice: in
the beginning of the verse, lest I should be exalted above measure, so in the
end of the verse, lest I should be exalted above measure; I say this is twice
repeated, intimating thus much, that the principal end that God aimed at in
this dispensation of his toward Paul, it was to keep him humble and suppress
Spiritual Pride in him.

The fourth Observation or Doctrine that is contained in the words is this,

That the proper course that is to be taken when we are under temptation,
Observe. 4.
is to pray much. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice; I besought the
Lord thrice, that is often, a certain number for an uncertain; thrice, that is
many times.

The fifth Observation that arises out of the Text is this,

That praying souls shall have a sufficiency of grace to carry them through all
their trials, Observe. 5.
conflicts and temptations. And he said, My grace is sufficient for thee.

The last Observation contained in the words is this,

That Gods strength is made perfect in our weakness, Observe. 6.
for my strength is made perfect in weakness.

All these Observations are points of great moment. I shall begin to speak of
the first of these Doctrines, and that is this,

Doct. 1. Doct. 1.
That it is the lot of the holiest men, and of the most eminent Servants of God
to be exercised with grievous and sore temptations. This I gather from those
words, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to
buffet me. There was given to me a thorn in the flesh. It is much controverted
by Interpreters, what this thorn in the flesh should be, and they have several
conjectures about it, some conceive it to be one thing, some another. I shall
not trouble you with the several opinions and conjectures about it, I rather
incline to what Calvin conceives to be the meaning of these words. Ego sub hoc
vocabulo comprehendi arbitror o^^^ge us tentationis, quo Paulus exercebat^r.
Calv. in loc.
He conceives by this thorn in the flesh is not meant so much one particular
temptation, as temptations of all sorts and kinds; it was not one or two, or a
few temptations only that Paul was exercised with, but he was exercised with
variety of temptations, with all sorts and kinds of temptations; and by the
flesh, Calvin understands not the body, but the unregenerate part in Paul, Paul
himself had an unregenerate part in him, as well as a regenerate, and in
respect of that unregenrate part in him, he was still subject to temptations.

Paul himself had not attained to that spirituality, but he had so much of the
unregenerate part in him that did expose him to temptations. This thorn in the
flesh is called the messenger of Satan, there was given to me a thorn in the
flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me. Why the messenger of Satan? The
reason is, because as temptations are injected by Satan, so when ever a
temptation arises, it should put us in remembrance who it is that we have to
deal with.

When ever a temptation comes, we ought to remember that Satan is near at hand,
he is the author of the temptation, he is the enemy that we have to deal
withal; and we should not be secure having such a subtle and malicious enemy to
deal with.

Now this messenger of Satan it was sent to buffet Paul, there was given to me
a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet me. (...).
It is an emphatical expression, that he might buffet me, (...). Phavo inus.
the greek word signifies to beat another with the fist: now you know that is
an Ignominious thing; when a person is beaten with the fist black and blew,
when his face is marred, it is a shameful reproachful thing, when a man's face
is buffeted and his visage marred by it, he is ashamed to come into company, it
strikes shame into him. So Paul's temptations struck him into a holy shame, his
temptations were a means to fill him with a sense of his own infirmities, and
take down all high conceits of himself, to show him what he was in case he were
left to himself.

Now if such a man as Paul was, a man of his grace and experience, no less than
an Apostle, if he were exercised with these temptations, then we see it is the
lot of the most eminent servants of God to be exercised with most grievous and
sore temptations.

For the handling this point, there are three things to be spoken unto in the
Doctrinal part.

1. I shall show what Temptation is, open a little the nature of Temptation. 2.
Show you what the several sorts and kinds of Temptation are.
And then thirdly, We shall come to the Grounds and Reasons of the Doctrine,
why it is that God trains up his Children under this discipline, why it is that
he suffers them to be exercised under grievous and sore Temptations.

1. I shall open the nature of Temptations; what is Temptation?

For the nature of it in General you may take it thus; The Nature of Temptation.
Temptation it is that proof or experiment that is taken concerning a person
for the discovery of man's weakness, and the Illustration of Gods power. This is
the Definition of Temptation.

The nature of Temptation may be known by the consideration of the formal and
final cause of it, the formal cause of Temptation is the experiment or proof
that is taken concerning a person.

To tempt, Tentare, est probare, sive experimentum sumere de aliquo.
it is to prove or take an experiment concerning another; to tempt, it is to
put things to the trial, to make things evident concerning a person, how things
stand with him. Now the end of Temptation being to make known something that
was not made known before, we must understand this aright.

That which is made known by Temptation, it is not any thing to God, for God
knows all things from eternity, he knew what was in man, John 2.25. But that
which is made known by Temptation, it is something to our selves and others,
something by Temptation is made known to our selves and others that was not
known before; and this is the Nature of Temptation to discover something to our
selves and others that was not so clearly known and understood before. And
Temptations give us an experimental knowledge of a thing; that which we knew
only conjecturally and opinionatively before, when we come to be Tempted we
have an experimental knowledge of that thing. And hence it is that the
Schoolmen distinguish between that knowledge which is acquired by reason and
discourse, and that which is gotten by experience. We may know many things by
reason and discourse; now it is one thing to know things by reason and
discourse, and another thing to know things experimentally, an experimental
knowledge is the most certain knowledge of things: Now this is the formal cause
of Temptation, that it is the experiment or proof which is taken concerning a
person. As for the final cause of Temptation, that is two fold.

1. The discovery of man's weakness, or infirmity. 2. The Illustration of Divine
Power.
1. One great end of Temptation is, the discovery of our own infirmity; we
never come to know what we are, till we come to be under Temptation; we think
our strength is greater than it is till we come to be tempted, we think we can
do more than we can do, we think we can master such a difficulty, overcome such
a corruption, perform such a duty, withstand such an allurement; but when a
Temptation comes, then our weakness and infirmity is soon seen. Now this is one
end of Temptation to discover to man his weakness and infirmity.

Thus we find how the Lord led his people through the wilderness to humble them
and prove them, Deuteronomy. 8.16. Who fed thee in the wilderness with Manna, which
thy Fathers knew not, that he might humble thee, and that he might prove thee,
to do thee good at thy latter end. And so in the third verse of that Chapter,
and verse 2. And thou shall remember all the way which the Lord thy God led
thee these forty years in the Wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee,
to know what was in thine heart, etc.

Thus God proved Hezekiah that he might know what was in his heart, 2 Chronicles
32.31. Howbeit, in the business of the ambassadors of the Princes of Babylon,
who sent unto him to enquire of the wonder that was done in the land, God left
him to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart.

The meaning is, that Hezekiah might know what was in his own heart; God knew
what was in his heart before, but God left him under this Temptation that he
might know all that was in his own heart.

2. The other end of Temptation is the Illustration of Divine Power. God
therefore suffers us to be under Temptation, that he might manifest his power
in supporting us under Temptation; this is expressed a little after the text, my
strength is perfected in infirmity.

By Temptations we have experience of our own weakness, and of Divine Power;
when a Temptation comes, then we find we have no ability in our selves to
withstand it (though before the Temptation came we thought we were strong
enough) and then God puts forth his power to enable us to do what we could not
do of our selves, and so Divine Power is Illustrated.

After God has shown us what we cannot do of our selves, then he shows us what
his Divine Grace can enable us to do: hence is that expression that follows in
the text, most gladly will I glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ
may rest upon me.

The sense of our infirmity makes way for the manifestation of Divine Power.
When God has shown us by Temptation what we cannot do, then he shows us what
his grace can do in us and for us; and this is the nature of Temptation.
Temptation it is the proof or experiment that is taken concerning a person for
the manisestation of his weakness and Illustration of Divine power.

The second thing to be spoken unto is, to show what are the several sorts or
kinds of Temptation.

There are four sorts or kinds of Temptation that we may distinguish of.

1. Some that we may call Divine Temptations. 2. Carnal or Fleshly Temptations.
3. There are worldly Temptations. 4. and Lastly, there are Satanical
Temptations.
1. There are some which are called Divine Temptations, such as proceed
immediately from God himself, Genesis 22.1. After these things God did tempt
Abraham; here you see there was a Divine Temptation: now these Temptations that
we call Divine Temptations and do proceed from God, are not to be understood so
as if God did tempt to sin, God cannot be tempted with evil, neither does he
tempt any man, that is, he does not tempt any man to sin, Jam. 1.13. These
Temptations therefore that we call Divine Temptations, are nothing else but
those trials which God brings upon his Children for the exercise of their
graces. When God brings his people into some notable straight, or difficulty,
or affliction, that they know not which way to turn or wind themselves out of
it, this is that which is properly called a Divine Temptation, and these trials
are therefore called Temptations, because by these Dispensations God tries his
people what they are, and what their strength, or rather what his grace in them
is, under such a straight, and difficulty, and distress they are brought into.
Thus God tried Abraham, David, Job, and other of his Saints.

2. There are carnal or fleshly Temptations. Now those Temptations that we call
carnal or fleshly Temptations, they are such Temptations that arise out of man's
own heart, Jam. 1.14. Every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own
lusts and enticed. Original sin, that is, that pravity and corruption of nature
that is in us, is here called by the name of lust: now this pravity of nature,
this draws us away and enticeth us, there is that corrupt nature in us, which
as it is in its self a sin, so it is a Temptation to sin. Corrupt nature
provokes and sollicits us to sin: In me, that is, in my flesh there dwells no
good thing. In the flesh, that is in corrupt nature, there is no good thing,
nay in the flesh dwells every evil thing, I find a Law in my members, warring
against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sen
which is in my members, Romans 7.23.

Now this is that we understand by fleshly Temptations, namely, the
inclinations that are in our hearts to sin.

Original Sin consists of these two parts.

1. Of that indisposition and averseness that is in us to good. 2. Of that
propension or proneness that is in us unto evil.
Now there is an habitual inclination, and an actual inclination unto evil; and
that actual inclination in us unto evil, it is the budding of Original Sin; it
is the exerting or putting forth of that habitual inclination that is in us.
Now the exerting and putting forth of Original Sin in actual inclinations, this
is that which is properly called fleshly or carnal Temptations. The Schoolmen
call this the impulse of sensuality, they also call it the first motions that
arise in the heart tending to sin.

It is a good expression of Austin, Nemo se palpet de suo, sibi Satanas est.
August.
Let no man stroke or applaud himself, let no man think himself better than he
is, every man is a Satan, a Tempter to himself. Every man has that in himself,
which is a Temptation to himself. And, these first inclinations that are in the
heart to sin, are properly called Temptations, because these first inclinations
have an alluring quality, a proneness in them, to draw men to sin in act.
Corrupt nature is apt to gratify it self in its own desires: and when corrupt
nature discovers its inclination to a sin, this is a strong Temptation to every
unregenerate person, and he knows not how to resist it. Hence is it said of
unregenerate men, that they fulfill the desires of the flesh and of the mind,
Ephesians. 2.3. that is, that way that the flesh would have them go they will go.
When the flesh is bending and inclining to such a thing, that way they will
bend and incline. And Regenerate persons themselves, though they have a
contrary principle of grace that does oppose, yet these corrupt risings and
inclinations that arise from Original sin within them, are a great incentive to
them, and unless they are assisted by actual grace, they are many times
overcome in particular acts. Tentatio a carne interius oppugnans de nostro
contra nos roboratur.
That Temptation, says one, that arises from the flesh within, is fortified
and strengthened by our selves against our selves, and therefore these fleshly
Temptations, these Temptations that arise from corrupt nature, that fountain of
Original sin which is in us, are the strongest of all Temptations, and we are
most apt to be overcome by them.

3. There are worldly Temptations, 1 John. 2.16. For all that is in the world,
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of
the Father but is of the world.

It is as much as if it had been said, This world, through men's corruption, is
an occasion of nothing else but temptation to men. All that is in the world,
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life is not of
the Father, but is of the world. It is as much as if it had been said, The
world, it tempts men with the Temptations of pleasure, of profit and honor; the
variety of objects that are in the world, the variety of conditions that are in
the world are Temptations to men. Prosperity has its Temptations, and
Adversity has its Temptations. Vae presperitatibus h^jus seculi semel and ite
um a timore adv rsitatis, and a corruptie ne laetitiae;
I remember it is a notable passage which Austin has, Woe to the prosperities
of this world, a first, and a second time. First, from the fear men have of
adversity whilst they are in prosperity; Secondly, from the corruption that
arises from prosperity. When men are in prosperity they fear changes, and
prosperity it self has a great deal of corruption attending of it. And then
says he, Vae adversi atibus s^^li semel, i^^run and tertio, etc.
Woe to adversity, a first, second and third time. Adversity is evil upon a
treble account. First, from the desire men have of prosperity, when they are
under adversity. Secondly, because adversity it self is a hard thing to be
born. And lastly, when men are under adversity their patience is in danger of
suffering shipwarck: and hence he concludes, N^^ ovid non teatat^^ humanae
vitasu^^^ terram?
is not the whole of man's life a Temptation upon earth? There is no state or
condition we can be in, but there is some temptation or other attends it. We
think if we were in such and such a condition, we should have no Temptations,
but that is a mistake, there is no condition we can be in but will afferd some
Temptation or other.

4. There are Satanical Temptations, and these Temptations are such as come
primarily and originally from Satan himself, (...).
Satan's name is The Tempter. It is Satan's proper work to tempt men to sin.
Therefore it is said of Satan that he put it into the heart of Judas to betray
his Master. And Peter says to Ananias, Acts 5.3.
Why has Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost? These are
Satanical Temptations, that come directly from Satan. Now these Temptations
that proceed from Satan, they are Infinite and Numberless. Satan has various
ways of tempting, sometimes we read of the fiery darts of the Devil, sometimes
we read of his wiles, sometimes we read of his devices, sometimes we read how
he transforms himself into an Angel of light. Satan has many ways of
assaulting the Saints, sometimes he assaults them by the injection of
Blasphemous thoughts, and these are so terrible to some of the Saints that they
are weary of their lives; sometimes by the injection of impure thoughts,
sometimes he assaults them by cruel Temptations, tempting them to things that
are against nature, and contrary to nature, as to self murder and the like;
sometimes he transforms himself into an Angel of light, and counterfeits the
voice of the spirit of God; and the best way to discover these Temptations, it
is by comparing them with the word. Whatever Satan's pretense is, his design is
always to take us off from the word, and to reduce us to believe or practice
something that has not a warrant in the word for it. Therefore we may take
this for a rule.

How plausible soever the Temptation is, if it has not a warrant from the
word, it comes from Satan who transforms himself into an Angel of light.

But Satan's usual and ordinary way of tempting is, by suiting his Temptations
to our corrupt nature. Satan observes which way our corrupt nature bends, and
inclines, and suits his Temptations accordingly.

Thus have I now opened the Doctrine, and have shown what Temptation is in
general, and also the several sorts and kinds of Temptation.

The next thing that comes to be spoken unto is, the Grounds and Reasons of the
point.

Why God suffers his people to be thus exercised with grievous and sore
Temptations.

1. One Reason lies in the text, it is to humble his people, lest I should be
exalted above measure through abundance of revelations, there was given to me a
thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me. Temptation is the
Physic or Medicine that God uses to keep his people from pride. How great is
the poison of pride, O quantum est venerum superbiae quod non potest nisi
vereno curari.
that can be cured by nothing else but poison? So great an enemy is God to
pride, that he sometimes lets his people fall into temptation, yea sometimes
into other sins, to keep them from pride; but of this more in its proper place.

2. Another Reason why God suffers his people to be exercised by Temptation, it
is to keep them from security; when temptations are absent we are apt to be
secure, and let fall our watch. Now God by letting loose Temptations upon us,
admonishes us of the danger we are in. We are little sensible of the danger we
are in of being overtaken with such and such sins. God suffers a Temptation to
break in upon us, and then he lets us see, that unless we watch and pray, we
may soon enter into Temptation.

3. God suffers us to be tempted to quicken our dependence upon himself, and to
cause us to run to him. When we are free from Temptation, we presume of our own
strength, and think all is well; God lets loose a Temptation upon us, and then
we see the need of divine grace to keep us.

4. God suffers his people to be tempted, that they may be the better fitted to
comfort others in their Temptations. It is said of our Savior, Heb. 2.18.
That he being tempted, is able to succor them that are tempted. None so fit
to comfort tempted souls, as he that has been exercised with Temptations
himself.

5. God exercises his people with Temptations to prepare them for his Divine
consolations. When our Savior underwent that great Temptation in the
wilderness, the Angels came and ministered unto him. Mark 1.13.
It is the usual method of God, first to humble, then to comfort. Now
Temptations are a means to humble the Saints, and so to prepare them for Divine
Consolations. Experienced souls know this to be true, that the saints greatest
comforts come in after their greatest conflicts. I have scarce known any, that
have attained to great experience in Divine consolations, but those that have
been greatly exercised and tried with Temptations.

6. God suffers his people to be tempted that he may add to their Crown, Jam.
1.12. Blessed is the man that endures temptation: for when he is tried, he
shall receive the Crown of life which the Lord has promised to them that love
him. We read of some in the seventh of Revelations, That they were clothed
with white robes, and they had palms in their hands: and who were these? these
were such as came out of great tribulation, Rev. 7.14. The saints who came out
of great tribulation and temptation, these are they that have palms of victory
put into their hands. God will put a special mark and badge of honor upon such
as have undergone greatest services, and born the greatest conflicts. Tentatus
habebis praemium duplex, ubi non tentatus, praemium es habiturus simplex.
It was a good expression of one: When thou art tempted and do overcome the
temptation, thou shall have a double reward; whereas if thou art not tempted,
thou shall have a single reward.

Is it so, Use.
that the saints are exercised with great and sore temptations? Is it the lot
of the holiest men, of the eminent servants of God to be exercised with
grievous and sore temptations?

This should teach us not to be aweary of the spiritual conflict; the life of a
Christian here on earth is a life of Temptation. Temptations we must expect,
and therefore we ought to prepare for them, 1 Timothy 6.12. Fight the good fight
of faith. A Christians life is a fighting life. A Christian is encompassed
round with many enemies, and he must expect to fight his way through, to
Heaven. I often think of the speech of an Ancient, Wise and Experienced
Christian, a man that had walked with God many years:

O says he, it is hard fighting till we get to Heaven. We think of an easy
Christianity, we think to get smoothly to Heaven, we think to meet with no
rubbs, difficulties, and temptations in our way, Oh but it will not be so!
Through much tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. He that will
be a Christian, Nos sic sumus, ut optemus verbum vilae and laetitiae habere:
sed tentationes mortis and tristitiae abesse: belli profecte and suaves
Tecologi! Discendum igitur est quod in media morte, in morsu and pavorious
conscientiae, in medio dentium Diaboli and Inferni versandum sit Christiano.
Luthur.
says another, must expect to be conversant in the midst of death, in the
gripes and terrors of Conscience, in the midst of the teeth of the Devil and of
Hell.

There are temptations of diverse sorts and kinds, External, Internal.
Temptations from the world, from Satan, from our own hearts: when one
Temptation is over we must expect another. There is no rest or quiet for a
Christian to be expected on this side Heaven. It is true, God out of his
infinite wisdom and goodness gives some few intervals of rest and peace to his
people, that they may not be quite worried by their temptations. But when they
have rested a while, they must expect new conflicts, new assaults. Thus we read
of our Savior when the Devil had ended his Temptations, he departed from him
for a season, Luke 4.13. The Devil had not so ended his temptations, but he had
a mind to begin again, and though he had left him for a season, it was but for
a season, and it was to try him with fresh assaults. We must look for new
assaults of the enemy. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my
throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my father in his throne,
Revel. 3.21. We must first overcome before we can expect the Crown. Now there
must be a fighting before there can be an overcoming. No man can expect the
reward till he have gotten the victory, and no victory can be gotten without
fighting.

Our Life in this our Pilgrimage cannot be without temptations, because our
proficiency in grace is known by temptations. No man knows himself but by
temptations. It is a speech of Austin, No man can be crowned unless he
overcome, and no man can overcome unless he war and fight, neither can he war
and fight unless he have enemies and temptations. Wherefore we should not be
weary of fighting, weary of striving, since this is the condition of our
present state. Our present state is a warring conflicting state. And by how
much the more fiercely we are tempted and assaulted, by so much the more
gloriously shall we be Crowned at last, if so be we overcome.

The end of the First Sermon.
SERMON II.
2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. And lest I should be exalted above measure through the
abundance of revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the
messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure.

For this thing I be sought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.

And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made
perfect in weakness.


WE come now to give some Directions how we may keep up the spiritual conflict.

1. If we would keep up this spiritual conflict, take heed of security, let us
never think our selves out of danger; when we are out of the danger of one
temptation, we may be in danger of another, so that there is never any time or
place for security. 1 Pet 5.8. Be sober, be vigilant: because your adversary
the Devil, as a roaring Lion walks about seeking whom he may devour.

If we watch not, the Devil may surprise us before we are aware, you know it is
our Saviors counsel, Watch and pray that you enter not into temptation:
without continual watchfulness we shall be soon overtaken with some temptation
or other.

2. If we would keep up this spiritual conflict, Let us study and consider
which way our temptation lies, whether to pride, or to passion, or to love of
the world, or to unbelief, or to some other thing: It is one great piece of a
Christians skill, to know which way his corruptions and temptations lie most.

For unless we know wherein our weakness, and our enemies strength lies most,
how can we watch, or arm and fortify our selves against them? Some have their
temptations lying more outwardly, some more inwardly; some are more affected
with outward things, with sensible things, with riches, pleasures, sensual
delights, and the like. Some have their temptations more inward, and are
affected with envy; pride, unbelief, diffidence, distrust of the providence of
God. These are their temptations. Now it concerns us wisely to consider where
the strength of our temptations lies, for usually every man has some peculiar
Temptation; something or other that is more than other a temptation to him.

3. If we would keep up the spiritual conflict, let us be sure to oppose our
watch and the utmost of our diligence there where the strength of our
temptations lies. As he said in that case, Fight not against great or small,
but against the King of Israel: So we should set the main strength of the
battle against our peculiar temptations, we should fight against constitution
sins and corruptions. I was upright, Psalm. 18.23.
says David, and kept my self from my iniquity. He set himself against every
sin, but especially he set himself to keep himself from his own iniquity.

4. If we would keep up the spiritual conflict let us be sure not to go forth
to fight and conflict with temptations in our own strength. By strength shall
no man prevail, 1 Samuel 2.9. That is, no man ever did or shall prevail by his
own strength. We think to do great things by the strength of our resolution,
and truly resolution is good if it be subordinate to our dependence on Christ.
But if when we have had experience that such a temptation has been strong upon
us, and we think we will fortify our resolutions against it, and we shall bear
it down another time by our own strength; truly when temptation comes we shall
feel our own weakness and fall very shamefully. I remember a notable expression
Austin has, Why do thou stand in thy self, and yet art not able to stand?
cast thy self securely on God, Quid in te stas, and non stas, etc.
fear not that God will fail thee, or suffer thee to fall to the ground, he
will receive and heal thee. The best way in all temptations is to cast our
selves on Divine grace: woe to him that thinks to stand by himself.

5. If we would keep up the spiritual conflict, let us keep the eye of the mind
fixed and intent upon God: Mine eyes are ever toward thee, says David in the
twenty seventh Psalm. The best way to overcome our temptations, is to have our
minds elevated and lifted up to God. Whilst the mind has a clear apprehension
of God, and the affections carried out in strength after God, it is not
possible that Temptations should prevail. I remember the reason the Schoolmen
give of the confirmation of grace in the Saints in Heaven, and that they cannot
fall; it is the beatifical vision, because they always see the face of God. The
Saints in Heaven having always the sight of God, adhere to him inseparably;
they having the sight of God, and knowing that they have the fruition of the
chief good, that there is not a better nor higher good to be enjoyed, nothing
can be a temptation to them to draw them off from such a good. We should labor
for a clear and more perfect knowledge of God here on earth; the more we know
God experimentally, the less power will temptations have over us. If we have
tasted that the Lord is gracious, if we have had but a little glimpse of the
Divine Excellency and perfection, all that the flesh, and the Devil, and the
world can offer to us, will seem little to what we see, and find to be in God.
Therefore let us labor to have our mind and affections elevated to God: the
morewe have our minds and affections elevated to God, the less will temptations
prevail over us.

The second Use is this; Use 2.
Is it so, that it is the lot of the holiest men, and of the most eminent
servants of God to be exercised with grievous and sore temptations? This may
inform us how much carnal people are mistaken, who think their conditions to be
therefore good, because they meet with no temptations. This is a great mistake,
they know not what conflicts and temptations mean. All things are quiet and in
peace with them. They think they are a company of melancholy timorous people
only, that speak of inward troubles, and are vexed and disquieted with
temptations. But such temptations are never the less, because they are not
sensible of them. The greatest temptation of all other is, to have no sense of
temptation. To this end let me propound to you these two Considerations.

1. When men are without sense of temptations, it is a sign they are taken
captive by the Devil at his will. It is the expression of the Apostle, 2 Timothy
2.26. When the strong man armed keeps the house, all things are in peace. It is
a sign men are fast bound in Satan's chains, when they are not sensible of his
temptations. It is certain, that Satan is always restless in his malice, still
laying snares and baits to tempt men to sin, and the world is full of baits and
snares; therefore when men think that they are most secure they are most in
danger. Satan's temptations are always nearest to a man, when he thinks them
farthest off.

2. When men have no sense of temptations, it is a sign they are destitute of a
principle of grace that should oppose temptation. It is said of a Godly man,
that he does not commit sin, because his seed remains in him, and he cannot
sin because he is born of God, 1 John 3.9. A regenerate person may be tempted
to sin as other men; but there is the seed of God and of grace in him, that
makes head against temptation. The spirit lusts against the flesh, Gal. 5.17
and the flesh against the spirit. Now when men are sensible of no such
conflict as this is, it is a sign they have not the seed of God in them, that
they want a principlc of grace.

It is true, There may be a conflict between conscience and sin in the heart of
a carnal man. I speak this that we may not be mistaken in our judgment
concerning the spiritual conflict. Every conflict is not the conflict between
sin and grace in a man's heart. There may be a conflict between Conscience and
sin in the heart of a carnal man. A carnal man has a mind to such a sin,
Conscience warns him of it, will not suffer him to sin unchecked, unreproved;
so that here is a conflict about sin: but all this while there may be no
opposition in his will against sin. But now in a regenerate person there is a
will, and a will; a will inclining to sin, and a will opposing that
inclination. But now there is no principle of opposition against sin in the
will of an unregenerate man: the full bent of his will is carried out toward
sin, though there be a fight in his Conscience against it. Therefore when men
are sensible of no temptations, neither from Satan, nor from their own hearts;
it is a sign there is but one principle in them, and that is flesh and
corruption only. Sunt in nobis duo contrarii Duces, caro and spiritus. Luther.
There are says Luther, in a Godly man two contrary Leaders or Commanders, the
flesh, and the spirit. Therefore when a man is sensible of no temptation, feels
no warfare, no conflict with sin, it is a sign there is but one principle in
him, and that is a principle of flesh and corruption. Therefore carnal men have
no reason to please themselves that they are not so melancholy and dejected as
others are, who are under temptations; certainly it is a sign that when all
things are in peace with them, the strong man armed keeps the house.

A third Use is an Use of Direction to teach us how to carry it when we are
under Temptation.

If it be so, Use 3.
That it is the lot of the holiest men, and of the most eminent servants of God
to be exercised with grievous and sore Temptations:

Then let us labor for the spiritual skill how to manage temptations, and to
carry it aright under temptation.

Here I shall propound four or five Directions, to show how we ought to carry
it under temptations.

Direction 1. Direct. 1.
If we would carry it aright under temptations; Let us study what Gods ends are
in permitting such a temptation, especially great and notable temptation to
come upon us. Affliction comes not out of the dust. Satan could not annoy or
infest us but by Gods permission. Satan is held in Gods chain, he can go no
further than God permits him. Therefore when we find Satan let loose upon us,
and our peace is disturbed, let us consider what Gods ends are in permitting
such a temptation; why God lets loose that cruel wolf to worry us.

Consider if you have not been too remiss in prayer, let fall your watch, been
too confident of your own strength; wisely search out the matter why God
suffers such a temptation to come upon you.

Direct. Direct. 2.
2. Study also Satan's ends. As God has his ends in permitting us to be
tempted; so Satan has his ends in tempting of us. Gods ends in permitting us
to be tempted are always good, he does it to humble us, to quicken us to
prayer, to keep us in dependence, to search more into our own hearts, to see
what is amiss there. Satan's end is usually to disturb our peace, to weaken our
hearts and our hands in the ways of God, or to draw us into some plain sin; now
we ought not to be ignorant of Satan's devices. If Satan Tempt thee to unbelief,
to question all, to question whether thou art sincere, whether thou art in a
state of grace, and have a right to salvation, make use of the temptation so
far as to examine thy evidences a fresh. But do not presently let go thy hold;
My integrity, says Job, will I hold fast till I die.

This I speak to such as are real Christians; few others I conceive are
troubled with that Temptation, to doubt and question their state, but the
children of God: Now to such I would say, do not presently let go your
integrity, when you are tempted to question your sincerity, and then do not let
go your hold of the promises.

This a true proposition, He that believes shall be saved. All the Devils in
Hell cannot overthrow that truth: Therefore keep thy hold of the promise still,
let not Satan be able to beat thee off from the promise. Whether thou shall be
saved yea or no, this is a proposition of eternal Truth, He that believes
shall be saved.

Then if it be some plain sin that Satan tempts thee to, presume not on thy own
strength, but presently fly to Divine Grace to keep thee from that sin. It is a
great part of wisdom in all temptations to consider Satan's ends, which are to
draw us off from the word, and from duty, and to allure us to some sin. Now we
should endeavor to frustrate Satan in his ends, and beware of his devices.

Direct. Direct. 3.
3. Resist temptations at the first approach of them; Resist the Devil and he
will flee from you, Jam. 4.7. If Satan be resisted, he will not stand his
ground; we have the word of God for it, Resist the Devil and he will flee, only
let us look to this that we be peremptory in our resistance. Take heed that we
do not dally with a temptation, but as soon as ever a temptation appears,
presently to resist it; the least dallying with a temptation brings us under
great danger of being overcome by it. If Satan can but get so much ground as to
draw our thoughts and minds to what he propounds: Delectatio morosa.
If there be that which Divines call a fixing and staying of the mind with some
delight on what is presented, there is mavelous great danger of being
overcome. Therefore the best way is to keep the enemy at the outworks, and not
suffer him to come near to our wills and affections; when temptations offer
themselves to our fancies or understandings presently resist them, not parley
with them in our minds. If we parley with the temptation, it may soon give them
an inlet to our wills and affections.

Direct. 4. Direct. 4.
The best way of dealing with some temptations is, by turning away from the
temptation with a holy disdain. As Christ said to Peter in that case, Get thee
behind me, Satan; so when Satan casts in Blasphemous thoughts, Impure thoughts,
Murderous Cruel thoughts, to do any thing against nature; the best way to deal
with such temptations is by a simple aversion from the temptation. It is a
passage I have met with of one that was experienced and acquainted with
temptation. The best way to deal with some temptations is to pronounce one
syllable and say, Fie Satan. Some poor souls when they find such and such horrid
thoughts cast into their minds by Satan, are even brought to the brink of
despair, think it is impossible that such thoughts can be forgiven. But let
such know if such thoughts be resisted and have not the approbation of the
will, if the will be carried in defiance to them, they are Satan's sins not
thine, they shall be laid at Satan's door not to thine.

Direct. Direct. 5.
5. In every temptation let us be sure to keep the word of God nigh unto us,
and have a present recourse to it. The word of God is called the sword of the
spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. No sword so fit to kill and slay a Temptation as the word
of God. If it be some sin in practice, that you are tempted to, take the word,
and say as our Savior did, It is written, it is written to the contrary. If it
be some spiritual inward sin that we are tempted to, as to Pride, Unbelief, or
the like, take the word and oppose it to these sins. If I am a child of God,
and Satan tempt me to doubt whether I am in the favor of God or no, take the
word and say, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? If Satan say thou
art a sinner and therefore thou shall be condemned, oppose the word and say, He
that believes is not condemned, John 3.17. If Satan tempt us to doubt of the
immortality of the soul, to doubt of the resurrection of the body, to doubt of
the future glory of the Saints: If he tempt us to doubt of any Article of Faith
whatsoever, we must still have recourse to some word of God that does clearly
and plainly assert the things that Satan tempts us to doubt of; this is the
ready way to slay such temptations: This is a sure rule: There is no way to
deal with Satan and his temptations like to this, As to oppose some true
proposition out of the word to what he suggests. The Devil tempts me to doubt
of many things, I must then have recourse to some plain word of God which
asserts the contrary, and here must my faith fix it self.

If it be so, Use 4.
That it is the lot of the holiest men, and of the most eminent servants of God
to be exercised with grievous and sore temptations:

The last Use is by way of Consolation. This Doctrine does naturally speak
comfort to tempted souls. Art thou tempted? do not despond because of thy
temptations: do not think strange concerning thy trials, conflicts and
temptations, as if some trange things had happened to thee, 1 Cor. 10. There has
no temptation taken you but what is common to man. It is the lot of the holiest
men, of the most eminent servants of God to be tempted; and usually it is so,
That the more any person is beloved of God, the more dear he is to God, the
more God suffers him to be tried and tempted. Thy temptations are bitter for
the present, but they shall have an end. It is an expression of Luther,
Distinguendum est tentationem in initium and sinem. Luther.
We must distinguish a temptation into the beginning, and the end; every
temptation has its end as well as its beginning. Hence is that of the Apostle
Peter, 2 Pet. 2.9.
The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of Temptations.

It is true that the strength of a temptation usually lies in the length of it.
A fierce and sharp temptation, if but short, is not so bitter as a smaller
temptation if long continued. But yet let us remember, That God is faithful who
will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, but will make a way
for us to escape. Certainly, It is the greatest temptation to be without
temptation; for when we are without temptation, we are apt to be secure, and to
neglect faith, and prayer, and so all of a sudden are drawn into some sin
before we are aware. I remember it is the observation of Luther. Sancti tum
maxim periculis expositi sunt, cum minimum sentiunt tentationum. Luther.
The Saints are then especially exposed to the greatest dangers when they are
least sensible of temptations. Therefore let us not be discouraged by reason of
our temptations, but arm our selves to the spiritual conflict, fight the good
fight of faith. If we go on fighting in the strength of Christ, we shall
overcome, and if we overcome we shall receive the Crown: Be thou faithful to
the death, Revel. 2.10.
and I will give thee a Crown of life.

The end of the Second Sermon.
SERMON III.
2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. And lest I should be exalted above measure through the
abundance of revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the
messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure.

For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.

And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made
perfect in weakness.


I Come now to the second part of the Text, and that is to speak of the ground,
and occasion of this exercise and conflict that Paul was under, and that is the
danger he was in of being lifted up, Lest I should be exalted above measure,
there was given unto me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet
me.

The Observation which does naturally arise from this Part, it is this,

Doct. 2. That, Doct. 2.
men of the highest grace, are in danger of spiritual Pride, and to be exalted
above measure. Lest I should be exalted above measure, says the Apostle. Paul
was an Apostle, a man of more than ordinary grace, and yet he was in danger of
Spiritual Pride.

In the prosecution of this Doctrine, these things are to be spoken unto.

1. We must show what Pride is, what the Nature of it is, in General. 2. What
Spiritual Pride is. 3. We shall show you how it comes to pass, that men of the
highest grace are in danger of Spiritual Pride.
1. We shall show a little what the nature of Pride is in general.

Pride may be considered either as it is in the understanding, or as it is in
the will: for pride is seated in both the faculties of the soul. Pride it is to
be found both in the understanding and will; now we shall consider Pride in
both.

1. For Pride in the understanding; Pride in the understanding, it is nothing
thing else but a vehement opinion, Vehemens opinio propriae excellentiae.
or strong conceit of a man's own excellency. And this pride in the
understanding has several branches.

1. One branch of Pride in the understanding is, when we imagine or suppose a
greater excellency to be in our selves than indeed there is. Superbia est
supergreaiens meatis elatio de to quod non est.
Pride is a surpassing or excessive lifting up of the mind concerning something
that is not. This is one first branch of Pride, when I have an apprehension of
some excellency in my self that is not indeed in me. This was in the Church of
Laodicea, she conceited her self to be rich, and increased with goods, and
indeed she was poor, and wretched, and miserable, and blind, and naked, Rev.
3.17. Pride arises our of some supposed perfections in us, which are not
really in us. Pride causes a man to think he has that which indeed he has
not. A proud man supposes some perfections to be in him which indeed are not
in him. He supposes there is that wisdom, grace, holiness in him which indeed
is not in him.

2. Pride in the understanding, is when we pore upon some excellency that is in
us, as if so be it were our own and not received. What have thou O man that
thou have not received, says the Apostle, and if thou have received it, why
do thou boast as if thou had not received it? This is pride when we glory
in the gifts of God, as if so be they were our own and not his. Maximum
superbiae genus -- It is the highest kind of pride, says Austin, for a man to
lift up himself above others, with the gifts which he has received from God.

3. Pride in the understanding is, when we suppose there is some merit and
worth in our selves, by which God is obliged to do that for us, and bestow that
upon us which he does do for us, and bestow upon us. Our Savior tells us, When
we have done all we are unprofitable servants. It is not possible that the
creature should oblige God in a way of merit, by any thing he can do; for when
the creature has done its utmost, it is but a debt of duty that it owes to
God. Therefore when we presume upon our own worthiness, to think so and so, and
therefore think God is bound to us, this is Pride.

4. The last branch of Pride in the understanding is, when we admire and
overvalue our selves and despise others.

Thus the proud Pharisee, I am not as other men are, I am no Extortioner, etc.
neither am I as this Publican. Pride causes a man to magnify himself, and
think contemptuously of all others. Although it be some raal good, some real
excellency, some real perfection we are possessed of, yet it is possible we may
think too well of our selves because of it; the more good is in us, the more
are we beholding to divine grace, and the better we should think of the grace
of God. By grace I am what I am, says Paul. But now this is the nature of
pride to cause a man to draw down every thing to himself; and instead of
admiring the grace of God, which only ought to be admired, pride causes us to
admire our selves.

But 2. There is pride in the will. Now pride in the will is the overloving of,
or overdesiring a man's own excellency. As pride in the understanding is too
great an opinion of a man's own excellency, Amor seu inordinatus appetitus
propriae exelentiae.
so pride in the will is the overloving of a man's own excellency, or an
inordinate desire of a man's own excellency. Now pride in the will, has several
things by which it is discovered.

1. The root of pride in the will is discontent. It is generally conceived, and
not without grounds, that the first sin of the Angels, and occasion of their
fall, it was Pride. Now the root of this pride was discontent. And that appears
from that expression of the Apostle Jude, Jude Ep. verse 5. The Angels which
kept not their first station. This was the occasion of the Angels fall, they
were not contented to be in the place, and station God had set them in, they
would be in a higher sphere than that God had placed them in. A proud person is
not content with the state God has placed him in. Some of the ancients make
ingratitude or unthankfulness to be one species or kind of pride. When a man is
not thankful for the benefits he has received; but though God has done much
for him, he is still discontent, this is one sign of pride. Discontent is a
certain argument of pride. A discontented person thinks nothing good enough for
him, whereas a humble person thinks every thing that is less than Hell, is a
mercy.

2. Pride in the will is when there is affectation of some superior excellency,
to the place and condition God has set a man in: This was in the Angels that
fell, and this was in our first Parents. The great temptation to our first
Parents, was this, You shall be as God; they aspired after the Divinity, there
was an affectation of some excellency that was above the rank and condition of
creatures. When a private person affects to be in the dignity of a magistrate.
When Korah, Dathan and Abiram affected the Priests Office, this was pride. And
in general it may be said when persons aspire to a superior excellency than
what is suitable to the condition and place God has set them in, this is pride
in the will.

3. Pride in the will is, when a man refuses to submit to the supremacy of the
Divine will. When a man would have no superior to himself. When a man would be
his own Lord and make his own will a law to himself. What greater pride than
this, for a man to own no superior? For a man to be willing to have none above
him, that should govern him? This is the nature of pride. Wherefore say my
people we are Lords, Jerem. 2.31.
we will come no more unto thee? A proud person is a man that is wholly given to
please himself, he disdains to submit to the will of another, he will be wholly
governed by his own will. This is an argument of intolerable pride, when the
creature refuses to submit it self to the Divine will. The perfection of a
created will is to submit its self to the Divine and Increated will. Now when
the creature casts off the Authority of God, and will not submit to the Divine
will, this is an argument of the highest pride. This was in them we read of in
Jer. 44.16. As for the word that thou have spoken to us in the name of the
Lord, we will not hearken to thee.

4. Pride in the will is, when there is a desire of singularity. When a man
desires that the excellency of others may be obscured, that so his excellencies
may alone appear. When a man would appropriate something to himself; when a man
is of this temper, that he desires such a good so as that he would not have
others to share in that good with himself: this is an argument of pride in the
will, when there is an affectation of singularity.

5. The last discovery of pride in the will is this, when a man makes himself
his last end. When a man refers all things to himself; when he desires the
gifts and graces of God and other good things, not that God might be glorified,
but that he only may be seen and admired.

Thus I have shown the nature of pride in general.

We come in the second place to show the nature of Spiritual Pride, because the
Text leads us to the consideration of that, Lest I should be exalted above
measure through the abundance of the revelations. The pride that Paul was
tempted to, was not that pride, the generality of people are lifted up with:
but his pride was another thing; Lest I should be exalted above measure through
the abundance of the revelations. Spiritual Pride was his temptation; Therefore
I shall speak something concerning spiritual pride. To open this we must know
there is that we call external pride, and then there is spiritual pride.

1. There is external pride; now that which we call external pride, is not so
called, as if it had not an internal root; for even in outward pride, there is
an inward root in the heart and mind; but we therefore call it external pride,
because it is such a pride as arises from external things.

Now external pride is distinguished according to the diversity of the objects
from whence pride arises. I shall only lightly touch some parts of external
pride. There is pride of birth, or of blood and parentage, pride of a man's
family, pride of strength, pride of beauty, pride of apparel, there is pride of
riches; Divitiarum vermis.
Pride is the worm that does naturally breed and grow out of riches, there is
pride of dignity and honor. Such is the proclivity and propension of man's
nature to pride, that it is apt to take occasion of pride from the least
things. Such is the dignity and excellency of the soul, that one would think
that so noble and excellent a thing as the soul is, should not take an occasion
of pride from such little things as paint and hair, and some poor ornaments, or
indeed from any external things that are so far beneath the excellency and
dignity of the soul. But pride is a mysterious sin, and pride will draw the
least thing to it self as an occasion of pride. It is the property of pride to
affect an ostentation of excellency, and when we have no greater thing to make
an ostentation of excellency by, we are apt to catch at every poor thing, every
poor shadow, to make an ostentation of excellency by it. One would wonder at
what poor things the pride that is in the heart of man catches hold of, to make
a show of excellency by. But this is the mysteriousness of this evil of pride,
to take occasion by the least thing to lift the heart up.

But there is another thing I am to speak of, and that is spiritual pride.

Now spiritual pride arises from the undue apprehension of some spiritual
excellency in us. As external pride arises from the consideration of external
things: So spiritual pride arises from the consideration of some spiritual and
internal excellency.

Now this I call an undue apprehension of some spiritual excellency that is in
us. I call it undue, because there may be an apprehension so far of the gifts
and graces of God in us as to give to God the glory of his own gifts. But when
there is such an apprehension of the gifts and graces of God in us, so as to
think highly of our selves because of these things, when we pore upon the gifts
of God, as if so be they were our own; when we forget the author of those
gifts, when we admire our selves and despise others, this is spiritual pride.

Now spiritual pride, it arises from several things.

1. There is pride of natural parts and indowments of the mind, pride of wit,
of memory, of judgment, of the goodness of a man's natural temper, and
disposition.

2. There is pride of spiritual gifts and graces, pride arises out of our good
actions. Omtia vitia in maletaciis timer^asure, superbia in ^^^^factis (...)
met^enda Aug.
All other vices are to be feared in our evil actions, pride is that vice that
is to be feared in our good actions.

3. There is pride of comforts, and spiritual revelations; this was Paul's case
here in the Text, Lest I should be exalted through the abundance of the
revelations. If God has done any thing more for a man either in point of
grace, or spiritual comfort, than he has done for another, no man is in such
danger of pride as he is; and he has most reason to watch against that sin.

Here I shall give you some brief touches to show you how this sin does act it
self. The actings of spiritual pride discover themselves in such things as
these.

1. Pride makes a man to forget and overlook all his deformities, and to pore
only upon his supposed perfections. When pride acts a man, it takes off his eye
from the black side that is in him, and his eye gazeth only upon that which he
thinks to be fair and beautiful. Pride makes a man to forget his own
deformities, infirmities and corruptions, it makes him forget his own
emptiness, nothingness, and insufficiency in himself, and to pore only upon
those things which indeed are the gifts of God, as if so be they were not Gods,
but his own.

2. The acting of spiritual pride discovers its self in swelling apprehensions
concerning a man's self. Tamor suscrbiae.
I remember it is a frequent expression that Austin has concerning pride, he
calls it, The humor, or swelling of pride; it is the property of pride to make
a man to swell in great and big thoughts of himself. Mark those words in the
Text, lest I should be exalted above measure: (...)
Pride causes a man to be exalted in his own thoughts. From hence follows a
preferring a man's self before others. Hence is that expression you have in
Deuteronomy, Lest his heart should be lifted up above his brethren. When a man's
heart is swollen with pride, he himself seems great, and all others seem
little. Is not this great Babel that I have built for the house of the Kingdom,
by the might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty? A proud person
thinks himself a nonsuch in the world.

3. And then in the third place, That which is the natural consequence upon
this, there is despising and contemptuous thoughts of others. Pride makes a man
undervalue all but himself.

The first Use shall be by way of Examination. This should put us upon the
search and inquiry into our selves, to see what spiritual pride we can discover
and find out in our selves. Pride is a subtle sin, an insinuating sin, it
insinuates its self into all we do. Pride is like Ivy that grows and twists
about the tree; as the tree grows, so the Ivy grows. Pride mingles its self
with all we do. And it is one good sign of some growth in grace when we can
discover the mixtures of pride in all we do. the best of Gods children are in
danger of this sin.

And here I shall show, when it is that we are most in danger of spiritual
pride, that so we may the more narrowly observe our selves, and discover this
sin when it does arise.

1. Then are we in danger of spiritual pride, when there is any appearance of
good in us, either as to our selves or others. The ground and foundation of
pride, is some excellency, either real or supposed. A man is not wont to be
proud of some thing that is not excellent, either really, or supposedly so; but
when there is any thing we suppose to have some excellency in it, that appears
to our selves or others, then we are in danger of Pride. When we apprehend
there is an excellency of parts, wisdom, memory, judgment, and the like, an
excellency of disposition, temper, an excellency of gifts and graces: When we
apprehend this to be in us, or others apprehend this to be in us, then have we
need to watch, then are we in danger of spiritual pride. When a man thinks any
thing to be in himself, or others think any thing to be in him whereby he does
excel others, then he is in danger of spiritual pride.

2. Then are we in danger of spiritual pride, when there is an increase of
knowledge in us, and there is not an increase of other graces proportionable.
The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 8.1. That knowledge puffs up. Knowledge where it
is not sanctified, it will certainly puff men up. Knowledge if it be sanctified
is a means to humble men. Now I have seen thee by the seeing of the eye, says
Job, Now I abhor my self, Job 42.5, 6. The clearer knowledge Job had of God,
the more vile was he in his own eyes. Sanctified knowledge humbles. The more we
know God, the more we know our distance from God; and the more we know the will
of God, the more we see how short we come of the spirituality of the Law, and
this is a means to humble us. But now when there is only a growth in
speculative knowledge, without a growth in other grace, this is apt to lift a
man up. When a man thinks he has more raised notions God, and Christ, and
Spiritual mysteries than other men, this exposes him to the temptation of
spiritual pride.

3. Then are we in danger of spiritual pride, when we have had greatest
assistances, and inlargements from the spirit of God. Assistances and
inlargements should humble us; for the more we receive from God, the more are
we beholding to God, and the more we should admire his grace. But such is the
corruption of humane nature, that we are apt to glory in the gifts of God, as
if so be they were our own. And therefore when we find quickening and
enlargement in holy duties, these are apt many times to lift us up. But this is
just as if a private person should put on the Robes and Ornaments of a King,
and be proud of them. These gifts, these inlargements are but the Ornaments God
has put upon us, and yet we are proud of them.

4. Then are we in danger of spiritual pride, when God has made some eminent
use of us, and employed us in some eminent service. There is as little reason
for pride in this case as in the former. For we are more beholding to God for
using of us, than he is beholding to us for any service we do for him, for God
has no need of us, and all that we do for him, it is by him, for no creature
is any thing, any farther than God takes it up and acts it. The best of the
creatures are nothing, any farther than God takes them up, uses them, and acts
them: and it is the highest honor that God will employ any creature in his
service, who could if he pleased do all by himself without any creature. Yet
such is our corruption, that when God has used us, we are apt to have high
thoughts of our selves, and mean thoughts of others, of whom God has not made
that use: whereas this should humble us, that God should use us and not others,
whereas he might have laid us aside and have taken up others, and have used
them.

5. Then are we in danger of spiritual pride, when we are in honor and
estimation with others. I remember it is an ancient proverb, and it is a true
one, He had need of strong bones that can bear many good days: truly we may
say, He had need of strength of grace indeed, that can bear much applause and
estimation, and not be lifted up. We should glory in the honor that comes from
God only It is true, we ought to bless God for any acceptance he gives us
among his people, that so we may be more serviceable, and God have more glory.
But Honor and Estimation, so far as it concerns ours selves only, is not a
thing so much to be rejoiced in; and the reason is, because this is the temper
we should be of. A Christian should desire that he might be unseen, and that he
and all creatures might be reduced to nothing, that God alone might be seen and
glorified: but such is the corruption of our nature, that it is mavelous
difficult for us to bear estimation and honor, and not to feel the risings of
spiritual pride.

6. Then are we in danger of spiritual pride, when God himself casts some
special honor on us, when God does not only give us houour and estimation
among his people, but when God himself sets some badge and mark of honor upon
us. When he gives us some eminent deliverance, some eminent answer to prayer,
some signal mercy or other, we are apt then to be lifted up, because God sets
some mark of honor on us, Psalm. 91.15. I will deliver him and honor him, we
may understand it thus, I will honor him in delivering of him. I will deliver
him so that his deliverance shall be honorable and glorious. Thus God did by
his people at the red sea, he gave them a glorious deliverance: he did not only
deliver them, but honored them in delivering of them; or else I will deliver
him and honor him; we may understand it so, I will first deliver him, and then
I will honor him after I have delivered him. Thus God did by Joseph, he first
delivered him out of prison and then honored him, he made him Ruler over
Egypt. Now when it is thus with a man that God delivers him and honors him,
by setting some special badge of favor upon him, such a man is in danger of
spiritual pride. A sad instance we have in Hezekiah, God delivered him and
honored him, he gave him a great deliverance, he delivered him from the
plague, and gave him riches and honor in abundance; this became a temptation
of pride to him; then was Hezekiah's heart lifted up, when God had thus
delivered him and honored him.

Thus I have shown in what cases we are in danger of spiritual pride: more
possibly may be thought of, but I shall mention no more. O let us narrowly mark
the workings of this corruption in our selves, this sin is exceeding natural
and incident to our nature; and if we do not see pride in our selves, it is not
because it is not in us, but because we want a spiritual eye to see that in our
selves that indeed is in us. O let us narrowly look to the workings of this
corruption, a little pride does greatly stain and blemish our best graces, our
best duties, our best services: a little poison, a dram of poison, is poison;
and no fin has more venom, malignity and poison in it than pride has. I shall
show hereafter something of the venom and malignity that is in this sin.

Let us therefore labor to find out the workings and actings of this sin in
us. He is a rare Christian that carries so curious an eye upon himself, as
diligently to observe the first buddings and puttings forth of pride in himself.

Labor to be humbled for the workings of pride. Use 2.
It becomes us to be humbled for every sin, but above all for the workings of
Pride. It is said of Hezekiah, that he humbled himself for the pride of his
heart. No sin so unbecoming a creature, so contrary to the nature of a
creature, and contrary to the glory of God as pride, as I may show more at
large hereafter. Therefore we should humble our selves greatly for this sin,
and the more we are tempted to this sin, the more we should pray that we might
abound in humility. Such is the power of Omnipotent grace, that it can turn our
diseases into a remedy and a medicine to heal us. God can by the power of
Omnipotent grace make pride a means to heal pride in us. Now we should pray to
find the power of Omnipotent grace put forth in our hearts, so as to make our
pride a means to humble us. Divine grace can show us the ugliness and deformity
that is in our hearts by the pride that is in them; and we should pray that
this may be a great means to humble us, that we have such a monstrous sin as
pride within us; for if ever God open our eyes, we shall see that pride is the
greatest monster in all the world.

The end of the Third Sermon.
SERMON IV.
2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. And lest I should be exalted above measure through the
abundance of revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the
messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure.

For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.

And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made
perfect in weakness.


I Come now to give the grounds and reasons of the Doctrine, to show how it
comes to pass that men of the highest grace, are yet in danger of spiritual
pride.

The first Reason of it is, Reason 1.
Because Satan assaults and tempts such most. None are like to be more fiercely
assaulted than men of the highest grace. It is a great Scripture to illustrate
this, Luke 22.31. Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired to have you, that he
may sift you as wheat. Peter was one of the most eminent of all the Apostles.
Now our Saviors intention was to admonish Peter of the danger he was in above
the rest. It was not Peter only that was in danger: the rest of the Apostles
were in danger of temptation as well as Peter; for our Saviors words are in
the plural number, Satan has desired to have you, he does not say to have
thee, but to have you, that is, he has a desire to assault you all and tempt
you all; but Christ mentions Peter; he does not mention any of the rest, to
show that Satan had a peculiar mind to tempt and assault him above the rest;
and our Savior admonishes Peter of the danger he was in above the rest,
Simon, Simon; the repetition our Savior uses, notes the earnestness of the
affection with which he speaks. When we admonish a friend of a danger, we say,
Friend, Friend, have a care of such a thing. Our Savior admonishes Peter of
the danger he was in: though all the rest of the Apostles were in danger, yet
Christ knew Satan had a particular malice against Peter, and would assault him
above the rest. The more eminent a man is in grace, the greater advantage the
Devil thinks to make, in case he can foil such a person. And although Satan may
not think to prevail always against a man that has much grace, yet he knows
not but he may prevail. Satan knows that many strong ones have been overcome by
his temptations. Our first parents in innocence, Sampson, David, and others
that were great saints, and he knows not but he may prevail upon others. Now if
he can prevail over some eminent Saint, he knows that his conquest and triumph
will be so much the greater. The Devil knows nothing will be a greater wound
and blow to Religion, than if he can make some eminent Saint to fall. Now Satan
knows that he can undo a man by nothing sooner, than by the temptation of
spiritual pride: for, as for gross sins in practice, a holy man abhors them,
and at the very first blush of a temptation, when a gross sin is presented to
him, he turns away with disdain. Oh, but spiritual pride is a more subtle sin,
and the Devil may more easily insinuate the temptation of that sin, and so
prevail.

The second Reason is, Reason 2.
Pride is such a sin as does naturally arise and spring out of our own hearts.
Pride was the first sin that infected the nature of the creature. It was the
first sin that did undo our first Parents: the first sin that infected the
Angels that fell. The Angels that fell had no tempter, none to tempt them to
pride, and yet they fell into pride. This is a clear argument, that there is no
sin we are more incident unto than pride. Man is endowed with an apprehensive
faculty, and when he apprehends some excellency in himself that is not in
another, then he is in danger of pride in the understanding; and when he
apprehends some superior excellency that is attainable, that he has not
attained unto, then he is in danger of pride in the will, for that is pride in
the will, the affectation of a superior excellency: so that there is no sin we
are more naturally subject to than pride, it naturally springs and grows up out
of our nature.

The third Reason why men of the highest grace are subject to pride is, Reason
3.
Because pride takes occasion from the gifts and graces of God, and causes a
man's heart to rise, swell, and be lifted up. The more gifts and graces God has
bestowed upon any person, he is in so much the more danger of pride. Such is
the venom and poison of pride, that it turns good into evil; sucks poison out
of the gifts and graces of God. Pride makes a man to think, do thou not see
how thou excellest others? Others have not such gifts and parts as thou have;
these are the workings of pride.

Fourthly, Reason 4.
Where men are endowed with some peculiar excellency in any kind, others are
apt to have too great esteem of them. Now the estimation of others is a great
occasion and temptation to pride; for we are apt to value our selves according
to the opinion and esteem others have of us, and this often occasions in us
temptations unto pride.

Fifthly, Reason 5.
Men of the highest grace are subject to pride, Because pride is such a sin as
is not so soon conquered and mortified, as other sins are. A man when he is
first converted, is sooner mortified as to sensuality and grosser sins; but
spiritual pride is not so soon mortified in him. A child of God when he has
gotten the victory and conquest over other corruptions, yet he is sain to
conflict with pride all his days. It is the observation of Austin, Superbiam
nor cito sanat Dous pro qua saranda illi piae a^imae cum lacrimis and ^a^^is
gemitibus supplicaal. Aug.
That God does not presently hear a man for the killing and mortifying of his
pride; when yet he desires to have pride mortified with great earnestness, and
cry to God with great sighs and groans that he may be cured of it. And there
are several reasons why God does not presently hear a man as to this thing, for
the mortifying of pride, though he cry to him with sighs and tears that they
may be healed of it.

The first Reason is, That he may show to us the great corruption of our
nature, how deeply pride is rooted in us. There is nothing shows us the
corruption of our nature more than pride does; for when we have prayed against
it, and striven against it, and fortified our selves with all arguments that
possibly we can against it, yet there are constant Ebullitions of it; so that
nothing shows the corruption of humane nature more than this sin.

2. God does leave this sin in his people, that he may make pride it self a
means to humble us. For what more humbling consideration than this, that so
malignant a root should remain in us, after so many means have been to
exterminate it?

3. Lastly, which I take to be a great consideration, God leaves pride in his
children notwithstanding all their cries and tears against it, Because it makes
them feel the smart, and taste the bitterness of the first sin as long as they
live. The first sin of the creature, it was pride; and therefore though God out
of the riches of his free grace have pardoned it, yet he leaves the root of it
that we may carry our grave clothes, the badge of our shame along with us as
long as we live. Pride was the occasion of the creatures apostasy from God,
therefore God will have us carry this badge of our shame with us to our graves.
For these reasons God in his infinite wisdom permits pride to continue and
remain in us; though he have taken away the power and reign of it in his
people: yet he leaves the root of it still, so as that it is matter of great
humiliation to them as long as they live. Thus I have given the grounds and
reasons of the Doctrine. I come now to the Use and Application of it.

And the great Use I shall make of it is this.

Is it so, That men of the highest grace are in danger of spiritual pride, and
to be exalted above measure?

This should teach us to watch and strive most against this sin, Use.
the sin of pride. I remember it was the speech of an holy man, a wise
Christian, and of great experience in the ways of God, As he said, fight not
against small or great, but against the King of Israel: so say I, of all
corruptions fight against these two, pride and self. We shall have more to do
with pride and self-love than with all other sins; when you have mortified
other sins, yet pride and self-love will be the two last sins you have to
conflict withal.

In the prosecution of this Use, I shall,

1. Endeavor to show the evil of this sin, and then 2. Propound some remedies
against it.

1. I shall begin to discourse a little concerning the evil of pride, that we
may be more out of love with it, and have our hearts more set against it.

1. Consider that pride is such a sin, as is most unbecoming of a creature.
What is a creature but something that is from another? A creature has nothing
but what it has received; it is nothing but what it has from another, a
creature came out of nothing; it is of it self and by it self nothing, and in
it self it tends to nothing. This is the very notion of a creature, if we
understand what the nature of it is, that it is all that it is from another.
Now a creature by pride magnifies it self, and makes it self to be something;
yea makes it self to be all. Take the creature abstract from its dependence
upon God, To^um essi creature est essi depende^s. Aquinas.
and it is nothing. The being of the creature is a dependant thing, and the
operations of the creature are dependant things. So that take a creature and
abstract it from God, and it is nothing. Now a creature that is indeed nothing
of it self magnifies it self, and makes it self all by pride. The creature by
pride lifts up it self, and arrogates that to it self which is not its own, but
has it all from another. What an absurd thing is it, that poor dust should
lift up it self, and give out it self, as if it were some great excellent
thing? That man that is made of the dust of the earth, should yet lift up
himself against his Maker.

2. Consider that no sin is so contrary to the glory of God as pride.

1. It is the glory of God that he is the most excellent being, he is therefore
called the holy one of Israel. The holy one, that is the most excellent one,
the most incomparable one; there is none like him, there is none to be compared
with him, he is infinitely distinguished from the creatures, He is the peerless
matchless one. Now a proud person lifts up himself, and makes himself to be
most excellent. A proud person would seem to be the most excellent one. Grace
teaches us that it is fit that God only should be seen and admired, and that
the creature should be unseen and reduced to nothing, Psalm. 57.5. Be thou
exalted O God above the heavens, let thy glory be above all the earth. Now
pride causes a man to desire that he only may be seen and admired. So that
pride is such a sin as is most injurious to the Divine Majesty. A proud person
affects an equality to God: we do not think of it, but it is certainly so, a
proud man would seem to be that which God is.

2. It is the glory of God to be the first cause; (...) all things are of him,
and by him. In him we live and move and have our being It is the glory of God
to communicate to the creature whatever the creature has. Now a proud person
robs God of this glory, a proud person attributes all to himself, as if he were
the cause of all; why do thou glory as if thou had not received it? 1 Cor.
4.7. Daniel 4 30.
Is not this great Babylon that I have built?

3. It is the glory of God to be the last end, to refer all things to himself;
hence is it said that he is Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the
first and the last. The original of all creatures, the last end of all
creatures. All things are of him, and by him, and to him. Now a proud man makes
himself his last end, he refers all things to himself. It is the property of
pride, for a man to affect a greatness to himself. A proud person so he be
great, he cares not who is little. Grace teaches us to pray that God may be
great, Hallowed be thy name, what is the meaning of that petition? In that
petition we pray that the name of God may be sacred amongst men, that his name
may be great and admired amongst men. Grace teaches us to pray that God may be
great amongst men, and pride makes a man desire that he himself may be great:
So that pride is injurious to God as he is the most excellent Majesty, the
first cause, and the last end.

3. To show the evil of pride, consider that as pride is a sin most contrary to
God, so God is most contrary to it. (...).
Hence is that expression that God resists the proud, sets himself in battle
array against them, 1 Pet. 5.5. God is a professed enemy to proud persons, you
can find very few instances of persons that have been eminent for pride, but
God has made them examples of his Judgments. Pharaoh, Senacherib,
Nebuchadnezzar, Herod, are all monuments of Gods severity against Pride. God is
a professed enemy to proud persons, Isa. 2.11, 12. The day of the Lord of hosts
shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is
lifted up, so verse. 17. And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the
haughtiness of men shall be made low, and the Lord alone shall be exalted. A
proud person would dethrone God, and set himself in the place of God, and
therefore it is no wonder if God ruin him.

4. Consider that pride was the first sin and the original of all sin. The
original of man's sin, and the Angels first sin was, that they would not be
subject to God. Iaitium omnis peccati seperbia, etc. Aug.
Austin observes the beginning of all sin is pride, and the beginning of pride
was to apostatize from God, for the creature to refuse to be subject to God.

5. Pride is such a sin as makes men most like to the Devil. Pride turned the
Angels into Devils. 1 Timothy 3.6. Not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride,
he fall into the condemnation of the Devil. That clearly intimates that pride
was the Devils first sin. When we would set forth a proud person, we are wont
to say, such a person is as proud as Lucifer, as proud as the Devil. Oh how
black a sin is pride that carries the image of the Devil in it?

6. The sixth Consideration, and that which ought to be matter of trembling,
is, Pride is such a sin as that it oft-times causes God to suffer men to fall
into other sins to heal and cure it. Oh how great is the venom and poison of
pride, that can be cured by nothing thing else but by poison? A wise Physician
permits his patient to fall into a lesser infirmity, to prevent a mortal
disease. The infinitely wise God when he sees his children inclined to pride,
permits them to fall into other sins, that so the shame of those sins may be a
means to humble them, and suppress their pride. It is a speech of Austin, Audeo
dicer s^perbis essi utile cad^re in aliguod apertum and manifestam peccat^m,
unde sibi displiceant, qui jam sibi place do cecederant. August.
I am bold to say, That it is sometimes prositable, and advantageous to proud
persons to fall into some open and manifest sin, that so they may be
displeasing to themselves, who had already fallen by too much pleasing of
themselves. I confess this speech may seem a little harsh, unless it be
qualified; we must remember that no sin is Eligible. For as we may not do evil
that good may come of it, so neither may we desire evil that good may come of
it. But this we may safely say, when God permits it to be so, that a man is in
great danger to be lifted up with spiritual pride, and he is overtaken with
some other sin; we may then conclude that Gods intention in such a permission,
it was to cure a greater evil, and so in the event it turns to good. Let us not
mistake here, that sin proves medicinal to any, to heal them, this is not from
the nature of sin; the nature of sin is quite contrary: the nature of sin is to
harden and to damn. Therefore when at any time sin does prove medicinal, this
is from the power of Divine grace, that knows how to turn that which is a
disease in it self into a remedy; yet this is a trembling consideration, that
so great is the evil of pride, that God suffers his children to fall into other
diseases to cure this disease, which is most pernicious of all other.

7. To show the evil of pride, consider that pride is such a sin that hinders
and puts a stop to the communication of Divine grace. Vas Gratiarum.
God gives grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5. Look as it is said, that humility is
the vessel that receives and contains other graces: So pride is that which
excludes other graces. When a man has a self-fulness, he is not prepared to
take in Divine grace. God fills the hungry with good things, but the rich he
sends empty away: we must be empty of self, before we can be capable of
receiving Divine grace. Some of the schoolmen conceive that the cause of the
Angels sin was, that they thought to attain the lasi happiness, which was the
vision of God, Per virtutem naturae suae absque gratia alicajus superioris.
by virtue of their own nature without the grace and help of any superior to
themselves. This conceit of their own sufficiency was the occasion of their
fall. When a man supposes he has some virtue, or root in himself to resist
temptation, and carry him forth to any holy action, this is such a thing as is
exclusive of Divine grace. He that supposes that he has a self-sufficiency,
cannot see the need he has of Divine grace. Therefore pride puts a stop to the
communication of Divine grace.

8. Pride is a sin that is most contrary to our communion with God, Isa. 57.15.
Thus says the high and lofty one, whose name is holy, who dwells in the high
and holy place, with him also that is of an humble and contrite spirit. God
dwells with humble and contrite souls, unto such he delights to manifest
himself. A man must be reduced to nothing in himself, before he be fit to
receive divine manifestations. It is the usual method of God to bring his
people to great abasement in themselves, before he manifests himself to them.
It is a great Scripture. Psalm. 138.6. Though the Lord be high, yet he has
respect to the lowly, but he beholds the proud afar off. God keeps himself at a
distance from proud persons, but if he observe any in the world. it is the
humble, lowly soul, that is the soul he delights in. Though the Lord be high,
yet he has respect to the lowly. Nothing indangers a man's spiritual comforts
more than pride: when a man has had the comforts of the spirit of God, and God
has been affable and familiar with him, and he begins to be lifted up in
himself, this causes God to suspend his comforts. When a man is proud of those
things that are merely the gift of God; this causes God to take away his gifts
from him; and so shows him what a poor and empty creature he is in himself,
when the gifts of God are withdrawn.

9. Consider, pride makes a man to forget himself, pride transports and carries
a man beyond himself, pride makes a man forget his own frailty, pride makes a
man forget that he is a mutable creature. Every man at his best state is
altogether vanity. Take a man in his best state, and he is subject to changes
and death. Should a piece of clay be proud? You must shortly be turned into a
clod of earth, and be crumbled into dust. Pride makes us forget that we are
mortal. Whatever external excellencies men are proud of, they are fading and
withering, All flesh is grass, and the glory of it as the flower of the grass.
And if a man have some spiritual excellency, and be proud of some gifts and
graces of the spirit of God; let God but withdraw his spirit, and he shall soon
see that he is nothing.

10. Pride causes a man to break off his dependence upon God, and deny
subjection to him. The perfection of the creature lies in dependence upon God,
and subjection to him. The perfection of a thing is to remain in the condition,
in which it was naturally set. Now the creature is placed from the very frame
and constitution of its being, in a condition of dependence upon God, and
subjection to him. Now pride causes a man to cast off his dependence upon God,
and subjection to him. A proud person thinks he has all of himself, and from
himself, and therefore sees no need of dependence. A proud person makes
himself his last end, and so refuses to be subject to another.

11. Pride makes a man to stick at no sin; pride is the mother and root of
other sins. A proud person that makes himself his own end, will stick at
nothing to serve himself and accomplish his own ends. These and many more are
the evils of pride.

Now it concerns us greatly to watch against this sin, and that for these two
Reasons.

1. Because pride is apt to arise secretly and insensibly in us. The root of
pride is ever budding and putting forth it self. There are many risings and
ebullitions of pride that arise and spring out of our hearts before we are
aware. Pride bubbles up in our duties, services and actions before we think, or
are aware of it, it is a thing that grows up secretly.

Then 2. If we do not watch against it, we may soon grieve the spirit of God,
and cause it to retire. There is no sin causes the spirit of God to withdraw
and retire from a child of God more than spiritual pride. Now pride being so
incident to our nature, and so apt to rise upon all occasions; we may too soon
lose the presence and familiarity of the spirit of God, unless we narrowly
watch against this fin.

The end of the Fourth Sermon.
SERMON V.
2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. And lest I should be exalted above measure through the
abundance of revelations? there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the
messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure.

For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.

And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made
perfect in weakness.


I Come now to propoun some remedies against this sin. The disease of pride is
such a disease as is hardly cured; nay it is not wholly cured in the best of
the Saints, while they live in the body, and all the remedies we can think of
are little enough to heal this disease.

1. Remedy, Let us study much our own infirmities and imperfections. It is a
sure rule, The foundation of humility, F adamentum humilitatis cogni io proprii
def ctus.
is the knowledge of our own defects. Nothing lays so great a foundation of
humility in us, as the knowledge of our own defects. We keep our eyes and pore
upon our own supposed perfections, but we sorget our infirmities and
imperfections. The true sense of our infirmities would strike a holy shame into
us. As the apprehension of what is good and excellent in us, is apt to lift us
up in pride: So in order to the suppressing and keeping down our pride, it is
good to consider our natural infirmities, and our sinful infirmities.

1. Let us consider our natural infirmities, we are but mutable dying creatures
at best, we are but poor pieces of clay. What little reason has he to be
proud, that remembers he is mortal, and must shortly be turned into rottenness
and dust? We may say to every one that finds his heart lifted up in pride, as
one did that was appointed to come to Alexander, and use these words, Remember
that thou art a man; so may we say, Remember that thou art a mortal creature.
As high as thou art, and as much lifted up as thou art in thy own apprehension,
thou must shortly be turned into rottenness, worms must feed upon thee.

2. Let us consider our sinful infirmities.

1. Consider our great defects in grace, consider our great defects in
knowledge, 1 Cor. 8.2. If any man think he knows any thing, he knows nothing as
he ought to know. How little is it that the best of us do know concerning the
nature of God? Concerning the Divine nature and attributes? How little do we
know concerning the Mystery of the Trinity? How little do we know concerning
the union of the two natures in Christ, the Hypostatical union as it is
commonly called? How little do we know of the mystical union, the union of
believers with Christ? how little are we acquainted with any of these Articles
of Faith? In all these respects we may say with him, I am more brutish than
any man, I have not the understanding of a man, Prove. 30.2. And as we are
desective in knowledge, so we are defective in faith, in love, in self-denial,
in heavenly mindedness, and many other graces. If some graces may seem to
flourish in us, yet are we not greatly defective in other graces? And if there
be some good in us, is there not a great deal of evil mixed with that little
good? Are there not many sinful circumstances that do attend the best of our
actions? It was the speech of an eminently holy man. There was not the best
action that ever I did in my life, but God showed me some sinful circumstance
attending it. Consider what the wise man says, Eccles. 10.1. Dead Flies cause
the ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a stinking savor. A little sin is
like a little poison mixed with the greatest delicacies, it mars and spoils
all. It is true, God out of his grace forgets the sinful circumstances that
attend his peoples services; but sin is of that nature that the least mixture
of it is enough to stain and blemish the best action.

2. Consider as there are great defects of grace in us, so we all carry about
with us the body of sin and death, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from the body of this death? Romans 7.
In me, that is in my flesh there dwells no good thing, Romans 7.18. There is
nothing that is truly and spiritually good, that proceeds from our nature.
Whatsoever is good proceeds from the spirit of God, and the grace of the spirit
in us. Corrupt nature that is in us is prone to evil, and nothing else but
evil; and if we do not always perceive the buddings and puttings forth of this
root, yet it is in us: that evil root sticks in us when it does not always act
in that sensible manner. Now what a humbling consideration is this, that we
should carry such a root of evil in us, that bears such a contrariety in it to
the holiness of God? The holy Angels never had such a root in them, they never
had their natures vitiated and tainted as we have: and the glorified Saints,
though sometimes they had the root of original sin in them as we have, yet now
they have no such root remaining in them. What matter of humiliation is this to
us, that we have that root remaining in us that is so contrary to the holiness
of God? The holy Angels have it not in them, and the glorified Saints are
delivered from it. There is little cause for any creature, the most perfect,
and innocent creature to be proud; because he is but a creature, and a
dependant thing. But how much less cause is there of pride in a sinful
creature, that carries the marks of his shame about him, and has lost that
purity that was stamped upon him in his first creation? When we have attained
the highest measure of holiness upon earth, yet remember it is not with us as
in innocence, we have the root of original sin still remaining in us.

3. Consider what great eruptions of sin and corruption there have been in us.
Whatever we are at present, we are by the grace of God. It is by grace that we
are what we are. But whatever we are at present, has not the time been, when
there has been great breakings out of corruption in us? I was says Paul, a
Blasphemer, and a Persecutor. 1 Timothy 1.16.
Thou that think thou have received most grace, and have attained most
holiness; have thou not been so and so? If thou have not been guilty of
scandalous sins, yet have there not many things fallen out in the course of thy
conversation, which thou have cause to be asbamed of? What fruit, Romans 7.21.
says the Apostle, had ye in those things, whereof you are now ashamed? Let us
remember the things that have fallen out in our conversation, they will be
matter of humiliation to us all our days.

This is the first Remedy against pride, to study our own defects and
imperfections.

The 2. great Remedy against pride, and that which I take to be the main of
all, is this, Let us study the humility of God-incarnate. This is certain, no
such remedy against pride as the study of the humility of God incarnate, Learn
of me for I am meek and lowly in heart, Matthew. 11.29. Let the same mind be in
you that was in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2.5, 6. What was the mind that was in
Christ Jesus? He was in the form of God, and yet took on him the form of a
servant, and humbled himself to the death, even the death of the Cross. It is
Austins observation, That humility whereby God was born of a woman, and by such
great indignity and contumelies was brought by men unto death, is the highest
medicine by which the tumor of pride is subdued and killed in us. O consider
it, The most Glorious God, the most humble man. God is humble, and shall a worm
be proud? Now Christ was God and man in one person, and Christ's condescension
and humility was exceeding great, if we consider him in either of these
respects, as God or as man.

1. Consider him as God, and so his condescension is exceeding great.

1. What condescension was it in God to come into the nature of man, to come
into the nature of his own creature, a nature so inferior to his own? He was
in the form of God, says the Apostle, and counted it no robbery to be equal
with God, and yet he was made in the likeness of men, and he was found in
fashion as a man, Phil. 2.6, Creator at Dominus omnium reram unus voleui esse
mortalium, Proinde qui manens in forma Dei f^cit and ho ninem, idem in forma
servi factus est homo. Leo.
7, 8. One of the ancients expresses it thus. He that was the Creator and Lord
of all things would become one of mortal men. He who being in the form of God
did make man, by assuming the form of a servant, he himself was made man. O
what condescension was this?

2. The humility and condescension of Christ as God appears in this, That he
was content to vail and hide his glory in our nature assumed. He was content to
have the glory of his Divinity covered and eclipsed by the vail of his
humanity, and that is the meaning of that expression, Phil. 2.7. He emptied
himself, (...).
taking upon him the form of a servant. How did the son of God empty himself?
Not by divesting himself of his Divinity; that was impossible; he remained to
be God still; It was not possible for him to cease to be God. But the meaning
is, He laid aside the manifestation of his glory; He did not divest himself of
his essential glory, that was impossible; But he laid aside his manifestative
glory for a time. He was content to have his glory unseen for a time. Sometimes
indeed he did emit and send forth the rays of his glory in his miracles. But
otherwise, he did for the most part keep in the rays of his glory, during the
time of his humiliation. He was looked upon as the Carpenters son. He was
hungry, weary, exposed to the same infirmities as we are, only without sin. All
this was his voluntary condescension. The Son of God when he was in our nature,
might always have let forth the bright beams of his Divinity, such as should
have dazelled the eyes of the beholders. But he was content to have his glory
unseen. Now consider it, If he who was the Son of God, and God, was content to
have his glory veiled and unseen, dot it become us to desire to be seen and
admired?

3. But then the depth of his humility lay in this, That he humbled himself,
even to the death of the cross; so the Apostle expresses it, Phil. 2. Consider
it, The person who gave himself to suffer was God though in the nature of man,
For their sakes I sanctify my self, John 17.19. The person that sanctifies
himself is God. So again, I lay down my life for the sheep, John. 10.18. No man
takes it from me, I lay it down of my self, I have power to lay it down, and I
have power to take it up again. Certainly he that has power to lay down his
life, and take it up again, was more than man. No man that is a mere man can
say thus, I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it up
again; therefore he that spoke these words was more than man. Now what
condescension was it for that person who was God as well as man, to lay down
his life for man, 1 John 3.16. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he
laid down his life for us. And we may say, hereby do we perceive the great
humility and condescension of God, that he laid down his life for us. O what a
spectacle of hamility was it to the holy Angels, (think you) to see him hanging
on the Cross, whom they knew to be the Son of God, and God, although clothed
with our nature, and whom in his Divine nature they had been inured for so long
a time to worship in Heaven? Here was a spectacle of humility indeed! It is
Austins expression, Remedi m elationis est contuitus Dominicae Crucis. Aug.
The best remedy against pride is the beholding the Lords Cross. Let us every
day take a turn at the Cross of Christ, and let us by the eye of faith behold
the Son of God, and God in our nature suffering the greatest torments to make
expiation for our pride. What should humble us more than this thought, that God
must become man, suffer and die for man, to expiate man's pride? If the death of
that person who was God, and who died on purpose to expiate our pride, will not
humble us, I know not what will. I may say whilst I was meditating on these
things, I found my heart in some measure affected with these considerations;
and if you steep your hearts deeply in these meditations, you may possibly find
your hearts affected also. O consider the humility of God incarnate.

2. Consider him as man, Remedy 2.
so his humility was very great. Never so humble a man as the man Christ Jesus,
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, As a sheep before his shearers
is dumb, so he opened not his mouth. Matthew. 11.
One great argument of humility is submission: when a person submits to bear
all that is laid upon him, this is one great argument of humility. Christ was
most patient and submissive to bear all that which God and man laid upon him.
He opened not his mouth, but as a meek Lamb bare all. 1 Pet. 2. (...)
When he was reviled, he reviled not again. And then, as his humility appeared
in his submission, so his humility appeared in this, that he attributes and
ascribes all to the Father, The Father in me does the works, John 14.10. I can
of my self do nothing, as I hear I judge, John 6.30. Now the greatness of
Christ's humility as he was man, appears from these three or four
Considerations, briefly, I pray you weigh them and consider them deeply.

1. In that he knew that he had the fullness of all habitual grace, that was
possible for a created nature to be filled with. The spirit of the Lord did
rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel
and of might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord, Isa. 11.2. O
consider it, Christ was humble when he knew he had all that grace that it was
possible for his humanity to be filled with, and when he knew that he had not
the least sin in him; and shall we be proud who have so little grace and so
much sin? If Christ was humble when he had perfection of grace and no sin, does
it become us to be proud, who have so little grace, and so much sin?

2. Christ knew that his humane nature was personally united to the Divine: And
this he knew was such a dignity, that no creature was or should be admitted to
besides his humanity. Now when Christ knew that he had attained that honor,
the grace of union which no creature was ever honored with, or ever shall be,
but his humanity; yet he was most humble under this dignity.

3. Christ knew that his humanity was to be used as a conjunct organ of the
Divinity in the work of mediatorship. It was by him as man that the Law was
perfectly to be obeyed and fulfilled. It was by him that the penalty of the Law
was to be undergon, he also as man was to make intercession for us. This also
was such an honor that no creature was admitted unto. No creature was ever
interested in the work of mediation with God, but that humanity of his, There
is one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. He knew
no creature should ever be interested in the work of mediatorship with God, as
his humane nature was, and yet he was humble under this honor.

4. He knew that after his humiliation, after the work he had to do for the
Father, was finished, he should be in the state of his exaltation, be advanced
above all creatures, Ephesians. 1.20. He set him at his own right hand, in the
Heavenly places, far above all principality, and power, and might, and
dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but in that
which is to come. It was Christ-man that was thus to be exalted. As he was the
eternal Son of God, so he needed no exaltation. For being in the form of God,
he was equal with God. But he that was thus to be exalted was he that was
raised from the dead; so we have it at verse. 20. Which he wrought in Christ
when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand, etc. Now
according to his humanity was he raised, and therefore according to his
humanity was he exalted. Now consider it, He that knew he should be exalted
above all creatures, not only in this world, but in that which is to come, he
was most humble, though he foresaw his exaltation; and that the dignity he
should be advanced unto, was such a dignity that no creature should be advanced
unto, yet no creature more humble than he. Learn of me for I am meek and lowly
in heart. Oh let us study Christ much, let us study the humility of God
incarnate: there is no means so effectual to humble us as this.

3. Remedy 3.
Let us study the greatness and majesty of God. As the humility and
condescension of God on the one hand, so the majesty and greatness of God on
the other hand, may be a means to humble us. H^wilitas homiais, and allitude
Deitatis. L^o.
Now in Christ both of these met, The humility of man, and height of the Deity.
Therefore as his humility as man, so the consideration of his highness and
excellency as God, may be a means to humble us. All creatures compared to God
are as nothing, you know what the Prophet says, Isa. 40.17.
All nations before him are as the drop of the bucket, less than nothing, and
vanity. What do we account of a poor bubble that is blown up? Truly all the
creatures are but as so many bubbles blown up. The same omnipotency which made
all the creatures which we see and behold, could make many more if he pleased.
We compare our selves with our selves, we compare our selves with others; but O
if we did compare our selves with the Divine majesty, then we should see all
our wisdom was but folly, our strength but weakness, our utmost perfection but
imperfection. It is a known passage, that of Job, Job 42.56. I have heard of
thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee, wherefore I abhor
my self, and repent in dust and ashes. This is a certain truth; nothing so much
humbles the soul as clear sights of God. When Daniel had a sight of Christ in
his majesty and glory, what does he say? O, says he, There remained no more
strength in me, ^a^iel 10.8.
for my comeliness in me was turned into corruption, and I retained no
strength. Had we right thoughts of Gods immensity, it would reduce us to
nothing, it would certainly do so. Take all the creatures and put them all
together, they are all as nothing in comparison of God. Therefore there is
little reason that one poor single dust, as each one of us is, should be proud.
Let us study therefore the greatness and majesty of God.

4. Remedy 4.
Consider whatever good or excellency there is in us, it is the gift of God.
Have we wisdom, parts, grace, estate, dignity, honor, All these are the gists
of God. And is it reason that we should be proud of that which is another?
What have thou O man, that thou have not received, and if thou have received
it, why do thou boast as if thou had not received it, again, who made thee
to differ? Thou were made of the same clay with other men; and if God has cast
more honor upon thee than he has upon others, thou have no reason to be proud
who wast taken out of the common mass, but to admire sovereign grace who has
bestowed that upon thee, that he has not upon others.

5. As a Remedy against Pride, Remedy 5.
Consider pride is the perversion of the end of our being. The creature as it
was from another, so it was made for another. No creature was made for it self,
that is certain, Romans 11.36.
All things were of him, and by him, and to him. The creature was made for the
glory of the Creator. Therefore when the creature exalts it self, and refers
all things to it self, it forgets the end of its creation. In Heaven God shall
be all in all; this is the perfection of the next world, that the glory of God
shall shine forth through all creatures, and by all creatures; and we ought to
account it our greatest perfection here on earth to be subordinate to God, and
to be used by him for his glory. Now pride makes us distinct and separate from
God, who should be referred to the glory of God; so that pride is the
perversion of the end of our being.

6. Let us mourn over the ebullitions and actings of pride, Remedy 6.
and also over the root of it.

1. We should mourn over the ebullitions and actings of pride in us. It is said
of Hezekiah, That he humbled himself for the pride of his heart. When that good
man showed his riches and treasures to the Ambassadors of the King of Babylon,
there was pride in it, and God made him sensible of it; and he humbled himself
for the actings of pride. We ought to be sensible of all the buddings and
puttings forth of pride, and to be humbled for it; And as we should be sensible
of the buddings and puttings forth of pride, so 2. We should be humbled over
the root it self. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body
of this death! When we do not find these sensible actings and stirrings of
pride in us, yet the root of it is there. Now we should be humbled that there
is such a root in us. Pride was the first venom or poison that was breathed by
the old serpent into our nature. Pride is most contrary to the glory of God,
and it is the core and heart of all sin. As the Naturalists say of the heart,
It is the first thing that lives, and the last thing that dies; so we may say
of Pride, It is the first sin that lives, and the last sin that dies. This
should be matter of humiliation to us, that we have such a bitter root as pride
in us.

The 7. Remedy 7.
Remedy against pride is this, The more we find the stirrings of pride in us,
the more should we labor to abound in humility. Be ye clothed with humility:
1 Pet. 5.5.
The more we find the stirrings of pride in us, the more should we labor to
put on humility. It Is one good means to mortify a lust, to labor to abound in
the contrary grace, to live in the exercise of the contrary grace; this the
Apostle teaches us in Gal. 5.16. Walk in the spirit and ye shall not fulfill
the lusts of the flesh. The way for us not to fulfill the lusts of the flesh is
to walk in the spirit. The way to keep down corruption is to live in the
exercise of grace. When we find our hearts inclined to pride, we should pray
for grace that we may find our hearts so much the more humble.

8. Let us be sure to give God the glory of what he has done for us, Remedy 8.
and bestowed upon us. Herod is condemned for this, that he gave not God the
glory. Acts 12.23.
We are apt to pore upon what God has done for us, and to forget the giver;
whereas we should reflect all upon God, and say, Not I, but the grace of God in
me.

Lastly, Let us labor for a holy magnanimity and greatness of spirit. Remedy 9.
There is that which some of the ancients call a holy pride, Sancta superbia.
that is this when the soul having a sense of its own excellency and nobleness,
thinks that it is beneath it self, to prostitute it self to these inferior
things. Nullum nisi omnipotentissimum, sapientissimum, and pulcherrimum, super
omnia amare dignatur.
It would be joined and united to the highest thing. It thinks that it is
beneath it self to be joined to any thing but the highest good, It can
vouchsafe to love none above all things, but he that is most omnipotent, most
wise, most beautiful. This is holy pride, when the soul cease to admire every
thing but God; when it cease to admire it self, and all creatures, and is
wholly taken up in the admiration of God who is the first, supreme, infinite
and eternal perfection. This is holy pride in the soul when it self and all the
creatures seem vile and base to it in comparison of God. This is a great but a
good pride, Magna sed bona superbia.
as one of the Ancients calls it. This holy magnanimity of spirit, is in the
Angels and glorified Saints, to whom not only all creatures, but they
themselves seem to be vile to themselves in comparison of God whom they love.

The end of the Fifth Sermon.
SERMON VI.
2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. And lest I should be exalteu above measure through the
abundance of revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the
messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure.

For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.

And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made
perfect in weakness.


3. Observe. Observe. 3.
THE Observation that next comes in order to be handled is this.

That the principal end why God permits and orders it to be so, that his people
should be tempted and undergo sore conflicts, it is to keep them from being
lifted up. Lest I should be exalted above measure, there was given to me a
thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me. It is very observable
that the end of this exercise and conflict of Paul is twice repeated in the
text, in the beginning, and end of the verse.

1. It is mentioned in the beginning of the verse, Lest I should be exalted
above measure.

And then it is repeated again in the close of the verse, Lest I should be
exalted above measure.

So that clear it is, that the main and principal end of God in bringing his
servant under this exercise, it was to suppress spiritual pride in him, to keep
his spirit low and humble.

This therefore is the point that now I shall speak something to.

Doctrine. That the principal end why God permits and orders it to be so, that
his people should be tempted and undergo sore conflicts, it is to keep them
from being lifted up.

And here I shall first lay down some propositions for the clearing of the
point, And then make some application.

I shall lay down two or three propositions for the clearing of the doctrine.

The first is this, Propos. 1.
Pride is such a sin that God cannot bear with in his Children. God indeed can
bear with no sin, for he is of purer eyes than to behold the least iniquity, as
the Prophet speaks, Hab. 1.13. And evil shall not dwell with him, Psalm. 5.4.
God cannot bear with any sin. But of all sins, God does in a more peculiar
manner set himself against the sin of Pride. Pride is such a sin as does in a
peculiar manner strike at the glory of God, and therefore God in a peculiar
manner sets himself against that sin. Hence it is said, That God resists the
proud, 1 Pet. 5.5. God is the professed enemy of Pride, and proud persons. God,
says Luther, Is the God of humble persons, he cannot bear with pride; Deus est
humilium Deus, non potest feire sup^rbiam, vult salvam esse suam Majestatem
Luth.
God will have his own glory and Majesty kept safe and inviolable. My glory I
will not give to another. Now a proud person would take from God the glory of
his Majesty; He would take that from God which is due to God only. A proud
person would seem great and excellent himself, and he cares not how the glory
of God is eclipsed, so he may seem great and excellent, therefore God sets
himself against pride above all other sins.

2. Propos. 2.
Temptations when they are sanctified, are a proper means to suppress and take
down pride in us. And the Reason is, because temptations are a means to humble
us, and show us what is in our own hearts. Temptations show us our own weakness
and infirmity, yea not only so, Temptations do not only show us our weakness
and infirmity, but they oftentimes show us the pravity and malignity of our
hearts that was latent and undiscovered before. Now temptations discovering to
us our infirmities and corruptions are a great means to humble us. For this is
a sure rule. The foundation of humility is the knowledge of our own infirmity:
Nothing does so naturally beget humility as the sight and knowledge of our own
infirmity, and corruption. Now God by temptation shows us our own weakness and
infirmity, yea the pravity and malignity of our hearts, and this is a means to
humble us. That temptations are a means to discover to us our infirmity, may be
clear to us by an induction of the several sorts and kinds of temptations.

I have showed in the opening the Doctrine of Temptations, that there are
Divine Temptations, Fleshly, or Carnal Temptations, Worldly Temptations and
Satanical Temptation. Now it may be clearly evinced that all these sorts and
kinds of Temptations, when God exercises us with them, are a means to discover
to us our infirmity and weakness.

1. Divine Temptations will do this: By Divine Temptations we are not to
understand temptations to sin. The Apostle is express for this, Let no man say
when he is tempted, he is tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with evil,
neither tempts he any man, Jam. 1.13. But by Divine Temptations we mean some
notable trial which God brings upon his Children. When God brings his children
into great streights, difficulties and afflictions that they know not which way
to turn themselves, this is properly a Divine Temptation. Now these Divine
Temptations are a means to show us our infirmity; for this is certain, The
least affliction which God exercises us with, when we are left to our selves
is enough to sink and discourage us. If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy
strength is small. Now herein have we experience of our own infirmity, that a
little affliction when we are not supported by Divine Grace, will make us
faint. It is true, a great affliction when we have supportation by Divine grace
will not make us sink; the power of Divine grace is such, that it will bear us
up under great afflictions. But on the other hand, the least affliction will
overset us, when we are not supported by Divine grace; and we shall be ready to
cry out, no sorrow like to our sorrow: though there be thousands that have far
greatet afflictions than we have. And if God bring us under any great and
remarkable trial, then to be sure we fall and miscarry without Divine grace.
Psalm. 30.6, 7. In my prosperity I said I shall never be moved. Lord, by thy
favor thou have made my mountain to stand strong, thou did hide thy face and
I was troubled. When we are in prosperity we think we shall never despond more,
we think we shall go on triumphing to the end of our days: but God brings a
little affliction upon us, and then we begin to pine and droop, this shows us
our infirmity. When Job was in his prosperity sperity he said he should die in
his nest, Job 29.18. but when God brought that sore trial upon him, he cursed
the day of his birth.

2. There are Carnal or Fleshly Temptations. By carnal Temptations we
understand the temptations that arise out of our own hearts unto sin. In me,
that is my flesh, there dwells no good thing, Romans 7.18. Corrupt nature that is
in us is prone to every sin; it is a great expression, that of the Apostle,
James 4.5. The spirit that is in us lusts to envy, that is, corrupt nature
lusts to envy, and not only to envy, but to revenge, vain glory, and every
evil thing. Now these inward inclinations of the heart unto sin, and the
lustings after it, do show us the deep corruption of our nature. We could not
imagine that our hearts were so vile and so bad, as indeed they are did we not
find such corrupt inclinations and lustings in them. What is thy servant a Dog?
says Hazael to the Prophet. We are apt to think with our selves, Is it
possible that ever I should feel such sinful thoughts and motions as I feel? No
one would believe, says Luther, how great and deep the corruption of the flesh
is, till he be tempted and tried. Temptation draws forth that corruption, and
makes it to appear in our hearts, that we would not think were there.
Temptation shows the blackness and soulness of our hearts. Now this is a means
to humble us; God by temptation represents to us the true hue and pourtraicture
of our hearts, and this makes us ashamed.

3. There are Worldly Temptations. By Worldly Temptations we understand such
temptations as are offered to us by external objects. 1 John 2.15. All that is
in the world is the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life. The world represents variety of objects to us, that are occasions of
temptation to us. The world sets before us the allurement of profit, pleasure
and honor: and when these baits are set before us, then we have too sad
experience how little we are able to withstand them. Eve her self, when she was
in innocence, when she saw that the Tree was pleasant to the eye, and good for
food, she took thereof. The spirit of God takes notice of that as an occasion
of temptation to her, when she saw that the Tree was pleasant to the eye, etc.
Now if she in innocence was led aside by a Temptation from an external object,
much more prone are we in our lapsed and fallen state to be carried away by
external objects. When Achan saw among the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment,
and a wedge of gold, then he coveted them, and took them, Jos. 7.21. Worldly
Temptations are too strong for us to withstand and overcome, unless we have
Divine grace to help us.

Some of the sounder Schoolmen among the Papists tell us, That man in his
lapsed state has not power to withstand any considerable temptation when it is
offered. Truly our own experience may tell us more, that we are not able to
withstand the least temptation, without Divine grace help us; therefore these
show us our infirmity.

4. There are Satanical Temptations, and these are temptations that Satan
himself suggests, and do immediately proceed from him. Now when we are under
these Temptations, we have too sad experience, how unable we are to deal with
such a powerful and subtle enemy as Satan is. He has many wiles and artifices
to deceive us. Hence it is that we read of the Serpents beguiling Eve through
his subtilty, 2 Cor. 11.3. Satan through his subtilty and wiles does circumvent
and overreach us before we are aware. When Satan tempted David to number the
people, how soon was David overcome with that temptation, 2 Chronicles. 21.1, 2. It
might seem a very plausible temptation. Persons would think there was no great
evil in it, for David to number his people, to know the strength of his
Kingdom; but doubtless Satan overreached David in that temptation. His end was
to lift him up in pride from the strength of his Kingdom. There is so much
subtilty in Satan's temptations, that we cannot withstand them without the power
of Divine grace. It is a saying of Austins, Every believing soul is bound to
confess, that as often as we fight against temptations and unlawful lusts, it
is not from our own free will, but from the help and assistance of Divine
grace, that our victory does proceed. And another of the Ancients has this
passage, No one that is regenerate is sufficient of himself to overcome the
stratagems of the Devil, but it is by the daily help and assistance of God that
we overcome these snares that the Devil lays for us; and this is evident from
that petition in the Lords Prayer, when we are bid to pray lead us not into
temptation. The meaning of that Petition is, that we ought to pray that we may
not be foiled and overcome by temptation; now if we ought to pray every day,
that we may not yield unto temptation, and be overcome by it; it is a certain
sign we should yield and be overcome by temptation, had we not daily assistance
from Divine grace. Thus temptations when they are sanctified, they are a means
to show us our own weakness and infirmity; and the fight of our own infirmity
is a most proper means to humble us.

The 3. Proposition is this, Propos. 3.
That God in his infinite wisdom, directs and orders the temptations of the
Saints, for this very end to suppress and keep down pride in them. This is
evident from the Text it self, Lest I should be exalted above measure, there
was given to me a thorn in the flesh, etc. This thorn in the flesh, this
messenger of Satan, it was given to Paul. (...)
All the temptations that the Saints are exercised with, they come either by
Gods permissive or effective will. If God permit their own corruptions to
tumultuate in them, it is for their own farther humiliation. It is an
expression I have read in Luther, That corruption sometimes rages in the
Saints: though it does not reign yet it may rage in a Saint as to a present
fit. Now when God suffers corruption thus to rage and tumultuate, it is to
humble them, and when he lets Satan loose to buffet them; God in these
exercises, designs to humble them. God and Satan have different and contrary
ends in the temptations of the Saints. Satan always tempts us to this end, to
draw us into sin; and God permits us to be tempted to keep us from sin. God
knows how to make use of the temptations we are exercised with, so as to turn
them to a remedy. There are scarce any temptations that do befall us, but there
is some evil or other does mingle with them. It is truly observed by Austin,
When we overcome temptations most of all, yet we have still reason to pray,
forgve us our trespasses. We seldom overcome any temptations so, but there is
something of guilt or other that cleaves to us in dealing with that temptation.
To be sure, those temptations that arise from our own hearts, those that we
call Fleshly or Carnal Temptations, there is always something of sin in them. I
will not dispute whether there be always sin in Satanical temptations: Some
have said, that there are some Satanical temptations, which are our afflictions
rather than our sins; true indeed, if there be nothing of the consent in the
will, then they are afflictions only and not sin. But we have reason to fear
whether there be not something of our own hearts that joins in with such
temptations. But as for the temptations that arise from our own corrupt hearts
there is always something of sin in them. The Papists indeed tell us, that the
first motions of sensuality, those first risings that spring out of the heart,
where there is not the subsequent consent of the will, are not sin: but the
tenth Commandment tells us quite contrary. The tenth Commandment tells us, Thou
shall not covet; and the Apostle Paul expounding that Commandment, tells us,
that those first motions of sensuality are sin, when he tells us, I had not
known sin but by the Law, for I had not known lust, unless the Law had said,
Thou shall not covet, Romans 7.7. Where he plainly calls the first lustings of
the heart sin. So that those first risings and lustings of the heart, where
there is not a subsequent consent of the will, are sin. And in those
temptations that proceed from Satan and the world, there is usually something
or other in our hearts that are ready to join with these temptations. Now
herein does the Sovereign power of Divine grace appear, that it turns that
which has the nature of a disease in it, into a remedy.

Our temptations have something of sin in them, or else are usually accompanied
with sin, and yet by the power of sovereign grace God makes them a means to
suppress sin. God by showing to us the pravity and corruption of our natures
which is usually discovered to us by our temptations, makes this a means to
subdue and mortify our pride, and God in his infinite wisdom orders our
temptations for this very end. Lest I should be exalted above measure, there
was given unto me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me.
Lest I should be exalted above measure.

Thus have I opened and cleared the Doctrine; I come now to make the Use and
application of it.

The first Use shall be by way of Information, Use 1.
This may inform us what construction we are to make, and what interpretation
we ought to put upon the variety of Trials, Conflicts and Temptations that God
is pleased to exercise us with. Certainly all these things are to humble us;
and this is the construction we ought to make of them, that these things are
sent to humble us. Such as are exercised with frequent and long temptations,
that have very little intermission in their conflicts; no sooner are they out
of one temptation, but another sore trial comes upon them. Such as these are
apt to despond and ready to run into despair, and to reason thus with
themselves, If God did love them, and had any care of them, would it be thus
with them? What! never to be at rest? What! thus to be always upon the rack?
But little do we know, the benefit and advantage that comes to us by these
frequent and repeated exercises, by these long temptations. It is a good
observation of a learned and experienced man, The frequent conflicts which the
Saints have with temptation, Crebra certamina tentation^m superbiam
confri^gunt, infirmitates alias insensibiles ostendant.
are a means to break in pieces that deep rooted pride that is in them, which
otherwise would not be so easily broken; and says he, They show those
infirmities to us, which otherwise we should be unsensible of, and would be
undiscovered to us, and they are a means to humble us. This is the good we get
by them though we do not think of it; they are a means to mortify that deep
rooted pride that is in us, and to discover those infirmities in us, which
otherwise we should not discover in our selves. So that when we can see no
other end in any great and unexpected trial that God brings upon us, we may
always have recourse to this, and say, This is to humble us. This is the
constant use we may make of our trials, as to say, This trial, this temptation,
this exercise, it was to humble us; this is the discipline of my Father to
humble me. Observe what God says of his people, when the Lord led his people
through the great howling wilderness, wherein were fiery serpents, and
scorpions, and drought, where there was no water; it was that he might humble
them, and prove them, and do them good in the latter end, Deuteronomy. 8.15, 16. So
that we may safely conclude when God does exercise us with more than ordinary
trials, it is to humble us, and prove us, and do us good in the latter end.
Whatever variety of dispensations we pass under, though our conflicts be very
sharp and bitter, yet we may conclude, all is to humble us, to reduce us to
humility, and to retain and keep us in humility. If such a man as Paul needed
temptations to humble him, much more do we.

2. This should teach us patiently to submit to this discipline that God is
pleased to exercise us with. Use 2.
If Divine wisdom think it fit to have us tempted to suppress pride, and keep
us humble, it becomes us to stoop and submit to it. No man ought to be angry
with the physic that is prescribed for his good, and necessary for his health.
We may possibly have such reasonings of heart as these: Could not God bring us
to his mind and will, without such sharp and bitter conflicts and temptations?
Oh but let us remember this is Gods way. It is not for us to think our selves
wiser than God: but it becomes us to submit to the Divine wisdom. I remember I
once heard a wise, holy and experienced Christian, speak to this purpose; I
thought with my self that God could if he had pleased have brought me to his
mind, and accomplished his will upon me without the frequent trials and
afflictions I met with; O but then I considered this was Gods way, and that
silenced me. We ought to consider this is Gods way and method to train up his
children under conflicts, trials and exercises, and this ought to quiet us. We
would fain go to Heaven a smoother way, without such trials and temptations: Oh
but God sees it meet that we should be tried and tempted; this is Gods way, and
it becomes us to submit to it. And however we may think God might bring about
his end without these things, yet Gods way will be found the wisest way in the
conclusion. And herein does Divine wisdom appear, that his strength is made
perfect in weakness. It tends more to the glory of God, that we should conquer
and overcome, under temptations, than that we should be kept wholly from
temptations; and it will tend more to our own advantage in the conclusion; for,
Blessed is the man that endures temptation, for when he is tried he shall
receive the Crown of Life which the Lord has promised to them that love him,
Jam. 1.12.

3. By way of exhortation, Use 3.
Let us labor to improve our temptations, so as that they may be a means to
humble us. Let us labor to answer Gods end in our temptations; Gods end in
permitting us to be tempted, it is to humble us, and therefore our endeavor
should be, that when we are exercised by temptations, we may get humility by
them.

Here the Question may be,

But how may we improve our temptations and make use of them, Question.
so as that they may be a means to humble us?

1. When ever temptations come upon us, Answer.
let us be sensible of the great danger we are in. God by temptation shows us
the danger we are in. Temptation shows us that if God keep us not, we may
easily fall into some great snare and intanglement. Temptation shows us, that
without Divine grace we are at the brink of ruin. Temptation shows us, that if
Divine grace do not keep us, we may soon fall into some foul and scandalous
sin. It is not by our own strength that we are kept from scandalous sins. When
temptation comes, we have experience of that corruption of Nature in us, that
would betray us to some scandalous sin, did not Divine grace keep us. Now
should not this be a mighty means to humble us, to consider that unless Divine
grace keep us, there is not the holiest soul but might be overtaken with a
scandalous sin? Let him that stands take heed lest he fall. Watch and pray,
says our Savior, that ye enter not into temptation. Every temptation puts us
in remembrance, that there is a whole chaos of evil, as Luther expresses it,
that lies before us ready to swallow us up, if God did not set bounds to the
Sea. It is an expression of one of the Ancients, Diabolical temptations should
put us in remembrance what the adversary is that we have to deal with. We
wrestle not, says the Apostle, against flesh and blood, Ephesians. 6.12.
but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness
of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. They are no mean
adversaries, but they are subtle and powerful enemies that we have to deal
with, when we are tempted. Therefore, let us be sensible of the danger we are
in. This may be one means to humble us to be sensible into what great sins we
may fall if Divine grace do not keep us.

2. Let us labor to be sensible of our own infirmity. As when we are under
Temptation we ought to be sensible of the danger we are in, that there is a
snare laid for us; so we ought to be sensible of our own infirmity, that such
is our infirmity, that we may easily be entangled and overcome by temptations
that are presented to us. They ought to be great considerations to us. If Adam
in Paradise, If the Angels in Heaven did not keep themselves by their own
free will, If David, Sampson, Peter, and other of the Saints did not overcome
temptations by the power of grace received; what reason have we to be sensible
of our own infirmity? Such is our infirmity, that a little temptation will
overcome us without the help of Divine grace. Peter was overcome by the voice
of a poor Maid, when he was in the Highpriests Hall. A little temptation will
overset us if Divine grace do not keep us. Let us not presume of our own
strength. He that thinks himself strongest will fall the next moment, if Divine
grace leave him and withdraw from him, therefore let us carry a deep sense of
our own infirmity.

3. Let us consider, as a means to humble us, How far corruption has been
stirred up in us by temptation. When temptation has been offered to us, have
we not oftentimes found corruption rising in our hearts, and joining with
temptation? It is said of Moses that holy servant of God, that They provoked
his spirit, so that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips, Psalm. 106.33. Moses was
one of the meekest men upon earth, and yet when a temptation came his spirit
was provoked, and his corruption stirred, so that he spoke unadvisedly with his
lips. How often do we find our selves exasperated unto passion, and sometimes
enticed to sinful desires and lustings by temptation? Jam. 1.14. Every man is
tempted when he is drawn away by his own lusts and enticed, that lust that is
in the heart, that is, corrupt nature, is enticed by temptation; when Satan or
the world presents such baits as are suitable to corrupt nature, corrupt nature
is ready to join in, and close with them. Now what matter of humiliation is
this, That temptations when they come, have such a power and efficacy upon us,
thus to extimulate and stir up corruption? It was not so with Christ, the
Prince of this world came and found nothing in him. He had no corruption in
him, and therefore none could be stirred up in him. It is not so with us; But
when temptation comes, it finds corruption in us, and stirs it up.

4. Let us consider what foyls, or marks of shame at least we have received by
temptation. Sometimes temptation prevails so far on us, as to irritate and stir
up corruption: although grace overcome in the conflict, and corruption break
not forth into outward act. Sometimes the temptation prevails so far in
particular acts, that the temptation is superior in the combat, and we are
foiled by it. Temptation gets the upper hand and draws us into such and such a
sin; now what matter of humbling is this? So likewise we should consider what
marks of shame temptation has left upon us. Truly the remembrance of some
temptations may strike shame into us. Paul had the messenger of Satan to buffet
him, the Greek word signifies to beat with the fist, to beat black and blew.
When people are so beaten as that they receive marks and impressions on the
face, when their eyes and faces are black with beating, they are ashamed to
come into company, ashamed to be seen. Paul's temptations were such, as that the
remembrance of them struck shame into him. That God should let loose Satan upon
us to buffet us with horrid temptations, with Blasphemous Impure thoughts and
the like: although they do not gain the consent of the will, yet these are
matter of shame, that there should be that in us, that the Devil hopes to get
some advantage against us, otherwise he would not thus assault.

The Last Use is by way of Instruction. Use 4.
This may teach us when God lets loose any Temptation upon us, what is the
proper course for us to take: the proper course to be taken in such a case, is,
presently and immediately to set our selves against pride, to fight against the
sin of pride, and to labor and pray that we may be reduced to the depth of
humility. O let us carry this Scripture always in our eye, Lest I should be
exalted above measure, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the
messenger of Satan to buffet me. God in permitting us to be tempted, levels at
our Pride, strikes at that sin, therefore we should strike at it. The best way
to have the rod removed, it is to answer the end of the rod. Temptation is the
rod of God upon us; and the way to have this rod removed is to answer the end
of this rod, which is to be humble, God resists the proud, but gives grace to
the humble. Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he
may exalt you in due time, 1 Pet. 5. The best advice that can be given, when
ever we find our selves greatly tempted is this, let us pray much against
pride, that pride may be mortified and subdued in us. The sooner our souls are
humbled and brought down, the sooner will God take off the rod and restore
comfort to us: that is the promise, Isa. 57.15. For thus says the high and
lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy; I dwell in the high
and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to
revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.
The sooner we are humbled and laid low before God, the sooner will God take off
the rod.

The end of the Sixth Sermon.
SERMON VII.
2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. And lest I should be exalted above measure through the
abundance of revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the
messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure.

For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.

And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made
perfect in weakness.


THat which comes now in order to be spoken unto, it is the carriage of the
Apostle when he was under this exercise, what course he took when he was
tempted, and that is in verse. 8. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice that
it might depart from me. So that the Observation or Doctrine that is next to be
spoken unto out of the words is this,

Doct. Doct.
That the proper course that is to be taken by us, when we are under
Temptation, it is to pray much; For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that
it might depart from me. I besought the Lord thrice, that is, often and
frequently, a certain number is here put for an uncertain. I besought the Lord
thrice, that is frequently, when I was tempted, I was much in prayer, that is
the plain meaning. Here I might take an occasion to show what the nature of
Prayer is in general.

Prayer, it is the expression of our desires to God for the obtaining of some
good, or the removing some evil. Others describe it that it is the showing of
our desires to him, from whom we hope to obtain what we do desire. But my work
is not to treat of prayer at large, and in the general; but my work is to show
how we ought to pray when we are tempted, and this is that the Text leads us
unto. When the Apostle was under this sore conflict, and had the messenger of
Satan sent to buffet him, then it is that he betakes himself to Prayer, For
this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me. Therefore
the thing I have to show is this,

How we ought to pray when we are tempted, when the Lord brings us under any
sore conflict, or Temptation, and here I shall speak to these things.

1. What are the things we should pray for when we are under Temptations? 2.
How ought we to pray when we are tempted? 3. Why is prayer the proper course we
are to take when we are under any special temptation?
1. What are the things we should pray for when we are under temptation?

There are four or five things I conceive that are the principal things that we
ought to pray for when we are under temptation.

1. We ought to pray that we may know the ends of God in permitting us to be
tempted, and also that we may have grace to answer those ends. This is certain,
God has wise and holy ends in permitting our temptations. Satan could not have
power to tempt us, unless God gave him power, and that appears from that
Scripture, Luke 22.31. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold Satan has
desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat. That which is desired is
not in our own power; therefore since Satan desires to have us to winnow and
tempt us, it is a sign it is not in Satan's power to tempt us without Gods
permission. Satan must have his permission from God to tempt us, before he can
tempt us. Now we ought to pray that we might know the wise and holy ends of God
in permitting Satan to tempt us, God does not afflict willingly, neither grieve
the Children of men. Temptations are the necessary discipline that God
exercises his children with. And if the ends of God were answered in our
temptations, God would soon remove the temptations from us. Experienced persons
know this to be true, that God soon removes and takes off a temptation when he
pleases. When persons have been greatly harrassed by temptation, God can all
of a sudden hush the temptation and silence it. As Christ rebuked the winds and
the Seas, and there was a great calm: So God can all of a sudden take off a
temptation that was strong and violent upon us. Experienced souls have found
this, that when such a temptation has been so strong upon them, as that they
thought they should never be able to get out of it, and disintangle themselves
from it, yet God of a sudden has taken it off from them; therefore it is our
concernment to labor and pray to know the ends of God in our temptation, and
to give God those ends that make God let loose temptation upon us, and then he
can soon take off those temptations that are matter of exercise to us.

2. We ought to pray for supporting grace that we may not faint under
temptation, Ephesians. 3.13. Wherefore I desire that ye faint not at my
tribulations for you, Heb. 12.3. Lest you be weary and faint in your mind. When
temptations are great and sore upon us; when they are of more than an ordinary
nature, especially when temptations are of long continuance, we are exceeding
apt to faint and despond under them. For this is certain, that the strength of
a Temptation lies in the length or continuance of it. A person may bear a very
great and sharp affliction if it be short, better than a lesser affliction if
it be long and continued: the length and continuance of an affliction is that
that makes us weary and faint in our spirits. Job when he was under great and
sore trials, he bare them very patiently at first; he bare the loss of his
Estate, Children, and one affliction after another; but when the affliction was
lengthned out, then there was found in him many fits of impatience. So the
children of Israel, when they were long in the wilderness, and tired in the
length of the way, then they began to murmur; therefore we ought to pray for
supporting grace, that we may not despond under our afflictions.

3. We may, with submission to the will of God, pray for the removal of the
temptation. Thus Paul did in the Text, for this thing I besought the Lord
thrice that it might not depart from me, that is, he prayed that the temptation
might depart from him: but though Paul prayed that the temptation might depart
from him; we must suppose that he did this with submission to the will of God.
He did not simply and absolutely pray that he might be free from temptation,
but with submission to the will of God, he prayed he might be delivered from
the present Temptation. Some Temptations may be good for us, and they may tend
to the trying and exercise of our graces. Jam. 1.12. Blessed is the man that
endures temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of life
which the Lord has promised to them that love him. Some temptations may tend
to the trial and exercise of our graces, and therefore we are not to pray that
we might be freed from temptation altogether, because some temptations may be
good and profitable for us. But if temptations be very heavy and pressing on
us, as Paul's was, then with submission to the will of God we may pray to be
delivered from such temptations.

4. We ought always to pray that we might be kept from the taint and defilement
of temptation; and that is plainly the meaning of that Petition in the Lords
Prayer, Lead us not into temptation. When our Savior directs us to pray, Lead
us not into temptation, his meaning is not that we should pray that we may not
be tempted at all; but his meaning is, that we should pray that we might not be
overcome by temptation. Our great work when temptation comes upon us, it is to
pray that God would not leave us to our selves, unto the weakness and infirmity
of our own hearts, nor to the malice and subtilty of Satan. Woe to us, when
Temptation comes, if we be lest either to Satan's malice and subtilty, or in the
hands of our own hearts, Satan is subtle enough to entice us, and our hearts
weak enough to betray us, unless divine grace keep us. Therefore when ever we
are under Temptation, our great work is to pray for divine grace to keep us
under our Temptations. 1 John 5.18. He that is begotten of God keeps himself
and the wicked one touches him not. The wicked one touches him not, how is
that expression to be understood? are not the Saints touched by Temptation? How
then does not the wicked one touch the Saints? There is a touch of temptation,
if I may so call it, and a touch of defilement; the Saints are touched with the
touch of temptation, that is, they feel the motions of temptation. O but he
that is born of God keeps himself, that is, he endeavors to keep himself, and
he prays for grace that he may be so kept, that he may not be touched with the
touch of defilement. He keeps himself, that is, the grace of God in him keeps
him from giving the consent of his will to temptation. And so far as the
consent of the will is withheld, so far a man is kept from the defilement of
temptation. I mean he is kept from the defilement of those temptations that are
from without merely. For that we may not mistake here, as for those temptations
that arise from within, that is, the first motions of sin that arise from
original concupiscence in the heart, although there be no subsequent consent of
the will, these first motions are sin; although when there is a subsequent
consent of the will, the sin is greater than when there is no subsequent
consent of the will. But in those temptations that come merely from Satan, or
proceed merely from the world and external objects; in such temptations as
these are, if there be no consent of the will there is no defilement. It is
true, it is hard for us to imagine any temptation offered to us by Satan or the
world, but there is some corruption or other stirred by it, and some degree of
consent, a partial consent of the will; but if we could suppose an external
temptation to come, and no corruption stirred by it, nor the least consent of
the will, then there were no defilement. A clear instance of this we have in
our Savior, temptation could not fasten on him, he received no taint, no
defilement from temptation, The Prince of this world comes and has nothing in
me, John 14.30. There was no corruption of nature in our Savior that should
incline him in the least, to the least partial yielding to temptation, but it
is not so with us. It is hard for us to imagine any great temptation that comes
upon us without some motions of corruption, and therefore there is usually some
partial defilement. Yet we ought to pray that we might be kept from defilement
as much as may be, by not giving the least consent of the will to temptation.
So much as the consent of the will is kept from yielding to temptation, so far
we are kept from the defilement of temptation.

5. Because we usually get some wound more or less in the conflict with
temptation, even when we are victorious in the battle, we should pray for the
pardon of those sins that attend our temptations. It is observed by Austin, No
one is such a Conqueror in temptation, but he has reason to pray, forgive us
our trespasses.

6. The Last thing we should pray for, is, the sanctification of our
temptations. We ought to pray that Divine grace might so concur with our
temptations, as that they may be a means to humble us; and that our temptations
may be a means to quicken us to do those things for which God lets temptations
come upon us. God, as I said before, permits temptations to come upon us for
wise and holy ends, and we should pray for Divine grace to quicken us to do
those things for which God sends temptations upon us.

2. How ought we to pray when we are under temptations?

1. We ought to pray under a deep sense of our own infirmities; we ought to
have such a sense of our own infirmites as to be sensible that the least
temptation is enough to foil us, unless Divine grace help and assist us. It is
proper only to indigent persons to pray. They that are sensible of no wants,
see no need they have to pray. None can pray aright but those that are sensible
of their own infirmity. When we come to pray under temptation, we ought to be
sensible of our own weakness; how unable we are without Divine grace to
overcome our temptations. Satan knows by experience what the strength or
infirmity rather of our free will is by the breach he made on our first parents
in paradise. Satan also knows what habitual grace can do without the present
assistance of actual grace, by the falls of many of the Saints that have been
overcome by his temptations: we ought therefore to pray under a great sense of
the need we have of present actual grace to assist us. Although our wills be
never so firmly fortified and resolved as we think against such a sin, yea
although we have the habits of grace in us, yet unless we have present actual
grace in the same moment that we are tempted, we are like to be foiled, and
that shamefully; therefore let us pray under a great and deep sense of our
infirmities.

2. We ought to pray frequently: For this thing, says the Apostle, I besought
the Lord thrice. Thrice, that is often; thrice in a more solemn manner: so some
learned men understand this expression. Besides Paul's ordinary way of prayer,
besides that he was wont to pray in an ordinary manner; he prayed thrice in a
solemn manner, about this temptation, so some understand it, A time of
temptation, ought to be a time of much prayer; when we are tempted in a more
than ordinary manner, we ought to pray more than ordinary. You know what our
Savior says, Ask and you shall receive, seek and you shall find, knock and it
shall be opened to you. We must ask, seek, knock. If we receive not upon
asking, we must seek, and if we find not upon seeking, we must then knock; the
meaning is, we must reinforce and redouble our prayers. Our Savior when he was
in the Garden prayed three times, Father, if it be possible, Father, if it be
possible, Father, if it be possible, he repeated his prayer thrice. Elisha when
he was to raise the Widows child, prayer thrice over it; and when he came to
pray for rain, he prayed seven times. And as a learned man observes, he would
have prayed seven times more if God had not given him an answer, he was
resolved to have continued praying still if God had not given him an answer.
And what do all these things teach us, but that we should not be discouraged,
but continue in praying, for this thing I besought the Lord thrice.

3. We ought to pray with great fervency. One end why God sends temptaions on
us is to quicken us to prayer; therefore when our trials and temptations are
more than ordinary, our prayers and cries should be more than ordinary. It is
said of our Savior when he was in his agony, he prayed more earnestly, Luke
22.44. (...).
More intensely. When our Saviors sufferings and conflicts were highest, then
he intended the strength of his prayer most. When our temptations and conflicts
are sharp, our prayers should then be most fervent. Our prayers are oftentimes
cold, remiss and lukewarm, therefore God sends temptations to set an edge on
them, and that we might intend the strength of them.

4. We ought to pray unweariedly, if the Lord do not hear us presently, we
ought not to give over praying, but ought to continue instant in prayer, Luke
1. And he spoke a parable unto them to this end, that men ought always to pray
and not to faint. It is the way of God to defer answering the prayers of his
people, that so he might give them the more abundant answer at last; therefore
we ought to be unwearied in prayer. Paul had not such an answer to his prayer
as to have the temptation removed, yet he continued praying, and so ought we to
do; though temptations are lengthned out, yet we ought to continue praying: And
although the sense of our unworthiness might sometimes discourage us from
praying, yet the sense of our own unworthiness ought not to take us off from
prayer. Luther confesses of himself he was oftentimes discouraged from praying
with the sense of his own unworthiness; but at last, says he, the spirit of
God overcame in me, by suggesting such thoughts as these are, whatsoever an one
thou art, how unworthy soever thou art, thou must pray, it is thy duty to pray.
God will not be sought unto, neither will he hear for thy worthiness sake, but
for his own mercy sake, therefore we ought to continue unwearied in prayer, and
nothing ought to take us off from prayer.

The third and last thing I am to speak to in the doctrinal part, is this.

Why ought we to pray much, when we are under temptation?

1. Reason 1.
We ought to pray much, because we have strong and potent enemies to graple
with. We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities,
against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against
spiritual wickedness in high places, Ephesians. 6.12. We have all the malice and
subtilty of Hell to contest with; and we have the baits and allurements of
profit, pleasure and honor, which we see the greatest part of men are overcome
by. And over and above all this, we have the treachery of our own deceitful
hearts to deal with; the heart of man is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked; therefore having such subtle and potent enemies to deal
withal; it concerns us to pray much.

2. Reason 2.
We ought to pray much, because our infirmity and weakness is more than we
think it is. There is not the least temptation but will be too hard for us, if
Divine grace do not help us. As strong as we think we are, and as much grace as
we tkink we have, yet when temptation comes we shall soon be foiled, if Divine
grace does not help us. What the strength of free will is, we have an instance
of in our first Parents in paradise (and we can never think enough of it) and
we have another instance of it in the Angels that fell from Heaven. And how
weak we are for all the principles of grace we have received, many of the
Saints, as David, Peter, and others are instances of it; therefore what reason
have we to pray for continual supplies of grace? If the Angels did not keep
themselves in Heaven; If Adam in Paradise did not keep himself by his own
free will; If the Saints of God have not kept themselves by the strength of
habitual grace, what are we able to do by our free will or habitual grace
received? Certainly our infirmity is greater than we are apt think it to be,
and therefore we ought to pray from the consideration of our own infirmity.

3. Reason 3.
It is one end why God permits us to be tempted, to quicken us to prayer; you
will find it by experience to be true, when God sees his people cold or remiss
in prayer, he does ordinarily let loose some temptation upon them to quicken
them to prayer: and though it be not always so, yet it is frequently so, that
some coldness and remisness in prayer does usually preceed our greatest
temptations. I do not say it is always so, for God does sometimes bring great
trials and afflictions on his children when they are most watchful, praying,
and in the most holy frame. And when trials come upon us when we are in this
posture, in a trembling, watchful, praying frame, then these trials are the
greatest mercies. And God by putting us into a praying frame before such
trials, prepares us for them before such trials, prepares us for them before
they come. Happy is that soul that is a praying, watchful, close walking soul
before temptation comes. But ordinarily we shall find that some fit of security
has overtaken us, before some remarkable trial and temptation comes upon us.
We do not see the danger we are in of such temptations, and therefore do not
pray against them; and therefore God sends temptations to awaken us from our
security, and to make us sensible of the danger we are in.

1. This is matter of reproof to us, Use 1.
that we give way to despondency, and sinking of spirit, under temptation, and
do not take the proper course that is to be used under temptation. Gods own
children are to be reproved in this case, they are apt to give way to
despondencies, and dejection, and sinking of spirit under temptation, and do
not take the proper course they ought to take when they are under it. The
proper course we are to take when we are under temptation, is to pray much; the
Apostle directs us, If any man be afflicted let him pray. So it may be said, is
any tempted, let him pray. Temptation is not one of the least afflictions the
Saints meet with; the Saints conflicts and temptations are oftentimes far more
bitter than their outward afflictions. Now art thou tried, afflicted, tempted?
pray, pray. Prayer is thy proper work: but instead of praying we droop and
despond; or if we pray, we pray but a little, we are soon weary and give over,
we think God must answer us the very next time we pray, or else we think God
does not regard our prayer. It is an infirmity that is incident to many of the
children of God to think, If God does not answer them this day, this week, this
month, that then God does not hear their prayers. But it is one thing for God
to hear our prayers, and another thing for God to give a present and sensible
answer to them. God does always hear the Saints prayers, which are according to
his will; but he does not always presently give them the thing they pray for;
and it is a great mistake to conclude that therefore God does not hear our
prayers because he does not presently give us what we pray for. Paul prayed
that the messenger of Satan might depart, but it did not depart; yet Paul's
prayer was heard for all that. When we pray for temporal things, God does not
always give us those things. God gives us temporal things, when temporal things
are good for us, and when they are not good for us, he denies us those things.
But we may take this for a certain rule, If we pray as we ought to pray, we
shall have an answer of our prayers one way or other; either we shall have what
we ask or something better; and this is certain, spiritual grace is far better
than any temporal thing that we can ask. And it is a sign that we have carnal
souls if we do not think so. Paul had not his temptation removed, but he had
spiritual grace given him, and that was far better than if the temptation had
been removed.

2. In the second place, Use 2.
This should exhort us whenever we are tempted to pray, and the more we are
tempted the more we should pray. Here lies the skill of a Christian, when ever
any particular temptation comes upon him, then to deal with God much about that
temptation. What we should pray for, and how we should pray, I have already
intimated. We should pray to know the end of God in temptation, pray for
supporting grace under temptation; pray to be kept from the sin of the
temptation, and pray for the sanctification of temptation: and with submission
pray for deliverance from the temptation. And we ought to pray with a sense of
our own infirmity, and we ought to pray frequently, fervently and unweariedly.
This is the proper course to be taken when we are under temptations. The Devil
is afraid of prayer, when Satan sees that temptation puts us upon prayer, and
makes us more servent in prayer, this will cause him to desist from tempting,
or to change his temptation. As when an enemy makes an attempt at one fort, and
finds strong opposition and resistance there, he leaves that and begins his
assault some where else, where he may be less suspected, and thinks to meet
with less resistance. If the Devil find himself strongly opposed in his
temptation, he will retire, Resist the Devil and he will flee from you. And if
we can pray, we shall be sure always to have some relief, For thou, Lord, have
not forsaken them that seek thee, Psalm. 9.10. God never forsakes praying souls,
Lam. 3.29. The Lord is good to them that wait for him, to the soul that seeks
him. It is a memorable expression of one of the Ancients, God is so good to his
people, Bonus Dominus saepe non trib it quod volumus, ut tribuat quod mall^mus.
that he does not always give them that which they would have, that so he might
give them that which they would rather have. God is able to do for us
abundantly above all we can ask or think. God does not always give us what we
do desire, that so he might let us see at last, that that which he does give us
is better than what we do desire. An eminent instance we have of this in our
Apostle in the Text. Paul had not the temptation removed from him, but he had
that given him which was far better; he had Divine grace given to him, My grace
shall be sufficient for thee. This was a far greater mercy than the bare
removal of the temptation, and this is that which leads us to the next point,
which is this,

Doct. That praying souls shall have a sufficiency of grace to carry them
through all their trials and temptations. Paul had not an answer given to him
that the temptation should be removed, but he had this answer given him, My
grace shall be sufficient for thee.

The end of the Seventh Sermon.
SERMON VIII.
2 Cor. 12.9. And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my
strength is made perfect in weakness.


IT remains now that I should speak to the fourth particular in the Text, and
that is the gracious answer or return that was made to Paul upon his prayer,
and that is in these words, And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for
thee.

The Observation or Doctrine which does naturally arise from hence is this:

Doct. Doct.
That praying souls shall have a sufficiency of grace to carry them through all
their trials, conflicts and temptations. When Paul had been dealing with God
about his temptation, he obtained this answer, My grace shall be sufficient for
thee. In treating of this observation, there are these things that do naturally
fall under our consideration.

1. What grace is, And he said my grace, what we are to understand by grace.

2. To show how grace is said to be sufficient for us, how God makes grace to
be sufficient for us; My grace shall be sufficient for thee. And,

3. What that grace is that God is wont to afford and communicate to his people
under their trials and Temptations. And afterward there will be way made to
the Reasons of the point.

1. What grace is, what are we to understand by grace, My grace shall be
sufficient, etc.

This Text does naturally lead me to speak of the Doctrine of grace, and truly
the Doctrine of grace is one of the most weighty and material points in
Divinity. Alvarez in his Preface to his Book de Auxiliis, observes that the
Doctrine of Grace is one of the chiefest points in Divinity, and that which
has an influence upon all the rest. And as it is a weighty Doctrine, so it is
the most sweet Doctrine, and it is to none so sweet as to holy souls, and to
those that have most grace; they that have most grace will prize the Doctrine
of grace most.

The nature of grace in general is something of an abstruse consideration, but
I shall endeavor to make it as plain as I may; therefore to understand the
nature of grace, we may take it thus. Grace may be considered either in the
cause, or in the effect. 1. Grace in the cause is nothing else but the love,
the favor, the good will of God toward man, 2 Timothy 1.1. Grace, mercy and
peace from God the Father, etc. The general notion of grace is nothing else but
the love, and (...), and benevolence of God toward men. This is the general
notion of the word grace, and indeed the love and favor of God, the good will
of God is the cause of all other grace, that which we call grace in the effect,
in a strict and proper sense: I say, the love and good will of God is the cause
of all this grace. Jam. 1.18. Of his own will begat he us. The Apostle there
speaks of one special effect of Divine grace, he speaks of regeneration Now he
says this grace, the grace of Regeneration is the fruit of Gods good will, of
his own will, that is, of his good will begat he us, so Phil. 2.13. It is God
that works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure. The good will of
God, the good pleasure of God is the cause of all that grace that is bestowed
on the creature.

But then, 2. There is grace in the effect. Now grace in the effect, is the
exerting or putting forth of the Divine power, for the producing of some
gracious effect in the creature, 2 Pet. 1.3. According as his Divine power has
given to us all things, that appertain unto life and godliness. It is the
Divine power that produces in the hearts of the elect, whatsoever is necessary
to life and godliness. It is the Divine power that produces all the effects of
grace in the creature. Now grace as it is in the effect, is either actual or
habitual. That which we call actual grace, is the exertion or putting forth of
the Divine power in order to the producing something in us. Actual grace
consists in Divine aid and help, or affistance that is given to the soul. That
which we call actual grace, consists in those Divine influences which flow into
the soul. Auxilium Di movens nos.
Aquinas calls it the help or assistance of God moving of us; this is actual
grace, Psalm. 119.173. Let thine hand help me: for I have chosen thy precepts.
Others call this the grace of God that moves and acts us, and they describe it
to be a transient motion or act of God upon the soul: this is actual grace.
Motio Dei transions.


But then 2. There is habitual grace, now that which we call habitual grace, it
is some effect of grace which is lest upon us, which is permanent and abiding
in us. So that if we would understand the nature of grace, we must consider
that Divine grace is either the actual aid and assistance of God moving and
acting of us; or else it is some habitual gift bestowed upon us, and inherent
in us, when it is so bestowed. Now that which Divines call habitual grace, is
set forth in Scripture by several expressions. It is called the seed of God, 1
John. 3.9. His seed remains in him. It is called by the name of grace in that
known Text, 2 Pet. 3.18. But grow in grace. To grow in grace, it is to
endeavor that the habits of grace which are insused into the soul by the
spirit of God, do grow and increase. This habitual grace is also called by the
name of the new creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is
a new creature.

In the next place we are to consider how the text is to be understood when it
is said, My grace is sufficient for thee. 1. By grace here in the Text some
understand grace in the cause, namely, the favor and good will of God, and so
they make the meaning to be this, My grace shall be sufficient for thee, that
is, through my love and favor toward thee, thou shall be superior to thy
temptations, thou shall be set above thy temptations, thou shall be enabled to
overcome thy temptations; though thy conflicts be sore and sharp, yet such is
my love and favor toward thee, that I will take care that thou shall be set
above all thy temptations, thou shall be superior to them, and overcome them.

2. Others by grace in the Text undestand actual help and assistance, and so
Calvin understands it; by grace he understands the help and assistance of the
holy Ghost. Auxilium spirit tus Sancti.
Now these two being subordinate, neither is to be excluded. That which seems
principally to be intended is the latter; namely, the assistance of Divine
grace, My grace shall be sufficient for thee; the meaning is, thou shall have
actual grace, actual help and assistance given to thee, to assist and help thee
in thy present conflicts. Now actual grace, being that grace which is here
principally intended; we must a little more fully consider the nature of actual
grace.

Now that which Divines call actual grace, it is twofold. It is either actual
grace, exciting or quickening, or else it is actual grace assisting. There is
actual exciting or quickening grace, and actual assisting grace.

1. There is quickening or exciting grace, 1 Cant. 4. Draw me, we will run after
thee. The Saints must be drawn before they can run. So again, Psalm. 119.36.
Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies. Divine grace is of that nature, that it
puts a new bent and byas upon the will. The will that was awkward and
indisposed to the things of God before, when it has the influences of Divine
grace communicated to it, then it is inclined, then there is a new bent and
byas put upon it, Psalm. 80.18. Quicken us and we will call on thy name. It is
God must excite and quicken us to pray, before we can pray. Not that we should
stay off from prayer till we find a sensible impulse to prayer. That may be a
great temptation upon a person to say he will not pray, till he find a sensible
impulse to prayer. We ought to put our selves upon the duty, out of obedience
to the command. The commands of God are, Pray without ceasing, Pray always,
with all prayer and suplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance. These commands are enough to put us upon the duty though we have
not an immediate and sensible impulse. But when it is said, Quicken us and we
will call upon thy name; we ought thus to understand it, that when ever we find
our hearts stirred up and quickened to the duty, this is from Divine grace, this
is actual grace exciting and quickening of us.

But then 2. There is assisting grace. Now assisting grace is that help or
power which is given us from God, whereby we are enabled actual to the
performance of what we were stirred up unto by exciting or quickening grace.
The Saints of God may sometimes have a will, but they may want power and
ability to do what they have a will to do, Romans 7.18. To will is present with
me, but how to perform that which is good I find not. So that there may be a
will, but want of power and ability to do what we would. Now here comes in
assisting grace. It is exciting grace that gives us the first will. Now when
exciting grace has given us the will, then comes in assisting grace to give us
ability in some measure to do that which exciting grace has given us a will
to do. It is God that works in you both to will and to do of his own good
pleasure, 2 Phil. 13. This assisting grace is that which Paul speaks of, 1 Cor.
15.10. Yet not I, but the grace of God with me. Here was assisting grace. The
grace of God did cooperate with Paul, therefore the Schoolmen do commonly
distinguish between operating, and cooperating grace. Operating grace is the
same with exciting grace, it works the first will; and cooperating grace is the
same with assisting grace. First, Divine grace helps us to will, and puts us
upon the doing such and such things: and then there is assisting or cooperating
grace, whereby we are enabled to the actual performance of what we were stirred
up to do, by exciting or quickening grace.

Now the virtue and efficacy of assisting grace is seen in two things.

1. In making us to resist or repel evil.

2. In inabling us to perform that which is good. The Apostle Paul speaks of
both these together, 2 Cor. 13.7. Now, says he, I pray to God that you do no
evil, but that ye should do that which is honest. Austin observes from this
Text, That the Apostle prayed for these Saints, Inspirationem bo^ae vobmtatis
and operis.
the inspiration of a good will, that God would inspire into them a good will;
and also that he would give them ability to perform what was good. For what
need had the Apostle to pray for them, that they might do no evil, but do that
which was honest; if so be that the will of it self were sufficiently fortified
against evil, and sufficiently inclined to do that which was good without
Divine grace? Prayer supposes a need of that we pray for; a man will not pray
for that he supposes he has not a need of. Therefore when the Apostle prays
for these Saints, that they might not do evil, but do that which is good; he
supposed they needed both, otherwise his prayer was needless. Now Divine
assisting grace helps as to both these, as to the repelling of evil, and as to
performing that which is good.

1. By assisting grace it is that we repel evil; by the help of assisting grace
it is, that we do repel Satan's Temptations from without. And that we do
conflict with the evil motions of sin that arise from our own hearts within.

1. By Divine grace it is that we resist Satan's Temptations, 1 Pet. 5.9. Whom
resist steadfast in the faith. We are not called here to resist Satan's
temptations, as if it were supposed, we could resist temptation by our own
strength. For, confider what is said, 1 Samuel 2.9. By strength no man shall
prevail, that is, by his own strength no man shall prevail. Therefore when we
are bid to resist Satan's temptations, it is supposed that it is by Divine
grace, and Divine assistance that we must resist his temptations. When Satan
desired to have Peter to winnow him as wheat, how was it that Peter overcame
Satan? Truly it was not by his own strength, but by Christ's praying for him. I
have prayed for thee, says our Savior, Luke 22.32. And what was it that
Christ prayed for Peter? Why, he prayed that his faith might not fail. Austin
observes that in this prayer is implied thus much. When Christ prayed that
Peter's faith might not fail; Ut haberet in fide, liberrimam, fortissimam,
invictissimam, perseverantissimam vol mtatem. Aug.
he prayed that Peter might have a most free, a most strong, a most invincible,
and a most persevering will in the faith. Peter had not this will of his own,
Peter had not so firm, so resolved, so invincible, so persevering a will of his
own. Peter did sufficiently show his own infirmity, what the impotency of his
own free will was, when left to himself; in that he denied his Master, when the
temptation came. Therefore it was Christ's prayer for Peter, that caused him
that his faith did not fail. Truly, if Peter had been left to himself, as he
failed in that particular act, so his faith would have failed totally and
finally. It was Christ's prayer, and not the strength of Peter's will that kept
his faith from failing totally.

2. It is by the help of Divine grace that we conflict with the motions of sin
from within our selves. It is a known Text, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have
dominion over you, because ye are not under the law, but under grace. That sin
has not dominion over us, we may thank Divine grace for it. The Law shows us
indeed what we ought to do, but gives us no power to do what it commands us;
the Law shows us what sins we ought to refrain from, but gives us no power to
abstain from them; No, it is Divine grace that keeps us from the dominion of
sin. Sin therefore has not dominion over us because we are not under the law
but under grace. Were we left without Divine grace, sin certainly would have
dominion. So likewise it is said, The spirit lusts against the flesh, Gal.
5.16. By the spirit there we are to understand the regenerate part in a Saint;
as by the flesh we are to understand the unregenerate part that is in him. This
the Apostle in another place calls the law of sin. I my self serve the law of
God: but with the flesh the law of sin, Romans 7. last. There is the law of sin,
and the law of the spirit of life in us. Now the spirit lusts against the
flesh, that is, that habitual grace that is in the heart of a godly man
quickened, excited and assisted by actual grace, this wars against the flesh,
against the unregenerate part that is in him; and what then? These two are
contrary one to the other. It is an expression I remember, Luther has, Sant in
nobis duo contrarii da es, caro and spiritus.
There are two contrary Captains, Leaders, or Commanders in us, the flesh and
the spirit. The flesh and the spirit oppose one another. And what is the result
of this combat and opposition? Ye cannot do the thing that ye would. The flesh
or the carnal part in a Believer oftentimes hinders the spiritual part from
doing what it would. And the spiritual part keeps the flesh from doing what it
has a mind to do. Thus Divine assisting grace helps us to resist and to repel
evil.

2. By the help of assisting grace it is that we are carried out to the
performance of what is good and acceptable in the sight of God. It is a great
Scripture to illustrate this, Heb. 13.20. The God of peace who brought again
from the dead, our Lord Jesus that great shepherd of the sheep, make you
perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you, that which is well
pleasing in his sight by Jesus Christ. We may observe here, 1. It is the same
power that is put forth for the producing of grace in us, that was put forth in
raising Christ from the dead. Why does the Apostle else usher in his prayer
with this preface, The God of peace who brought again from the dead our Lord
Jesus Christ, etc. This intimates that there is the same power put forth in
working grace in the hearts of the Saints, that was put forth in raising Christ
from the dead. And there is another Scripture that speaks fully to this, 1 Ephesians.
19.20. And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward, that believe
according to the working of his mighty power: which he wrought in Christ when
he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly
places. So that there is the same power put forth upon Believers, for working
faith and grace in their hearts as was put forth in Christ, in raising him from
the dead.

2. The Apostle shows us, we must be made perfect in every good work. make you
perfect, the Greek word is a very emphatical and significant word, and we may
not let it pass without a particular examination of it, (...).
make you perfect; this word as it appears both from the Critics in the Greek
tongue, and also from the use of it in the New Testament has two principal
significations.

1. It signifies to Adapt, to frame, (...).
to dispose a thing, thus the ancient Critics render this word, by a word that
signifies to frame, to fit, to square, to polish, to adapt a thing. And thus we
find the word used in the New Testament. It is said of Christ, (...).
a body have thou prepared for me, or as it may be rendered, a body thou have
fitted or adapted for me. Thus we read of the vessels adapted for destruction,
(...).
Romans 9.22. What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known,
indureth with much long suffering the vessels of wrath fitted for destruction.

2. The word signifies to repair the defects of a thing that were in it before,
(...). Phavorious.
and thus the Greek Critics render this word by a word that signifies to
perfect and consummate, thus it is used in the New Testament, Night and day
praying that we might see your face, and might perfect that which is lacking in
your faith, 1 Timothy 3.10. There is the same word that is in the Text. Now both
these significations are of great use in this place. The God of peace make you
perfect in every good work.

1. It is Divine grace that must prepare, adapt, fit, polish us, that we may be
ready to do a good work. We are not suited to good works, we are not fitted to
put forth one act of faith or obedience. It is Divine grace that fits us for
the acting of faith and obedience.

2. It is Divine grace that must repair the defects of grace that are in us,
and fill up what is wanting in us. Divine grace must begin, and Divine grace
must consummate every good work in us. So that by this one word, the God of
peace make you perfect, there is a double error confuted. The error of the
Pelagians and Semipelagians. The Pelagians held, that the beginning of faith
and good works was from nature, and the consummation and perfection of them was
from grace. On the contrary, the Semipelagians distinguish between faith and
works, they affirm the beginning of faith was from our selves, but the
beginning of good works was from grace; but yet that this grace was obtained by
the merit of our says, and so by consequence held, the beginning of faith and
good works was from our selves, though the consummation of them was from grace.
But now this one word in the Text confutes both these errors, for the Text
shows that the beginning and perfection of good works are all from Divine
grace. It is Divine grace that must begin good works, and it is grace that must
perfect and finish good works in us. It is Divine grace that must begin every
good work, it is Divine grace that must frame and compose us to good works. We
are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus to good works, 2 Ephesians. 10. So that
we are created to good works.

3. It is Divine grace that perfects good works in us, when they are begun. The
God of peace make you perfect in every good work. Hence it is that Christ is
said to be not only the Author, but Finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.3. Looking
unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our faith: what more clear than these
things?

4. The Apostle is not content to say make you perfect, but he amplifieth and
expresses himself yet farther, Working in you that which is pleasing in his
sight by Jesus Christ. Here he plainly affirms that it is God that works in us
what ever is good and pleasing to him. So that it is clear and evident, that
the Apostle ascribes the honor of all to Divine grace. It is Divine grace
assists us, not only to resist evil, but also to perform what is good and
acceptable in the sight of God, verse. 26, 27. I will put my spirit within you,
and cause you to walk in my statutes. Observe it, It is we that belive and
obey. Oh but it is the spirit of God that is put into us, that causes us to
believe and obey. It is a known speech of Austin, It is certain, says he, that
we will, what we do will, it is we that believe, and obey: there is the act of
our wills in these things; but it is as certain, that it is by the power of
Divine grace that we are enabled to will graciously. As it is certain that we
will, what we do will; and as it is certain that we do believe and obey, so it
is as certain that it is by the power of Divine grace that we do thus believe
and obey. I will put my spirit (...) you, and cause you to walk in my statutes.
So that though we walk in Gods statutes, yet it is the Spirit put within us
that causes us to walk in Gods statutes, and to will and do what we do will
and do. It is God that works in us both to will and to do, Phil. 2.13.

The 2. Particular.
thing to be spoken to is this, How grace is said to be sufficient for us, My
grace shall be sufficient for thee. Grace may be said to be sufficient for the
Saints, upon several accounts. There are these things implied in this Phrase.

1. When God promises that his grace shall be sufficient for us, his meaning
is, that he will not leave his people to themselves, but give them Divine aid,
help, succor and assistance in their temptations. This the following words
make out to be the meaning, My grace is sufficient for thee, why so? For my
strength is made perfect in weakness. As much as if it had been said, The grace
of God shall be sufficient for his people, so as that he will not fail to give
Divine strength and assistance to them according to their necessities.
Therefore when the Lord promises a sufficiency of grace, the meaning is, he
will not leave us to our selves, but he will give Divine aid, and help, and
assistance of grace to us, so that we shall have grace to help in time of need,
that is the expression, Heb. 4. last. Let us come holdly to the throne of
grace, that we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need: then is
Divine grace said to be sufficient when we have Divine help and assistance
given to us in every time of need. It is a sweet and precious promise, Isa.
41.17. When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue
fails for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not
forsake them. Here is certainly a promise of Divine grace. Luther says (...)
this promise, He knows not whether there be any promise more effectual in the
whole Scripture, for the comforting afflicted consciences than this promise.
Here is a promise of Divine grace, and the grace that is here spoken of, is
either to be understood of the Doctrine of grace, viz. the Doctrine of the
Gospel, or of the Spirit of grace. It seems clearly to be a prophecy
concerning the Gontiles, when they shall thirst after the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and the spirit of grace, what then? says the Text, I the Lord will
hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them. That they did desire
grace, this was some beginning of grace, To desire the help and assistance of
grace is the beginning of grace. Desiacrare auxiliu^ gratiae, iriti^^ gratiae
est. Aug.
It was a sign that the grace of God had been at work in their hearts, that
they began to seek after grace. When the poor and needy seek for water, that
is, when they seek after grace, well, but what is the issue? I the Lord will
hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them. God is never wont to
leave them destitute of grace, who are breathing after grace. The very desire
of grace, is the beginning of grace; and the same grace that has wrought a
desire in us after grace, will also give us the grace that we do desire, for it
is God that works in us, both to will and to do.

2. When the Lord promises his grace shall be sufficient; his meaning is, that
he will give suitable and proportionable grace to our temptations and trials.
He does not only promise to give us some grace, but suitable grace; grace
suitable and proportionable to our trials and temptations. My grace shall be
sufficient for thee: the meaning is, According to the nature, quality and
greatness of our trials and temptation, so shall our strength be. If our
temptations be more than ordinary, we shall have more than ordinary assistance,
and greater measures of grace. A pregnant Scripture we have to confirm this, 1
Cor. 10.13. There has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man:
but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are
able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be
able to bear it.

Two things are here promised.

1. A gracious Issue to the temptation.

2. Strength proportionable to the temptation whilst we are under it.

1. One thing here promised is a gracious Issue unto the temptation. God will
make way for you to escape. We ought to distinguish the temptation into the
beginning, and the end, every temptation has an end as well as a beginning. We
see the beginning and progress of a temptation, but so weak is our faith, we
are not able to see to the end of it; but now the word tells us, it shall have
an end, he will make way for us to escape. Therefore we ought to labor by the
eye of faith to see to the end of our temptations. Could we by the eye of
faith, see to the end of our temptations, it would greatly relieve us under
them; Now says the Apostle, God will make way for us to escape.

The 2. thing promised is proportionable strength to the temptation whilst we
are under it. God is faithful who will not suffer ye to be tempted, above what
you are able; we are not able to bear the least temptation. Why then is it said
that God will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able? Are we able
to stand under any temptation? No certainly, the least temptation is enough to
overset and overbear us, if we be left to our selves. Therefore are we taught
to pray, Lead us not into temptation; certainly, if we were able to overcome
temptation by our own strength, our Savior would never bid us to pray, Lead us
not into temptation. When we are bid to pray, Lead us not into temptation, we
are in effect bid to pray for Divine grace to keep us from being overcome by
temptation; and if we must pray for grace to help us against temptation, it is
a certain sign we have not strength of our selves to deal with any temptation
without Divine grace. How then is it said, that God is faithful, who will not
suffer you to be tempted above that you are able? The meaning certainly is
this, God will not suffer you to be tempted above what his grace will enable
you to grapple and deal with the temptation. God will so moderate, order and
qualify the temptation it self, and he will give such supplies of spiritual
strength to you, that you shall be able to stand under it; for so it follows,
That ye may be able to bear it. Did not Divine grace assist us, we should not
be able to bear the temptation, but we should certainly fail under it;
therefore the Lord promises us a sufficiency of grace and strength to bear us
up under the temptation.

I shall proceed no further in the explication at present, but come to a little
Use and Application of what has been already opened of the Doctrine of Divine
grace.

1. Learn from what has been opened concerning the Doctrine of grace, Use 1.
that there is little reason why men should magnify nature, and cry up the
power of nature so much. Some of the Ancient Philosophers cried up the power of
nature, and tell us, that men are born with the seeds of virtue in them. The
Pelagians of old affirmed that nature and free will was sufficient of it self
as to the acts of obedience without internal grace. And some in our days cry up
moral virtue, and count it a great crime for any man to make a difference
between grace and moral virtue. But let us consider this Text. We may find
enough in this Text to confute all these notions; consider what is said here
unto Paul, My grace is sufficient for thee. Why is it that God promises his
grace to Paul? Some magnify the power of nature, and cry that up: and some
magnify moral virtue, and level grace with it, making moral virtue and grace
all one. Now let us consider, had not Paul as much of nature, as much of the
strength of free will as other men, had he not as much good nature in him as
other men? Nay, was not Paul brought to as high a pitch in morality; had he not
as much moral virtue in him as other men? He says of himself, he was brought
up a Pharisee; and the Pharisees were the strictest sect among the Jews,
insomuch that it was a saying among them, If but two men went to Heaven, one
would be a Pharisee. Now Paul was a Pharisee, and he says, as touching the Law
he was blameless, Phil. 3.5. Yea, over and above all this, Paul had the habits
of supernatural grace, and a great measure of supernatural grace. 1 Timothy 1.14.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ was exceeding abundant through faith, and
love which was in Jesus Christ. Yet notwithstanding all this, notwithstanding
the goodness of Paul's nature, the power of free will, notwithstanding the
height of morality he had attained unto, that he was blameless touching the
Law; notwithstanding the habits of supernatural grace, yet he stood in need of
actual grace, of actual assistance in his temptations, for otherwise this
promise had been in vain. What need had Christ to have told Paul, My grace
shall be sufficient for thee? He might have spoken to Paul in this language,
Look to thy self Paul, thou have strength enough to repel thy temptations; thou
have the power of nature, the strength of thy freewill, the habits of grace,
and these are weapons enough to furnish thee against thy temptations. But on
the contrary, Christ tells him, My grace shall be sufficient for thee; and what
does this but plainly intimate, that Paul's free will, the power of nature, nay,
the power of habitual grace received, had not been sufficient for him, had not
present actual grace assisted him? God does not promise us that which is in our
own power. If he promise his grace shall be sufficient for us, it is a certain
sign that without grace we can do nothing.

2. Let us labor to see the necessity and excellency of Divine grace. Use 2.
When God would promise the best thing to Paul that he could give him, he
promises divine grace to him, My grace shall be sufficient for thee. O the
sweetness that is in Divine grace! O the unutterable, inexpressible sweetness
of Divine grace!

Austin observes that Divine grace consists in a certain spiritual suavity that
is let in upon the soul.

I may have occasion hereafter to show the reason of that unutterable sweetness
that is in Divine grace, and there is a great account to be given of it.
Certainly if we have indeed tasted that the Lord is gracious, as the expression
is, 1 Pet. 2.3. we shall find such a sweetness in grace, that we never found in
any thing else. And if we do not find unutterable sweetness in Divine grace,
above what we find in external things, it is a certain sign we have but a
little grace. Carnal men dote upon carnal pleasures, but the reason is, because
they think there is no higher sweetness. Austin, that holy man professes, that
God had allured him with the sweetness of his grace, and now it was most sweet
to him to want other sweetnesses. O let us labor to experiment the sweetness
of Divine grace. If once we have experimented the sweetness of Divine grace, we
shall value that above all other sweetnesses whatsoever; but of this more
hereafter.

The end of the Eighth Sermon.
SERMON IX.
2 Cor. 12.9. And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my
strength is made perfect in weakness.


THat which we were last treating of in the Doctrinal part, was, how grace is
said to be sufficient for the Saints; and two particulars have been already
mentioned.

The 3. Particular is this, 3. Particular how Grace is said to be sufficient.
Gods grace is said to be sufficient, in that Divine grace shall not be wanting
when it is necessary. As God will give out grace suitable to the trials and
temptations of his Children; so he will give out grace to them in the fittest
and most opportune time, 2 Cor. 6.2. I have heard thee in an accepted time. God
may, and oftentimes does permit things to come to extremity with his people,
but when it is come to extremity, then he is sure to help them. You know what
was said in that case, In the mount will the Lord be seen. When Isaac was just
ready to be sacrificed, and the knife put to his throat, then did the Lord step
in and help. So likewise, Jonah 2.2. I cried by reason of my affliction to the
Lord, and he heard me; out of the belly of Hell cried I, and thou heardest my
voice. Jonah was in the Whales belly, which was to him in his apprehension as
the belly of hell, because he apprehended Divine displeasure in it; there he
saw no hope of deliverance, but then did he cry to the Lord, and the Lord heard
and delivered him. It is an observation of Luther, God does many times not hear
his people till it come to the very last sigh and groan that is in their
hearts, and when they can pray, and sigh, and groan no longer, then God hears
them. Now then is Divine grace said to be sufficient, when grace steps in and
helps us in the most opportune time, in the very nick, and utmost time of
extremity, Psalm. 116.3. The sorrows of death compass me, and the pains of Hell
gat hold upon me: I found trouble and sorrow. What then? I was brought low, and
the Lord helped me. So in another place, Who remembered us in our low estate,
for his mercy indureth for ever.

In the last place, Partic. 4.
Grace is said to be sufficient, when, as our temptations and trials are
continued and lengthned out, so Divine grace is continued and lengthned out. If
God should give us Divine help and assistance at one time, and withdraw it from
us at another time, we should certainly fail. But then grace is said to be
sufficient when there is a continuation of Divine grace: and as our temptations
and trials are lengthned out, so divine grace is continued and lengthned out to
us, and this seems to be the plain case in the Text. Paul could not obtain
fredom from his temptation, but he obtained this answer, that Gods grace should
be sufficient for him; the meaning is, God would not so answer him, as to
remove the temptation from him; the temptation should continue still; yet Paul
should have this answer, that he should not be deserted in point of grace;
grace should continue constant with him, till the temptation was brought to a
period. And thus grace is said to be sufficient for us, when though our
temptations are great and of long continuance, yet we have grace given to us to
counterbalance them, and to make us to bear up under them. It is an emphatical
expression, 1 Cor. 10.13. God will with the temptation make way to escape that
we may be able to bear it. Observe that expression, with the temptation; that
expression, with the temptation, seems to intimate thus much clearly, that the
temptation may be lengthned out, that it may be continued for a long time. Yea,
but Divine grace shall be continued all the while; though the temptation
continue, yet Divine grace shall not be wanting; there shall be grace with the
temptation, that is, grace and temptation shall run parallel; the temptation
shall last no longer than Divine grace is continued and lengthned out to us,
Romans 14.4. God is able to make him stand. It is spoken of such as are weak and
infirm in grace. Now God is able to make them stand, when we are never so weak,
and infirm, and impotent in our selves, Divine grace is able to make us stand,
and if we have recourse unto it, will make us stand.

Thus I have shown what grace is, and how grace is said to be sufficient.

The 3. Particular that is to be spoken to in the Doctrine, is this, what that
grace is that God affords to his people under their conflicts, trials and
temptations. My grace shall be sufficient for you. What is this grace that God
affords and communicates to the souls of his people when they are under
temptations, that I shall open to you in three Propositions briefly.

1. God gives to them corroborating or strengthening grace to manage their
temptations, and to help them to grapple and conflict with them. It is one
property of Divine grace to corroborate and strengthen the soul, strengthened
with might by his spirit in the inward man, Ephesians. 3.16. Strengthened with all
might according to his glorious power, etc. Col. 1.11. The God of all grace
settle, strengthen, and establish you, 1 Pet. 5.10. The God of all grace; It is
the property of grace to strengthen, to corroborate the soul. We are
insufficient of our selves to resist or withstand the least temptation. Now
this is one effect of Divine grace, that grace inables us to resist, withstand
and repel a temptation. Whatever we may think of our selves, were it not for
the help of Divine grace, we should yield to the first touch and impression of
a temptation. Now Divine grace helps the infirmity of the will, which would
soon yield, and make no resistance, did not Divine grace fortify and
strengthen it; It is a memorable passage of Austin, S^^^eatum est inst^m^^ati
vol^^a^^s humanae, ut divina gratia indeclinahiliter and insuperabiliter
ageretur. Aug.
God, says he, has provided against the infirmity of man's will by the help of
Divine grace, by which it is so acted as not to be turned aside or overcome; so
that although it be weak and infirm of it self, yet it shall not be overcome by
any difficulty. And that which he farther adds is very remarkable: So it comes
to pass, says he, that the weak and infirm will of man, by the strength of
Divine grace perseveres in a little good, whereas the sound and strong will of
the first man, did not persevere in a greater good. If you consider it, our
first Parents when left to themselves and the liberty of their own will, did
not overcome a lesser temptation. Adam when in Paradise being left to the
freedom of his own will, did not by the strength of his own free will overcome
the first temptation offered to him. But now Divine grace inables them who are
under the power of it, to resist greater temptations. The first Adam left to
the freedom and liberty of his own will, was soon overcome by the first
temptation offered to him. The second Adam, the Lord Jesus Christ, that was
assaulted with all manner of temptations, being corroborated and strengthened by
Divine grace was overcome by none. So that we may clearly see the power of
free will, and the power of free grace in the two Adams; The first Adam being
under the power of his own free will, was overcome by the first temptation. The
second Adam being under the power of Divine grace overcame all temptations.

2. God gives to his people supporting grace, to keep them from fainting under
their temptations. We are exceeding apt to faintings and despondencies under
our conflicts, Heb. 12.3. Consider him that endured such contradiction of
sinners against himself, lest ye be weary and faint in your minds. Long
afflictions, long exercises and temptations do dispose us to fainting and
despondencie, (and experienced souls, souls trained up under conflicts, know
this to be true) yea not only so, but they have a far worse effect sometimes,
they sometimes dispose the children of God to hard thoughts of God, and
repinings against God, and to unworthy speeches of God. A sad instance of this
we have in very holy men, in Job and in the Prophet Jeremiah, though they bore
their afflictions a long time, with a great deal of patience and calmness, yet
having been under their afflictions for some time, they brake forth into
intemperate speeches and sore sits of impatience. And both the one and the
other of them was found cursing the day of their birth; which shows what the
effects of long trials and exercises is, unless there be Divine grace to
support and keep us under them. Now Divine grace so far as it is given to us
keeps us from these despondencies, that we be not tired out with the length of
our temptations, Isa. 41.10. Fear not, I am with thee, be not dismayed I am thy
God, I will strengthen thee, yea I will uphold thee with the right hand of my
righteousness. God upholds his people under their temptations by Divine grace,
so as to keep them from fainting under them, Psalm. 27.13. I had fainted unless
I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living. God
keeps his people from fainting, by stirring up faith and hope in them, that
they may see a gracious Issue of all their afflictions. It is a great relief to
the Saints under their afflictions and temptations, to hope that things shall
end well at last; Though I walk in the midst of trouble thou will revive me,
says David, Psalm. 138.7. And thus Divine grace helps the Saints and keeps them
from fainting, by keeping alive faith and hope in them, that things shall go
well with them at last.

3. And Lastly, God gives to his people victorious or conquering grace to
enable them to overcome temptations; Greater is he that is in you, than he that
is in the world. The grace of God that is in the hearts of the Saints will make
them superior to all their temptations.

But you will say, Objection,
does not experience tell us to the contrary? Do not we see many of the Saints
of God lamentably foiled and worsted by temptations? Was not Sampson, and
David, and Peter overcome and foiled by their temptations? How then is it that
Divine grace is victorious in the Saints, and makes them overcome their
temptations?

To this I Answer, Answer.


That though the Saints of God are foiled by some particular temptations, yet
Divine grace overcomes in them at last. Though Sampson had several foiles, yet
his faith got the victory at last; and that appears from hence, that he is put
upon record for one of the Worthies of God and eminent in faith, Heb. 11. And
so Peter and David, though they were foiled by temptation, yet they were
recovered from their falls by the power of Divine grace. David's repentance, and
Peter's repentance were as eminent as their falls had been. And the fall of the
incestuous person in the Church of Corinth, together with the defilement that
came on the Church by reason of it, was followed by such an after-work of
repentance, both by the person himself and the whole Church, as that the
Apostle says they had approved themselves to be clear in that matter, 2 Cor.
7.11. (...).
pure, chaste in that matter, so the word signifies. So that as the falls of
some of the Saints have been eminent, so their repentance has been as eminent;
Divine grace is victorious in the hearts of the Saints at last; though the
Saints may receive a foil in particular temptations, yet Divine grace overcomes
at last. To him that overcomes will I give to sit with me on my throne, Rev.
3.21. It is by the help of Divine grace that we do overcome. Now the
victoriousness of Divine grace appears in two things.

1. The victoriousness of Divine grace appears in this, in inabling the Saints
to persevere in the spiritual conflict, 1 Timothy 6.12. Fight the good fight of
Faith; whilst a man continues fighting he is not overcome. The Saints are
enabled to continue fighting to the last. Hence is that of the Apostle Paul, I
have fought a good fight, 2 Timothy 4.7.
I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, etc. Paul continued fighting
to the last, and herein does the victoriousness of Divine grace discover it
self, that it makes the Saints keep the field, they go on fighting to the last.

2. The victoriousness of Divine grace appears in this, in inabling the Saints
to persevere in a way of faith and obedience to the end, Rev. 2.7. Be thou
faithful to the death. They could not be so, did not Divine grace help them.
Romans 2.7. To them who by patient continuance in well-doing, etc. observe the
expression, by patient continuance in well-doing. The Saints victoriousness
appears in this, in their patient continuance in well-doing. Now it is Divine
grace that inables them unto this, Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me. What is the meaning of that? Talis
ac tantus trit timor meus, ut mihi perseveranter adhaereant. Aug.
that is, says Austin, Such and so great shall that fear of mine be that I
will put into their hearts, that they shall perseveringly adhere to me. Our
continuance and perseverance in obedience, it is as well from Divine grace as
the beginnining of it. It is another speech of Austin, Si in nullo gloriandum,
quando nostrum nihil sit, profecto nec de ob^dientia perseverantissima
gloriandum est. Aug.
For as much as we ought to glory in nothing of our own, since nothing is our
own, we ought not to glory in our most persevering obedience. It is by Divine
grace that we persevere in obedience; the same grace that makes us to begin in
a way of obedience at first, is that that makes us persevere and continue in a
way of obedience to the end.

Thus I have shown you what that grace is that God is wont to afford to his
people, under their trials, conflicts and temptations.

The 4. and last thing that remains briefly to be spoken to in the doctrinal
part, is the grounds and reasons of the point.

Why is it that praying souls shall have a fufficiency of grace to carry them
through their conflicts and temptations. I shall touch at the Reasons very
briefly.

1. The first Reason is, Reason 1.
Because God loves the prayers of his people and delights in them. The prayer
of the upright is his delight, Prove. 15.8.

2. Reason, Reason 2.
As God loves the prayers of his people, why, so he will be sure to answer
their prayers one way or other, Matthew. 7.8. Every one that asks receives,
whosoever seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall be opened.

3. Reason is, Reason 3.
As God delights in the prayers of his people, so he delights in no prayers
more than in those that are made for Divine grace, Matthew. 5.6. Blessed are they
which do hunger and thirst after righteousness. He does not say, that they that
hunger after this and that temporal thing shall be satisfied, but they that
thirst after righteousness, after spiritual and Divine grace, they shall be
satisfied, Luke 11.13. If ye being evil know how to give good things to your
children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them
that ask him? If his people ask grace and the spirit from him, this is the most
pleasing request, and this request shall be sure to speed, Isa. 41.17. When the
poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue fails for
thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Jacob will not forsake them.
What is the water there spoken of? Certainly it is Divine grace. When they seek
water, that is, when they seek Divine grace and the influences of the spirit, I
the Lord will hear them, I the God of Jacob will not forsake them. God is not
wont to deny the prayers of his people when they ask Divine grace of him, God
resists the proud, but he gives grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5.5. God is most
delighted to give grace, and he is most pleased when his people ask grace.

4. Reason is this, Reason 4. Desiderare auxilium gratiae est initium gratiae.
Aug.
The desires that are in us after grace, are some beginnings of grace; to
desire the help of Divine grace is some beginnings of it. For we could not so
will, that is, will Divine grace, did not God inspire that will into us, for it
is God that works in us to will, as well as to do. 1. It is God that works in
us to will; it is we that will indeed, but it is God that helps us to will; for
the preparations of the heart are from God. 2. Prove. 16.1.
God having given us that grace to will and desire grace, he crowns his own
grace in us, he crowns that grace with success. He works in us to will, and to
do, of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13.

Lastly, Reason 5.
The end why God brings us under conflicts and temptations, it is, that his
grace might be seen in helping of us. This is expressed here in the Text, My
strength is perfected in infirmity. Therefore if God should deny us grace under
temptations, he should lose one of his main and principal ends in permitting us
to be tempted; for one of Gods main ends in permitting us to be tempted is,
that the power of his grace might be seen and magnified in us. It were not
possible for the Saints to stand or bear up under their trials and temptations,
did not Divine grace assist them. Now if God should withhold his grace when
they need it and cry to him for it, God should lose the honor of his own grace
which he delights to magnify and illustrate.

These are the reasons of the point.

We come now to make the Use and Application of the Doctrine.

The first Use may be by way of Information. Use 1.
This point may inform us, that man's free will is not sufficient of it self,
without Divine grace, to resist temptation, or indeed to do any thing that is
spiritually good. This inference does naturally arise from the Doctrine, If
Paul had had a sufficiency of himself to have grappled with his temptations,
God needed not have promised his grace to him. But now when God promises that
his grace shall be sufficient for Paul, that is a certain argument that Paul's
own ability, and the strength of his own Free Will was not sufficient of it
self, to help him to overcome his temptations without Divine grace. What need
were there that Gods grace should be promised to us, to be sufficient for us,
if our Freewill were sufficient of it self, without Gods grace to carry us
through our temptations? This Idol of Free Will forged by proud nature, which
would fain retain that excellency, which man was only possessed of before his
fall, is that which has been adored in the world all along. The Pelagians of
old held that free will was untouched, unmaimed, not hurt at all, and that man's
will was sufficient of it self, if it pleased, to obey the commands of God. The
Semipelagians held that free will was wounded indeed and maimed, but then it
was not wholly corrupt, and therefore they attributed man's conversion partly to
grace, and partly to the free will of man, and so divided the matter, partly
between the grace of God, and partly between man's will. The Papists in the
Council of Trent condemn this as a great error of the Protestants, that they
hold that after the fall of Adam free will is lost. Now when they are pleased
to fasten this opinion on the Protestants, that freewill is lost; certainly no
man was ever so absurd as to imagine that that natural power or faculty of
free will was lost. Man has still his natural faculties left to him since his
fall. His understanding remains, and his will which is a free power, and has a
power and liberty of election in it, this faculty still remains in him.
Neither do the Prostestants affirm, that the will has lost its liberty in
civil, natural and political matters; (although we must suppose, that even in
these things the Divine Providence, that governs all other things, has a
supremacy over the will of man, and governs it in such away as is consistent
with the liberty of the will.) But that which the Protestants affirm is this,
that since the fall of Adam the will has lost its liberty to that which is
spiritually good. The free will that they deny is free will to good, there is
no free will in man since the fall to that which is spiritually good. The will
retains its liberty to sin still, it freely, yet necessarily wills sin, but it
cannot will good, Liberum Arbitri^m ad malum s^ssicit, ad bonum autem nihil est
nisi adjuvetur ab omnipotente bono. August.
and to this agrees the Doctrine of Austin, Free Will is sufficient as to
evil, but it is nothing at all as to what is good, unless it be helped and
assisted by the omnipotent good. Without the power of omnipotent grace the
Scripture teaches us, that we have not sufficiency of our selves to think a
good thought. Nay, we are so far from having a sufficiency of our selves to
have a good thought, that Every thought and imagination of man's heart by nature
is evil, only evil, and continually evil, Genesis 6.5. Evil thoughts do naturally
proceed from us. But we are beholding unto Divine grace for every holy thought;
and what should this teach us, but to be exceeding humble in our selves, and to
think meanly of our selves? It is a great saying of Calvin, The Foundation of
our Religion is humility. Truly that Religion that exalts self, will not be
found to be a good Religion in the conclusion. The whole of the Gospel (if we
understand what the Gospel is) it lies in this, to show us that all our
Salvation must be from grace, and grace alone. Deny this, and we overthrow the
whole frame and fabric of the Gospel. Blessed are the poor in spirit, Matthew.
5.3.
for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Till we are emptied of all high thoughts
of our own sufficiency, we are not Subjects capable of receiving Gospel grace,
for the Gospel offers grace to them that have nothing, to them that are poor.

In the second place, Use 2.
this shows us the excellency of Divine grace. When the Lord would give the
best thing to Paul that he could give him, what is it that he does promise to
him? He promises grace to him, My grace shall be sufficient for thee. He does
not promise to give to Paul that which he prayed for. Paul prayed to be
delivered from his temptation, but God would not give him that, but he gives
him that which is far better, he gives him Divine grace, he says, My grace
shall be sufficient for thee, this shows us the excellency of Divine grace. O
that we knew the excellency and sweetness of Divine grace! Fain would I, if I
were able, set before you a little the excellency and sweetness of Divine
grace, to make my own soul and yours more in love with it. There is infinite
beauty, pleasantness, delightfulness and sweetness in Divine grace. Those sweet
and fresh gales that we are sensible of in the spring season are not so sweet
to our senses, as the air and sweet gales of Divine grace are to an holy soul,
that has experience of them. I shall instance only in one particular at
present, to show the sweetness of Divine grace, though in another discourse I
shall set before you more at large the excellency and sweetness of Divine
grace. And the paticular I shall mention is only this.

1. It is all one what condition we are in, if we have but the gales of Divine
grace, and are acted by Divine grace in every thing. If we be in prosperity,
grace will make us spiritual in the use of all our comforts, grace will show us
God in every comfort, grace will cause us to find out God in every thing that
we enjoy, and lead us to God in every thing. Grace will keep us from sticking
in the creatures we enjoy, and grace will elevate us to God by these things. So
likewise, if we be in adversity and afflictions, grace will quiet the soul
under afflictions, grace will cause a man to rest in the divine wisdom and
will; grace will cause a man to be content to be without the things another
has, and to satisfy himself in God without these things. This is that which
made Paul to say, He had learnt whatsoever state he was in, therewith to be
content: he knew both how to be abased, and he knew how to abound: every where
and in all things he was instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both to
abound and suffer need: he could do all things through Christ's strengthening of
him, Phil. 4.11, 12, 13. Divine grace made every condition sweet to him, thus
will Divine grace make every condition sweet to us, if we have a sufficiency of
grace to manage it aright. This should teach us to covet and desire Divine
grace more than all other things. Truly, we need not be much concerned what our
outward condition is, but our great concernment is to pray that we may have
Divine grace to act us in every condition. If we can feel and experiment the
energy and operation of Divine grace, that will carry us through every
condition to the glory of God and our own comfort. We are expecting times of
trouble, and I fear there is too great cause for us to expect them: but let us
not be so much solicitous what may befall us, what difficulties we may be
exercised withal, as we are solicitous to get Divine grace. Oh let us pray for
a sufficiency of Divine grace, and then whatever our troubles, trials and
calamities may be, Divine grace will carry us through them all.

I shall add no more at present, but in another discourse I shall enlarge
farther on this subject, to show the excellency and sweetness of Divine grace.

The end of the Ninth Sermon.
SERMON X.
2 Cor. 12.9. And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my
strength is made perfect in weakness.


I Come in the next place to an Use of Admonition. Use 3.
This should admonish us to take heed of trusting in our selves, or presuming
in our own strength. If we need Divine grace to carry us through our conflicts
and temptations, then we should take heed how we trust in our selves, Prove.
28.26. He that trusts in his own heart is a fool. We are never in greater
danger, than when we presume on our own strength most. Peter presumed on his
own strength, but how soon was he foiled? We think we can do great things
before we come to the trial, but when a temptation comes, then we quickly see
our own weakness. It is a notable passage I have read of one of the Ancients.
It is a speech of Ambrose, We often speak, says he, of contemning this world,
and of having nothing to do with it; but oh, that our affections were as
cautelous and wary to avoid it, as it is easy for us to speak of avoiding it,
but that which is worse than this, the bait and temptations of earthly desires
do oftentimes come in upon us, and vanity overspreading the mind, does
oftentimes occupy and take it up; so that, that which we study to avoid, we
shall think of and revolve in our minds; and, for a man to keep himself from
these incursions of temptation is very hard and difficult, Non in potestate
nostra est cor nostrum and nostrae cogitationes. Ambros.
but to put them off altogether it is impossible; our own heart, our own
thoughts are not in our own power. How often does sad experience evidence this
to be true? Oh that every one of us would dive into our own hearts, will not
our own experience tell us, that this is too true? How often do our own
thoughts, our own passions, and affections hurry us contrary to the deliberate
purpose of our will? We resolve it may be against such and such a sin, and yet
our own thoughts and affections hurry us contrary to our own resolution. It is
good for us therefore not to be highminded but fear, Prove. 28.14.
blessed is the man that fears always. It is good for us to be jealous over
our own hearts, always to suspect the weakness and infirmity of our own heart,
and how prone we are to be overcome by temptation; for this is certain, we are
never in greater danger to be overcome by a temptation, than when we suspect
our own hearts least.

We shall now reassume what we touched on more briefly before, and discourse a
little more largely concerning the excellency of Divine grace, My grace shall
be sufficient for thee. The second Use reassumed concerning the excellency of
Divine grace.
When the Lord would give the best thing to Paul that he could give him, he
promises Divine grace to him, My grace shall be sufficient for thee. God does
not promise to take away the temptation from him, though Paul had prayed for
that, for this thing I besought the Lord thrice that it might depart from me.
He besought God to take away the temptation from him, but God does not hear him
as to that, he does not deliver him from the temptation, but he promises him
something better, he promises him divine grace to carry him through his
temptations, My grace shall be sufficient for thee. This shows us the
excellency of Divine grace. My design is upon this occasion to speak something
of the excellency of grace. This I am sensible is a noble subject in it self,
and oh that I were able to speak of it according to the worth and dignity of
it. I would fain speak of the excellency of Divine grace, that so I might call
up my own soul and others to the love and desire of it. Here I shall propound,
and set several considerations before us, to show unto us the excellency of
Divine grace.

The first Consideration is this, Consid. 1.
Grace is such a gift that is of a supernatural rank and order; grace is such a
thing as transcends and excels the whole sphere of nature, grace is a certain
gift of a supernatural order. Gratia est donum quoddam supernatural^ ordinis.
It was the Divine power that created and made all the creatures and
constituted them in their beings, and it is the Divine providence that
conserves the creatures in their beings, and in their operations. The whole
course of nature is preserved by the general influx of Divine providence. It is
a contradiction to suppose such a creature as is independent upon God the first
cause, either as to its being or operation. But now although the whole course
of nature be thus preserved by the general providence of God, yet grace is
someting that is altioris ordinis, as the Schools speak, of a higher order,
something that does excedere ordinem naturae, exceed the order of nature. The
creatures, by the general concourse of Divine providence, may perform such and
such natural actions for natural and convenient ends, but now grace elevates
and raises the soul. Grace elevates the soul to such actions as are above
nature, and to those ends that are supernatural. Grace is that power or impress
that is left upon the soul, whereby the soul is carried forth to supernatural
acts. Man as he is a man, as he is a rational, intellectual creature, may do
civil and political actions; he may buy and sell, traffic and converse, make
wholesome laws for the good and benefit of the community. But now there are some
acts which are above the sphere of nature, as to believe God upon his word, to
love God above all things, to refer a man's self and all his actions to the
glory of God as his last end; it is not from a principle of nature, but from a
principle of Divine and supernatural grace, that a man is carried forth to such
acts as these, so that grace carries a man above the sphere of nature.

2. To show the excellency of Divine grace, Consid. 2.
consider that it is Divine grace that enables us to resist and overcome
temptation. We should be ready to yield to the first touch and impress of a
temptation had we not aid and affistance from Divine grace to refist it.
Free Will, (as has been hinted before) was soon overcome in the first Adam, by
the first temptation that offered it self. But now Divine grace in the second
Adam overcame all temptations: So that by comparing the two Adams together, the
first and the second Adam, we may see the plain difference between the virtue
or power of free will, and the virtue and efficacy of Divine grace. Free Will
in the first Adam was overcome by the first temptation, Divine grace in Christ
the second Adam overcame all temptations. So that if we would be superior to
all temptations, we must be sure to subject our selves to that grace that
raigns in the second Adam. All those habitual gifts that the first Adam was
endowed with, did not make him superior to one temptation, though Adam in
innocence was possessed of the image of God, yet all those habitual gifts that
were in the first Adam did not make him superior to one temptation. But yet
that actual grace that is conveyed to us by Christ the second Adam, can set us
up above all temptations. How little taking and prevalent are the strongest
temptations when Divine grace is present? Joseph that was solicited by his
Mistress from day to day, yea who had violent hands laid upon him to have
forced him to yield to her, yet having the presence of Divine grace with him,
overcame all these temptations. On the other hand if we have not the assistance
of Divine grace, a less temptation will prevail. David, and Sampson were
carried away by the bare aspect of a temptation; so vast a difference is there
in us when we have the presence of Divine grace to help us, and when we have
Divine grace withdrawn from us.

3. To show us the excellency of Divine grace, Consid. 3.
consider, Divine grace is that which does facilitate the acts of obedience.
Grace makes a man to act with ease and facility in the ways of God: and whereas
without divine grace, every act of obedience would not only be hard but
impossible, by the presence and assistance of Divine grace, the acts of
obedience are made facile and easy. The moral Philosophers say of habits, that
they do facilitate the Power to act, and render the faculty more apt and ready
for action. He that has acquired an habit of temperance, it is more easy for
him to deny himself, and abstain from what is pleasing, and may be tendered to
him. Thus Divine grace facilitates the ways of God, it renders the duties of
Religion more sweet and easy; his commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5.3.
The reason why holy duties seem hard and difficult to us, and the reason why we
do not know how to wade through them, it is because we have no more experience
of Divine grace. The assistance of Divine grace renders duties that seem very
hard and difficult in themselves, to be very facile and easy, Psalm. 119.32. I
will run the way of thy commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart.

4. To show the excellency of Divine grace, Consid. 4.
consider, it is actual grace that quickens and excites habitual grace.
Although we have the habits of grace in us; yet we cannot exert and put forth
these habits into act without actual grace, John 15.5. without me ye can do
nothing. Believers, that are in Christ, that have the habits of grace, cannot
perform any act of obedience without actual grace and present influence from
Christ. Awake O North wind, come thou South, blow upon my garden, that the
spices thereof may flow out, Cant. 4.16. The Saints graces which are here
compared to spices, they will not be in exercise and so yield a pleasant
fragrant savor, unless there be fresh gales of the spirit to blow upon them.
As we are beholding to Divine grace for planting the habits of grace in us
first of all, so we are beholding to Divine grace for every new act of race we
put forth, For it is God that works in us both to will and to do, Phil. 2.13.

5. It is by the help of Divine grace, that we mortisie corruption, Consid. 5.
and repress the nutions of sin that are within us. Romans 8.13. If ye by the
spirit mortify the deeds of the flesh. It is by the spirit that we must
mortify the deeds of the flesh. Mortification is a duty enjoined upon us; we
are commanded to mortify sin, Col. 3.5. Mortify your members which are upon
the earth. Oh, but though Mortification is a duty incumbent upon us, yet it is
by the help of the Spirit and the assistance of Divine grace that we perform
this duty. Certain it is, says Austin, Certurn est, nos facere com facimus,
sed ille facit ut faciamus, praebendo vires efficacissimas voluntati. August.
that we do what we do, but it is as certain that it is God that enables us to
do what we do, by affording most effectual strength to the will. When
corruption moves and stirs in us we should soon yield and consent, did not the
Spirit of God give us efficacious power to resist. Our hearts are as weak and
unstable as water, we are unable of our selves to resist the least motion of
sin, but by Divine grace it is that we repress the impetuous and violent
motions of sin. What is the reason that corruption at some times so soon rises
up, and gets head, and bears us down, and transports us in an uncomely manner;
whereas at another time, we are able to check the first risings and motions of
corruption? What is the reason of this difference, but that at one time we have
the assistance of Divine grace; and God leaves us at another time to our
selves, but for our humiliation.

6. It is Divine grace that does recover and restore us after our relapses and
falls into sin. Consid. 6.
As it is Divine grace that prevents and keeps us from falling, so far as we
are kept from falling; so it is Divine grace that recovers us out of our falls.

1. It is Divine grace that keeps us from falling into sin, so far as we are
kept, Jude 24. To him that is able to keep you from falling. We should fall
foully, we should fall scandalously, did not Divine grace keep us. Oh, it
becomes us to love Divine grace greatly. There is not the holiest person that
could keep himself from falling into a gross and scandalous sin, did not Divine
grace keep him. Some of the Saints have fallen into foul and scandalous sins,
David did so, and others of the Saints have done so, and did not Divine grace
keep us we should certainly do as they have done. Our Savior bids us pray,
Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, and what is the meaning
of those two Petitions, but that we might have grace to keep us from
temptation, and grace to deliver us from evil. Now if we ought to pray to be
delivered from evil, certainly we cannot keep our selves from the evil of sin
without the power of Divine grace, therefore if we are kept from the like
falls, wherewith others are overtaken, let us not be high-minded but fear, let
us remember that it is by grace that we stand.

2. As Divine grace keeps us from falling so far as we are kept, so it is
Divine grace that recovers us out of our falls. We should remain long enough
under our falls did not Divine grace raise us up, and recover us out of them.
It is conceived by Divines, that David did continue some time under his fall
before he was recovered out of it. Look as when God leaves us to our selves
first of all, our own hearts will hurry us to the greatest exorbitancies; so if
God continue to leave us to our selves, we shall pine and languish under our
distempers, our own corruptions will tumultuate more and more. For though
corruption cannot not reign in a godly man as it does in a wicked man, (it is
inconsistent with grace for sin to reign in any that have grace) yet it may
rage in him for a time, and Luther has a saying to this purpose, That sin may
rage in a godly man for a time more than in a wicked man. Oh, but how very sad
and bitter is it where God permits and suffers corruption thus to tumultuate
and rage in us? Truly till Divine grace do recover us, corruption will have its
raging fits. It is Divine grace that does recover us. He restores my soul,
says David. Oh, until Divine grace do restore us, it will be long enough till
we restore our selves, nay we shall never be restored. Not that we are to sit
still, but the more we find corruption to rage, the more ought we to groan to
Heaven, and cry out so much the louder for Divine grace: but this is certain,
till Divine grace recover us, we shall never be recovered. When Peter was left
to himself, left by Divine grace, he denied his Master the first, second and
third time, and there was no sign of his recovery, till Christ gave him a look
with his eye. It must be some powerful touch of Divine grace that must recover
us when we are fallen by corruption and temptation.

7. It is Divine grace that quickens, Consid. 7.
enlivens and raises the affections after they have been flat and dead. Holy
men, persons that have walked with God, do often complain of damps and
deadnesses that they feel coming upon themselves. It is not so with them as
sometimes it has been with them. They do not feel that fervency in prayer,
that liveliness in holy duties, that activity for God, those meltings in their
affections as sometimes they have found. Oftentimes there is great listlesness
to holy duties, much coldness and deadness in their hearts, much streightness
in their affections in their performance of holy duties. David prays in Psalm.
119. Uphold me that I may live, that was an argument that he was sensible that
his spiritual life was greatly decayed, that he was grown dead, and heavy, and
lumpish in the ways of God; that he had lost that quickness and liveliness of
his affections that once he had. Thus is it with others of the people of God,
they find deadness, coldness, lumpishness too often coming upon them, and the
cause of this spiritual deadness is commonly one of these things, either, 1.
Unthankfulness for former quicknings, or else, 2. Presumption of our selves,
and our own strength, and thinking that we had quickening and enlargement at
command. Or else, 3. Neglect of some of the means of grace public or private.
Or else, 4. Some inordinate affection springing up in the soul. Or else, 5.
Some secret indulgence to some sin that grieves the Spirit, and causes the
Spirit to withdraw from us. These are ordinarily the causes of those deadnesses
that fall upon the Saints. Now when the Saints fall under these deadnesses, it
is Divine grace must quicken them; they cannot raise themselves from under
these deadnesses, they cannot get from under them. We may think to rise and
shake our selves, and do as at other times; but believe it, if the Spirit of
God be departed from us, as from Sampson, we shall fall flat to the ground: as
a man that is wounded, may essay to rise up and to walk, but presently falls
down to the earth again. But now Divine grace, that puts new life and strength
into the soul; a fresh gale of the Spirit elevates and raises a dead soul. Look
as a ship when it is becalmed, and there is no wind stirring; can make no way,
but then a fresh gale comes, and then it sails amain. So when a soul has
received a fresh gale of Divine grace, then it begins to move afresh, then it
can act afresh, whereas before it was becalmed and found littie stirring,
little motion Godward. Draw me, says the Church, and then we will run after
thee, Cant. 1.4.

8. The excellency of divine grace appears in this, Consid. 8.
that it elevates a man above the world. What is it that makes some of the
Saints to contemn the world when others do so much admire it? it is the the
power of Divine grace that elevates and raises their hearts above the world.
It is grace that makes the world seem a little thing. Grace shows a man
something higher than the world, and causes a man to look down upon the world
with a holy disdain and contempt, as a thing that is much beneath him, Gal.
6.14. I am crucified to the world, says the Apostle, and we look not to the
things that are seen, 2 Cor. 4.18. Grace carries up the soul above temporal
things. Grace causes a man to look upon the things of this world as mean and
of short continuance. Other men admire the world and pursue it as their chief
good; but now a man that is acted by Divine grace does not so, he has no such
admiring thoughts of it, he does not apprehend so much good, so much excellency
in it, but his heart is carried out to something higher.

9. Grace, Consid. 9.
it enables a man to bear afflictions, grace quiets the soul under affliction,
and strengthens it to bear up with patience under it, 1 Col. 7. Strengthened
unto all patience. It is Divine grace that strengthens us to bear afflictions
with patience, we should sink and succumb, and despond, did not Divine grace
strengthen us to bear up under affliction, Isa. 40. last. He gives power to
the faint, and to them that have no might he increases strength. Truly, a
little affliction will sink us if Divine grace do not help us; whereas on the
other hand, a great affliction will not be able to bear us down, if Divine
grace do but support us. If a man have a great presence and assistance of
Divine grace, it will help him to bear a long course, and tract, and series of
affliction. If one affliction come upon the neck of another, yet if he have
Divine grace continued to him, Divine grace will enable him to bear all. Job
had one affliction come upon the neck of another, and yet he faith, The Lord
has given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.
Indeed when he was left to himself, then he cursed the day of his birth, but as
long as Divine grace was with him he bare one affliction after another. When
the Lord leaves us to our selves, then we shall find secret murmurings and
repinings in our hearts against the providence of God, and God leaves us
sometimes on purpose to our selves to show us what is in our own hearts. If
Divine grace be withdrawn, then we have experience how apt our hearts are to
repine, and to be impatient under affliction; but when Divine grace is present
with us, then we can lie down sweetly under the hand of God and acquiesce in
his wisdom and will, believing that every thing that comes upon us is best for
us, as he said, I was dumb and opened not my mouth, because thou did it.

10. I shall only mention one particular more at the present, Consid. 10.
although there is more to be spoken concerning this argument of Divine grace:
Divine grace will teach us to think honorably of all the works and providence
of God, of all that he does abroad in the world, The Lord is righteous in all
his ways, and holy in all his works, Psalm. 145.17. A man that is acted by
carnal reason and fleshly wisdom, is offended and displeased with the works of
God that do not suit with his reason, and agree with his apprehension. But now
Divine grace teaches us to adore those providence of God that we cannot
comprehend, and attain to the reason of, How unsearchable are his judgments,
and his ways past finding out, Romans 11.33. Divine grace will teach a man to
allow that prerogative to God, as to know how to carry things beyond the line
of humane understanding. Grace will teach a man to allow God that wisdom, as to
be able to see the reason of things that we do not see the reason of, Job
12.23. He increases the nations and destroys them, he inlargeth the nations
and streightneth them again. Grace will teach us to adore the providence of God
in all these things. God has cast us upon an age of wonders, he is doing
strange and wonderful things in the earth, and what is our duty under all these
things, these strange and wonderful actings of providence? Truly,

1. To justify God, not to accuse him of unrighteousness in any of his
dispensations, but to allow him that sovereign wisdom, that he knows the reason
of those providence we do not see a reason of.

2. We ought to learn more effectually the vanity of the world and all earthly
things.

3. We ought to learn this by the great changes and revolutions that come upon
the earth to fix our heart upon things that are firm and stable, and cannot be
shaken, Heb. 12.28. We receiving a Kingdom that cannot be moved. We see by
experience that the states and nations of this world may be shaken, O but there
is a Kingdom that cannot be shaken. We receiving (says the Apostle) a Kingdom
which cannot be moved, and what is that Kingdom that cannot be shaken? Truly
the Kingdom of Christ in the hearts of men. The visible Kingdom of Christ may
meet with visible stops and interruptions, that is to say, the Gospel that was
preached in some places may be removed and taken from those places where it was
preached, the Ordinances may be removed from one place and carried to another,
this I call the visible Kingdom of Christ, this I say may meet with visible
stops and interruptions, yet this we may say concerning this visible Kingdom of
Christ, that look what the visible Kingdom of Christ loses in one time and in
one place, it shall certainly gain at another time and in another place. But
though the visible Kingdom of Christ may meet with some stops and
interruptions, yet the spiritual Kingdom of Christ that is set up in the souls
of men abides constant in the midst of all outward shakings. The Kingdom of
God, says our Savior, is within you. O there is a Kingdom within! and what
does that Kingdom consist of? It consists in righteousness, peace and joy in
the Holy Ghost. This Kingdom abides in the midst of all changes in the world.
Pardon of sin is still the same, the love and favor of God is still the same,
Salvation is still the same and we may live in the hope and comfort of these
things in the midst of all the changes, vicissitudes and revolutions that come
upon the world. And if we place our happiness in anything besides what is in
these things, our happiness is liable to be shaken. There is nothing in this
world we can be certain of, the greatest, highest and best things of this world
are subject to change. But if we know that our sins are pardoned, if we know
that we have an interest in the love and favor of God, if we know that our
souls shall be saved at last, here we have something that is certain to quiet
and comfort us. And let me be bold to say, it will never be well with us till
we are brought to this, to resolve all our happiness into the salvation of our
souls at last, I say till we do this we shall never be at rest, 1 Pet. 1.10.
Receiving the end of your hope, the Salvation of your soul. Until the thoughts
of salvation preponderate the sufferings of this life, till we are able in some
measure to relieve our selves with this one thought, whatever my afflictions
are, I hope I shall be saved at last, salvation is mine and I hope I shall live
with God for ever, it will never be well with us, for afflictions and trials
will come whether we expect them yea or no, and if one affliction be blown over
we must expect another. When therefore afflictions and trials come upon us, if
we have nothing to stay, balance and quiet the heart, we must needs sink under
them. Now nothing will bear up our hearts but the hope of salvation; let us
therefore live upon the hope of Salvation; there is nothing like to the solid
assurance and hope of salvation in the next life, that will bear us up under
the various changes of this life. Oh let us be making sure of salvation, that
will be our greatest comfort and support amidst all the changes we may meet
with here beneath.

The end of the Tenth Sermon.
SERMON XI.
2 Cor. 12.9. And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my
strength is made perfect in weakness.


THere are several other particulars that discover to us the excellency of
Divine grace, and you must carry this all along with you, that I am not now
speaking of that which Divines call habitual grace, but I am speaking of the
excellency of the influence of Divine grace, or that which is commonly called
actual grace. Now I shall propound several things more concerning the
excellency of grace, over and above what I have already spoken of.

The 1. Particular is this, It is by the help of Divine grace that we come to
apprehend the reality, the nature, the beauty and excellency of spiritual
things.

1. It is grace that helps us to apprehend the reality of spiritual things.
Carnal men that are destitute of Divine grace, hear of the things of God, but
they are only general notions, swimming in their brain. Carnal men may hear of
Heaven, and Hell, they may hear of the preciousness of the soul, they may hear
of the excellency of Christ, and the like: but they are not acquainted with the
reality of these things; they have indeed some general confused notions of
these things, but these things are not represented to the mind of carnal men as
real things. Now here is one discovery of the excellency of Divine grace.
Divine grace discovers to the soul the reality of spiritual things, it causes
a man to apprehend what is spoken concerning God to be real, it causes a man
to apprehend that Heaven and the glory of it is a real thing, and that the
excellency of Christ is a real thing, Heb. 11.1. Faith is the evidence of
things not seen. Faith causes things that have a real being in themselves, to
have a real being and existence in a man's apprehension. Faith makes things to
be clear, and plain, and evident to the soul. Those things that are dark,
obscure and uncertain to carnal men, that have no grace, these things appear
with clearness and evidence to a man that has Divine grace. It is said of the
ancient Saints, that, They were persuaded of the promises, Heb. 11.13. That is,
they were fully persuaded of the verity, truth, and certainty of the promises.
Other men have only some fluctuating, wavering, uncertain thoughts of spiritual
things, but they are not possessed with the truth and reality of them. It is
Divine grace only that causes spiritual things to appear to be real to the
mind and apprehension of a man.

2. It is Divine grace that causes a man to apprehend the nature of spiritual
things. Other men hear of God, and Christ, and the mysteries of the Gospel, but
it is little they apprehend of the nature of these things, 1 Cor. 2.14. But the
natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. A man that has not grace does not know, neither can he know
spiritual things. There must be a spiritual light let into the mind, to cause a
man to apprehend the nature of spiritual things, otherwise he cannot understand
them, because as the Apostle says, they are spiritually discerned. Now men
that have no grace, they are destitute of this light, whereby they should
apprehend spiritual things. But now Divine grace, that gives a spiritual
apprehension of spiritual things. To you it is given to know the mysteries of
the Kingdom, Matthew. 13.11. It is a spicial gift of God, to be acquainted with
the nature of spiritual things, for these things are riddles to other men. A
carnal man knows the outside of things, but he is not led into the inside of
truth; as the Apostle speaks concerning the Law, Heb. 10.1. That the Law had a
shadow of things to come, but it had not the very image of the things
themselves. So we may say a carnal man, a man that is not illuminated by the
light of Divine grace, such a man may have a shadow of the knowledge of things
in his mind, he may have the form of knowledge in his mind, but he has not the
very image and substance of things in his mind. But now Divine grace makes
spiritual things appear in some measure as they are. By the help of Divine
grace we are helped to see spiritual things as they are, hence is that of the
Apostle, you received it not as the word of man, but as it is in truth the word
of God, 1 These. 2.13. Other men receive the word, as the word of men; O but
grace makes a man to receive the word as the word of God, it discovers to him
the nature of the word, that it comes from God, and has a Divine stamp and
impress upon it.

3. Grace causes a man to apprehend the excellency of spiritual things. As
Divine grace helps a man to understand the reality and nature of spiritual
things, so it causes a man to apprehend the excellency of spiritual things, 1
Cor. 2.6. We speak wisdom among them that are perfect. By perfect here the
Apostle does not understand such as are simply and absolutely perfect, for
there are none such in this world: But he means comparatively perfect, We speak
wisdom among them that are perfect, that is, such as are perfect in comparison
of other men, We speak wisdom to them that are perfect, that is, unto
enlightened souls. We speak wisdom to them that are endowed with grace and the
Spirit of God. I suppose the Apostle by perfect here understands illuminated
souls, such as are illuminated by grace and the Spirit of God. Now, says the
Apostle, We speak wisdom to them. The Gospel and the Mysteries of it, is the
greatest and highest wisdom to illuminated souls, to such as are enlightened by
the Spirit of God; however they may appear foolishness to other men who are not
enlightened, yet there is no such wisdom to an enlightened soul, as there is in
the mysteries of Christ. The conjunction of the two natures in the person of
Christ, and the mystery of Divine grace in carrying on the work of our
Salvation by Christ in both his natures, this is the greatest wisdom to an
enlightened soul. We speak wisdom to them that are perfect, this is the wisdom
the Apostle speaks of, viz. The mystery of Christ, the mystery of our
salvation carried on by Christ, this is the highest wisdom to an enlightened
soul. Divine grace makes a man to see the excellency of spiritual things. An
enlightened soul sees the worth of pardon of sin, the worth of Gods favor, the
beauty of holiness, the preciousness of the promises; whereas other men see no
great excellency in these things. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither
has it entered into the heart of man, to conceive the things that God has
prepared for them that love him. But God has revealed them to us by the
spirit, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. The Spirit of God reveals the excellency of those
things to the children of God, that other men see no excellency in.

2. The second particular to discover the excellency of Divine grace is this,
It is Divine grace that elevates the soul to God. Naturally we stick in these
lower and inserior things. Now this is the nature of grace, Tiah't crcaturam
rationalem supra conditionem naturae ad participationem Boni Divini.
that it does advance the reasonable creature above the condition and sphere of
nature, unto the participation of the Divine good. Nature sticks in natural
good, nature rests in natural things, but grace carries up the soul to a
supernatural good, grace carries up the soul above all created things unto God
himself. This is a great thing that does commend Divine grace to us, that it is
grace only that elevates the soul above the creature unto God. Were it not for
Divine grace, we should always stick in the creature. It is grace that elevates
and raises the soul above the creature unto God. Without Divine grace we can
rise no higher than the creature. Every natural man seeks his happiness in the
creatrue, sticks there, and rises no higher. But this is the excellency of
grace, that it elevates and advances the soul to God himself, To thee O Lord
do I lift up my soul, Psalm. 25.1. Grace raises up the soul above created
things unto God. By the power of Divine grace we are elevated to that life
which is above nature. Grace carries us above the sphere of nature. By the
power of Divine grace it is that we come to know God, to love him, to converse
with him, John 17.3.
and this is life eternal to know the only true God. We may eat, and drink, and
walk up and down in the world, but this is not eternal life, these are the
actions of a natural life which must have an end: Also we may buy, and sell,
and commerce in the world, but these are the actions of a civil life, and these
things must have an end, they must end with this world. But to know God, to
love him, to seek his glory, these are the actions of a spiritual life, and
these are the beginnings of eternal life. So that grace, it carries a man above
the whole sphere of nature. Without grace you can only do as other men do, you
may perform the actions of a natural life, those things that concern this
world, but you cannot do those things that concern the spiritual life. It is
grace only that elevates and raises up the soul to God.

3. To show the excellency of Divine grace, consider, There is infinite
sweetness in Divine grace. O the suavity, the unutterable sweetness that is in
Divine grace! I dare appeal to the experience of holy souls, whether ever they
found any thing so sweet to them in this world as Divine grace, and the actings
of it in their souls. Nothing so sweet as Divine grace. And here I shall set
before you in some particulars the sweetness of Divine grace.

1. Consider, That Divine grace carrying up the soul to God, as it does, it
carries it up to the highest object. Grace causes the soul to transcend and go
beyond the sphere of all created things and to fix in God alone. Now when the
soul is brought to God, there is not a higher or more superior object for the
soul to ascend unto. Now when the soul by the power of Divine grace is brought
to him who is the highest perfection, beyond whom there is not a higher
perfection; this must needs cause infinite sweetness, for the soul is still
climbing up from one thing to another, it is ascending higher and higher, it
would fain be at the top of all good. I say it is in the nature of our souls to
aim at this. But now when the soul has found out the highest perfection, him
that is perfection it self, this must needs be matter of infinite sweetness to
it; when the soul has found out that good, than whom there is no higher,
greater or better, but is absolutely perfect and complete, certainly that must
needs afford the greatest sweetness and contentment to it.

Amongst the several ends men aim at, and the several goods that they pursue,
there is always one last end, one chief good, and when they acquire the last
end, and obtain the chief good, that is their greatest delight. Now God is the
last end, the chief good, nothing is beyond him, nothing may be compared with
him. Now Divine grace elevating the soul to God, must needs fill it with
infinite sweetness.

2. The sweetness of Divine grace appears in this; grace, in carrying forth the
soul to God, carries it forth to the most suitable and convenient object.
Delight arises from suitableness and convenience. Now grace elevating the soul
to God, elevates it to the most suitable object. The soul being of a spiritual
nature, a spiritual good is most suitable to it; the soul being immortal, an
eternal good is most suitable to it; the soul being so a vast capacity as that
it can take in more than all created things come to, an infinite and an
uncreated good is most suitable to it. Now Divine grace is that which elevates
the soul to God who is a spiritual, eternal, infinite good, and this is the
most suitable and convenient object for the soul, and therefore when the soul
by Divine grace is carried up to God, it must needs fill it with the greatest
sweetness, because no object so suitable and convenient to the soul, as God.

3. Another thing, to show the sweetness of Divine grace is this, That Divine
grace raises the soul to an holy kind of amplitude and greatness. I remember
Gibeuf observes that the true liberty of the will it do consist in divina
quadam amplitudine, in a divine kind of amplitude or greatness of soul, that is
to say, when the soul is carried up above the sphere of created things to love
God and to adhere to him as the chief good, this is the true liberty of the
will as he states it. Now it is Divine grace that raises the soul to this
amplitude and holy greatness. Grace is that which raises the soul up to God,
and when the soul by the power of Divine grace is raised up unto God, then it
has a large field to expatiate it self, and walk in. The more the soul is
acted by Divine grace, the more liberty and enlargement does it find in it
self, Psalm. 111.45. I will walk at liberty, for I seek thy precepts. As much as
if he should say, I find nothing that gives that liberty and enlargement to my
soul like to the exercise of grace, like to holy walking. When Divine grace
raises the soul to walk with God in a way of obedience, this is that gives the
greatest liberty and enlargement to the soul. If we observe it, we shall find
it true, Earthly things, when the soul is let out to them in an inordinate way,
do but confine and narrow the soul, the soul is as it were pent up in a narrow
place, when it is confined to these things. But when grace raises the soul to
God, then the soul finds it self at liberty, the soul never enjoys it self so
much as when it loves God most, when it adheres to God most, when it delights
in him most. Here the soul finds Sea-room enough, when the soul adheres to God,
solaces it self in God, then it is in a vast Ocean of good. But when the soul
adheres to the creature, it is kept within narrow bounds and limits. The
creature is but a little, narrow, private, particular good, indeed it is not
worth the name of good if it be considered abstract from God and its relation
to him. But now God is the universal good, and by grace it is we are elevated
to God the universal good. There is an innate propension in the soul, carrying
it out (if I may so say) to an infinite good. Indeed this is the unhappiness of
men by the fall, they have lost the knowledge of the true good. Man by the fall
has lost the knowledge of God, and love to him, and man having lost the
Creator, and being sunk into the creature, there we stick, till Divine grace
elevate us, and take us out of the creature, and bring us back to God again.
But though it be thus with man by the fall, that he has lost the knowledge of
God (the only true good, the chief good, the infinite good) and love to him,
yet there is a general inclination in the soul (if I may so speak) toward the
chief good, that is to say, the soul of man would fain be at the highest good
if it knew how to come at it, and this is intrinsecal to the nature of the
soul, and the Radix of liberty lies in it, that the soul would fain come up to
the chief good, if it knew how. Now these lower and particular goods detain and
keep back the soul from God the chief good, whilst the soul is in a tendency
toward good (as it always is and cannot but be, the reasonable soul is always
in a tendency toward some good or other). It is hindered from ascending unto
God the chief good, by adhering to these lower and inferior goods, and thus it
is narrowed and confined; whereas if it could reach to God, there it would find
liberty and enlargement by seeing an infinite good before it. Now herein does
the excellency of Divine grace appear, in that it causes the soul to extend it
self and reach forth it self unto God the infinite good; and whilst the soul is
thus carried forth in a direct line of affection toward God the infinite good,
then it finds the greatest liberty and enlargement in it self. This is another
that speaks the sweetness of Divine grace, that it fills the soul with an holy
amplitude or greatness, and delivers it from confinement.

4. The sweetness of Divine grace appears in this, grace causes the soul to
act regularly, and in the most perfect manner. The more regular and perfect the
operations of the soul are, the more true peace. You will find it in
experience, that all the troubles and disturbance of the soul comes from the
oblique and irregular motions of the soul; the more regularly your souls move
and act, the more peace, Psalm. 119.165. Great peace have they that love thy
law, and nothing shall offend them. The law of God is nothing but the
expression or declaration of his will, now the will of God is the rule of
goodness. Now Divine grace is that which elevates the soul to act most
regularly, and conformably to the Divine will, which is the rule of goodness,
and perfection, and the greater harmony there is between our will and the
Divine will, the more true peace. Look as it is with the body, when all the
parts of the body are kept in their proper place; when none of the limbs are
dislocated, and disjoynted, when the humors are kept in a due temperament,
when the senses are kept quick and lively, and fit to discharge their office,
and to perform their operations, the body is then in the most perfect health,
and injoyes it self most. So it is here, when all things are in order in the
soul, when the soul acts most regularly and conformably to the Divine will,
then does the soul enjoy it self most. The perfection of every thing, it is to
be in the place God has set it in. Now the perfection of man who is a
reasonable creature, it is to be in a state of subjection to God. Man as he is
a reasonable creature being created under a law, man's perfection is to be
subject to the Divine law, and the greater his conformity is to that Law, the
greater is his perfection, and the reason is, as was said, because man by
observing the Divine law, keeps in the place God has set him in. Man as he is
a creature is in a state of subjection, and his perfection is to be subject to
his Creator, and the more he is so, the more he does attain the end of his
creation, and so by consequence the more true peace does he enjoy.

5. The sweetness of Divine grace appears in this, that Divine grace causes a
man to delight in the ways of God, Blessed is the man that fears the Lord,
that delights greatly in his commandments. So much grace, so much delight in
the ways of God. A man may walk in the ways of God, yet not find so much
delight in them at first. But so much as a man has of Divine grace, the more
shall he delight in the ways of God; and the more a man can delight in Gods
ways, the greater is the measure of his grace. Now it is Divine grace that
causes a man to delight in the ways of God: now delight causes sweetness; so
much as we can delight in the ways of God, so much sweetness shall we find in
them: and the reason why we find no more sweetness in the ways of God, is
because we delight no more in them.

6. The sweetness of Divine grace appears in this, that the presence of Divine
grace sweetness the want of other comforts. Prove. 14.14.
A good man, says Solomon, is satisfied from himself. A holy man that wants
other comforts, so far as he is acted by Divine grace, finds a great deal of
sweetness in the exercise of grace it self; and the reason why he finds no more
sweetness, is because he has no more grace. Nothing is more sweet to an holy
soul, than to love God, and be beloved of him, In the keeping of his
commandments there is great reward, Psalm. 19.11. not only after the keeping of
them, but in the keeping of them there is great reward. So much as Divine grace
acts us, we shall be satisfied in God and with God himself, when God denies us
other things. Not but that we may lawfully desire and use other things, so far
as God allows and gives us these things. But when God denies us these things,
it is the property of Divine grace to incline the soul to take up with God, and
to satisfy it self with God, when God withholds these things from us, as I may
show more hereafter.

7. The sweetness of Divine grace appears in this, that grace causes a man to
live upon God himself in the midst of other comforts. As it is the nature of
Divine grace to cause a man to retire to God, and cleave to him when he wants
other things; so it is grace that causes the soul to live upon God himself in
the midst of other comforts. When a man is surrounded with all other comforts,
grace causes the soul to turn it self to God and say, thou art my happiness,
thou shall be my happiness, and not these things, this is the proper language
of grace. I take it for a certain truth, that it is the property of grace to
suffer the soul to rest in nothing but in God himself. Grace causes a man to
pass through all his other comforts, and enjoyments, unto God, and say, Thou
art the true rest, the life and solace of my soul. Nothing is, nothing can be,
nothing shall be that to my soul which thou art. It is Divine grace that thus
elevateth the soul to God. Carnal men that are not acted by Divine grace, stick
and rest in the outward things themselves that they enjoy. It is Divine grace
only that causes a man to live upon God in the midst of other things, and to
solace himself in him over and above all the other comforts that he does enjoy,
Thou art my portion, says my soul, Lam. 3.24. And it is a great Scripture,
Psalm. 142.5. Thou art my refuge, and my portion in the land of the living. Why
in the land of the living? What is the meaning of that, that the Lord is his
portion in the land of the living? The land of the living, is this present
world, so it is taken in several Scriptures, Isa. 38.11.
Hezekiah said, He should not see the Lord, even the Lord in the land of the
living. So it is said of Christ, That he was cut off from the land of the
living; Isa. 53.8. Psalm. 27.13.
so again, I had fainted unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord
in the land of the living: so that the land of the living, is taken for this
world. Now, says David, Thou art my refuge, and my portion in the land of the
living, God was not only to be his portion in the other world, in the land of
eternity, if we may so call it, but he was to be his portion in this world,
when he should be surrounded with all the comforts the earth could afford him.
It is true, David was now in an afflicted condition, he was in the cave, as the
Title of the Psalm shows, yet he had a promise of the Kingdom. Now God was not
only his refuge in his present distress, but he was resolved that God should be
his portion in the land of the living; if ever he were brought to the Kingdom
that was promised to him, yet God should be all his portion then. It is the
property of grace to make a man account upon God more than he does upon all the
good things and comforts that he does enjoy. When he has all these things
about him, yet he accounts upon God, and what God is to him, above all these
things.

8. Lastly, To show us the sweetness of Divine grace, consider, It is always
well with the soul when it is acted by Divine grace, and the soul is always
full of trouble, confusion and perplexity, when it is deserted by Divine grace.

1. It is always well with the soul when it is acted by Divine grace. There is
an ineffable suavity that accompanies Divine grace; the soul feels the most
perfect ease, quiet, serenity, satisfaction, so far as it is acted by Divine
grace. Observe your own experience and you shall find it true, so far as your
hearts are acted by Divine grace, you will find an inward rest, quiet, and
serenity of mind. This made Austin say, that Divine grace consisted in a
spiritual suavity. Truly this spiritual suavity is inseparable from Divine
grace; so far as we are acted by Divine grace, we shall find inutterable
sweetness in it. The hardest things in Religion are made sweet by Divine grace.
The tears of grace are sweet, and that which may seem a paradox is certainly
true. Godly sorrow is more sweet to a man that is acted by Divine grace, than
all the pleasures of sin are to a carnal man. Patience in bearing the cross, is
sweet; for though afflictions themselves are bitter, yet the grace of patience
by which we bear afflictions, this is most sweet. Yea acts of self-denial are
sweet, for though it be bitter to nature to have our own wills crossed, yet when
Divine grace helps us to conquer our wills, out of love to God, nothing is more
sweet. How sweet is grace that sweetens the hardest things? The hardest things
in Religion are made sweet by Divine grace, O there is inutterable sweetness in
Divine grace! Could we always will and desire as grace would teach us to will
and desire, we should not complain of so many troubles as we do, for our
troubles arise from hence, because we do not act, as grace would teach us to
act.

2. As it is always well with the soul when it is acted by Divine grace, so it
is always ill with the soul, when it is deserted in point of grace. When a man
is left to himself, when there is nothing but nature or corruption that acts in
him, then there is nothing but trouble and disquietment, the soul is then in a
tumult, all things are in a hurry. It is Divine grace that carries the soul to
its center, and when the soul is not acted toward God by Divine grace, it is
like a thing off from its center, out of its place, and then the soul must
needs be in a confusion. How excellent and sweet then must Divine grace be,
that makes all things well with the soul whilst it is acted by it, and all
things ill with it when deserted by it. How do these things then call upon us
to love and prize Divine grace? O it is one of the greatest seize in
Christianity, to see the need of Divine grace, and to long to be acted by
Divine grace; and as we do come to greater atttainments in Christianity, the
more we shall see the need of Divine grace, and the more we shall desire to be
acted by Divine grace.

The end of the Eleventh Sermon.
SERMON XII.
2 Cor. 12.9. And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my
strength is made perfect in weakness.


I Come now to some other particulars to show us the excellency of Divine
grace. The last consideration mentioned to set forth the excellency of grace,
was taken from the sweetness that is in Divine grace, and that was the third
particular; we now come to a fourth.

4. The Excellency of Divine grace appears in this, That Divine grace, The
fourth Particular to show the excellency of Divine grace.
it is some kind of participation of God himself. Grace is that which causes
us in a measure to participate of the Divine Life, and of the Divine
perfection. Hence is that expression of the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 1.4. That we
are made partakers of the Divine nature. By the help of Divine grace we are
brought to the nearest similitude to the Divine Life. For wherein does the will
of God consist? It is the perfection of God to will himself as the last end,
and to will all things relating to the creature in the most holy manner. This
is the Divine perfection. Now by Divine grace it is that we are able to will
God as our last end, and to will all other things regularly and conformably to
the Divine will. It is the happiness of Heaven that we shall be like to God, 1
John 3.2. We shall be like him, that is, we shall be holy as he is holy, happy
as he is happy, according to the capacity of the creature. Now by grace we are
assimilated to God here on earth. None so like to God here on earth as he that
is most acted by Divine grace.

5. Another thing wherein the excellency of Divine grace appears is this,
Partic. 5.
Divine grace is that which causes a man to deny his own wisdom, his own will,
his own inclinations and affections, and to refer himself wholly to the Divine
wisdom and will, and to acquiesce therein. Thus did the power of Divine grace
exert it self, and show it self forth in our Savior, and if we would look for
grace, and see where grace is to be found in perfection, we must look to
Christ, for he is the highest pattern of grace, in him grace acted it self in
perfection. The power of Divine grace in the heart of our Savior showed it
self in this, to make him deny his own will and acquiesce in the Divine will,
Matthew. 26.37, 39. Father if it be possible let this cup pass from me:
Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. Here we see our Savior denies
his own will, and refers himself to the fathers will; the natural desire and
inclination of the humane will in our Savior was to be kept from suffering.
But now herein did the power of Divine grace appear in the heart of our
Savior, that he denied his own will and referred himself to his Fathers will,
Not as I will, but as thou will. As much as if he had said, not that which I
desire, not that which nature would think best, but that which thou in thy
infinite wisdom think best, and which thy will determines. Much of the power
and efficacy of Divine grace appears in this, in helping a man to conquer his
own private will, his natural desires and Inclinations. When the Impetus and
bent of nature lies this way, nature is carried with a strong current to such a
thing, then comes the power of Divine grace and helps a man to deny this strong
bent and inclination of nature, and carries him a quite contrary way, this
shows the efficacy of Divine grace. And they that do not know what this means,
know little of the power of grace. But those that have felt the power of the
grace of God upon their hearts, they know what these things mean.

6. Partic. 6.
The Excellency of Divine grace appears in this, that it will cause a man to be
satisfied in God, and with God, without other things. I have showed formerly
how grace causes a man to live upon God in the midst of other things. Now I
must show how grace will cause a man to be satisfied with God when he denies
him other things. So much as a man is acted by Divine grace, he will adhere to
God, live upon God and be satisfied with God when he wants other things. Not
that a Godly man despises and refuses the gifts of God which he bestows upon
him; he knows he may lawfully desire and use the gifts of God in their proper
places. But when God denies those comforts to him that others have, or he
himself has a mind to, so far as a man is acted by Divine grace, he will
retire to God himself and adhere to him, accounting God to be his happiness
when he has nothing else, Psalm. 16.5, 6. The Lord is the portion of mine
inheritance, and of my cup: thou maintainest my lot. The lines are fallen unto
me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage. It is as much as if he
had said, though I have nothing left but God, yet I have enough in him, I am
satisfied in him, Divitiae nostrae, Deus noster. Aug.
God is our riches said that holy man. O let us pray for more Divine grace, and
then we shall have more experience of this frame.

7. The Excellency of Divine grace agpears in this, Partic. 7.
that it elevates the soul to the desire of the Heavenly Country. It is by the
power of Divine grace that we come to breath much after the future life. It is
said of the ancient Saints, Now they desire a better country, that is an
Heavenly, Heb. 11.16. It was grace that elevated them unto this, for it is
proper to nature to stick in present things. The natural desires and affections
that are in men cause them to desire to live always here on earth. They know
not another life, are not acquainted with it, and therefore they do not desire
it. It is Divine grace only that does discover to men another life, and causes
them to suspire and breath after that life, 2 Cor. 5.8. We are consident, and
willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord.
Paul knew there was another life, a more excellent life after this, he knew he
should be present with the Lord, and live with him, and this made him suspire
and breathe after this life. It is only the grace of God can make a man breathe
after the future life, for the generality of men that are not acted by Divine
grace, stick in these things, and would always live here on earth.

8. Partic. 8.
The Excellency of Divine grace appears in this, that it causes a man to
persevere to the end. It is by the power of Divine grace that we are kept on in
a way of faith and obedience to the end. Did not Divine grace support us, our
faith would fail; and though we have overcome many difficulties already, yet
our faith would flag at last, and we should be ready to give up all our hopes.
Therefore does Christ tell Peter that he had prayed for him that his faith
might not fail. This plainly intimates that if Peter had not had assistance
from Divine grace, his faith would have failed. So likewise we should saint in
the course of our obedience did not Divine grace support and uphold us, Psalm.
73.13. Verily, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in
innocence, says that holy man. When he was under the power of temptation, he
was ready to give off his obedience, to give up the course of his walking with
God, he began to repent he had been religious and walked with God. But now it
is by the help of Divine grace that we are kept from fainting in the course of
our obedience. The Lord has promised that he will put his fear in our hearts
that we shall not depart from him, Jer. 32.40. Did not God put his fear into
our hearts, we should be ready to depart from him. He also leads us in the
paths of righteousness for his names sake, Psalm. 23.3. It is grace causes us
to persevere. It is Austins observation, That grace is necessary for the elect,
when they are converted first of all, Sive cum convert^ntur, sive cum
praeliantur, sive cum coro^antur.
It is necessary for them when they war and combat, and it is necessary for
them when they are crowned at last. It is Divine grace that converts and turns
our hearts to God first of all. It is grace upholds us in the spiritual
conflict, and enables us to sight the good fight of faith, otherwise we thould
be weary and faint in our minds, and we should be ready to give up the field.
And then it is grace that crowns us at last, so that all is of grace. And it is
another memorable speech of Austin, After man's fall, God would have it
appertain to nothing but his grace, that man should come to him at first, and
it does also appertain to the same grace only, to keep him that he should not
depart from him. So that after man's fall it is Divine grace that first brings
man back to God, and it is the same grace that holds man close to him in the
course of obedience, so that he never depart from God again, but goes on to
persevere in the way of faith and obedience to the end.

9. Partic. 9.
The Excellency of Divine grace appears in this, that it carries a man above
the sears of death. It is grace only that carries a man above the fears of
death, and makes him willing to lay down this life, and cau^eth him sweetly and
placidly to resign up his soul into Gods hands. Father, into thy hands, says
Christ, I commit my spirit. Act. 7 59.
Lord Jesus, says Stephen, receive my spirit, Nature abhors the thoughts of
dissolution, nature cannot endure to think of parting with this life, Not that
we would be uncloathed, says Paul, but that mortality might be swallowed up of
life, 2 Cor. 5.4. Paul himself found in himself an abhorrence in nature as to
dissolution. O but then the power of Divine grace in him made him to speak
otherwise, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. Here we see the
different language of nature and grace in the same person. Nature makes him
say, not that I would be uncloathed, but grace makes him say, I desire to be
dissolved, so that grace overcomes nature. When nature abhors nothing more than
death, and dissolution, yet such is the power of Divine grace, that it makes a
man freely to lay down his life, and to surrender up his soul sweetly into the
hands of God.

Lastly, Partic. 10.
The last particular I shall mention to show the excellency of Divine grace is
this, It is the happiness of Heaven to be always acted by Divine grace; to
think, to love, to desire, to will, to speak, to act nothing but as Divine
grace would teach and incline us to do, this is the perfection of Heaven it
self. What is the perfection of Heaven, but that we shall be full of grace and
of the spirit of God? The perfection of Heaven consists in this, that grace and
the spirit of God shall act us universally, always, and in all things. The
happiness of Heaven is described by this, that God shall be all in all, 1 Cor.
15. And one way by which God is all in all is this, that in Heaven, we shall be
full of the spirit of God, and that we shall be purely, and perfectly, and
eternally acted by the spirit of God. Here nature and self sway us very much,
but the perfection of Heaven is this, that we shall be purely and solely acted
by the spirit of God, and flesh and nature shall no more have the sway in us,
but we shall do every thing as the spirit of God acts us. How excellent is a
Saint here on earth? What a beauty and majesty does there appear in him here on
earth, so far as he is acted by the spirit of God and by Divine grace? That
which makes any thing uncomely in a Christian, is that nature, and corruption,
and self appears in him. But so far as grace and the spirit of God acts him,
there is nothing but beauty, loveliness and comeliness that appears in him. How
excellent I say, is a Saint so far as he is acted by the grace of God here on
earth? Oh but there are many mixtures of corruption, and imperfections in the
best of the Saints here on earth, there is none of the Saints so perfectly
acted by Divine grace, but something of self and corruption interposeth. O but
in Heaven he shall be purely, and perfectly, and eternally acted by the spirit
of God, nothing shall come from him then but what savours of the spirit of God.
Now if the perfection of grace, be the perfection of Heaven it self, how
excellent then is Divine grace that brings us near to the life of Heaven?

Thus have I shown the excellency of Divine grace in several particulars.

And what should all that that we have heard concerning the Doctrine of grace,
and the excellency of it teach us?

1. It should cause us to love Divine grace, to prize it, and long after it
more, to covet it, and pray for it more than we do for temporal things. Had we
spiritual eyes to see the beauty and excellency of Divine grace, we should not
be so fond of other things, and neglect grace, our main desires would run out
after grace.

2. We should make this Use from what we have heard of the Doctrine of Divine
grace, we should pray that we may feel the operations and effects of Divine
grace put forth in our souls. We have heard how that grace causes a man to
deny his own wisdom, will, affections, inclinations, and to resign himself
wholly to Gods will. We have heard how grace causes a man to be satisfied in
God and with God in the want of other things: We have heard how grace elevates
the soul to the desire of the Heavenly Country; how it causes a man to
persevere in faith and obedience to the end, to lay down this life when God
calls him thereunto. Now we should pray to seel and find that presence of
Divine grace in our souls that we may be carried forth to all these things;
then and never till then shall we know the sweetness of Divine grace and the
excellency of it, when we find these sweet operations, and powerful effects of
Divine grace upon our hearts. He that has found these operations and workings
of Divine grace in his soul, cannot but love Divine grace above all other
things whatsoever.

Having showed the Excellency of Divine grace, it remains only that I should
propound some means in order to the obtaining of grace. God promises to give a
sufficiency of grace to his people, My grace shall be sufficient for thee. What
are the most proper means for us to obtain sufficiency of grace from God
according to all our necessities?

1. Let us labor to be deeply sensible of the need of Divine grace. Direct. 1.
Our Savior tells us, That without him we can do nothing, John 5. Although
we have the habits of grace, yet we need actual grace to enable us to do any
thing that is good. Paul says, that to will was present, but how to perform
that which was good he knew not: we need actual assisting grace, to carry us
through every duty. Now we ought to be deeply sensible of the need we have of
Divine grace. 1 Pet. 5.5.
God gives grace to the humble, the humble soul is the soul that God singles
out to give grace unto, and when are we humble? Truly then are we humble when
we are poor in spirit, when we are sensible of our own impotency and inability
to do any thing that is spiritually good without Divine grace. It is a speech
of the wise man, He that trusts in his own heart is a fool. There is nothing
that hinders us more from the reception of Divine grace, than when we are
self-confident, and presume upon our own sufficiency. The promise is, my grace
shall be sufficient for thee. If we have a self-fulness, a self-sufficiency we
are not like to have a sufficiency of Divine grace. What need has he of a
sufficiency of grace from God that thinks he has a sufficiency of strength in
himself? Paul says that he had not sufficiency of himself to think any thing.
We ought to be deeply sensible of our absolute dependence upon Divine grace,
and that without Divine grace we are nothing. One great reason why God suspends
and withholds grace and assistance from us, is, because we think that we have
strength and sufficiency at our own command, and because we have been carried
out so and so formerly, and have been acted by Divine grace so and so,
therefore we are ready to think it is in our own power to act as we have done.
Therefore is it that God leaves us to our selves, to show us what we are
without the assistance of his grace. God will have us to see that all is of
grace, and if he suspend and withhold his grace never so little, we cannot do
what we have done.

2. If we would obtain Divine grace, Direct. 2.
let us prize grace above temporal things. Our desires are apt to run out after
other things, but the main of our desires should run out after Divine grace.
Let me say (But O how few Christians believe it, or live as if they did believe
it?) That God does more for us, in communicating the least grace to us, than in
bestowing on us the greatest temporal blessing. And the reason is plain,
because grace is in order to a supernatural good. Grace lies in a tendency to
our communion with God here, and our enjoyment of him hereafter. Now grace
being such a gift as is of a higher rank and order than any temporal good, we
ought to prize it as such. I have often thought, so the Lord keep us from sin,
and give us a sufficiency of grace to act us throughout our whole lives, we
need not be greatly solicitous about any thing else. It is the greatest
happiness in this world to be kept from sin and to have a sufficiency of grace
to act us. Whatever temporal thing God denies us, if we have but a sufficiency
of grace to act us, and to help us to do that which is pleasing in his sight,
it is enough. It was Paul's great option and wish, that whether present or
absent he might be acceptable to God, 2 Cor. 5.9. Now as long as we are acted
by Divine grace we shall have a testimony in our selves that we are accepted of
God. Not that the fundamental acceptance of our persons depends upon our grace
and obedience, this depends upon the perfect obedience and righteousness of
Christ. But so far as we are acted by Divine grace, we shall have a testimony
in our selves, that what we do is pleasing to God. And can thou desire a
greater happiness O Christian than this, to have such a testimony as Enoch had,
that thou have pleased God? So far as thou art acted by Divine grace thou shall
have this testimony given thee that thou have pleased God, 1 John 3.22.
Whatsoever we ask we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do
those things that are pleasing in his sight.

3. Let us thirst after grace, Direct. 3. Matthew. 5.6.
the promises are made to thirsting, Blessed are they that hunger, and thirst,
after righteousness, they shall be filled. And it is a great Text, John 7.37.
If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink, he that believes on me, out of
his belly shall flow rivers of living water. Christ promises a liberal
effusion of grace and the spirit to them that thirst and come to him for grace.
The living water here spoken of, is grace and the spirit; so it follows, This
spoke he of the spirit, which they that believe on him should receive. Here
then is the living water, namely the spirit, and the grace of the spirit: well!
But here are rivers of living water. He that believes on me, out of his belly
shall flow rivers of living waters. Ye is not drops of living water, but rivers
of living water. This sets forth the copiousness and abundance, of that grace
that Christ will communicate, and then these rivers shall flow too; out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living water, that is, there shall be a free passage
of Divine grace unto the believing soul, nothing shall impede and hinder the
current of Divine grace to a believing soul, and then it is said, Out of his
belly, (for I take it that there is weight in every word) that is, grace shall
be a living spring within him. Out of his belly, grace comes primarily from
Christ the head of the Church, but a believer, by union with Christ, and
dependence upon Christ, shall have grace as a living spring in him; that I take
to be the meaning, compare this with John 4.14. But whosoever drinks of the
water, that I shall give him, shall never thirst; But the water that I shall
give him, shall be in him a well of water, springing up into everlasting life.
A believers grace comes all from Christ the head of the Church. O but his
supplies of grace by living upon Christ the head of the Church shall be so
constant, as if so be he had a spring of grace in himself. It shall be in him a
well of water, springing up into everlasting life, it notes the constancy of
supply that shall be to every believing soul that lives upon Christ as his head.

4. Direct. 4.
Let us pray for the spirit and Divine grace much. Ask, and ye shall have,
seek, and you shall find, Mat. 7. God has promised to give the spirit to them
that ask him. When Paul would obtain strength against his temptations, what was
the course that he took, For this thing I besought the Lord thrice. We may pray
for temporal things, and not always have what we would have, because God does
not always see temporal things to be good for us. But if we pray for Divine
grace, the Lord will be sure to hear us as to that: and though we have not such
measures of grace as we would have, yet we shall have a sufficiency of grace,
such a measure of grace as God in his infinite wisdom thinks fit for us; so the
promise runs, My grace shall be sufficient. We may not have as much grace as we
would, but we shall have such a measure of grace as God sees best for us, we
shall have a sufficiency of grace.

5. If we would obtain Divine grace, Direct. 5.
let us labor for that holy skill of deriving grace from Christ the head of
the Church, Ephesians. 1. latter end, God has given him to be head over all things
to his body the Church. This is a mystery, though few Christians I am afraid,
understand it, as they ought, that Christ is appointed of God, as head of the
Church to dispense and give forth all grace to the Church, and every member of
it. God has given him to be head over all things, that is a great expression,
over all things, that is, to all intents and purposes. Christ is appointed head
of the Church as to all ends, and uses whatsoever, that whatever grace we need,
we must receive it from Christ as our head, and he is appointed of the Father
to give it out. Therefore here lies our great concernment, to labor after a
holy skill to derive grace from Christ as head of the Church. I am afraid, we
are greatly defective here. The greatest part of Christians I am apt to believe
are more acquainted with living upon the righteousness of Christ for
justification, than they are acquainted with the way of deriving grace, and
spiritual influence from Christ the head of the Church for sanctification. It
is not enough that we know how to have recourse to Christ for pardon and
justification, but we should be acquainted with Christ as the head of the
Church, and live upon him for actual grace and spiritual influence. John 15.4.
Abide in me, and I in you. We must learn that skill to abide in Christ by the
attractive acts of faith, or we shall make little of sanctification.

Here it may be said, Question.
wherein does this skill consist of deriving actual grace from Christ the head
of the Church? Answer.


If we would be skilled in this mystery of drawing virtue from Christ the head
of the Church, we must attend to these two things.

1. We must look to the humanity of Christ as the first receptacle of grace,
John 1.14. The word was made flesh full of grace and truth. The word, the
second person in Trinity assuming our nature, the humane nature in Christ, by
means of the personal union comes to be filled with all grace. The humane
nature I say, by its personal conjunction with the word, is filled with grace,
and therefore that immediately follows, the word was made flesh, full of grace
and truth. No sooner was our nature united to the second person in Trinity, but
by means of this union, it comes to be filled with all grace. So that the
humane nature in Christ is the first receptacle of grace, that is the first
thing we are to attend unto.

2. We must look to the divinity in Christ as replenishing his humanity with
all grace, and in the humane nature assumed, becoming the fountain of grace to
us, Col. 2.9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. The
fullness of the Godhead by means of the personal union dwells in Christ, and
mark it, by means of the personal union it becomes the fountain of grace to us.
First, it fills the humanity of Christ. The Godhead fills the humanity, and by
the humanity, and through the humanity it conveys grace to us. So that faith in
having recourse to Christ for actual grace, has to do with both natures in
Christ, the humane nature, and the divine nature. First, Faith has to do with
the humane nature, faith is to eye the humane nature as the first receptacle of
grace, and as the organ by which grace is conveyed to us. Secondly, Faith has
to do with the Divine nature as the principle efficient of all grace, Joh.
1.16. Of his fullness we receive grace for grace. This fullness here spoken of,
is primarily and originally in the Godhead, and then secondly, this fullness is
derivatively in the humane nature of Christ, and that in these two respects.

1. In that the humane nature in Christ has all the habits and effects of
grace impressed upon it that nature is capable of.

2. That the humane nature is the organ of the Divinity, in and by which all
grace is diffused, and communicated unto us. Of his fullness we receive grace
for grace. Now we should study more the way of having recourse to Christ, and
drawing actual grace from him; the more we can eye the Divinity in Christ as
filling him with all Grace, and lean upon him as our Head for all grace, the
more grace we shall receive from him.

6. If we would obtain Divine grace, Direct. 6.
let us be greatly thankful for what grace we have already received, To him
that has shall more be given. As we should be thankful for all the gifts of
God, so especially for the gift of grace, because it is one of the choicest and
best of all the gifts of God. If we are bound to bless God for temporal mercies
and favors, much more for Divine grace. Nothing will cause God sooner to
suspend grace from us, than unthankfulness for what grace we have received. God
would have us to know that grace is no small gift, therefore when we are not
deeply sensible of what mercy God has shown us in giving us what grace we have
already received, nothing is so likely to deprive us more of grace. God sets a
high price on his grace, and he would have us do so too, therefore if God have
given us any grace, we should be more thankful for that, than for any temporal
blessing; And to him that has shall more be given.

The end of the Twelfth Sermon.
SERMON XIII.
2 Cor. 12.9. And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my
strength is made perfect in weakness.


I Am now come to the last part of this Text. I did in the last exercise finish
that clause, My grace shall be sufficient for thee, where I took occasion to
handle the Doctrine of Grace. I come now to speak to the last clause, which is
in these words, For my strength is made perfect in weakness. These words, as
likewise the former, My grace shall be sufficient for thee, are the Lords own
words to Paul, they were spoken immediately by the Lord himself to Paul, and
therefore ought to bear so much the more weight with us. The person who spoke
these words was Christ, and that appears from the end of the verse. Most gladly
therefore will I glory in my infirmity that the power of Christ may rest upon
me. Paul had made his prayer to Christ, For this thing, says he, I besought
the Lord thrice, that is, the Lord Christ. I besought the Lord Christ, I made
my prayer unto Christ. Where we may observe by the way, that it is lawful for
us to direct our prayers to Christ, we may direct our prayers to either of the
persons in the Trinity, and we may direct our prayers to Christ, as Paul did
here, I besought the Lord, that is, the Lord Christ, so Stephen did Acts 7.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Now as Paul had directed his prayer to Christ, so
he receives an answer from Christ, and he said, My grace is sufficient for
thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness. And he said, who was this
that said this? It was he that Paul had directed his prayer to, to wit, the
Lord Christ. As we may lawfully pray to Christ, so Christ is able to hear and
answer our prayers, John 14.13, 14. Whatsoever you ask the Father in my name, I
will do it, he does not say the father will do it, but I will do it. Now the
answer Christ gives to Paul is this, My grace is sufficient for thee, for my
strength is made perfect in weakness. My grace is sufficient for thee, of that
I have already spoken, that which I have now to speak of is the latter clause,
For my strength is made perfect in weakness. Now this latter clause, For my
strength is made perfect in weakness, is a reason and explication of the former
clause, My grace shall be sufficient for thee. Paul had prayed that the thorn
in the flesh, the messenger of Satan might depart from him, Christ does not
give this answer to Paul, that this shall be done for him, that he prays for,
Christ does not tell him, that the temptation shall be removed and taken away,
but he gives in this answer, that his grace shall be sufficient for him. The
temptation was still to continue upon Paul, but Paul was to have a sufficiency
of grace to help him under the temptation. Now in the Text, Christ gives the
reason, why it is that he takes this course, that temptation shall continue
upon Paul, and not be removed presently, but he shall have grace to assist him
under his temptation. The reason why Christ takes this course with Paul is,
that so by this means Christ's power, Christ's virtue, Christ's strength, may be
illustrated, and made known so much the more. Such was Paul's infirmity, that
Paul of himself would certainly succumb, and faint under his temptations, he
would certainly be ovecome by them, if he were left to himself. Now the Lord
had two ends in continuing Paul's temptation upon him.

1. To show to Paul his own infirmity, to discover to him his own impotency and
inability to stand under his temptation if left to himself.

And then, 2. Another end of Christ was to make known his power and grace, that
when Paul's infirmity would certainly have suffered him to fall, yet the power
and grace of Christ should make him stand. This I take to be the proper scope
and design of these words, For my strength is made perfect in weakness. Christ
would have Paul's temptation to continue upon him, that by this means his power
and grace might be so much the more illustrated in supporting Paul under his
infirmity. The words are plain, and are easily resolved into this proposition.

Doct. That christ's strength is perfected in our infirmity, Doct.
or else Christ's strength is perfected in man's infirmity, (...).
For my strength is made perfect in weakness.

A point though it may seem plain, yet it is of great use unto exercised souls,
and none will understand the sweetness of this point, but those that have been
under exercises.

For the unfolding of this proposition we must consider, 1. What we are to
understand by infirmity, that is one term in the Text, My strength is made
perfect in weakness, or infirmity; what are we to understand by infirmity? 2.
What is meant by the power of Christ, My power or my strength is made perfect
in weakness. 3. How the power of Christ is made perfect in infirmity. 4. What
that power or strength of Christ is, that is made perfect in the Saints
infirmities.


And then we shall come to the reasons of it.

1. What are we to understand by infirmity, My strength is made perfect in
weakness or infirmity; there are infirmities of several sorts and kinds: but
there are three sorts of infirmities that are principally intended in this Text.

1. There are natural infirmites.

2. Moral infirmities.

3. There are the accidents or occurrences that fall out in humane life; all
these may be well taken in here.

1. There are natural infirmities. Now natural infirmities, are either
infirmities of the body or of the mind.

1. There are infirmities of the body. Infirmities of the body are such as
these, weakness, sickliness, Crasiness of the natural temper, all manner of
diseases and distempers that are incident to the bodies of men, these come
under the name of natural infirmites.

2. There are infirmities of the mind, as namely meanness and lowness of parts,
dullness of apprehension, shallowness and weakness in the judgment,
unretentiveness in the memory, and the like, these are infirmities appertaining
to the soul, and these are the first sort of infirmities, namely, those that we
call natural infirmities, belonging to the body or mind.

2. There are moral infirmites, now by moral infirmites we are to understand
two things.

1. Weakness and imperfection of grace.

2. The relics and remainders of sin and corruption in the Saints, and the
Saints of God labor under these infirmities.

1. There is weakness and imperfection of grace in the Saints. Though they have
truth and sincerity of grace, yet there is a great imperfection of grace in
them, imperfection in their knowledge, we know but in part, 1 Cor. 13.9.
as the Apostle speaks, imperfection in their faith, and love, and other graces.

2. The Saints, they have the relics and remainders of sin in them. Thus Paul
complains, In me, that is in my flesh, there dwells no good thing, Romans 7.18.
and in the last verse of that Chapter, with the flesh he served the law of sin.
Now these relics and remainders of sin that are in the Saints may properly be
called infirmities, because though the Saints have these infirmities, these
relics and remainders of sin in them, yet these do not reign in them, they
feel the bent of their will set against sin; though sin has a being in them,
and though they find the motions of it, arising from corruption and the
unregenerate part in them, yet the bent of their will is set against it.
Therefore Paul says in that Text before, With my mind I serve the Law of God,
but with my flesh the law of sin; with my mind I serve the law of God, the
deliberate purpose of his will, the bent of his will was set against it, though
by reason of the remainders of sin in his flesh, he was many times surprised,
overtaken, carried often contrary to that which was the deliberate purpose of
his will.

3. By infirmities, we are to understand the accidents and occurrences that do
belong to humane life, as crosses, losses, hardships, difficulties, distresses,
and the like, whatever may fall out in the course of providence that may tend
to debase us, or depress us and lay us low, all these things come under the
name of infirmity. Tam naturae nostrae imbecillitas, quam omnia abjectionis
argumenta. Calvin.
Calvin observes that infirmity in this place is a general name and under it is
comprehended, as well the imbecility of our nature, as all those things that
fall out in providence that may tend to humble us. Whatever falls out in
providence that tends to humble us, this comes under the name of the Saints
infirmities. The Apostle himself in the words after the Text teaches us what he
understands by infirmities in verse. 10. Therefore I take pleasure in
infirmity, in reproach, in necessity, in persecution, in distress, for
Christ's sake, for when I am weak then am I strong. Here we see the Apostle
joins infirmity with reproaches, necessities, persecutions and distress, so
that whatever was matter of abasement and humiliation to Paul, these he
reckoned a part of his infirmities.

The second thing we are to speak to in the Text is, what we are to understand
by the power of Christ, my strength is made perfect in weakness, or infirmity,
what are we to understand by this strength or power of Christ?

To open this, we must know, that Christ's power may be considered in the root,
or in the effect. The power of Christ considered in the Root, is that virtue,
that strength, that is in Christ himself. Christ's power is infinite. Christ's
power considered in it self is the same with the Fathers power, I and the
Father are one, John 10.30. I and my Father are one, that is, one in essence,
and one in power. And here it is well observed by a learned man, that in this
Text we have a proof of Christ's divinity. For if it be Christ's power that
carries the Saints through their difficulties and temptations, then certainly
Christ must needs be God. Now the Apostle tells us it was the power of Christ
that rested upon him, that carried him through all his temptations.

Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in mine infirmities, that the power
of Christ may rest upon me. If it was the power of Christ that carried Paul
through all his temptations and trials, and which carries the Saints through
all their trials and temptations, therefore Christ must needs be God, for
nothing but infinite and an almighty power can carry the Saints through all
those difficulties and temptations they are exercised with.

2. The power of Christ may be considered in the effect, and so the power of
Christ is nothing else but the effect of his power put forth in us, Ephesians. 3.20.
According to the power that works in us. There is a power put forth in us, and
that is the power that is here meant, My power is made perfect in infirmity,
that is, the energy, efficacy and operation of my power, is seen in men's
infirmity. This I take to be the plain meaning, man's infirmity makes way for
the putting forth of the effects of my power in him. Now there is a twofold
power of Christ that we may distinguish of.

1. There is the power of his providence.

2. The power of his grace.

1. There is the power of his providence, God has spoken once, yea twice have
I heard this, that power belongs unto God, Psalm. 62.11. power belongs unto
God, that is, power to administer and order all things in his providence as he
pleases. So in Heb. 1.3. Upholding all things by the word of his power. Now
the power of Christ's providence is seen in man's infirmity, that is, the greater
man's weakness and infirmity is, the more is the power of Divine providence seen
in upholding of him.

2. There is the power of Christ's grace, observe how the words lie, My grace
shall be sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness, here
grace and power seem to be synonymous, they seem to be put one for another;
Christ's grace is his power; Christ's grace is that Divine help and assistance he
gives to us, and his power it is his grace, that assistance of grace which he
gives to his. So that the plain meaning is, My power is made perfect in
weakness, that is, the power of my providence and of my grace is made perfect
in man's infirmity.

The 3. term to be explained in the Text is this, How is it that Christ's power
is perfected in infirmity, (...).
my strength is perfected or consummated: the plain meaning is, it is
illustrated, it is displayed, it is made visible, and conspicuous. Two things,
I conceive, are carried in this expression, My strength is made perfect in
weakness, or infirmity.

1. That man's infirmity gives occasion to Christ to put forth his power; My
strength is perfected in infirmity, as much as if it had been said, My power
has occasion, or matter of exerting it self when man's infirmity is discovered.
God is not wont to manifest, and put forth his power, till our infirmity
appears; and when our infirmity does appear, then is the time and season Christ
is wont to put forth his power. There are many great Scriptures speak to this,
For the Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for his servants; when
he sees that their power is gone, and there is none shut up or left, Deuteronomy.
32.36. So in Isa. 40.29. He gives power to the faint, and to them that have no
might, he increases strength: and it is a great expression that, Hos. 14.3. In
him the Fatherless finds mercy. It is an expression I have read of Luthers
upon that Text, It is a thing defined and determined, that if thou will find
mercy, thou must be fatherless. God shows mercy to none but those that are
fatherless. Thou must first be fatherless, thou must be helpless, thou must
have no strength before God show thee mercy. The creature must be reduced to
nothing in it self, before God put forth his strength to help us. And it is
another expression of Luther, God in his proper form and nature is such a God
who loves afflicted persons, and who has compassion upon them who are in
distress, who are deprest and brought low. I was brought low and he helped me,
says the Psalmist. God puts forth his power then when man is brought lowest.

The 2. thing implied is this, That Christ's power it is made visible and
conspicuous to us by our infirmities. We should never have so clear a sight of
Divine grace, had not we first a sight and sense of our own infirmity. This
expression of being perfected, My strength is made perfect in weakness, it has
relation to our sense, the sense and feeling of our own infirmity is that which
gives us experience of Gods power so much the more. Had we no sense of our own
infirmity, we should be apt to think we had a sufficiency in our selves, but
when we see and perceive our own infirmity, then we see it is by another
strength and not by our own, that we are enabled to do and suffer what we do
and suffer. If we had not some sense and experience of our own infirmity, we
should think the strength and sufficiency were in our selves. O but God leaves
us under infirmity, that we may see the strength and ability God affords us
under infirmity, is another, and not our own. This I take to be the meaning of
the words, My strength is made perfect in infirmity.

The 4. thing which we are to inquire into, and that which is of great moment
in this matter, is this,

What is that power and grace of Christ that is put forth and made known in our
infirmity?

1. Supporting grace is made known by our infirmity. Our infirmity is a means
whereby the grace of Christ in supporting us is seen more clearly. When our
burdens are many, and our pressures great upon us, it is a wonder we do not
sink and faint under them, and therefore when we are under great trials,
pressures and temptations, it is infinite power that does support us, and the
power of Christ is then made known in infirmity when we are supported under
such burdens and temptations, which were enough to sink flesh and blood, and to
crush such poor frail creatures as we are. I say, supporting grace is made
visible by the Saints infirmities. Isa. 41.10. It is the promise of God to the
Church, and though it is spoken to the Church in general, yet it is applicable
to the particular members of the Church, I will strengthen thee, yea I will
help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness. Here
is supporting grace. Psalm. 145.7. The Lord upholdeth them that fall, that is,
God upholdeth them that are ready to fall. The Saints of God are sometimes near
overwhelming, so great are the burdens and pressures that they lie under, that
they are almost sunk under them, then does God put under his everlasting arms,
and upholds them. It is a pregnant Text, Psalm. 94.17, 18. Unless the Lord had
been my help, my soul had almost dwelt in silence, that is, I had been a lost
man, I had given my self for lost, My soul had almost dwelt in silence, that
is, I had gone down to the grave, the place of silence. My afflictions and
pressures were so great, that they would have brought me down to the grave, the
place of silence, compare this with Psalm. 115.17. The dead praise not the Lord,
neither any that go down into silence, that is, the grave the place of silence.
So that the meaning is, unless the Lord had been my help, my soul had almost
dwelt in silence, that is, my afflictions had sunk me, and swallowed me up,
brought me down to the grave. And then mark what follows in the next verse,
When I said my foot slippeth, thy mercy O Lord held me up, here is upholding
grace, and this was seen in the infirmity of this Holy man, which before he
mentions, the infirmity of this Holy man made way for the discovery of this
grace of God toward him.

2. Assisting grace is made perfect by our infirmity; the experience we have of
the risings of our own corruptions, and the insinuation of Satan's temptations,
and also the experience we have of our own inability to deal either with the
one or the other, shows us how much we are beholding to assisting grace to
enable us to withstand or overcome them. And this seems to be the case in the
Text, Paul saw an inability in himself to deal with the thorn in the flesh,
that is, to grapple with those motions of corruption that Satan's temptations
did extimulate and stir up in him. Now the Lord promises him his assisting
grace, My grace shall be sufficient for thee. Now the power of God helping him
to overcome these motions and temptations which he was infested with, was the
more illustrated by this means, the power of assisting grace to enable Paul to
overcome his temptation was more seen, than if Paul had no temptation at all.

3. Recovering or restoring grace is made perfect by our infirmity, Psalm.
23.3. Thou restorest my soul. Thus the grace of Christ recovered and restored
Peter after his fall. When Peter denied his Master, and our Savior looked upon
him, and conveyed his grace by that look, this begat repentance in Peter,
Matthew. 26.75.
he went out, and wept bitterly. Our infirmities make way for the illustrating
the glory of restoring and renewing grace. For as we are unable to preserve and
keep our selves from falling, so we are as unable to recover our selves when we
are fallen. It is the grace of Christ which brings our hearts into frame, after
they have been out of frame, Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart O God, and
renew a right spirit within me. David needed a work of creation to pass upon
him, after his fall. His heart was so disordered by sin, that it had need be
set right again, and therefore he prays, Renew in me a right spirit. Sin had
distempered him, and therefore he needed the grace of God to rectify, and set
things right in him. We cannot bring our own hearts into frame when they are
out of frame. We should pine and languish away under our relapses did not
Divine grace set us right. Now this is that which illustrates the Grace of
Christ, that when we cannot recover or restore our selves, after our falls, he
recovers and restores us.

Lastly, Reviving and comforting grace is made known by the Saints infirmities.
The Children of God have their fainting fits, holy and experienced souls know
what belong to them. When their pressures are great, when their temptations and
trials have been long and sore upon them, this brings them even to fainting,
they are ready to say with Daniel, they retain no more strength, neither have
they any spirit in them. David complains, Psalm. 119.25. My soul cleaves to the
very dust. And a verse or two after he says, My soul droppeth or melts away
for heaviness. And Jonah says, My soul fainted within me, Jonah 2.7. Secure
persons, who live at ease, and have no experience of temptation, and spiritual
conflicts, know not the meaning of these things, but holy experienced souls
know the meaning of them. The Saints of God are sometimes brought to such
extremities, by their afflictions and temptations, that they are even in a
manner overwhelmed by them. The title of Psalm. 102. is remarkable to evidence
this, A prayer of the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, and pours out his
complaint before the Lord. The Saints then are sometimes overwhelmed by their
sorrows and temptations. Now these fainting fits the Saints are cast into, make
way for reviving or comforting grace, 2 Cor. 7.6. God who comforts them that
are cast down. It is one of the titles given to God, God that comforts them
that are cast down, and it is a great Text which was hinted before, Isa. 40.29.
He gives power to the faint, and to them that have no might he increases
strength. Were not the Saints brought to these faintings sometimes, were they
not brought to this, to think, they had no strength, no might, they would not
see the power of God which revives them, when they are brought to the very
brink of the grave, to the very brink of destruction.

This should teach us cheerfully to submit to those afflictions, trials,
temptations, and all manner of exercises that God is pleased to exercise us
with. Under the name of infirmity, all manner of afflictions and trials are
comprehended. Now if Christ's power be perfected in our infirmity, that is, by
our trials, temptations, exercises, we should cheerfully submit to this
discipline, James 1.2. Count it all joy when you fall into diverse temptations,
that is, when you fall into diverse afflictions and trials, count it all joy; a
strange Doctrine to flesh and blood! what is it a matter of joy to be
afflicted? Is it a ground for all joy for a man to be afflicted? Truly, it is
so in respect of the consequents, it is not so in respect of it self. Look upon
affliction in it self, and no affliction is for the present joyous but
grievous, so the Apostle tells us, Heb. 12.11. But it is a matter of joy to
fall into afflictions in respect of the consequents, count it all joy when ye
fall into diverse temptations. Why so? The following words tell us, knowing that
the trial of your faith works patience. The Saints afflictions so far as they
are sanctified, are a means to increase their faith and patience, and the gain
of a little grace by our afflictions makes amends for all our afflictions. If
we gain faith or patience, or any grace whatsoever by our afflictions, the gain
of a little grace is a greater good than there is evil in our afflictions.
Besides, if Gods strength, and power, be manifested in our weakness and
infirmity, we ought willingly to submit to those trials, and afflictions, and
temptations that he lays upon us. We are bound (though it be a hard lesson to
flesh and blood) to love the glory of God above our own ease and quiet. If
therefore the power and grace of Christ, be illustrated in our afflictions and
exercises, it becomes us the more cheerfully to submit to them, because God
will have a revenue of glory this way. I remember it is an expression of
Luther, Christianus sine afflictionibus nil ^al^t. Luther.
A Christian without affliction is worth nothing. We would fain take up with an
easy Christianity, we would fain carry on a smooth easy profession without
rubs or difficulties, or any considerable exercises and trials. We would have
no temptations, we would meet with no troubles or afflictions in our way; but
alas it will not be. Therefore let us remember this Text, My strength is made
perfect in weakness. God will find out something or other to exercise us with
all our days, and if we should be without exercises, God would lose his glory
and we should lose the grace and experience that is gotten by these trials. Let
us pray much that sin may be kept out of our afflictions; if sin be kept out of
our trials and afflictions, none of our afflictions will do us hurt.

The end of the Thirteenth Sermon.
SERMON XIV.
2 Cor. 12.9. And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my
strength is made perfect in weakness.


THE Doctrine propounded from these words was,

Doct. Christ's strength is perfected in our infirmity.

I come now to the grounds and reasons of the Doctrine which I shall briefly
speak to, and then come to the Application.

First, For the grounds of the point, Why is it that God takes this course?

1. To let us see our infirmity.

And then, 2. To perfect his strength or power in our infirmity.

There are two grounds of this.

1. Because Gods design is to humble us. Reason 1.
Now the sense of our infirmity is the proper means to humble us. It is a true
saying, and a saying we can never think of too often, The foundation of
humility is the knowledge of some defect, or imperfection in our selves. Whilst
we have a self-fulness, a self-sufficiency, whilst we apprehend nothing but
wisdom, strength, ability, and excellency in our selves, this lifts us up. For
Pride, what is it, but a vehement or strong opinion of a man's own proper
excellency? Now whilst we apprehend nothing but excellency in our selves, this
lifts us up, therefore God in his infinite wisdom discovers to us our weakness,
impotency, infirmity and imperfection, and the sight of our own infirmity and
imperfection is a means to take down our plumes, and to depress and humble us.
Now our humiliation makes way for Gods exaltation. The more the creature is
humbled and debased, the more is God exalted. This is certain, when any
excellency of the creature is seen and admired too much, the excellency of God
is so much the more unseen; the admiration of the creatures excellency is a
means to darken the glory of God, and therefore God draws a Vail upon our
glory, that so God may be the more seen, Isa. 2.17. The loftiness of man shall
be bowed down, and the haughtiness of man shall be made low, and the Lord alone
shall be exalted in that day. When all created excellency is laid low, then is
Gods excellency the more advanced.

The 2. Reason 2.
Reason is this, Gods strength is perfected in our infirmity, because the sense
of our infirmity makes us to see that all is of grace. When God has reduced us
to nothingness in our selves, when God has made us to see that we are nothing,
that we can do nothing, then we clearly see, that all that we are, and all that
we have, is of grace. It is natural to us to arrogate too much to our selves,
to ascribe things to our own strength, sufficiency and wisdom, and therefore
the Lord shows us our own folly, how unable we are to satisfy our selves in
difficult cases. How often do we meet with such difficulties and perplexities
in our lives that are beyond all our own wisdom to know how to resolve our
selves in them, and to extricate our selves out of them? And God in his
infinite wisdom leads us into these difficulties to make us see that it is
beyond our own wisdom to help us out of them. And he also shows us our own
weakness and impotency, to withstand such temptations as we meet with in our
course, and then we clearly see that all is of grace; if we have any wisdom
strength and sufficiency to help us in our difficulties and temptations, it is
all of Divine grace. So that God first reduces us to nothingness, and then
helps us, to show us that all is of grace, and that we may set the Crown upon
the head of grace, and attribute nothing to our selves.

I come to the Use and Application of the Doctrine.

Is it so, that Christ's strength is perfected in man's infirmity?

The first Use shall be,

1. Use 1.
By way of information, This shows us, nothing does more obstruct Divine grace,
and shut the door against it than self-fulness, and presumption of our own
strength, and sufficiency. In the Text it is said, My strength is made perfect
in infirmity, that is, the sense of our infirmities makes way for the
manifestation of Divine grace. Elsewhere it is said, God gives grace to the
humble, 1 Pet. 5.5. and in the same place, where it is said, God gives grace to
the humble, it is said, He resists the proud. Look as humility prepares us for
the reception of Divine grace: so on the contrary, pride obstructs, and stops
the current of Divine grace. The low valleys are watered and receive the
blessing of the showers from Heaven, whereas the tops of the high mountains
remain dry and barren. Thus God delights to refresh low and humble souls with
the dews of Divine and Heavenly grace, whereas such as are proud and lifted up
with the conceit of their own excellencies and perfections, receive none of
those Divine dews and showers of grace. God fills the hungry with good things,
the rich he sends empty away. Therefore of all sins, it concerns us to watch
most against spiritual pride. There is no sin that is a greater enemy to the
reception of Divine grace than pride. Gods design is to show us our own
emptiness, and then to fill us with his fullness; but till we are emptied of
self, we can never expect to be filled with Gods fullness.

The 2. Use is this, Is it so, Use 2.
that Christ's strength is perfected in our infirmity? Be exhorted from hence to
labor to get, and retain a deep sense of our own infirmity; the more we retain
a sense of our own infirmity, the more do we prepare the way to the grace of
Christ, for Christ's strength is perfected in our infirmity. Truly humility is
the principal grace in a Christian. It is a memorable passage of Calvin in his
Institutions. The Foundation of our philosophy is humility, As he that being
asked, what was the first virtue in an Orator, said pronunciation, and being
asked what was the second virtue in an Orator, said pronunciation, and being
asked what was the third virtue in an Orator, said pronunciation: so says he,
If any man should ask of me what is the first virtue of a Christian, I would
say humility, if any one should as what was the second virtue of a Christian, I
would say humility, if any should ask what was the third virtue of a Christian,
I would say humility, and always humility. The foundation of Christianity is
humility. What is the whole Gospel? The whole Gospel lies mainly in these two
things, that our righteousness lies out of our selves, and that our strength
lies out of our selves. The Gospel therefore is a Doctrine of humility. Now
humility arises from the sense of our own infirmity, nothing so proper a means
to get and preserve humility in us as the sense of our own infirmity.

But here it may be said,

Ques. Question.
What is that sense of our own infirmity that we should keep up in our selves;
My strength is made perfect in infirmity. It is the design of God to make us
sensible of our own infirmity. How ought we to be sensible of our own infirmity?

Answ. 1. Answer.
We ought to keep up a great sense of our great defects in spiritual wisdom and
knowledge, 1 Cor. 8.2. If any man thinks that he knows any thing, he
knows nothing as he ought to know. We think we are wise, we need to be taught
no more; Oh but we are very ignorant in many things. How ignorant are we of God
and Christ, of the will of God, and our own duty in many points? Jer. 10.14.
Every man is brutish in his knowledge; the more humility there is in us, the
more sensible shall we be of our own bruitishness as to the knowledge of God. O
let us consider that Text, Prove. 30.2, 3. Surely I am more brutish than any
man, and have not the understanding of a man. I neither learned wisdom, nor
have the knowledge of the holy. Why so? What is the matter? This was the case,
this holy man was deeply sensible how defective he was in the knowledge of God.
He was sensible how defective he was as to the knowledge of God in his
greatness and immensity, and as to the knowledge of God in the mystery of the
Trinity, so it appears in the following verse, verse. 4. who has ascended up
into Heaven, or descended, who has gathered the wind in his fist, who has
bound the waters in a garment, who has established all the ends of the earth?
Here he complains of his ignorance, of the greatness and immensity of God. He
had not such becoming thoughts of Gods greatness and immensity as he ought to
have; and in the next words he complains of his ignorance in the mystery of
the Trinity, What is his name, and what is his sons name, if thou can tell? O
do any of us know God in his attributes, or do we know him in the mystery of
the Trinity as he ought to be known, and may be known? O let us be sensible of
our great infirmity and defects as to spiritual wisdom and knowledge, that that
which we do know is but the least part of that which we are ignorant of;
therefore let us not think that we have known all that is to be known of God,
for believe it, we are but babes in knowledge in comparison of what may be
known of the mystery of God, of the Father and of Christ. It was not for
nothing that the Apostle prays for them that they might understand the mystery
of God, and of the Father, and of Christ: Coloss. 2.2.
the mystery of God, of the Father, and of Christ is a great mystery. To know
God in the unity and simplicity of his essence, to know God in the Trinity of
persons, is so great a mystery as we shall never be fully able to understand
in this life.

2. We ought to be sensible of our impotency to resist temptations. We think we
are strong and can resist any temptation; but when some great and prevailing
temptation comes and bears us down, then we see how weak we are. Peter said,
though all denied Christ yet he would not, but yet by sad experience he found
the temptation too strong for him; we ought to be sensible that the many
temptations we meet with in our course, will be too strong, and too hard for
us, if we be left to our selves.

3. We ought to be sensible of the great corruption of our natures, and of that
great proneness and proclivity that is in us unto evil, Romans 7.
In me, that is in my flesh, there dwells no good thing, says Paul. Nay, it
may be said in our flesh, there dwells every evil thing. The spirit that is in
us lusts to envy, James 4.5. If we observe our own hearts, we may see in them
the seeds and principles of all evil; out of the heart, Matthew. 15.19.
says our Savior, proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications,
thefts, there is the root of all sin to be found in our hearts. This sense of
the corruption of our own hearts, and proclivity that is in them to evil, will
be of great use to us.

1. This will be a means to make us so much the more jealous over our own
hearts. He that trusts in his own heart is a fool, says Solomon; and the heart
is deceitful above all things and desperately wicked, Jerem. 17.9.
who can know it? So deceitful, and wicked are our hearts that they will soon
betray us to sin, if we be left to our selves.

2. As this sense of the corruption of our nature will make us so much the more
jealous over our own hearts, so this will make us see the daily need we have of
Divine grace; the more experience we have of our own corruption, the more we
see our need of Divine grace to keep us; for whither would our corruptions
hurry us, if Divine grace did not keep us?

4. We ought to be sensible of our inability to perform difficult services, yea
our utter insufficiency to do the least thing that is good, without Divine
grace. Without me, says our Savior, ye can do nothing, John 15.5. Our Savior
does not say without me ye can do no great thing, but he says without me you
can do nothing; just nothing, not the least thing, we have not sufficiency of
our selves, says the Apostle, to think any thing. What is less than a thought?
O what should humble us more than this, to think that we cannot command a good
thought? We must be beholding to Divine grace for every holy thought. This
sense of our infirmity is that which makes way for the illustration of Christ's
strength, My strength is perfected in infirmity. It was the speech of one,
Persici non potest home qui se non satcatur infirmum.
that man cannot be perfected, who does not confess himself to be infirm. Our
highest perfection in this life, it is to be sensible of our imperfection. It
is another speech of one of the ancients, if I misremember not it was Jeroms,
Hancunam praesentis vitae persectionem esse, ut te imo rsectum agnoscas.
This is the only perfection attainable in this life, that thou acknowledge thy
self to be imperfect.

5. Lastly, We ought to keep up a sense of the many trials, afflictions,
changes and vicissitudes that we must expect to pass through in our present
state, and our own inability to stand up under them, without Divine grace,
without Divine help and aid. If we be now in prosperity, and think it shall be
always thus, and never otherwise with us, this is a means to lift us up:
whereas if we be still in expectation of affliction, and also are sensible of
our own inability to undergo the least affliction without Divine help and
assistance, this will be a means to humble us. It was the speech of a wise and
experienced Christian, When I rise in the morning I expect what God will
exercise me with before night. It is good to be under the expectation of some
new trials and exercises, this will be a means to keep us humble, and this will
be a means to preserve in us a sense of our infirmity, and make us see our
constant need of Divine grace. If we think to live without afflictions we shall
but deceive our selves so much the more, for afflictions will come whether we
think of them or no. But if we be in a constant expectation of afflictions,
this will be a means to humble us, and to bring us to a sense of our own
infirmity, and when we are most humble and have the greatest sense of our own
infirmity, then are we most prepared to receive Divine grace, for Christ's
strength is perfected in our infirmity, that is, in the sense of our infirmity;
the more sensible therefore we are of our infirmity, the more are we prepared
to receive Divine grace.

The 3. and Last Use is this, Use 3.
Is it so that Christ's strength is perfected in our infirmity?

This should teach us to pray much, that we may have more experience of Christ's
power resting upon us in our infirmity. This was Paul's ambition, here in the
Text, My strength is made perfect in infirmity, what follows? The next words
are, most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmity, that the power
of Christ may rest upon me. The words in the original, (...).
are very significant, that the virtue of Christ may inhabit in me, or that the
strength of Christ may pitch it self upon me, or as the word signifies, that
the strength of Christ may tabernacle upon me, ut tanquam in tabernaculo inbab
tet in me potentia Christi.
therefore Beza renders it, that the power of Christ may inhabit in me as in a
Tent or Tabernacle. To open this expression, two things seem to be intimated in
it.

1. That we are poor weak frail vessels; that our bodies are like to Tents or
Tabernacles, the body is often compared to a Tabernacle, 2 Cor. 5.1. For we
know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle, were dissolved, we have a
building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. Here the
body is compared to a tabernacle, and so the Apostle Peter uses the same
expression, As long as I am in this my tabernacle; and in the very next verse,
knowing shortly that I must put off this my Tabernacle, 2 Pet. 1.13, 14. The
body is like a poor Tent or Tabernacle, the stakes of it are not so strong, and
deeply fixed, but it may soon be taken down, soon removed.

2. The expression intimates the need we have of Divine power and strength to
support us, that the power of Christ may Tabernacle upon me, it is as much as
if the Apostle should say, this poor Tabernacle of mine would be soon blown
down, did not a Divine hand keep it up, and support it, therefore Paul's
ambition was that Christ's power might rest upon him.

But here it may be asked,

When may Christ's power be said to rest upon us?

1. When we have a present sense of Christ's power in our extremities; thus Paul
a little after, in the Text, When I am weak, then am I strong, verse. 10. How
so? When I am weak, then am I strong; this seems to be a contradiction! But the
plain meaning is, when he had the greatest sense of his own infirmity, then he
had the most experience of Christ's power put forth in him, man's extremity is
Gods opportunity.

2. Then do we find the power of Christ rest upon us, when we find the power of
Christ strengthening of us to bear afflictions, 1 Col. 11. Strengthened with all
might according to his glorious power, unto all patience, and long-suffering
with joyfulness. It is the power of Christ in the Saints that strengthens them
to all patience, and then does the power of Christ rest upon them, when by the
power of Christ they are enabled to bear afflictions with joyfulness, Phil.
4.13. I can do all things through Christ strengthening me, I am able to do all
things, or I have power to do all things, so the word signifies, I have power
and strength to do all things, (...).
and what were these things, that Paul had a power to do? He could want, he
could abound, he could be full, he could be hungry, he could bear all
conditions with an equal mind. He had learned in whatsoever state he was,
therewith to be content. Now it was the power of Christ resting on him that
enabled him to do this. Nature cannot bear such vicissitudes, changes and
variety of conditions with an equal mind. Nature frets and storms when it meets
with variety of troubles. O but the power of Christ resting upon Paul made him
bear all changes with an equal mind. Nothing but the power of Christ resting on
us will make us bear all conditions, afflictions and changes with an equal
mind. And then does the power of Christ rest upon us, when by the strength of
his grace we are enabled to bear up under all the afflictions that we meet with
in the course of our pilgrimage.

3. Then may the power of Christ be said to rest upon us, when the power of
Christ acts us and carries us forth in difficult duties and services. Christ
has promised, that his Spirit shall be in the heart of his people, John 14.16.
I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever; and in the latter end of the next verse, it is said,
He dwells with you, and shall be in you. How shall it be in them? It shall be
in them, to act them. When we find the presence of the spirit of Christ to act
us in a sensible manner, then is the power of Christ said to rest upon us.

But here it may be said, Quest.
how may we do to attain to this? to have the power of Christ to rest upon us?
for this is a desirable thing to feel the power of Christ to rest upon us. This
was so desirable a thing to Paul, that he could glory in reproaches,
necessities and persecutions, because by this means he had more experience of
Christ's power resting upon him. Paul was contented to undergo the greatest
difficulties, afflictions and hardships, so that he might have experience of
Christ's power resting on him. And why is it so desirable a thing to feel
Christ's power resting upon us? The reason is, because every approach of God,
and every manifestation of the Divine presence is most precious to the Saints.
Now when the Saints have experience of Christ's power resting on them, they are
most sensible of Gods approaches to them; when Christ's power rests upon them,
it is a manifestation of Gods presence in them, and what can be more desirable
to a holy soul, than to have some experience that God and Christ dwell in them?

How then may we attain to this, that the power of Christ may rest upon us?

1. We must carry a deep sense of our infirmity, Answ.
the sense of our infirmity makes way for the manifestation of Christ's power,
this we have heard already, when we are weak in our selves then have we most
experience of Christ's strength, When I am weak, then am I strong, says the
Apostle, he that would have experience of Christ's strength must be reduced to
nothingness in himself.

2. We must subject our selves to Christ as our head, it is a great expression,
Ephesians. 5.24. Therefore as the Church is subject unto Christ, what is the import
of that expressiom? What is it for the Church to be subject unto Christ? I
conceive that the meaning is, That the Church and every member of it ought to
own the Authority and Supremacy of Christ as its head, it ought to acknowledge
him as the fountain and spring of all its supplies, and depend on him for all
things, this is the Churches subjection to Christ, an owning and acknowledging
Christ to be her head, owning and acknowledging his power and authority over
her to supply all her wants, and to depend on him for all, this is for the
Church to be subject to Christ, to subject her self to him in a way of
dependence. John. 15.4.
Abide in me, and I in you; the promise of Christ's abiding in us, is made upon
our abiding in him, we cannot expect Christ should abide in us by way of
gracious influence, unless we abide in him in a way of dependence.

3. And Lastly, We must long for, and wait for the power of Christ to be
exerted and put forth in us. If we would have the power of Christ resting on
us, we must look for power without our selves to strengthen us in suffering,
and act us in duty. Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ's
strengthening me, (...).
through Christ in strengthening of me. We must pray that we may seel the power
of Christ operating and working inwardly in our hearts. Ephesians. 3.20. We read of
his power manifested in the Saints, Now unto him that is able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power that works
in us. We should pray that we may feel and experiment more of this power that
works in the Saints. The more experience we have of this power, the more shall
we find that we are supported and born up under our afflictions and
infirmities, the more we shall find we are enlarged and carried forth in all
our services; whatever our infirmities, afflictions, necessities and distresses
are, the power of Christ resting on us will carry us up above them all, For his
strength is made perfect in our infirmity.

The End of the Fourteenth Sermon.
SERMON XV.
Solomon's Song, 1.4. Draw me, we will run after thee.


HAving showed the excellency of divine Grace, I shall now take occasion from
this Scripture to speak something concerning the necessity of Divine Grace, and
the sense which the Saints have of the need they have of the help of Divine
Grace. I take it for a certain Truth, that the elder we grow in Christianity
the more sensible shall we be of the need we have of Grace. Younger Christians
may be carried out much in the heat and strength of their affections, but elder
Christians do easily perceive the need they have of Divine Grace. We have here
the profession of the whole Church, she professes the need that she has of
Grace, and therefore prays for it, Draw me, we will run after thee.

Her petition supposes her want, she prays to be drawn, wherefore she needs to
be drawn, Draw me, we will run after thee; she plainly intimates that unless
she were drawn, she could not run. So that in these words, here is a plain
declaration of the sense that the Church had of the need of Divine Grace. Her
praying that she might be drawn by Divine Grace, supposes that she needed
Divine Grace to draw her, and her saying, Draw me, and we will run after thee,
plainly shows that unless she had Divine Grace to draw her, she could not run.

In the words of the Text there are these three things to be considered, one
whereof is supposed and the other two are employed.

That which is supposed, is the need which the Church had of the drawings of
Divine Grace, and the sense that she had of the need of these drawings, Draw
me, we will run after thee. Her praying to be drawn, supposes her need to be
drawn, for we are not wont to pray for that which we do not want. Therefore if
the Church pray to be drawn, she needs to be drawn. This is therefore employed,
the Churches want of Divine Grace, and the sense that she had of the want of
this Grace.

There are two things expressed in the Text: 1. The Churches petition, Draw me.
The 2. Is the consequent of granting this her petition, Draw me, and we will
run after thee.


There are three Observations or Doctrines that do arise out of the words. The

Doct. 1. Is this, That holy Souls are most sensible of the need which they
have of the help of Divine Grace. This is clearly employed here, when the Church
prays, Draw me; she was deeply sensible of the need she had to be drawn; how
drawn? drawn by Divine Grace. The

Doct. 2. Second Observation is That the sense which we have of the need of
Divine Grace should make us pray so much the more for the drawings of Divine
Grace. The

Doct. 3. Third and last Observation is this, The end why we should desire the
drawings of Divine Grace, it is that our hearts may be more carried out after
God. Draw me, and we will run after thee. The end why she desired to be drawn,
was that her heart might be the more carried out after Christ. These are the
Observations that lie plainly in the Text.

I shall begin to speak a little of the

1. Of these, holy souls are most sensible of the need which they have of the
help of Divine Grace. In speaking to this point there are two or three things
to be spoken unto.

1. To show you what that grace is that holy souls are sensible of a want, and
constant need of in themselves. And, 2. What that sense is that holy souls have
of the need and want of Divine Grace. And then, 3. The reasons of it.
1. What that grace is which holy souls are sensible of the need of.

I shall open this in several particulars, and the more experience we have
attained unto, the more shall we understand the things that are set before us.

1. The Saints are sensible of the want of quickening or exciting grace; this
is primarily intended in the Text, Draw me, we will run after thee, why does
the Church pray to be drawn? this is employed, that she found her self very
dead, heavy, and lumpish in the ways of God, she found her heart very unapt to
move toward Christ, therefore it is that she prays to be drawn, draw me, that
is, quicken me by exciting grace, I find my heart very dead, I find my Spirit
lumpish, heavy, unapt to move toward thee, therefore quicken me by exciting
grace. She was sensible she could not move toward Christ till exciting grace
did quicken her. Holy souls are sensible of many damps and deadnesses, and
indispositions that come upon them, they have not that quickness, liveliness,
and fervor in the ways of God, that sometime they have felt. The more
experience we have of our own hearts, the more we shall be sensible of these
damps and deadnesses and indispositions that art apt to come upon us, and if we
are not sensible of these things it is a sign we are not acquainted with our
own hearts. David prays often in the 119. Psalm for quickening, Quicken me,
quicken me, in several places of that Psalm; hence may we gather that he found
a great deal of spiritual deadness that was come upon him. Do not we often find
an indisposition to prayer, to meditation, to holy conference, oh then do we
need quickening grace, then do we need to pray as the Church does here, draw
us, when we find our hearts dead and lumpish in the ways of God, then do we
need quickening or exciting Grace.

2. Holy Souls are oftentimes sensible of the want of elevating grace to raise
and elevate their hearts to God. This also is in the Text, Draw me, we will run
after thee. The Church was sensible that she could not get up her heart to God
as she would have it carried up to him. Draw me, she would fain get an advance
toward God, but she could not get up her Spirit to him as she would. She had
not those enlarged affections toward God as sometimes she had, and therefore
she prays to be drawn. Consider it well, do you not sometimes find your
affections very flat and low to what they are at other times; either your
affections stick in some lower inferior things, or else there is such a clog,
a weight that lies upon them, that you cannot get them to ascend to God. O how
seldom is it that we can get our affections upon the wing to mount up and soar
aloft toward God! our affections flag and sink, and it is well sometimes if we
can tell whether we have any affections for God yea or no. Sometimes it may be
we shall find our hearts carried up aloft, above the Sphere of all created
things, we shall find we love God incomparably above all things here below, at
other times we find our hearts lumpish and heavy like a piece of lead, and
cannot get them to ascend to God, as sometimes they do, therefore the Saints do
want elevating grace, to elevate and raise their hearts to God: The Saints find
the need of Divine Grace to elevate their hearts above present things.

It is natural to us to stick in present things, in things that are seen, and
the Saints that have acquaintance with their own hearts, find they have need of
Divine Grace to elevate their hearts above the things that are seen, to the
invisible God. Unless divine grace raise us we shall sink into present sensible
things and cannot get up above them. It is only Divine Grace that raises us
above present things.

3. The Saints are sensible of the need they have of corroborating or
stengthening Grace and that in these three particulars,

1. They see the need of strengthening grace to carry them through the
difficulties of their Pilgrimage here on earth. The elder the Saints grow, the
greater and sorer are their difficulties many times. God puts his people to the
hardest lessons at last oftentimes, and elder Christians are more sensible of
the need of Divine grace to carry them through the difficulties of their
Pilgrimage. So great are their trials and difficulties sometimes, that they
meet with, that they are ready to faint under them, Psalm. 27.14. Wait on the
Lord, be of good courage and he shall strengthen thine heart.

Why is this spoken, but only to show us that the Saints are oftentimes reduced
to such a case and condition, as that they had need to be bid to take heart and
spirit to themselves, they are apt to despond and sink in their spirits through
their own infirmities, and the greatness of their trials that come upon them,
they are apt to cast away their hope, and therefore they need Divine Grace to
strengthen their hearts; and the Lord here promises that he will do it, Wait
on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thy heart.

The Saints find by experience hat their hearts are apt to despond within them,
when their difficulties are great, and renewed upon them, and they have need to
pray for corroborating Grace to fortify and bear them up against the
difficulties they meet withal.

2. They are sensible of the need of corroborating and strengthening Grace to
support them under their sorrows and afflictions, Psalm. 119.28. My soul melts
away for heaviness, strengthen thou me according to thy Word. In the original
it is, My soul droppeth, that is, it is ready to die and faint away under my
afflictions, therefore strengthen me according to thy Word, unless thy Grace
strengthen and uphold me, my soul will drop and melt away under my afflictions,
my afflictions will be too hard for me, and sink me quite and clean, Psalm.
119.116. Uphold me that I may live, when a person is just ready to sink and
faint away, unless there be one near to uphold him, he must needs fall to the
ground. This holy man speaks here after this rate, I am just fainting away,
uphold me that I may live. The Children of God find themselves even fainting
and dying away under their afflictions and pressures, therefore they find the
need of upholding Grace, or else they must sink and perish. Those that are at
ease know not the meaning of these things, but exercised souls know the meaning
of them. Those that have been under Temptations know what David means when he
says, My soul melts away for heaviness, and uphold me that I may live.
Without Divine Grace the Saints would sink and perish in their afflictions.

3. They are sensible of the need of strengthening Grace to carry them out in
the performance of duty, To will is present with me, says the Apostle, but how
to perform I know not, Romans 7.18. Holy souls find a mind and will to do many
things, but how to do them and perform them actually they know not, they would
fain deny themselves, they would fain bring their will to Gods Will without the
least reluctance. They would fain Pray better, and Hear better, but when it
comes to perform, they find they are very short, and they find the need of
Divine Grace to help them to perform what they will to do. It is a great
Scripture, Psalm. 119.35. Make me to go in the path of thy commandments, for
therein do I delight. His delight was in the ways of God, yea but for all that
he needed Grace to make him to walk in them, and therefore he prays, Make me to
go. It may be we can say we have a delight to pray, a delight to hear, a
delight to meditate, but for all this, we need actual assisting grace to enable
us to pray, and to enable us to hear, and to enable us to meditate, Make me to
go in the path of thy Commandments, for therein do I delight. Though he
delighted in Gods Commandments, yet he wanted Grace to make him to go in them.
Though we have a love and affection to holy duties, yet we want Divine Grace
and assistance to carry us out in the performance of those holy duties that we
love.

4. The Saints are sensible of the need they have of mollifying grace to soften
and break their hearts, this is the language of the Church, Isa. 63.17. Lord
why have thou har dened our hearts from thy fear; the Church here complains of
her hardness, she is sensible of the need of mollifying Grace. Holy souls are
sensible of much hardness and unbrokenness of spirit. It is a great trouble to
them oftentimes that they cannot find their hearts break and melt for sin as
sometimes they have done. Is it not a great trouble to you Christians to find
these changes? You have found your hearts melt and break, now you cannot find
them breaking and melting as heretofore. It is the Promise of the Covenant,
Ezekiel. 36.26.
I will take away the heart of stone, and give a heart of flesh. Now if it be
the work of Divine Grace to take away the heart of stone (as certain it is
(there is much of that heart of stone remaining in us any further than Divine
Grace is put forth in us to soften our hearts) then the Saints want mollifying
Grace to break their hearts under the sense of sin. Sometimes a little sin will
break our hearts and affect our consciences, at other times a greater sin will
not do it, therefore we want Divine Grace to make our consciences tender at all
times.

5. The Saints are sensible of the need of medicinal or bealing grace to heal
the malignity and perverseness which they find lurking in their natures. There
is a root of pride, of passion, of envy, a root of frowardness and discontent,
a root of murmuring and impatience, a root of covetousness, which lurks in all
our hearts, and the more experience we have of our own hearts, the more need we
shall see we have of the Grace of God to heal these roots of sin that are thus
lurking in us, Psa. 41.4. Heal my soul for I have sinned against thee. We read
of Ephraim that there was a root of covetousness and forwardness in him, Isa.
57.17. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, there was one evil,
viz. covetousness, I hid me and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way
of his heart, there is another evil added to it, viz. frowardness and
perverseness of spirit, his heart was very much out of frame, what does God
say? I have seen his ways and will heal him. When our hearts are froward and
perverse, nothing but Divine Grace can set our hearts right.

We have many such roots of bitterness in us, Pride, Passion, Covetousness,
Envy, Frowardness, Discontent, Murmuring, Impatience, and the like. Now we need
Divine Grace, medicinal Grace to heal us.

6. The Saints are sensible of the need which they have of powerful efficacious
grace to cause them to believe in Christ. Draw me, that is; draw me to thy self
in a way of believing; so some expound it, and they compare this Text with
those words of our Savior, Joh. 6.44. No man can come to me, except the Father
which sent me, draw him. There must be the drawing of Divine Grace before any
person can come to Christ in a way of believing, so that we need efficacious
Grace to draw us to come to Christ in a way of believing. Whatever we may
think, there is naturally an opposition in our hearts against the way of
believing. It is natural to every man to seek for a righteousness in himself.
We were all born under the Covenant of Works, and we desire to live and abide
under the Covenant of Works, and seek for a righteousness of our own, This is
plain from that of the Jews, Romans 10.3. They being ignorant of Gods
rightcousness, and what is this righteousness of God? imputed righteousness,
the righteousof God by Faith, as the Apostle calls it, Phil. 3.9. Now, says
he, they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, went about to establish their
own righteousness. It is natural to every man to seek for a righteousness in
himself, and he is loath to be beholding to the righteousness of another, so
proud is the heart of man that he would not go out of himself for happiness,
therefore it is the power of Divine Grace that must take a man out of himself
and from off his own bottom, to make him come to Christ. And as we need Divine
Grace to help us to believe first of all, so we need the help of the same Grace
to enable us to put forth every particular act of Faith. We have a clear Text
for it, Romans 15.13. Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in
believing, that ye may abound in hope, in believing, that is the meaning. But
how so? Through the power of the Holy Ghost; to the end that ye may abound in
hope through the power of the Holy Ghost, mark it, it is by the power of the
Holy Ghost that we must abound in the acts of Faith, we cannot put forth one
act of Faith without the power and special helps and assistance of the Holy
Ghost. Do we not find it a difficult thing to come to the spiritual
apprehensions of Christ? how hard do we find it to apprehend the person of
Christ aright? how difficult is it to have right conceptions of the
righteousness of Christ, and of the Grace of Christ? Now Faith begins in the
spiritual apprehension of Christ, Joh. 6.40. This is the Will of him that sent
me, that every one which sees the Son, and believes on him, may have
everlasting life. There must be first seeing of the Son before there can be
believing on him. Spiritual apprehension of Christ is the first thing in Faith,
there must first be a spiritual apprehension of Christ before there can be an
act of Faith upon Christ, therefore Paul prays that he might know Christ, Phil.
3.10. That I may know him, etc. Now if we cannot so easily come to spiritual
apprehensions of Christ, it is not so easy to act Faith upon him as we may
think. Therefore the Saints need the power of efficacious Grace to cause them
to believe; and the Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 6. latter end, That there is the
same power put forth to make us to believe, as was put forth by God when he
raised Christ from the dead.

7. The Saints are sensible of the need that they have of preparing or
dispositive Grace, if I may so call it, to prepare, incline, and dispose their
hearts to the things of God, Psalm. 10.17. Thou will prepare their hearts to
pray, thou will cause thine car to hear. Thou will prepare their hearts to
pray. It is God that prepares the heart to pray; so in Psalm. 119.39. Incline my
heart to thy Testimonies. The Saints are sensible of the need of the Grace of
God to put a new bent, a new bias on their hearts. Incline my heart to thy
Testimonies; our hearts are oftentimes out of frame, very much unsuited to
spiritual things, and holy souls are sensible of the need of Divine Grace to
bring them into frame, to dispose them and bring them into a temper fit for the
duties God calls them to, Heb. 13.20, 21. The God of peace make you perfect in
every good work, that is, adapt, frame, dispose you to every good work. Oh the
more experience we have of our own hearts, the more need we shall find we have
of Divine Grace to bring our hearts into frame, and keep them in frame.

8. The Saints are sensible of the need they have of over-powering and
conquering Grace to conquer and overcome the reluctance that is in their wills
against the Divine Will. When Gods Will thwarts and crosses our wills, our
wills are apt to reluctate and make head against Gods Will, therefore holy
souls are sensible of the need of Grace to overcome that rebellion and
opposition that is in their wills against the Divine Will. O it is the mighty
power of the Grace of God that makes a man lay aside his own will, and his own
private affections; nothing but Grace can make a man do this, every man by
nature is wedded to his own will, and nothing but the Grace of God can take a
man off from his own private will, and his own private affection. When our
Savior had foretold his sufferings, Peter could not bear this, his will began
to reluctate, Matthew. 16.22. Then Peter took him, and began to rebuke him,
saying, Be it far from thee; Lord, this shall not be unto thee. When Gods Will
thwarts ours, our wills are apt presently to rebel, and to make head against
it: Therefore holy souls are sensible of the need of Divine Grace to overcome
the reluctance that they find in their wills against the Will of God.

9. The Saints are sensible of the need of preserving Grace to preserve and
keep them from falling into gross and scandalous sins, Jude verse. 24. To him
that is able to keep you from falling, falling, how? falling foully, falling
scandalously. It is God that is able to keep us from falling, we are not able
to keep our selves. It is the Divine power that keeps us from falling foully
and scandalously, we cannot keep our selves. We have another Saint professing
his inability in this point, Psalm. 17.5. Hold up my goings in thy paths, that
my footsteps slip not; as much as if he should say, I shall soon tread awry, I
shall easily be overtaken by some gross sin, if thou do not uphold me, if
thou do not keep me. Psalm. 19.13. Keep back thy servant from presumptuous
sins, as much as if he should say, I am prone enough of my self to fall into
presumptuous sins, it is thy grace alone can keep me back from them. Alas, if
we should trust to our own strength we should soon find how weak it is; there
is not the holiest soul, but would fall into scandalous sins, did not Divine
Grace keep him.

10. And lastly, The Saints are sensible of the need they have of fixing and
establishing Grace to keep their hearts fixed and constant in the ways of God,
Psalm. 86.11. unite my heart to fear thy name; unite my heart, when this holy
man prays to have his heart united, that shows he found his heart prone to many
excursions, his affections were scattered abroad unto variety of objects,
therefore does he pray to have his heart united to God, that so he might adhere
to God only, firmly, inseparably, truly. It is very hard for us to keep our
hearts always close to God, every poor thing is apt to distract them and turn
them aside, therefore holy souls, that walk with God, see a necessity of Divine
Grace to fix their hearts, that they may cleave to the Lord firmly and
inseparably.

Is it so, use 1.
that holy souls are most sensible of the need they have of Divine Grace? hence
may we learn, that they who magnify and cry up the power of nature and man's
free will, and decry the necessity of Divine Grace do little understand their
own hearts, and the reason is, because this crying up of the power of nature
and man's own ability and strength, is manifestly contrary to the experience of
the Saints in all ages, therefore it was well observed by one, That the
principles of some men, who do cry up Free Will, they are contrary to the
common sense and experience of all the faithful. Some men teach us that we have
a power to believe: the Saints experience in all ages tells them that they have
no power. Certainly Paul had as much of the power of Free Will in him as
another man, and yet he says, We have not sufficiency of our selves to think a
good thought, what less than a holy thought? and yet we have no less than an
Apostle, after all the Grace he had received, that tells us, that he had not
sufficiency of himself to think a good thought. Some men make their boast of
their own strength and sufficiency, but how contrary is this to the language of
the Saints in Scripture? The Saints with one accord in Scripture cry out, Draw
us, quicken us, incline us, unite our hearts, order our steps in thy ways,
what are all these expressions but a holy confession of their own
insufficiency? therefore they who cry up the power of nature and man's Free Will
are not to be credited in what they say, because it is contrary to the sense
and suffrage of the Church in all Ages.

This should teach us in the

2. Use 2.
Place great humility; If the Church here prays to be drawn, Oh then let us all
labor to be sensible of the need we have of Divine Grace. The more sensible we
are of the need of grace, the more humble shall we be in our selves, the
greater dependence shall we have upon Christ, the more shall we seek to God for
Grace, and the more we shall give to God the glory of the Grace which we
receive from him: whereas on the contrary, the more we abound in the sense of
our own fullness and sufficiency, and the less sense we have of our need of
Divine Grace, the more liable we are to fall. Take it for a certain truth, that
none are more likely to be deserted of God, and left to themselves than those
who are presumptuous of their own strength, and unsensible of the need they
have of Divine Grace, for God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble,
1 Pet. 5.5. When we do not keep up the sense of our need of Grace, then God
leaves us to our selves, and shows us what we are, and what we can do, or
rather what we cannot do, without the help of Divine Grace, and God leaving us
to fall one way or other, makes us see what need we have of his Grace.
Therefore as we would not have God desert us, and leave us to our selves, let
us keep up a constant sense of the need of his Grace; and that no^ only as to
some things, but as to every (...) Without me, says our Savior (...) do
nothing, he does not say (...) nothing at all, not one thing ^^^^tion of our
own strength (...) is that which undoes us. We presume upon our own gifts and
Grace received, upon our own sufficiency and resolution, and are not sensible
of our need of Grace for every thing, and hence it is that we go forth in the
confidence of our own strength and ability, and neglect our dependence on
Christ, and then we have experience oftentimes how greatly we miscarry. But we
shall find it to be true, that our greatest perfection lies in this, to go
entirely out of our selves, and to have the most entire dependence upon God for
every thing; the highest perfection a Christian can attain to in this life, is
to go wholly out of himself, and to have an entire dependence upon God for
every thing.

The end of the Fifteenth Sermon.
SERMON XVI.
Solomon's Song, 1.4. Draw me, we will run after thee.


I Now proceed to the second thing, and that is, to show what the sense is the
Saints have of their need of divine grace.

I shall but touch upon this in a few words, and then come to the reasons, to
show, How it comes to pass that holy souls have this sense of the need of
Divine Grace.

1. What that sense is that the Saints have of their need of Divine Grace.

1. They have an awakened and lively sense of their need of Grace. The
experience they have of their own hearts makes them to see their need of the
Grace of God. They find by sad experience that they are overtaken by many sins
contrary to the deliberate purpose of their wills; they find also they come
very short of doing and performing that good they have a mind to do and
perform, To will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I
find not, says Paul, Romans 7. Now this inspection the Saints have into their
hearts and lives, keeps up in them an awakened sense of the need which they
have of Divine Grace. The sad experience of what they find and feel in
themselves, will not suffer them to be ignorant of the need of Divine Grace.

2. As they have an awakened and lively sense of the need of Divine Grace, so
they have a continued sense of the need of Divine Grace. The sense of the need
they have of the help of Grace it runs throughout their whole lives; the elder
any one grows in Christianity, the more experience he has attained unto, the
more sensible he will be of his need of Divine Grace. De Bono Perseverantiae.
Austin after he had written many Books concerning the Grace of God, one of his
last Books was concerning the good of perseverance. The Saints after they have
received much Grace from God, yet they are sensible they need this Grace also,
that they may persevere and hold out to the end.

We come now to the grounds of the Point.

How is it that the Saints have this sense in themselves, this awakened sense,
this continued sense of the need of Divine Grace, what are the Reasons of it?

There are three or four Reasons to be given of it.

1. The Saints are sensible of a fountain of sin within them, 1. Reason the
Saints have of the sense of the need of Divine Grace.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death,
and it is sin that dwells in me, Romans 7.20. Now the Saints being so sensible
of original sin that dwells in them, are also sensible that this evil root
that is within them, is apt to betray them upon all occasions. In me, that is,
in my flesh dwells no good thing, Romans 7.18. Corrupt nature that is in us
will never incline us to good: But it is prone enough to incline us to evil.
When Temptations from without are wanting, our own hearts are prone enough to
tempt us to evil, Jam. 1.14. But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of
his own lust, and enticed. If there were no tempter from without, there is
corruption enough in every one of our hearts to seduce us to sin. Now the
experience which the Saints have of the treachery and deceitfulness of their
own hearts, this makes them to see the constant need which they have of Divine
Grace. Jer. 17.9.
The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked. Wherein does
the deceitfulness of the heart discover it self? Truly, among other things the
deceitfulness of the heart discovers it self in this, that when sin seems to be
fast asleep, when it does not stir at all, when it seems to be as a thing dead
and extinct, yet upon the least occasion it awakens and puts it self forth
again with fresh life and vigor. Now this proclivity and readiness that is in
the heart to sin, that upon every occasion the heart is apt to bend and incline
toward sin, this makes the Saints sensible of the constant need they have of
Divine Grace.

2. As the Saints are sensible of a fountain of sin in them, 2. Reason the
Saints have of the sense of the need of Divine Grace.
so they are sensible how unable they are to withstand the impetuous motions of
coruption that arise from the root of sin in them. Oh do we not find oftentimes
corrupt nature to bear us down like a mighty Torrent? When the Lord reproved
Jonah for his peevishness and fretfulness because of the gourd, Do thou well
to be angry? what does Jonah answer, I do well to be angry to the very death.
Here was a Prophet, no less than a Prophet blown up by a passion, yea by a
passion for a very little thing, as we would think, such are we when we are
left by Divine Grace. How often is it thus with us that some violent affection
hurries us, and transports us beyond all bounds, a poor passion blows us up,
and we know not how to withstand it: this makes the Saints see their daily need
of Divine Grace; unless Divine Grace set bounds to our passions and affections,
whither will our passions and affections hurry us? Now the experience the
Saints have of the impetuous motions of sin within them, this makes them see
their need of Divine Grace.

3. The Saints are sensible of their impotency and utter inability of
themselves to do any thing that is good, 3. Reason the Saints have of the sense
of the need of Divine Grace.
2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing, but
our sufficiency is of God. Holy souls find by experience that they cannot
command good thoughts or holy affections. Is it not thus with you sometimes? do
not you say in the secret retirements of your souls, O that it were with me as
in the days of old, O that it were with me as sometimes it was, O that I had
such apprehensions of God, such affections toward God as sometimes I had! Now
the Saints finding by experience that they cannot command holy thoughts and
holy affections, nor perform any thing that is spiritually good, this sense of
their own impotency, makes them see their need of Divine Grace.

4. And lastly, 4. Reason the Saints have of the sense of the need of Divine
Grace.
The Saints have experience of very different frames in themselves, when they
are acted by Divine Grace, and when they are left to themselves.

When they are acted by Divine Grace, then they get above this world, then they
can mount up aloft, then they can delight themselves greatly in God, then they
can take up their rest and satisfaction in God; But at other times when they
are left to themselves, and Divine Grace does not so act them and assist them,
they experience no such thing, but on the contrary they find their hearts flat,
dead, carnal, and too like to other men, grovelling in this world: this is the
difference holy souls find in themselves, and all is according to the accesses
and recesses of Divine Grace. Now the Saints finding that it is not at all
times alike with them, but that it is far otherwise with them when they are
acted and assisted by Divine Grace, and when they have not the same assistance
of Divine Grace, this makes them see their constant need of the Grace of God.

And so I have done with the doctrinal part: I come now to the Use and
Application.

This is matter of Reproof to us that we are no more sensible of the need of
Divine Grace; Use 1.
we have a self-fulness, a self-sufficiency, we do not see the constant need we
have of the Grace of God. Happy soul is he that sees his constant need of
Grace; but I am afraid there are few such to be found. The Apostle tells the
Corinthians, Ye are full, ye are rich, ye have reigned as Kings, 1 Cor. 4. that
is, ye are so in your own conceits, and apprehensions; it was not really so,
but in their own opinion and conceit concerning themselves. Thus it is with
many Professors, they are full, they are rich, they are Kings in their own
apprehensions, they are come to the top of Christianity. But it is much to be
feared that men's greatest supposed perfection will be found to be their
greatest imperfection.

Certainly holy men that have walked with God, have counted it their greatest
perfection to see their need of the Grace of God. But alas we see no such need
of Grace; we think we are full, we are apt to think we have all that need be
desired. It was the charge which Christ brought against the Church of Laodicea,
Rev. 3.17. Thou say, I am rich and increased with good, and have need of
nothing. O but it was but her saying so, it was not really so, for whereas she
said she was rich and increased with goods and wanted nothing, she was indeed
really poor, and blind, and wretched, and miserable, and naked, so our Savior
tells her. Such is our pride and self-conceit, that when we are most poor, we
then think our selves to be most rich, and when we want all things, we think we
abound in all things.

But how does it appear that we have not a due sense of the want of Divine
Grace?

There are two or three demonstrations that may evince and make it clear to us.

1. That we are apt to presume much, and have high conceits of our own
seize, Gal. 6.3. If any man think himself something, 1 Cor. 8.2. If a man
think he knows any thing. We are apt to think that we have attained much,
that we are very knowing persons, that little more can be added to us than we
do know, than what we have received. Now these high conceits of our selves, are
a certain sign of our self-fulness, and that we do not see our need of Divine
Grace. He that thinks that he is well stored already, he that thinks he has
provision enough of his own, will never be a beggar at the door of Grace.

2. A clearer demonstration yet is this, that we feel so little of a spiritual
hunger and thirst in our souls after Grace. The sense of want causes hunger
and begets thirst. Hunger and thirst do properly arise from the sense of want.
When nature is sensible of some want, this causes hunger and thirst. Now that
we do not feel our souls pricked with a spiritual hunger and thirst after
Grace, it is a sign we are not so sensible of our want of Grace as we ought to
be, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall
be filled, Matthew. 5.6. There must be a spiritual hunger and thirst after Grace,
as ever we expect to receive much Grace; but how little is it of this spiritual
hunger that we feel in our selves? We are soon sensible of the want of other
things. If our bodies be but a little distempered, we are soon sensible of the
want of health; if we are in wants, streights, and necessities, we are soon
sensible of the want of supplies. O but how rarely are we sensible of the want
of Divine Grace; of the want of Faith? Faith to believe in Christ, Faith to
believe the Promises? How rare is it that we are sensible of the want of love
to God, of the want of holy affections, of the want of brokenness of heart for
sin, hatred against sin? and the like. We have a quick sense of other wants;
but is our sense so quick when we are under spiritual wants? That our hunger
and thirst is no more vehement after Grace, that we feel no more keenness and
sharpness in our appetites after Divine Grace, it is a certain sign we are not
so sensible of our need of Grace as we ought to be.

3. Another sign that we do not find the want of Grace, is, that we do not see
a greater need of the ordinances and of the means of Grace. If we saw a need of
Grace it self, it is reasonable to suppose, we should see a greater need of the
means by which God is wont to convey Grace. The ordinances are the
conduit-pipes, the ordinary means, by which God is wont to convey grace to the
souls of his people: For, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing is of the Word of
God; Romans 10.17.
therefore that we are so indifferent as to our attendance on the Ordinances,
and do not find that need of them in our own souls, it is a certain sign we are
not so sensible of the want of divine grace as we ought to be. The holiest men
who have had the greatest sense of their need of grace, have been most sensible
of their need of the Ordinances to preserve and keep alive grace within them.
Hence is that of David, Psalm. 63.1. My soul thirsts for thee, my soul longs
for thee in a dry and thirsty Land, why so? That I may see thy power and thy
glory, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. He had found the power of
divine grace put forth in his soul, in the Ordinances, and that experience he
had of the grace of God that had appeared to him in the Ordinances, cauhim the
more to thirst after them. Holy souls see a need not of one Ordinance only, but
of every Ordinance, for they know that there is not any one means of grace
appointed in vain. I take it for a certain Truth, that so far as a man comes up
to spirituality and to any growth in Christianity, the more he will see his
need of every Ordinance. There is no Ordinance of God in vain. The infinitely
wise God has not appointed any one means of grace that our souls do not need;
therefore holy souls see their need not only of some Ordinances, but of all the
Ordinances; and as they see their need of every Ordinance, so they see their
need of the frequent use of the Ordinances; and the reason is plainly this, the
more grace a man has, the more he is acquainted with the state of his own
soul, and the more a man is acquainted with the state of his own soul, the more
he sees the great defects that are in himself, and the sight of those defects
in himself makes him prize all the ways and means whereby God is wont to
communicate grace to his people. This is the true reason why holy souls see
their need of the Ordinances. Now that we do not find such an appetite to the
Ordinances, so as to bring us to them with that frequency, nor such a relish
and savor in them, when we are present at them, it is a certain sign that we
are not sensible of the want of grace, and it is our want of a sense of our
need of grace that makes us so regardless of the Ordinances as we are. It is
far from an high attainment to sit loose to the Ordinances. They who do so, and
do constantly neglect the Ordinances, give too great grounds of suspicion,
whether they have any grace or no; for the more grace any man has, the more he
sees his need of all the means of grace.

The second Use is by way of Exhortation, Use 2.
to exhort us to maintain and keep up a deep and constant sense of the need we
have of divine grace. It is the counsel which Christ gives to the Church of
Laodicea, Rev. 3.18. I counsel thee to buy of me Gold tried in the fire, that
thou may be rich, and white raiment, that thou may be clothed, that the
shame of thy nakedness do not appear, and anoint thine eye with eye salve that
thou may see. She thought she was rich and increased with goods and wanted
nothing, Christ tells her, it was not so as she imagined, but that she was
poor, and wretched, and miserable, and blind, and naked, therefore he exhorts
her to keep up a sense of her need of grace, I counsel thee to buy of me, etc.
That is therefore to be the Exhortation unto us, that we would labor to keep
up a constant sense of our need of divine grace. Now for a few Motives to
quicken us hereunto.

1. Consider, Motive 1
This is the way to prepare us to receive most grace from God. The more
sensible we are of the need of grace, Luke 1.53.
the more are we prepared to receive grace from God. For, God fills the hungry
with good things. Humility is, Vas Gratiarum.
as one calls it, the Vessel that receives and takes in all other grace; by
humility we are prepared to receive all other grace at the hand of God. Now
Humility arises from a sense of our own wants and indigency, the more sensible
we are of our own wants and weaknesles, the more humble we shall be, and the
more humble we are, the more are we prepared to receive divine grace, for God
gives grace to the humble.

The second Motive is this, Motive 2
Not to be sensible of the need of divine grace, is an argument of great
security; for what is security? Security is when a man thiks himself free from
danger; then is a man secure when he is apprehensive of no danger; now, then is
a man in the greatest danger, when he is least apprehensive of danger. A man is
never in greater danger of falling into some gross and scandalous sin, than
when he is most secule. Our Savior bids us to watch and pray that we enter not
into temptation: this plainly intimates, Matthew. 26.41.
that if we do not watch and pray, we may soon fall into Temptation; now if we
are not sensible of the need of divine grace, but are secure, and think all is
well, we shall neither watch nor pray, and so, soon be surprised and overcome
by Temptation.

The third Motive is this, Motive 3.
Nothing will provoke God sooner to desert us in point of grace, and to leave
us to our selves, than for us not to keep up a sense of the need we have of his
grace. If we think we have a self-fulness, and a self-sufficiency, this causes
God to leave us to our selves, that so we may see what we are without his
grace. We read how God left Hezekiah to try him, that he might know all that
was in his heart; 2 Chronicles. 32 31.
we we do not presently see all that is in our hearts, till God withdraw his
grace form us. Am I a Dog, said he, 2 Kings 8.13.
that I should do so and so? so are we apt to think within our selves, is it
possible that ever I should be inclined to such a sin and such a corruption?
Now when we presume on our own strength and sufficiency, the Lord leaves us,
and then we soon see that superfiuity of naughtiness that is in our hearts, we
see that sin in us that we little thought had been in us.

4. And lastly, That we may keep up the sense of our need of divine grace,
Consider, the more sensible we are of the need of grace, the more sensible we
shall be of the help and assistance of divine grace when God affords it to us,
and so God will have the glory of his own grace. Gods design is to have the
glory of his grace in all things. Now the more sensible we are of the want of
grace, the more sensible we shall be of the help and assistance of divine grace
when God affords it to us.

But here it may be inquired, What ought we to do that we may keep up a
constant sense of the need of divine grace? I shall propound a few means to
help us herein.

1. Would we see the need of divine grace, let us be much conversant in the
study of our own hearts. The work of a Christian lies mainly and principally in
two things, In the study of Christ, and in the study of his own heart; the
study of our own hearts will make us see the need we have of Christ and his
grace. He that studys his own heart, will see his constant need of Christ and
divine grace; the more we study our own hearts and are acquainted with them,
the more clearly shall we see the natural propension that is in us unto evil,
we shall also see our impotency and inability to what is good, yea not only our
impotency and inability to what is good, but our averseness and indisposition
to what is good, also our instability and inconstancy in what is good, and also
a proneness and readiness in us to comply with temptation upon all occasions.
All this will show us the need of divine grace. The more we are acquainted with
our own hearts, the more shall we see how hard and difficult a thing it is to
get them into a spiritual frame, and when we have got them into that frame, to
keep them in a spiritual frame. So unsuitable are our hearts to spiritual
things, that it is hard to get them into a spiritual and heavenly frame, and
when they are set a little right toward God, they are unstable as water, and
soon fly off again: these things plainly show us the need of divine grace. Let
us examine our own hearts, and see whether they cannot set their seal to the
truth of these things, and if so, them may we see our constant need of divine
grace.

2. We ought to consider our frequent retuns and relapses into the same sins;
yea into the same fins after repentance for them; for though a regenerate
person does not ordinarily relapse into the same gross sins often, He that is
born of God does not commit sin, 1 John 3.10. that is, a regenerate person does
not ordinarily and familiarly fall into gross sins, he may be surprised and
overtaken with a gross sin, so David and other Saints have been, but a
regenerate son does not often relapse into the same gross sin; but a regenerate
person may relapse into sins of infirmity and such as we have reason to account
great infirmities. How often do fits of Pride, of Passion, of Unbelief, of
Murmuring, of Impatience return upon us, yea after we have been humbled for
these things, and after these things have cost us dear? this shows us the great
corruption of our nature, and the constant need we have of the grace of God;
for if we be so prone to fall, and so ready to be entangled and overcome with
Temptation upon every occasion, though we have mourned over, and prayed against
the sin we have been overtaken with, this shows us our constant need of divine
grace.

3. To help us to see the need of divine grace, let us Consider, That the least
suspension of divine grace makes a present decay or withering in our souls. Let
the Sun withdraw and absent it self, darkness and cold presently succeeds: cut
off the beam from the Sun, the beam cannot maintain it self, the beam is
maintained by a constant influx and supply of light from the Sun the fountain
of light: so is it in this case, If divine grace withdraw it self, our souls
grow dark and dead immediately. Let the influences of divine grace be but
suspended, that activity and vigor of grace that was in our souls before, does
presently vanish, Joh. 15.4. As the branch cannot bring forth fruit unless it
abide in the Vine, no more can ye, unless ye abide in me. In the same moment
that the branch is severed from the stock, it begins to wither and die
immediately: No sooner do we sever our selves (as it were) from Christ, by
neglecting our dependence on Christ, but we lose our grecnness and freshness
immediately. It is true, the radical union, if I may so call it, which is
between Christ and a soul, that always remains, for once in Christ and ever in
Christ, the radical and fundamental union that is between Christ and a true
Believer is indissoluble; but if we do not maintain and keep up the life and
spirit of this union (if I may so express it) by actual dependence on Christ,
present decays and witherings will certainly ensue. Observe it in your selves,
and you will find it true, when you neglect to have recourse to Christ, and
have not that intimate dependence upon him for grace, you shall find that your
fouls are not solively and vigorous in the ways of God, as when you dependence
upon him is kept up high and strong. The least suspension of actual grace from
Christ lays us under present witherings and decaies.

The end of the Sixteenth Sermon.
SERMON XVII.
Solomon's Song, 1.4. Draw me, we will run after thee.


THat which we were last treating of, was to show what Means we ought to use,
that we may keep up the constant sense of the need of Divine grace.

Two or three have been already mentioned.

1. We should be much versed in the study of our own hearts.

2. If we would keep up the sense of our need of divine grace, we ought to
consider our frequent returns and relapses into the same sins, even after
repentance for them.

3. Consider that the least suspension of divine grace, makes a present decay
and withering in our spirits. We now proceed to a fourth Means or Help.

4. To make us sensible of the need of divine grace, Consider, We cannot live
upon grace already received; all our former seize in grace are not
sufficient to carry us out to act spiritually, without new supplies of grace, 1
Phil. 1.9. This shall turn to my salvation through your prayer, and the supply
of the Spirit of Jesus Christ; the Greek word properly signifies an additional
supply. (...).
There must be an additional supply of grace and strength to all the former
grace which we have received, to make us to act spiritually. It is not enough
that we have habitual grace, but we must have actual grace to excite and draw
forth the habits of grace to act in us, Cant. 4.16. Awake, O North wind, and
come thou South, blow upon my gar den, that the spices thereof may flow forth.
Though we have habits of grace in us, which are here compared to Spices, yet we
must have actual grace, fresh gales and influences of the Spirit to draw forth
the habits of grace into exercise, otherwise our Graces will be like unbeaten
Spices which send forth no savor. And it is not enough that we have actual
grace at one time, but we must have fresh gales of the Spirit upon all
occasions to carry us forth with new vigor in the ways of God. A Ship that
has a fair gale of wind, for the present, to fill its Sails, makes way amain,
but it can run its course no longer than that gust of wind lasts; when the gust
is gone, the Ship soon flags and slackens in its course: Thus it is with us,
when we are under fresh gales of the Spirit, we can make some speed and good
progress in the ways of God, but when the gale and gust is gone we are soon
becalmed, we many times trust in our own affections, we trust in our own
inlargements in duty, and because we have found such affections at one time, we
think we can command the same affections again; and because we have found such
and such inlargements in duty, we think we can do so still. But we ought to
know and consider, that all these affections and inlargements are but the
effects of divine grace. It is the grace of God that quickens our affections
and inlargeth our hearts. Now if we trust in the effect, and not in the cause,
we shall soon find our selves greatly deceived. When Sampsons locks were shorn,
he thought to go out and shake himself, as at other times, but he wist not that
the Spirit of the Lord was departed from him, Judge. 16.20. Thus it is with us,
because we have such quickenings and inlargements at one time, we think we can
go forth in the strength of these things, and do as formerly we have done; but
we do not consider that unless we have the same presence of divine grace to act
us now as acted us heretofore, we cannot act as then we did.

5. To make us sensible of the need of divine grace, let us consider, We cannot
live upon our former comforts, and the former experiences we have had of Gods
love. Although we have had some assurance of Gods love, although we have had
some experience of spiritual comforts, although there has been such things
passed between God and our souls, as that we would think we should never lose
the comfort of them: yet without fresh incomes of divine grace, we cannot bear
up in a time of extremity. I would not be mistaken here, I know a Christian
lawfully may and ought to make use of all the experiences he has had of Gods
love, but if he trust in these, and if he think he need not present actual
grace to help and support him in a time of extremity, all his experiences may
fail him: and the reason is plain, because God may suffer a veil to be drawn
over all a man's former comforts and experiences, that he shall have little use
of them for the present. Our Savior himself (which is the highest instance
that can be given) had a veil drawn over all his comforts; he had been inured
to the sight of God all his life, he had walked in the light of his Fathers
countenance all his days, yet all of a sudden, he cries out, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me. It is true he was never deserted in point of grace,
he had the presence of the Spirit to act him always in a way of obedience, yet
there was a veil drawn over all his comforts, there was a suspension of comfort
and manifestation. Therefore since it is possible that there may be a veil
drawn over all our comforts, it is good for us to pray for a constant supply of
divine influences to support and comfort us.

I remember a passage of an holy man, and one of great experience in the ways
of God, I find it best, faith he, when I come to greatest heights of peace and
assurance, to mind what is my present duty, otherwise I meet with a cloud.
Truly if we trust in our own seize in grace, and upon the comfort and
experience we have had already of Gods love, and do not maintain constant
dependence upon him for new supplies of grace, we may soon meet with a cloud,
for God loves to keep us in dependence.

6. To show us the constant need that we have of divine grace, let us take in
this great Consideration, Nothing but present actual grace can carry us through
our greatest extremities. When it comes to a time of great affliction, when we
are cast into great streights and difficulties, when we are brought to a dying
hour, nothing but present actual grace can carry us through these things:
although former experiences, although grace received may be of some use to us,
yet over and above all these things we must have present actual grace to carry
us through a time of great extremity. I do many times think with my self what
may be of greatest use to a man to carry him through a dying hour, how a man
may be best prepared for a dying hour; and truly there may be several things
that may be of use to a Christian this way, I shall hint at a few briefly.

1. One thing may be, The renewing of a man's former evidences, the
consideration of the more eminent actings of grace that have been in his soul.
There is no Christian that has walked with God for any considerable time, but
upon reflection, he may remember some more eminent and remarkable actings of
Gods grace in him, concerning which he may say, This, if any thing, was the
grace of God in me: this may be of some use to him.

2. Another thing may be the remembrance of what has passed between God and a
man in his whole life. Many of the Saints can say, at such and such times there
were such passages between God and their souls which they have reason never to
forget; when they tasted and felt such things, they thought those were
evidences of the love of God to them.

3. A third thing which I look upon to be of great moment is this, The setting
of some special promises before the eye of a man's soul, upon which he may be
able to venture his soul: God has said, He that believes on his Son shall not
be condemned: Joh. 3.18. Joh. 6.40.
again, He that believes on his Son shall have eternal life. Now to lay some
clear certain great and fundamental promises before the eye of a man's soul, and
to venture his Soul upon the bottom of these promises, is one main way to help
a man in a dying hour. It is said of the ancient Saints, They all dyed in
Faith, not having received the Promise, Heb. 11.13. They all dyed in Faith,
that is, they took Gods Word for their Salvation; we must all venture our
Salvation upon the bottom of Gods Word, we must be able to single out some Word
of God, and say, Upon the bottom of this Word I can venture my soul, venture my
eternal estate: These are of good use to us in a dying hour.

4. But that which I take to be the principal means, above all other, is this,
To pray for present actual grace, to carry us through a dying hour. Though the
remembrance of former experiences, the remembering what God has bestowed upon
us, the setting the Promises before the eye of our souls may be of great use to
us, yet that which is necessary, over and above all this, is actual grace in a
dying hour: For neither the grace we have received, nor former experiences, nor
the promises will be of use to us, unless we have actual grace to help us to
make use of them. Therefore I conceive that here does the main skill of a
Christian lie, if we would be carried through a dying hour, we should pray much
that God would not desert us in point of grace, that he would not desert us in
that hour, but own us, stand by us, and assist us in that hour; Though I walk,
says David, through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil,
for thou art with me, Psalm. 23.4. Therefore our great prayer should be, that we
may have actual grace to uphold us in the difficulties of life, and to carry us
through the agonies of death: The Promise is, I will never leave thee, Heb.
13.5.
nor for sake thee. Now we ought to put this, and such like promises in suit,
that so we may never be deserted in point of grace; and if we have the constant
presence of divine grace with us, that will carry us through death it self.

And thus I have dispatched that first Doctrine, viz. Holy souls are sensible
of the need which they have of divine grace. The

Doct. 2. Second Doctrine is this, The sense of the need which we have of
divine grace, should make us pray much for the drawings of divine grace: Draw
me, and we will run after thee. Her praying for drawing, supposes her want and
need of drawing, and her praying for these drawings of divine grace speaks the
greatness and earnestness of her desires after them.

Here we have two things to speak to; 1. To show what these drawings of divine
grace are. And 2. How, and by what means it is that God is wont to draw the
souls of his people to himself.


1. What these drawings of divine grace are, I shall speak to this,

1. In General; and then show you how it is that God draws the souls of his
people to himself, or by what means it is he does this.

1. What these drawings of divine grace are. These drawings of divine grace, I
take to be the quickenings or excitations of the Spirit of God, whereby the
soul is elevated and raised above its natural pitch, and carried forth with
life and vigor in the ways of God. God is said to draw those, Quot
efficaciter movet and impellit ad aliquid agendu.
whom he does efficaciously move or stir up to do any thing. When God does stir
up, and effectually move a person to do a thing, then he is said to draw him;
hence it is said in Judge. 7.4. I will draw unto thee Sisera the Captain of
Jabins Army, that is, I will move him, and incline him to come out against
thee. Now these drawings of divine grace do suppose several things.

1. They suppose some distance and estrangement that there is between God and
us; if there were not some distance and estrangement between God and us, we
should not need divine grace to draw us near to him: therefore when the Church
prays here to be drawn, it is to be supposed that she found some distance and
estrangement that was between God and her.

2. These drawings suppose some deadness, indisposition, and unaptness in our
selves to move toward God. If we were not dead and backward to come to God,
what need we divine grace to draw us to him?

3. These drawings suppose our weakness and inability to move toward God. No
man can come to me, says our Savior, except the Father which has sent me
draw him, Joh. 6.44. If therefore we need divine grace to enable us to come, it
is a sign that we cannot come of our selves: these drawings are a sign of our
infirmity.

4. They suppose an act of Gods power, and the exerting of efficacious grace to
enable us to move toward God. Drawing is an act of power, Job 24.22. He
draws also the mighty with his power, Psalm. 110.4. Thy people shall be
willing in the day of thy power. It is an act of power to make us willing, who
are naturally unwilling. God of unwilling, makes us willing. It is God that
works in us to will, Phil. 2.13. It is God that efficaciously works in us the
very act of willing: (...).
the act of willing spiritually proceeds from the energy or effectual working
of Gods power. It is true we have a natural faculty to will; but to will
spiritually, this is the effect of Gods power and grace in us, and it is God
that works in us so to will. Thus have I shown the nature of these drawings in
General. But the

2. Thing is that which is of greatest moment, How is it that God draws the
souls of his people to himself; by what means is it that God thus draws us?

God draws the souls of his people to himself several ways.

1. By setting his excellencys before the eye of the Soul, Draw me, says the
Church here, how is that? How would she be drawn? Draw me by setting thine
excellencys before me, by presenting thine amiableness unto me, this seems
clearly intended by what follows in this Verse, The King has brought me into
his Chambers: the Chambers are the place where the King manifests his presence,
there he is to be seen, the Church therefore prays to be drawn by being
admitted to a sight and view of Christ, by having a prospect of his excellencys
given to her. This is certain, nothing is so attractive to the soul as the
sight of Gods excellency. If we consult our own experience we shall find it
true, one great cause of all our damps and deadnesses is, that we have lost the
sight of God that sometimes we have had, we have not that sight and sense of
the divine excellency that sometimes we have had. Our affections cannot rise
higher than our apprehensions; if therefore we have lost those clear and lively
apprehensions we have had of God and Christ, it is no wonder we have lost our
affections toward him. When we have clear apprehensions of God and Christ,
then we see a surpassing glory in that object above all others. One true sight
of God makes all other things seem little, Isa. 33.17. Thine eyes shall see the
King in his beauty, thou shall behold the Land which is very far off. When once
the soul has a sight of God in his beauty and glory, all the creatures seem to
be at a great remove and distance. The creatures seem to be but little when
once the Creator himself appears. This therefore is one way by which God draws
us, by presenting himself before the eye of the soul. It is a great Text, Joh.
14.21. If any man love me, I will manifest my self to him. The Word here used
is a precious word, it has much of heavenly sweetness in it to an holy soul
that values Christ's presence, (...) Ei co^spiciendum exhibebo meips m.
I will manifest my self. Beza renders it, I will expose my self to be seen by
him. I will offer my self (as it were) to his view, it is more than to declare
or manifest simply, It is for a person to expose himself to public view. As
Kings and Princes have their times and seasons when they expose themselves to
public view; so Christ promises that he will make himself visible, as it
were, he will expose himself to the view of his people. Beza conceives, Plenan
a^ quasi bumanis o^u is aspectabilem declarationem.
that by this word is signified a full declaration of a thing, and such as if
it were made visible to the eye. Not that it is a corporal sight, but a
spiritual sight that is here spoken of: but the meaning is, that Christ will
manifest himself so clearly to the eye of the soul, that the soul shall have
(as it were) a view of him, an aspect of his glory, such at least as is
suitable to the present, state, wherein we walk by Faith, (...), Hesych. (...)
Phavorinus.
not by Sight. The Critics in the Greek Tongue observe, that this word
signifies to make a thing clear, plain, to show a thing clearly, openly to
another. I endeavor to explain this word as fully as may be, because it is so
precious a word, I will manifest my self to him. Thus we read how Joseph made
himself known to his Brethren: Thus Christ makes himself known to his people,
by opening a little of his glory to them, and lets them know what he is; and
one beam of the divine Majesty let in upon the soul, will soon attract and draw
the soul to him.

2. Christ attracts and draws souls to himself by the merit of his sufferings,
Joh. 12.32. And I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men after me, that is, I,
when I am lifted up upon the Cross, by the merit of my death and suffering will
draw all men after me. It is a remarkable Scripture, and has something of a
mysterious signification in it, Matthew. 24.28. Where the Carcass is, thither the
Eagles will be gathered together. The Eagle is famous for her quick and
piercing eye; the Eagle by her pierceing eye can see the Carcass at a great
distance. An Eagle-eyed Christian can see that worth and excellency in a
Crucified Christ which another cannot see, My flesh is meat indeed, and my
blood is drink indeed, Joh. 6.55. An Eagleeyed Christian can discern that the
flesh of Christ is the food and nourishment of souls. An Eagle-eyed Christian
can perceive that it was in that flesh of his, that the Law was fulfilled, that
the penalty of it was undergone, that divine justice was fatisfied, and
everlasting righteousness brought in, this attracts a believing soul to a
Crucified Christ; Christ Crucified is to some a stumblingblock, and to others
foolishness, 1 Cor. 1. but to those that understand the mystery of his death
and suffierings, Christ is the wisdom of God, and the power of God. Hence is
that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.2.
I determine to know nothing save Jesus Christ and him Crucified; so likewife
Phil. 3. I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of
Jesus Christ my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do
count them but dung that I may win Christ. Nothing will attract the heart more
than the confideration of what Christ is, and the contemplation of what Christ
has done and suffered for us, the name of Christ is as ointment poured forth,
therefore do the Virgins love him, Cant. 1.4. The more we know Christ in his
personal excellency, and are acquainted with his grace as Mediator, the more
will our hearts be attracted and drawn to him.

3. Christ draws us by the discovery of his love to us, Hos. 11.4. I drew them
with the cords of a man, with bands of love: Love is the loadstone of Love; we
Love him because he first loved us, 1 John 4.19. Nothing so powersul to draw
our hearts to the love of God as the apprehension of Gods Love to us. Now God
does sometimes drop and distill the sense of his love into the hearts of his
people, and that draws them to Love him. Observe it in your selves, when the
heart has been very low, flat, and dead before, let the Lord but infinuate a
little of his Love to the Soul, by some especial act of kindness, that will
raise and quicken it immediately. Love is powerful and attractive, it melts and
dissolves the soul: if the soul be but in an ill frame before, let the Lord but
manifest a little of his Love, and it is soon overcome by it, and put into a
better frame.

4. God draw the souls of his people to himself by giving them new and fresh
tastes of the excellency of spiritual things. The Saints themselves do not
always relish that savor that is in the Word, nor taste that sweetness that
is in the Promises; I say, they do not always taste a like sweetness in the
Word, nor relish a like savor in it, as sometimes they have done; and when
they have lost that taste and relish that they had of spiritual things, this is
that which makes their affections flat. If we had as lively tastes of spiritual
things, as we have sometimes, our affections would not so often flag as they
do, 1 Pet. 2.2. As new born Babes desire the sincere milk of the word. If so be
ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. Those that have once tasted of the
sweetness and goodness of the word, cannot but still desire it as long as that
taste remains with them. Consider, O Christian, what glory does there appear in
the Word at some times? What excellency and heavenly sweetness in the promises
at one time over and above what there does at another? Now God allures and
draws the hearts of his people, by giving in those tastes and relishes of
spiritual things at some times, which they are not sensible of at other times.
No man, says our Savior, having drunk old Wine, straightway desires new, for
he says the old is better, Luke 5.39. So when the soul has newly tasted of
the sweetness that is in God and Christ, when it has tasted of the sweetness
that is in the Promises, and in divine grace and heavenly consolations, it does
not presently grow fond of the world and worldly comforts: the sweetness the
soul has tasted and experienced in heavenly and spiritual things, attracts the
soul to Love and defire these things above all others. And we shall find it
true in experience, That when we grow fond of other things, it is because we
have lost those tastes of God and Christ and spiritual things, which sometimes
we have had.

5. And lastly, The last thing I shall mention at present, is this, God
attracts and draws the hearts of his people by giving them a little sight and
prospect of that glory which is above, 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man the things which God has
prepared for them that love him; but says the Apostle, God has revealed them
unto us by his Spirit, that is, God has revealed them to us in part by his
Spirit. It is not possible that we should take in the Glory that is above, in
our minds and conceptions, as it is in it self, but God gives some little
prelibations and foretastes of it unto his people. Hence is it that we read of
the tasting of the good Word of God, and tasting of the power of the world to
come, Heb. 6.4, 5. It is possible that a man that is under a common work of the
Spirit (for it is of such the Apostle there speaks) may have some tastes of the
glory and happiness of heaven. I do not think that those that are merely under
a common work, and are said here to taste of the heavenly gifts, and of the
powers of the world to come, that they have, or can have such tastes of the
sweetness, glory, and blessedness of heaven, as those have who are truly
regencrate, and are under a saving work; but some apprehensions they may have
of it, they may apprehend it to be a state of bliss and happiness. A man that
is under the common work of the Spirit may apprehend Heaven to be a place of
freedom from all misery and trouble, and where he shall enjoy happiness and
perfect bliss, and have all joy, peace, comfort, and satisfaction: such like
general apprehensions of Heaven is all, I conceive, that a man under a common
work does usually attain unto. Now if a man that has but a common work may go
so far, then the Saints who have more than a common work, they that have divine
and saving illumination, may apprehend much more of the glory of Heaven. The
Saints who are savingly enlightened, may apprehend something of this state, as
it consists in the clear sight and vision of God, in intimate fellowship and
communion with God, in perfect holiness, and the like. Nothing does more
powerfully attract the soul than when something of the glory of the other world
is set before it. Now God does sometimes let down a corner of Heaven, as it
were, into the souls of his people, and gives them in transitu, a little
glimpse and glance of the glory that is above, and this makes all present
things seem to be but little things to them. We look not, says the Apostle, to
the things which are seen, for they are temporal, but we look unto the things
which are not seen, for they are eternal, 2 Cor. 4.18. When a man, by the eye
of Faith, has a little prospect of the Heavenly Country, and and when he
beholds the perfect serenity, the tranquillity, the unchangeableness, the
blessedness, the joy, the satisfaction, the delights that are in that Country,
this must needs attract and allure the soul to the desire and love of these
things, because these things do far excel any thing that is to be found in this
world. Who would not prefer an unchangeable state before a changeable? perfect
serenity and tranquillity, before constant trouble? perfect joy and
satisfaction, before a state of grief and sorrow? Therefore when the soul has
a little prospect, by Faith, of that blessed life and state that is above; this
must needs attract the desires of the soul, to desire the happiness and
blessedness of this state, infinitely above all other things, In his presence
is fullness of joy, at his right hand there are pleasures for evermore, Psalm.
16.11. This is certain, the clearer apprehensions we have of the excellency of
the divine presence, the more shall we thirst and long after it; this is
evident from the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 5.8, We are confident and willing rather
to be absent from the body, and present with the Lord; we delight most to be
present with the Lord: (...).
as much as if he should say, we are at the present confined to the body, we
are as prisoners in the body; But that we could take most delight in, Gratius
est no^ his. Beza.
that which would be most acceptable to us, is, to be absent from the body, and
present with the Lord; the thoughts and apprehensions we have of the divine
presence, makes it most delightful to us to be absent from the body, and
present with the Lord. Thus God by letting down something of the glory of the
heavenly Country, and giving the soul a little apprehension what the excellency
and ravishing sweetness of the divine presence is like to be, does attract the
souls of his people to himself.

The end of the Seventeenth Sermon.
SERMON XVIII.
Solomon's Song, 1.4. Draw me, we will run after thee.


THere are, as we have heard, several ways and means by which God is wont to
draw the hearts of his people to himself, I have mentioned five already.

There is one thing more, which indeed is one of the principal means by which
God draws the hearts of his people to himself; I shall speak to that, and then
come to the Use and Application of the Point.

6. The sixth means therefore is this, God draws his people by the secret
touches of his Spirit, and by the impression of divine power upon their hearts,
Cant. 5.4. My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my bowels
were moved for him. My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, that
is, he gave me a secret touch by the finger of his Spirit. The Spirit of God is
sometimes called the finger of God, and that plainly appears if we compare two
Scriptures together, Luke 11.20. with Matthew. 12.28. in one place, it is said,
If I by the finger of God cast out Devils: In the other place it is said, If I
cast out Devils by the Spirit of God. The Spirit of God then is called the
finger of God. So likewise the hand of God denotes the power of God, Exodus
15.11. Thy right hand, O Lord, is become glorious in power. And this
expression, the hand of God, is sometimes used to set forth the cause of men's
conversion, together with the effect of it, the saving work of the Spirit of
God upon the hearts of men, Acts 11.21. And the hand of the Lord was with them,
and a great number believed and turned unto the Lord. So that this is the plain
meaning, Christ put forth his hand by the hole of the door, that is, he gave
the Church a secret touch by the finger of his Spirit. What followed upon this,
what was the effect of this? that which followed was this, My bowels were moved
for him, the Churches affections were presently quickened and raised by this
touch, though she was dead, listless, and indisposed before, one touch of the
Spirit quickened and raised her affections, Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my Spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes. The Lord had promised to give
a new heart, and a new spirit before this; in the Verse before it is said,
Verse 26.
A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and yet
over and above this, the Lord promises, I will put my Spirit within you, and
cause you to walk in my Statutes. When God promises to give a new Heart, and a
new Spirit, that which is intended by it, is the work of the Spirit upon the
heart, framing the New creature in us, Joh. 3.5. Unless a man be born of water,
and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; and yet although
there be a new heart, and a new spirit given to us, and formed in us, by the
Spirit of God; yet over and above this God must put his Spirit into us, and
cause us to walk in his Statutes; and this plainly shows, that the habits of
Grace are not sufficient of themselves, without actual grace, to carry us forth
to any act of obedience, for what need is there that God should promise to put
his Spirit into us, and cause us to walk in his Statutes, after he had before
promised the new heart and new spirit, if the habits of grace of themselves had
been sufficient to carry us out to all spiritual actions? But now the Lord
promises to put his Spirit within us, and cause us to walk in his Statutes,
and that we shall keep his Judgments and do them, and what does he intend by
all this? Certainly thus much, that he will not only give us the habits of
grace, but he will put his Spirit into us, as a constant Spring to seed and
maintain his own grace in us, and that he will act us by his Spirit: He will
give us that actual grace by his Spirit, that shall help us to make use of
those habits of grace that he has planted in us, Romans 8.14. As many as are led
by the Spirit of God, are the Children of God. The Children of God then are led
by the Spirit of God, the Spirit of God is no stranger in the hearts of the
Children of God. No, as many as are the Children of God, are guided, led and
acted by the Spirit of God. Hence is it that we read of the power that works
in us, Ephesians. 3.20. according to the power that works in us. There is a power
that is continually working in the heart of the Saints, and by this power it
is, that they are drawn to God. God draws the hearts of his people by the
visits of his Spirit, and by the fresh gales of divine grace. Look as a Ship
that is under a fresh gale can speed her course amain: so when the Saints are
under new and fresh gales of the Spirit, then they find their hearts drawn out
toward God, and carried forth in the ways of God, Psa. 119.132. I will run
the way of thy Commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart. God must first
enlarge our hearts before we can run the way of his Commandments. When the
Spirit of God inlarges the heart, and fills the sails, then the soul can run
and move swiftly toward God. Thus have I shown the several ways by which God
is wont to draw the hearts of his people to himself.

I come now to the Application of the Doctrine. And

1. Use 1.
The first use shall be by way of information.

Let us learn that it is possible for the Saints themselves to fall under
spiritual dullness and deadness. The Church we see here in the Text, finds her
self in such a frame, as that she needs divine grace to draw and quicken her.
Now unless she had some sense of spiritual dullness and deadness that was come
upon her, there had been no such necessity for her to pray for these drawings:
But this is an Argument that the Church found her heart more indisposed to the
ways of God than heretofore, and that is the reason she prays that she might
be drawn. Sad experience shows it to be true, that after we have felt the most
lively and effectual workings of the Spirit of God in our hearts, after we have
had the greatest tastes of spiritual joys and comforts, after our hearts have
been most enlarged in holy affections toward God, yet oftentimes we fall into
spiritual deadness and dullness; we do not feel that life and power in our
souls as heretofore, there is a greater indisposedness and listlesness in us to
holy duties; we are not so lively in holy duties, our affections are not so
stirring and working toward God, we have not that relish in the promises, we
do not so rejoice in them, we are not so active for God, we are not so fruitful
in our places, we have not that hatred of sin, neither do we make that
resistance against it, as sometimes we have done. All these things and more
that might be instanced in, do show, that oftentimes the best of Gods Children
do fall under deadness of heart, and spiritual dullness. Now the Causes of this
spiritual dullness and deadness are commonly such as these.

1. Unthankfulness for grace received. Unthankfulness is a greater sin, and
costs us dearer than we are aware of; God takes nothing more unkindly at the
hands of his people, than their unthankfulness for his own grace bestowed upon
them. When we are not sensible how much God hathdone for us in giving us his
grace, this does many times provoke God to take away his grace from us, and
then we soon fall under this spiritual deadness and dullness.

2. A second Cause of dullness and deadness in the Saints is this, Neglect of
some of the means of grace, either in public or private. If we neglect any one
of the means of grace, we shall soon find dullness and deadness come upon us;
for this is certain, the infinite wise God has appointed no one means of grace
in vain. And so naturally dull and dead are our hearts, that there is not one
of the means of grace but we need it Therefore if we neglect any of the means;
if we attend public ordinances, and in the mean time are negligent in private
Prayer, reading the Word, meditating of it, and self-examination, this may be
one cause of deadness. On the other hand, if we use private means, as Prayer,
Meditation, and the like, if we neglect public means, or any of the Ordinances
which God has appointed; if we come to hear the Word, but neglect the
Sacrament, or any one instituted means which God has appointed for our help,
that may bring this deadness on us. For it is certain, we need all the means of
grace, and the more we come to understand our own hearts, the more we are
concerned about our spiritual state, the more we shall see our need of all the
means which God has appointed for our help and quickening. And if we consult
our own experience, we shall find that when we are most remiss in the use of
the means, then does spiritual deadness and dullness come upon us.

4. Another Cause of this spiritual dullness and deadness is some secret
corruptions that we indulge in our selves. Exhort one another, Heb. 3.13.
says the Apostle, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin. Sin is a deceitful thing, and will harden the heart; any sin connived at,
beloved and entertained will harden the heart: When that Love that should be
let out to God and the ways of God is turned aside to a lust, that must needs
harden the heart. Besides any sin indulged, grieves the Spirit of God: the
Spirit of God is not wont to take occasion to withdraw because of sins of
infirmity; but if any sin be indulged and allowed, and get some liking and
consent in the will, and be harbored by us, this grieves the Spirit of God,
and the Spirit of God being grieved soon retires, and when the Spirit withdraws
and retires, spiritual dullness and deadness must needs follow.

5. Another great Cause of this spiritural dullness and deadness that comes
upon the hearts of the Saints, is, Inordinate affections to earthly things. The
strength of the affections cannot go forth two ways at once; therefore if the
affections be carried out violently, impetuously, and beyond their due bounds
toward earthly things, they cannot be carried out with that vigor toward God
and the ways of God as they ought to be. It is the violence and impetuousness
of our affections unto other things, that puts such a damp upon them in
reference to God and the things of God: let us look unto our own experience and
we shall find it to be true.

5. And lastly, Another Cause of this dullness and deadness, is, resting in the
grace that we have received, and presuming on it, because we have had such
quickenings, such inlargements in duty; because we have found some affections
toward God, we think we can command the same quickenings, the same
inlargements, the same affections at our pleasure. Now when we rest in what we
have already received, and think we have quickening and enlargement at command,
this causes the Spirit to withdraw from us, and then we soon fall into
spiritual deadness and dullness. These are usually the causes of the spiritual
deadness and dullness that comes upon the Saints. Now we ought not to give way
to this spiritual deadness and dullness, but to pray and strive much against
it. Holy souls, the more grace they have, the more sensible they are of this
spiritual deadness and dullness, when it comes upon them. And the more grace a
man has, he will complain more of these inward decaies of his soul, and the
spiritual deadness that comes upon him, than he does of outward afflictions.
This was the Churches complaint, Isa. 63.17. Why have thou made us to err from
thy ways, and hardened our hearts from thy fear? She complains of the
withdrawings of divine grace, and that spiritual deadness and hardness that was
come upon her. It were happy for us if we could be more sensible of the
dullness and deadness that comes upon our affectons, than we are of our outward
afflictions; But alas, a little outward affliction touches us to the quick, and
makes us to complain very bitterly; but how little sensible are we of our
deadness and dullness in the ways of God, and of the loss of that spiritual
vigor and liveliness that formerly we have had? Certainly, this deadness and
dullness of spirit is a great evil, a sore evil.

1. This deadness of spirit renders the graces which are in us, for the
present, in a great measure useless. It was the saying of Mr. Greenham,
Deadness of spirit is the Grave of many heavenly graces. The graces of the
Spirit of God are buried, as it were, by this dullness and deadness of heart.
When we are under the power of this dullness, the grace that we have received,
can neither be beneficial unto others, nor comfortable to our selves. The more
grace is visible in us, the more benefit do others receive by it, and the more
comfort do we our selves reap from it. If grace be not visible, as others
receive little benefit by us, so we our selves cannot reap the comfort of grace
in our selves. Now whilst our hearts are dead and dull, there is little
visibility of grace in us; so that whether we respect others benefit or our own
comfort, it concerns us to strive against this dullness and deadness of heart.

2. As we deprive our selves of the comfort of grace, and others of the benefit
of it by this deadness and dullness: so we rob God of his glory, For hereby
(says our Savior) is my Father glorified, that you bring forth much fruit.
The more active and lively grace is in us, the more glory has God from us, and
therefore by consequence, when we are dead and dull, and our graces unactive in
us, God has little honor from us.

3. Spiritual dullness and deadness in our selves neglected, makes way for
security, and security is the highway to some worse evil. Therefore it
concerns us to strive against spiritual deadness and dullness in the beginning,
for if we neglect it, we shall by degrees fall into security, and when we are
secure we may soon be surprised by some gross and scandalous sin before we are
aware. Awake, O Christian, rouse up thy self strongly when ever thou find
thy self dull in the ways of God, awake out of thy security, for security
prepares the way for some fall, for some foul fall, if thou do not strive to
prevent it; deadness brings on security, and security makes way for thy fall,
some great fall, unless grace prevent.

4. Lastly, To engage us to strive against this deadness, Consider, a constant
deadness and flatness of spirit renders a man's state very doubtful and
suspicious. It renders a man's state very doubtful whether he be in the state of
grace, yea or no. It was Christ's charge against one of the Churches, Revel.
3.2. Thou have a name to live but art dead. When there is an habitual deadness
upon the heart, when there is no life, no vigorous affections toward God, and
this continues, and there is no groaning under it, no striving against it, a
man may well suspect whether his state be right, yea or no.

Upon all these grounds it concerns us much to strive against this spiritual
deadness. The Church was under deadness here in the Text, but she did not lie
down under her deadness; but the sense she had of her deadness and dullness,
makes her pray, Draw me. So the sense that we have of that deadness and
dullness, that too often comes upon us, should make us pray much for quickening
and exciting grac

The next Use is of Exhortation. This should exhort us to pray much for the
Drawings of divine grace. Let us take the same course that the Church here does
in the Text. Let us pray much as she did, Draw me, we will run after thee.
Truly, the more acquaintance we have with our own hearts, the greater insight
we have into our spiritual estate, the more need shall we see of the constant
quickenings and excitations of divine grace. How low and dead, and unactive
shall we find our hearts to be in the ways of God, any further than we are
under fresh and constant gales of the Spirit of God? Although we have found
great quickening heretofore, and have had our hearts very much enlarged and
drawn out toward God, unless we have a continuation of divine grace, we shall
soon find that our hearts will flagg. Holy souls are most sensible not only of
the need of grace, but also of the continuation of that grace which at present
acts them, without which they perceive their hearts would soon flagg and fail.
The Lord promises his Church, that he will water her every moment, Isa. 27.3.
and truly we shall find that we need to be watered every moment. The least
suspension of divine grace will soon make a decay in us.

But here it may be said, What course ought we to take, and what Directions may
there be given in order to the obtaining of fresh gales of the Spirit, and
continued supplies of divine grace. I take this to be a material Point a little
to insist upon.

For what so desirable to holy souls as this, to feel frequent visits from God
in their souls? to be under fresh gales of the Spirit? and to have constant
supplies of grace? Therefore I shall speak something by way of Direction, how
we may attain these continued supplies of divine grace.

1. We must be very thankful for grace received, To him that has, Matthew. 25.29.
says our Savior, shall be given, and he shall have abundance: the way to
receive more grace, is, to be exceeding thankful for grace received. Nothing
provokes God to withold grace from us more than unthankfulness. But Hezekiah
rendered not according to the benefit done unto him, therefore wrath was upon
him, 2 Chronicles. 32.25. It is true, it was a temporal deliverance that Hezekiah
was unthankful for: But if unthankfulness for a temporal mercy, for a temporal
deliverance, provoke God so much, what will unthankfulness for the receipt of
spiritual and divine grace do? The gifts of divine grace are the choicest of
the gifts of God. Eonum unius Gratiae est majus Bonum Bono naturae, etiam
totius universi. Aquinas.
The good of one grace is a greater good than the good of Nature, even of the
whole Universe. So then when we are unthankful for so choice and excellent a
gift as grace is, this provokes God much: Therefore if we would have more
grace, let us be exceeding thankful for grace received. O make much of the
influences of divine grace, prize them at a high rate. Believeit, you cannot
command grace when you please, you cannot command the same quickenings,
inlargements, and affections toward God (as sometime you have had) when you
please; therefore when God gives you any of the visits of the Spirit, value
them, and have the highest esteem of them, you cannot have them when you would,
you have them not at your command, and the way to have them continued, is, to
be sensible how great a mercy it is to enjoy them, and to be very thankful for
them.

2. If you would have constant supplies of geace, take heed of glorying and
resting in grace received: What have thou, that thou did not receive, 1 Cor.
4.7.
and if thou have received it, why do thou boast as if thou had not
received it? If we think we have a stock already in our own hands, and that we
need not be beholding to God for more, this is the ready way to make God
suspend the influences of grace from us. It is true, it is the duty of a
Christian to stir up the grace of God that is in him, 2 Timothy 1.6.
(Stir up the gift of God that is in thee, says Paul to Timothy). O but take
heed that you do not rest in grace received, as if you could act in the power
of that, without new supplies of grace. God will keep us in constant dependence.

3. If we would have constant supplies of grace, We must keep our eye much, and
live much upon the fountain of grace: In Christ are all our fresh Springs
found, Psalm. 87. last. All my fresh Springs are in thee. Abide in me, and I in
you, says our Savior, Joh. 15.4. Happy soul is he that has learnt the skill
of a constant dependence upon Christ. It is a great promise, Joh. 7.37. He that
believes on me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living waters. If we
maintain our dependence upon Christ, we shall never want supplies of grace. It
is likewise another choice and precious promise, Joh. 4.14. He that shall drink
of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst: but the water that I
shall give him, shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting
life. He that shall drink of the water that I shall give him, shall never
thirst: what is the meaning of that, never thirst? shall he not thirst at all?
shall believers never thirst? that seems not to be the meaning of it: But the
plain meaning seems to be, he shall never thirst, so as not to be satisfied, he
shall not remain unsatisfied when he thirsts. And this the following words
explain and make out to be the meaning, He that drinks of the water that I
shall give him, shall never thirst, Why so? The water that I shall give him,
shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life. He that
has a well of water always by him, need never thirst, Why, so, says our
Savior, he that lives upon me and that Fountain of grace that is in me, he
need not thirst, because he has the Fountain of grace always at hand, always
by him, to which he may have recourse. If we keep our eye upon the Lord Jesus
the fountain of grace, we need never want grace, for he will be sure to give
out grace to us at all times, and upon all occasions suitable to our
necessities: It is a great Text, Ephesians. 1.22. God has given him to be Head
over all things, to his body the Church. Christ is given to be a Head over all
things, that is, a Head to all intents and purposes, to all ends and uses
whatsoever. There are no wants or necessities we can come under, but Christ is
appointed for a Head to us to supply us in those necessities.

4. We must take heed of those things that may hinder and obstruct the
influences and operations of divine grace. There are several obstructions that
do hinder the influences of grace which we ought carefully to avoid, as we
would have the constant supplies of divine grace.

1. One Obstruction that hinders the influence of divine grace, is, coldness
and remisness in our desires after grace. God fills the hungry with good
things, but the rich he sends empty away, Luke 1.53. If we observe it, we shall
find that the Promises run much to thirsting: If any man thirst, let him come
unto me and drink; Joh. 7.37. Rev. 22.17.
so, If any man thirst, let him drink of the water of life freely. And, Blessed
are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, Matthew. 5.6.
they shall be filled. So that we see the Promises are made much to thirsting.
Now if our desires are cold and low, if we ask grace with a spirit of
indifferency, being little concerned whether we receive grace yea or no; this
is the ready way to go without grace. Ask and ye shall receive, Matthew. 7.7.
seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened to you. Psalm. 81.10.
Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it. The more our desires are enlarged
after grace, the greater communication of grace shall we receive from God.

2. Another Obstruction of divine grace, is, spiritual Pride. If you would have
constant supplies of grace, take heed of spiritual Pride and secret liftings up
of soul, after grace received. If our hearts swell in pride, and grow big with
the conceit of our own excellencies upon grace received, this is the way for
God to suspend and withold grace from us, for God resists the Proud, 1 Pet.
5.5.
but gives grace to the humble. Nothing is a greater enemy to our graces, or
our comforts than spiritual pride. You that desire to maintain your communion
with God, above all watch against this corruption, for that will hinder your
communion with God and obstruct farther communications of grace from him.

3. Another Obstruction of grace, is, Non-improvement of grace received, not
complying with those motions of the Spirit of God we have already had. If we
have had the motions of the Spirit of God provoking us, and putting us forward
to what is good, checking us and warning us against what is evil and sinful,
and we do not comply with these motions, how can we expect farther assistance
from the Spirit of God? The Spirit of God is most free and liberal in the
communication of his grace, where it is kindly dealt with, where his motions
are obeyed and followed. But if we do not make use of what grace we have
already received from the Spirit of God, how can we expect farther Grace from
him?

4. Another Obstruction of divine grace, is, Guilt lying upon the Conscience.
Whilst any sin lies unpardoned, etc. whilst there is any matter of difference
between God and us, this may cause God to suspend divine grace.

This is certain, That David by his fall had lost that presence and familiarity
of the Spirit of God with him, which he had before his fall; and therefore he
prays, Psalm. 51.11. Take not thy holy Spirit from me. The Spirit of God was so
far departed from him, that he was afraid of losing the Spirit of God quite and
clean, so in the twelfth Verse, Uphold me with thy free Spirit. He did not feel
that power and presence, and energy of the Spirit of God in his heart, as he
was wont to do. If the Spirit of God have taken any offense and distaste at us,
by reason of any miscarriage of ours, that offense must be removed, and the
Spirit of God treated very kindly before he will return again. Ezekiel. 39. last
Verse, the Lord promises there that he will no more hide his face from the
house of Israel, for he had poured out his Spirit upon them. Neither will I
hide my face any more from them, for I have poured out my Spirit upon the house
of Israel, says the Lord God. Observe it, Gods pouring out of his Spirit, is a
sign that he is reconciled to us, it is a sign of reconciliation, and we cannot
expect that God should pour out his Spirit upon us, so as that we should find
that free and familiar operation of the Spirit of God in our hearts, till all
things be clear between God and us; therefore the guilt of any sin lying on the
conscience unpardoned, may obstruct the communications of Divine Grace, and may
hinder that intimate, familiar presence of the Spirit of God which sometimes we
have had.

5. Another Obstruction of divine grace, is, some corruption or sin indulged
and continued in. The Saints are said to be an habitation of God by the Spirit.
Ephesians. 2.22.
Now the Spirit of God loves a pure and chaste habitation. If we sully and
defile our souls by the love of any sin, by indulging our selves in any
corruption, we render our hearts a very unfit habitation for that pure and holy
Spirit to dwell in. Know you not, says the Apostle, that your bodies are the
Temple of the Holy Ghost which dwells in you, 1 Cor. 6.19. Our Souls and
Bodies are the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and certainly if we defile this Temple
of the Holy Ghost, we cannot expect that the Spirit of God will make his
residence in it, Prove. 1.23. Turn you at my reproof, behold I will pour out my
Spirit upon you. If the Spirit of God rebuke us for any sin, we ought presently
to take this rebuke; If the Spirit of God give us a secret hint and intimation
that such a thing is amiss, we ought to reform that thing, we ought to take
such a hint, and what then? then God will pour out his Spirit upon us. But if
we retain the love of sin, and persist, and go on in sin, after God has
rebuked and checked us for it, we cannot expect that God will pour out his
Spirit upon us: For the Promise runs, Turn ye at my reproof, and I will pour
out my Spirit upon you; not otherwise: so that if we retain the love of sin,
after God has checked and rebuked us for it, we cannot expect the
communication of divine grace.

Lastly, The last impediment of divine grace that I shall mention, is, security
and presumption of our own strength and sufficiency. If we think we have a
stock in our own hand, and have quickening and enlargement at command, and can
act at our own pleasure in the ways of God without Divine Assistance, nothing
provokes God sooner to withdraw his grace from us.

These are the impediments and obstructions of divine grace. Now if we would
have constant supplies of grace, we must take heed of all those things that
obstruct the passage of grace, and do hinder the communication of it to our
souls.

The end of the Eighteenth Sermon.
SERMON XIX.
Solomon's Song, 1.4. Draw me, we will run after thee.


THere is one Doctrine more which lies in the words, which yet remains to be
spoken to, and that is this,

Doct. 3. The end why we should desire the drawings of divine grace, it is,
that our hearts may be the more carried forth after God. Draw me, says the
Church, and we will run after thee. The end why the Church desires to be drawn,
is, that her heart may be carried forth the more after Christ.

Here we have two things to speak unto.

1. What the import of the phrase is, what this running does imply, Draw me, we
will run after thee.

2. How it is that the Saints have their hearts carried out after God.

1. What this phrase of running does import: Running notes several things.

1. It notes quickness and liveliness of affection, Draw me, we will run after
thee, that is, our affections shall then be elevated and enlarged toward thee.
Am^^ est Pes Aninae.
Love is the foot of the soul. The feet are the instruments of motion, the feet
are they that carry us from one place to another; thus the soul by its
affections is carried forth to the object that it loves. Running therefore
notes the raisedness of the affections. Thus we read how Elisha run after
Elijah, 1 Kings 19.20. He left the Oxen and run after Elijah, that is, his
affections were now up and he must needs follow Elijah. So that running notes
the elevation of the affections: when the affections that were dead and lumpish
before, begin to move and spring afresh toward God, Cant. 6.12. Or ever I was
aware, my soul made me like the Chariots of Aminadab. Many make these to be the
words of Christ to the Church. But some there are that make these to be the
words of the Church to Christ. Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the
Chariots of Aminadab. And if so, then it notes the spiritual motion and
affection that was in the Church toward Christ. Her soul made her as the
Chariots of Aminadab, that is, her affections did move swiftly toward Christ.
Draw me, we will run after thee. Running here in the Text is opposed to
deadness, the Church found her affections flat and dead before, therefore she
prays to be drawn by divine grace. Now when she is drawn, she says, she will
run, that is, she shall have new affections. Her affections that were dead and
flat before, shall now be quick and lively toward God and Christ.

2. Running notes progress in Faith and Holiness, Gal. 5.7. Ye did run well,
who did hinder you? the meaning is, you once did make a good progress in the
Faith, but now ye are slidden back. A Christian ought always to make a
progress, Col. 1.10. Increasing in the knowledge of God, 2 Pet. 3.18. Grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Non progredi
^st regredi.
Not to go forward is to go backward. A Christian is seldom at a stand, if he
be not going forward, he is going backward, he is declining. Now a Christian
ought to run, that is, he ought to make a farther progress. Add to your Faith
virtue, and to your virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, Pet. 2.15.
and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness, and to godliness
brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity: So likewise, Forgetting
the things that are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are
before, Phil. 3.13. Nothing hinders our spiritual growth. more than a vain
conceit in us, that we know as much already, as need to be known, and that we
have attained already as much as we need to attain unto. Paul was of another
temper when he says, Not as if I had already attained, either were already
perfect, but I press toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God
in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.12, 14. To run therefore is to make a progress, not to
take up with any measures of grace already received, but to press forwards to
that which we have not attained unto.

3. Running notes diligence and activity in the ways of God, 1 Cor. 9.24. So
run that ye may obtain, that is, run with care and diligence, put forth your
utmost vigor and activity in the ways of God, Psalm. 119.32. I will run the
ways of thy Commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart, that is, I shall
be diligent and active in thy ways, when I have derived grace from thee.

4. Running notes strength and courage in him that runs, Dan. 8.6. The He-goat
is said to run to the Ram in the fury of his power: Running therefore notes
strength and courage; so the Saints running in the ways of God, notes their
strength and courage in the ways of God, Isa. 40.31. They that wait on the
Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they
shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not faint.

5. And lastly, Running notes perseverance in our Christian course to the end,
Heb. 12.1. Let us run with patience the race that is set before us.

The second thing to be spoken to, is this, How it is that the Saints have
their hearts carried out after God. The end why they desire divine grace, is,
That they may run in a spiritual manner, and that their hearts may be carried
after God. Now how is it that the Saints have their hearts carried out after
God?

1. The Saints have their hearts carried out after God by desires and longings
after him, Psalm. 63.1. My soul thirsts after thee, my flesh longs for thee,
Isa. 26.8, 9. The desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of
thee; and in the next Verse, With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea
with my spirit within me will I seek thee early. Whilst other men do mainly
and principally thirst and cover after the creature, holy souls do mainly and
principally thirst after God himself, Psalm. 42.1. As the Heart pants after the
water brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God. The Heart is a thirsty
creature by nature, and when it is hunted its thirst is greater, such is the
thirst of holy souls after God.

But it may be said, What is that thirst that holy souls have after God?

It lies eminently in two things, and it will be good for us to observe them,
because we may know much what the measure of our grace is by these two things;
Holy souls thirst after Gods gracious presence here on earth; and they thirst
after Gods glorious presence in Heaven.

1. Holy souls thirst after Gods gracious presence here on earth, Psalm. 42.2.
My soul thirsts for God, for the living God; when shall I come and appear
before God? When shall I come and appear before God? that is, when shall I see
the face of God in his Ordinances, Psalm. 101.2. When will thou come unto me?
Nothing more proper to grace than this, to carry out the soul in longings after
communion with God. If you feel nothing of this in your selves, if you do not
find ardent, strong breathings and longings in your souls after God, you have
reason to suspect your selves that all is not well with you. Unless the soul be
under Temptation, or under the prevalency of some corruption at the present, or
under the withdrawings of the influences of the Spirit of God in some time of
Desertion, I say, unless it be in such cases as these, the pulse of the soul
will beat this way, viz. in ardent breathings after God and communion with him;
and if we do not find it to be thus with us, we have reason to fear the state
of our own souls, for thus it will be if grace act like it self in our hearts.

2. The Saints have great longings after the sight of God and the glorious
presence of God in Heaven. Come, come, is the language of the Church in
general, The Spirit and the Bride say, come, Revel. 22.17. Being confident and
willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord.
Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly, is the language of particular Saints. Certainly
the pulse of grace, if I may so express it, beats mainly these two ways: In
longing after a sense of Gods presence in our souls here on earth; and in
longing after the perfect enjoyment of God in Heaven.

2. The Saints have their hearts carried out to God by Love. Love is the motion
of the soul to the thing beloved. The soul naturally moves toward that it
loves. Love is the weight or balance of the soul, Amor meus est pondus meum,
eo feror, quo amo.
the soul is carried where it loves. Now the souls of the Saints are carried
toward God by Love, Psalm. 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And, I will love thee, O Lord, my strength,
Psalm. 18.1. God himself is the great thing in the eye of holy souls; though
friends be dear, relations dear, yet God himself is most dear. O Lord, says
Austin, thou art not only dearer to me than this earth, and all things that are
in it, but thou art more acceptable to me than Heaven it self, and all the
things that are in it. Hence is that of David in Psalm. 43.4. I will go to God
my exceeding joy. The joy of my joy, Laetitia ^etitiarum.
that is, the top of my joy. Though other things may be amiable to a godly man
in their place, yet God himself is most amiable to an holy soul.

3. The Saints have their hearts carried out to God by Admiration; that which
we call admiration, is, the fixing or staying of the mind upon some excellent
object; the minds fixing or staying it self with delight upon some object which
it is pleased with. Admiration takes in a double act of the soul.

1. It takes in an act of the mind or understanding; what we admire the mind
fixes and dwells upon; admiration detains and holds the mind fixed in the
contemplation of a thing; what we admire the mind does not presently go off
from, but it stays and dwells upon it.

2. Admiration takes in the act of the will; the will likes and is well pleased
with the goodness of an object, and that makes the mind fix and stay upon it.

Thus the souls of the Saints are carried out to God by admiration; Holy souls
love the divine excellency, and they are pleased in it, therefore the will
causes the mind or understanding to fix it self in the contemplation of it. My
meditation of him shall be sweet, says David. Psalm. 104.34.
The Saints cannot always get up their hearts to this frame of admiration, and
it is matter of bitter complaint to holy souls, that they cannot find their
hearts so taken with the divine perfections, as sometimes they have been; but
this is certain, this is most pleasing to a holy soul when he finds his heart
most taken and ravished with the excellencies of God, and when he can admire
him more than all created things.

4. The Saints have their hearts carried out to God by delight. Delight carries
the heart powerfully to the object we delight in, what we delight in we cannot
but think of, Psalm. 119.47. I will delight my self in thy Commandments, which I
have loved: As much as if he should have said, the love and affection which I
have to thy Commandments carries out my heart to them. Thus the Saints do
sometimes find their hearts carried out to delight in God, Isa. 58.14. Then
shall thou delight thy self in the Lord. It is true, it is too seldom, too
rare, that we can thus delight our selves in God, there is one thing or other
that interposeth to hinder us from delighting in God; sometimes guilt
interposeth, that clogs our consciences, and that hinders us from delighting in
God. Sometimes inordinate affection to the creature steps in, and when our
affections are diverted and turned into another channel, we cannot so delight
in God as we ought to do. Sometimes spiritual darkness and deadness hinders our
delighting in God.

1. Spiritual darkness hinders us from delighting in God, we have lost that
sight of God, we have lost those apprehensions of God, which sometimes we have
had; and if we have lost that sight of God, and those apprehensions of God that
once we had, no wonder we cannot delight in him, for our affections follow our
apprehensions, as we have heard.

2. Spiritual deadness hinders us. Our affections are flat and low, and we
cannot get them up to God, so (that as was said) it is too seldom that we get
our hearts into this frame to delight in God; but it is happy with the Saints
when they can find it thus with them, it is never so well with them, as when
they can have their hearts carried out with delight to God.

5. The Saints have their hearts carried out to God by adherence. When we can
find our hearts intimately and firmly adhering to God, then are our hearts
carried out to him. It is good for me to draw near to God, Psalm. 73.28. It is
good for me to adhere to God, Bonum est mihi adhaere Deo.
so the words are rendered by learned men; so Psalm. 63.8. My soul follows hard
after thee. This following hard after God, implies two things.

1. Strong desires after God. And

2. Intimate adhering or cleaving of the soul to God, Adhaeret anima mea post
te, hoc est, vitae securus acquiesco.
My soul cleaves after thee, that is, my soul rests securely in thee, says a
learned man. My soul cleaves after thee, it is as much as if it had been said,
Whilst I think of thee and of thy mercy toward me, although thou seem
sometimes as if so be thou would withdraw thy self from me, yet I go after
thee, I follow after thee in thy very footsteps, I follow thee so close that I
may never let thee go out of my sight. Adhaerere post aliquem nihil aliud esse
videtur quam vestigiis fugientis inhaerere.
To cleave after another, says a learned man, it is to follow another in his
footsteps. Ainsworth observes, that this phrase notes Love, constancy, and
union in the Spirit, he that cleaves to the Lord is of one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17.
My soul cleaves, that is, it cleaves intimately and inseparably to thee.

6. And lastly, The Saints have their hearts carried forth toward God in a way
of satisfaction, Psalm. 63.5. My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and
fatness. He is speaking of communion with God: If he can have but communion
with God, oh then his soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness.
Nothing can terminate the desires of the soul but an infinite good. When the
soul has taken in this and that particular good from among the Creatures, it
finds it is still capable of more, and therefore is still desiring more: but
when the soul has met with such a good, as that it can never come to the end
and bottom of it, then it is satisfied and filled. Now there is good enough in
God to fill the soul, and there is something still redundant, and therefore it
is in God alone, that the Saints find satisfaction, and to him it is they are
carried out, so as to seek satisfaction in him.

The first Use, is, for Application. Use 1.
Let us be exhorted to labor and pray that we may experimentally find our
hearts thus carried out after God, by Desire, Love, Admiration, Delight,
Adherence, satisfaction. O let us put it to the Trial, and we shall find it
true in experience, the more we can find our hearts thus carried out after God,
the more sweetness shall we find in this life. It is good for me to draw near
to God. We shall find it the wisest course to have our hearts fixed and centred
in God. It is natural to us all to seek for rest. Men are seeking far and near
to find rest; but we may wander up and down all our days, and never find what
we seek and pursue after, unless the pursuit of our souls be after God. God
alone is the true rest of souls, the quiet and center of souls, the more our
hearts are carried out after God, the more rest shall we find. The end of
motion is rest; the end why we move toward the Creatures in desire and love,
is, because we think to find some rest and contentment in them. Now if our
souls be carried out after God in holy affections, there, and there only shall
we find that rest that our souls are longing after. Take this for a certain
truth, It will never be well with us, we shall never find rest to our souls
till we have learned this skill to keep our hearts reserved for God, and to
expect happiness from nothing but him. Though we may and ought to use the
Creatures in their place yet we must still expect all our happiness from God.
Take the best comfort, the best condition in this world, yet there is not all
the good in it we desire. There is something that is wanting still, something
that we cannot find in any creature, and in any condition. Examine your selves
and you will find it so: Therefore it is not good that we expect to find
happiness in any thing under the Sun, for if we do, we shall certainly deceive
our selves: But if we place our happiness in God, he will not deceive us, Psalm.
62.6, 7. My soul wait thou only upon God, for my expectation is from him, he
only is my rock and my Salvation, he is my defense, I shall not be moved. The
more our souls are carried out after God, the more rest we shall find. Not but
that we may desire and love the Creatures in their places, but take heed of
expecting to find rest in them, and of expecting happiness in any thing but
God. O let us labor to learn this skill, (and happy are they that can learn
it) to keep our hearts reserved for God as our only happiness, and to learn to
expect happiness from nothing but him.

Let us be exhorted to pray for Divine Grace, Use 2.
as the means whereby our hearts may be thus drawn out to God, Draw me, we will
run after thee; the Church prays to be drawn that she may run after Christ.
Before we are drawn, our affections cannot run out after Christ. When we find
our hearts dead, unapt to move toward God, then should we pray for the
drawings of divine grace. Age Domine and fac, excita and revocanos, accende and
rape, flagra; Dulcescas, jam amemus and ^ur^amus. Aug.
It is the saying of Austin, Lord, do thou quicken, and stir up our hearts, do
thou call hack our hearts to thy self, do thou inflame them, do thou ravish
them and allure them, do thou set them on fire, do thou sweeten and indear thy
self to us. Now, now let us run and love. Truly till divine grace does excite,
inflame, allure, and set our hearts on fire, we shall find we cannot run after
Christ. How often do we find a great weight and mighty clog lying on our souls,
that we cannot ascend to God as we would? We should pray therefore that God
would remove this weight, that he would quicken our hearts by the drawing of
his Spirit. O when our souls are carried forth with life and vigor toward
God, then shall we find rest and sweetness, and peace to our souls. On the
contrary, when our hearts are estranged from God, when our affections are flat
and dead toward him, we shall find nothing but trouble and disquietment,
restlesness and dissatisfaction in our souls. Return to thy rest, Psalm. 116.7.
O my soul, says that holy man. God alone is the rest of souls; so far as our
hearts are carried out with life and vigor toward God, we shall find rest,
peace, and quiet to our soul; so far as we depart from him, we shall find
nothing but trouble and disquietment: Therefore let us pray with the Chruch
here, Draw me, we will run after thee.

FINIS.

