THE RED-SHANKES SERMON: Preached At Saint Giles Church in Edinburgh, the last
Sunday in April, by a Highland Minister.

Ierem. 30.

Sion is wounded, and I will heal her, says the Lord.



LONDON, Printed for T. Bates.

1642.

The Redshanks Sermon.
JEREM. 30. Sion is wounded and I will heal her says the Lord.
I Need not trouble you to set forth who is meant by Sion, ye all know well
enough that it is the poor Church of Scotland, who is now wounded in her head,
in her heart, in her hands, and in her feet.

In her head by government, in her heart by doctrine, in her hands by
discipline, and in her feet by worship.

First she is wounded in her head, where she has got such a clash as has made
all her brains clatter again, and almost put her beside her five senses.

First in her seeing; for she could have seen as well as any Christian Kirk, but
now she cannot distinguish between black and white, for bring plain Popery
before her and she cannot discern between that and true Religion.

Secondly, she is wounded in her hearing; she could have distinguished the
sound of the Gospel and the rigor of the Law, but now since the Organes came
in, she is grown as deaf as a door nail.

Thirdly, she could have smelled as well as any other Kirk, but now she has
smelt the whore of Babylon, she is so senseless, as bring the stinking Popish
trash under her nose, and it will seem as sweet as a Rose.

Fourthly, she could have tasted as well as the best, but now she has so
tasted of the Popes Idolatry she cannot relish her former food.

Lastly, she was so pure and tender as she would not touch any thing which had
been corrupted, but now she has touched some Popish pitch, and how can she but
be defiled? the application follows.

You see how she has almost lost her senses, and you that are old men have
seen her Ministers, going in good old short cloakes, with round black velvet
capes, which little cloakes, turned more souls to God then ever the long
gowns did.

You have heard such good Ministers expound the law and apply the Gospel in
their Pulpits, but now you may hear the proud Prelates rumbling up and down
the streets in their Coaches, in their long gowns, and if you would hear them
speak, follow them to the Council Table and there you shall hear more then
you will be content to follow.

For her smelling, I am sure she smells better then ever she did, for she can
smell a Bishopric, ten years before it fall; but it may be those that smell
best shall never lay their fingers ends on it now.

The Kirk tastes better then ever she did; for in old time she would have
been content with a mess of milk and bread and such homely fare; but now
they must feed on the finest, and take a lick of the best liquor.

Lastly, she touches now better then ever she did, for where she would touch
nothing formerly but spiritual matters, now she will take upon her to handle
the temporal business first, and leave the other till they have leisure.

I have now showed you that the Kirk is wounded in her head, and decay of her
senses, and I will return to show you the rest of her wounds.

Secondly, she is wounded in her heart, which is by the doctrine of the Kirk
through the abundance of Popery and Arminianisme, now common in our Kirks and
Schools.

The Kirck of Scotland was once a bonny grammar school, and then she was
skilled in Regimen and concordantia, and could have made a pretty piece of
Latin, for every thing she did was forced dare regulum, and when she offended,
was pandere manum, but afterward when she went to the College she either had,
or would take more liberty unto her, and then first of all she began her
Rhetoric, and instead of true and proper speaking, she learned nothing but
alegories and hyperbolies; then she came to the logic and instead of the true
demonstration she learned nothing but Homogenes and Syllogismes; afterward she
came to the Ethics, but she did not much trouble her self with them, but
studied the Politics where she prospered so well as she turned true religion
into state policy, and for the Metaphysics ye know their ends, which should
be unum utrum and bonum; so true religion must be one true and good religion,
^ut this was too high and honest for them, too hard to learn, wherefore she
studied no more the Physic but turned true religion into materia prima, and
made it capable of any form they pleased to impose upon it.

So that ye see our Kirk is wounded in her heart, by the doctrine of the Kirk
and teaching of the Schools, which have been such, as I am sure that many of
you that hear me at this time have wished a hundred times to have been out of
the Kirk, when you heard such paultry stuff as came from them.

Thirdly, the Kirk is wounded in her hands, which is the discipline of the
Kirk, once famous by her reformation, after she ran away from Rome: but hard
did they follow her, feign would they have overtaken her, and if they had
gotten her they had given her the largest lash, but (God be thanked) she ran
too fast for them. But now of late she has gone a pilgrimage to Rome, where
she was taken stealing of some of their trumperie, yet when they knew her
mind, and saw it was but only a book of Common prayer, and the Canons of high
Commission which they saw made much for their matter, therefore they let her
go and flatterred her to follow the order of the Mother Kirk in other
Kingdoms, which she promising to do, then they bound her hands with a silken
Cord of Canonical obedience to the Ordinary, and she took much delight to
be bound with so bonny a band, but after they got her fast, they made that
silken band a Cablerope, with which they have girded her so hard as she cannot
stir, and so they will force us either to a blind obedience, and to accept
of such Idolatrous and superstitious Ceremonies on the one side, or else to be
all forsworn fellows on the other side, by which means the Kirk of Scotland
has been so wounded and bound in her hands as this 20. years bypast the
poor Kirk of Scotland could not have a meeting of her members in a lawful
assembly.

Now I come to tell you how she is wounded in her feet, that is in the worship
of the Kirk; the office of the feet is to travel withal, and they have made
a very hackney of Religion* the Kirk was once a bonny Nag, and so pretty as
every man thought it pity to ride her, till at last the Bishops, those rank
riding Lowns, got on her back, and then she trotted so hard as they could
hardly at the first well, ride her, yet at last they so cross legd her and
hopshackled her, that she became a pretty pacing beast, and so easy that they
took great pleasure to ride upon her. But now what with their riding her, up
and down between Edinburgh and London (and one Journey to Rome too they had
given her sick a sore heat that we have been this twelve month walking her
up and down to keep her from foundering.

Nay they have not only made a horse but an Ass also of the Kirk of
Scotland* yea an Ass worse then Balaam wa^; Balaam ye ken was ganging a great
way, and the errand ye ken too, to curse where the Lord had blessed, and the
Angel first met him in a broad way, and the Ass bogled and startled, but
Balaam beat the Ass and got by the Angel, and so was our, Kirk beaten
unreasonablie when Episcopacie came riding on her Ass amongst us.

Afterward Balaam met the Angel again in a straiter way, and then the Ass
startled more then before; Balaam beat her again worse then he did before, so
was our Kirk kicked and very shrewdl^e wounded when the Bishops brought in the
5. Articles of Faith amongst us.

The third time the Angel met Balaam in so strait a way as the Ass could not
pass by, and Balaam beat the Ass again, but the Lord made the Ass to
speak and reprove him for beating her, and then God opened Balaams eyes. So
the Bishops (being as blind as Balaam) have ridden and beaten our Kirk so
long, and taken us at such a strait, as we were even ready to be destroyed.
But God has heard our cry, and we pray him also open the eyes of our
adversaries who were even as blind as Balaam, and were going as unlucky a way
as he; for they were posting to Rome with a Poakmantie behind them, and what
was in their Poakmantie (trow ye?) marry even the book of Common prayer, the
book of Cannons, and orders of the High Commission. Now as soon as the Ass saw
the Angel, she falls to flinging and over goes the Poakmantie, and it hung on
the one side of the Ass by one string, and the Bishops hang by the hamme on
the other side, so as they hang cross the Ass (like a pair of paniers) stuffed
full of Popish trash and trinkets. Feign would the blind Carle have been on
the saddle again, but he could not; nay so he might be but set to ride again
he would be content to leave his Poakmanty amongst us. But let me exhort ye
(dear Brethren) not to let such a swinger ride any more on your Religion, for
if he do he will be sure one time or other to get the Poakmantie behind him
again.

They have not only wounded the Kirk of Scotland, as I have told you, and
made an horse and an Ass of it, but they have betrayed it also for a some of
money, as Judas did Christ; ye ken, who betrayed our Savior, not only he
that took money to betray him, but also those that were silent in so good a
cause, those that accuse him, those adjudged him, and those that forsookehim.
And I fear me we have them that betray our Religion in all these ways, as I
shall touch anon. But now I will see if I can find out the false Judas that
takes money or promotion to betray our Religion. And I must now tell you a
metaphorical tale, I dare not say it is true, but you shall have it as I had
it.

When I was a little lad at School, there was a young hopeful Theologue and
expectant who is now another manner of man (not such another in the land,) And
he being to preach of those words of Judas, Quid mihi dabit is etc. what will
you give me and I will deliver him into your hands? The young man loved his
Text so well, as he told over and over again, both in Latin and Scottish;
There was a good old man sitting near him and hearing him still upon that
Text, thought to give him his answer; and so standing up and looking upon him
the next time that he said what will ye give me and I will deliver him unto
you? the old man answered, marry thou shall have a good fat Bishopric; and
then I am sure thou will betray him indeed. Now ye may find out by this who
has betrayed the Kirk of Scotland.

My Brethren the comparison between Christ and our Kirk holds well together,
and their troubles have been in some things alike: for Christ is the head the
Kirk is the body; ye ken our Savior when he entered first into the Ministry he
was carried by Satan (God save us) into the wilderness, where he was tempted
forty long days of a m^ckle Devil, in which time he endured many temptations,
but as soon as he began to work his miracles, then he was carried into
Jerusalem with great triumph, where there was nothing but Hosanna in their
mouths, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord: the next news ye
hear of him they came with Halberts, and feathered staves, and troops of
Soldiers, from the high Priest to apprehend him.

So the Kirk of Scotland for almost 40. years bypast has sat desolate in
the wilderness, by you contemned and rejected of all, and endured many
temptations, and now in the end having overcome them, she is riding to
Jerusalem in Triumph. For now there is nothing in all men's months but Hosanna,
crying, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.

But in the last place ye remember when Christ was betrayed, how they came to
betray him; therefore take heed when they come with swords, and staves, and
bands, of men from the high Priests against you, that you do not with Peter
deny your Master and your Religion, and like the rest of the Apostles show a
fair pair of heels, and forsake him.

Now poor fools ye have all seen your Church wounded, where she lies a
woeful spectacle, but what shall we do for to heal her? marry pray unto the
Lord who has promised to heal his wounded Sion and we must put to our helping
hands also; for such as put their hands to the Plough (as ye have done) and
turn back again, are not fit for the Kingdom of heaven.

After his Sermon was ended, his prayer said, and a Psalm sung, he stood up to
give the blessing: but first said thus, I know it is not the custom in this
place to say any thing after Sermon, yet because I had much to say, and one
thing drove another out of my, head therefore I must crave leave to ad a word
or two by way of exhortation.

First I will speak to such Noble men as have not subscribed the Covenant, to
know their reason, ye will say ye are Noli me tangere, howsoever I will give
you a touch, and it may be ye will answer, ye must go in a Parliamentary way,
the meanest first, and the best last: ye would be angry if ye were told the
poor must enter heaven before you. You have a fashion here in the Southern
parts of Scotland, that when ye come to the Foord of a River, the poor Post
man must first venture over upon his little Nag, to see whether it be deep or
no, and then the Lord comes mounted on his gay steed and he passes over. This
is no good fashion where ever you had it, we that are Highlanders have a
better then that our selves; we usuallie go on foot, and when we come to a
foord we are loath to lose a man, therefore we join Arm in Arm, and hand in
hand, and all go in together, so that the strong suports the weak, and drown
one drown all, so put your hand to the Covenant and either live or die with
the rest.

In the second place ye that are of the College of Justice ye excuse your
subscribing because ye are employed by his Majesty and so cannot stand with
your honors to do it: heers a brave reason but a bad example; for so may the
very meanest man in the Kingdom that gathers up, but 20. s. per annum, for the
King, have such a hole to go out at, well there is but one man betwixt God and
you, get by him and go to God.

In the third place I must speak to you that are of this City Council,
although I see that there are four of your chiefest Chaires empty: you excuse
your selves because you are in office, and when ye are out you will Subscribe:
heers a brave reason indeed; now ye ought to be ringleaders to the rest in
this City, as in all other affairs; who dares subscribe in the City till ye
have done it. And if God get his work done ere that time, where be your
thanks? Let our chief Register look over his books and see if ever the Town
of Edinburgh suffered for joining with the Kirk of Scotland.

Lastly I must speak a word to you that are Strangers: then turning himself
to the Provost, Baylives, and Doctors of Aberden who sat in a Gallerie by
themselves he said, it may be that ye do not subscribe the Covenant, because
when ye came hither on your Civil affairs, you promised not to subscribe it,
remember your own proverb in buying and selling (an Aberden man may recant his
first bargain if he please) therefore let me advise you to play Aberden men's
parts, and take your word again, and go home and drink a Cup of Bon-accord,
and join with the Kirk of Scotland, and subscribe the Covenant.

FINIS.

