THE RAMPANT ALDERMAN, OR NEWS FROM THE EXCHANGE, A FARCE.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall.
1685.

THE RAMPANT ALDERMAN.
ACT. I. SCENE. I.
Enter Rover and Wilding severally. Rover. DEar Jack, I am glad to see thee
with all my heart 'ifaith. How long have thou been in Town?


Wilding. Too long to my sorrow, Ned, except thy charming Sister Cordelia were
kinder, the God of Love and I are still at Sword and Dagger about her. And I
find too late, like a Fool as I am, in spite of my Blood he will be too hard
for me.


Rover. Oh there is no Fence against a Flail, Jack. A pair of Black Eyes thou
know, wound deeper then a Case of Pistols; but cheer up Man, thou have me on
thy side, I know thou love her Honorably.


Wilding. Else let me never get the Heaven I sigh for. Sir, I am a man of
Honor, and hate a base Action, as much as I do Cowardice.


Rover. I believe thee 'faith: And to be serious with thee, 'gad I had rather
Pimp for thee than any Man in Christendom, that is the truth on it.


Wilding. Pimp for me!


Rover. Ay, Jack, hold a Door neatly, Cough, and cry Hem, if any body come;
thou understand'st me.


Wilding. Sir, I dare not understand ye, nor would I hear this from any other
Man -- it is well you are her Brother.


Rover. Come, prithee be not Angry, thou art a brave Fellow, and I love thee.
And by this Hilt thou shall have a Touch with my Sister -- in spite of the
Musty Alderman, or e're a Lousy Plush Jacket in Christendom. I hope thou can
dispense with a touch with her in the Bed of Honor, Jack.


Wilding. Ay Boy, there indeed a Touch with her would make a Man Immortal: But
what Alderman is this thou speak of?


Rover. Why, Sir, a Jack-o-lent, with a Jack Chain about him: An old drivling,
fribling, fumbling Fobus, that makes Love to her. And is so damnably Rich, and
withal so confoundedly Lecherous, that he thinks it is no more but up and ride
with her.


Wilding. The Devil choke him with the Furs of his own Gown. What Is to be done
Friend?


Rover. That Is as Time shall try. See here comes my Sister and my Cousin Julia,
whom I Will take aside to give you opportunity: Go put up briskly to her, do you
hear?

Takes Julia aside.
Enter Cordelia and Julia. Wilding. Madam, tho the Charms of your Beauty are
not to be resisted by any thing composed of Flesh and Blood as I am, yet a
little good Nature too, would add another Charm greater than all, and give me
hopes of Life, that am despairing by your Cruelty.


Cordelia. If Women, Sir, were always to be won with Words, the grand Deceivers
of our Sex, would have a true occasion to condemn our Easiness; but I Am
resolved to turn the Scale, and prove, that once there was a Woman gained by
Merit.


Wilding. Ah, let me know in what I Am deficient, and I Will reform my self -- but
I see plainly you have made another Choice, and I am damned to all the Hell of
Rigor in your Frowns. Oh cruel Sex! too Fair, and too Ungrateful!


Rover. What a Devil's the Matter now? Why how now Ned, what watring thy Plants
already. 'dsHeart, they make Love just like Cats, they are always either
Howling, or Scratching one another.


Julia. They come the nearer then to the nature of the Business; for Love in
its best quality, is but a kind of Caterwauling, the He Cat follows the She
into the Parlour, then presently the She runs after the He into the Garret,
where there is such an eternal Mew betwixt 'em, just like that Gentleman's
making Love for all the World.


Wilding. Does my Integrity and constant Passion deserve to be thus slighted?


Cordelia. When you have worked upon my good Opinion a proof of your Integrity,
you may be better used; till when, let me advise you to leave Angling, Sir, the
Fish will not be Caught, I can assure ye.

Our Sex by Profit often is Betrayed,

But Worth shall win me, or I Will die a Maid.


Exit. Julia. Fare ye well, Sir, take care she does not see the Onion you have
wrapped up in your Handkerchief, for you have Tears at command, I see. 'And to my
knowledge, a Man can no more weep without an Onion, than he can make Love
without Lying; they are both absolutely necessary. And so sweet Sir, your
humble Servant. Ha, ha, ha.


Exit laughing. Wilding. Ah, the Devil fleer ye; 'dsheart this Jillflirt,
gigling young Queen, will jeer me to Death, I shall never be able to look her
in the face again.


Rover. Ah, Pox on it, you must, you must: What a Lover and want Confidence,
such a one would be a strange Monster indeed. But come prithee, let us go and
contrive how to Supplant this Old Fusty Alderman; for if he intends to Cut up
my Sister like a young Virgin Pullet, by this Light, I Will cut him like an Old
Capon; he shall be as bare as the Eunuchs in the Grand Signior's Seraglio. I Will
see what the Alderman has in his Purse for once.


Wilding. I think he may spare the Jewels in it, for any good his Worship will
do with 'em. But prithee Jack, Is not this he that was always voting Mischief
against the King, and speaking Treason in the Common Council?


Rover. The very same, the most Notorious Whig in all the Fraternity.


Wilding. There Is some hopes then he may be hanged in time, that the Fraternity
may be rid of him.


Rover. No doubt, but Fate has some such Blessing in store for him; he keeps
company with two Sham Elders, which he styles by the Title of Doctors,
forsooth, the one squeaks Sedition to him in the Coffee-House, and the other
Cants it in the Conventicle.


Wilding. Ay, I hope I shall see 'em Cant it at the Gallows too; prithee do, I
know 'em Jack.


Rover. Oh, without doubt, the one is Doctor Oylyfist, the sneaking Non-Con. of
Spittle-Fields, and the other of Famous Memory, is --


Wilding. Doctor Oats.


Rover. Ah, well guessed my Noble Heart, 'gad thou art right.


Wilding. Why then, farewell Mr. Alderman, if that Noble Doctor keeps ye
Company, the Gibbet is like to feel your weight, I Am sure.


Rover. 'dsHeart, here he comes, and Company with him: It Is high Change time,
and the place will fill presently, therefore let us be gone, for I would not
have him see us.


Wilding. Nor I neither, I am not so fond of his Company.

Exeunt.
Enter Alderman and Booby. Alderman. Is thy name Booby?


Booby. Yes, and't please your Worship. I Am a true Booby by Father and Mother.


Alderm. What Country-Booby are ye?


Booby. I Am a Buckinghamshire Booby, and please ye, and of a very ancient
Family.


Alderm. How so?


Booby. Why my Father was a Miller of Maidenhead, and he having a great
occasion for a Wife, Married one Katharine Crack of Carnarvan; so that betwixt
the Boobies of Buckingham, and the Cracks of Carnarvan, I am as arrant a Booby
as ever you saw.


Alderm. Very well, Friend, if thou art Industrious, thou may come to great
Preferment; it is many a Boobies case as Times go, for it is a very lucky Name, I
promise ye, and comes near the Baboons, a very rich Family of our Party here in
the City.


Booby. I have heard great talk of the City Baboons indeed: Is your Worship any
kin to 'em?


Alderm. Troth Friend, there is some Relation betwixt us. Sir Bartlemy Baboon
married Mrs. Clawbuttock, of Highgate, and had Issue by her two Baboons.


Booby. And never a Monky.


Alderm. But then comes in Sir Timothy Thrum, my Great Grandfather, and he
Clawed up the Widow Clawbuttock, and got by her Toby Thrum, and Thomas Thrum,
Talbot Thrum, and Tomasine Thrum, and my self, a second Timothy Thrum, who were
all Married to rich Fortunes. And --


Booby. And so they Thrum'd one another to the end of the Chapter.


Alderm. But no more of this. I find thee a very fit Fellow for my Service, and
therefore do Entertain thee. Thou can Lie for me to a Lady that I am in Love
with, can not?


Booby. Yes, and lie with her too, if you would have me.


Alderm. How, Sirrah, lie with her!


Booby. With her Chambermaid, I mean, and't please your Worship: I have a great
Impediment in my Speech.


Alderm. Alas, alas, well, prithee observe me, there is a Rich young Lady
that is in Law, and just come to Town to have her Business done.


Booby. There are a great many, Sir.


Alderm. What, Sir?


Booby. Young Ladies, that come to Town to have their Business done.


Alderm. Go too, you Wag, mark me what I say, This young Lady is extremely
troubled.


Booby. With the Griping of the Guts, Sir.


Alderm. Guts, Sirrah: No, with Impertinent Suitors, Sirrah, which I intend to
deliver her from, and to that end have wrigled my self into her Acquaintance.


Booby. Your Worship does very well to wrigle your self into any part of her.


Alderm. Well said, in faith, witty Booby, there is a Brumigham Groat for that
saying, to encourage thee.


Booby. A Pox on your Bounty: What a rare Brumigham Master shall I have?


Enter Beatrice. Alderm. Here comes my Daughter, your first business must be to
hand her Home, and keep all Fluttering Suitors from her; especially a Huffing
Frenchman, that is just come from the Siege of Luxemburg.


Booby. And intends to blow up her Mine, does he Master?


Alderm. He does so Booby, ingenious Booby, he does so. There Is something more
for thee, for that saying.


Booby. A Queen Elizabeth Threepence, just as thin as his Conscience. Why, I am
made for ever, I shall roll in Money at this rate.


Alderm. Go Daughter, go Home with him: And let me have no more Parleys with
your French Kickshaw, do you hear?


Beatrice. My Duty shall be shown in my Obedience, Sir.


Alderm. And in the Evening I Will prepare Lovissit, my young Mistress, it is such
a pretty little twinkling Rogue, such a bucksome Shape, and such a ^ound plump
Buttock, that I am almost Mad for her. I Dream of her a Nights, and Sigh for
her a Days; and when I meet with her at Church, cannot mind one word of the
Sermon for staring at her. Well, I must have a Bout with her, come what will
on it.

And all my Brethren then shall find in me,
There is some Mettle left in Seventy Three.

ACT. II.
Enter La Bounce. La Bounce. VAt a Diable is de matra, dat me can finda no
Person in dis House, what hoa, where is dis Rich Alderman, and de pret sweet
young Lady his Daughter, dat is to be my Wife. Mounsieur, Jack, Toby, Man,
Woman's, or Shild, where are you all?


Enter Booby with a Quarter-staff. Booby. What the Devil have we got here, a
French Flap-Dragon, just spit out of Monsieur Crequy's Mouth, and come to
Invade us in our own Quarters. I Will Quarter him. I Will be too nimble for him
in faith. I Will quarter him with my Quarter-staff here if he be not Civil. How
now, Sir, who are you, hah?


La Bounce. Who am I, Zoon, look in my Face, vat a Diable can you not see?


Booby. Yes, I can see, and you shall feel too, if you have not more Manners; I Will
tell you that Monsieur Basimicue.


La Bounce. Scoundrel Valet, keep your distance, and reverence my Profession, I
am a Soldier.


Booby. And a very Impudent one, as ever I saw.


La Bounce. I am just come from de Seige of Luxemburg, my Name is Capitain La
Bounce.


Booby. La Bounce, a Plague on your Family, there is many a poor Spaniard the
worse for 'em to my knowledge. But what make you here good Captain Bounce, hah?


La Bounce. I come to speak vid de Rish Alderman, and de fair Lady his
Daughter; I intend to Marry her and den lie vid her like a Soldier, and a
Gentleman.


Booby. A Gentleman. And is that like a Gentleman, to come into an Aldermans
House without Knocking? Do You hear Madg in the Kitchen there, look about your
Dishes and Plates, and see if the Gentleman has Stole nothing.


La Bounce. Morblieu, me Steal: Poltroon such another word, me will scour my
Rapier in thy small Gut.


Booby. Hark'e, Captain Bounce, if you put your French Tricks upon me, I shall
Bounce your Noddle with my Quarter-staff here, for I am a Gentleman too, and my
Name is Booby.


La Bounce. De Boobies are de base beggarly Famillee.


Booby. You lie like a Potgun as you are, and here is my Voucher. Holds up his
Quarter staff. And tho I am no Soldier, I will Thrash a Soldier if you
provoke me, Monsieur la Bougre je parle mieux Francois que vous. There Is French
for ye, ye Son of a Whore.


La Bounce. O Mordieu, sit grand Confidance.


Booby. What a Pox do you think we have no Breeding amongst us, ha? You shall
find we have, and Courage too. And so have at you, good Monsieur Snuff Box.

Fight here.
Enter Rover, Cordelia, Beatrice, Wilding and Julia. Rover. How now, what is the
matter here?


Booby. No great matter. I was only Cracking French Crowns into English Groats:
Have ye enough yet, good Captain Bounce?


Beatrice. This is the French Fantastic Officer, that pretends to have
authority to be my Husband.


Rover Does he so? I shall pretend to cut his Throat then.


Wilding. And I think I shall have a blow at his Skull, if he intend to breed
his Mungrel Offspring amongst us.


Booby. Ay, you may have blows at it if you will, but to hurt it is impossible;
his Skull is harder than my Quarter-staff.


La Bounce. J^ime at the Siege of Mons, me vas two time shot troo de Head with
a Cannon Bullet.


Rover. Well said Monsieur 'ifaith, that was a French Swinger.


Booby. Oh damned lying Rogue! shot through the Head with a Cannon Bullet.


Julia. Peace Booby, let us hear him.


La Bounce. I vas blown up in de Mine at Luxemburg, and vas one of the foremost
of those dat took de last Bastion. I have bin in ten Storm at Sea, seen both
the Gulf of Venice and Florida, and de very Navel of de World, you Scoundrel,
and shall I be effronted thus? No, dear will comes times for Revenge, I say
dear will, and so Serviture Messieur, serviture. --

Exit huffing.
Booby. Monsieur votre tres humble. There Is more French for ye, ye Son of a
Whore you.


Cordelia. It Is such a Conceited Ass, there is no enduring him.


Beatrice. Yet I am so plagued with his Impertinent Addresses, that I am almost
weary of my Life; there is never a day but I am fore'd to spend two Hours in
hearing his French Giberish Courtship.


Rover. To as much effect, I hope, as his French Valor was at Luxemburg. No,
dearest Madam, I hope you never will forget my constant Services.


Beatrice. Never whilst they are constant Services.


Julia. Which never last above a Month and a Day. A Man of the Town puts off
his Passion just like an Old Suit; he must have a New one every Month, or else
he grows Slovenly.


Wilding. But mine to fair Cordelia lasts for ever. Oh that I had the grace to
be believed, or that my Love could enter at thy Ears, and tell her heart how
truly I adore her.


Rover. Come Ned, thou shall find she does resent thy Fidelity. I caught her
napping this Morning, Boy, and have a fine Story to tell thee.


Cordelia. Nay, Brother, what do you mean!


Rover. Nothing but Honesty, Sister. But I tell thee once again, Jack shall have
a Touch with thee, and there is an end.


Booby. Here Is Mr. Alderman just now hobling in, by this Light; therefore shift
for your selves Gallants.


Rover. Now, Sister, do but Nigle him finely, and let me alone to carry on the
rest.


Beatrice. Pray, dear sweet Madam, make a Fool of my Father, for I hate to see
him Dote at these Years.


Cordelia. If he has no more Wit than he has Ability in Love Matters, he shall
find I am Match enough for him, if he were Forty Years younger.


Beatrice. Speak softly, here he comes.


Enter Alderman. Aderm. Where are ye Booby?


Booby. Here, Sir, here.


Alderm. Go to Mr. Rump the Poulterer, and bid him send me in a brace of
Partridges, tell him, I intend to make a Collation to Night.


Booby. I must bring never a fat Capon and Sawsages with me, must I Sir?


Alderm. An Extravagant Rogue. A Capon, what to do Rogue? what to do?


Booby. The Lady has brought her Coachman with her, we must have something for
him, Sir.


Alderm. Why bring a Capon then, and be Poxt to ye, this Rogue will undo me with
Expenses. And do you hear, Sirrah, when you are there, step to Mr. Codshead the
Fishmonger, and bring a Cock-Lobster: Do kou know a Cock-Lobster, Sirrah?


Booby. Ay, Sir, as well as I know you to be a Cock-Alderman.


Alderm. What an arch Dog it is, a Cock Alderman! Get ye gone Sirrah; the Rogue
will make me Laugh forty times a Day. -- 'Odso, here is the Exit Booby. Lady,
and now methinks I am very Cockish indeed. Madam, your humble Servant, I made
bold to send my Daughter to Invite ye to a Dish of Meat, and the Fiddles.


Cordelia. And you see I have obeyed your Summons, Mr. Alderman.


Alderm. Blessing on thy Heart, and we'll be as Merry as the Beggars 'ifaith,
and thou shall see me Dance a Jigg presently. 'Odso, methinks I could Cut a
Caper up to thy Middle, I am so Active; Leap, Vault, do the Sommerset like a
Boy of Eighteen, and Jump over a Stick like a Spaniel.


Cordel. But not for the King of England? I hope Sir.


Alderm. The King of England, no not I: I Would not Jump over a Straw for him. For
a certain Duke, that shall be Nameless, I could Jump, tho the Joynt-Stool were
as high as the Exchange. --


Cordelia. And you broke your Neck on the other side. What a wonderful thing is
Zeal for the good Old Cause.


Alderm. I see the Witty Baggage knows I am a Whig. Come prithee Sweet Heart,
sit down, and let us leave the good Old Cause to its self, and Tope about a
Glass of good old Sack: Beatrice, here take my Keys, and reach me the Bottle on
your Left Hand, next the Door, you will find a -- Gives her the Keys. written
Paper on it, -- go bring it hither quickly.


Cordelia. You are wonderful Brisk to Day, Mr. Alderman.


Alderm. What should ail me, Sweet Heart? what should ail me? I am not so Old
yet, but I can pay a Bill at sight, as well as one and Twenty, Girl. Think of
that, Sweetheart, think of that.


Cordelia. Ay, but there is a witty Saying, Sir, That an Old Man of Sixty, full
of Vaunting and Brags,
Often thinks to pay Debts, without Money in's Bags.
Think you of that, Mr. Alderman.


Alderm. A plaguey cunning Queen, 'odzooks, I was never so Nonplus'd in my
Life. But I must not seem to be concerned, -- aside. Ah would we were in Bed
together, to try how well I could Pay. Come, Beatrice, where are ye?


Beatrice. Here it is, Sir. Enter Beatrice with a Bottle.


Alderm. Let me see. -- The Liquor of Generation. reads the Note. Ay, this is
it. Here Is that will make the Blood dance, 'ifaith. -- Go, Beatrice, go and
take care Supper be well Ordered, and let the Fiddlers be ready, do you hear?


Beatrice. Yes, Sir, -- I know this is only to get me out of the way: But I Will
sit him, for I Will place Mr. Rover her Brother, and the rest, where they shall
hear all.


Exit Beatrice. Alderm. Fair Lady, come faith, here is a Health to your
Maidenhead.


Drinks. Cordelia. Oh, fie Sir!


Alderm. Nay, nay, this over Modesty spoils all, it does 'ifaith. -- Come, it
shall be Drunk. -- Nay, faith, we'll have a Health to my performance too,
presently.


Rover Peeping. Will you so, Sir, -- Very well indeed. 'sHeart, how the old
Goat tickles himself. aside.


Cordelia. Indeed, Mr. Alderman, this Discourse is too loose: Pray consider who
I am.


Alderm. Who thou art? Why thou art to be mine, Sweet heart.


Wilding Peeping. I had rather you were Hanged as high as the Monument,
Sweetheart.


aside. Alderm. I could never have imagined Heaven had so great a Blessing in
store for me, to lie snug upon those delieate Breasts, to be embraced in those
Arms, Ah. --


Julia Peeping. Ah, you will have another Tone when you are Guelt, good Alderman
Stallion.


aside. Cordelia. Fie, fie, indeed I must not endure this. If your Love is
honorable, pray keep your distance?


Alderm. Prithee excuse me. Faith, I am so transported, I know not what I do.
Then what a Neck is there for a Row of Pearls to glitter on, -- Ah!


Rover. Ah, now he comes to it.


Alderm. And this pretty little, little Foot, what an incomparable provoking
show it would make with a pair of Diamond Buckles on it: Zooks I must kiss it,
I cannot forbear, -- I must kiss it 'ifaith. Falls down, and strives to kiss
her Foot.


Cordelia. For shame, Mr. Alderman, this is beyond enduring.


Rover. Now does the old Rogue, I warrant, stink like a Filchard.


Alderm. A Suit of Point for that Head, and Rings for that pretty soft Hand,
whose Touch or Grasp, would raise a Man to Life, if he had been dead a Week, ah!


Julia. Ah, -- brave Alderman Rampant!


Alderm. Well, I am strangely provoked, I know not what to do she has so
provoked me, -- ah Rogue.


Cordelia. Either be more Civil, and touch me no more, or I Am resolved I Will
call out, and expose ye.


Alderm. Well, well, I will be patient, I will, I will. But as long as I did
not touch thee about the Middle, as the Song says, what needs all this Coyness?
And now I think on it, shall I sing an old Catch to thee, Sweetheart?


Cordelia. Any thing to keep ye more Tame.


Alderm. Come on then. -- And the Theme shall be a touch about the Middle, --
ah Rogue. Frisks about.


Cordelia. Come, come, begin.


Alderman Sings. THe Old Man he Peeped through the Barn-door,
As he was walking along,
And there he spied four Legs on the Floor,
And his Wifes two Legs among.
2.
Ho, ho, quoth he, since I do perceive,
You Dance without a Fiddle:
I pray what e're you do with her Legs,
To let her alone in the Middle, the Middle.
To let her alone in the Middle.
Enter Booby. Alderm. How now, Sirrah, how dare you intrude without Coughing or
Hemming first, ha? Have NOT I told you of that?


Booby. Hem, hem, I come to tell ye that Supper is ready, Sir: and the Fiddlers
have just rozin'd their Throats and their Guts; and are preparing to strike up,
Sir.


Alderm. Let 'em strike up then, and bid my Servants give us the Dance we had
last Christmas.

Dance here. So, so, very well, come Sweetheart, now to Supper. And after I
have warmed my Blood with another Bottle, it shall go hard but I Will have a Bout
with her beforehand, 'ifaith.

Exit Alderman leading Cordelia.
Enter Rover, Wilding, and Julia. Rover. You shall be Guelt before that
happens, sweet Alderman, 'ifaith. Wilding, go you and inform the Neighbors of
the Business, and get a Constable ready, we'll hamper this old Whipster.

And prove by this, in spite of his Complaint,
No Whoremaster is like your Whiggish Saint.

ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Booby. Booby. I Have made the Coachman so Drunk yonder, that he mistakes
his Coach-boot for his Coach-box, so that he can discover nothing of my Design,
I Am sure. And now the time is coming, when I shall prove my self to be no Booby
nor Fool to the Alderman, but Mr. Lovewel, a Gentleman, and got into his
Service for the Love I bear his Daughter. It Is a strange Old Fellow. -- He has
Dragged and Drawn the Lady so about the Room yonder, that he wants nothing but
Hanging and Quartering her, to make a mere Traitor of her. It Is well she is made
of Country Mould, in faith; if she had been of the Town Pocky Stuff, a Leg or an
Arm had been lost in the Service long before this. And yonder they are all
watching him, with a design to surprise him at it. Well, if he chance to want
my help, he shall pay for it, in faith, and then we may chance to find a Trick
for their Trick, but there must be Money in the Case; for I have no Wit without
Money, nor ever had in my Life. Here he comes, I Will slink behind the Door, and
observe.


Enter Cordelia followed by the Alderman. Cordelia. Such a Rudeness as this,
ought to be Punished with more than common Severity.


Alderm. Prithee deer Pug, don't talk of Severity, but let me Kiss thee; I must
Kiss thee faith, never stir I Must.


Boody. You Will stink for your stirring, I find that, presently.


Cordelia. If there be Law, or Honor, or Justice in the Nation, I Will be
Revenged; you shall know what I am, and what Friends a Woman of my Quality can
find to do her Reason. Marry come up, must I be obliged to hear your fulsome
Folly, your stale nasty bawdy Jokes, stolen from the Witless Drolls in
Bartholomew Fair? Must I be your Property, do you intend me for your
Scotch-warming-Pan, you old Fornicator you?


Booby. She opens well, in faith, she is a sure Hound, I warrant her.


Alderm. How sharp the Rogue is, when she would pretend to be Angry: But I know
this is but a Copy of her Countenance, I am not to be Fob'd off so, in faith.
Therefore Come to my Bed, my Dear, my Dear,
Come to my Bed, my Dear;
To Marry is a Cheat, and we can do the Feat,
As well as if we were, we were,
As well as if we were.



Cordelia. Then your design was to make a Whore of me, was it so, Grandsir
Grey-beard?


Alderm. A Whore! Oh, fie, fie, that is a paw word. No, no, a Miss, or so, if
thou would, my Dear. Oons, why should not I keep a Miss as well as e're a
young long-back'd Fop in the Town, I Am sure I am as well able?


Booby. Ye lie, Master, ye lie, you are too weak in the Back; besides there are
things wanting, Age has made a mere Capon of ye.


aside. Cordelia. Thou keep a Miss! What would thou do with her, or with any
Woman else? Unless 'twere to buckle her Shoes, hold her Gloves, or Usher her
to Guild Hall on a Lord-Mayors Day.


Alderm. Yes, I could pay her Family Duties, Sweetheart.


Booby. There you lie again, Master, that you could not to my knowledge.


Cordelia. Duty. -- The best Duty thou could pay, were to hold the Door for
some abler young Fellow, that would take pity on her. 'dsDeath, you feeble,
fulsome, fribling Fumbler, let me go, or I Will force my way; I Will be at thee by
this Light.


Alderm. What, thou will not Rogue, thou art not in Earnest: Thou can not
Fight, can thou? If thou will Jerk me a little, with all my heart, faith; and
I Will go fetch Rods, I keep 'em ready in the House upon all occasions.


Cordelia. Nay, I Will Flaug your Worship, if you come near me.


Booby. 'Odsheart, she will be too hard for him, I see by her. Now who shall we
get to be the 'tother Second, for I am resolved to make one?


Alderm. But prithee, let us leave off Fighting, and fall to Loving again. I Die,
I Languish for thee, I am Sick, Lovesick, Sick to the quick; if thou will not
believe me, I Will show thee my -- 'Odsings, it was just coming out.


Cordelia. Impudent Satyr, stand off.


Alderm. Nay faith, it is impossible, I must Rumble, and Tumble, and Jumbl, if
you will not consent by fair means; I am resolved to Ravish, and there is an end
on it.


Cordelia. Nay then, Help, help, -- Murder,

Takes hold on her Rape, Murder, help, help, --


Rover and Wilding within. Rover. Break open the Doors there, it is my Sisters
voice; I Will have the Doors open.


Booby. Oh, I expected this! 'Odsheart, how Mr. Alderman looks now?


Cordelia. Oh, thanks to Providence, it is my Brother's voice. Now, Goat,
Stallion, you shall find what it is to abuse a Woman of my Quality.

Exit Cordel.
Enter Booby. Alderm. Oh Booby!


Booby. Oh, Master, what have you done?


Alderm. Oh, Booby, I am Ruined, Undone, Disgraced for ever; I have got


Booby. The Pox, Sir.


Alderm. Ah, worse, worse, Eternal Shame, perpetual Ignominy; I shall be a
Byword to the World, and hooted out of the Exchange.


Booby. Why you have not Ravished her, I dare swear, Sir.


Alderm. No, I have not Ravished her, it is true, but I would have don't if I
could, Booby; I was just upon the Business.


Booby. Why, faith, and to be just upon the Business, and yet come off again so
soon, shows great constancy of Mind, Master.


Alderm. Ah, there is a damned Apothecary, my Neighbor, a jeering Rogue, that
if ever he should come to know it, I were no Man of this World; I should be
t^iz'd to Death.


Booby. You must get him Poisoned with one of his own Drugs, I think, Master.


Rover and Wilding within. Rover. Where is this Abominable Villain, this Goat,
this Ravisher? Break open all the Doors there; I Will cut him in pieces, if there
were no more Men alive.


Alderm. Oh, what shall I do!


Booby. They are coming up Stairs. Come, Sir, what will you give me to free you
from this trouble now?


Alderm. Oh, any thing, dear Booby, here are a hundred Guineys in this Purse, I
give 'em thee with all my heart, and any thing else that thou will demand, set
me but clear of that Tarmagant Roaring Rascal.


Booby. Come set your Hand to it, here is a Note drawn up for that purpose.


Alder. I with all my Heart.

Writes.
Booby. So, so, now get ye into that Chest there.


Alder. That Chest, Booby.


Booby. Ay, ay, quick, quick, leave the rest to me.


Alderm. Ah, dear Booby, I am bound to thee for ever.

Alderman gets into the Chest.
Booby. Now will I swear to them, that I saw him get out of a Window upon the
Leads to the next House, which they believing me their Friend, will doubtless
give credit to.


Wilding. The next Room open that, the Rascal has hid himself there.


Booby. Indeed, Gentlemen, here is no one here but my self; the Alderman is got
out of the Window to the other side of the House.

Exit Booby.
Alderm. Oh, dear Booby, well, never Man had such a Servant.


Enter Beatrice. Beatrice. Ah, have I caught ye, Mr. Booby, 'ifaith. This Rogue
turns Cat in Pan, and has hid my Father there in the Chest, and now for the
sake of Money, intends to put a Trick upon us; 'twas well I had the Curiosity
of Peeping, for I Will go and discover all his Roguery immediately.

Exit. Booby meets her.
Booby. 'Odsheart, who is this I see? Mrs. Beatrice. Nay then the cunning
Gypsy has discovered all, I Am sure. Come turn out, Sir, quickly turn out, I
must have a Counterplot instantly, or all is Ruined.


Alderm. What Is the matter Booby?


Booby. Come out, come out, quick, quick.

Alderman comes out of the Chest.
Alderm. Oh, I fancy they have got the Tokens of my Manhood in a Cleft Stick
already.


Booby. Come, strip, strip, change Clothes and Hats with me presently, -- I Will
fit them with a Plot, 'ifaith.


Alderm. Oh, heavenly Booby!


Here they change Clothes. Booby. So, now as you take my place, I Will take
yours, and let 'em come in when they please.

Booby gets into the Chest.
Alderm. Most incomparable Booby! 'Odsnigs, I begin to be a little in Heart. --
This was a rare Invention of the Rogue.


Cordelia. There, there, those Stairs on the Righthand.

Booby Peeping out of the Chest.
Booby. I tell ye, ye are mistaken, the Alderman is gone.


Enter Rover, Wilding, Cordelia, Julia, and Beatrice. Rover. Ye lying Rascal,
we have discovered your Villainy, Sirrah, and will reward ye; in the mean time
take that and that.

Beats the Alderman, mistaking him for Booby.
Alderm. Ah, with all my heart, and so farewell to ye. Oh rare Booby.

Exit Alderm.
Wilding. There, there is the Chest, let us see what is in it.


Julia. A huge bundle of Iniquity, no doubt on it.


Cordelia. Hang him filthy Brute, he is too bad to live; come pull him out
Brother, that I may be Revenged.


Rover. Oh, are you here, Sir?

Opening the Chest.
Booby. Yes, Sir, I am here, Sir.

Starting up.
Omnes. How, Booby!


Booby. Ay, ay, the very same, I am Booby, Sir.


Wilding. And dressed like the Alderman, these are Wonders: Who Is that went out
then?


Booby. Oh, 'twas the Devil, Gentlemen, he has been Tormenting me this three
Hours.


Rover. If it was the Devil, 'twas a strange fat bulky Devil; I am sure he had
Substance enough, as my Cudgel here can witness.


Booby. Madam, I heartily beg your pardon for my Rudeness to ye; alas, I was
Possessed.


Cordelia. Why was it you then all the while?


Booby. Me, me, only me: I have been Tempted this two days, to take the good
Aldermans Habit to abuse you, -- by that Devil that went out just now.


Rover. How came he by your Livery on?


Booby. Ay, it is a thieving Devil, he has some Frolic to play in it.


Julia. Nay, the Devil has strange Tricks with him now and then, that is the
truth on it.


Rover. Come, come, let us go down and Examine this Business more narrowly; for
howe'r you took this Shape to affront my Sister, to day; I Am sure, the Rank
Alderman was in his own Shape Yesterday.


Cordelia. Pish, this must be a Lie: Will this Fellow make me believe, that the
Devil could Eat and Drink with me.


Beatrice. How should the Devil get into our House?


Wilding. Come, come, we shall find out the Lie immediately, and so come along
Friend.


Booby. Ay, with all my heart: And if you find it to be a Lie,


Rover. What then:


Booby. Why you have it as cheap as I, and so take it among ye.

Exeunt.
SCENE. II.
Enter Alderman. Alderm. WAs there ever till this Moment, any Alderman of the
City in such a Garb? Truly, I believe not since the Conquest. I have known many
a Fool in the Habit of an Alderman, but never till now, an Alderman in the
Habit of a Fool. Well Timothy Thrum, keep thy Shame to thy self if thou art
wise; now would I fain know how Booby gets out of his Tribulation. It Is a witty
Rogue, and no doubt was designed for a Whig by his admirable Cunning. -- But
stay, who have we here?


Enter La Bounce. La Bounce. Oh, Monsieur Rascale, have a me catch you, and
vidout your Quarter-staff? Dat is ver' well now, me vull be revenge and cut
your Troat, you Rogue.


Alderm. Oh, Lord, what shall I do? He takes me for Booby, and will Murder me.


La Bounce. Zoon, you Dog, how dare you affront a Soldier, and a Gentleman hoh?


Alderm. Oh, Lord, I never affronted ye, Sir, not I.


La Bounce. You lie like Son of Whore, and for dat me will Gueld a you.


Alderm. Oh, what does he, will Gueld me!


La Bounce. You shall not have one Stone to tro at a de Dog, nor Arm, nor Leg
to stand upon, you Poltroon.


Alderm. Indeed, noble Sir, you mistake me, I am not the Person you take me
for; I am a very honest Fellow, Sir, and your Worships most humble Servant.


La Bounce. Ah, wheedling Rogue, but dis shall not serve your turn: Remember
the Quarter-staff, Rogue, remember dat, and dear is for you, and dear, and dear.

Beats him.
Alderm. O Lord, I shall be Murdered. Pray, Sir, hold, and believe me, indeed I
am not the Person you take me for.


La Bounce. Not de Person, vat a Diable are you den? Come along vid me to de
Aldermans House, me fall soon know de truth of dat; Come, come along.


Alderm. Oh, by no means, Sir.


La Bounce. Oh, by all means, Sir, you may be do Rogue that run away and Rob
him, I must know dat: Along, along, Troop, troop.


Alderm. Oh, what shall I do, this is worse then all. -- If he brings me
thither, I shall be discovered and disgraced for ever.


La Bounce. Oh, dam Rogue, vat you make face at, hah? Morblieu, dis must a be
some Rascal Teef dat have stola something. -- Come along, along.

La Bounce pulls him out.
Alderm. Oh, what shall I do, my Name will be a Byword to the Brethren, and my
Reputation like a dead Dog, will stink above Ground.


SCENE. III.
Enter Rover, Wilding, Cordelia, Julia, Beatrice with Booby. Cordelia. I Told
you this lying Villain only put a Trick upon us, and on my Conscience, has not
told us one word of truth in the whole Story.


Julia. Nay, the Rogue has a lying, leering, fleering Dog-face. Sirrah, I shall
see that Face of yours upon the Gate House one time or other, fronting Sir
Thomas.


Booby. I believe, forsooth, you would rather desire to see my Buttock there,
if the truth were known.


Wilding. Any Limb would serve.


Rover. Ay, ay, any will serve, and one of 'em must come there, or else the
Features of his Face are damned Liars.


Booby. I had rather you were all Hanged there, I deal plainly with ye.


Enter La Bounce and Alderman. La Bounce. Vere, vere is dis Alderman, me have
brought a dam Rogue Rascalle, dat me believe have Rob him.


Rover. How Is this, the Alderman in Disguise, and brought back by Captain La
Bounce; this was Luck 'ifaith.


Wilding. Your Servant, good Mr. Alderman.


Cordelia. Your obedient Vassal, sweet Mr. Alderman.


Julia. Your most Devoted, good Alderman Rampant.


La Bounce. Zoon, is dis the Alderman himself? Vat a rare Plot is dis now? Me
vul have his Daughter, or me vul swear Felony and Robbery against him Jeime.


Booby. Jeime, if you swear your self to the Gallows, you shall not have her.

Discovers himself.
Rover. What, do I see my dear Friend Will Lovewell?


Booby. The same, Sir, and no more Booby now, Mr. Alderman. I have a Note of
your Hand here, which shall be either for Ten Thousand Pounds, or your
Daughter. -- You know my old Love to her, and shall now know I got into your
Service for her sake.


Alderm. I am Confounded, and know not what to say. Take me, tear me to pieces,
do what you will with me.


Cordelia. No, no, we'll be more merciful than so: You shall only be Exposed a
little, and make Reparation for Affronts: You are Rich, Mr. Alderman.


Alderm. I shall have my Shame sung in Ballads to scurvie Tunes, 'twill be News
all over the Exchange by to Morrow at this time. Oh I will shut my self up in
my Counting House, and never see the World again.


Wilding. You will do the less Mischief, my Rampant Senator; but now to our
Business in this World. Madam, this should be an hour of Mirth and Joy faith;
surprise me with your Hand now, and say you are Mine.


Cordelia. There, Sir. This may be the Critical Minute for ought you know.

He kisses it.
Rover. And what say you to me, pretty Mrs. Brisk.


Julia. Why, faith, there is mine too; hanged, I hate to stand out when any good
Game is going forward.


Booby. Our Hands and Hearts are paired already.


Beatrice. I hope so, dear Lovewel, I Am sure I have shed many a Tear since my
Father forbid thee our House.


La Bounce. Vat a Diabla, must I have never a Metresse den? Morblieu, me will
fight vid every one of you. Take your Metresse away, and beget a Generation of
Soldiers dat shall scour the World, and defy the Devil and Fortune, and dat
is the Resolution of Captain La Bounce.


Rover. And so Bounce off good Captain, unless you will make one in a Dance;
the Alderman has Fidles in the House already, come strike up.

Dance here.
This is at last our Alderman Disgraced,
And we have shown the Letchery barefaced:
Wenching in Hair-brained Youth's a shameful evil,
But to be Old and Rampant, that is the Devil.
For when Gray Hairs once freeze the Reverend Crown,
Fancy may mount, but all things else go down.
FINIS.

