Mr. ROVSE HIS SPEECH BEFORE THE LORDS AT THE TRANSMISSION OF Dr. COSSENS March
16. 1640.

LONDON, Printed for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Guilt-cup in Paul's Churchyard. 1641.

MASTER ROVSE HIS SPEECH BEFORE THE LORDS AT THE TRANSMISSION OF Dr. COSSENS,
March 16. 1640.
MY LORDS,
I Am commanded by the House of Commons to present to your Lordships, a
Declaration and Impeachment against Dr. Cossens and others upon the complaint
of Master Peter Smart; which Master Smart was a Protomartir or first Confessor
of note in the late days of persecution: the whole matter is a Tree whereof
the branches and fruits are manifest in the Articles of this Declaration, which
being read, I shall with your Lordships favor, discover and lay open the root.

The Declaration was read, and then he proceeded as follows.

My Lords,

I Am now to discover the Root of Master Smarts persecution, your Lordships
have heard of a great design to bring in Popery, you have heard of Armies of
Soldiers, and particularly of the Popish Irish Army, the burden and complaint
of the Commons; but there is another Army not so much spoken off, and that is
an Army of Priests, for since Altars came in, so they delight to be called; it
is a saying of Gregory the great, that when Antichrist comes, Preparatus est
exercitus Sacerdotum; there is an Army of Priests ready to receive him, this is
fulfilled in our time, for certainly this Army of Priests does many ways
advance the designs and plots of Popery.

A first way is by the subversion of our Laws and government, our Laws and
Popery cannot stand together; but either Popery must overthrow our Laws, or
our Laws must overthrow Popery: but to overthrow our Laws, they must first
overthrow Parliaments, and to overthrow Parliaments they must overthrow
property, they must bring the Subjects goods to be arbitrarily disposed that
so there may be no need of Parliaments: this has been done by Doctor
Manwaring, whom we find wanting, yet not in the seats but the Bar of the
Lords house, and the like by Doctor Beale, and I think it was the intention of
the late Canons.

A second way by which this Army of Priests advances the Popish design, is
the way of Treaty, this has been acted both by writings and conferences
Sancta Clara: himself says, Doctissimi eorum quibuscunque: So it seems they
have had conference together, and Sancta Clara on his part labors to bring the
Articles of our Church into Popery and some of our side strive to meet him in
that way, We have a Testimony that the great Archpriest himself has said:
It were no hard matter to make a reconciliation, if a wise man had the handling
off it; but I verily believe that as the state of Papacy stands, a far wiser
man than he, cannot reconcile us, without the loss of our Religion. For the
Pope being fastened to his errors, even by his chair of Inerrability, he sits
still unmooved, and so we cannot meet, except we come wholly to him.

A man standing in a Boat tide to a Rock, when he draws the rop, does not
draw the Rock to the Boat, but the boat to the Rock. And Sa. Clara does in
this somewhat honestly confess it; for he says, that he dealt in this way of
Treaty, not to draw the Church to the Protestants, but the Protestants to the
Church.

A third way, is a way of violence, this violence they exercise partly by
secular Arms, and partly by priestly Arms, which they call spiritual, for
secular Arms, we have their own confession; that the late War was Bellum
Episcopale, and we have the Papists confession, that it was Bellum Papale. For
in their motives they say, that the War concerns them not only as subjects,
but as Catholics, for so they falsely call themselves: and if it be so, then
Bellum Episcopale is also Bellum Papale, and in the Episcopall-Warre, the
Papal cause is advanced, for the spiritual Arms thus they come to execution.

When a great man is coming, his Sumpters, his Furniture, his Provision goes
before, the Popes furniture, Altars and Copes, Pictures and Images, are come
before: And if we believe Dr. Cossens, the very substance of the Mass, a
certain sign that the Pope was not afar of.

Now these forerunners being come, if any man resist them, fire comes out of
the Brambles, and devoures the Cedars of Lebanon: the Army of the Priests falls
upon him, with their Armies of Suspention, Sequestration, Excommunication,
Degradation, and Deprivation; and by these Armies has Master Smart been
oppressed and undon^: He falls upon their Superstitions and Innovations, and
they fall upon him with their Armies, they beat him down: yea, they pull him
up by the Roots, taking away all his means of Maintenance and Living: yet
they leave him life to feel his misery: Ita feriunt, ut diu se sentiat mori,
there is no cruelty to Priestly cruelty. These are they that did put our very
Savior to death, the Calling is reverend; but the corruption of it is most
pernicious: Corruption optimi pessima, I know no reason of this change, except
it be that of the Apostle, because when they knew God, they did not worship him
as God; but made a God of the World, placing the excellency of Priesthood in
worldly pomp and greatness, and gave the glory of the Invissible God, to
Pictures, Images and Altars* Therefore God gave them up to vile affections, to
be Implacable, unmercifull, and without natural affection: But whatsoever the
cause is of corruption, certainly their Armies have fallen heavily upon Mr.
Smart, and Priestly cruelty has cast him into a long misery, from which he
could get no release by any Priestly mercy.

And now it is prayed, that as these Delinquints by the cruel oppressions of
Mr. Smart have advanced the cause of Popery, so they may in such a degree of
Justice be punished, that in them Priestly cruilty, and the very cause of
Popery may appear to be punished and suppressed, and that Mr. Smart suffering
for the cause of Protestancy, may be so repayed, that in him pious constancy,
and the very cause of Protestancy may appear to be righted and repaired.

FINIS.

