THE Royal Flight: OR, THE CONQUEST OF IRELAND. A NEW FARCE.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin, near Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1690.

The Persons.
K. J. D. of Berwick. Tyrconnel. Powis. Herbert. Nugent. Lutterel. Talbot,
Pretended Primate. Arch Bishop of Cassels. Sarsfield. Hamilton.
Mac-Guillicuddy. D'Avaux, Lauzune. La Hoquette. Leri, Ld. Mayor of Dublin Hall,
the Priest. Priests and Jesuits. Protestants and Papists. Officers and
Soldiers. Messenger. Lady Lancarty.
PROLOGUE
AFter one Summers being in Arms in vain,
And Ireland looked like Hounslow-Heath Campaign:
When to drink Usquebagh, and pick his Toes,
Mend his pacht Brogues, and Mundifie his Clothes,
Was all Teague had to do, one would have thought,
The Irish might to Discipline been brought;
For though their Wit and Sense can never Charm ye,
They might have learnt the Language of an Army:
When their great Generals, famed beyond the Moon,
Were Deputy King James, and Count Lazune.
The first, (for why should we great Actions bury,)
So famous for his Flight from Salisbury.
The other who from's Master learnt the Trick
Of Burning Towns, because they are Heretic:
But they learnt only how to fight in jest,
Nay, when they were by greatest dangers pressed,
And minding nothing that their Generals say,
But how to face about and run away,
Not Bullies Scouring from the Midnight Watch,
Nor needy Debtor from a Sergeants Catch,
Could Faster run, than did the Irish Host.
When Great King William over the Boyn was crossed;
Their Abdicated Prince first showed the way,
And why should they behind their Leader stay?
For he, it is said, from Hubbaboos and Hoots,
Rode sixty Mile that day, and spoiled his Boots.
'Twould be a Jubilee at Rome that Day,
If James could learn to fight, as well as Pray.
And I Will affirm't without his Royal Word,
It Is a good Cause sets th'edge upon a Sword.
But his is such a sneaking little Cause,
And much more Ugly, then he made our Laws;
A Cause of such a Tottering sinking Fame,
No Prince e're thrived, that undertook the same;
And were there but a worser Place than Hell,
May they be all sent there, that wish it Well.
THE ROYAL FLIGHT: OR THE Conquest of Ireland.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
James, Tyrconnel, Herbert, Hall the Priest. K. James leaning his Arm upon a
Table, and resting his Head upon his Knuckles. IT was observed, that when I was
first crowned in this Kingdom of Ireland, my Crown stood like the Steeple of
the Duomo at Pisa, awry upon my Head, which way soever Men looked upon me. Was
that a good Sign, Hall, or No?


Hall. I suppose it leaned toward England, Sir, and then 'twas a good sign -- I
long to be preaching again in your Chapel at White hall --


James. By the Mass, and so do I too, to hear thee there -- But when I first
turned Roman Catholic, I was promised Mountains of Gold. Where are those
Mountains? --


Hall. Despair not, Sir; I make no Question, but rather than you shall want,
that Heaven will rain Gold for as many days together, as it rained in the Time
of the Flood.


James. I good Sooth, Father Hall, I should be glad to see that day come -- I
have no Faith in Miracles --


Hall. I am sorry to hear you say so, Sir --


K. James. Why so? --


Hall -- Oh Sir -- If you would but trust in the Queen of Heaven, I dare be
bold to say, she would send you her own Lifeguard to fight without Pay --
which would be the same thing, as if she should Coin half the Stars in the
Firmament, to make Money for you.


James. In the mean time what good News, my Lords -- How go Affairs in England
--


Herbert. To your wish, Sir -- The closed Parties are all to pieces again --
Whigs and Tories once more at Daggers drawing, and contending for Mayors and
Sheriffs, and Common Council-Men as much as ever --


SCENE II.
Herbert, Tyrconnel, D'Avaux, Berwick, James. James. I know I have a good Party
there -- but still my Brother of France --


D'Avaux. Hold Sir -- I am my Master's Representative in this place, and must
not brook this Language -- My Brother of France. --


James. Why Sir, I am a Crowned Head --


D'Avaux. That Is nothing Sir, you are but his Viceroy in this Kingdom --
consequently none of his Brother -- My Master's too Jealous of his Honor to
call his Inferior Brother --


Tyrconnel. By St. Patrick, you are a Proud Frenchman --


D'Avaux. By St. Denis, you are a Beggarly Teague --


Barwick. Sir -- the King is my Father -- and my Father is the King of Frances
Brother --


D'Avaux. Princock -- you are too Saucy -- Then turning to K. James. Sir, I
demand Reparation for these Affronts --


James. My Lord, I Am sorry for the occasion -- I know indeed the Barons of my
Exchequer at London may call Baron Tell-clock Brother, but Baron Tell-clock
must not call any of them Brothers -- You Are in the Right my Lord D'Avaux -- I
am but a King-Tell-clock in the World at present -- But pass it over -- I Will
undertake my Wife shall make all well again --


SCENE III.
D'Avaux, Lausun. D'Avaux. Morthleu! A Prince of No-land call my Master
Brother! --


Lausun. Truly, my Lord, I think 'twas by you ill timed -- for you know our
Master pretends to assist him as still King of Great Britain -- and therefore
I don't believe he would have disowned the Expression as yet, had it been
spoken to his Face --


D'Avaux. But I know as well how our Master intends to Fool him -- how he only
makes a Tool of him, but despises him in his Heart --


Lausun. That Is nothing -- what a Party would our Master loose both in England
and Scotland, and perhaps in this Kingdom too -- should he pretend to set up
for himself --


D'Avaux. To tell you truth, I think our Master does ill to spend so much
Money, Time, and so many Men upon him -- For i'my Conscience 'twill all come to
nothing --


Lausun. I am in a fine case then, to sell so fair an Estate as I have done to
follow his Fortune --


D'Avaux. Why look ye Sir -- Where Prudence and Courage are wanting, there can
never be a Prospect of Success.


Lausun. What must we do then? --


D'Avaux. Make haste while the Sun shines -- Plunder and repay your self, there
be good Gleanings still left -- Never pity the People, they are a sort of
Miscreants not worth hanging. -- I have taken that course with the King, as to
make him seize all his Protestant Subjects Goods by Armed Force, and then
having set a Price upon them at his own Pleasure, which he only pays in his own
Copper Money, to export them to our Master his Dear Correspondent in France.


Lausun. You are a Faithful and Politic Minister I must confess --


D'Avaux. Tanned Hides, Raw Hides, Wool, Tallow and Butter, are all
Commodities which my Master wants -- and how much of this sort of Merchandise I
have got the King to Ship off into France this year 1689 do you think? --


Lausun. I cannot tell my Lord.


D'Avaux. Begar my Lord, no less than Thirty three thousand four hundred fifty
eight Hides Tanned and Raw -- Sixty one thousand four hundred and five Stone of
Wool, three hundred eighty nine Tun of Tallow, and Forty Stone of Butter. Good
Chaffer, my Lord, in France; as being all Staple Commodities, the Exportation
of which Beggars the Protestants, the only Industrious People of the Island,
and Impoverishes the Kingdom; for which our Master makes no other Returns, but
only Materials to Murder the Heretics, and conquer the Nation for himself.


Lausun. Our Master, my Lord, I know is a Prudent Prince, and I make no
question but your Lordship has been able to carve sufficiently for your self
out of such Lumps as these -- But when all is gone, what shall we have for our
pains? --


D'Avaux. Why, my Lord, our Master does not intend to remove the Land, there
will be Arable and Pasture still left -- and you will have your Proportion you
may be sure --


Lausun. Faith, my Lord, I would fain know which County will fall to my share,
because I would be a little kind to my own Tenants -- But letting this go --
Did you ever see, my Lord, such a Court as this? Not a Lady worth the Salute of
Serviteur Madame -- Their yellow Hair and Freckles would turn the Stomach of
the most pumple-fac'd Whore-master in the World -- A Man would rather let his
Name perish, then lie with 'em to support his Family --


D'Avaux. You Are a little too severe my Lord, it is true the Dublin Ladies want
the Wit and Air, the Garb and Demeanor of our Parisian Belles Filles, but
there are some that will serve for all that, to keep a Man warm in a Frosty
Night as well as the best -- Then again, my Lord, there is a pleasure in Variety
-- and many Men as well as my self, love to see what Forraigners have got, as
well as their own Native Country-women --


Lausun. It Is very true, my Lord, and I would not willingly be beaten out of
the Country, before I had tried one of these Female Teagues --


D'Avaux. You have leisure, my Lord -- when you lie idle in your own Quarters,
you have nothing to do but to be beating up the Women's Quarters -- Look out
sharp, there is Game enough -- I have so much business in my Head; I am so taken
up with the Spirit of Politics, that I have no time for Carnal Recreation.


Lausun. I wish your Politics Success, my Lord --


D'Avaux. Ay, Ay my Lord, if they succeed, we'll have French Ladies and
Frenchified Ladies Hold Belly Hold -- In the mean time I must go look after my
Royal Charge --


SCENE IV.
Hall the Jesuit, and a Rabble of Priests, one carrying the Host and another
Tinkling a Little Bell before 'em. 1 Priest. Matter Apostolorum, ora pro nobis
-- Singing --


2 Priest. [Whispering to his Companion] -- S'life Joy make a great haste --
for by my Shoule, Joy, I have promised a Dear Joy to meet her by Twelve of the
Clock --


1 Priest. By my Shoule I Am in thy Condition -- Audi preces Nostros pro Domino
Nostro Jacobo -- bo -- bo -- Singing -- Omnes. Regina Caeli, audi preces
nostros -- Singing --


Hall. Sing Holy Men -- pray Heartily Sons of Heaven, and you shall see happy
days --

Omnes. again -- [Tearing their Throats] -- Regina Caeli audi preces nostros --
pro Domino Jacobo -- bo -- bo --


Hall. And your Abbeys and your Nunneries shall be restored to ye again.

Omnes again, Yo -- He -- Ba -- bo -- be -- bo -- bo -- yo -- He -- bo -- bo --
bo -- Au -- men -- Singing


Hall. And ye shall tread upon the Necks of the Heretics --

Omnes again, Yoh -- heh -- Ba -- be -- bo -- ba -- bo -- Yoh -- heh -- ba --
bo -- bo -- bo -- Au -- men -- Singing.


3. Priest. What did he say? -- We should have our Nunneries again? --


Whispering together. 4. Priest. Ay marry did he --


3. Priest. Pray God he be John -- For by my Shoule now, I am old Dog at a
Forcible Entry -- Heaven rest my Father, who was a Bum-bayly, for teaching me
--

Omnes again -- Yoh -- Heh -- ba -- bo -- be -- be -- ba -- bo -- Yoh -- Heh --
bo -- ba -- be -- bo -- Au -- men --


Hall -- Av Holy Fathers -- this Devotion will do the Heretics Business -- We
have a Great Work upon our Hands -- Therefore do you labor with the Queen of
Heaven -- and I Will labor with our King upon Earth --


Omnes -- Yoh -- heh -- ba -- bo -- be, be -- ba -- bo -- Yoh Heb -- bo -- ba
-- bo -- bo -- bo -- Au -- men --


Hall. Well done Fathers, go on and prosper -- Pray like Horses -- The Queen of
Heaven knows all Languages, from the Holy Hebrew to the Profane Pedlers French
-- Farewell -- I am sent for by the Defender of our Faith --


SCENE V.
K. James, Hall, Tyrconnel, Nogent. James. Where have you been, Hall, I have
wanted thee this three hours.


Hall. It Is a strange thing, Sir, you can do nothing without me -- I that was
but a Cooks Son but the other day, am now become your chief Achitophel -- Where Is
your Great Father Peter's? --


James. Hang him Fool and Knave -- He has brought me to all this -- Thou art
all Inspired -- and talk like an Angel -- Speak Blessed Oracle -- I know
thou have seen the Queen of Heaven in a Vision last night --


Hall. -- I did so, Great Sir -- and she showed me your Majesty just come into
the World wrapped up in her own Smicket --


Tyrcon. Father, Father, did she tell you that she would hide him in a Cloud in
the day of Battle, as Venus did Eneas? --


Hall. She did not say the same words -- but her showing him to me in that
Posture implied, she would always protect him --


Tyr. The Heathen Oracles, Father, many times speak Truth, but 'twas wrapped up
in such Ambiguous Lies, that Men could never find it out --


Nogent. I wonder that such a Bon-Catholick as you should question the Truth of
what Father Hall says -- You may as well call in doubt the Infallibility of our
Holy Father the Pope.


James. Let every one believe as he pleases -- You know it is my declared
Opinion -- But how shall a Man do to get so much into Venus's Favor, as to be
wrapped in a Cloud, in the time of Battle -- I would fight then like a Dragon --
tho if the Cloud be not Cannon-proof, I would not care a Fig for the Cloud
neither --


Hall. Sir, it is the same thing to be under the Protection of the Queen of
Heaven, as to be wrapped in Venus's Cloud -- For you shall be then encircled with
Angels in such a manner, that from whatever Point of the Compass the Bullets
come, they shall stand and catch them in their Hands, as the Maids do
Stool-balls in the Holy Days.


James. Were I assured of this, I would Fight, as I said before, like a Dragon.


Hall. Nothing so sure, Sir, if your Majesty would but once be pleased to Fight
--


James. I Will consider of it --


Hall. In the mean time a word with your Majesty in private --


SCENE VI.
K. James, Hall the Priest. Hall. Sir, we have been praying for your Majesty's
Success like so many Cats upon the Tiles -- We have and will make such a
hideous Noise, that certainly Heaven will answer our Requests, rather then be
troubled with us -- To tell you Truth, Sir, they wholly depend upon your Royal
Word and Promises -- So that were it not for hopes, their very Heart Strings
would crack with the pains which they take Day and Night, to teize Heaven with
their Caterwawling for your sake --


James. I know not that I ever gave them any cause since my Conversion to
mistrust me -- For tho I never regarded the keeping my word with Heretics, I
was always true to them --


Hall. Half the Revenue of this Island will be hardly sufficient to reward them
for the great care they take of your Affairs --


James. I intend them no less -- for I mean, if God prosper me, to have but two
sorts of Subjects in the World -- Churchmen and Slaves -- the One to ride me --
the Other to be ridden by me --


Hall. Some People tell me, Sir, that I smell very strong of an Archbishopric
-- And when I ask 'em what sort of smell that is, they Laugh -- But then I tell
'em, I know not how an Archbishopric smells, -- only that I serve a Good and
Gracious, Pious and Religious Master -- a dutiful Son of the Church -- a
Promise-keeping Prince -- And then a great many Laugh again -- but then I tell
'em, let them Laugh that win -- Did I not tell 'em right, an't like your
Majesty?


James. Nothing can stemm thy Prophetic Spirit, but my downfall -- Thou
might have told 'em, 'twas not the smell of an Archbishopric, but of a
Cardinals Hat with Tossels -- But hark thee me, Hall, art not thou Confessor
to the Lady Lancarty?


Hall. Yes an't please your Majesty for want of a better --


James. I dye for love of that Lady -- and you must use all the Charms of that
Sacrament to bring her into my Embraces -- Else I tell thee, I shall dye -- and
then all your Fat is in the Fire --


Hall. -- My dreaded Liege, I am not of that Opinion, that we must not do evil
that good may come of it --


James. By the way Hall. she is married --


Hall. That Is no Impediment at all Sir -- [Aside.] Now I smell a Cardinals Hat
indeed -- You are a Prince so Brave, so Generous, so Valiant, so Renowned, so
Virtuous, so Pious, so punctual an Observer of that Maxim, do as you would be
done to, that it is Pity the World should not be stockt with your Royal Breed
-- Upon the Word of a Priest, Dread Sovereign, the Sacrament of Confession
shall lore Bonnet to all other Considerations but this -- The Sacrament of
Confession shall serve you to the uttermost of its Power -- Who would be such
an Infidel, as not to Pimp for the Holy Church? --


James. -- Tell her --


Hall. Tell her my Liege! -- I Will tell her it is the Queen of Heavens Pleasure
-- and she must do it --


James. Were it nothing else, this Complacency of thine will raise thee -- go
and be speedy in the Affair.


Hall. She Confesses to morrow --


James. The sooner the better -- But be sure of Secrecy -- S'life -- if my
Tyranness should know it, I should never be able to protect the first Perriwig
I appeared before her in -- and perhaps another Black Eye to boot --


Hall. I see the Rock, and shall avoid it, Sir --


SCENE VII.
Lausun, La Hoquette, Count de Leri, Nugent. Nugent. [To Lausun having a Book
in his hand] What, my Lord, Bookish this Morning -- I suppose there is no body
here that needs to hear Lectures of Martial Discipline --


Lausun. Begar, Millord, me ha sold de very great Estate vor de King of
Englan's sake -- and me must get de very great Estate by do King -- Begar dis
booken show me de very fine tings -- it is de Present Estat of Englan -- Begar
me no beaga without Booka -- me kenow vat me Beaga, bevore me open my Mout --
Begar -- me no be denied -- me no Fight de stroke, bevore de King make me de
Promise under his Haund of de great Matre -- Begar here be de Lord High
Mareschall -- vat is dat de value --


Nugent. That Is a place of much more Honor then Profit.


Lausun. Begar me no care vor de great Onor, me be vor de Profeet --


La Hoquette. So be me too Begar -- Let me see your Book a delittle Millord --


Lausun. Hold -- Let me shooze in de first place a -- den take a de Book among
you -- Here is de Lord Shanselour's place -- de Fee 848 Pound per de year --
Begar me no accept of de eight hundred vorty eight Pound by de year -- Me ha
sold a great deal mush more Begar --


La Hoquette. Begar den me vil ave it -- Begar me get a nautre, and a nautre if
dat vill not serve a --


Nugent. The Lord Chancellor's place and the Judges are only for Lawyers my
Lord -- they must be left for such as us to share.


La Hoquette. Begar me no care for de Law -- me put in de Deputy vor de Law --
Begar de King himself is but our Maitre's Deputy -- Begar and de English and de
Iris be no more den de Deputies to de Franshe Man de Mereet --


Count de Leri. Here is de Lord Brevie de Seal -- Fee vifeteen hundred poun
par l'an --


Nugent. My Lords -- you had better look among the Men of Great Titles -- there
you will find Forfeitures anow to beg -- These Places are but for Life -- but
Land will descend to your Posterity --


Lausun. Begar here is de Duke a de Beaufort --


Nugent. Ay now you have hit it -- there is a Man enjoys more Land of his own than
Forty Marquisses of France --


Lausun. Den here is de Earl of Bedford --


Nugent. Ay marry Sir, there is another has more than all the Peers of France
put together -- but it is a great part of it Abbey Lands, perhaps the King will
restore it to the Church.


Lausun. Begar -- me no care de rush for de Shurch -- let them take a de Lord
Shancellors, and de Lord Privy Seals places dat vill -- me ave de Duke of
Beauforts and de Earl of Bedfords places -- Begar --


Nugent. What both? --


Lausun. I Begar -- boat -- Begar -- me go presantly to de King -- an me beaga
dese two places Begar -- And Begar he give em me too -- or me no Fight a stroke
Begar --


SCENE VIII.
K. James, Lausun, La Hoquette, Count de Leri. Lausun. Begar, Sir, me be come
here -- me leave a me Native Country to serve your Majestee -- me sell very
much Land Begar for your sake -- me come here to restore you to your Trone --
Begar me deserve de very much Recompanse --


James. Gratitude, my Lord, is a Virtue which I always boasted to be Master of
-- and therefore you may rest assured of a Reward answerable to your Services.


Lausun -- Begar Sir, me no love de General -- me love to come to de Particular
--


James. My Lord, any particular Request of yours in reason is granted --


Lausun. Why den -- an please your Majeste, me sall expect for my good Service
de Duke of Beauford's and de Earl of Bedford's places -- Begar dose two places
me expect or me no Fight a stroke Begar --


James. I know no places they ever had Sir -- Indeed the one was President of
Wales -- but that is more Honor than Profit, my Lord --


Lausun. Begar me be told dey ave a more Land den all de Peers de France a.


James. Oh now I understand you -- You beg the Estates of these two Persons --


Lausun. I Begar -- de Estates -- me hope your Majestee wont let a me be
sheated for no speak good English --


James. By no means my Lord, and you have my Royal Word for it --


Lausun. Begar me no take a de word -- Dey say you no so good as your word --
dey say, dat had a you kept your Promise wid a your Subject, you no need of
come here -- Begar -- me ave it under a your Hand and Seal Begar -- or me no
Fight un stroke a Begar --


James. My Lord, I shall take order to give you all the Satisfaction you can
desire --


La Hoquette. Please your Majestee, you must expect to be troubled with more
Petishioners o dis kind -- but as you have many to ask, so you have much to
dispose of -- All your Subject vill be de Traitors Begar --


James. And I Will swinge 'em off for a Company of Heretics too, if ever I get
among 'em again -- But they that serve me in my Extremities, shall eat Gold --
they shall not ask so fast as I Will give -- Can you think of nothing Monsieur?
--


La Hoquette. Sir, me beg by de book -- me beg de Gran Shansellors place --


James. That Is for a Lawyer, not for a Man of the Sword --


La Hoquette. Den gi' me de Arshbishop de Canterbury's place --


James. That Is for a Divine --


La Hoquette -- O Sir -- me put in de fine Deputees -- me get de monee -- me no
care for de Law nor de Gospel neder --


De Leri. My Suit is for de Gran Treasurers place -- and I make no doubt, but
wat wid my Pansion, and wat me shall sheat your Majestee, me shall do vell
anough -- I would not give a rush for de Treasurer that knows not how to lick
his own Fingers --


James -- Look ye my Lords -- I don't love much trouble -- 'een be your own
Carvers your selves -- Do you but take care of me and my Little Son -- and
then, take and do what ye will -- For to tell you the Truth, I don't care a
Farthing what becomes of my Subjects --


De Leri. Wy Sir, you know you have made our Master a Promise to destroy de
Heretic -- and Begar your Subject be de Grand Heretic i would Varle --


James. It Is very true -- and therefore do you act your parts like Men of
Valor -- and then -- Boys --

If by your Courage I am e're restored,

I Will make 'em know that I can keep my word.


ACT II.
SCENE I.
K. James, Tyrconnel, Nugent, Powis. Tyrconnel reading a Letter. THE P. of O.
has certainly completed his Levies, and will be in Ireland in less than a
Fortnight -- In the mean time King James's Friends are hard at work -- In the
mean time the Cock-match goes on -- the Black-coats promise -- and you would
not think how briskly the young Fry Gabber at Samm's Coffee-house -- So soon as
the P. is got over the Water we fairly begin -- We have great hopes the E. of
T. will fail their Expectations, and leave 'em in the Lurch, when they least
expect it -- 'Twill be such a Blow as will make their Hearts ache -- The King of
France's Declaration has wrought strange Effects, and reconciled him to
abundance of Gulls -- The Five Bishops stand stoutly to their Pan-pudding --
Come, come, Sir, It Is a long day that never has an end -- It Is Money that makes
the Mare to go -- He that has the longest Sword governs the World -- And a
light Wind shakes no Corn --

To King James -- Thus you see, Sir, all things go trim and trickfie for you in
England -- Your work will be done to your hand --

James. Ay, Ay, -- But what shall we do with this same Prince of Orange -- I
fear me you will find him a Sower Crab Orange -- I ha found him so to my Cost
-- and you know the Proverb -- Hang a Dog upon a Crab-tree, and he will never
love Varjuice -- And for my part I am forced to abstain from Veal, least they
should bring Oranges to the Table -- the very sight of 'em makes me ready to
Puke --


Nugent -- Oh Sir -- the Queen of Heaven is a' your side --


James. I had rather have another Joan of Arque of my side by half -- One Amazon
upon Earth is worth twenty she Saints in Heaven -- It Is true she was burnt for
a Witch -- but for all that she turned the Fortune of France.


Nugent. Heavens! Sir -- we never heard you talk at this rate before --


James. I tell ye, I am angry with the Virgin Mary because she would not give a
Blessing to my Endeavors upon my Wife -- and yet I gave her the best Bodkin
that ever she wore in her Life -- So that had not some been wiser than some, I
might have dug up all the Parsley Beds in the Kingdom, before I should have
lit upon a Boy so fit for my purpose -- I am discomposed --


Powis. What think you (Sir) of retiring back to France for a while -- For some
People have made an Observation, that none of your Designs thrive where you are
in Person -- You have found the one pretty true by Experience -- try the other way
-- and let us alone to Fortune by our selves --


James. Fortunes a Whig and a Draggle-tail -- If St. Patrick will not assist his
own Teagues, and St. Denis stand by his own Country men, I am lost --


Powis. This Despair of yours will discourage your Soldiers --


James. No, no, my Lord -- I don't despair neither -- You see I venture my
Person among you -- and that I think is sufficient to show that I have Courage
--


Tyrcon. Sir, I have read in the Story of Richard the Third, how Henry the
Seventh fought Richard the Third and slew him --


James. And so, my Lord, you would have me fight the P. of O -- I thank ye my Lord
for your Parallel -- I Will do any thing in Person but that -- You know that
Richard the Third was accounted a Tyrant, as I am accounted -- and Henry the
Seventh the Deliverer of the People -- Now then, my Lord, if the Parallel hold,
it is the P. of O. that must Kill me, and Not I the P. of O -- I thank ye my
Lord for your good Advice, but I shall not take it -- Is there no way to beat the
P. of O. but by my fighting him in Person? -- Must I do your Drudgery for ye?
As if there were not anow to fight him in Person besides me -- Gad do you fight
him in Person your self, if you like fighting in Person so well --


Tyrcon. Sir, if you let him pass the Newry, he will presently be with ye at the
Boyne -- and if he get over that Passage, then farewell Frost Y' faith --


James. Your Bodies are the Walls I trusted to, to guard those Passes -- and
because I did not think ye all Guy's of Warwick, St. Georges, and Palmerins of
England, I got my Brother of France to assist ye -- What would ye have me do?
-- It Is not for Kings to expose their Royal Persons -- If I am lost, all is lost
-- Tie all the cursed Protestants Neck and Heels together, and Pile 'um up
in the way as high as the middle Region -- Surely that will stop his Highness
for some time -- If that will not do, the Lord have Mercy upon us -- However if
the worst come to the worst, I have one Shift left me still, that I can run
faster than his Highness can follow me --


Tyrcon. Heavens Bless us! don't talk of running yet Sir; if you do, you will set
your Soldiers a running as fast as Sheep -- You must appear among 'em, and
hearten 'em up with your Presence --


James. If that be all, that shall be done I warrant ye -- I can ride about,
and look like Hector himself where there is no danger -- as you shall presently
see -- Let my Horse be got ready --


SCENE II.
Representing the Irish Camp, the King riding about and showing himself to the
Soldiers, attended by Tyrconnel, Powis, Sarsfeild, Herbert and others. James.
What Fellow is that with a Crows Nest about his Chops? -- and a Mouth as wide
as a Sawpit -- He looks as if he were able to eat up a whole Regiment of the
Prince of Orange's Men --


Tyrcon. Why, Sir, have you forgot your Friend Teague Oregan, your designed
Governor of Charlemont?


James. Is that he? -- Hark ye me, Fellow Soldier -- can you hold out a
strong Town? --


Teague. I by my Shoule can I, to serve your Majesty -- tho by my Shoule, Dear
Joy, I will not make a promise to hold it out to the eating of Dogs and Cats,
because Bonny Clapper and Conny Rapper agrees better with my Stomach -- But if
no Enemy appear before the Town -- If I meet with no Molestashions of Bombs and
Grenades, and such other Diabolical Instruments of Death -- I will hold out
your Majesty's Town as long as Nestor lived --


James. That is a pleasant Fellow, I warrant him --


Tyrcon. Yes, and as Stout as ever Knock Fergus himself. He only talks to make
your Majesty merry --


Teague. Ay by my Shoule do I -- For by my Shoule I admire and adore your
Majesty for your Grandeur and Puishance, as being Tenant in Capite to the
Frensh King for three large Provinshes of this flourishing and populoush
Island: and then for your extraordinary goodness in taking upon you to be the
Sharitable Defender of the Roman Catholic Relishion, to the loss of almost
three Kingdoms -- tho I have no Religion at all -- for that my Dear Joy makes a
Man Coward-hearted --


James. [Aside to Tyr.] I fear this is not the Man you take him to be.


Tyrcon. Nere doubt him, Sir -- I have seen him eat a Dagger to the Haft,
merely because it would not enter a Musket-proof Breast Plate.


Teague. I must confesh, Dear Joy, that some Considerashions at some time may
mortify my Courash, so that if I meet a Party of the Enemy three times less
than my own, I may be persuaded to run for it; not out of any fear of my Shoule,
Dear Joy, but becaush the best Governor in the World may sometimes have a
Qualm come over his Stomach, a jay ne scay quoy, that will daunt the Spirit of
Ajax himself. Which Devil of a jay ne scay Quoy, if it should seize me when the
Enemy comes before your Majesty's Town, I cannot be poshitive in the
Resosolutions I may be forced to take -- besides a natural Antipathy which I
have against Storming -- For when an Enemy takes a Town by Storm, he puts all
to the Sword -- and I would be more tender of your Mashesties Subjects --


James. Thou speak like a Christian, and I took thee for a Soldier -- well,
come to my Tent at Night --

The King riding on meets Sarsfeild, to whom How now Sarsfeild, how goes the
World -- Are your Men in Heart? They say the P. of O. is coming to give me a
Visit --


Sarsfeild. Lusty and Brave, Sir -- they have all vowed to save your Majesty
the Expense of Belly-Timber, and to feed upon nothing but Danes and Dutchmen
as long as there is one alive -- and as for the Inniskillen Men, they have
Sworn to dry 'em up in their Chimneys for Rellishing Bits in the Winter --


James. Bravely resolved -- this comforts my Heart again --


Sarsfeild. Sir, as I was walking the Rounds the other night, I heard a Noise in
one of the Suttlers Tents, where some of my Soldiers were Drinking your
Majesty's Health in Snap-dragons -- which made me stand still to listen -- And
your Majesty cannot imagine how many sorts of Oaths they Swore, what they would
do to serve your Majesty, if ever the P. of O. came into this Kingdom -- One
swore Walsingham -- another swore like a Lord -- another swore like a Tinkar --
I have some Men under my Command, that if words would do it, will make all the
Fat in a Churchyard tremble -- I have others that eat Iron Wagons -- Kill all
they see, and eat all they Kill -- I have another Regiment of young stout
Fellows that are all in Love up to the Hard Ears, and Fight merely to win their
Mistresses Favors -- You need no more fear the P. of O. than I fear a good
Dinner --


Herbert. S'life, Sir, this Army can never be beaten; this is an Army not of
Men but of Termagaunts -- Now one Termagaunt is better than twenty Croats --
and twenty Croats are better than forty Tartars -- and forty Tartars are better
than fourscore Danes or Dutch -- by which Computation one of your Termagaunts
will beat eight score of the P. of O's Soldiers -- However if you are afraid
of the Leaves never go to the Wood -- but keep in your Castle of Dublin --
there sit in Counsel, receive Intelligence, and give out Orders -- Let them
Fight -- do you Design and Advize -- Policy many times is better than Strength
--


James. No, not so far neither -- I Will be within call however the world goes --
it is but having a good Horse always ready Bridi'd and Saddl'd -- A Man may be
said to be present, if he be but within the smell of his Army --


Soldiers shout -- Volleys from all Parts. Sarsfeild. Brave Boys -- Brave Boys
-- Ay marry Sir -- here is Music for ye -- Is not this better than all your
Chapel Glister-pipes? --


James. Thou will never leave thy Profaneness -- Sarsfeild --


Sarsfeild. Now you look like Jove with all his Thunder about him --

Shout again -- Volleys again. And then throws up his Hat. Hey --


James. [Aside] This Fellow will make me valiant I think, in spite of my
Teeth. [Aloud] Ay marry -- this is like my Mustring upon Hounslow-Heath -- I
could live and dye with such merry Boys as these -- were this the worst of it
-- Well, I would not for a Cow of a Groat, but have seen and heard what I have
heard and seen this day -- and now let all the Devils in Hell say nay, I am
resolved to have one Brush for it --


Powis. This, Sir, is like your Victorious Brother of France -- He never comes
near danger no more than you do -- but he rides about, and puts Life into his
Soldiers, and then gets aloof off -- You cannot imagine what an Encouragement
it is to an Army; to have a King aloof off -- And then when the Danger's over,
you may gallop in among 'em and spit i'their Mouths, and have all the Honor of
the Day attributed to your Valor --


James. That Is but reason, my Lotd -- your Counsel's good -- and I assure ye my
Lord, this day has got me two Stomachs -- one to Eat, and the other to Fight --
but let us eat first -- there is no such have for the other.


SCENE III.
Hall the Priest, Lady Lancarty. Hall. That Is nothing Madam, where the Holy
Church imposes a Command, you are to make no Scruples --


Lady. Surely Father, you do not talk as you mean -- Did the Holy Church ever
command a Woman to commit Adultery? --


Hall. No, Madam, nor did the Holy Church ever command a Woman to commit Murder
-- And yet you see that for the good of the Holy Church Judith cut off
Holophernes's Head -- Nor is it without great Probability from the Effect, that
she let him have the use of her Body to boot -- for you see that he had tired
himself -- that is, he had overwrought himself through the Allurements of a
fresh Beauty and fell asleep -- Thus you see, Madam, here was Whoredom, Murder
and Treachery, three Fowl Sins, it is true -- but being imposed upon Judith by
the Necessities of the Jewish Church, she was not only acquitted by the Church,
but highly applauded for what she had done --


Lady. But Father, I do not see the Holy Church in any such danger at present
-- Where are the Holophernes's that threaten to ruin the Holy Church?


Hall. Madam, here is a Great Monarch, upon whom all the Hopes of the Holy
Church in England, Scotland and Ireland depend -- This Great Monarch Sues to
you for the Trifle of a nights Lodging -- Now upon your denial, this Great
Monarch, not able to bear the Cross of his Ardent Affection, dies -- and what
follows? -- All the Hopes of the Holy Church are thereby lost for ever -- and
you condemned to Eternal Purgatory --


Lady. -- Father, Those of your Order are notable Sophisters -- but you shall
never argue me out of my Honor -- I say again, the Holy Church never commanded
a Woman to commit Adultery --


Hall. Lord Madam, that you will not understand -- when I say the Holy Church,
I mean the Interest of the Holy Church -- For the Interest of the Holy Church
and the Holy Church are all one -- Now Madam, when the Interest of the Holy
Church requires it, you are bound to do whatever may contribute to the
Advancement of her interest --


Lady. I cannot be of your Opinion, Father --


Hall. Madam, I must chide you for your Squeamishness -- what Injury will it
be? -- For grant it were a Sin -- you know the Church can give you Absolution
-- Now then where you receive no Injury, to pretend Conscience to the Prejudice
of the Holy Church! -- Madam, I wonder at ye.


Lady. I know Father that you can Absolve me -- but will my Husband forgive me?
-- You know Father there was a great Lady in France that went into England, and
returned back into France, but was Poisoned in three days after she got home.


Hall. Your Husband! Madam -- why Confessors of my Order don't use to be Blabs
of their Tongues --


Lady. I don't know Father how it comes to pass -- but when Women do those
things, the Devil still ows 'em a shame -- and all the Town rings on it the next
day -- who do you think told that Ladies Husband? -- her self? --


Hall -- Madam -- I tell ye Madam, you stand in your own Light -- and why is it?
-- because you are afraid to Cuckold your Husband -- Now I affirm that you
don't Cuckold your Husband -- For Kings are not Men, but Gods -- Now I say it
can be no Defilement to a Mortal Husbands Bed, for his Wife to lie with a Deity
-- ergo -- And thus Alcmena could not be said to Cuckold Amphitryo, because she
did not lie with a Man, but with Jupiter, that was a God -- ergo again --


Lady. I see, Father, you leave no Stone unturned -- But are you sure the King
dies for love of me --


Hall. Ah -- Madam, do you think I come to tell ye a Canterbury Story -- or that
I would appear in such an Office as this, but to serve our Holy Mother the
Church? --


Lady. Truly Father, I cannot tell what to say to the Business -- the Devil and
you are two Prevailing Tempters -- But are you sure the King dies for Love of
me? --


Hall. Sure! Madam --


Lady. I would not for a Thousand Pounds, the King should dye for Love of me --


Hall. A Thousand Pounds! Madam -- why it is as much as your Life's worth -- you
may be impeached of High Treason upon it --


Lady. Why then Father it is resolved -- neither will I dye for the King,
neither shall the King dye for me -- I find my self in a tottering condition --
Were his Majesty but here himself now, he might push me down with the end of
his Foresinger --


Hall. It Is a Heaven upon Earth, Madam, to be a Great Monarch's Mistress -- I
have heard of One who had a Thousand Pound brought her every Monday Morning to
Play at Cards with --


Lady. That Is more than I expect -- it is in Obedience to our Holy Mother the
Church that I submit -- But Privacy's the Word, Father --


Hall. Blessed Lady, be assured of that -- My Bosom is a Cabinet not to be
unlockt with Keys of Torment, when entrusted with Secrets of this Nature --


Lady. [Aside] A most excellent Pimp -- would I had known thee sooner -- Well
then, Father, I leave the rest to your discreet Contrivance -- For you know the
Saying, Tho Tw. be not Coy, Reputation is Nice --


Hall. By the way Madam, one thing more -- when the Crowned Head lies grovelling
at your Feet, and bathing your Knees with his Tears -- remember me, Madam.


Lady. A Labourer like you is worthy of his Hire -- farewell, Father


SCENE IV.
Hall, K. J. Groom of the Chamber. Hall. Now do I go to wait upon the King with
a Conscience void of Offense -- Thanks be to Heaven, I have discharged a Great
Trust, and that Faithfully and Effectually too -- By such ways as these do
those of our Order insinuate themselves into the Courts of Kings, and govern
the Hearts of Princes -- The Miss is our Slave, and the Prince is Hers -- Thus
we command his Secrets, ruin our Enemies, and preserve our own Grandeur -- Thus
Father Le Chaise governs Madam de Montespane, and she governs Lewis XIV. she
commands the Heretics to be destroyed, and her word's a Law -- And that which
washes our Consciences with Hyssop is this, that all this is done to advance
the Interest of the Holy Mother the Church -- But I delay too long to carry the
Good News to the King --


To the Groom of the Chamber. Sir, is his Majesty awake? --

Groom. Quite the Contrary, Sir -- He is fast asleep --


Hall. Wake him then, for I have Business of Importance to communicate to him
-- tell him I am here, and that will be your Warrant of Security --


Groom. [To himself] Pox of this Rascally Priest, now must I go wake the King
to hear some impertinent Lecture or other for eating Roast beef of a Friday --
Are you so much in haste, Father, you cannot stay till the King wakes of
himself? -- He was up late last night --


Hall. -- Sir, Company will then press in -- my business is private --


Groom. [To himself] Some Pimping Story or other, Begad -- and then I Will not
hinder it --

Goes in and comes out again. Father, the King's awake, and gives you leave to
enter --


Shuts the Door after him. James. Father, you have waked me out of a sweet
Slumber -- I was just dreaming of the Lady you wot of --


Hall. It Is from her I bring you Tidings -- I wish all your Enemies were as
much at your command as She --


James. Most Excellent Father -- sit down -- and talk softly --


Hall. Sir, I gave her a Visit under the usual pretense of Confession --
according to your command --


James. And did you find her laden with Sin --


Hall. I never asked her Sir, how many Sins she had committed -- my business
was, as you well know, had they been a hundred, to persuade her to commit half
a Score more, to serve your Majesty -- and then to give her a Discharge in full
--


James. And how did she relish your Discourse Father? --


Hall. Why Sir I laid before her the Danger that threatened the Holy Church, if
she should suffer you to Languish and Pine away to Death for Love of her -- I
told her how you had lost your Stomach, and that nothing would go down with you
but Sugar sops at night -- How you fasted and prayed Mundays, Tuesdays,
Wednesdays, Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays; and that I was confident she was
the Saint, to whom you offered up all your Devotions --


James. What said she? --


Hall. She Hectored and Flounc'd at first, as if she had been the Goddess of
Chastity -- called me Pimping Priest, and a Reproach to my Profession -- and
held out her Flag of Defiance at that rate -- that I began to despair of taking
the Fort -- but the Devil so Faithfully supplied me with fresh Batteries, that
at length, as I may so say, I took her by Storm -- And when she surrendered --
But does the King dye for me, she cried, with such a Languishing Utterance,
that I perceived I had wounded her to the Heart in the Assault, and that she
only expected you to be her Surgeon --


James. Successful Father -- thou have obliged us for ever --


Hall. She enjoined me Sir, most seriously to Privacy -- and I found too she
had read the Earl of Rochester's Poems -- for she made use of the Duchess of
Clevelands Argument --


James. That, Father, must be another of your Masterpieces --


Hall. And I think Sir, I have it already -- I will go to her again, and
appoint a convenient Time and Hour for Confession -- which being done with all
the Care and Caution imaginable, you shall go and meet her in my Habit -- Our
Habit is a strange sort of Habit, Sir -- the Devil makes use of it sometimes to
cover his Clov'n Feet -- A Jesuits Gown is like Ixions Cloak, which Juno gave
him to lie with her undiscovered --


James. By the Mass, Father, thou have Wit and Invention at Will -- I hug thy
Design -- and I like it the better, because you know I am one of the Order my
self --


Hall. Sir you see I am wholly at your Devotion --


James. Nor shall you loose by it, Father -- Croesus shall not be richer than
Thee, if e're I come to my Throne again -- More than that, I will erect a
College of Jesuits in England as big as the Escurial in Spain -- There shall
thou live like a Prince -- have more Lordships than the Old Abbots of St.
Albans, and Eat and Drink in more Plenty than the Monks of Glassenbury --


Hall. These are Spurs would make a Malt-horse fly like a Pegasus -- Alas Sir,
my Ambition aims not at these great things -- The World well knows your great
Zeal to advance the Glory of the Holy Order -- And that is the main Spur that
quickens me to your Service -- I have my Lesson Sir --


Bows and goes off. SCENE V.
Lausun, La Hoquette, Count de Leri. Lausun. [Reading a Letter] I am certainly
informed, that the Prince of Orange will suddenly be in Ireland with a great
Army -- Therefore if your Affairs do not succeed in that Kingdom, be sure to be
careful of K. James, and hasten his safe return into France --


La Hoquette. Our Master's a Wise King -- but why he should be so chary of an
Unfortunate Prince, is past my Apprehension -- Diable -- I am sorry he is not
in France at this present -- For never any thing prosper'd wherever he was --


Lausun. If you do not apprehend it, I do -- there is no such Mystery but may be
easily unfolded -- Should he be too Fortunate he would be too Rampant for our
Master -- Let him be Unfortunate -- but still preserve him in his Misfortunes
-- and at one time or other he may chance to do our Masters work --


La Hoquette. Mortbleu -- What a power of Money has he cost our Master already
to no purpose --


Lausun. Thou Art a Fool, my Master has not spent a Doit upon him -- all our
Master has spent, has been for his own Interest -- Had it not been for our
Masters pretended assisting him in this Kingdom, and by that means cutting out
other work for the P. of O. we should have had that Encroaching Enemy of ours
at Versailles before this -- And besides, if our Master get this Kingdom under
this pretense, it is all clear Gains and Money well laid out -- You know what he
Conquers is all his own -- let the Pretense be what it will -- If our Master
thought the Kingdom of Heaven worth Having, he has Penmen that would derive
his Pedigre in a direct Line from the Virgin Mary, rather than he should want a
Pretention -- In short K. James must be a Goad in the sides of the English as
long as he lives --


La Hoquette. Mortbleu, then let our Master find out a Goad that will pierce to
the Quick, and not such a Goad without a Point as K. James -- Let him set up
his Son, the Young P. of Wales -- Fortune's a Whore, and loves Young Flesh
better than Old --


Lausun. No, no -- There are none in England but those of our own Religion that
believe that Farce -- King J. has been Crowned in that Kingdom, and the
Protestant Jesuits of his Party have found out a quaint Distinction already of
a King de Jure and de Facto, to make a Broyl upon the Coast, and divide the
Allegiance of the People -- It Is for this our Master is so chary of K. James --
otherwise he would not care whither the Cham of Tartary, or the Great Mogul
were King of England, 'twere all one to Him -- Our Master's a Charitable
Monarch, and if any Foreign Prince in his Distress, craves his Assistance,
there is no Man so ready to lay hold of the Opportunity -- The Fox desired the
Lamb but only to let him put in his Head, and then he knew well enough how to
get in his whole Body --


La Hoquette. Nay, I know our Master knows how to make use of a proper Tool as
well as any Prince in Europe -- But what would he do with this Island if he had
it? --


Lausun. Why Transplant all the Cowardly Irish to his Plantations in America,
and People the Kingdom with his own Subjects -- Or what if he should Dispeople
the Country and leave it without Inhabitants?


La Hoquette. I confess it is a good way to prevent Rebellion.


Lausun. You know our Master loves to be King of Countries without People --
and that made him Depopulate the Palatinate, and the rest of his Conquests in
Germany -- Nay you see how he Dispeoples his own France it self -- By the way,
he learnt that piece of Policy of the Turk -- And so if he could but get
footing in England, you should soon see what a Hunting field K. J. and He would
make of it --


La Hoquette. Mortbleu, there is reason for that -- it is a Hive of Heretics
that ought to be smoked to Death with Brown Paper and wet Straw -- But do you
believe the P. of O. is a coming indeed? --


Lausun. Our Master you see believes it, and trembles already for his Brother
of England --


Leri. I don't like that same Diabolical Faith of our Master -- it is ominous --


La Hoquette. Nor do I love Fighting in an Island -- it is like Scanderbag and
the Giants Fighting in a Sawpit -- I love the Continent-Liberty where a Man may
run as far as he pleases --


Leri. However our Master could not have given us a fairer pretense to run away
with Honor, had he studied five years -- Nor indeed do I see any reason why we
should venture our Lives and our Limbs with an English King that will not venture
with us --


Lausun. In short Gentlemen, we are bound to fight for our Honor -- and we
must save the King to obey our Master --


Leri. But if I be killed, how can I save the King? --


Lausun. Therein you must use your Discretion -- A good Soldier may fight with
Discretion -- and make an honorable Retreat both at the same time --


La Hoquette. And you shall see Noble General, how discreetly we'll split a
Hair between our Martial Honor and our Obedience to our Master -- our Lives
for yours, we'll either Fight discreetly, or retreat discreetly -- But a Pox of
retreating -- I scorn to retreat -- Now I think on it, I can kill a hundred at a
time for my own share, and fight with discretion --


Leri. Nay, if ye go to that, I know not how many hundred I may kill when I am
thoroughly heated -- for I remember I killed Forty once with my own hand in
cold Blood -- No, I Will never retreat unless I Am hard put to it -- but if the
Devil and Necessity drive me -- then I must obey my Master --

It Is Honor we seek, and Honor we'd have,
But with your kind Grace,
They search the wrong Place,
That look for it in the Grave.

SCENE VI.
James, Tyrconnel, Herbert, Powis, D'Avaux, Nugent. James. The Critical
Juncture's near at hand -- Now my Lords, your best Advice -- For my part, I
believe that besides the Enemy that threatens us from the other side of the
Water, we have a Shoal of Heretics lurking in our Bosoms here at home -- I
could wish, with my Brother Caligula, they had All but one Neck -- and then I Would
make quick dispatch with 'em --


Herbert. I am apt to believe they are all disarmed by This, Sir --


James. That Is nothing -- as long as they have Arms to their Shoulders, the
Rogues will be doing Mischief -- They have Plough-shares, and Plough-tails, and
I Am afraid, too many rusty Sithes still left -- Pox a' those Sithes, They had
like to have ruined me in the West of England -- I would not have my Men mowed
down a second time by Barley-cutters --


Powis. I don't believe, Sir, there is a Considerable Protestant but what is in
Jayl -- they tell me the Prisons are stov'd with 'em as thick as Loaves in a
Brown Bakers Oven -- I am sure the Priests are abroad in every Nook and Corner
under your Majesty's Jurisdiction -- and the Devil's in it if a Protestant
Thrasher escape 'em -- I am certain they want neither Diligence nor Malice --


James. I Am afraid the Rogues don't starve fast enough in Jayl --


Nugent. I know of nobody that relieves 'em -- some of 'em were carried naked
to the Dungeon -- and tho they begged but the covering of an old Blanket to
cover their Nakedness, it would not be granted -- More than this, the Jaylors
have order to feed 'em as if they had been sentenced for standing mute at their
Trials -- There Is nothing wanting that Catholic Zeal and Providence can do --


James. Are they not Chained? --


Nugent. No, Sir, They are kept weak and low enough I Will warrant ye -- You may
trust 'em Male and Female together without any danger of Procreation --


James. This is something to the Point, I must confess -- But what must we do
to disperse the main Cloud that hangs over our Heads? --


Nugent. May it please your Majesty, I have read of a Story somewhere, I cannot
at present remember where -- but I am sure I have read it, of a certain King of
the Moabites, that being afraid of the Children of Israel, sent for one Balaam
a Conjurer to curse 'em -- Is there never a Trithemius or an Agrippa of a
Jesuit, that could Summon up all the Plagues of Egypt together to help a
dishessed Prince at a Dead Lift? -- One Star of the first Magnitude well
unhinged by an expert Charmer, would squeeze the whole Camp of the Herericks
into Pancake-Batter -- I have heard of Showers of Wheat, and Showers of Fire
that have formerly fallen at the first word of a devout Saint --


James. I have said it, and will say it again -- there is no more trusting to
Heaven in these cases -- for I find by my Wives last Miscarriage, that Wonders
from Heaven are ceast, and that there is a General Embargo upon Miracles in the
Upper Regions --


Herbert. A desperate Disease must have a desperate Cure -- Did your Majesty
ever make use of the Lower Regions yet --


James. I believe I have sent some that way in my time -- but they were my
Enemies, and perhaps did me more harm than good --


Herbert. We read that Ulysses, who was the cunningest Dryboots of his time,
and Eneas who was the Greatest Hector in Europe, and a Pious Prince to boot,
when they were both at their Wits end, took a short Fegary to Avernus, and
having there consulted the greatest Politicians of that place, returned again
so well freighted with Council and Advice, that they got quit of all their
Enemies, and died i'their Beds -- Your Majesty has as short a Cut to Avernus as
any of those Heroes here in your own Kingdom through St. Patrick's Hole -- You
may take Father Hall along with you, and be back in three days at farthest --
There you will meet Matchiavel, Richlieu, Mazarine, Sixtus Quintus, my Lord
Jefferies, and several others that will be ready to aid you with their Advice
for nothing -- And this I hold to be the wisest Course your Majesty can take,
as being the only Remedy that preserved those Hero's, when all other means
failed --


James. Would you be willing to bear me company, my Lord? --


Herbert. With all my Heart -- and would be contented your Majesty should leave
me behind with my Preach cleaving to a Stone, as Theseus left his Friend
Pirithous, if it might be to your Majesty's Advantage --


James. A very great Complement indeed, my Lord -- but you know I have done so
many ill things by your Lordships Advice, that I dare not trust to the Devils
Courtesy --


Tyrcon. Sir, you may think what you pleafe -- you may do what you please --
you may go to Avernus if you please -- when all is done it is the sword must
deside the Quarrel -- You have a brave and a numerous Army here, you have
Friends in England -- and if the Cock-match do but hit we are made --


Powis. Ay, if the Cock-match hit, 'twill spoil His Highness's Journey for
Ireland I Am sure -- and I cannot well devise how it should miss, if his Majesty
of France be not too penurious of his Leuidore's --


D'Avaux. My Lord, my Master's no Snale -- He knows his own business --


Herbert. And then again the Distinction of a King de Jure and de Facto works
like Butter in a Sows Tail -- One rub it is true will turn a Bowl from the Jack
-- but here are many rubs in his Highness's way: if he gets over 'em all -- I
must contradict your Majesty and say, Miracles are not ceast --


James. The Prince is a good Gamester my Lord, and knows how to mend his next
Cast, tho his first Bowl miscarry --


Herbert. Well -- but suppose the Prince should come among us -- will not he be
treated with? --


James. No, no -- my Lord, I know him too well -- He Will never come to
Compositions -- He Will have all or none -- He Is too well acquainted with my
Brother of France and I, to trust the strongest Engagements we can make him,
unless we so secure him, that it would be the same thing as if we should
surrender up all into his hands --


Tyrcon. Why then we must trust to the Sword -- They say Fortune assists the
Daring -- I am sure she never helps those that lie in the Ditch and cry God
Help 'em -- Men that resolve to dye are easily Masters of other Men's Lives --
Besides there is one thing more your Majesty does not think of -- I have heard
of Jacob Clements, and Ravilliac -- It Is true it is below Persons of Honor to
make use of such means -- but Necessity often times constrains us to base Actions
--


James. I understand ye, my Lord -- and have been often thinking of what you
say -- but I have been censured too severely already for my Brother's Death --
and the business of the E. of Essex -- and I am loath to expose my Memory to
farther Ignominy -- Besides, it is a work of Darkness, not fit for present
Consultation --


Powis. Time, Sir, prays upon your Life as well as upon Ours -- Something
therefore must be done with Expedition --


James. You rather Teeze than Advise me my Lord -- what is that you would have
me to do with so much Expedition? -- Have you got your Tools ready? -- if you
have, set 'em to work -- Your Clements's and Ravilliac's are not so soon
tutored as you think for -- Had I come sooner to the Throne --


D'Avaux. What said my Master? -- Then you had been sooner turned out --


James. Consequently the sooner turned in again, if your Master's good Luck
han't quite left him in the Lurch -- I fear I am come to the Ebb of his Fortune
--


Powis. They say indeed there is a Fate in all things -- A Man that is born to
be Hanged shall never be Drowned -- and he does but row against the Stream that
contends with Fortune --


Herbert. Fortune is many times like a Dover Post-horse -- she will go so far and
no farther -- I wish she be not now in her Sullens --


Tyrcon. I care not a Fig for Fortune -- she is a Jade of all Religions -- she is
a Heathen, a Turk, a Jew, a Catholic, a Heretic -- she waited upon Octavius
Caesar, a Pagan, to his dying Minute, but Deserts the Most Christian King when
he has most need of her Assistance, and will not let him have a bit of good
Luck but what he pays through the Nose for -- But let her be as Waspish as she
will -- I am persuaded she might be manacl'd with Prudence, Courage and
Diligence -- Sir [speaking to the King] you must make the Stress of your
Opposition at the Boyne -- If the Prince get that Pass, we are all ruined --
Had our Priests Faith enough to remove Mountains, half a Score of the biggest
i'this Kingdom would be few enough to add to the Natural Fortifications of that
place -- But if the Prince had a hundred Mountains to clamber, He Will get over
'em all, unless you oppose him with Courage, Prudence and Diligence equal to
his -- Sir, you must oppose the Prince and his Fortune with those three
Barricado's, or else a Rush for your Opposition --


D'Avaux. Jernegoy, my Lord -- you have put your Dread Sovereign upon the
hardest Task he ever had in his Life --


Herbert. My Lord, you talk of Prudence, Courage and Diligence -- Why those my
Lord, are Virtues that never grew i'this Country -- The Air of this Climate has
a natural Antipathy against 'em, and will no more endure 'em, than it will
Spiders or Nightingales --


Nugent. What need Foreign Manufacture, when we have Treachery, Bogs and
Newries of our own Growth -- Poison all the Fresh Water in the Country -- and
hang up the Protestants upon all the Trees in the Road, and infect the Air with
the Stench of their Carcasses -- Strew the Grass with Rats-bane, to kill up
their Cattle -- My Lords, we have Zeal without knowledge -- A good Rat-catcher
would Kill a thousand of these Heretic Vermin in a day --


James. My Lords -- here is one talks of Courage and Valor, another of Poisoning
and Plaguing, and I know not what my self -- but no body talks of Praying to
Heaven for Success --


Tyrcon. Let the Churchmen do that -- they have nothing else to do --


James. Why then my Lord D'Avaux, do you send into France -- tell your Master
how the case stands -- advise him not to loose a Hog for a Hapoth of Tar --
I Will send into England, and do something or nothing -- And for you, my Lords,
do you bustle about, ride about, run about, fly about, and about and about --
take the Rope as well as the Butter -- if one slips the other will hold -- I know
not what more can be said, or what more can be done --


SCENE VII.
Hall the Jesuit and Priests. Hall. It Is true, it is a black Cloud, and gathers
thicker and thicker -- but I spoke with the Queen of Heaven last night, and she
assured me she would take care to disperse it --


1. Priest. I am afraid we are all out of the way; for the Queen of Heaven is
but a Woman, and I fear me does not understand our Business -- We should pray
to St. Martin and the Seven Champions, they understand M litary Affairs and
Fighting --


2. Priest. In truth Father Hall, we have been long enough Praying to Heaven
without any considerable Success -- I am afraid the Saints there are all turned
Protestants -- And therefore I would that we should now turn our Devotions
downward, and send to Gog and Magog; there are they two, and General Beelzebub
would bring along an Host of Infernal Hussars able to conquer all the Cantons
of Switzerland --


Hall. How wickedly you talk Father -- it is the Interst of the Saints to favor
our Cause -- I Am sure there is no Religion in the World that pays them that
Respect which we do -- All the Heretics slight 'em, unless the Schoolboys for
the Holy days sake -- Nay some are such Clowns, as not to admit 'em the Title
of Saint, but call 'em plain Thomas and Matthew --


2. Priest. And is there any Religion in the World that pays more respect to
Gog and Magog, and Beelzebub as we do? -- The Turk does not pay so much -- Come
Father, I am for driving that Nail that is most probable to go --


Hall. I tell ye Father, you talk wickedly -- and I am afraid our wicked Lives
fight against us more than any thing else -- Come, Fathers, let us come to
Confession a little among our selves -- I must confess, my Father was a Cook,
and dealt in Raw Flesh; but he told me 'twas never so good as when it was warm,
if it were not over much Roasted -- and I must confess I have loved, and do
love, and so did my Mother before me, a piece of warm Flesh -- And I confess, I
have been conniving at, and assisting to help others to warm Flesh -- And half
a Score Drams of your Absolutions, Fathers, will expiate for what I have done
--


1. Priest. I must confess I had once a very great Passion for a young
Gentlewoman that was Married, and she had as great an Affection for me; but not
finding an Opportunity to cousen her Jealous Husband, I ordered her to
counterfeit her self Sick, and to send for me to cure her with a Relick of a
Saint that I had. Accordingly she did so, and fending for me, accordingly I
went, and took one of my Brethren of the same Covent along with me, and while
he was busy with the Maid, I employed my time with the Sick Mistress. But the
Mischief was, that being like to have been surpised by the Husband, for have I
left my Breeches behind; and had it not been for a Fetch that the Devil put
into her Head (I shall love him the better for it as long as I live) we had both
been discovered. But she told her Husband my Breeches were the Relick of the
Saint that had cured her, and that I had left 'em behind at her Request in case
her Fits should return again, and so all was well. Was that any Sin, Father, to
cure a Sick Lady? If it be, I must confess I have committed many a one of the
same Nature.


Hall. Look ye, Father, here we must consider the Intention of the Thing; for
if the Intention were to cure the Lady, 'twas a good Intention --


1. Priest. But she was not Sick, but only feigned her self Sick --


Hall. That was nothing to you -- you had nothing to do to examine whether she
counterfeited or no -- you found her Sick and you cured her -- and so you
fulfilled a good Intention -- And therefore Father they must be louder Sins
than these that cry to Heaven and do us Mischief.


1. Priest. I must confess, I made Love to another married Woman -- and she put
the Dice upon -- for she appointed the Night at her own House, and when the
time came, most wickedly put an Old Woman of Threescore and Ten to bed to me --
I must confess the Old Grandame lost nothing by it, for Jone was as good as my
Lady in the Dark -- But that was not all -- the next Morning she sent for all
she knew of her own and my Acquaintance, and exposed me and my Female piece of
wrinkled Antiquity, like Vulcan and Venus, to public View; so that I was
forced to forsake my Quarters, for fear of the rude Castigations of the Boys --


Hall. This was a Sin, Father, for you suffered your self to be gulled by a
Woman -- and such Sins as these, that is, the Discovery of such Sins as These
undoes us -- For it exposes the Warts and Wenns in our Sanctity as Cham
uncovered his Father's Nakedness --


2. Priest. Therefore Father, to avoid the Treacheries of Women, I learnt at
Rome, a notable Wary Trick they have there to make use of the Male Sex -- And I
must confess I have had a great Passion for several pretty Youths -- And I must
farther confess, that I have at this time a very pretty Urchin that lies with
me every night -- He has such a Winning Way with him, such a Charming
Behavior, and Twattles so like a Nightingale, that I cannot but I must chuck
him under the Chin now and then --


Hall. Take heed Father -- I fear me this is that Sin which in the Hebrew they
call Sodomy --


2. Priest. I question that, Father Hall, -- I am apt to believe the Ancients
were mistaken in the Signification of that word -- I rather think the
Inhabitants of Gomorrah made use of their Beasts, and that was their Crime --
and therefore it was, that in Old times they adored their Deities in the shape
of Beasts -- I cannot believe so many of our great Cardinals and Bishops,
Fathers of our Church, would set us such bad Examples, if Sodomy were a Crime
--


Hall. I know indeed there was one of our Cardinals that wrote in defense of it
-- but I never heard of any that ever wrote in behalf of Adultery --


2. Priest. It Is certain Father, that He who commits one Sin, sins less than he
that commits two at a time -- Now he that commits Adultery, runs himself into
Prodigality and Expense upon his Beloved, and at the same time invades his
Neighbors Property -- but a smooth Chinn'd Youth preserves a Man from the
Guilt of both those Crimes -- and who would go to a Crown Ordinary, when he may
please his Appetite better for Six pence? --


Hall. It Is true indeed, we are born Flesh and Blood, and tho our Church
forbids us to Marry, Nature will have its Course --


2. Priest. If Men did not sometimes commit Errors, there would be no need of
Repentance -- That Is the Remedy which we are ordered to make use of for the
attoning of Heaven in cases of Necessity and Distress --


Hall. Therefore Fathers, as we have been all great Sinners, I would have ye
apply your selves to this Remedy -- and make fair Weather with Heaven till the
Storm be over -- Our Affairs are now in a ticklish Condition -- Then it will be
time enough to break your Vows and Contracts with Heaven, when you are at ease
and in Prosperity -- He that vowed a Wax Candle to the Holy Virgin as big as
the Main Mast, when he was in danger to be cast away, thought her not worth one
of Twelve to the Pound, when he was got safe a Shore --


1. Priest. Now, Father, you make me Scratch where it does not itch -- But do
you think, Father, there is any such danger of the Prince of Orange?


Hall. I know not what to think on it Fathers -- but exercise your Cats a Nine
Tails -- let every Man be a Whipping Tom to his own Flesh -- Repentance you
know saved Nineveh --


2. Priest. Now would the whole Universe were turned Topsie Turvy, and Satan
sole Lord of the Upper Regions -- Sure Satan would not let the Cause of his
Servants suffer --


1. Priest. You wish well, Father -- but let us be whose Servants we will -- I
do not find that either Heaven or Hell takes any care of us -- and for my part,
of all Repentances I don't like this Cat a Nine Tail Repentance -- This
nointing a Man's Back with Sacred Oil of Whipcord --


2. Priest. It Is no more than what the Proverb says -- Sweet Meat must have
Sour Sauce --


1. Priest. Then give me leave to wish in my turn -- that our Sour Sauce may
bring us Sweet Meat at length -- When I Whip my self upon my own Account, I lay
it on so gently, that if I should hit a Louse I should do it no hurt -- but
this Whipping upon a National Account, I d ead the thoughts of it -- It makes
my Back sore before I touch it --


Hall. It Is a National Account indeed, Fathers -- for if we loose this place,
we loose all our Hopes in this World -- and for the other, I am sure neither
you nor I think of it -- You loose the Fruits of all your Massacres and
Rebellions -- We loose the Fruits of all our Plots and Conspiracies -- A Jesuit
hitherto so Famous for his Politics, will be looked upon no better than a Jakes
Farmer -- His Holiness minds nothing but to keep the Most Christian King out of
Italy -- and the Most Christian King himself will have both his Hands too full
to do us any good -- Who would not Whip himself, as you may suppose Jehu Whipped
his Horses, rather than this shall come to pass! -- The way to Lash our Enemies
is to Whip our selves -- Lustily, Floggingly, Stoutly, Robustiously, Vigorously
--


1. Priest. Truly, Father, I fear the Mercy of my Hand -- I should hardly
torment my self at such a Rate, to save Rome from being sacked again by the
Goths and Vandals -- Can you think of no other, but this Drive on Carman way to
save this poor Island? -- Well -- I have it now -- and I hope my Ingenuity will
secure my Shoulders -- Come Fathers, come along with me --


ACT. II. Scene 8.
Tyrconnel, Primate, Nugent, Hall and Priests. Tyr. GOod morrow, Fathers --
what News brings you here so early? --


1. Priest. We have been up, my Lord all Night, at our Devotions, and something
Heaven has informed us of, for public good.


1. Priest. My Lord, we humbly conceive, here has been a very great neglect --
for numbers of Men signify little without a Blessing from above.


Prim. Have you brought those Blessings along with you, Fathers?


1. Priest. No, my Lord -- but we wonder they have not bin sent for all this
while, from the Fountain where they are to be had upon Earth -- We have heard
of several Princes, that have been presented with Consecrated Swords, and
Belts, and Hats of great value by St. Peter's Successor; by virtue of which
they have wrought Miracles, and won mighty Victories, to the unspeakable
Propagation of the Holy-Church; but we hear of none of these Consecrated Swords
that have been sent to our Sovereign, or so much as desired in his behalf.


2. Priest. I should rather advise, that his Holiness might be sent to for a
hundred thousand Consecrated Asses Jaw-Bones -- for by that means might every
one of our Soldiers prove a Sampson -- Or else I would have his Holiness to
send us St. Peter's Sword -- (for if he has his Keys, there is no doubt, but he
has his Sword too) -- for then would I undertake, that if our Soldiers should
but touch their Weapons with that Sword, they would receive a particular Virtue
from it, as a Million of Needles from the touch of one Lodestone; and then
would every single Soldier kill a thousand Heretics.


Tyr. I do not understand, Fathers, any need we have of recurring to such
extraordinary Miracles. --


2. Priest. No, my Lord, if all Men, had your Lordships Resolution; but the
fears of Men, and causes of their Fears, are as various as their Faces -- They
are all Godfrey of Bullens, till they see their Enemies -- but then this thing
frights 'em, and the other thing scares 'em -- and then run, he that can run
fastest. --


Tyr. Why therefore it is, Fathers, that while we are a going to fight, you must
pray for the Success.


Priest. Alas! my Lord, we are Men of Frailty as well as others, and therefore
I have always observed, that one Pious Fraud is worth a hundred Pious
Ave-Maries -- Of those your Lordship knows that we have many -- and never did
the Difficulties of our Holy Mother the Church, more than now, require the
practice of them.


Primate. For those things, take your own Courses, Fathers, you know the Duties
of your Functions -- and have my Power for your assistance.


4. Priest. My Lord, pray send for half a score Officers and Soldiers -- you
shall then see what Course we intend to take.


Enter Officers and Soldiers to them. 4. Priest. Gentlemen, you are sent for
hither, to let you understand, that you are now to fight for your Holy Mother
the Church, your King, and your Country.


1. Officer. By my shoul, Fathers, we know all this -- but Fathers, however
Life's shweet.


2. Officer. And then again, Fathers, it is well known, that we Native Irish,
have a strange Antipathy against Farting -- but the English great Guns keep
such a Bouncing and Roaring, as if all the Winds in the Compash were in their
Breeshes, and they spit Fire, and shit Lead and Iron at such a rate, that we
must confesh, they make a great fear upon us shometimes.


4. Priest. But you are Soldiers and Men of Honor -- and such have always
held it better to dye bravely in the Field, than to live in Slavery, without
your Laws, your Estates and Religion. And who would not rather choose to dye a
Martyr, and go immediately to Heaven, than live Bog-trotting and stealing of
Cows upon this miserable Earth?


3. Officer. But I have been a lewd Liver all my Life, I must confesh, and you
tell us so often of a Damnashion to come -- that many times it makes me rather
shoose to live a little longer, than to be poshted out of this World I know not
whither.


4. Priest. As for that, Gentlemen, you shall have Pardons in your Pockets,
under the Hands and Seals of his Holiness, for all the sins that ever you
Committed, of what nature soever -- so that all who are slain, shall go to
Heaven forthwith, before a Cat can lick her Ear -- Nay, there shall be a Note
taken of their Names, and they shall all be Canonized too -- There they shall
fit all the day long, and eat Ambrosia, and drink Nectar, which are as far
beyond Bonny Clapper and Vsquebagh, as Vsquebagh and Bonni Clapper, are beyond
dead small Beer and Poor John. There they shall be attended with lovely young
Girls with golden Wastcoats, and azure Petticoats, to play with, and sing 'em
asteep. There they shall sit with Crowns upon their Heads, commanding every one
a Province as big as all Ireland. These are the Rewards of those that are slain
in the defense of the Holy Shorches Cause.


4. Officer. But suppose our Breeshes are rifl'd, and our Pardons taken out of
our Pockets.


4. Priest. That will signify nothing -- St. Peter shall let you in for all
that -- you will be known by your very Deaths Wounds -- Why, look ye Dear Joys,
in whom do you believe? --


1. Officer. We believe in the Virgin Mary and St. Pautrick.


4. Priest. And don't you believe the Cause of the holy Mother the Church, to
be a good Cause?


2. Officer. Yesh, by my shoule do we. --


4. Priest. Why, then you are worse than Turks, if ye don't fight to the last
gasp in a good Cause. -- For the Turks believe they never shall dye till their
time appointed be come -- and that has made 'em so victorious -- if your time
be come, it matters not whether you be slain by a Bullet, or a fall down Stairs
in your Vsquebah -- if your time be not come, all the Bullets in the Kingdom
can never touch ye.


3. Officer. By my shoule, Father, if the whole Army were as well shatisfied as
we, they would fight like so many Lions for their Preys -- what say you, Dear
Joys?


Omnes. We say as you say, -- and we say as the Fathers say, -- and the Fathers
have made great shatisfassions upon us, by St. Pautrick. --


Hall. You speak like noble Champions of the Church -- go then, and inculcate
these things into the minds of your Fellow Dear-Joys, and we'll be sure to be
with you every day, to confirm you in your Resolutions. --


Exeunt Officers and Soldiers. 4. Priest. Look ye, my Lord, this is the only
way to make these People fight -- For if the considerations of future
Beatitude, so sensual as we make it, will not do, nothing else I am sure will do
it. And therefore, my Lord, you see we have made it as sensual as that of
Mahomets.


Primate. I like your way very well, Fathers; therefore come to me, and I Will
let ye have Pardons by the Bushel -- you may get what you can from the
Commanders -- but let the Common Soldiers have 'em for nothing -- Brass Money
signifies little at Rome. --


Nugent. There is one way more, we have forgot, which is the Turkish way, to
intoxicate their Soldiers with Opium, before they engage -- for since the most
Christian King makes use of the Turkish Force, we may as well make use of the
Turkish Policy -- Put Opium in their Snush, and they rush into Battle, and
sight for a time, like Game-Cocks -- so that the Enemy will never be able to
withstand their Lubberly Multitude.


Tyrcon. This way, or that way, or any way, so we can but get 'em to stand the
Brushes they are like to endure -- And therefore Fathers, try the force of your
Divinity-Magick.


4. Priest. We'll do all that lies in our Power, you may be sure, my Lord. --
'Twas we that made 'em formerly rebel,
And now we hope to make 'em fight as well,



ACT. II. Scene 9.
Lauzune, Lutterel, Tyrconnel. Lauzune. WOuld you not have the King, Sir, keep
his Agreements with my Master: -- You know, that when your self, together with
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen Addressed him about this Business, in hopes that he
would still conside in you and them to govern Dublin, the King made answer,
that he had past his Word to his Brother Lewis, that I should have the
Government of Dublin, and therefore could not recede from it. --


Tyrcon. Sir, I am as yet chief Governor of this Kingdom under my Master, King
James, and believe the Town to be already in safe hands --


Lutt. What Contracts our Master made when he was abroad under your Masters
Power, are invalid in his own Dominions --


Lauzun. Is it so? Then it is time for me to return home again with my Masters
assistance --


Tyrcon. Of what? --


Lauzun. Of five thousand old beaten Soldiers. --


Tyrcon. For which you had the same Number of new raised Men, which a Winters
Discipline, would soon make as fit for service, as the best Men in your Masters
Army.


Lauzun. Did not my Master furnish you with Wine, Fruit, Brandy, Hops, Tobacco,
and other Commodities?


Tyrcon. And did not you carry off our Butter, Cheese, Wool, Raw Hides and
Tallow; and did not the King release seven pound ten shillings upon every Tun
of your Wine? --


Lauzun. That Is nothing to the purpose -- if you quarrel with my Master --
you will lose the best Card in your Pack -- and therefore I demand the Keys of
the City and Castle, as by agreement between my Master and yours. --


Tyrcon. Not so fast, Sir, -- who is King in Ireland, your Master or ours? --


Lauzune. I know no King in Ireland, but my Master K. Lewis, and therefore once
more in his Name I demand the Keys of the Castle and City.


Lutt. One would think the Keys of the City should serve your turn -- there is
room enough to quarter your handful of men --


Lauzun. Sir, My Master does not use to be contented with Cities, unless he may
have the Citadels that command 'em.


Tyrcon. Then it seems your Master intends to make a Conquest of this Kingdom,
-- marry so far as hitherto, it comes easy enough to him.


Lauzun. I know not what my Master intends to do -- I am nor of his Council --
but this I am sure of, that private Men never lend great Sums, but upon good
Security.


Tyrcon. Thus Prodigal Heirs, when hungry, sell their Birthrights for a Mess
of Porridge.


Enter K. J. K. J. Why so much color in your faces here, my Lords? -- This is
no time for Heats and Quarrels.


Lutt. Here Is General Lauzune, Sir, demands the Keys of your City and Castle of
Dublin -- I know not how I have trangress'd in my sidelity to your Majesty, but
that I may be still entrusted with them as well as He; Does your Majesty intend
the French shall make a Palatinate of Ireland?


James. Peace, Lutterel, -- you are too hot.


Lutt. Would it not vex, Sir, any Man of Mettle to be degraded from his Honor,
to oblige an Alien? -- Give him the rest too, and save nothing for your self,
but empty Name.


James. Intreague of State, above thy reach, and private Contract between my
Brother Lewis and my self, command thy swift Obedience.


Lutt. Then take your Keys, Sir, and dispose of 'em at your pleasure; it shall
never be said that my hand ever did so poor an Act -- however give a loser
leave to speak -- Had you kept your word but half so well with your English
Subjects, as you do with the French, you had never been reduced to this.


[Exit Lutt. James to Lauzune. My Lord, Losers will sometimes be in passion,
though they lose their money never so fairly -- He Is honest, though forgetful of
his Duty at this time -- Besides Severity would be unseasonable at such a
Juncture as this -- It Is sufficient for you that I have kept my Promise with
your Master -- You see the Keys are yours, you may now go take possession when
you please.


[Excunt. ACT. II. Scene 10.
Lauzune, Solus. BEgar me dank de King for noting -- He delivre me de Key of
dis Gran City, and of de Chastel dat command it, begar, because he know no
vich vay to elp imself -- begar me Maitre tank a de King vor noting -- begar he
dare as vel tack a de Bear a by de toot, as disoblige a me Maitre -- Begar me
Maitre be de gran King of de varle -- and begar me be de gran Prince of
Irlanda -- begar me make a de King submeet a to me, me varrant him -- me a
got de possession of de gran City of Dubleen, and of de Castle, and me keep a
them bor begar, or if dey voree a me to run a de way -- me run a de way by de
light of 'em -- begar me set all on de veere, me burn, burn, kill, kill, and
make all as plain as my nail -- but first me plundra all de Hereteeks, and de
Papists boat -- me make up me bundla me garant me. -- Foutre Diable of de
Gran Prince of Irlanda,
That cannot lick his fingra, having all at commanda.


ACT III.
Scene 1.
King, Tyrconnel, Hamilton, Primate, Nugent, Mac Gillicuddy, Butler, Talbot. MY
Lords, I make no question but you hear the News of the P. of Orange's being
Landed, and my Intelligence from England, confirms the number of his well
provided Forces -- He comes with all the Preparations of a Great, a Prudent,
and a wary Captain -- And now he is come, I know he will not trifle time away --
In the mean time all is quiet in England -- not a Mouse stins in my behalf, and
that perplexes me -- I wish I were well rid of this unwelcome Guest -- but ugly
fears possess me. --


Tyr. However show 'em not, Great Sir, that will dishearten all the rest. --


James. No, My Lord, not so neither; I Will have one brush for it, you may be
sure, what e're comes on it -- But you know, my Lord, we must be forced to leave
Dublin but thinly manned behind us -- and it is a fowl Nest of Heretics -- I
wish they had bin all transported long ago.


Tyr. You know, Sir, that was debated in Council at the beginning -- But then
it was found, that all the Butchers, Brewers, Bakers, Clothiers, Weavers,
Tailors, Shoo-makers, Hat-makers, Smiths, Carpenters, and other Artizans were
Heretics, so that had they bin removed, your Soldiers could have had neither
Meat, Bread, nor Drink, nor Clothes to wear, nor Carts to carry their Provision
and Ammunition into the Field; nor would your Majesty have had a Mint and
Workmen to Coin your Brass and Copper. --


Nugent. However, Sir, there is Order taken to secure the Heretics safe enough
-- Your own Example in England, in Monmouth's time, has taught us to confine
'em all with in the Churches, Hospitals and Jayls of the City, 'till the
Business be well over; and then you may make Bonfires of 'em for your
Victories. --


James. Well then, that care's over -- But how stands the Army affected for
fighting? are they in the same brave humor they were in, when I last took a
view of 'em. --


Tyr. I think so, Sir, they show the same Symptoms of Valor as ever, they
Drink as hard, Swear as hard, toss about your Health as fast, Bounce, and Rant,
and Swagger as loud as ever, and quarrel with one another as much as e're they
did -- and why they should not fight the Enemy as Boldly and Courageously as
they Duel one another, I know not -- This I dare say, they will either fight or
run away; but that is left to their Discretion --


James. Well, but to come more close to the Business -- you see the Newry's
lost, and you all agree that if we lose Ardee, the Boyne is the next Pass to be
defended -- so that it looks like stopping one Torrent by another. --


Hamilton. Goads Bread, and I Will undertake to hold the Enemy play there this
whole Summer -- or I Will give him leave to make a whistle of my Tail --


James. Bravely said, Hamilton -- but is the River fordable? -- for if it be.
--


Ham. What if it be? I Will have it undermined, and blow 'em up, if they offer to
set foot in the water --


James. Greatly said again, Hamilton -- But I have heard that Old Prince
William of Nassau, had such a Trick of passing Rivers, that Duke d'Alva put the
Question, whether his Army had wings or no -- Now suppose our Enemies should
have such a knack.


Ham. Bread a Goad, Sir, I have men under my Command, that will kill a Sparrow
or a Tit-Mouse flying, much more a Horse or a Man; if they do not fly in the
Night.


James. But what if they do --


Ham. What if they do? Why then bread a Goad, Sir, I have a way to prevent that
too, by driving stakes into the ground, all along this side of the River, for
many Miles together, with their upper ends as sharp as Needles -- so that when
they come to light, they must of necessity spit themselves with their own
weight -- A General without Stratagems, is like a Mountebank without his
Receipts. --


James. Well, my Lords, if we can but stop him ten days, I make no question but
to see an Alteration of the Weather in our Affairs -- for I have certain
intelligence from Our Brother of France, that he has so ordered it in England,
that the Prince's Fleet will not fight, but leave the Dutch in the Lurch, if
they presume an Engagement -- so that the French being Masters of the Sea, we
shall have what Assistance we desire here, besides a numerous Invasion of
England it self, to join with our Friends in that Kingdom -- My Brother of
France well knows that if I fall, his Universal Monarchy must sink -- My Lords,
these are my hopes, and these my Fears --


Talbot. Does your great Game, dear Sir, depend upon a ten days stop -- that is
too too mean, to beg of hoary Time -- We'll make it Agamemnon's Toil to gain
the Boyne -- I scorn to fly --


Ham. And so do I --


Gillicuddy. And so do I --


Butler. And so do I -- Unless the Soldiers turn their backs and Fly -- For
'twas never my ambition to fight whole Armies alone. --


Enter an Irish Soldier, staring and Breathless. Tyr. How now, Fellow-Souldier
-- what News? --


Sold. By my Shoule, Dear Joy, very bad -- I wash one of those that was set to
guard the Pash, within four miles of the Newry; and there we had news that the
Danes and the Dutch were advanced as far as the Newry -- presently they sent us
word, that if we burnt any more Houses, they would give no quarter either to
French or Eerish -- By and by we saw a Party of them appear at a distance --
and by St. Pautrick, they looked all like your Sharazens, with turnpike Beards
on each side their Mouths, as sharp as Boars Tushes -- which made such a great
fear upon us, that we presently quitted the Pash, and made haste to Ardee, my
Dear Joy -- Had your Lordship bin there, my Dear Joy, you would have done the
shame, by my Shoule --


Tyrcon. Could you observe their Number?


Sold. By my shoule, dear Joy, I believe there might be about thirty Thousand
--


Tyrcon. How! thirty Thousand, Man!


Sold. By my shoule, they made so great fear upon me, that I have hardly yet
recovered my self -- By St. Pautrick, I am shure there was great many more than
four hundred --


Tyr. Well, is this all you can say? --


Sold. Yesh, by my shoule -- and I think enough too --


K. J. A very good beginning, by my Troth -- This is just Hey, pass and be gone
-- If the Conclusion be no better --


Ham. You are not, Sir, to judge of all the rest, by the Cowardice of one
Rascallion Slave -- Let 'em enjoy a Trivial Pass or two -- And let them all
their Numerous Forces join,
There Is nothing won, till they have won the Boyn.



ACT III. Scene 2. Representing a Sutler's Tent.
Three Irish Captains, 3 Irish Lieutenants, 3 Irish Ensigns, Sutler. 1. Capt.
Well -- Dear Joys, what shall we drink this Morning --


Omnes. Even what you please, Captain --


1. Capt. Hey, Sutler, -- what is the best Liquor by St. Patrick, now.


Sutler. All Is best, my dear Joys, -- Claret, White Wind, Brandy, Vsquebagh, --
which you like best --


1. Capt. Then bring us half a dozen Bottles of Claret -- better we drink it,
than the Heretics have it --


[They all drink three or four Healths about, and then cease. 1. Capt. Well --
my dear Joys, have ye been at the King's Tent this Morning? How go Squares --


2. Capt. Yesh, I was at the King's Tent -- There was all in deep
Considerations and Consultations -- not a great Officer to be spoken with; and
so I left 'em by St. Pautrick --


3. Capt. What think you on it, Captain -- how does the Pulse of your Heart
beat? -- For by my shoule, the Prince will make a quick push fort -- he encamps
in the Plains of Dundalk this Night -- and then by my shoule, he will be with
us to Morrow --


1. Capt. By my shoule, my Heart beats but faintly -- The Devil tauke me now,
if I do love these French Men -- They begin to Tyrannise over us already --


1. Lieutenant. By St. Pautrick, I had like to have run my skein -- through a
French Captain's Guts but the other Night, for calling me Erish Teague --
however, I flung a Glass of Wine in his Fash -- and had we not been parted, I
had let the Sun through his Body --


2. Lieutenant. By my shoule, I will fight for his Majesty, for my Relishions,
and for the Holy Fathers the Preistshs, but I will not fight for the French --


3. Lieutenant. By St. Pautrick, a Son of a ten thousand Fathers of a French
Man, told me to my Fash the other day, that he knew no King in Ireland, but King
Lewis -- I could have kicked him to Hell, had I thought him worth the Devils
acceptansh --


1. Capt. Why this, by my shoule, it is, dear Joys, that makes the Pulse of my
Heart beat so faintly -- By St. Pautrick, I am in a quandary whether I shall
fight or run for it.


1. Ensign. By my shoule, dear Joy, if I see you run, I Will follow with the
Colors --


2. Ensign. By my shoule, Captain, I think it nonsense to fight for the French
against his Majesty --


1. Captain. By St. Pautrick, I think we shall be all of one mind by and by --


3. Ensign. I don't know, noble Captain, that ever we true born Irish, ever
disagree'd among our selves in these points --


2. Capt. Suppose we should get the day, and the French should come in and
overrun our Wives and Foster Sisters, -- what should we get by that? --


1. Lieutenant. It Is true, I could be as cruel as another to another, but not
to my self -- but he is cruel to himself, that fights for him that intends him a
mischief --


3. Capt. And therefore it is, that I like the way of Massacring Heretics, much
better than fighting with Heretics -- It Is a more Compendious way, and done
with less trouble --


1. Capt. Why then, dear Joy, what think ye of make Petitions to his Majesty,
that the business may be decided by most at three throws, I have a lucky hand
at flinging sometimes --


3. Ensign. Or suppose you should lose -- the difference would be determined
without Bloodshed -- and the Chance of Fortune the same --


1. Ensign. Or, let three to three, set foot to foot, and they that fall first,
lose all --


1. Cap. No, Ensign -- there would be no Chance in that -- for then the Danes
or the Dutch would be sure to win -- But what need all this dispute? -- We are
safe as yet -- there is a Wall of Water between us; nor any thing but their
Cannons can hurt us -- and I hope that none of us were ever so Cursed in our
Mothers Bellies, to be killed with a Cannon Bullet upon dry Land -- Hark -- by
St. Pautrick the Drums are in an Uproar -- There Is Mischief at hand by Creesh
-- Ensign look out, and see what is the matter --


Ensign goes out and returns. 1. Ensign. The Enemy's in view -- and we are all
Commanded to our Posts --


1. Capt. Nay then, if they are so valiant, as to fight with two the most
mischievous of all the four Elements at once, let every man do as God and St.
Pautrick direct him --


[Exeunt Omnes. ACT III. Scene 3.
Messenger, D. of Berwick, Sarsfield. Mess. PArdon, great Sir, the Tidings
which I bring, Of a lost Kingdom, and a vanquished King.


D. of B. Speak out the dreaded Truth -- I fear my Royal Father still proves
unsuccessful --


Mess. Just as you say, Sir, -- Free Passage over the Boyn the Enemies has
gained -- Your Royal Father's Forces routed and dispersed -- and he himself
hasting once more to reimbark for France --


Sarsfield. Curse of my Stars, that I must be detached that day -- I would have
wrested Victory out of Heretic Fortunes hands --


D. of B. Were thou in the Engagement, Friend?


Mess. I was one of your Royal Father's Guard that day -- and being posted
where he stood, beheld the whole Action --


D. of B. Then give us the best acount of it thou can -- For in his Letter to
me, my Father only tells me, I must shift for my self --


Mess. upon the 30th. of June, the Enemy encamped within sight of us, the River
Boyn being between Us and Them -- but it seems the P. of Orange did not think
fit to Enterprise any thing that day, in regard the Body of the Infantry and
Artillery did not come up till late -- however we could discover him riding to
and fro' to view the Posture of our Army, and judged it was he, by the
Attendance that hovered about him, which made us fire with two Pieces of six
pound Ball among the Thickest -- but as if all our Bullets had been Huguenots,
not one would touch him, but one that only kissed the top of his shoulder, and
whispered him in the Ear, as if Fortune had only sent to welcome him to the
Boyn, and encourage him the more to our Ruin.


Sarsfield. Damned Traitor of a six Pounder -- No wonder we go thus to rack,
when our Bullets will not do their Office --


Mess. The next day, we were first attacked by a great Body of the Enemy, under
Count Schomberg, who having passed the River near to Slane, forced his way
through eight hundred Dragoons that guarded the Ford, and being reinforced with
fresh Succors, after a small resistance, routed all that opposed him, and
drove them as far as Duleek.


Sarsf. That word small resistance makes me mad -- why small resistance, in the
Devils Name? -- Small Resistance and small Beer, are much at one -- May they be
accursed, and never taste strong Drink more, for their small-Beer Fighting --


Mess. On the other side, the Danes and Dutch, in a great Body, took the stream
like so many shag Spaniels -- and fighting up to the middle in the Water, beat
off our Men, and gaining the Land, routed all before 'em --


Sarsf. The Devil take 'em for a Company of Sons of Water-Dogs -- Where was
Lauzune all this while?


Mess. Why, Sir, at the same time the P. of O. passing the River at the head of
a great Body of Horse, attacked Lauzune with a Bravery to be extold, though in an
Enemy, and forced him to give way; and at length to retire, finding himself
abandoned by the Foot -- It Is true, he retreated in good Order, after the loss
of General Hamilton taken Prisoner -- but the rest dispersed and broken, some
ran one way, some another -- leaving all our Baggage and eight Pieces of Cannon
as a Pray to the Victors -- All that proved lucky to us in this Battle, was
this, that Duke Schomberg was slain with a Carbine-shot, at the head of his
Men, advancing to observe Lauzune's motions --


D. of B. Where was my Royal Father all this while? --


Mess. He stood upon a rising ground in the Rear, out of harms way, where with
Tears in his Eyes for a while he beheld the bad Condition of his Affairs --
till at length my Lord Tyrconnel crying out with a despairing Voice, Sauvez le
Roy, -- and his Majesty, seeing his Army all in disorder, took care to save
himself, and fled with all speed to Dublin --


D. of B. What was our loss? --


Mess. The loss of the whole Kingdom, an't like your Grace --


D. of B. I mean what our particular loss?


Mess. About fifteen hundred slain, and a great number of Prisoners -- I forgot
to tell you, Sir, there was one whole Regiment ran away, without so much as
taking up their Arms from the ground where they had Regimentally laid 'em --


Sarsf. Those were Sparks of Venus, I Will warrant ye, Sir -- such as had rather
fight in a Brothel-House than in a pitched Field -- a blessed story -- Now the
Devil take me, if all these Fellows do not deserve to be fairly hanged out of
the way, that we may have no more of the breed of 'em -- Oh -- Yonder I see
some of the Rascals coming hither for shelter --


[The Scene discovers a great number of Fugitives running to Sarsfield 's Body
for security. Enter half a score dusty Teagues. Sarsf. Scoundrels where have
you left your Arms? --


1. Soldier. By my shoule, dear Joy, we have left 'em behind us --


2. Sold. By my shoule, dear Joy, we made great fire upon the Enemies, till
they came so near us, that we were afraid they would have taken us Prisoners,
by St. Pautrick --


3. Sold. By Creesh, dear Joy, I club'd out the Brains of no less than seven
Heretics at one time -- yesh marry did I --


Sarsf. I warrant they were dead before --


3. Sold. Yesh indeed were they, dear Joy, -- but they made such fear upon me
as they lay, that I resolved to kill 'em again --


4. Sold. By Creesh now, 'twas in my Thoughts to have fought like a Devil --
but the Rogues sent us word, that if we did, they would give us no Quarter --
and so when all run, I run for good Company --


Sarsf. The Deaths of drowned Kittens in a Horse-Pond, attend ye all -- What
encouragement has a Man of Courage to entrust himself with such Vermin -- l'de
trust my self as soon in a Hare-Warren, against a Heard of Wolves --


5. Soldier. By my shoule, dear Joy, you do us wrong, we did as much as Men
could do -- but we met with Men that were more than Men -- You know, dear Joy,
it is a hard matter to row against the Stream -- but these Men fought against
the Stream, and yet beat us -- They stood in the Water like Stakes, -- and fired
so fast out of the Water upon us, that we could not stand upon the dry Land --


D. of B. Come, Colonel, there is no help for no Remedy -- It Is my Royal
Father's Misfortune to work with bad Tools -- and the best Artist in the World
can never make a Silk Purse of a Sows Ear. --


Sarsfield. However there is Life in a Muscle still -- the Heretics have not
done all their Work yet -- we have something still left, that will hold 'em
play for some time -- and if we can but get fresh Succors from France, we may
be able to turn the Scales -- or else at least to make an honorable
Composition for our selves.


ACT III. Scene 4.
King J. Tyrconnel, Herbert, Mayor of Dublin, and others. K. J. TO Day a Man,
to Morrow a Mouse --


Herbert. I must confess, I was in hopes I might have had a Mace carried before
me, as well as my Capital Enemy Jefferies --


Tyrcon. Lose all in one day, without hopes of ever having a Back Game to play!
What will the World think of us? -- They Will say, surely we were either very
Improvident, or very Confident Gamesters, to hazard all at one Throw --


K. J. I must confess, I long mistrusted the Issue of this day, and therefore it
was, that I sent away Trant, to prepare Ships for my return into France before
the Fight --


Herbert. 'Twas ill foreboded, an't please your Majesty -- but by this you have
acquired the Honor of being the greatest Prince in the World, happy in your
Misfortunes, to be both a King, a Priest, and a Prophet; which is more than
your Brother Lewis can pretend to -- A King without contradiction -- a Priest,
as being of the Order of Loyola, and the Prophet of your own Afflictions --


Fer. I wish I might have proved a false Prophet, though it had cost me the
spoiling of your Compliment, my Lord -- But there is no staying here -- They are
in quick pursuit I warrrant ye, after us -- therefore send for the Mayor and
Aldermen.


Herbert. They attend without, Sir --


Enter Mayor and Aldermen. K. J. Gentlemen, I had a very good Army in England;
but when I had the greatest Occasion for them, they deserted me -- When I came
into this Kingdom, I found my Roman Catholic Subjects well equipped and
prepared to defend my Cause. And though I had been often told, that when it came
to the touch, they would never bear the brunt of a Battle, I would never
believe it till now. It Is true, they did not desert me as in England, yet when
it came to a Trial, they basely fled the Field, and left the Spoil to my
Enemies -- So that hence forward I never more desire to head an Irish Army, and
now am resolved to shift for my self; and so must you too. So, Gentleman,
Farewell --


Mayor. Now is my Heart as heavy as a six Pounder -- fit for nothing but a
Grocer's Scales, to weigh Plums withal -- and therefore to keep it from sinking
to the bottom of my Belly, I hope my Brethren and I shall endeavor to lighten
it this Night, with your Majesty's Health before the Enemy comes amongst us --
It Is the last thing that we do for the departed, and so may Heaven grant you
success with the same Benevolence, as we shall drink it with fidelity to your
Cause --


Herbert. A pretty rough draught of Cordial Allegiance -- yet something better
than Grief in one hand, and Sorrow in the other -- Withal, my Lord Mayor -- I
must tell ye, that though it has been often debated, in Case a Revolution should
happen, whether upon deserting of Dublin, the City should not be fired, the
King has considered of it, and thinks it too Barbarous to be done -- for though
he affects the French Modes in all other things, in that he does not --


Tyrcon. You see what a gracious Prince you were like to have had, and
therefore let it be the last Act of your Obedience to repress all Insolences
of the Rabble, and keep all things quiet, till your new Guardians come, and
then let them alone --


Mayor. And I think too, the Protestants may be all let out of their
Confinements, without any Orders of the Lieutenancy --


Tyr. Ay, Ay, my Lord, or else they will let out themselves -- farewell, my Lord --


K. J. Now, my Lords, let us post the next way to Waterford -- for I Am
resolved not to sleep till I get a Shipboard --


Herbert. Please your Majesty, I intend to bear you Company --


K. J. With all my heart, my Lord -- I always love to have Justice of my side.


ACT. III. Scene 5.
The Released Protestants and Papists meet in the Streets, the Papists fawn
upon 'em. Papist. OH Neighbor, well met -- I am heartily glad to see you at
liberty again -- By my shoule, Neighbor, you cannot imagine how sorry I was at
your Confinement -- By Creesh, Neighbor, I did all that lay in my Power for
you -- went and spoke in your behalf; till I was so snubb'd for my pains, that
I was forced to pull in my Horns, for fear of being taken for one of you --


Protestant. Ay, Neighbor, I heard what pains you took -- and I thank you for
it most heartily --


Papist. Truly Neighbor 'twas always my Opinion, that our Clergy were somewhat
too severe -- I wish they had been more mild, it might perhaps have been better
for 'em -- I told 'em of their Rigor many times -- but then they were
presently Cock a Hoop -- What are you a favourer of Heretics? -- and then my
Mouth was presently stopped --


Protestant. Well, Neighbor, it is past now -- and I pray God forgive 'em, for
my part, I do --


2. Papist. O Neighbor, How I am overjoyed at your deliverance -- I protest,
Neighbor, I offered to be your Bail, and carried another along with me, but it
would not be taken -- I think the Devil was in 'em to be so Cruel -- I knew ye
to be an Honest Man, and a just Dealer -- and I would have paun'd all the
Reputation I had in the World for ye, if they would have taken it --


Protestant. I thank you kind Neighbor, I am very well satisfied in the Truth
of what you say -- and I wish they would have taken your security, for I was
almost stifled, we were so crowded together --


3. Papist. Neighbor! I protest I joy to see you out of your Trouble -- did
you never receive some inconsiderable trifling parcels of Money by a private
hand -- I know they were not worth speaking of -- but I Will assure you, upon the
Word of a Christian, 'twas I that sent 'em --


Protestant. I Will assure you, Neighbor, they were very acceptable -- and I
most cordially thank you for it -- I knew Neighbor, 'twas your Charity, by the
private mark you used to give your Money. --


Papist. And did not at other times, the same private hand, bring you meat and
drink?


Protestant. Yes, Neighbor, I must needs acknowledge it --


Papist. I Will assure ye 'twas I that sent it -- for I could not endure Men
should be so cruelly used --


Protestant. I was not ignorant of your kindness, Neighbor -- I knew the Meat
by the dressing, and the Drink by the taste -- for I knew you had your meat
always well dressed, and kept good Drink in your House -- I hope I may live to
retaliate your Courtesies. --


4. Papist. Your most humble Servant, Mr. Clommell. --


Protestant. I do not know you, Sir --


Papist. It may be so, Sir, -- but were not you for two years together most
violently tormented with the Headache --


Protestant. Yes, Sir, I was so, but when King James was here, coming over
Essex Bridge late in the Night, from visiting some Protestant Relations, some
body or other, without the least provocation in the World, gave me a cut of the
Head about seven Inches long, to my great ease as it proved, for the Pain has
never troubled me since the Cure --


Papist. I Will assure ye, Sir, upon the word of a Christian, 'twas I gave you
that Cut -- for by my skill in Surgery, I knew there was no other way to Cure
ye -- And I did it unexpectedly, for fear you would have been unwilling to have
undergone the Cure, had you been told of it beforehand --


Protestant. Truly Sir, 'twas a very great kindness, more than I deferv'd --
and a very great Cure; and I Will assure ye, Sir, I shall recommend ye for a
Curer of the Headache, to all I know that are in the same Condition that I then
was --


Exeunt Papists -- Protestants meet together. 1. Protestant. Who lately thought
of an Alteration like this, so sudden and so Comfortable! -- I could not
reconcile my Bones to the hard Boards, for my life -- they will hardly endure a
Feather Bed yet, they are so sore --


2. Protestant. How did you find your House at your return -- I Am sure they
left me nothing but bare Walls --


1. Protestant. Truly Neighbor, I have not heard a Mouse stir in my House yet
-- I believe they all went after our Provisions to the Popish Habitations --
and then for my Wares and Goods they are all vanished -- and yet I am sure when
I left 'em, they were all Corporeal Substances, that had they not been taken
away, would never have moved of themselves -- Certainly Carriage was very dear,
during our Confinement -- and I am apt to think they would have carried a way
the very bare walls too, had they had time to pick down the Mortar.


3. Protestant. Certainly since the Parisian Massacre, never did Prince permit
so much Barbarism to be committed in the Metropolis of a Kingdom.


5. Protestant. And yet now I cannot but smile -- to hear our late Persecutors
and Slanderers tell us, what private friends they were to us in our
necessities, to curry favor with us for fear of the same usage -- But for my
part, I don't believe a tittle they say -- only I give 'em cheap good words. --


6. Protestant. That it was debated whether they should fire the City or no, in
case they were forced to desert it, is apparent by by the King's own confession
-- and it was no less plain, that those thoughts were laid aside, more out of
fear of the little Mercy to be expected from an Enemy so enraged -- than out of
any Kindness to us -- and therefore now we are free, let us have a care of the
same Yoke again -- I hope we shall fight a little better for our Deliverer --
than these Caterpillars did for their King -- and so if you please, let us go
and Drink the best Health in the World, To King William and Queen Mary.


Exeunt. ACT III. Scene 6.
Tyrconnel, Lauzune, La Hoquette. I Saw him Shipped off -- and I could not but
let fall some of my Radical Moisture at parting, but it was only like a short
April shower when the Sun shines -- for indeed, under the Rose be it spoken,
our King is not the man I took him for -- no man more impatient for the loss of
his Crown, no man more unwilling to venture himself for the recovery of it --

Lauzun. My Lord, my Master's a Politician, and will not let him venture -- He
has charged him to the contrary -- For if he be lost, my Master loses the
chiefest Instrument he has to disturb his most dreadful Adversary. --


Tyrcon. And when your Master finds he can do no good with him, what will he do
with him then? -- For people have little Kindness for unfortunate Princes,
especially those that show themselves more careful of their persons, than of
their Dominions. And therefore if this last Act of his have not quite
extinguished that small Remainder of Affection which the English had for him, I
think they are too blame, to be always venturing their Lives and Fortunes in a
leaky Bottom --


Lauzune. What will you do then, my Lord? --


Tyrcon. I Will even do as well as I can -- I Will only stay to see Lymerick lost,
-- and then I Will consider -- I must confess I have some Embers of gratitude
still glowing for my Old Patron and Raiser, -- and I would fain do as much for
him as I could --


Lauzune. But what shall I do then, that have sold all to sollow the Fortune of
an Unfortunate Prince? -- I am loath to return home to my own Country to be
laughed at --


Tyrcon. Faith, my Lord, I would advise you to carry your Brigade into the
Morea, as Hawksworth the English Tailor, in Ed. the thirds time, got leave to
march into Italy, then variously in Arms, where he served them that gave most,
with that success, that at length he had the honor to be buried in Florence,
under a noble Monument, by the name of Giovanni Acuto. My Lord, when you have
got your Men into the Morea, you may either side with the Turk your Master's
great Crony, or with the Venetian, which gives most; and by that means, after
great Renown acquired, you may chance to be buried either in St. Marks at
Venice, or else in the Chief Mosquee in Constantinople --


Lauzune. I should be glad my Lord, of your Lordships Company, and be willing
you should share as well in my Fame, as in my Funerals --


Tyrcon. Pardon me, my Lord, for being merry in misfortune -- an ounce of Mirth
is worth a pound of Sorrow --


Hoquette. But what shall I do then? -- I have no Brigades to carry either to
the Turk, or any where else --


Lauzune. Oh! Lieutenant General, you may return again to your Native Country
without Reflections --


Hoquette. I think, my Lord, I have as much reason to complain as you -- our
Master might have sent some body else than us of his first of April Errands,
into a Cowardly Country -- What Honor did he think we could win among a
Company of Captain Cut-puddings that never intended to fight -- Had we not
understood the Right French way of fighting savingly, we had been all cut to
pieces --


Tyrcon. My Lords, I make no question but you have both of ye made up your
Mouths pretty well -- This Island affords good staple Commodities, that are
good Chaffer in France -- and sure you did not burn so many Towns and Villages
for nothing -- certainly you skim'd off the Cream of the spoil for your selves
--


Hoquette. Something begar we have got you may be sure -- but not so much as
you think for, or we expected to gain -- Ventre Goy, I was for plundering of
Dublin, and then we might have filled both Pockets, Breeches and all -- now we
must be glad to get away with a Flea in our Ears, in Comparison, as well as we
can -- Would I were well safe once, where some of my Luggage lies --


Lauzun. I wish I were any where but where I am -- here I neither Command, nor
am Commanded -- but lie still for want of work, like a Brick-layer in Winter --
Morbleu, I thought to have been Prince of Dublin before this --


Tyr. I question, my Lord, whether that would have fallen to your share --


Lauzune. Mortbleu, had we beaten the Enemy, I could have beaten all your Men
my self -- and then I would have tried who was Master, your King or ours --


Tyr. Ah, my Lord, I Am afraid you showed your Teeth too soon -- and that was
the reason our Dogs bit no closer --


Enter Messenger. My Lords, the English Army is certainly marching toward ye
in two Bodies -- One General Douglas Commands, the other is headed by the
Victorious Prince himself --

Lauzune. We have been all along deluded with Stories and untruths -- Where are
your fifty thousand Men, my Lord, that were to rise in England? --


Tyr. Why, Sir, they are gone to join the twenty thousand Men your Master sent
to take the I Will of Wight -- don't your Lordship understand what belongs to
false reports yet? --


Lauzane. Yes Begar, and to true ones too, my Lord -- I wish I had never given
Credit to the true ones, and I had never lost my true Shouldier of Mutton, to
snap at the shadow --


Enter second Messenger. The Enemy comes on a-pace, and lies this Night at
Goolin Bridge --

Lauzune. Were I not now in an Island, I could find a hundred holes to creep
out of this Labyrinth -- I could join a hundred of my Master's Parties -- But
in this Lobs Pound, what the Diable shall I do with two thousand five hundred
Men -- Well, my Lords, I Will leave Lymerick, for that would be to shut my self
up in a Pound, within a Pound, and retire to Galloway -- There I shall either
meet with Ships to carry off my Men -- or else with new Reinforcements from my
Master --


Was ever Man thus Bubbl'd Ventregoy,
To sell good Land to purchase a Decoy.
ACT. III. Scene 7.
Messenger, Lauzune, Tyrconnel, Berwick, Hoquette, Sarsfield, Talbot -- MY
Lords, I come with Winds and Sails as diligent to hasten me, as I was zealous
to bring you welcome Tidings from St. Germains. --

Berwick. Thou seem to have rather flown, than come by Sea --


Mess. With the same speed your Royal Father flew, who was at Tredah the Tenth
of July, and the Twenty sixth at St. Germains --


Berwick. And is my Royal Father well? --


Mess. Upon the twenty sixth of July, your Royal Father arrived at St.
Germains, in the King of France's Coaches, accompanied by the D. of Bouillon --
Great Chamberlain; who was sent to receive him in his Majesty's Name --


Ber. There Is Honor still, and Royal Respect I see, shown even to my Father's
Misfortunes -- what would be done to his Prosperity! --


Mess. The King went to visit him the same day, and received him with all the
Testimonies of a Tender and Ardent Affection -- And made him new Protestations
to support him against his Enemy, and to employ all his Forces to restore him;
nor did he show him any signs of being dissatisfied with his Conduct --


Ber. There Is new Consolation for ye, my Lords, to raise your sinking Spirits
--


Lauzune. I wish they may come quickly, or else I fear I shall be in the Sudds,
before their Arrival --


[fetching a deep sigh -- Ber. Why do you sigh, my Lord? --


Lauzune. [Sighing again.] I know my Master's a great Dissembler, my Lord, and
I am well satisfied moreover, that he has other Fish to fry, than to employ all
his Forces to assist your Royal Father -- Morbleu, I don't like the beginning
of the Story -- Go on Messenger.


Mess. The Visit lasted above two Hours, and by the report of some that
understand Affairs, 'twas not altogether spent in Complements -- It Is said
also, that your Royal Father is to go aboard the French Fleet, and endeavor to
land in England, where he hopes to find a Considerable Party that will declare
for him --


Ber. I like this well -- 'Twas so ordered, to save my Father's Vow, who has
determined never to head an Irish Army more --


Mess. The next Morning he went to Versailles, to visit her Majesty, and
returned that Evening to the Queen his Royal Consort --


Ber. And how did she receive him? --


Mess. [After a little studying] Um -- why -- an't like your Grace, there were
some little Bickerings between 'em at first -- but the next Morning she seemed
well contented.


Ber. Ay -- she is a Woman never bears Malice long in her Mind --


Mess. There Is something more that I have to say, but I Am loath to out with it
--


Ber. Out with it man -- for fear of Choking --


Mess. It Is said -- there stops


Ber. Prithee go on --


Mess. -- It Is said, that all the Welcomes and Caresses which the King made
your father, cannot reconcile him to the Esteem of the Court Grandees -- They
say that William was truly born to Command, and James to obey -- and that it
was for your Father who had nothing more to lose, to have acted the Person of
King William in Ireland, and for William the third to have spared himself, as
your Royal Father did --


Ber. And did they call him King William? --


Mess. Yes, an't like your Grace --


Ber. I Will go and Challenge 'em every Mother's Son, as soon as I Am at leisure
-- Well, but how does my Royal Father look, does he seem any way dejected? --


Mess. Quite the contrary, Sir -- He carries it with an Air and Countenance
rather of a Prince Triumphant over his Enemies, than of a Person that had fled
before 'em --


Ber. Law ye now there, my Lords -- You see my Royal Father's Heart whole still
-- and the King of France sticks to him -- I find we shall have the other Brush
for it still --


Lauzune. All this does not yet satisfy me -- I Am sure my Master's too knowing
in the Art of War, not to understand, that if his Arms have not prosper'd in
Ireland, it must be in part the fault of him that commanded them -- So that if
he received him kindly at his return, and appeared satisfied with his Couduct,
it was rather out of Policy, than from the bottom of his Heart -- But my Master
has still need of him, to oppose the King of England, and therefore it is, that
he is so good a Husband of him, and so behaves himself toward him as if he
were the greatest General in the World --


Sarsfield. You are so full of Scruples, my Lord -- you suppose and believe,
and believe and suppose this and that and the other -- I believe and suppose no
such thing -- I believe the King of France to be real, and that he seriously
intends to do as he says --


Tyr. Otherwise he were the most ungrateful Person in the World -- for when it
lay in our Master's Power he did all that he could for him -- Nay, I may boldly
say, that had it not been for our Master, he had never come to what he is -- I
will instance ye only in one thing, and that was in mannaging all the Dutch
Wars for your Master's advantage --


Tal. Gad I believe the most Christian King to be one of the Honestest
Gentlemen in Europe -- and my reason is, because he always loved a handsome Girl
--


Ber. Look ye, my Lords, you must grant me that Kings Heads are better than
other Men's Heads -- And if so, then two Kings Heads are better than one -- so
that I am confident, after these two Kings have laid their Heads together a
little while, you will see strange Alterations in Europe --


Tal. Would he were hanged that does not not believe your Grace speaks like an
Angel --


Sarsfield. For my part, I hope to be revelling in London -- Let me see -- How
long first? -- do you appoint a time, my Lord --


Tyrcon. Truly, my Lord, I cannot --


Sars. Before -- before -- Tuesday come Sennight --


Lauzune. -- Not so soon, Colonel --


Sars. I Will hold ye, my Lord, a hundred Guineys to one on it. --


Lauzune. Wagers are Fools Arguments, Colonel --


Sars. By the Bones of my Father, I Will take the Lie from never a French Bougre
-- Diable of ye all --


Draws -- They all draw, take Parties, fall a fighting, and so put an end to
the last Act. Epilogue.
I Wonder what our Audience will say,
Of this our Thundering, drumming, fighting Play?
Here are no Scenes indeed, as will invite,
We bring 'em or, but yet they will not fight.
These Irish are of just the self same Kidney,
Like the two Cowards in Sir Philip Sidny.
They Huff, present, Rage, foam, look big and Swear,
But something whispers to 'em, have a Care.
Such Sparks the Ladies Hatred cannot lack,
They hate the Man, that always turns his Back:
No, they by other methods must be won,
They like the Man that briskly pushes on.
It Is strange what Nature made these Irish for,
They Are neither good in Peace, nor fit for War;
The highest Office they are fit for most,
Is to be Trotters in the Penny Post.
Oh! were they all upon a Famous Plain,
Where never yet was daring Monarch slain,
From whence, to Rome, if we could them Convey,
We gladly would the charge of Carriage pay.
BOOKS Printed for Richard Baldwin.
THE Folly of Priest Craft, a Comedy.

To the two Universities, an Epistle; together with a Prediction, concerning
the French, Translated out of Callimachus, who is by St. Paul, said to be a
Prophet, and that his Testimony is true. Titus Chapter 1. v. 12. 13.

The Address given in to the late King James, by the titular Archbishop of
Dublin, from the general Meeting of the Romish Bishops and Clergy of Ireland,
held in May last, by that King's Order; wherein several things relating to the
Popish Designs upon these three Kingdoms, are discovered, the Original whereof
was found in the late King James's Closet, in the Castle of Dublin, at his
leaving that City: And the Copy whereof was found in the titular Archbishop's
Lodgings. Now published with Reflections on each Paragraph.

A True Relation of the Cruelties and Barbarities of the French, upon the
English Prisoners of War. Being a Journal of their Travels from Dinan in
Britany, to Thoulon in Provence; and back again. With a Description of the
Situation, and Fortifications of all the Eminent Towns upon the Road, and
their Distance. Of their Prisons and Hospitals, and the Number of Men that died
under their Cruelty: With the Names of many of them, and the places of their
Deaths and Burials: With an Account of the great Charity and sufferings of the
poor Protestants of France; And other material Things that happened upon the
Way.

The Memoirs of Monsiour Deageant; containing the most secret Transactions and
Affairs, from the Death of Henry IV. till the beginning of the Ministry of the
Cardinal de Richlieu. To which is added, a particular Relation of the
Archbishop of Embrun's Voyage into England, and of his Negotiation for the
Advancement of the Roman Catholic Religion here; together with the Duke of
Buckingham's Letters to the said Archbishop, about the Progress of that
Affair; which happened the last Years of King James l, his Reign. Faithfully
translated out of the French Original.

The Cabinet Opened; or, the Secret History of the Amors of Madam de Maintenon
with the French King. Translated from the French Copy.

The History of the most Illustrious William P. of Orange; Deduced from the
first Founders of the Ancient House of Nassau; together with the most
considerable Actions of this present Prince. The second Edition.

A Collection of Fourteen Papers, relating to the Affairs of Church and State,
in the Reign of the late King James.

The Character of a Trimmer. His Opinion of, I. The Laws and Government. II.
The Protestant Religion. III. The Papists. IV. Foreign Affairs. By the
Honorable. Sir William Coventry. The third Edition, carefully Corrected, and
cleared from the Errors of the first Impression.

An Impartial Relation of the Illegal Proceedings against St. Mary Magdalen
College in Oxon, in the Year of our Lord 1687. Containing only Matters of Fact
as they occurred. The Second Edition. To which is added the most remarkable
Passages omitted in the former. Collected by a Fellow of the said College.

The Justice of the Parliament, in inflicting of Punishments subsequent to
Offenders' vindicated; and the lawfulness of the present Government asserted.

An Account of Mr. Perkinson's Expulsion from the University of Oxford, in late
times in vindication of him from the false Aspersions cast upon him, in a late
Pamphlet, Entitled, The History of Passive Obedience.

The Way to Peace among all Protestants; being a Letter of Reconcillation, sent
by Bp. Ridley, to Bp. Hooper. By Mr. Sam. Johnson.

Purgatory proved by Miracles; collected out of Roman Catholic Authors. With
some remarkable Histories relating to British, English, and Irish Saints, with
a Preface concerning their Miracles. By Mr. Sam. Johnson.

A Seasonable Discourse, showing the unreasonableness and Mischiefs of
Imposition in Matters of Religion; Recommended, to a serious Consideration. By
Mr. Andrew Marvel, late Member of Parliament.

The Revolter. A Tragi-Comedy, acted between the Hind and Panther, and Religio
Laici.

A Collection of Poems, Satyrs, and Songs, against Popery and Tyranny. In four
Parts. Most of them writ by the late Duke of Buckingham, Mr. Andrew Marvel, Mr.
John Aylof, and Mr. Stephen College.

An Answer to the Bp. of Rochester's first and second Letters, etc.

The Intrigues of the French King at Constantinople to imbroll Christendom;
discovered in several Dispatches past between him and the late Grand Signior,
Grand Vizier, and Count Teckely; all of them sound among that Count's Papers.
With some Reflections upon them.

The New Nonconformist. Or, Dr. Sherlock's Case in preaching after a
Deprivation, incurred by the Express words of a Statute; fairly Stated and
examined. With some short Reflections upon Mr. Cook's Sermon, Feb. 2. 1690.
which was Licensed by the Archbishop's Chaplain.

The Fate of France. A Discourse where it is showed, That by the Happy
Revolution in England, all the Designs of the French King for the Universal
Monarchy are disappoined; and the Rational Grounds to believe his Downfall near.
In three Dialogues betwixt Father Petre, Father La Chaise, and two Protestant
Gentlemen.

The Anatomy of a Jacobite Tory. In a Dialogue between Whig and Tory,
occasioned by the Act for Recognizing K. William and Q. Mary

The Great Bastard, Protector of the Little One. Done out of French. And for
which the French King put forth a Proclamation, with a Reward of five thousand
Louis d'Ors to discover the Author.

Reflections upon a Form of Prayer, lately set forth by the Jacobites of the
Church of England; and of an Abhorrence, tendered by the late King to some of
our Dissenting Bishops, upon his present Majesty's Landing.

A true Account of a late horrid Couspiracy to betray Holland to the French And
of the Trial, Confession, Condemnation and Execution of Jacob Martinet, Sheriff
of the Town of Sluys; and Cornelius Reoland, Master of the Ship called the
Argle of Amsterdam, who were Executed for the said Conspiracy, May 6. 1690.

Essex's Innocence and Honor vindicated; Or Murder, Subornation, Perjury and
Oppression, justly charged on the Murderers of that Noble Lord, and True
Patriot, Arthur (late) Earl of Essex. As proved before the Right Honorable
(late) Committee of Lords, are ready to be Deposed. By Laurnece Braddon, Gent.


