The Gentleman's Companion.

THE Gentleman's COMPANION: OR, A CHARACTER OF True Nobility, AND GENTILITY: In
the way of Essay.

By A Person of Quality. Written at first for his own Private Use, and now
Published for the Benefit of all.

LONDON, Printed by E. Oaks for Rowland Reynolds, at the Sun and Bible in the
Poultrey, 1672.

TO THE Nobility and Gentry OF England, Scotland, and Ireland, in General; And
all that Love and pursue true Virtue; PARTICULARLY, To the Right Honorable,
William, Earl of Dalhousey, Viscount Kerington, Lord Ramesey, His near Kinsman,
and Allye.
AS it is Virtue, a large and Noble Soul, hating all baseness and low
pusillanimous Actions that makes a Gentleman, and truly Enobles him more than
his Birth: So is it the true way of immortalizing our Families, the only Balm
that can keep our Names from rotting, and the chiefest Buckler against the
sharpest Dints of the Teeth of Time. For Families have their Beginnings,
Increase, State, and Fall, or Death, as well as Persons, only they continue
longer. He that by his Virtues has laid the Foundation of his House, and is
the beginner of his Family, is for ever to be Honored, and more to be praised
than all his Successors. He that advances, and increases his Family by his
Virtue, is to be Ranked in the second place. He that keeps it only at a stay,
may be fraught with outward Honors, and Turgent Titles, yet to be feared is
empty of inward Endowments. But he that Ruins his Family is most Unfortunate;
and if by his vice, the most miserable and despicable of Men. What shall I say?
The whole Discourse is but an Epistle unto you all admonitory; And therefore I
shall referr you to it, and add no more here, but that the Author is

A true and unfeigned Lover and Honourer of the Nobility, and Gentry, worthily
so called.
Die 15. Junii, 1669.
THE CHARACTER OF True Nobility, AND GENTILITY.
CHAP. I. What Gentility is.
WE see nothing more frequently galls a Man, than baseness of Birth, when in
Reputation or Honor; nor nothing more elevates him, than the empty Title of a
Gentleman, which duly considered in its Rise, Progress, and End, is but a Non
ens, and the greatest Vanity imaginable to boast of. For, as Alii pro pecunia
emunt Nobilitatem; alii illam lenocinio, alii venificiis, alii parracidiis;
multi proditione Nobilitatem conciliant; plerique adulatione, calumniis; ex
homicidio saepe orta Nobilitas, and strenua carnificina.
Agrippa well observes, Oppression, Fraud, Cosening, Usury, Knavery, Bawdery,
Murder, and Tyranny, are the beginning of many Ancient Families; one has been
a Blood-sucker, a Parricide, the Death of many a silly Soul in some unjust
Quarrels, Seditious, made many an Orphan and poor Widow, and for that he is
made a Lord, or an Earl; another has been a Pimp, a Pander, a Parasite, a
Plures ob prostitutas filias, uxores, nobiles facti; multos venationes,
Rapinae, Caedes, praestigia, etc.
Slave, prostituted himself, his Wife, Daughters, to some Prince lasciviously
inclined, and so he is for that exalted, and his posterity made Gentlemen ever
after. As Tiberius preferred many for being famous Whore-Masters, and Sturdy
Drunkards. Some rise by force, and some come into this Parchment-row of
Heraldry by Deceit, Foolery, Villainy, and Search your old Families, and you
shall scarce find of a multitude (as Aeacas Silvius observes) Qui secleratum
non habent ortum, aut qui vi and dolo eo fastigii non Ascendunt.
most by indirect means, or wealth, the measure of Nobility and Gentility; (
Disputare de Nobilitate generis, sine divitiis, est disputare de Nobilitate
Stercoris; as Novisanus the Lawyer Notes.
Nobilitas sine re, projecta vilior Alga.) So that wealth denominates it, and
wealth maintains it.

To be no otherwise a Gentleman than thus, signifies little. It may be thou art
his Heir, his supposed and reputed Son (when indeed a Serving-man, or some
other, a Neighbor, may be thy true Father.) A Fool may have vast possessions;
and he that accounts a man more Noble, a better man, for having them, is a Fool
himself. And if thou art not as well an Inheritor of thy Fathers, and Ancestors
Virtues, as Estate, thou art but a Titular Gentleman at best. What wise man
thinks better of any Person for his Gentility, or Revenues, that is an Idiot,
and impertinent? Machiavel says well, Omnes eodem patre Nati; Adam's Sons all:
And the Ancientest Gentility and Nobility arose from what was none. I would not
be mistaken here, as if I despised Gentility of Birth, or endeavored to bring
it into contempt (as in the time of our late Rebellion it was too much) for I
am a Gentleman born my self, and that of an Ancient and Honorable Family. But
still, I say, he is more to be respected, that has raised himself by his own
Virtues, and worth, and leaves a Noble Posterity, or Name, than he that is
contented to live vitiously, shunning all Virtue, because he is, as they call
it, a Gentleman; and his Estate can bear him out in all Riot, and Excess. It is
certainly better to say, Ego meis majoribus Virtute praeluxi, to boast of
Virtue than Birth.

Who can be so unjust, as to deny Abdolominas his due praise, who was but a
Gardener, and yet by Alexander, for his Virtues, made King of Sidonia: Or
Cathesbeius his, the Sultan of Egypt, and Syria, by Condition a Slave, but for
worth and valor second to no King, and therefore was elected Emperor of the
Mamuluches? Jovius. Lib. 1.
or Pizarro's, who for his Prowess, was made by Charles the Fifth, Marquis of
Anatillo? And the Turkish Bassa's are all advanced on the account of pure As
George Monk, Duke of Albermarle, was by King Charles the Second.
merit. Pertinax, Philippus Arabs, Maximinius, Probus, Aurelius, etc. From
private Soldiers, became Emperors; Cato, Cincinnatus, etc. Consuls; Pius
Secundus, Sixtus Quintus, Johannes Secundus, Nicholas Quintus, etc. Popes.
Socrates, Virgil, Horace, Libertino patre Natus. Can any one despise such Noble
Souls for the meaness of their Rise, or Birth? Homer, Demosthenes, Hercules,
Romulus, Alexander (by Olympia's confession) Themistocles, Jugurtha, King
Arthur, Jephtha, William the Conqueror, Peter Lombard, P. Comestor, Bartholus,
Adrian the fourth, Pope, etc. were all Bastards, yet all brave and gallant Men.
And almost in every Kingdom, many ancient Families have been at first,
Bastards. Corpore sunt and animo fortiores Spurii plerumque ab amoris
vehementiam seminis; Gass. etc. Cardanus de subtilitate.
Nay, the best Wits, greatest Scholars, valiantest Captains, and most Heroic
Spirits to be found in all our Annals, have been born out of Wedlock: and will
a wise man say they are ever the worse for that which is not their fault? It Is
a wonderful thing, says Machiavel, to him that shall consider it, that all
those, or the greatest part of them, that have done the highest Exploits here
upon Earth, and excelled the rest of the Noblest of their time, have been,
still, born in some abject place, or of some base and obscure Parents, and are
usually most fortunate. What wise man thinks the worse of Tully for being an
Up-start, or of Iphicrates, and Marius, for their mean Birth, or of Agathocles,
King of Sicily, for being a Potters Son. So Telephanes, King of Lydia, was but
the Son of a Carter; Valentinian, the Emperor, of a Rope-maker: Primislaus,
King of Bohemia, of a Cow-herd: And Tamberlain the great is by most reputed
only the Son of a Shepherd, as he was himself; nay, and David the King, a man
after Gods own heart, was no other.

So that I may conclude, if thou have had never so many Noble Ancestors, it is
nothing to thee; (vix ea nostra voco) If thou manifest it not in the practice
of their Virtues. If thou have a good Soul, good Education, and art Virtuous,
well qualified in thy Conditions, Honest, Ingenuous, Learned, hating all
baseness, thou art a true Gentleman, nay, perfectly Noble, (...)
though born of Thersites.

Which comprehending the true qualifications of a Gentleman, because I love not
tedious Discourses, I shall only hint at some few of the chiefest, as they may,
and do concern a Gentleman, beginning with

MEMBER I. Education.
IT being indeed another Nature, altering our understandings, wills, and
affections; or a custom imbibed at the Commencement of our Capacities: for a
man may as soon change his color from white to black, or his Nature, as his
Customs. Nay, its For we are only civil, or uncivil, good or bad, foolish, or
wise, or any thing else, according to Custom; so that they that adore it not in
in their actions, and do not dress themselves, make their Congies to obey and
observe it, pass in this World but for Fools, and all the rest of their Actions
accounted ridiculous.
Tyranny is so Universal, as we daily see men choose rather to destroy their
healths, Estates, and Lives, than alter their Customs.

There is not only a necessity of good Education to accomplish a Gentleman, but
great caution it be not bad or indiscreetly managed. Many Parents love their
Children so foolishly by their too much indulgence and remissness in
Correction, or for want of wit to govern them, that they seem rather to hate
them, whereby they being uncultivated, must needs bring forth the steril, and
briary fruits of rudeness, ignorance, incorrigeableness, gracelesness, etc.

Against indiscreet Parents and Rulers.
Others again, on the other side, are so indiscreet, morose, austere, and
passionate, especially some Tutors, and pedagogues, that they dishearten Youth,
and many times besot or mope good wits, and so cow them out as they never have
any courage or ingenuity all their lives after. Such Martyring Tutors or
Parents are no better than Hangmen; Nimia severitate deficiunt, and desperant;
making them weary of their Lives, and despair; not only perverting the good
temperature of their minds, but the Constitution oftimes of their Bodies too;
for force makes their Nature return with the greater violence, Discipline and
Education less importune. Thus our Minds, and Natures become Figgs, or
Thistles; therefore we ought seasonably to prune the one, and eradicate the
other. For while Young they are most flexible, and may be brought to any
proportion before they have taken to an Habit. To spare any cost in so
excellent a work, and of so great consequence, is to be penny wise, and pound
foolish. And it is a great fault in many Parents, and extremely prejudicial,
that give not sufficient allowance as they grow up, for it inevitably splits
them on the Rock of baseness, causes them to associate with mean company,
whereby they lose their time by learning little or nothing, debases their
Spirits, casts them on sneaking Inferior shifts, and oft-times is the cause
they prove more than ordinary Extravagant when Means fall into their hands.

That Women are no less Rational, Intelectual, and Docible, than Men.
I am not of their Opinion who think a Woman wise enough, if she can keep her
self out of the Rain, and can distinguish between her Husbands Hat and his
Cloak; concluding it never a good World since they could either Write or Read.
For Women have Souls as well as we, and differ nothing from us but in the odd
Instruments of Generation. They are generally more witty, and quicker of Spirit
than Men; and oft-times many Women have been known to excel all the Men of
their Country. Learning, Wisdom, Valor, Magnanimity, Government of Empires,
Kingdoms, etc. are not solely Masculine. The Being of Man or Woman simply, does
not make either of them good or bad; happy, or unhappy; Noble, or base;
handsome, or unhandsome: both of all are common to both Sexes. And in truth, if
any may challenge the preheminency, the Females have much reason, if we
consider, they are for the most part, more pitiful, more pious, faithful,
merciful, chaste, beautiful, than Men; coming sooner to a ripeness of judgment
and reason; the faculties of their Souls being more vigorous. Man was made of
the Dust of the Earth, or (...) Homo utriusque Sexus includens. Genesis 5.2. Fuit
rubicatus (...) ex terra rub^a formatus.
red Earth, but Woman of Man himself, a more Noble Matter, and refined; and in
the order of the Creation we see, after God had made all the inferior and
meaner things, he makes the Noblest, Man, as the Lord, and Governor of them
all; and then lastly, ends with the Creation of the Woman, as the Masterpiece
of Nature, and glory of the Man. I say, if we consider these things, the Woman
may be equaled, if not preferred before the Man; were not we taught by an
infallible Spirit, that the Man is the Head of the Woman; and that he was not
made for her, but she for him, and he for God; and therefore is she to be in
subjection to the Man. It Is extremely idle, however, to despise them; for had
they the Men's Education, they would, perhaps, exceed them. They are Genesis 5.2. Their
name was by God himself given Adam, and as this signifies both, so does homo,
haec homo, as well as hic.
Female Men (as I may say) and differ (as was noted) but in trifles, merely for
the propagation, nutrition, and continuation of Mankind. Semiramis, Thamyris,
and others, abroad; Queen Mary, and Elizabeth, at home, have shown Women as
well as Men knew how to govern Kingdoms, and Empires. Deborah was a Prophetess
(and so were all the Sybels, to show God reveals himself as well to Women, as
Men) and a leader of the People, nay, of God's People, against their Enemies.
And if Joshua were a (...) Jeshugnah, Solus, Salvatio, a Rad. in Hiph. (...)
Hoshiong, Salvavit.
Savior of Israel by his Valor; Jael, that slew Sisera, and Judith, that cut
off Holofernes's Head, declares, that Men alone are not courageous, and fit for
politic, Martial affairs. If there were many great Heroes, and Conquerours,
were there not as many Amazons? Was not the great Monarch, Cyrus, Conquered by
a Woman? Zenobia, Queen of the Palmyrians, taught her Sons the Greek, Latin,
and Egyptian Tongues; and wrote an Epitomy of the Eastern Histories. As
Cornelia taught the Gracchies, her two Sons, the Latin Eloquence; for which
also our Queen Elizabeth was famous. Aretia taught her Son Aristippus,
Philosophy; Socrates himself did not disdain to hear the public Philosophical
Lectures of Diotima, and Asyacia: as Apollos was not ashamed, though Learned,
to be Catechized by Priscilla. Likewise Tullia inherited her Fathers Oratory,
as well as Estate. Hipatia, the Wife of Isidore the Philosopher of Alexandria,
was excellently well skilled in Astrology. Sappho in Poetry, the Inventress of
Saphick Verses; As also the three Corynnae: the first of which out-did Pindar
five times, notwithstanding he was the Prince of the Lyrick Poets. Nay, the
very Apostles themselves were taught by Women, or the Women were, as it were,
Apostles unto them, when Christ first appeared to Mary, she was to go and tell
the Apostles, etc.

But every History will afford us some Woman or other equalling some of our
best Men. Wherefore they that think to find the Nobleness, or abjectness in the
Sex, seek where nothing is to be found; for the being a Man, or a Woman, makes
them neither Noble, nor Ignoble (as was said) but the being an xecellent Man,
or an excellent Woman. So then, if there be any defect, it is from the
individual person, and no more from the Sex, than from the whole Species.

This being so, it is great folly in Parents (especially the Nobility, Gentry,
and such as have Estates) if they have not (in a prudent way) as much care in
the Education of their Daughters, as Sons; especially in this Age, wherein they
need to be furnished with abundance of Virtue, to withstand the continual
assaults Men make on their Chastity. Why should they then not be instructed in
all manner of Good Learning, and Literature? which is one great and chief part
of Education; and the other is like unto it, Travel.

PART I. Learning, Literature, and Studies for a Gentleman.
LEarning, good Literature, and Studies tend chiefly to the Rooting of Virtue,
and good manners, as well as wisdom in a Gentleman, and to perfect our Natures.
And this rests in good Seminaries of Learning, and good Societies, such as are
the Universities.

When Grammar has Instructed him in Language, true Orthography, and to
understand what he reads, Philosophy, both Natural and Moral, should be looked
into, for as much as they make a Gentleman both grave and profound. The
knowledge of a few good Books is better than a Library, and a main part of
Learning.

As for Logic, Rhetoric, and such Studies that tend only to Contention, and
Ostentation, time is but ill spent about them; and when all is done, signify
little.

Experimental Philosophy is much to be preferred, especially the Spagyrical,
and Cartetian; Experience being that chief thing indeed that perfects our
Studies.

Being thus well grounded, that he may be well accomplished to serve, and Honor
his Creator, his King, and be serviceable to his Country, let him acquaint
himself chiefly with History, Poetry, and Oratory: The first (in as much as it
makes past times as they were present, by comparing one with another, and
observation) will give him wisdom. The second, Invention and nimbleness of wit.
And the last, Ornament, and an awful respect of his Auditors; allowing a
convenient time for meditation of what thou have read, for that will make it
thy own.

Since then all our Studies tend to the glory of God, the welfare of our
Country, and the advantage of Man, or Neighbor, we will show a little how a a
Gentleman may be fitted to do both.

SECT. I. The Grounds of a Gentleman's Religion.
LEt me here, in so weighty a matter, a little take the Liberty to expatiate.
As Religion is the Cement that keeps the Church from falling, and knitteth
the Members thereof together, and prevents Confusion; so uniformity is the
Cement of Religion, and is both well pleasing to God, and advantageous to man:
The breach thereof, being the inlet to Sects, Schisms, Heresies, Atheism,
Superstition, and all Profaneness, and Confusion. Uniformity in Religion
increases faith toward God, and all good works, as well as peace in the
Church, peace of Conscience, Love, and Charity toward our Neighbors.

Causes of Atheism.
Whereas Divisions, and contrary Opinions in Religion, is the Inlet of all
evil, the increaser of feuds, emulation, envy, and malice one against another,
neglecting peace and unity, to follow a party and Nihil est quod tam impotenter
Rapiat Homines, quam suscepta de salute Opinio; siquidem pro ea omnes gentes
corpora and animas Devovere solent, and arctiffimo necessitudinis vinculo se
invicem colligare.
faction; And without doubt, keeps off many from the Church, and may be the
most probable Reason, for ought I know, why this Age so swarms with Atheists;
So that it is almost come to that pass, that he that will not Blaspheme his
maker, nay, and deny there is any such thing as a Deity, and declare himself a
downright Atheist, is accounted no Gentleman.

The existence of a Deity, against Atheists.
Whenas they may sooner doubt whether they themselves be, than whether there be
a God. For if they be only Entia a primo, (as I have noted elsewhere) they must
first know him that is primum, before they can know themselves. A flashy,
drolling wit, and some small Notions, and sips in Learning, inclines many men
to Atheism, (yet, for the most part, they are but half-witted fellows, though
they make a great bustle in the World;) but, true wisdom, and a large draught
of Learning brings them to the knowledge of a God. Who can but admire to see
men fancy such idle chymeras in their Heads, as all things are produced by
Nature? When, if they were able to salve all her Phenomenon; yet they must be
constrained to confess, that at the beginning there must be an Infinite,
Omnipotent, and Omniscient Being, to dispose that confused Chaos, or Heap of
Atoms, to cause an universal Harmony; and especially to convert those Atoms
into those various seminal contextures, on which most of the abstruse
operations and productions of Nature depend. Besides, it is less difficult to
conceive the Eternity, and all the Attributes of a GOD, than to conceive
Infinite, Eternal, Self-existent, and Self-moving Atoms. To Judge by sundry
Causes, of many things, if not of most, is to judge amiss, and on imperfect
grounds; for we knowing nothing but as our Senses represent them unto us, we
must needs judge of things not really as they are, but according to the Analogy
they have with us; and so many times we rest in them, and search no further:
But, if we seriously weigh the concatenation of Causes, we must needs be driven
to acknowledge a supreme hand, and a GOD the first moving cause. For all
actions and mutations in the World are performed by motion, which motion being
traced through its causes, will bring us to an eternal Being, and the
acknowledgment of a GOD, as being the first mover; and consequently, that he is
Eternal: whence it is easy to prove the rest of his Attributes.

Causes of Atheism.
I shall not dispute with such as maintain there is no real Atheist denying GOD in
the heart; Since this wicked Age wherein we live does sadly evince to us the
contrary. But this I shall affirm, that hardly any Sect, or Opinion in Religion
is approved by any, but the professors thereof, (as if they had no Nulla
firmior amicitia, quam quae contrabitur hinc; nulla Discordia major, quam quae
a Religione fit. Montanus in Micah.
Charity) presently account them Atheists, which may be put as another cause of
Atheism. For, none more like to be Atheists, than such as place their Religion
in this or that Opinion; especially, if they reflect on the Antipathy each have
to other, and consider seriously, how all, confidently, conclude themselves in
the Right; backing their Tenets with Scripture, Authority, and Reason; and that
most things they hold as Truths, to be but dubious, at best, unless he be a
resolute Person, not doubting at all in his Opinion and Sect. But if he waver,
and be doubtful, changing from one Sect to another, have taken exceptions at
the defects of most, it is a wonder if he fall not out with all, and fix on
Atheism at last, and despise all Religion as a cheat, or policy to keep Men in
good Order.

Another cause of Atheism, may be Peace and Plenty in a time when Learning
flourishes. For Prosperity has damned more Souls, than all the Devils in Hell;
It makes Men cast off fear of GOD, and Man; entangles Men's minds in Vanity,
blinds them in their pleasures, and overwhelms them in Sin: For, whilst we
thrive in the World, we are apt to turn our backs on Heaven: whereas, Poverty,
and afflictions are the dispensations of Providence, and the blessings of the
Almighty, to fit Sinners for Repentance, inclining our minds more to true
Devotion, for the afflicted have God, for the most part, in their minds and
mouths.

An Habit of Scoffing, and deriding the Scriptures may be another cause. This
Vain, Idle, and Fantastical, Pityful, Childish humor of Jesting, proceeds
(which this Age so Super-abounds with, among such as call themselves Gentlemen)
from Pride and Ostentation. For, they being, generally, Men of weak Judgments,
and unfit for matters of Substance, and Solidity, as being above their
apprehension; they, immediately, with a disdainful Jest, scorn what they are
incapable of, or proceeds from any that attempt noble things. Wit may lawfully
be used, GOD having given nothing to us in vain; but great care ought to be had
it be not abused, especially in jesting with Holy things; for thereby they make
a mock of Sin, trifle with the wrath of GOD, and play, like Fools, with
Hellfire, whither, without Repentance, they are posting. This way of fooling
is beneath a Gentleman, for it Hebetates the Reason, and renders him empty,
flashy, and Fantastical.

Another cause may be, the Clergy live scandalously, which is a great eyesore,
and a main cause; what can be more unseemly, than to see such as should lead
men to Heaven, walk themselves as if there were no Hell? That should be
Instructers of others in Sobriety, Humility, and all Piety, live loosely,
proudly, in all Riot, and Excess? Drinking, Whoring, Lying, Swearing, Pride,
and Covetousness, are odious in every one; but especially in those that should
teach otherwise, are they aggravated. Such are a dishonor to their Coat, the
scandal of the Church, and an occasion of the Enemies Blaspheming. Who will
believe those are sins, as they exclaim in the Pulpit, if they themselves all
the week after walk in them with delight?

A Gentleman, though he should with much indignation abominate such vile
practices, and, if in power endeavor to suppress them; yet should not be so
narrow spirited, as therefore to neglect the Ordinances of GOD, since the
Author, and Finisher of our Faith, and Religion, Commands the very Apostles
themselves to hear the Scribes and Pharisees, those whom he calls so often
Hypocrites, and against whom he pronounces so many woes; only with this
Restriction, That they do not as they do; However, their Doctrine was good, and
therefore enjoined To do as they say. A Minister that has a Lawful Call, ought
rather to be reprehended, than slighted. He may be evil himself, yet instruct
others in good works.

These make large Rents in the Church; Union, of all things else, ought to be
desired therefore. And why are there so many differences among us? Either
because we are wedded to our own ways, and Opinions; or because we quarrel
with shadows, Order, Ceremonies, and things indifferent, and not of Faith,
while we neglect the Substance, and fundamentals in Religion. Many times,
through weakness of Judgment, violent contests arise between party and party,
and yet neither differ in the main, and perhaps, not in the thing it self
neither; which through their ignorance, notwithstanding, they know not how to
Reconcile. To Compose these Differences is by fair and gentle, not foul, and
rigorous means, according to the Laws. A weak Brother is to be restored in the
Spirit of meekness. Consciences are not to be compelled by Fire and Sword: For,
that Religion which is established by the sword, must needs bek in to
Mahomet's, let the pretenses be what they will, or worse. As we have lately too
woefully experimented in our blessed times of Reformation; in which they did not
stick, in their Zeal, to destroy the Lord's Anointed. If they had been men
after Gods own heart, as they were Saints, their hearts would certainly have
melted with sorrow and remorse, as David's smote him for but cutting off the
skirt of Readiness Garment, and yet he never intended to cut his throat: But their
hearts were hardened, if not seared. Nothing more unbecoming a Gentleman, than
to oppose his Sovereign, the fountain of Gentility; or Government, the
Ordinance of GOD. Can any man be so stupid, as to imagine there can be any
Religion in Rebellion, or Reformation in murdering of Kings, subverting of
Government, and destroying many Families?

Innovations in Religion are dangerous, unless gradual, and by the steps of
time; for so they will hardly be perceptible. No Innovation, unless by the product
of time, can suit well with any well-governed Nation; for long-continued
Customs agree best together, although, perhaps, in themselves bad; whereas
better, being unused, link not so well, and therefore prove more troublesome.
So that great caution is to be had in Reformation, that the Alteration be for
Reformation, and not the Reformation a pretense to Rebellion; which a Gentleman
in all public Conferences, Consultations, and Counsels, ought carefully to
avoid. Let all Discourses of Religion be without passion, bumbast words, or
intricate speeches, and with the greatest mildness that may be. In all
disputes, that you may prevent prejudices in your Antagonist, gain esteem in
him, and avoid needless Discourse; grant all you hear him propose, that you
reasonably can, and that may tend to the clearer detecting the Truth.

Superstition in Religion is worse than downright Atheism, and quite contrary
to true Religion; Illorum pietas, mera impietas: For it is the reproach of the
Deities. It being most contumelious to have any opinion of GOD that is unworthy
his Divine Majesty: It Is better to have no knowledge at all of him. Atheism
never disturbed the peace of the State, or Church; for an Atheist is an
observer of Sense, Reason, the Laws of the Land, his Reputation, and
Preservation. But Superstition has been the overthrow of many a flourishing
Kingdom, Tyrannizing over the fancies, minds, and Reasons of Men.

It Is a wonderful thing to consider how men's minds are naturally inclined to
Superstition, than which nothing is more unbecoming a Gentleman: Tot mundi
Superstitiones, quot Coelo Stellae! The Superstitions of former times were
innumerable; Sacrifices, and Ceremonies, making Images of all matter, and
adoring them when they had done, multiplying so many Rights, Torments, and
Vexations as may well become the Devil to be the Author, and maintainer of
them. It Is strange to see it so Universal in time past, and to continue even to
this day; That wise and knowing People should take more pains to go to Hell,
than we do to go to Heaven! The Superstition of the Pagan Gentiles.
If we take a view of the Japans, the Banians in Gusart, the Chinese Idolatrys,
the Americans of old in Mexico, especially the Mohammedan Priests, we shall find
that the Papists vows, Poverty, Obediences Orders, Merits, Martyrdoms,
Fastings, Alms, good works, as they call them, Pilgrimages, etc. are no more
than they do; and that their blind Zeal, and Idolatrous Superstition, in all
respects, is much at one; little, or no difference: Nay, it is hard to say,
which is the greatest, which is the grossest. He that shall read the Papists
Golden Legend, the Jews Talmud, and the Turks Alchoran, will conclude that such
gross Fictions, Fables, vain Traditions, Prodigious Paradoxes, and Ceremonies,
could never proceed from any other Spirit than that of the Devil himself.

The Egyptians, that pretend so great Antiquity, three hundred Kings before
Amasis; and, as Mela writes, 13000 years from the beginning of their
Chronicles, that bragged so much of their knowledge of old; of their Wealth and
Power, that vaunted of 20000 Cities; yet, at the same time, as Diadorus Siculus
Records, their Idolatry, and Superstitions were most gross, worshipping the Sun
and Moon, under the name of Isis, and Osyris; and afterward, such These
Indigites were Men Canonized, or Deified, and so called Divi.
Men as were beneficial to them, or any Creature that did them good. In the
City of Bubasti they adored a Cat, Herodotus.
Ibis, and Storks; an Pliny.
Ox, Macrobius.
Leeks, and Onions. The Syrians, and Chaldeans, had as many proper gods of
their own See Lucian, Vera Historia, and de Dea Syria. Morny, Cap. 20. De
veritat. Relig. Guil. Stukius, Sacrorum, Sacrificiorumque Gentil. Descript.
Peter Faber Semister. Lib. 3. Cap. 1, 2, 3. Seldom, De Diis Syris. Purchase
Pilgrimage.
invention. The Romans borrowed from all, besides their own gods, which were
Majorum and Minorum Gentium, Multitude of gods in all Ages, and among all
Nations adored.
as Varro holds; certain, and uncertain. Some Celestial, Select, and great
ones, others Adopted gods.
Indigites, and Demigods.
Semidei, Were such as had charge over Men's Houses.
Lares, Ghosts, or Spirits, Apparitions.
Lemures, Dioscuri, Soleres, and Parastatae. Dii Tutelares among the Greeks:
the same as Boni and Mali Genii, among the Latins. Gods of all sorts, for all
Functions; Some for the Land, some for the Sea, some for Heaven, some for Hell;
some for Passions, Diseases; some for Birth, some for Weddings, Husbandry,
Woods, Waters, Gardens, Orchards, Pax, quies, salus, Libertas.
etc. All Nations, and Offices, Kings, Emperors, and Valiant Men, that had
done any good Office for them, they did likewise In this manner; he being dead,
his Body was carried (with all Solemnity, and Ceremony) of the chief Nobility,
and Senate, with Songs and Hymns they performed to the gods themselves) to a
Tabernacle, or Tent made with a great pile of Wood, in form of a Tent, with
three other less Tabernacles, one upon the top of the other, the lowest being
richly adorned with Gold outwardly, but within full of combustible Matter,
where they lay him within the second Tabernacle; so he that is next to be
Emperor sets fire to the lowar Tabernacle, and then lets loose immediately a
flying Eagle from the top of the Tabernacle, as supposed, to carry his Soul
into Heaven.
Canonize, and adore as gods; 'twas usually done, and the Devil was ready still
to Second their intents; Statim se ingessit illorum Sepulchris, statuis,
Templis, aris, etc. He crept into their Temples, Statues, Tombs, Altars, and
was ready to give Oracles, Cure Diseases, do Miracles, etc. As, by Jupiter,
Aesculapius, Tiresias, Apollo, Mopsus, Amphiarus, etc. Dii and Semidii, for so
they esteemed them; gods, and demigods: Some were medii inter deos and
homines, between men and gods, as Max. Tyrius. When a good Man dyed, they held
his Soul ex homine Demon evadit, becomes forthwith a Demi-god, and in
commiseration helps his poor Friends, here upon Earth; Informs, Succors, etc.
Punishes those that are bad, and do amiss, as a good Genius to protect and
govern mortal men appointed by the gods, so the Platonists will have; it
ordering some for Provinces, some for private men, some for one Office, some
for another; for all intents, places, Creatures, they assign gods. Neither do
they Deifie good men only, but Tyrants, Monsters, Devils, Nero's, Domitians,
Heliogabalus's, Beastly Women, and Errant Whores. Nay, they make gods on such
ridiculous occasions as Children make Babies, As Mornaeus notes. Their Poets
make gods, Et quos adorant in templis, Ludant in Theatris, as Lactantius
scoffs. Hesiod reckons up at least thirty thousand gods: Varro makes three
hundred Jupiters: Flora was a Rich Harlot in Rome, and for making the
Commonwealth her Heir, her Birthday was solemnized long after; and to make it
a more plausible Holy Day, they made her Goddess of Flowers, and Sacrificed to
her among the rest. The Statue of Antinous, the Emperor, Adrians minion, was
adored by him. Venus, a notorious Strumpet, as common as the Boggards, to Mars,
Adonis, Anchises, and yet she as great a Goddess as the rest, and as much
renowned by the Poets, who were their chief Doctors, and Fathers of their
Church. Cuna was assigned to Cradles, Diverra, for sweeping Houses, Nodina,
Knots; Prema, Promunda, Hymen, Hymenaeus, for Weddings; Comus, the god of good
Fellows, god of silence, of comfort; Hebe, Goddess of Youth; Mena menstruorum;
Minerva, of Wisdom; Juno, of Heaven; Urania, of the Stars; Pluto, god of Hell,
and Riches: Male, and Female gods, of all Ages, Sexes, and Dimensions; with
Beards, and without Beards; married, and unmarried; begot, not born; as Minerva
start out of Jupiter's brow, himself a graceless Fellow, and drove his Father
Saturn from his Kingdom. And this Saturn was but a pityful King of Crete,
Wicked, Tyrannous; of whose Lusts, Rapes, and Villainies, a whole Volumn might
be written; cruel also, eating his own Children, and at last gelded himself,
and yet as good a god as Jupiter, or the best.

The Superstitions of the Jews.
The Ancientest Superstitions, next the Gentiles, were practiced among the Jews,
in their Groves, and High Places, with their several Sectaries, the chiefest of
which were the Pharisees, Sadduces, and Besides the Galilaeans, Samaritans,
Hemerobaptists, Mashahaeans, etc. which I shall pass by.
Essenes: The strange Opinions and Fopperies they maintained is not worthy the
Relating, indeed; so sottish, ignorant, blindly Superstitious were they, tiring
themselves and others with their idle Ceremonies. He that shall peruse the
comments of their Rabbis on the Scripture, their absurd Tales and Fables they
certainly give credit to, will imagine them hardly Rational, if not absolutely
mad. Can any thing be more vain and Ridiculous than their fancies about the
expectation of their Messiah? The great pomp he shall come in; as how he shall
terrify the Gentiles, and overcome them with new Diseases: That every King in
the World shall send him one of his Daughters to be his Wife, because it is
said, Psalm. 45.10. Kings Daughters shall attend on him. How Michael, the
Archangel, shall sound his Trumpet, and gather all the scattered Jews into the
Holy Land, and there make them a great Feast of all the Beasts, Birds, Fishes,
that ever were, and a glass of Wine that grew in Paradise, and that has ever
since been kept for Adam's Cellar. For the first Course, will be that great Ox
that feeds on a thousand Hills; Job 4.10. Psalm. 50.10. That great Leviathan;
and a Bird that laid an Egg so big, that by chance tumbling out of the Nest, it
brake down three hundred tall Cedars; and it self being broken by the fall,
deluged an hundred and threescore Villages. This Bird, they say, could stand in
the Sea where it was so deep as an Hatchet would be seven years in sinking to
the bottom, and yet came up but to his knees; with multitudes of figments of
the like Nature, which they constantly believe, deluding themselves and others,
and yet will, by no means, be dissuaded.

The Mohammedan Religion is a gallemafry, or hotch-potch of the Gentiles, Jews,
and Christians; and so sottish, as if they had picked out the most vain, and
ridiculous things in every one of them, to make up their Alchoran, being
stuffed with idle Fables and Superstitions, as well as lies. The Superstition
of the Mahometans and Turks.
As, how Mahomet was saluted when he came from Meca by the Beasts, Birds, and
the very Stones: How the Moon came down from Heaven to give him a Visit: How
GOD sent for him, and spoke with him: With many Fables of the Sun, Moon, and
Stars. That at the Day of Judgment there shall be three sounds to prepare to
it, which must last fifty thousand years. A Paradise, which consists in Coeundi
and Comedendi voluptate, and pecorinis Hominibus scriptum, bestialis beatitudo.
They pray five times a day with their Faces toward the South, and wash all
their Bodies over before and after. They fast a Month together, and must not
eat a bit till Sunset: Their Pilgrimages are as far as the River Ganges, where
they wash themselves, maintaining they wash away thereby all their sins. Others
Travel as far as Meca, to the Tomb of Mahomet, which they account meritorious
and miraculous: Their sins being thereby forgiven, and they anointed Saints
ever after: whence many, at their return, put out their eyes, that they may
never behold vanity more; and some bite out their tongues. Their long Prayers,
Stoning of the Devil, their eating a Camel at Grand Cairo, in their way to
Mahomets Tomb, their running till they sweat; and innumerable other foolish
Ceremonies they have, which if they observe not to a tittle, they think they
shall be damned.

Superstitions of the Church of Rome, and other Christians.
But, to come nearer home, I may safely, I think, and without injury say, all
the principal Devils in Hell are employed for the subversion, and destruction
of Christians; Those several Oppositions, Temptations, Batteries, Heresies,
Schisms, that in all Ages he has fomented, is a clear evidence of his being
most busy among us of the true Church. They began in the very primitive, and
Apostolic times; many Heretics, and Antichrists were even then abroad, and
so have ever since continued. In St. Augustine's time there were fourscore and
eleven Heresies. In which number we may rank our Pseudo-Christians, who have
now overrun most part of Christendom. And since their Leader proclaimed
himself Pontifex Maximus, Usurping power over Kings, and preposterously setting
Aaron above Moses, to establish their own power, greatness, sovereignty, and to
enrich themselves, have introduced a multitude of humane Traditions, and
Fopperies; As Purgatory, Limbus Patrum, Infantum, and a great deal of such
Geography in the Subterranean terra incognita, Mass, Praying to, and adoration
of Saints (whereas, whoever is to be prayed to ought to be Omnipotent to do for
all, Omnipresent to hear all, and Omniscient to know all; which no Saint, or
any but God himself is, or can be) Fastings, Bulls, Indulgencies, for 40000
years to come; Processions at certain times, Images, Shrines, Relicts,
Confessions, Penance, Satisfactions, Blind Obediences, Vows, Pilgrimages, with
Innumerable Orders of Priests, Friars, Mendicants, Franciscans, Carthusians,
etc. Monks, Anchorites, Jesuits, etc. with a multitude of such subtilties, and
gross absurdities; So that Scripture must be concealed, and prohibited the
Vulgars reading, or perusing, eclipsing the glorious splendor of the Gospel by
their Superstitions, whereby indeed Legends are introduced, and Religion
abolished. So that he that shall but observe their profane Rites, and foolish
Customs, How Superstitiously kept, how strictly observed by the People, even
before Gods Commandments, keeping them in Ignorance, Blindness, and such
Obedience, as they are brought to that servile strictness, as they dare not, on
the pain of Damnation, break the least Ceremony, Tradition, or Edict. They will
sooner kill a Man, than eat a bit of flesh in Lent without a Dispensation; kill
a King, if told it is meritorious, and made believe he shall not only be
pardoned here, but go immediately to Heaven, be Canonized, and the like; with
their Rabble of Romish Deities, for all Countries, Professions, Offices,
Diseases, and Persons: St. George, for England; St. Andrew, for Scotland; St.
Patrick, for Ireland; St. Dionysius, or Denis, for France; St. Jago, for Spain;
St. Luke, for Painters; Gregory, for Students; Cosmus, and Damian, for
Philosophers; Crispin, for Shoomakers; Katharine, for Spinners. Anthony, for
Piggs; Gallus, for Geese; Wenceslans, for Sheep; Pelagius, for Oxen; Sebastian,
for the Plague; Valentine, for the Falling Sickness; Petronella, for Agues;
Apollonia, for the Toothache. The Virgin Mary, for Male, and Female, all
places, Offices, persons, and Conditions, for both Sea, and Land; an Universal
Goddess she is.

Whosoever shall but observe these things, with their diverse Adorations,
Exorcisms, and ridiculous Injunctions, will absolutely conclude them altogether
as vain as those Superstitions of the Pagans, Jews, and Mahometans, if not
worse; or at least, they are the same in other Names, Circumstances, and
Ceremonies.

The Superstitions and Frenzies of some in our own Bosoms.
On the other extreme, we have a mad, giddy Company of Precisians, Schismatics,
and Heretics, even in our own bosoms, that through too much blind Zeal against
Popery, Do demolish all. These will admit of no Ceremonies at all; no Cross in
Baptism, no kneeling at the Communion, but stand; or, as some of them that
account themselves in the first order of Saints, sit irreverently on their
breech, and take the Cup of the New Testament, as they do their Mornings
Draught; They will have no Fasting-dayes, no Church-Musick; Organs are Popery;
and Anthems, though never so well composed, They prefer the idle stuff of
Sternhold, and Hopkins, who have indeed, with their pitiful Verse and Rhymes,
murdered the Psalms. No Bishops, nor their Courts; no Church Government,
unless by Lay Elders as ignorant as themselves: But, for the peace of Sion, and
glory of GOD, rail against all our Church Discipline as Popery; and for the
Zeal of the cause, run into open Rebellion, and Sacrilege, as we know, by too
woeful Experience. They will hardly, some of them, tolerate our University
Degrees, or Universities themselves. All Humane Learning is the Language of the
Beast; Degrees, Titles of Rome; Caps, Hoods, Tippets, Gowns, Surplesses, Lawn
sleeves, etc. Things indifferent in themselves, and merely for Ornament,
Distinction, and Decency, they hate them, cry out against them, they are of the
Whore of Babylon, the Relicts of Popery, and he that wears them, has,
undoubtedly, a Pope in his Belly. They will approve of naught but what they
invent themselves; They make matter of Conscience of them, and will rather
forsake their Livings than subscribe to them. They will admit of no Holy Days,
or honest Recreations; as Hawking, Hunting, Cards, Tables, because some have
abused them. No Churches, no Bells, some of them, because Papists use them. No
Interpretation of Scripture; no councils, or comments of the Fathers, but such
as their own fantastical spirits, and idle brains dictate, and suggest. By
which spirits, being misled, more prodigious Paradoxes are vented, than by
Papists themselves.

Some pretend to prophecy, secret Revelations, will be of the privy council
with GOD himself, and know all his secrets. A company of giddy, quarter-brain'd
heads; they will take upon them to divine how many shall be saved, and who
damned in the Town; Interpret the Revelation, Daniel, and Ezekiels Visions, and
apply those hidden Mysteries to private Persons, times, places, as their own
private spirit, and shallow wit Informs them. They will tell you exactly, in
their Enthusiasm, when the World shall be at an end; what year, nay, to the
very day too. Some, in imitation of Christ, will fast forty days. Some call
GOD, and his Attributes, in question: And some of them so far gone with their
madness, and Revelations, that they are absolute Bedlams, and out of their
wits, making themselves to be God, Christ, the Holy Ghost, Elias, Moses, and
what not? Of these Men, I may conclude, in general, that however they may seem
to be discreet in other matters, and discourse well, Laesam habent
Imaginationem; in this their madness and folly break out impetuously, and have
far more need of Physic, than many a man that keeps his Bed. They are mad, and
therefore have more need of a Cure, than such as are in Bedlam; They must be
blooded, and purged with Hellebore.

I cannot better Characterize them, than thus; they are generally possessed with
madness, folly, pride, insolency, arrogance, singularity, peevishness,
obstinacy, impudence, scorn, and contempt of all other Sects, persuasions, and
Opinions, or that dissent from their Interpretations, and Conjectures. They are
only wise, only Learned in the Truth; All damned but they, and their followers;
And yet they torture the Scripture, and turn it like a nose of Wax to their own
ends, and purposes; Always learning, and yet never come to the knowledge of the
Truth. And yet so wilful, and besotted, say what you will say, it is all one,
they care not, they will have their way, though all the World contradict them:
Like vertiginous people, they think all goes round and irregular, when indeed
the error is in their own brains. They generally affect Novelties, and prefer
Falsehood before Truth; and that which their folly and rashness has once
produced, with pride afterward, frowardness, and contumacy, they maintain as
long as they live, against all Reason, or Sense.

In a word, this is common to all Superstition, there is nothing so bad and
absurd, ridiculous, impossible, incredible, which they will not believe,
observe, and diligently perform as much as in them lies. Nothing so monstrous
to conceive, or intolerable to put in practice, so cruel to suffer, which they
will not willingly undertake: So powerful a thing is Superstition.

Nothing, I say, is so unbecoming a Gentleman as Superstition, whose Master is
the people; and in all Superstition, therefore, wise men follow Fools: Besides,
in it self, its odious and deformed, as well as stupid and sottish, by how much
the more it resembles Religion.

How a Gentleman may be sure to make choice of the true Religion.
Since every Religion, Sect, and Opinion (as was said) is as confidently
believed, and maintained by the professors thereof, as the only true one; It is
the part of a Gentleman, especially being instructed in good Learning, to
examine all with impartiality, looking on his own with the same indifferency,
as if he had never been therein instructed, that he may find out the truth of
the Christian Faith, and the main Articles of it; the Being, and existence of a
GOD, and the consequent Doctrines of Natural Divinity; and then the Truth and
Authority of the Holy writ. And thus a Man shall be able indeed to give an
account of his Faith. What can be more unseemly, than to hear a Gentleman have
no more to say for his Belief, than a Pesant, a Mohammedan, a Jew, or Pagan;
that he was so taught, and all the Nation, and therefore he is of that belief?

Which that he may the clearer do, he must consider, first, the Testimony, the
Foundation on which Christianity is built, viz. Jesus Christ; That he was sent
from GOD the Father, to manifest his will and counsel unto us. The truth of
which when he has cleared, the belief thereof will be Rational to him. Now,
this Testimony of Christ, the Author, and Finisher of our faith, is given by no
less than GOD himself; who though he be Omnipotent, Omnipotentia excludit omnes
defectus, qui sunt Impotentiae, seu posse mori, Peccare, etc. Thomas Aquinas,
2. Quest. 25. Art 34.
yet cannot lie, being Truth it self in the abstract. His very existence then
may be as well doubted as his Testimony. And you have heard already the
irrationality of Atheism, in our proof of a Deity; and that even among the
Heathen a Deity has ever been acknowledged, as also that their gods were true.

The Testimony God gives of Christ.
He was promised to Adam, when fallen, long before his coming; The Seed of the
Woman shall break the Serpents Head. And his Testimony of him, when sent, was
at his Baptism, and on the Mount, with Peter, James, and John; This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear him. And a little before his
Death, I have glorified it, and will glorify it again. Likewise, by the Star
at his Birth, which the very Heathen confessed portended the descent of some God
for the Salvation of Mankind. Also by many Miracles wrought both by Christ and
the Apostles, and other ways, as well as by an Audible Voice. As, at his
Death, By Eclipsing the Sun at the time of the Full Moon, contrary to the
course of Nature; so that many Astronomers in other parts of the World admired
the strangeness thereof, as a violence done to Nature; whence Dionysius the
Areopagite, thus exclaimed; Aut Deus Naturae patitur, aut Mundi machina
Dissolvitur. The Vail of the Temple was rent, which the Superstitious Jews so
adored. And the saints dead Bodies arose, and went into the Holy City, and were
seen by many. Which things were so notoriously known, that multitudes were
Converted, saying, Of a Truth, this was the son of God. And lastly, He himself
did not only Rise, but was taken up into Heaven, both body and soul, before
their eyes.

So that the Question will be now, whether there be any credit to be given to
the scriptures, that give such ample testimony of Christ from GOD, or whether
they are his revealed word, more than other Writings. Touching which I shall
wholly lay aside those Arguments, from their Majestickness, and sometimes
plainness of style; Their subject on which they treat, or the power and
influence they have on Men's Consciences, as Idle, frivolous, not sufficiently
evincing them to be Divine Oracles, or to proceed from the Holy Spirit: since
our Consciences easily consent to what our belief is prepossest with in our
Infancies. Besides, if this be all, a Turk may plead as much for the Alchoran,
in every respect, as we Whether the Old and New Testaments be the Word of God.
can for the Bible. Neither does the sealing the Truth thereof by the blood of
Martyrs signify any thing in this particular, since we daily see, Jews, Turks,
Pagans, Heretics, Sects of all sorts, Venners gang, though in open Rebellion,
and before that, the Regicides, dye as resolutely, courageously, with as much
seeming assurance of their salvation, as the best Martyr of them all, in the
affirmation and justification of their own belief and Deceits.

We must therefore endeavor to ground the Truth and Authority of Holy writ on
more sure and sound Foundations. Which I shall here, at this time, a little
attempt; notwithstanding the uncharitable censures of ignorant, angry, and
narrow-witted Zelots; accounting me, in Discourses of this Nature, an Atheist,
or at least one that contemns, or has but little regard for, or to the
Scripture; And all because I have still endeavored to bring them to a Rational
ground of their Faith. For although some things in Religion be beyond Reason,
yet it is not against Reason, and most may be made out by Reason. If this were
not so, our belief would be very Implicit. I shall therefore endeavor to make
it plain, that the Books of the Old and New Testaments are the Word of God, and
that upon the pure account of Reason only: For to go about to prove any such
thing to an Atheist, or Pagan, by the Scripture, or any Argument deduced
thence, is (when he believes no such thing) to be ridiculous, and to prove a
thing to be so, as Women do, because it is so, and compel another man's Reason
too suddenly.

This, I hope, no Pagan, or Atheist will deny, that there is as much reason to
believe the History of the Old and New Testament, as any other, since there is
the same Reason; first, to believe the Tradition of the Old and New Testaments,
as the Tradition of any other. i. e. That there was such a Man as Moses, that
wrote of the Creation, of the Patriarchs, of Gods Judgments on the Egyptians,
of his delivering the Israelites from the servitude of Pharaoh, and leading
them through the Wilderness. And after him, a Joshua, who was their Captain and
General in their possessing the Land of Canaan. And so the Judges, Kings, and
Prophets, etc. that did such and such Acts. A Matthew, Mark, Luke, and a John,
that wrote such things as they saw, and knew in their own times to be true, of
one Jesus of Nazareth. I say, we have as much reason to believe the Tradition
of these Histories, as any other Histories: Or, as that there was an Homer,
that wrote Illiads; a Virgil, his Georgicks; an Ovid, his Metamorphosis; A
Plato, an Aristotle; and the rest of the Philosophers, or their Works.

Secondly, its as Rational to believe, that those Books of the Old and New
Testament were written by the same Men as are their reputed Authors; as to
believe Plutarch's, Tacitus's, Tully's, and Caesar's works were theirs.

Thirdly, that all that was delivered in the Old Testament, in Christ's time,
was true; appears by his frequent quoting of, and referring to it in his
Discourse, and Disputes. Besides, if it had been corrupted, he would, no doubt,
have taxt them with it, as well as for their Teaching for Doctrines the
Traditions of Men. And that it is the same we now have, and the Jews at this day
acknowledge; and that 'twas never corrupted, is evident from the multitude of
Copies distributed after the first and second Captivities, to every Synagogue,
where they were dispersed, in which they read every Sabbath Day. Now, how it
should be possible for Men, in almost all Nations, and at different times, to
combine together in corrupting the Book of God, on design, let a prudent Man
judge. But we find they do all agree; which they could never do, if any, and
not all of them, should have been corrupted. And, that they should altogether
designedly, or casually, be corrupted, when there appears no solid reason for
such a contrivance, seems more than improbable. To which add, if they were
corrupted, 'twould have been in those places especially which speak, and
Prophecy of Christ, and against them. Besides, if they were corrupted, they
should have corrupted the Septuagint Translation, which was extant in Egypt
three hundred years before Christ, to make them agree. Again, if we observe it,
we shall find more harmony between the Writers of the Divine Oracles, (though
distant in time) than among any other Writers whatsoever. Lastly, that the Old
Testament, which we acknowledge, is the same the Jews now receive, and always
did, may easily appear, by comparing our Copies and Translations with the
Originals among them in all Nations: Nor can it be thought that the Learned in
all places, times, and of contrary Religions, Jews, Papists, Protestants, etc.
should combine to deceive the giddy, and more unknowing sort of people in the
World.

Fourthly, because they wrote nothing but what was done in their own times, and
known generally to all, who might have contradicted their Writings; especially
the Scribes and Pharisees, who under the Gospel were their Persecutors; and
would, assuredly, have condemned them, had they been false, or liable to
exception. Nay, and Josephus, though a Jew, yet an unbeliever in Christ Antiq.
Judaic. Lib. 18. Cap. 4.
testifies, that at that time, there was a Man (if he might call him a Man)
whose name was Jesus, that did raise the dead, Cure Diseases, and do many
Miracles; and being accused by the chief of the people, was Condemned, and
Crucified by Pilate, and the third day appeared to them again alive, as it was
predicted of him by the Prophets. Moses, and the Prophets; Matthew, Mark, Luke,
John, Peter, James, Paul, and Jude, have been continually reputed, and
generally from Age to Age, down to these our times, confessed by all, to be the
Penmen of those Books that bear their Names. Nay, this is acknowledged by the
very Jews, Pagans, and even by Julian the Apostate. And therefore there is not
only the same Reason to believe them as any other writings; but as great
Reason, if not greater, that their Writings are true; since what they wrote was
only the passages or actions of their own times done by themselves or others;
which were easy to be known, being, most of them, done in public, and they
either Eye, or Ear-witnesses, or both, of all passages: So that they had the
greatest opportunities in the World for detecting the Truth, and consequently,
best able to declare it. Besides, the Penmen throughout the Bible were either
Kings, Rulers, men of Honor, and high esteem among the People; and therefore
would not attest lies, to expose themselves to the contradiction, and scorn of
the World, or Vulgar: As Moses, Joshua, Samuel, David, Solomon, Nehemiah, Ezra,
etc. Or Prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel, Ezekiel, etc. Or Apostles, or
Disciples, Men of Integrity, Piety, and Fidelity, that could purchase nothing
by that they delivered, if untrue; nay, for attesting those very truths, they
incurred Imprisonment, Banishment, Persecution, Poverty, and all kind of
misery; Wandering up and down in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented, etc. They suffered for their profession of the Truth more
than any Men did. Besides, they and their Doctrine was owned more especially by
GOD himself, in giving them the Spirit of Prophecy, the Inspiration of the
Holy Ghost; so that though illiterate, they could speak all Languages, the
power of working Miracles, Casting out of Devils, Curing of Diseases by even
their very shadows, which was more than Christ in the flesh did; and which the
Magitians, and Conjurers of those times could never do, though zealously
attempted; and therefore we have greater reason to believe their Writings, and
them, than any other whatsoever. For none can be so impious, or irrational, as
to think GOD would countenance, and give testimony to Impostures, and juggling
tricks; and especially such as pretend to teach and lead Men into the way of
Salvation. This were (to speak with Reverence) to make GOD accessory to the
entrapping of men's Souls, and the deceiving the whole Christian World.

A Gentleman having thus laid a Foundation of his Faith in the Being and
Existence of a GOD: In his testimony of Christ, the Object, Author, and
Finisher of our Faith; the truth and Authority of the Old and New Testament:
and compared the profession is made in the Church of England, with the vain
Fopperies, Superstitions, and Innovations of the Church of Rome; and the
uncharitableness to be found among them, and all Sectaries, Schismatics,
Phanaticks, and Heretics, who condemn to Hell all that are not in their way;
accounting all without their pale, damned: The irrationality of the Mahometans,
and the absurd stupidity of the Pagan-gods, and Worships, The fantastical
follies, and whimsies of the Jews: I say, these things being compared, and the
former Foundation laid and rooted in the intellects of a Gentleman, he may not
only soon resolve himself into a Religion, but be satisfied which is the true
one.

I shall therefore add no more in this matter, but come to the next
qualification of a Gentleman, and a part of Education, before premised, viz.

PART II. Travel.
IN the next place, Travel (being first well grounded in Religion) will be
requisite to experience, and accomplish a Gentleman, especially if he have the
Language, and other good parts; if not, he ought to take one that has, and has
been abroad before, that he may be informed of the Customs, and Humors of the
People, and with what Company to associate; otherwise a Man may be sooner
injured, than benefited: And without a competent Judgment, Ingenuity, Reason,
and good Nature, ruined; or at least, return as empty as he went.

Let him, in every Town, City, and place he comes, acquaint himself with the
most Learned, Eminent, and in Repute, Experienced, and sober Men; whereby he
may not only learn good, but avoid much evil, Debauchery, Quarrels, and most
other inconveniences; especially with Ambassadors, at least when they have
Audience, if possible; with their Universities, Libraries, Buildings, Revenues,
Colleges, Churches, Monuments, Monasteries, Government of the State and place
Civil; their Courts of Judicature, when they plead, judge, and determine
Causes; as also Ecclesiastical, and their Courts; and, if in the Metropolis,
the Kings Court it self, or Chief Governors: The Situation of places,
Prospects, Rivers, and all Ornaments, Ports, Havens, Ships, Fortifications,
Trainings, Tilts, and Tournaments, Treasuries, Magazines, and Armories, Castles,
Forts, Ruins, and Antiquities; Coyns, Measures, Habits, Customs, Feastings,
Weddings, Funerals, Public Shows, Wardrobes, Public Masks, Comedies,
Plays, Interludes, and Triumphs; especially such as are frequented by the
better sort; and with every thing else that is worth the noting: And keep an
account in writing, of every days Observation, wherever he goes. So shall he
in a little time be greatly improved, and make the best advantage of his
Travels; which that he may the better do, he ought to observe these Rules, viz.
To avoid Idle Expenses, Vain Ostentation; and Regulate his Discourse, and
Carriage.

SECT. I. Of Expenses.
A Gentleman, of any Man, ought to be most wary and prudent in this matter; not
only lest he should by his Extravagancy expose himself to the derision, and
scorn of the Vulgar; but also to avoid the imputation of folly, when so, as
well as by being too penurious when there is just occasion. If the occasion
therefore, when weighed, be more ponderous than the Money, let it go; but part
not with your Gold for dross; yet manage it so, as rather to shun the occasion,
than seem to sneak from it basely for love of thy Money. Since Money then is to
be spent, see that thou spend it to thy Honor, and Reputation.

Amasis, King of Egypt, made a Law (which was also established in Athens, by
Solon) that there should be an Annual inspection into every Man's gettings, and
expenses; and if the latter was found to exceed the former, on a rational
account, so as he must needs be adjudged to take some indirect courses to
supply his expenses, he should be put to death. According to the former,
therefore, the latter ought to be limited; for a Man shall be found but able to
bring both ends together, that makes his expenses amount but to half his
In-comes: what shall he do then whose Revenues are uncertain? It does certainly
concern him to be more than ordinarily saving, and prudent, so it be not
imputed to baseness; since he that thinks to lay up at the years end, must
reduce his layings out to the third part of his comings in. If a Gentleman
therefore will keep within compass, and avoid the many cheats of Servants, he
must have an insight, nay, a diligent eye into his own Estate; which is no
disgrace unto him, nor to the best Man living. He will find it a greater, to
want at last, what he is daily defrauded of.

I would not be mistaken here, as if I pleaded for getting immoderately Riches;
or in the least countenanced covetousness, which is worse than Prodigality; but
to show how a Gentleman should, like himself, walk prudently between both, and
keep the golden mean. Of Riches, the true value of them.
For Riches, in themselves, are not of so great worth as we make them; neither
is great Riches and Possessions of real use, excepting only so much as we make
use of for the making our own Lives comfortable, and others by our charitable
benevolence. All the rest do us no pleasure; that is, Really: they may please
the eye, and idle fancy of a Coxcomb, but that is all, I say, unless employed to
our own, or others good: He may be the keeper of them, yet not enjoy them; like
an Ass, that carries Gold, yet eats but Hay. Besides, they are but momentary,
but like the Sea, unstable; they flow in for a while, and perhaps become very
full, when, on a sudden, there is as great an Ebb, and they run to another.
They have wings, and fly away; but if they will stay, they don't make a Man
really better, or more happy: Nay, they are rather an hindrance to all good
Virtue and Piety, as well as an Inlet to all evil; as I have largely showed
elsewhere. Pluto, the god of Hell (as the Poets feign) is likewise the god of
Riches; which shows, that Riches sent from the Devil, i. e. ill gotten; by
Racking of Tenants, oppressing the poor, etc. or Riches got by going to the
Devil (as many a one, to leave their Heir Rich, dies a wretch) must needs (in
all probability) be ill spent: Let that content thee that has been gotten
justly, thou can leave contentedly, can use soberly, and distribute
cheerfully, and honestly, in the time of thy Life, and Health: For that other,
on thy sick, or Deathbed, seems rather to be a cheat, than Charity; in as much
as it is more a Distribution of another Goods, than thine own.

SECT. II. Of Vainglory, and Ostentation.
MUch might be said (did I affect prolixity) of this pleasing humor of
Vain-Ostentation and glory; the Amabilis Insania, this sweet frenzy,
whispering Air, and most delectable passion, which ravisheth our Souls, and
lulls our Senses and Reasons asleep. There is therefore nothing more unbecoming
a Gentleman, nor nothing he should with more caution avoid; for it sets so
sweetly on him as he scarce ever perceives, or is sensible of his Malady. And
there is the madness; he commonly loves him that does him most harm. A Man may
better resist Lust, Anger, Covetousness, Fear, Sorrow, or any other passion,
Quem non gala vicit, Philautia superavit.
than this itching, and insinuating evil. For the Fame he aims at hurries him
beyond all Reason, Patience, and Moderation; attributing to his own wit and
management every successful Action that he has but the least hand in. As the
shallowest Waters, and emptiest Casks make the greatest noise; so these kind of
Fellows make the greatest bustle in the World.

To be vainly Ostentative, then, is greatly to be abominated, and shunned by a
Gentleman. But yet we must not here mistake; for in some cases it is of great
use, nay, and is great Discretion. As in all Noble, and High undertakings, the
hope of glory and praise adds life to the Enterprise, and many times, success
as well as perpetuity of Name. Wherefore write we, Etiam mediis in morbis, to
the wasting of our Healths, but for Fame? And therefore we set our Qui de
contemnenda gloria libros scribunt, and nomen Inscribunt.
Names to our Books. Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter. And,
in Learning, were it not for this, Fame's wings would be clipped. A little
Vanity, and Opinion, therefore may be allowed, especially in such Natures whose
Bark is so balasted with solidity, and Reason, as Fame's breath cannot over-set
it. A Natural Magnanimity is acceptable, and grateful, putting a good decorum
on such Men's Actions as know how to manage it. In all Callings it may be
allowed; it is Ingeniorum Cos, the whetstone of Wit and Valor. There Is a modest
ambition, as Themistocles was roused by the glory of Miltiades; And Achilles
Trophies excited Alexander. It Is a sluggish humor, not to emulate or sue at
all, to withdraw, neglect a man's self, refrain from such places, Honors,
Offices, through sloth, niggardlyness, fear, bashfulness, or otherwise; to
which by his Birth, Place, Fortunes, Education, etc. he is called, apt, fit,
and well able to undergo. For Humility, and self-denial it self, may be Acts of
Ostentation. Yet Fame, in many respects is to be avoided, since she
congregates, for the most part, with her Trumpet, more Enemies than Friends. If
it be immoderate, it is a Plague, and an unsufferable torment.

Her two Daughters are, Levity of mind, Immoderate Joy and Pride; not excluding
those other concomitant vices; Bragging, Hypocrisy, Peevishness, and
Curiosity. All which proceed from our selves; we are active Causes, from an
over-weaning conceit we have of our good parts, own worth, (which indeed is no
worth) our bounty, Favor, Grace, Valor, Strength, Wealth, Patience, Meekness,
Beauty, Gentility, Prudence, Knowledge, Wit, Science, Art, Learning, our
Excellent gifts, and Fortunes; For which, Narcissus-like, we admire, flatter,
and applaud our selves, and think all the World esteem so of us; which how
unbecoming a Gentleman, the most Rural may judge. And the greater caution is to
be had of a Man's Actions and carriage to avoid them, by how much they are apt,
insensibly, to invade us, in the best of our undertakings. Wherefore I shall
add no more here, since somewhat will be said in the subsequent Section, as to
the other particulars.

SECT. III. Discourse and Carriage.
REason it is, a Gentleman, of all Men, should demean himself well, and most
exemplary, which is no easy matter, in this wicked Age wherein we live; unless
he be of a passing good Nature, i. e. have an inclination to Virtue, and an
Habit; which is indeed goodness it self, and the chief of all other Virtues.
Such an one must be courteous, and civil to all Men; as well Strangers as
Friends, and Relations; pityful to, and of all in affliction; and misery; easy
to forgive, and pass by injuries; and grateful for as well small as great
favors, gifts, and obligations. Hereby shall all manner of Vice be shunned,
and Virtue daily increase. Carriage, then, as it comprehends as well
Discourse, as the outward behavior, is, and must be either to a Man's
Superiors, Equals, Inferiors, Relations, Strangers, Friends, or Enemies; or
to Himself.

SUBSECT. I. To Superiors.
AMong Superiors, Kings and Princes are most to be Honored; especially thy
own, to whom thou owe Obedience, Allegiance, and all that thou have, or art;
We must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but Conscience sake. It Is the
Ordinance of God; and whosoever resists, shall receive to himself Damnation.
Take Solomon's advice, To Fear the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them
that are given to change. For Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft; and
nothing so unseemly as to see any Man to pretend to Gentility, and Honor, and
yet resist the fountain of both; no pretense whatsoever can justify such an
Action.

Let thy speech to him be (whether he be a Man of parts or no) with that due
Reverence his Dignity requires, and so thy Behavior; avoiding all
unseasonable Discourses and Jests, it being no less hazzardous to be too bold
with such as are so far above thee, then that of the Flies playing with the
Candle.

For other Superiors, the Honor and respect their place and Quality requires
of thee, thou art likewise to give them. Yet keep thy distance so, as thou
may be rather beloved, than slighted; and seem to walk rather humbly, than
sneakingly. Court especially such as are most likely to do you a kindness,
without casting more obligations on them than what are inevitable: For great
persons Love rather such whom they have obliged, than such as have obliged
them; for they love not equal retributions by such as are not their Equals;
and so excite rather Shame or envy than love in them to their inferiors.
Although Impudence, Confidence, and Boldness be no Virtues, yet the least of
these will beggar them all: The Italians have therefore a Proverb, that speaks
thus much in English: the World was made for the Presumptuous.

If a Favorite to a Prince, neither write, nor speak his faults, nor, many
times, what thou know of him to be true; especially if revealed unto thee as
a secret; lest by its coming to his ears thou be ruined unawares; for such
men are more dangerous to be meddled with, then Monarchs themselves. Kings being
above all envy, or punishment; but Favorites knowing they stand in a slippery
place (as it is always about the Throne) creates not only a jealousy of all
that can divulge their miscarriages, but puts into them contrivances of
mischief against all such, if not final destruction. It Is not safe therefore to
be privy at all to their secrets. And whatever thou do, avoid all strife with
thy Superiors; putting thy hand to what is dangerous, and not justifiable; and
making any great Man's Interest thine own, who has lavisht his Estate. Neither
be persuaded by them to forfeit thy Allegiance to thy King on any pretense
whatsoever; which cannot be without forfeiting a good Conscience toward God,
and, in most likelihood, thy Soul to the Devil. Be not therefore so
fickle-pated, to desire changes in State; but satisfy thy self with this, That
Government is the care of Providence, not thine. If we rightly consider the
condition of Kings, we need not envy them; they deserving rather our pity,
being, at the best, but miserable; having but few things to acquire, or aim at,
and many things to dread, and afflict them. But, since we have hinted at this
before, it shall suffice.

SUBSECT. II. To Equals.
MY advice is, thou follow these few admonitions. Make no comparisons. Find no
faults. Meddle not with other men's matters. Admire not thy self. Be not
Opinionative. Neither arrogate, nor derogate. Be not proud, nor popular.
Neither flatter, lie, nor dissemble. Be constant. Keep thy word and promise
punctually, though but in slight, and small matters; so shall thou be believed
in greater. Keep thine own Counsel as to thy intentions and secrets. Be
respective to thine Equals, but not Familiar. Insult not. Cast not off an old
Friend. Accuse no man. Praise none rashly. Give no man cause of offense. Lay no
wagers. Mend in thy self what thou see amiss in others. Take time by the
fore-lock. Be temperate in these four things; Lingua, Loculis, Oculis, and
Poculis. Watch thine Eye. Moderate thy Tongue, and thy Expenses. Hear much, but
speak little. Give no ear to Tale-bearers. Be patient, meek, merciful, and
grateful. Be not fond of fair words. Maintain Friendship. Do good to all.
Frquent good company. Admonish thy Friend in secret, and commend him openly. Be
not too curious. Make not a Fool of thy self to make others merry. Avoid
contentious disputes; but if thou can not avoid them, keep within moderation,
and charge not farther than thou can make a safe, and honorable retreat; and
in some Controversies 'twere not amiss to resolve thy Arguments into Questions,
ever remembering to keep a reserve within thy self, that thou do not discover
all thy knowledge, that on just occasion thou may deliver rather more, than
less than was expected, which will make thee the more Respected. It Is good
also, sometimes to dissemble thy knowledge in what thou art known, or thought
to know; whereby thou shall be judged, another time, to know what perhaps thou
knew not. Avoid conceitedness in either thy carriage, words, or looks; seem
not better, greater, or wiser than thou art; lest thou be rendered less than
thou should be. How ridiculous is it in a Gentleman, to seem to carry all
with a grave Hum, Nod, or hard word; which, perhaps, he himself understands as
little as they that hear him? And in Discourse, to take that for granted, which
he cannot prove; or barely on the account of his Quality, to venture at what he
knows he understands not, and yet would fain persuade his Auditors he
understands much more than he says? These are pityful evasions, and become
none but shallow-witted Gentlemen. Yet many times, with the Vulgar, the Duil,
Hard-skull'd Man is taken to be grave, when indeed it is rather his
Constitution. It Is more strange therefore to se^ such not grave than grave. But
true Ingenuity and Wit is ever mixed with some madness, or what the Vulgar
account Levity.
As also that other, which many are guilty of, viz. When they are at a stand,
or loss, color over the matter with a nicity, or some distinction; and so,
while they proclaim their ignorance, yet would have it taken for profound
knowledge. As also those other pityful shifts, of either denying all to
conclude the Argument; or slighting all as impertinent or nice.

To speak pertinently to the thing in hand, and agreeable to the Person with
whom thou dealest, is better than Eloquence: avoid therefore the flashy, frothy
desire of advancing thy wit, and ability of holding an Argument; but choose
rather a solid Judgment in discerning Truth. In Discourse it is good to be
general, and not tied to certain particulars, and forms, which argues a great
emptiness, and when discovered, is most ridiculous; ever remembering to allow
others also time to speak, and reply. Be not Dogmatical in thy Discourse; argue
rather to be Instructed, than be obstinate in thy Opinion: and, if possible,
reduce the show to demonstration, which will be more persuasive than an hundred
Syllogistical gingling Arguments; whereby thy Reason, rather than Wit, will be
seen. In Seconding another, add somewhat of thine own: And in granting thy
Antagonists assertion, do it with some distinction. If Discourse be by thee
designed to edify thy self, it is better do it by Questions, than Positions;
provided, thou suit them to the skill of the Person thou inquirest of; for so
shall thou engage him not only to speak, but to delight himself therein, and
thou shall receive Instruction: For he that abounds in Questioning, shall, at
lengrh, abound in Learning. It Is convenient, however, in all Discourse, to
mingle it with variety. It Is most Noble, and Creditable, to begin, and be the
occasion of the Discourse; and then to moderate, and pass to somewhat else; and
so thou will be the Ringleader.

In all Discourse avoid Jests, and Jeers, which however much taken up of late,
nothing more unbecoming a Gentleman; it being an effect of Levity, and a flashy
wit. Besides, as it makes Men afraid of a lash from thy Tongue, so may thou
from thence fear a scourge from their Revenge. It Is not good therefore to
reflect on any one in Discourse, but worse on Kings, or Great Men, or
State Affairs, or any distressed case that deserves thy Commiseration: For
Jests in such cases are dangerous as well as injurious. But especially when
they are darted against Religion (as I hinted before.)

To discourse of, or praise a Man's self, is extremely ridiculous; The best way
of doing it, and most becoming a Gentleman, is through the sides of another, in
commending that virtue which is pretended to by thy self, or that thou thy self
art known to be possessor of.

Of Complements.
It Is most sure there is a knack in Complements, which is of force to imprint
real and effectual Passions in such with whom we converse; that is of excellent
use, if thou can be so lucky, as to hit on it. Yet it is not good to be too
perfect in Complements, for envy will convert all thereinto, though thou be
otherwise never so virtuous, and well qualified. However, there is a kind of
Necessity to use so much, as may humor the fashion of the times, or the
parties with whom thou dealest; in as much as if thou use nothing but
downright Honesty, thou had need to be of more than ordinary parts, and
Estate to rub through the World: whence we so frequently see the Virtuous, and
Honest, put by preferments, and oft-times poor, when time-serving Fellows,
though Idiots, are preferred (as I have also noted elsewhere;) wherefore,
harbor not such partial, and narrow affections, but fashion thy self according
to the Nature of the times wherein thou live; Live out of thy self, study
other Men's humors, and observe them, and thou shall never be unfortunate. But
remember that thy own petty ends and envy carry thee not beside thy self; and
be so faithful to thy self, as thou be not false to others; be not so
narrow-spirited, then, as to be selfish, nor confine thy thoughts to so
straight a Prison, if thou will shun great Temptations, and abundance of Evils.
What will not a self-lover do for his own advantage? Yet, in the end, he
becomes the scorn of Fortune, and the reproach of all men. Besides, it is a
great addition to a Man's Reputation, to have a good behavior, yet careless,
and without affectation, or their Bon-grace is lost; and which is worse,
Reputation lessened as to gravity, and solidity: On the other side, wholly to
neglect them, is to cause every one to neglect thy self, and not give thee that
due respect thou deservest, or expectest. However, they must be sure to be used
to Formal, and Ceremonious Constitutions, and Strangers, in point of Civility.

Lastly, among Equals, Familiarity will increase too soon; and that oft-times
(as the Proverb is) breeds contempt: wherefore, it is not amiss, sometimes, to
stand at a distance, and not to be too frequently with them, for that will
render thee of small price with them, and expose all thy parts and virtues to
Contempt.

Of Honor and Praise.
If thou aimest at Honor, and Praise, it is sooner obtained in smaller things
than great; forasmuch as the former may be frequently reiterated, the latter
acted but seldom. As Honor is obtained by revealing thy Virtue without
disadvantage, so Praise is but the reflection of thy Virtue, which represents
it self in so many various shapes, as we may justly expect it but a Juggle, and
Deceit: Proceeding either of Friendship, and good-wishes, and so it may be
rather his Love, than thy merit: or from flattery, and so cannot be confided
in; or from malice to excite another emulation, and envy, and so is dangerous:
or from the Vulgar, and so is, for the most part, ever false (as I have often
hinted in other Writings) blowing up bubbles, and letting things of weight fall
to the ground. For they can reach but to the lowest degree of Virtue^, being
astonished at those of the middle degree, and quite blind, and not able to
behold the splendor of those of the highest sort. Let thine aim at Honor be
for merit, not fame; so shall Envy, that Canker of Honor, be it self consumed.
Attempt nothing in which thy failing may prove more to thy disgrace, than the
performing of it, to thine Honor. If thou performest any thing well
unattempted by any before, or attempted with ill success, though it be trivial,
and of no great moment, thou shall gain more honor then by performing a
greater of more weight, Virtue, and difficulty. Rather carry thy self so, as
Honor may fall upon thee, than to Court, or pull it on thy self. Temper, if
possible, thy behavior, so as one or other of thy Actions will suit with most
humors, and thou will do well. That Honor casts the most splendid beams,
which is gained by excelling thy competitours in their own way, and beating
them at their own Weapon.

Against Duelling.
And here I think it not amiss to tell thee, I mean not [by Weapon] to exceed
him in a Duel. And since, for the most part, this foolish Action, and unlawful
practice of Gentlemen arises between Equals, and about punctillios of Honor, I
shall show you it is no Honor, nay, the greatest dishonor a Gentleman can
possibly be guilty of, it standing in direct opposition to, 1. Sense, and
Reason. 2. Honor, and Reputation. 3. Valor, and Courage. (All which they so
much pretend to). And 4. All Morality and Piety.

The irrationality of Duelling.
First, can any thing be more irrational and senseless, than to see men forfeit
their Peace, Pleasure, Habitations, Life, Soul, and all, for a Word, a
whimsical punctillio, as they suppose, of Honor? Or to purchase eternal
Damnation, for a momentary revenge? or terrors, and guilt of Conscience, for a
Humor? Then to see Men, for a lie, invite him that gave it to give them also
their Deaths-wound? For an affront, to expose themselves to ruin? And for fear
of the reproach of Man, incur the terrors of the Almighty? Then to see Men
cast away Repentance, and all hopes, so desperately as they do, who leave
themselves no space, nor grace for either? Then to see Men follow so empty a
praescript, merely because it is the fashion; and not be able to counterpoise
their most weighty matters and affairs to suppress it? Than to see Men that are
Rational Creatures, yet not make use of so much Reason, as to consider these
things?

Secondly, it is a false way of measuring Honor by the Sword on every trivial
occasion of a Mistress Health, a word, a slight carriage, and the like
fooleries, which are the usual causes of Quarrels; which is indeed the
dishonor of a Gentleman, by how much it is his Honor to pass by Offenses.
It Is more Honorable to make Peace, than to add fuel to strife, which may,
perhaps, end in Murder. In all public dangers of thy Country, and in the
Service of thy Prince be as forward as any; and in such Lawful attempts, quit
thy self like a Man, that the World may see thou fear not Death, nor
preferrest Life before thine Honor and Reputation; Thus the declining of a
Duel will appear rather to be shunning of Sin and Damnation, than Cowardice;
especially, if thy Actions and walkings render thee truly conscientious. Since
the Mad, Infamous, Cruel, Irrational, Impious Act of Duelling sets God at
defiance; 'Twill be the true Honor, and Reputation everlasting of a Gentleman,
to endeavor the extirpation of this idle, wicked, and damnable custom; which
renders a Christian Irreligious, and even a Moral Man a Fool. But, if they must
contend, and Quarrel, let it be to exceed each other in this Magnanimous,
Heroic, and Honorable design.

Duelling is rather Cowwardize, than Courage, or Valor.
Thirdly, the vain-huffing Valor of the giddy-pated Hectors of our times is
most ridiculous, and in effect, the rankest piece of Cowardice, and
Fool-hardiness imaginable, under the pretense of Courage, being fuller fraught
with a sordid fear, than a prudent caution; and that which they fear is only
the breath of a Man's word, which runs them on all hazzards, and to fight to
decline the aspersion of Cowardice; and yet, if Victor, run away from the
avenger of Blood, some Catch-pole, who, perhaps, yet is no Gentleman. Is it not
the greatest piece then of pusillanimous Cowardice imaginable, or madness;
when, notwithstanding, they will encounter the very wrath of God; and, like the
Giants, fight against Heaven; and dare rather be damned, than be angered, or
Reproacht.

Duelling directly opposite to Morality and Piety.
Fourthly, that which Duellists finely (as they think) or rather foolishly
smooth over with the term of satisfaction, is but, in effect, downright
malice, or revenge, which is, as it were, a barbarous Execution of Justice.
They being thirsters after their Enemy's blood, than which nothing is more
Delectable, Delicious, nor desirous to them. Nay, they discover themselves to
be indeed downright Murderers; since what they do, is with premeditation, and
deliberation. And so are no less, likewise, impious in letting the Sun go down
on their wrath; but also Rebellious against the Sacred Dictates of the
Almighty. And, if they dye in the conflict (as it is not impossible they may
both) and tumble into a Ditch, their Bed of Honor, with grinning countenances,
are they not highly promoted? This Bed of Honor, this grinning Honor; O, how
becoming they are a Gentleman!

In a word, not only Charity is thereby infringed, but all sobriety, meekness,
patience, humility, forgiveness of Injuries, gratitude, and all other Virtues;
since in this their beastial Rage, and rashness, they will not let their very
Friends escape their Sword's point, if there be but the least seeming mistake:
As well as Piety, which teaches us to love our Enemies, and forgive our
Brother, not only seven, but seventy times seven times: but they will not bear,
much less, forgive one. How would these Huffs learn that lesson then, to turn
the other cheek, if smote first on one, when a very word sets them on fire of
Hell? Besides that, It Is the Honor and Glory of a Man to pass by Offenses:
Anger rests in the bosom of a Fool. He that is slow to anger is better than
the mighty; and he that Rules his Spirit, than he that takes a City. From the
opposing these sacred decrees of Heaven, arise all the Duels on Earth between
these Zamzummims, who have enacted clean contrary; pronouncing such to be
milk-sops, and soft gibbos, that resent not an affront so hainously as to
dispatch the Offender into the other State. This they decree to be Gallantry;
the Spirit of Meekness, Prudence, and Humility Cowardice, or pusillanimity. The
ways to avoid a quarrel, you may see beneath in Anger rectified.

Whether excess of Drinking become a Gentleman.
I cannot omit here one main occasion of this vain Duelling, viz. That beastial
Exercise of Drinking; a Recreation too common among those that call themselves
Gentlemen, than which nothing is more uncomely to such; forasmuch as this vice
un-mans a Man, if it either elevate his speech to an intemperate pitch, as
either to commit folly, or to lose his gravity; or, on the other side, if it
render him stupid, or sottish, or inflames him into Rage, or Lust, or any wise
hebetates his understanding, obfuscates his Reason, or renders him incapable of
serving God in his Calling, or his King, Country, or Neighbor, let the
pretense be what it will; which, for the most part, he must needs be guilty of,
if he compels another to drink according to his own stint, or humor.
Therefore, in all Companies, be thou an Ahasuerian, that none may be compelled
to drink more than he is willing, which best becomes a true Gentleman;
forasmuch as there is no Reason for thee to compel another to be ruled by
thee. These are the ordinary effects of Drinking; and when the Senses and
Reason are denubilated, what Vice may it not be an Inlet to, bringing all
Diseases, both of Body and Mind, upon the Transgressors? As I have elsewhere
noted. To which I might here add, This good-fellowship will prove the worst
fellowship in the World in the end; and their maintaining of Friendship, the
greatest enmity, it destroying both Reputation, Good Name, and Estate, as well
as Health, Life, Body, and Soul. How many in their Jovial Cups have done that
which they have Repented all their lives after? And by thinking to drive away
care by drink, have drank care, their own confusion here, and eternal damnation
hereafter, on themselves? A Gentleman, therefore, should have better Recreation
and Past-time, than this sordid one of Drinking; forasmuch as his endowments
are beyond others.

If he have but little Worldly business, he may employ his time many ways in
edifying others. If he rightly, and seriously considers the uncertainty of our
times, and Lives, how above the one half is spent in sleep, eating, and other
necessary diversions in our Callings; Visits from Relations, Friends, etc. He
will find Time is the most precious thing in the World, and that his whole time
is but little enough to work out the Salvation of his Soul; and that he has
none to squander away in Drinking, then.

SUBSECT. III. To Inferiors.
EVery Condition is, or may be made pleasant unto us; since there are
miscarriages in all Men, it behooves a Gentleman to be so discreet, as to pass
them by: neither injuries, nor favors being other then as we apprehend, and
apply them to our selves. Our conceits, and Interpretation of all Actions, and
things, making them pleasing, or displeasing unto us. As it is arrogance to be
at variance with Superiors, dangerous as well as hazzardous with Equals; so
with Inferiors it is baseness, and beneath a Gentleman. The truth is, we should
avoid the displeasure of all; nay, even of the meanest, could we think
seriously how advantageous such an one with whom we are angry may be unto us
hereafter. Be civil, and affable therefore, to all, carrying thy self in an
equal temper between Pride and Familiarity. Discharge thy heart of those turgid
thoughts that all kind of passions frequently occasion, whereby thou shall
never break Friendship. If it be a Child, or Ignorant, whether Man or Woman,
that gives thee Offense, or cause of Anger, it is beneath thy notice; for this
is but to mistake them, and so to give them the occasion of Offense. If a
Droll; let him Droll on, and reflect not that on thy self that was not intended
toward thee; for so thou will not only make a Fool of thy self, but him wise
by thy application. If a Servant; persuade, or command him; yet so, as thy Love
to his good by amendment may be rather seen, than the venting thy Rage, which
will never do good; for angry words, and Rage do but excite contempt in him,
and hatred toward thee; it ought to be done then mildly, seasonably, and
gravely: And be sure thy i^l example lead not him, nor any of thine Inferiors,
to err. If a Scurrilous Person; as thou have no cause of admiring at it, so
thou have as little of taking notice of it. Let thy great care be to oblige all
thy Inferiors, if it lie in thy way, and to gain their Love; whereby thou
shall assuredly avoid the hatred, envy, and malice, which thou must ever
suspect from such as are beneath thee. Expect the worst, so shall thou be so
wise, as to know how to Remedy thy self, let it be what it will. And, be not
too scrupulous; for if a wise Man should take notice of all the mad, and
foolish Actions of most Men, he should never be quiet; and so a wise Man would
be rendered a Fool, miserable, and unfortunate, and Fools would be more happy.
Pay every Man his due, without grudging, or endeavors of abatement, especially
when agreement was made before, or you know the worth of the thing. That money
which is gotten by Robbing the Spittle, will prove the worst gotten of any, and
by grinding the faces of the poor, will eat as a Canker into thine Estate.
Neither despise them, if thou will render thy self Rational, it being Fortunes
fault, not theirs; they ought rather to be pityed, than slighted; For, if they
help not themselves, God will never help them. So that, in some measure, Faber
quisque est Fortunae suae.

SUBSECT. IV. To Relations.
SUch as are Parents, Wife, Children, I call and understand by the Name of
Relations in this place. All other Kindred, as Brethren, Uncles, Cousins, etc.
come either under the Notion of Superiors, Equals, Inferiors, or Friends; and
therefore I shall speak only as to the three former.

Parents challenge, as their due from us, Love, Obedience, Honor and
Reverence, as Instruments, and the Proca^rtick cause of our Beings; and that,
however they are affected in Body, or Mind. Nothing so unbecoming as Pride
toward, hatred of, Rebellion against Parents, especially in a Gentleman: and
yet how frequent is it among them to wish their Parents Death, to get the
Inheritance? And by so much is this the more frequent, by how much the greater
is the Possession; than which nothing is more inhumane and abominable; and this
is the end of all our labor under the Sun, or that can be expected in this
Vale of misery, and Ocean of tears; wherefore David might well exclaim, Mine
Age is as nothing before thee; verily, every Man, at his best State, is
altogether Vanity. And I have observed however, such have, to their extreme
trouble, been Retaliated in the same manner by their own Children, as a just
Judgment of the Almighty.

As Marriage is a most Honorable Estate, being appointed by God himself in
Paradise: So if the Parties can agree as they ought, it is the greatest
Happiness can befall a Man on this side Heaven. But, if they be unequally
Matched, live at variance, no greater torment or misery. To have a Scold, a
Fool, a Whore, a Fury, is the worst of Plagues, and an Hell upon Earth. A
Gentleman ought to be exceeding wary in so weighty a matter as Marriage, which
is for Life; and, perhaps, may be but once done, and therefore ought to be well
done: Of Marriage, and single Life. See more, Division 7.
Especially since thereby he shall either make, or mar his Fortunes; Marriage
being usually the impediment to great and Noble Achievements. Better therefore
never Marry, than Marry amiss; since the most glorious, noblest Acts, and most
laudable, and meritorious, have been done by unmarried Men. And truly, though
Marriage in some Respects, and for some men, be very commodious; yet a single
Life is more free from all cares, fears, and troubles; more pleasant, more
advantageous, and prosperous, in every respect; since he that is married has
given Hostages to Fortune, and is but a Prisoner to the World at best.

But if thy Constitution of Body, or convenience of Estate, or necessity of
Issue, or whatever else compels thee to marry, Let there be a suitable
proportion of Years, Births, Fortunes, Conditions; but make thy choice,
chiefly, for Virtue, than ought else. See more, in Division 7. beneath, in
Heroic Love Rectified.
Let not the Splendor of her Beauty (which is so tender a Flower, that the
blast of any Sickness shrivels to nothing, A Temptation, if not, oft-times, a
snare to thy self, and others; the greatest folly imaginable) or Gold dazzle
the eyes of thy understanding, and so obfuscate thy judgment as to precipitate
thee into such a Pitfall. Beauty and Honesty seldom agree; straight Personages
have, often, crooked manners; fair Faces, foul Vices; good Complexions, ill
Conditions: Suspitionis plena res est, and Insidiarum. Rablas Hist. Pantag.
Lib. 3. Cap. 33.
Coquage, god of Cuckolds, accompanies the Goddess Jealousy; both follow the
fairest, by Jupiter's appointment; and they Sacrifice to them together. He that
observes not these Rules, must look to Repent it. Non generum, sed malum
genium; non nurum, sed Furiam, non vitae comitem, sed litis fomitem Domi
habebit. However, Beauty joined with Virtue will prove an excellent foyl; yet,
if that cannot be, let her be rather comely, than deformed; for, as on the one
side, Molestum est possidere quod nemo habere dignetur; so, on the other,
Dificile custoditur quod plures amant. Let her be neque Lectissima, neque
illiberalis, between both; Nec formosa magis quam mihi casta placet. However,
quod ite^rum moneo, I advise thee, whether she be handsome, or unhandsome,
choose her out of good Kindred, well Educated, and Virtuous, not omitting thou
look well to the main chance of her Estate; especially if thine be impaired,
and in the wane. For, a comfortable Estate is, next to Virtue, the only means
to extenuate the innumerable inconveniences, and miseries of a married Life.

But when once thy choice is made, thou must treat her with all Love and
Civility (yet so as that thy Love do not enervate thy Rule over her, nor that
lessen thy Love) Letting her want nothing is requisite to her Quality, but
maintain her accordingly; allowing her all the liberty discretion, time, and
place will permit; keeping faithful and constant to her Body alone, which thou
should cherish as thine own with mildness; Avoiding all strife and
contentions, and especially Jealousy, that Devil, that haunts the Houses of
most married People: Of Jealousy in Marriage.
It Is a kind of Zeal for Love, or Envy, lest any one should beguile us of what
we chiefly Love. Which equally torments such as have none, as such as have a
cause. It Is not the thing it self, but the believing it to be so, that galls a
Man, or Woman, Tortures his Spirits, and Soul. This is the Vulture that gnawed
Prometheus's heart: and is as common with Batchelors as married men. Whence
ensue so many Quarrels, Duels, Murders, and Villainies, notwithstanding, it is
the weakest thing a man can possibly be guilty of, especially a Gentleman. And
extremely discommendable, in that it argues he has either an ill Opinion of
her, or himself, or Loves her not as he should do; for true Love banishes all
mistrust; therefore it is clear he Loves not her, but himself; or the good he
conceives consists in enjoying her only himself, which he would never fear to
lose, did he not judge himself unworthy of it, or account his Wife disloyal.
Besides, it is the most absurd, ridiculous, and most brutish passion, and
sottish, that can be: Since thereby he discredits himself, and his Friends,
dishonors his Children, disgraceth his Family, proclaims his shame, being
the Trumpetter of his own misery, by Divulging, Macerating, and grieving
himself and others, when the thing it self is not of so great moment, whether
true or false, as to wound so deeply. It Is the blow that never smarted, if
rightly considered: For, if a Man have a Cabinet that every man's Key will open
as well as his own, why should he think to keep it private? The more he stirs
in it then, the more he aggravates his own misery; for when all is done, it can
never be redressed. It Is better, in such a case, to be contented, or contemn
it; since no one can assuredly say he is no Cuckold, or shall never. In many
parts of Africa there is not a Maid to be found, after fourteen. In the time of
Severus the Emperor, it was so common, that diverse Laws for the restraint of
this Vice were made; Husband and Cuckold were then synonymas. Nay, it has been
the Fortune of many Emperors, Kings, and Princes; David, Agamemnon, Menelaus,
Philippus of Greece, Ptolomaeus of Egypt, Lucullsu, Caesar, Pompeius, Augustus,
Antonius, Antoninus, etc. wore all Acteons Livery. Nay, the most Heroic
Spirits could never avoid it; there is no Remedy in such a case, therefore, but
patience; better put it up with quietness.

Children serve to Eternize our Names, and that is all; the poorest way of
Immortalizing, and common to the base, as well as Noble; to the Peasant as the
King; nay, even to bruit Beasts. The Nobler way is, by great Actions, Noble
works, and attempts, whereby a Man's Name will be engraven in his merits, and
Achievements, so deep, as the teeth of Time can never devour. Whence we see
the greatest works have been done by Childless Men.

It Is beneath a Gentleman therefore to account the want of Children a
punishment, affliction, or misery; since the Risk that is run for them in
Marriage is hazzardous, yet obligatory. And admitting the Wife be Virtuous,
thou art not sure whether he that shall come after thee, and possess thy
Inheritance, shall be a Wise Man, or a Fool; Besides, they are certain cares,
and uncertain comforts. Many times the Extravagancies and Vices of but one,
causes more trouble then will over-balance the pleasure in all the rest. And
it is, for the most part, seen, the dispositions both of Body and Mind suit more
with a Brother, a Kinsman; and, it may be, one farther off in blood, then with
the Children; forasmuch as the surer side, at least (if not both) is a stranger
to the Family.

It Is neither Heresy, nor Imprudence, then, to adopt an Heir to thy mind,
though nothing of Kin, equally wise with thy self, or enducd with such Virtues
as thou could wish thou had a Son of. Whence the Italians make little or
no difference between Children, and such as are near of Kin; so they be allied
and Virtuous, they matter it not.

But if it be thy Fortune to have Children, thou ought, especially, to
provide for them, in the first place, good Nurses; the future welfare of their
Constitutions and Lives depending thereon, there being the same Virtue and
property in the Milk as in the Sperm; as I have formerly showed. (...), A
former Book of mine. Chap. 3. Sect. 3. Sub-sect. 1.
And therefore such an one ought to be chosen, that may correct the Mothers
Defects and Infirmities of both Body and Mind, if any be.

As they grow up, and become capable, the best seasoning of their minds and
Spirits will be with Piety, and the Fundamentals of Religion, besides other
Education before Discoursed of; not being too morose on the one hand, nor too
indulgent on the other, to let them run on in any Vice till it become habitual;
But, if possible, by fair admonitions and advice reclaim them. If that will not
do, the Rod of Correction must bring it out; provided, it be done seasonably,
moderately, and without passion, lest the Child should apprehend himself
corrected not so much for his own fault, as thy humor and Rage, and become
rather worse, than better, afterward.

Neither is it for thee only to have a tender care over thy Children, while
such, to see them well Educated, and Instructed; but to have a watchful Eye
over them, even when at years of Discretion, whether they live according to the
Rudiments they have received, that they may be encouraged, or reprehended, as
occasion serves: giving them thy self a good Example, which, usually, is more
prevalent than precept: For without it, neither Admonition, Reproof, nor
Correction can either take place, or be well attempted, when guilty of the same
which thou thy self should Reprehend and Correct in thy Son.

There are several other Circumstances that belong to a Parent toward his
Children; but most of them, if not all, being Intersperst in the foregoing
Discourse, to avoid prolixity (which I hate) and tautology, I shall proceed.

SUBSECT. V. To Strangers.
EVen Strangers, as well as those of a Gentleman's own Country, City, or Town,
ought to be civilly treated; forasmuch as all Men are of one Stock, and
Lineage, throughout the whole world: And nothing is more commended to us than
Love; nay, we are commanded to love one another by the Founder, Author, and
Finisher of our Religion, and Faith. And yet there are a sort of dirty People,
mean-spirited, and froward, that hate all that are but above them, or
Strangers; though they are enjoined not to vex a Stranger, but rather to
entertain them, for many thereby have, unawares, entertained even Angels from
Heaven. And though this little giddy People make he greatest outward show of
Piety and godliness, yet they have not so much knowledge as to know this is
Scripture; but it is no wonder, since the wicked one has sown his Tares among
the Wheat in most of the Cities and Towns of England, in the late Rebellion;
which I fear will never be rooted out by the Clemency of Government, till the
conflagration of all things, and they receive the just Judgment of Hypocrites.
I cannot, nor do not generally tax the Gentry with this Crime; but this I may,
and can safely say, that many that go under that Denomination, are highly
hereof culpable. But I look on such either as Spurious, or Up-starts, or
tainted with the forementioned sin, that is as the sin of Witchcraft. I hope a
Gentleman, worthily so called, will not only avoid it, but make it a mark of
distinction from such as Usurp the Title undeservedly. And therefore, since as
to their Quality I have spoken before, I shall here descend

SUBSECT. VI. To Friends, and Enemies.
YOur Acquaintance may be many, yet, perhaps, your Friends but few. True Love
is the bond of Friendship, grounded upon Virtue, not Vice; He that loves
another for his Company in Drinking, Whoring, Gaming, or any other Vice only,
is his Enemy, rather than Friend. Friendship is Zealous and Instrumental for
each others good. So that he that is Friendless, is, as it were, out of the
World, or alone. It Is not Company makes Society, since in the midst of it a Man
may be in solitude without Love. As the Latin Proverb is, Magna Civitas, Magna
Solitudo. A great City is a great Wilderness. For generally there is so much
Self-love, Covetousness, Fraud, and Deceit, that not one of an hundred you will
find true-hearted. And then what Society, unless merely on the account of
Profit? Thus a Man may live all his Life in the world without pleasure, in
solitude and misery, there being no greater ease to a Man's Soul, Spirit, and
Heart, then to discharge its fullness by communicating his imprisoned thoughts
to a Friend, whereby Joys are revived, and increased; Sorrows and Troubles
killed, and impaired. Besides, by this Communication of thoughts, a man's own
Intellect is not only bettered, but avoids splitting on the Rock of his own
flattering thoughts; and arrives into the safe Haven of the good and impartial
advice and Counsel of his Friend, both in Relation to his Affairs, and
Deportment. Great benefit has risen from Friendly Counsel, for the Tongue of
the wise man is Health; Animi est Remedium, oration; Good advice is of force to
quiet even a wounded Spirit, if it be wisely administered; It Is Incantationis
instar, a Charm; Aestuantis Animi refrigerium; The true Nepenthe of Homer;
which was no Indian Plant, but an opportune, and seasonable speech. Alt'ring,
and moving a Man more then Circes Cup, Helena's Boul, Medea's Unction, or
Venus's Girdle. As In Plotinus's Life, written by him.
Porphirius, the Philosopher, in a discontent, as he was going to make away
himself, being met by his Master Plotinus, was pacified, Reconciled to himself,
and Redeemed e faucibus Erebi, by his seasonable, and comfortable advice. So
powerful a Charm is a discreet, and dear Friend; Ille Regit Dictis Animas, and
Temperat Iras. Nay, what cannot he indeed do? And how many good Wits, good
Natures, and Excellent parts have been lost, and sunk, for want of the
Admonition, and Counsel of a Friend? In all Affairs, two is better than one,
especially since a Man is apt to be partial to himself, whence a Friend becomes
a Man's second self. And if he be a true and faithful Friend indeed, a Man's
Life becomes, as it were, double; all Affairs whatsoever appertaining to his
Felicity in this World, being given to him, and his Assistant; since he may
perform them by his Friend even at a distance. Nay, and those things (which is
another advantage) that, it may be, he cannot, neither would it be convenient
for him to do himself, he can perform with ease by his Deputy.

Since Friendship then is of so excellent use, great care is to be had of
maintaining it. To which Faithfulness in all secrets and trusts is a great
requisite. Nay, it is beneath a Gentleman, to betray his Trust reposed in him by
an Enemy, much more by a Friend: such a Crime is unsufferable, irreparable,
unpardonable almost, for it wounds to the bottom of the heart. Constancy also
is a very good band to Friendship; and so is gentle, prudent, and seasonable
advice on all occasions: For this revives a Man's Love, when he sees his
Friend, as it were unexpected, watching over him for his good. And such a
Friend is better than a Brother. Show not thy Levity and weakness in forsaking
an old Friend, which is very injurious; let not every light offense then
provoke thee to such a rash Action; for in losing a true tried Friend, thou
losest the greatest Earthly happiness imaginable.

To our Enemies also, though never so inveterate, is to be performed all
actions of humanity, and kindness; we are to forgive them, though they should
transgress, not only seven, but seventy times seven times, even as God has
forgiven us. Forasmuch as it is the Honor of a Man to pass by Offenses; much
more is it becoming a Gentleman, than that beastial way of Revenge. It Is very
easy to say, I forgive him, and yet never forget him, nor his Injury; which is
beneath a Gentleman. If thou have indeed forgiven him, manifest it in all civil
Behavior, and by Obligations, as frequently as opportunity presents. Nay, if
need were, to Relieve him with thy Estate to thy Power, And in all other cases
that lie in thy way to do him good; which is the greatest Conquest imaginable
thou can have over him; and thereby thou shall melt him into remorse, and
sorrow. Lastly,

SUBSECT. VII. To Himself.
DID we but know how, rightly, to behave our selves to our selves, 'twere not
the least part of our Happiness. And, herein, since our whole Discourse has
been for the accomplishing a Gentleman in other Respects in general, which yet
somewhat relates hereunto, in many places, I shall conclude it with this, which
comes more particularly to the health of his Person; which as Physicians tell
us, consists in a Right Regulation of the six non-natural things (as they call
them) which are, 1. Aer. 2. Meat and Drink. 3. Sleeping and Waking. 4. Rest and
Exercise. 5. Retentions and Evacuations. 6. Passions and perturbations of the
mind. Which will comprehend most of what I intend to add on this Subject.
Wherefore, as briefly as I may, beginning with

DIVISION I. Air.
OF all Earthly felicities that a Gentleman does, or can enjoy, Health is the
chiefest. It being that alone that sweetneth all other Happinesses unto us.
What pleasure is to be taken in Coffers of Silver and Gold, in the Richest
Apparel, in the fairest, and stateliest Edifices, in the most delicate Fare, in
the pleasantest, and most Ravishing Music; nay, in the most beautiful Wife,
or in ought else, without Health? Nothing so precious in this World, nor
nothing more desirable nor delectable: for without it all other things are
nothing worth. Pleasures will be but torments whilst they are thought of, since
they cannot be enjoyed. All the Gold in Ophir, or the Indies, Diamonds, or
other precious stones, are but eye-sores, whilst they cannot ease. They nothing
avail. Honors, Polite and Turgid Titles, do not suit with a crazy, rotten
Carcass, confined to a Bed, Nihil refert utrum agrum in ligneolecto, an in
aureo colloces. Senca. Epist. 17.
or imprisoned in the narrow confines of a small Chamber. Beauty flies away
with it, and is metamorphosed into Deformity in an instant, and length of days
is but a protraction of misery, a lingering, and continual Death without it. In
a word, it is that, and that alone, which sweetneth all things in this Life,
and makes them amiable to us. But in the praise of Health, that of Scaliger,
Poet 44. is most complete, and full, Cum Ariphrone Sicyonii sic exclamat (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Which are rendered by some, thus, in Latin. O Sanitas beata,
O Sanitas amanda,
O Sanitas colenda,
Tecum mihi beat
Reliquum agitare vitae
Liceat! mihi perennis
Comes o adesto vitae!
Nam quicquid est bonorum,
Et quicquid est Leporum,
Et quicquid est Honorum,
Et quicquid est Amorum,
Magnis in auri acervis,
In liberis venustis,
In principum decore,
In Conjugum favore,
Et quicquid est, quod ampli
Largitur orbis Author,
Quietis a Labor,
Gaudiique post dolorem,
Tecum viget, viretque
O Sanitas beata,
Tu ver facis suave
Fulgere gratiarum:
Sine te nihil beatam.
Quas a Calcagino Imitati sunt.
O Qua nec altera vetustior est coelitum,
O una cunctis expetita Sanitas.
Quodcunque reliquum est vitae, utinam
Agam, and una omnium contubernalis sis mihi;
Quicunque enim fortunis fruitur, aut liberi,
Aut est aliter obnoxious voluptiae,
Te una favente cuncta habet propria:
Afflant and illum Charites; est media Hyems,
Rigeat, tamen ver illi flosculos parit.
Absente te sunt cuncta Dura and aspera,
Nec grata prorsus caetera est faelicitas,
Quum esse plane desinit faelicitas.
He that is sick, neither hears, tastes, or fancieth aright; he enjoys not
himself. The sweetest Meats are bitter to him, or at least unsavory; The most
harmonious Music sounds harsh, and does but disturb him; he delights in
nothing as he ought, for nothing eases him. How careful then ought a Gentleman,
of all others, to be of preserving and maintaining the Jewel of his Health,
without which he being not able to enjoy Friends, Relations, or any thing he
has?

Wherefore, that he may possess an orthostadian health indeed, and live
happily, let him observe this our following Discourse.

The Air is an Element, without which we cannot live one moment of time; it
being continually received into our Bodies by respiration, or pores. So that,
as is the Air, such are our Spirits; and as are our Spirits, so likewise are
our Humors; and as are our Humors, such are our sollid parts. So that, it is
not only a cause of Life, but Diseases of all sorts, and Death it self. A
Gentleman, therefore, should have a special care, if he intend to preserve, and
prolong his Life (for the enjoying those many pleasures God and Nature has cast
before him) that his House be Situated in a good Air (of the Nature of the
Air, both in Substance and Quality, I have (...) Cap 6. Sect. 2. Sub Sect. 2.
Memb. 1. Sub-Memb. 1. Division 1. Sub-d^vision 1.
elsewhere showed, in a Book lately published; and how variously it may be
altered by the Stars, Seasons of the Year, Winds, Meteors, Zones, Climates,
Quarters of the World, Regions, Situation of places, Cities, Towns, Houses,
and by the particular Constitution and Nature of the place. Wherefore, I shall
not trouble my Reader with a recital of the various alterations they make in
us, and the strange effects the Air in every respect has on us) or build one
so, or remove to such an one. Now, to know whether the Air be good, you must
know, its considered either in Relation to it self, or in Relation to the Body
receiving it. As, in Relation to it self, a clear, pure, serene Air is to be
preferred, in regard our Temperature, and Constitutions, for the most part,
follow the temperature thereof. But in Relation to the Body receiving it, its
purity signifies nothing; nay, perhaps, it may be very bad; For that is only to
be accounted wholesome, and good, that is most proper and convenient for the
Constitution, and present condition of him, or her that is to receive it:
either to mitigate the Distemper, or correct, alter, or expel the peccant
Humor. How to choose a Doctor of Physic.
In which if thou art not able to direct thy self, make use, before it be too
late, of some Doctor, worthily so called, and graduated, not a nominal one
only, or ignorant intruding Practitioner, for they will but cheat you of your
money, and fool away your Health, if not your Life. Avoid, if possible, such as
are so fawning, and, to outward appearance, plausible to their Patients, so as
rather then displease them, they, many times, neglect the right administration
of a Cure. As also, on the other side, such as tie themselves so strictly up to
the Rules of the method of Cure, as they suspect not sufficiently the event, or
wholly neglect the condition and constitution of the Patient; one that is in a
mean between these, is best. Let him, if possible, be near thee; or keep him
with thee when sick, especially in acute Distempers, which many times change to
quite another thing, then, perhaps, they were but an hour before; and so, the
Medicine, Pro re Nata, ought to be also changed; which at a distance, your
Physician can never be able with certainty to advise in any case almost
whatsoever. As for such as are in Health, let them not be too curious in their
choice of Air; for, by their frequent imagining this or that Air best for them,
and fearing, and contemning that they live in, they deject, and prejudice
Nature, and frequently opinionate themselves into some ugly Distemper or other
which they most feared. Nothing better, when all is done, than change of Air for
a Man's Health; and who has more opportunity, leisure, and ability, than a
Gentleman? I shall therefore proceed to the next.

DIVISION II. Meat and Drink.
COuld a Gentleman but rightly behave himself to himself in this particular,
how famous would he be? In how much more Honor, Reputation, Reverence, and
Love of all would he live, than he usually lives in now through his Riot, and
Excess in Eating and Drinking? They are the Introducers of all Diseases. And
therefore, since, for the most part, there is nothing in which we more
frequently err, being chiefly guided rather by our sensual appetites, than
Reason, verifying that old saying, Plures crapula, quam gladius: And since
nothing more alters our Constitutions, both in Relation to their Quality, and
Quantity, a Gentleman ought to have the greater care he be well advised by his
Physician how he may safely use the For that which is generally, and in it self
wholesome, may not be so to thee particularly.
former, and refrain the latter. An insatiable paunch is a pernicious sink, and
the fountain of all Diseases, both of Body and Mind. It subverts, and perverts
the good temperature of the Body; stifles, and hebetates the wits; suffocates
Nature, it being thereby rend'red incapable of depascing the aliment thoroughly;
whence ensue crudities, and the seeds of all Diseases, and most frequently
pains in the Bowels, Eructations, Loathings, Vomitings, Opilations of the Liver
and Spleen, putrid Fevers, Stone, Gowt, Consumptions, and all manner of
weaknesses, Cachexia, Plethora, Bradiopepsia, Cacochymia, Wind, Decrepidness,
and indeed, what not? And sometimes sudden Death, arising out of the Repugnancy
of gross Humors corrupting. For as the Fire is extinguished by too much fuel,
so is likewise our Natural heat by immoderate eating. It must needs then, not
only be unbecoming a Gentleman to Epicurize, but be his Ruin.

To exceed in Drinking (which now adays, though very erroneously, is accounted
the chief, if not the only distinguishing mark of a Gentleman) is abundantly
worse. Subverting the good Temperature of their Bodies by their Intemperance,
as also immerging their Understandings, and Reasons. So that if they be witty
in any thing, it is ad gulam, to please the Palate, or cast a bald jeer or jest
on him they pretend the greatest Friendship to; the which if they second with a
loud laugh, it is the best syllogism and piece of Philosophy they have; making
themselves indeed Beasts, while they retain only the shapes of Men. For, while
in a Drunken humor, what evil are they not prone to? It Is the Inlet of
Quarrels, Murders, Rapines, Fornication, Adultery, nay, Incest too. A
destroyer of Health, Estate, and Soul, and all: nay, what Vice indeed can a
Drunkard be free of?

A simple Diet is best to preserve Health, observing withal such things as are
beneficial to thee, and such as are hurtful. And, there being no measure for
any Man's stomach, let this be thy gage, (since it is impossible to prescribe
the just quantity for every person; some being contented with less, others not
satisfied with more, and so much as will keep me in health, will, perhaps,
destroy thine) to rise with an appetite. Eat not till thou have an appetite;
and then, eat not till thou have none: But so much as Nature may Digest amidst
the greatest employments, so shall thou find the Body and Spirits more
lightsome. But, if thou find thy wits hebitate^, thy Fancy and Reason
obfuscated, thine Appetite satiated, thy Body lassated and ingravated, thy
Senses nauseated, thy Stomach infartiated with acid and flatulent eructations,
and thy Head with Catarrhs, etc. It Is certain thou have exceeded the bounds of
moderation and temperance, which is exceedingly unbecoming a Gentleman. The
same may be said of Drink, and worse. But because I have more at large exploded
it in another place, and given Rules for the Regulation of these Enormities, I
shall here add no more, but come to

DIVISION III. Sleeping and Waking.
THese interchangeably once in twenty four hours take their course, or turns:
So that irregularity in either of them is extremely prejudicial. Too much sleep
hurts the sensitive faculties, renders the Body stegnotick, Hebitates the Head,
and infartiates the Brain with many fumes. That sleep may be accounted
immoderate which is continued beyond the concoction of the aliment, for thereby
Distribution is impedited; Unde pravitas Corporis, and excrementorum provectus.
Long and tedious sleeps engender many emplastick humors apt to septifie in the
Veins, and Brain especially. It also Resolves, Refrigerates, and stupifies the
Nerves, dulls the Spirits and Senses, causes defluxions and Rheumes, and
extinguisheth natural heat. Likewise, if it be unseasonable; as after Bleeding,
a Purge or Vomit before wrought off, on an empty stomach, immediately after
eating, or in the Daytime; it is exceeding hurtful to health.

On the other side, inordinate waking is as bad; for, as the Senses are
composed by sleep, so by waking they are kept ever employed; and the Spirits
being moved from within to the external Organs, for performing the Animal
Actions, are by immoderate watchings consumed and dissipated, the whole body
dried, especially the Brain, and sometimes thereby corrupted, Choler increased,
the humors adusted, natural heat destroyed, and the whole Man rendered squalid.

A Gentleman should therefore, in these, take great care he exceed not, if he
tender his health: and lay aside that mad sitting up whole Nights. For, though
strength of Nature, while Young, may not presently be sensible of these
Extravagancies, yet as age comes on, they will be sad remembrancers. And, since
it cannot be very delightful, and for the most part, done only in a frollick,
or in some mad humor, which I have heard many Repent of next day; I shall
hasten to

DIVISION IV. Rest and Exercise.
OF any the preceding non-naturals there is hardly one a Gentleman should be
more circumspect in, than this of Rest and Exercise; nothing being more
pernicious to the Soul than Idleness. It Is one of the seven deadly Sins, odious
to God, and all good Men; eating the Mind and Soul as Rust does Iron; the
Devil's Cushion it is, and the Nurse of all manner of Vice; neither is there
any thing more destructive to the Body; for it weakens it, extinguisheth
Natural heat, hinders concoction and evacuation, causes oppilations, and fills
the Body full of gross, corrupt, excrementitious Humors; and is the
Procatartick cause of all manner of Infirmities. For, as a standing Pool
corrupts, and breeds putrefaction, so does our Body and Humors, being idle.
And yet idleness is become the badge, as it were, or distinguishing mark of
Gentility, to be one of no Calling, not to Labor; for that is derogatory to
their Birth; they make Vacation their Vocation. To be mere Spectators, Drones,
to have no necessary employment in their Generation, to spend their days in
Hawking, Hunting, Drinking, Ranting, etc. which are the sole exercises almost
of many of our Gentry, in which they are too immoderate. They know not how to
spend their time (sports excepted) what to do else, or otherwise how to bestow
themselves. They do all by Ministers and Servants, thinking it beneath them to
look after their own business, till, many times, their Servants undo them, or
at least, enrich themselves. Every Man has some Calling, and it is not
unbecoming a Gentleman. But they are all for pastimes; it is most, if not all
their study: All their wit and inventions tend to this alone, to pass away
their time in impertinencies, as if they were born, some of them, to no other
end.

Opposite to this is Exercise, Labor, Diligence; which if in excess, on the
other hand, or unseasonably used, are as pernicious and destructive. A
Gentleman, though never so great, has business enough, and labor too, if he
rightly consider. Besides, exercises I am sure they will have, good or bad,
whatever comes on it. Therefore I shall show how they are to be used, and which
are the best. Violent Exercise and weariness consumes the Spirits, substantial
parts of the Body, and such humors as Nature would otherwise have concocted;
diversely affect both the Body and Mind, hindering Digestion, sometimes breaks
the Vessels, and frequently extravasateth the blood, causing Inflammations in
the external parts, and skin environing the Ribbs, whence come Pleurisies: And,
the blood thus irritated, if it remain still in the Veins, excites putrid
Fevers, and many other Maladies. Exercise at unseasonable times, as on a full
stomach, is as bad: For it corrupts the Aliment in the stomach, and carries the
Chyle crude and indigested into the veins; which there putrefying, destroys the
health, and confounds the Animal Spirits. Likewise before evacuation by stool,
that the body be cleansed from its Excrements it is unfitting. For when the Body
is hot, and the pores open, their faeculencies are apt to be mixed with, and
transported to, the good humors, and other parts. Neither is it to be used
before concoction be, at least, almost perfected. For the heat being thereby
evoked, concoction must needs be impedited, ill humors accumulated, and diverse
infirmities engendered.

A Gentleman is not only to observe the right using of exercise; But that he
choose and use only those that are good: most of their exercise is to eat,
drink, lie down to sleep, and rise up to play; they think it is well, many of
them, if they can but Hawk, Hunt, Ride an Horse, play at Cards and Dice,
Swagger, Drink, Drab, and take Tobacco with a grace; Sing, Dance, wear their
Clothes in Fashion, Court and please the Ladies, talk great fustion, Insult,
Scorn, Strut, contemn and vilify others, perhaps, their betters, and use a
little mimical apish Complement above the ordinary custom; they think
themselves complete, accomplished, and well qualified Gentlemen. These are most
of their employments. This their greatest commendation. I am not against these
Recreations, if rightly used; however,

A Gentleman's Recreations are of two sorts; either within, or without doors; to
refresh his spirits, entertain a Friend, exhilarate the mind; to aleriate time,
tedious otherwise in those long solitary Winter Nights, by certain games; the
best of which may be abused, and are too often, by some that call themselves
Gentlemen; so that many are undone by it, and their Posterity beggared, being
led thereunto merely for filthy Lucre; whence also arise cosening, wrangling,
swearing, drinking, lying, loss of time, no good in the end, and, frequently,
Ruin. For when once they have gotten an habit of Gaming; they can hardly leave
it.

Exercises within doors.
Among Recreations and Exercises within doors, are Cards, Dice, Tables, which
many narrow-witted People too severely explode; in themselves they are honest
and harmless recreations; the abuse of them must not deny the use of them: they
may as well forbid the use of Wine, because some have been inebriated
therewith; or conclude the use of Women sinful, because some have been clapped by
them. Chess is also a good innocent Game, as well as ingenious, and best
becoming a Gentleman of all the rest, if not abused, especially such as have
wavering minds; provided, it be moderately used, as a diversion to entertain
the time, a Friend, put off heavy, melancholy, or idle thoughts, and the like
harmless, innocent ends, which all were first invented for: Not to spend all
their Life in gameing, playing, and fooling away their time, as too many do.
This is very unseemly in a Gentleman. Some men's whole delight, as well as
Recreation, is To take Tobacco, Drink all Day long, and Night too, in a Tavern,
to discourse of impertinencies, and that tend to no Edification; to Jest, Sing
and Roar: This is a most sordid Life for a Gentleman. Billiards and Truke are
harmless, and may be used as a Diversion, now and then. Music, especially
Vocal, as well as Instrumental, Dancing, Fencing, do well become a Gentleman's
private Exercises. For Health, Galen commends Ludum parvae pilae, to play at
Ball; Tennis is more becoming a Gentleman, for a Game or two, but more may
prove too violent; it exercises every part of the Body, and is very good, so
that he sweat not too much.

Study commended.
But the Noblest exercise of the mind within doors, and most befitting a Person
of Quality, is Study, sometimes one, and sometimes another, for Diversion, were
not amiss. Which are most commendable, and becoming a Gentleman, you have been
taught before. Chap. 1. Memb. 1. Part 1.


And, as I hinted there; A few good Books is better than a Library, and a main
part of Learning. I shall here contract his Study into these few Books
following; in which he may indeed read all that is requisite, and of Substance.

Next to the SACRED WRIT, The Saint and Martyr of GREAT BRITAIN, King CHARLES
the First, His EIKON ASILIK; Hooker his Ecclesiastical Polity; Dr. Hackwel his
Apology for the Providence of God in the Government of the World; Bishop
Andrews, and Bishop Sandersons Sermons; Dr. Hammond's Works. Dr.
Stillingfleet's Origines Sacrae, and defense of Archbishop Laud against
Fisher, and the Bishop himself; The Honorable Mr. Boil his Style of the
Scriptures, and Ball's Catechize. Our KING JAMES His Works. The Lord Veralam,
Viscount St. Albans, his Works, especially his Advancement of Learning, and his
Novum Organum. The Great Boil his Experimental Natural Philosophy, and the rest
of his Works. The wonderful Cartesius's Philosophy. The worthy Sr. Kenhelm
Digby his Nature of Bodies. And that Prodigious Philosopher of our Age, Doctor
Henry More of Cambridge, his whole Works. Dr. Brown his Religio Medici, and
Vulgar Errors; Dr. William Harvey, de Circulatione Sanguinis; Dr. Charleton
his Physiologia, against Atheism, etc. Dr. Willis, de Fermentatione; Cot his
Genesis of the World; Mr. Hook his Micrography; and the rest of our New
Experiments; Mr. Glanvill his Scepsis Scientifica. Tully's Works, and
Erasmus's. Euclid his Elements, Copernicus, Galileus, and Gassendus. Sir Walter
Rawleigh his History of the World; Ortelius, Mercator, and Hondius, Helyns
Geography, Camden his Britannia, Caesar's Commentaries, Plutarch's Lives,
Josephus, and Philo Judaeus; Cornelius Tacitus, the Turks History, and Sandys
his Travels, Sr. Richard Baker his Chronicle; with the Continuation of Mr.
Phillips. The French, Spanish, German Histories, and the Histories of all other
Nations. especially Spotswood, Lord Bishop of Saint Andrews, his History of
Scotland; Homer, Horace, Virgil, Ovid, Buchanan the Scot, not inferior to any
Poet. And among our selves, old Sr. Jeffery Chaucer, Ben. Johnson, Shakespeare,
Spencer, Beaumont and Fletcher, Dryden, and what other Plays from time to time
you find best Penned; And for a Diversion, you may read Hudebras, and Don
Quixot, and Quevedo for prose; As also for General Readings, Burton's
Melancholy, and our Famous Seldom his works. Or, if thou will study thy own
frame of Body, thou may read Galen, Laurentius, Bartholinus Filius,
Riolanus, Spigelius, Vestlingius, our Doctor Glisson de Hepate, Dr. Wharton de
Glandulis, and Dr. Willis de Cerebro, with our Latter Dutchmen. As for Books of
Physic, I willingly omit to mention which are the chief of them, lest I should
enlighten Quacks, and Empericks, and bold Intruders into the practice of that
Noble Study; the Nation swarming too much already with such Vermin.

Or study some Art, or practice Brachygraphy, that requires much attention. Or,
let him Demonstrate a Proportion in one of the five last Books of Euclid;
Extract a Square Root; Or study Algebra, than which nothing is more pleasant,
so bewitching and ravishing, so easy withal, and full of delight: whence, Ex
ungue Leonem, he may define by his thumb alone the Magnitude of Hercules, or
the true Dimensions of the great Colossus, which contained 1080000 weight of
brass. By this Art he may contemplate the variation of the Twenty three
Letters, which may be so infinitely varied, that the words complicated and
deduced thence will not be contained within the compass of the Firmament. Ten
words may be varied 40320. diverse ways. By this Art he may examine how many
Men may stand one by another in the whole Superficies of the Earth; some say
148456800000000. Assignando singulis passum quadratum. Or, with Archimedes, he
may compute, if the whole mass of the Earth were Sandy, how many Sands it might
hold; first, knowing how much a small Cube of the bigness of a Mustard Seed
might contain. Or, for a Diversion, calculate the motion of the Planets, their
Magnitudes, Apogaeums, Perigaeums, Excentricities, Distances from the Earth;
The bigness, thickness, compass of the Firmament; each Star, with their
Diametres and Circumferences, by those curious helps of glases the Telescopes.
Or calculate the Spherical Triangles, Square a Circle, etc. Or study the
Optics, Geometry, but chiefly the Mathematics, or such like Arts and
Instruments, and Mechanical Inventions. As, to make diverse Cranes and Pulleys,
by which one Man shall draw more, than a thousand without them: Lift up, and
remove great Weights. To make Diving Boats. A Chariot to move without Horses.
To fly in the Air, walk in the Water; Mills to move of themselves, and such
Thaumaturgical works. To Represent solid Bodies by Cylinders and Concaves; Make
a perpetual motion; An inextinguishable light, or Ernestus Burgravius his Lamp
to be made of Man's blood, which Chymically prepared forty days, and
afterward kept in a Glass, shall show, he says, all the Accidents of this
Life; Si Lampas hic clarus, tunc homo Hilaris and sanus Corpore and Animo; si
nebulosus and depressus, m^le afficitur, and sic pro statu hominis variatur
unde sumptus Sanguis. Cum homine perit and evanescit.
and when the Man dies, it goes out. Or study his Book De mummia, by which he
will cure most Diseases, and transfer them into Beasts or Plants. Or Bacons
Tract De Retardanda Senectute, to make a Man live three or four hundred Years.
Or set up a Laboratory, and turn Spagyrist, make Panaceas, Unguentum Armarum,
the Sympathetical Powder, Rare Extracts, Elixirs, Balsams, Spirits, Salts,
Essences, etc. What can be so pleasing as the Speculation of these things, or
more becoming a Gentleman, for his Recreation and Diversion? But the best study
of all is that which concerns his own Salvation. Or let him study his own
Heart, than which nothing is more deceitful. Or how to mortify the flesh,
resist the Devil with all his Devices, and the temptations of the World. Take
an account of every days omissions, commissions, and failings. Be frequent in
Prayer, Meditation, and good works, Charitable deeds, etc. And he shall never
complain of want of Time or Employment.

Exercises without Doors.
Exercises and Recreations which are used abroad, that may befit a Gentleman,
and most healthy, are Pilmall, Gauff, these by striking the Ball exercise the
whole Man, together with the Walk, and may be used moderately without any
excess or violence. Also Riding the great Horse, Running at a Ring, Tilts and
Tournaments, are Noble Exercises as well as healthy, and becoming his grandeur.
In like manner Balon, Quintan, Stop-ball, Pitching of a Bar, Casting of a
Weight, are healthy and Laudable. So is Archery, by reason of the Walk, and may
be now and then used without any disparagement to him. The same may be said of
Bowling. Nothing so pleasant to some Men as Fowling; or Fishing is a good
pastime, if it be not too melancholy a Recreation; they are nothing expensive,
and not unbecoming a Gentleman. Hawking does not unbecome him neither, nor
Hunting, provided, he have a care he be not, with Acteon, devoured by his
Hounds; that the charges exceed not treble the pleasure. Also Raceing, if he
run and gallop not himself out of his Estate, as too many Hair-brained Men,
that have the Name of Gentlemen, have done. They are very Laborious Exercises,
and accompanied with many dangers; otherwise Lawful and good disports, used
moderately and discreetly, which a Gentleman should be very careful of. The
truth is, no Recreation done seasonably, moderately, and discreetly, is
unbecoming a Gentleman for his health sake; even to Ringing, Running, Leaping,
Nine-pins, Quoits, Catt, Trap-ball, however they are not so graceful nor
suitable, and therefore better let alone where any other can be had. As also
Hurling, Wrestling, and Football, such rude pastimes better becoming the
Vulgar, and Laboring Man; the sight of them, however, as a Spectator, is not
amiss. But, no less pleasant, and befitting a Gent^eman, than any of the rest,
is, with some good Company, to take a Journey to Visit some Friends, or see
some City, Castle, Monument, or walk in delicate Gardens, Orchards, Mounts,
Groves, Wildernesses. These Ravish some Constitutions: As to go upon the Water,
Walk by the bank side of a River, Pond, Brook, does others. But since each
Man's discretion and inclination will be herein a sufficient guide, I shall add
no more of this, but descend to the fifth non-natural, viz.

DIVISION V. Retention and Evacuation.
REtention and Evacuation, you must know, is as effectual a non-natural cause
of Diseases, as any whatsoever. A Gentleman therefore ought to be very careful
he exceed not in either of them; for, since for the nourishing of our Bodies,
and restoring strength, we have daily need of Food; and since the Aliment is
seldom perfectly concocted, or converted into pure nourishment, of necessity
there must remain a faeces, the Retention of which, beyond the requisite time,
must needs occasion many Infirmities. Untimely and intemperate Evacuations, on
the other side, are worse; ejecting, many times, the profitable nourishment
with the Excrements, whereby the whole Body is rendered debil and Consumptive.
As I have abundantly showed elsewhere.

'Twere good to prevent the mischief, there being many sorts of Retentions and
Evacuations, by timely consultation with the Physician, which is all I shall
say here, since, as I have formerly declared in another Book, it is against my
Conscience to encourage Emp'ricks, and bold Intruders into the practice of
Physic, to ruin Men's Lives, there being too many of these Vermin already in
every Town and Country. I shall therefore hasten to the last thing promised,
but first praemize a word

SUB-DIVISION I. Of Custom.
OF all things, Custom is one of the strongest (as you have heard) a second
Nature, alt'ring our very Constitutions and Temperatures. Wherefore in all
these non-naturals somewhat ought to be allowed to Custom, which gradatim
incroaches on us by multiplied Actions. Wherefore whatsoever a Man is
accustomed to, though in its own Nature bad; yet it is less hurtful, than its
contrary, working less resistance, and, consequently, less disturbance in our
Bodies, because of its agreement in equality with what was before in the Body.
Wherefore as these ought rather to teach us to enure our selves to what is
laudable and good, than evil, since it is so powerful in its self, and so
difficult to be altered: so on the other side, we are not suddenly, to break off
a Custom, though pernicious. For nothing is more destructive to Men's Bodies,
than sudden alterations. It must be done therefore (...), gradatim; nay, even
such as have been long accustomed to Wine, or any thing worse, Tobacco, etc.
whereby they have, perhaps, subverted their healths, and good temperatures,
even in Fevers, or any other Distemper, their Custom ought to be indulged,
since otherwise, Nature being prohibited her delight, will despond, and yield
so to the Disease, as may prove her Ruin. But of this I have elsewhere
Discoursed. Wherefore I shall add no more here, but proceed to the last thing
promised, viz.

DIVISION VI. Passions and Perturbations of the Mind.
FOr the better understanding of what I mainly desire to drive at in this
particular, it is requisite to know that there are diverse passions whereby we
are, or may, nay, must be, notwithstanding the idle boasts of the Stoics, at
one time or other affected with. As, 1. Admiration. 2. Estimation. 3. Contempt.
4. Magnanimity, or Pride. and 6. Humility, or Dejection. 7. Veneration. 8.
Disdain. 9. Love. 10. Hatred. 11. Desire. 12. Hope. 13. Fear. 14. Jealousy.
15. Security. 16. Despair. 17. Irresolution. 18. Courage. 19. Cowardice. 20.
Emulation. 21. Affright. 22. Remorse. 23. Joy. 24. Sorrow, Grief, or Sadness.
25. Distaste. 26. Discontent. 27. Light-heartedness. 28. Derision. 29. Envy. 30.
Pity. 31. Satisfaction. 32. Repentance. 33. Good will and gratitude. 34.
Indignation and Wrath. 35. Glory. 36. Shame. With innumerable more which I
might particularize: So that their number is indefinite and without number, yet
may be referred to these six. 1. Admiration, 2. Love, 3. Hatred, 4. Desire, 5.
Joy, 6. Sorrow, Sadness, and Grief, which innumerable ways, and on as many
occasions, terrify our minds, and shake our Souls, corrupt our Spirits,
Humors, and Ferments, to the destruction of our healths and Lives; wherefore
I Will take the liberty, before I give any direction, how to resist and mitigate
these unruly Sons of Zeruiah our Passions, to rip them all up, as near as I
can, and show you what they are; and how they depend one on the other.

Philosophers in former time have deduced the passions from the two Appetites
of the Soul, Concupiscible, and Irascible, contrary to Reason, making it have
distinction of parts, and applying or attributing all to the two faculties of
Anger and Desire, more then to its faculties of Admiration, Love, Hope, Joy,
Fear, or any other.

All Passions and Perturbations are certain motions, resentments, and
apprehensions of the Soul, and occasioned only by the motion of the small
Glance in the midst of the Brain, the principle seat of the Soul, through the
agitation of the Spirits: which being hung on the top of the Conduit by which
the Spirits of its anteriour cavities have communion with those of the
Posteriour, the least motions in it cause a great variation in the course of
the Spirits, and so e Contra the least alteration in the course of the Spirits,
causes the motions of this very little kernel and chief Throne of the Soul
extremely to alter. However, the Soul is (notwithstanding this kernel be her
chief part where she more vigorously Acts and Resides) really joined to all the
parts of the Body, yet is not diminished when any part is cut off, but
withdraws on the dissolution of the contexture of its Organs. For, it admits
not of dimensions, but refers to the whole Mass and contexture of Organs.

SUB-DIVISION I. Of Admiration.
PEripatetick Philosophy is not herein to be followed. Admiration is, on the
first rancounter of an object, a sudden surprise of the Soul, causing a serious
consideration of the object, whether rare or different from what she knew
before, or supposed it should be, and then we admire it. Astonishment,
Estimation, and Contempt.
If it be in excess, it is Astonishment. And according as we more or less admire
the object, is Estimation, or Contempt, which is only our opinion of the
object, and are sorts of Admiration; inasmuch as if the object be not admired,
there is no reckoning made of it more than Reason dictates. But if they proceed
from Love or Hatred, as sometimes they do, and often may, the object is
considered, as we have more or less affection to it.

Magnanimity, Pride, Humility, Dejection.
And indeed, Estimation and Contempt may generally relate to all kind of
objects. And so we may either Esteem, or Contemn our selves: and then the
motion of the Spirits occasioning them is so apparent, that it causes a
mutation, not only in the countenance, but even in the very Actions, Gate, and
Deportment, whence arise Magnanimity, Pride, and Humility or Dejection. Which
in process of time, from Passions, become Habits. And truly, if we rightly
consider, it is no absurdity for a Man to esteem himself; for he that is wise
will do it. But then, he must be one that has an absolute command over his
Will, and a free Disposition; for only the Actions thereon depending may be
justly praised, or blamed; esteemed, or condemned. And thus we become Masters
of our selves when we have the free disposing of our Wills, and so become truly
Generous and Magnanimous, as that we may set our selves at the highest rate we
justly may if we rule our Wills well: But if ill, it can never be. He that has
attained to this free disposition of his Will, will never contemn, nor blame
another. For all faults in others, he rather extenuates and excuses, than
aggravates and condemns; as believing they proceed rather from ignorance, than
good will. And although he think himself no ways Inferior to those of far
greater Estate, Honor, Knowledge, Wit, etc. So on the other side, he does not
esteem himself much above his Inferiors. For all these things, in comparison
of his good will, he values but as trifles, imagining that for which he esteems
himself, is, or may be in every one. Nay, he is the most humble of any Man, for
the same Reason; since by Reflecting on his former faults, and those he is like
to commit are no ways inferior to others: He prefers not himself before any
body, but concludes others that have this free Disposition, may use it as well
as himself.

This is the truly Generous Person, and most likely to Master his Passions, and
inclined to do great things, as shall be showed beneath. In Passions Rectified.
He that esteems himself for ought else than for this free disposition of the
Will, is not really Magnanimous, nor has true Generosity, but only Pride, which
is a Vice, the other a Virtue, arising chiefly of flattery; whence Men become
proud, oft-times, for things that deserve not any praise, but rather the
contrary; so that, most frequently, we find the most stupid sort of People fall
thereinto.

Dejection is a vicious Humility, and as much unbecoming a Gentleman, as Pride.
And is Diametrically opposite to Generosity. For, as Pride enslaves a Man to
his desires, his Soul must needs be perpetually perturbed with Anger, Hatred,
Revenge, Envy, and Jealousy. So, Dejection impoverishes the Spirits of Men;
yet such become, most commonly, arrogant and proud, shamefully at other times
debasing themselves, and sneaking to such as they fear, or may get by, and yet
insult over such from whom they neither hope, nor fear any thing. In prosperity
they are as much elevated, as in adversity deprest: When as a generous, free,
and Virtuous Soul is still one and the same.

Another branch of Estimation, when we regard an object as able to do good or
hurt, is Veneration; and of contempt, Disdain. The motion of the Spirits that
excites Veneration is compounded of that which excites Admiration, and Fear,
beneath spoken of. Those that excite Disdain, of those that excite Security or
boldness as well as Admiration. Veneration is an inclination of the Soul, not
only to esteem the object it reverenceth, but also to submit to it with some
kind of fear, and to endeavor to make it become gracious to her. Veneration
and Disdain.
Our Love and Devotion is only to those from whom we expect good; our Veneration
to free causes only, which we apprehend are able to do good or evil to us.
Disdain is an inclination of the Soul to contemn a free cause, though it can do
both good and evil; yet esteemed so far beneath him, that he fears neither.

Thus much shall suffice to be spoken, briefly, of the first Passion,
Admiration; whose cause is in the Brain, and not in the Heart, or Spleen,
Liver, Blood, etc. Though the other Passions are in them also, as well as in
the Brain. For the knowledge of the thing admired is only in the Brain, and not
in the Heart, Liver, Blood, etc. on which depends all the good of the Body. It
has no contrary, in that if the object don't surprise a Man, he considers it
without passion, being not at all moved. And, in that he admires nothing but
what seems rare, it is a beneficial Passion, making him not only to apprehend,
but remember things he was before ignorant of, the Idea thereof being, by some
passion or other, impressed in his Brain, or applied by his Understanding. But,
if it be in excess, as commonly we are apt to admire too much, it is not only
very unbecoming a Gentleman, but also it does much hurt, in perverting the use
of Reason. And if we admire nothing but what differs from that we knew before,
or seems rare, this passion must needs be an effect of ignorance, in that
nothing can seem so unto us unless we were ignorant of it. The more ingenious,
and wittiest of Men, however, especially if they distrust their own
sufficiency, are most apt to admire. And none but ignorant, stupid,
Block-headed Dolts are free from this passion.

SUB-DIVISION II. 2, 3. Love, and Hatred.
HEre we may premise; it is more facile to consider the passions all together,
than to speak distinctly of each; I shall, therefore, put Love and Hatred
together in this place.

Love is an emotion of the Soul, inciting it, by the motion of the Spirits, to
join in Will to the objects that seem good and convenient for us, which
occasioneth Love: That is, so to join in Will, as to make a man's self and the
thing beloved one and the same. And so it is different from Desire, which is a
Passion apart. Hatred, on the contrary, is an emotion of the Spirits, which
incite the Soul to Will to be freed and separated from objects represented to
be hurtful or evil.

In Love, the motions of the Blood and Spirits (if not joined with Desire, Joy,
or Sadness, etc. but simple and alone) are even, as also the pulse, but greater
and stronger than ordinary; emitting more heat, and Celeritating Digestion, and
therefore is an Healthy Passion. But, in Hatred the Pulse is uneven, more
debile and quick, cold instead of heat, or mixed with pungent heats in the
breast sometimes, concoction impedited, vomits excited, and the humors become
corrupted, or at least vitiated; and so is a very noxious, and unhealthy
passion.

This proceeds from the tie that is between the Soul and the Body; as, when any
corporeal action is joined with a thought, one still accompanies the other: As
is apparent in such who have an aversion to some Medicine, they cannot think on
it, but the taste, smell, etc, comes also immediately into their thought. For,
the Blood, or some good and delectable chyme getting into the Heart, and
becoming a more convenient Alimony than ordinary to maintain heat there, the
principle of Life, occasion the Soul to join in will to this Alimony, viz. Love
it; And thus, at the same time, the Spirits descending from the Brain to the
muscles, might press, or agitate the parts from whence it came to the Heart,
Stomach, and Intrails, whose agitation increases the appetite; or to the Liver
and Lungs, which the muscles of the Diaphragma may press. Whence the same
motion of the Spirits ever since accompanies the Passion of Love.

On the contrary, in Hatred, some strange Chyme, not proper to maintain the
heat of the Heart, but rather like to extinguish it, is thereunto communicated;
and so the Spirits ascending to the Brain from the Heart, excite the passion of
Hatred in the Soul. And thus these same Spirits, being, from the Brain,
transmitted to the Nerves, may expel the blood from the Spleen, and the small
Veins of the Liver, to the Heart, to hinder the noxious succ from entering; and
move to those which might repel this juice to the intrails and the stomach, or
sometimes to cause the Stomach to eject it: whence these motions accompany the
Passion of Hatred.

Benevolence, and Concupiscence.
There are two effects of Love, Benevolence, and Concupiscence. The former is,
when we wish well to what we Love. The latter, when we desire the thing loved.
There are different passions that yet participate of Love. As, the Ambitious
Loves Glory. The Avaritious, Riches. The Amorous, a Woman. The Drunkard, Wine;
which though different, yet participating of Love, they are alike. Affection,
Friendship, and Devotion.
However, Love is not always the same, and alike; for it admits of Degrees: as,
when we esteem an object of Love less than we esteem our selves, it may be
termed only an Affection, when we value it equal to our selves, it may be
termed Friendship; when more, Devotion. And sometimes we love merely for the
possession of the object whereunto our passion relates, and not the object it
self, for which we have only a desire mixed with other particular passions. As,
Ambition, Avarice, etc. But, the Love a Generous Soul, and a Man of Honor
bears his Friend, is of another and purer Nature; And that of a Father to his
Child is more immaculate and sublime.

Now, although Hatred be Diametrically opposite to Love; yet are there not so
many sorts of Hatreds, as Loves: Because we observe not so much the difference
between the evils we separate from in Will, as we do between the goods
whereunto we are joined.

And, forasmuch as the objects of both Love and Hatred are represented to the
Soul, both by the External senses, and Internal; it will follow, there are two
sorts of Love, and as many of Hatred, according to the object, whether good or
handsome, evil or ugly. When we judge any thing good and convenient for us by
our internal Senses, and Reason, we may most properly term it Love; if contrary
to our Nature, and offensive, Hatred. Liking, and Horror.
If it be judged by our external Senses, we term it Handsome or Ugly; and so have
either a liking or abhorring to it. Which two passions, of Liking, and Horror,
are usually more violent, than Love and Hatred. Because, what is conveyed to
the Soul by the Senses makes greater impression, and yet presents things more
false, than what is communicated to it by Reason.

Love and Hatred proceeding from Knowledge (as it is clear they do) must needs
precede Joy and Sadness (except when Joy and Sadness proceed from Knowledge:)
and when the things this Knowledge inclines us to Love, are in themselves truly
good, or to Hate, truly evil; Love is then most excellent, and transcendent:
for, it joining things that are truly good to us, we are thereby rendered more
perfect. Neither can it then be in excess; the most that can be, does but join
us so absolutely to those good things that we distinguish between the Love we
have to them, and our selves, which cannot be evil. Nay, Love is so good, that
were we un-bodyed, we could never Love too much. Neither can it fail of
producing Joy, because it represents what we love as a good belonging to us.
Hatred, on the other side, can never be, in the least degree, but it is
noxious, and accompanied with sadness. Yet Hatred of evil is necessary in
respect to the Body, though not manifested but by pain. Therefore it is never
enough to be avoided, though it proceed from a true knowledge; since it is not
only prejudicial to the Soul, but extremely hurtful to the Body, if it exceed,
in relation to its health. Much more is it, then, to be shunned when it arises
from any false Opinion.

SUB-DIVISION III. 4. Desire.
YOu must remember (as was said) that all the Passions arise from the
consideration of good and evil, and so does this. As, we may Desire the
possession of a good, or to be rid of an evil, or to avoid it, etc. It Is caused
by the Spirits agitating the Soul, thereby disposing it to will such things as
she accounts convenient, whether it be the presence of an absent good, or the
conservation of a present, or e contra. The Heart is thereby agitated more than
by any of the other passions, and the Brain furnished with more Spirits, which
passing thence into the muscles, render all the Senses more nimble, and
consequently, all the parts of the Body. It has no contrary; for, seeing there
is no good, the privation thereof is not evil; nor any evil, taken in the
notion of a positive thing, the privation thereof is not good; it must be the
same motion which causes a Desire after good, and the avoiding of evil, that is
contrary to it: If it be considered thus, I say, it may be clearly perceived to
be but one passion. Aversion, Horror, and Liking.
Herein only is the difference, that when desire is after some good, it is
accompanied with Love; afterward with hope and Joy; when it tends to the
avoiding of an evil contrary to that good, it is accompanied with Hatred, Fear,
and Sorrow; and so it is conceived contrary to its self, and in the Schools
opposed by that which they call Aversion; but on no good ground. Yet, the
desire arising of Likeing is (notwithstanding Horror be its contrary, and the
Desire after good, and avoiding evil, be from the same motion) extremely
different from that which arises from Horror. For, though they be contrary,
they are not the good, and evil, which are the objects of these desires; but
only two emotions of the Soul, that cause it to seek after two very different
things. Horror is instituted by Nature to represent to the Soul a sudden and
unexpected Death; so that, even at his very own shadow, he is put into such an
horror as makes him immediately feel as great an emotion, as if a most evident
danger of Death were before his eyes; which causes a sudden agitation of the
Spirits, inclining the Soul to employ all her strength to shun the evil; and
this kind of desire is called Aversion, or Flight.

Likeing, on the other side, is peculiarly instituted by Nature to represent
the enjoyment of what is liked as the greatest good; which causes a Man very
earnestly to desire this enjoyment. There are several sorts of Likeing, and the
desires arising from them, yet not alike powerful. As, the loveliness of any
neat toy makes us like and desire it; but the chief is that which arises from
the perfections a Man imagines in another Person, especially the Female Sex, by
reason of certain impressions in the Brain; which at a certain Age, and certain
Seasons, causes us to look on our selves as defective, and to desire the Person
of the other Sex to be united to us to make us complete; and so fixes our Souls
to feel all the inclinations Nature has given us to seek after the good she
represents to us as the greatest we can possibly possess, on that Woman only.
Of Heroic Love.
And this Desire which is bred thus by liking is denominated Love, more commonly
than the Passion; and has, indeed, far stranger effects. The kinds of Desire
are as various as its objects. As, the desire of Revenge differs much from the
desire of Learning, and both from this desire, called Love, occasioned by
Likeing.

Now, as the acquisition of a good, or the avoiding of an evil, is sufficient
to incite a desire; so, on more serious consideration of the probability of
obtaining the desire, if the probability be much or great, Of Hope, Doubting,
Fear, Jealousy, Assurance, Security, and Despair.
it excites Hope; if little or small, Doubting, or Fear; whereof Jealousy is a
sort. Likewise, when Hope is extreme, and so strong as to banish all fear, it is
converted into Assurance and Security, and is commonly accompanied with
Anxiety; for, though we be assured our desire shall be accomplished, and still
wish it should; yet, notwithstanding we never cease to be agitated with the
passion of desire, which makes us seek the event with Anxiety: Of Anxiety in
this Affair.
As extreme fear degenerates into Despair. And although this Hope and Fear be
Passions contrary one to the other, yet at one and the same time we may be
possessed by them both. As when on any desire, we fancy unto our selves several
Reasons pro and con, some make it easy, whence Hope; the other difficult,
whence Fear.

Hope is a Disposition of the Soul, persuading her what is desired shall be
accomplished, through a peculiar motion of the Spirits mixed with those of Joy
and Desire.

As Fear is another disposition, persuading it shall not be accomplished.

Jealousy is a kind of fear of losing some good we desire to keep to our
selves, proceeding rather from the value we set on the thing, than Reason;
which causes us not only to examine the least occasion of suspicion; but to
conclude them forcible Arguments too: and relates only to suspicions, and
distrusts; for none can be said to be Jealous, that shuns an evil when there is
just cause and reason to fear it. It Is a laudable Passion in some cases; as
when a Woman is Jealous of her Honor, and so shuns all occasions of suspicion,
as well as the Action of evil; In as much as great goods are more carefully to
be kept, than less.

When the event of Hope or Fear depends on a man's self (as it does not always)
there may be many doubtings touching the Election of means. Irresolution,
Courage, Boldness, Emulation, Cowardice, Affrights.
When it don't depend on us, it occasions Irresolution, which causes again
Debates and Counsels. When it does, it excites Courage, or Boldness, whereof
Emulation is a kind. Contrary to Courage is Cowardice; and to Boldness,
Affrights; which become not a Gentleman.

Remorse of Conscience.
When we are resolved on an Action, before the Irresolution be quite taken off,
it occasions Remorse of Conscience; which regards the present or past time
only, and is a sort of sadness proceeding from a scruple in our Consciences,
that something we have committed, or omitted, is not well, or good, it
necessarily presupposing Doubt; for if we were assured the thing were evil; Of
Doubt, and Repentance.
it would cause rather Repentance; or we should never have committed it, since
the Will inclines us to nothing but what has an appearance of good. However,
this Remorse makes us examine whether what we doubt of be good or no, and
hinders us from committing the like another time; and so is an useful Passion:
but better it is never to feel it, since it ever presupposes an evil.

Irresolution is a kind of Fear, which causing the Soul to waver between
several feasible Actions, hinders her so as she performs none; yet it may so
happen, that a Man having his choice of many things equally good, he may be,
for a while, Irresolute, and at a pause, and yet not be afraid; which arising
only from the Subject presented, and not any emotion of the Spirits, can be no
Passion, except the fear of failing in the choice increase the uncertainty.
Which fear is so strong in some, as it becomes an excess of Irresolution,
arising from too great a desire to do well, and weakness in the Understanding;
which having no clear and distinct Notions, is fraught with a company of
confused ones. However, since Irresolution gives time to consider and debate,
it may be of good use, and oft-times is; but if it continue longer then it
ought, thereby slipping the time of Action, it may prove as pernicious.

Courage is, oft-times, Natural, or an Habit, as well as a Passion; when the
latter, it is a certain heat, or agitation, disposing the Soul, and powerfully
addicting her to Execution. Boldness is a sort of Courage, exposing the Soul to
the Execution of things most dangerous. Its object is Difficulty, whence
commonly proceeds Fear, and sometimes Despair; so that Courage and Boldness is,
in most dangerous and desperate cases required, joined with hope, or assurance
of success. Emulation, as I said, is also a sort of it, but in another sense;
for Courage may be considered as a Genus that is divided into as many sorts of
species as there are objects, and as many more as it has causes. In the first
sense Boldness is a sort, in the other Emulation, which is nothing else but an
heat disposing the Soul to attempt things which she hopes may succeed, from the
example of others; yet so attended with Desire and Hope, that they are more
powerful to send abundance of Blood to the Heart, than Fear or Despair to
hinder it.

Cowardice is Diametrically opposite to Courage; it is a frigid languishing,
whereby the Soul is from the Execution of what it should do, impedited. It
proceeds from want of Hope and Desire, and very unbecoming a Gentleman, and is
extremely noxious, in that it diverts the Will from profitable Actions, yet is
advantageous to the Body. For, by hindering the motion of the Spirits, it also
hinders the dissipation of their Forces; Besides, it frees him that is possessed
with it, of pain. Fear the opposite to Boldness, or Affright, is not only
frigidness, but, as it were, Animae atonitus, that divests her of all power of
Resistance, much more unbecoming a Gentleman; it being an excess of Cowardice,
as Boldness is of Courage. The chief cause is Surprise; But I shall draw to an
end.

SUB-DIVISION IV. 5, 6. Joy and Sadness.
SInce in the midst of Joy there is commonly Sadness, our Lives being a
Glucupicron, I shall here join them together, and briefly touch them both, with
their subordinate Passions; and hasten to a Conclusion.

Joy is a pleasing emotion of the Soul, consisting in her enjoyment of good,
that the Impressions of the Brain represent unto her as her own. Joy is the
only frui^ the Soul possesses of all other goods; insomuch as he that is wholly
without Joy, is, as it were, without a Soul. Intellectual Joy.
There is also an Intellectual Joy, which differs from this that is a Passion,
being a pleasing emotion in the Soul excited by her self; and her sole action
consisting in her enjoyment of good, which her Understanding represents to her
as her own: yet is hardly separable from that which is a Passion. For the
Understanding being sensible of the good we possess, the Imagination,
immediately, makes some Impression in the Brain, whereby the Spirits being
moved, the Passion of Joy is also excited.

It Is evident, then, Joy, whether a Passion, or Intellectual, proceeds from the
opinion we have we possess some Good; as sadness, some Evil. Intellectual
Sadness.
For in the same manner there is also an Intellectual sadness, as well as
Sadness a Passion; which is an unpleasant languishing, consisting in the
Inconveniences it receives from evil; which the Impressions of the Brain
represent unto her; However, many times, we are Joyful or Sad, without any
apparent Cause or Reason, we being not able to observe distinctly the good or
evil exciting them; Because the good or evil make their Impressions in the
Brain without any intercourse of the Soul, they belonging only to the Body: And
sometime also, though they appertain to the Soul, because she considers them
not as good or evil, and so the Impression in the Brain is joined thereunto
under some other Notion.

In Joy the Pulse is even, but quicker than ordinary; yet not so strong, nor so
great as in Love; in it a Man feels a pleasant heat, not only in the Breast,
but over all the parts of the Body with the Blood. In Sadness the Pulse is slow
and weak, feeling the Heart, as it were, contracted, or tied about; also
frigidity, which communicates a coldness to the whole Body, and is extremely
prejudicial to the Health: The Orifices of the Heart being greatly straightened
by the small Nerve that environs them, and but little Blood sent to the Heart,
being not agitated in the Veins. Yet the Appetite fails not, because the
Pilorus, the Lacteals, and other Vessels through which the Chyle passes from
the Stomach and Intrails to the Liver, are open, unless it be joined with
Hatred, and that closes them. On the other side, in Joy, all the Nerves in the
Spleen, Liver, Stomach, Intestines, and the whole Man, Act, especially that
about the Orifices of the Heart; which opening, and dilating them, enables the
Blood which the rest of the Nerves have sent from the Veins to the Heart, to
get in, and issue forth in greater quantity than ordinary; which Blood having
often passed through it, coming from the Arteries to the Veins, easily dilates,
and produces Spirits, fit for their subtilty and equality to form and fortify
the Impressions of the Brain, which dispense lively and quiet thoughts to the
Soul: And therefore is a Passion conducing much to Health, rend'ring the Color
and aspect of the Countenance livelier, brisker, and more Vermilion, which we
call Blushing. For by opening the sluices of the Heart, the blood is made,
thereby, to flow quicker in all the Veins, become hotter, and more subtle.
Whereas, clean contrary in Sadness, the Orifice of the Heart being contracted,
the blood flows more slowly to the Veins; and so becoming colder and thicker,
does not dilate so much, but rather retires to the internal parts, neglecting
the remote, and external; whence the Face becomes pale and squalid, especially
in great Sadnesses, or such as are sudden; as is seen in Affrights, whose
surprizals augment the Action that obstructs the Heart.

Change of Color, or Blushing, Gesture of the Visage, and Eyes, Tremors,
Languishings, Syncope, Laughter, Tears, Sighs, and Groans.
Whence these Passions cause various effects in us, as well as Change of Color,
or Blushing; As Gesture of the Face, and Eyes, Tremors, Languishings, Syncope,
Laughter, Tears, Sighs, and Groans. Though, for the most part, the face is pale
with Grief, Sorrow, Affrights, and red in Joy; yet sometimes it may also be red
in Sadness, especially when Desire, Love, nay, and often times, when Hatred is
joined therewith. Definition of Shame.
Or in Shame, which is only a mixture of Self-love, and an earnest desire to
avoid some present Infamy; or, it is a sort of Modesty, or Humility, and
mistrust of ones self; for he that values himself so highly as to think none
can slight, or dis-esteem him, can hardly ever be ashamed. For the blood being
heat by the passions, they drive it to the Heart, and thence through the Great
Artery to the Veins of the Face; and Sadness that obstructs the ventricles of
the Heart not being able to hinder it, unless when it is in extreme; as also
hindering the blood in the Face from descending when but moderate, whilst the
aforementioned Passions send others thither, which fixing the blood in the Face,
makes it, oft-times, redder then in Joy; because the blood in Joy, flowing
quick, appears livelier and fresher. And so in Shame, which is compounded of
Self-Love, and an earnest desire to avoid some present Infamy; for, therein the
blood coming from interior parts to the Heart, is transmitted through the
Arteries to the Face, where, by a moderate sadness it is fixed, and hindered from
returning again to the Heart, for a time. Likewise, Redness of Face is seen
also in Anger, and an eager desire of Revenge Why the Face is red in Anger.
mixed with Love, Hatred, and Sadness, and many times in Weeping; Of Weeping
Tears.
for Tears flow not from extreme sadness, but that which is moderate joined with
Love, and frequently with Joy. For we must know, Tears are only certain
effluviums which continually expire from the eyes (that emit more than any
other part of the Body by the pores, or otherwise by reason of the largeness
of the optic nerves, and the abundance of small Arteries through which they
pass) which abounding, or else not being well agitated, condense, and convert
into water; as is apparent in such as are weak and infirm, who frequently
sweat, in that the Humors are not well agitated; so when they abound, though
they are not more agitated; as we see sweat ensues moderate Exercise. But the
eyes sweat not; Tears, therefore, are either occasioned by changing the figure
of the pores by which the Vapors pass, through any accident whatever, which
retarding their motion, and altering the order and disposition of the pores,
those Vapors which before passed regularly through those Channels, run one
into another (as is frequently seen when any hurt befalls the eye by any stroke,
dust, etc.) and so become Tears. Or, by Sadness; which cooling the blood,
contracts the pores of the eyes, and consequently, diminishes the Vapors; but
being joined with Love (than which nothing increases them more, by the blood
sent from the Heart) it converts them into Tears in an abundant manner. As we
see Old Men and Women through Affection and Joy, these Passions sending much
blood to the Heart, are exceeding apt to weep: and this is frequent, without
any sadness at all. For, the blood, by those Passions sending many Vapors to
the eyes, their agitation being retarded by their Natural coldness, are
instantly converted into Tears. The like may be seen in all such as are subdued
by small occasions of Grief, Fear, or Pity.

Groans, how occasioned.
Tears are accompanied, moreover, by Groans, which are caused by an abundance of
blood in the Lungs, driving out the Air they contained, by the Windpipe
impetuously. The cause of Scrieches, Cries, and Laughter.
And sometimes, Scrieches, and Cries ensue, which are usually more sharp than
those that accompany Laughter, though they are occasioned almost in the same
manner; in that the Nerves which contract, and dilate the Organs of the Voice
to make it sharper, or flatter, being joined to those that open the Ventricles
of the Heart in Joy, and shut them in Sadness, cause these Organs to be
dilated, or contracted, at the same time.

For, Laughter is only an inarticulate sound, or clattering voice, occasioned
by the blood proceeding from the right Ventricle of the Heart, by the Arterious
Vein suddenly puffing up the Lungs, and at several fits forces the Air they
contain to break forth violently through the Windpipe; which motion of the
Lungs, and eruption of the Air, move all the muscles of the Diaphragma, Breast,
and Throat, whereby those of the Face are also moved, having some connection
therewith.

Though Sighs as well as Tears presuppose. Sadness; yet the cause is exceeding
different. The Caufe of Sighs.
For (as was said) Tears follow when the Lungs are full of blood; Sighs, when
they are almost empty; and when some imagination of Hope, or Joy, opens the
orifice of the venous Artery, which Sadness had contracted; for, then the
little blood that is left in the Lungs rushing at once into the left ventricle
of the Heart through the venous Artery, and driven on by a desire to attain
this Joy, which at the same time agitates the muscles of the Diaphragma and
breast, the Air is suddenly blown through the mouth into the Lungs, to fill up
the vacant place of the blood, which we term a Sigh.

Laughter, whence occasioned.
So Laughter seems chiefly to proceed from Joy, and yet is rather from Sadness;
In that, in the greatest Joys the Lungs are so repleat with blood that they
cannot be blown up by fits. Whence it is, Joy never, unless it be very
moderate, is the occasion of Laughter; or that there be some small admiration,
or hatred joined therewith: And therefore, it is very obvious, extraordinary Joy
never produces Laughter. Now, the surprise of Admiration joined with Joy so
suddenly opens the orifices of the Heart, that abundance of blood rushing in
together on the right side thereof, through the Vena Cava, and rarefied there,
passes thence through the Arterious Vein, and blowing up the Lungs, causes a
sudden Laughter. And so does the mixture of some Liquor that rarifies the
blood; as the wheyest part of that which comes to the heart from the Spleen by
some small emotion of hatred, assisted by a sudden admiration; which mixing
with the blood there that is sent thither abundantly by Joy from the other
parts, may cause an unusual dilatation of the blood.

The cause of Joy and Grief.
Now the Spleen sending two sorts of blood to the Heart; the one thick and
gross, the other exceeding subtle, thin, and fluid; (Whence from this proceeds
Joy, as from that Grief and Sadness) is the Reason why those who have infirm
Spleens, have their Lucida intervalla; are subject, by fits, to be sadder, and
at other times merrier. And so, frequently, after much Laughter, sadness
ensues; in that the most fluid part of the blood from the Spleen being
exhausted, the more undepurated follows it to the Heart.

Laughter is also accompanied with Indignation; but then, for the most part,
it is but feigned, and artificial; yet, sometimes, it is, and may be Natural, as
proceeding from the joy a Man has he cannot be hurt by the evil whereat he is
offended; especially finding himself surprised by the Novelty, or unexpected
encounter of the evil.

Nay, without Joy, by the mere motion of Aversion it may be produced; forasmuch
as thereby the blood being sent to the heart from the Spleen, and there
rarefied, and conveyed into the Lungs, are easily blown up when it finds them
empty. For whatsoever thus suddenly blows up the Lungs, causes the outward
action of Laughter. Except (as was said) when sadness and grief convert it into
groans and shrieks, which are accompanied by Weepings.

Another effect of these passions, you have heard, is Tremblings. They are Of
Tremblings.
rather an effect of Sadness and Fear, which by thickning the blood, the brain
is not sufficiently supplied with spirits to send into the Nerves. The same
does cold Air. They are occasioned also when too many, or too few spirits, are
sent from the brain into the Nerves, whereby the small passages of the muscles
cannot be duly shut, and so the motion of the Member is impedited. Tremblings
from Anger, Wine, Tobacco, how occasioned.
For, in Anger, an earnest desire after any thing; In Drunkenness by Wine, other
Liquors, or Tobacco, or extraordinary heat, too many spirits being sent to the
brain, make such a confusion as they cannot regularly nor readily be sent
thence into the muscles.

The Causes of Languishing.
Languishing is another, and is felt in all the Members, being a disposition,
or inclination to ease, and to be without motion: occasioned as Trembling, for
want of sufficient spirits in the nerves: But in a different manner. For
Languishing is caused when the Glance in the Brain do not determine the Spirits
to some muscles rather than others; when Trembling proceeds from a defect of
the Spirits. It Is also, frequently, the effect of Love, joined to the desire of
any thing which cannot be acquired for the present. For, in Love, the Soul
being so busied in considering the object beloved, all the spirits in the Brain
are employed to represent the Image thereof to her; whereby all the motions of
the Glance are stopped which were not subservient to this Design. And so in
Desire, though it frequently Renders the Body active (as was noted) when the
object is such as something from that time may be done for acquiring it. Yet
when there is an Imagination of the Impossibility of attaining it, all the
agitation of Desire remains in the Brain; where being wholly employed in
fortifying the Idea of this object, without passing at all into the Nerves,
leaves the rest of the Body Languishing. And thus also Hatred, Sadness, and
Joy, may cause a kind of Languishing when they are violent, by busying the soul
in considering their objects; But most commonly it proceeds from Love, because
it depends not on a surprise, but requires some time to be effected.

Swoonings, and the Causes.
Swooning is another effect of Joy, and is nothing but a suffocation of the
vital heat in the Heart, some heat remaining that may afterward be kindled
again. It may be occasioned several ways, but chiefly by extreme Joy, in that
thereby the orifices of the Heart being extraordinarily opened, the blood from
the Veins rush so impetuously, and so copiously into the Heart, that it cannot
be there soon enough rarefied to lift up those little skins that close the
entries of those veins; whereby the fire and heat thereof is smothered, which
used to maintain it when it came regularly, and in a due proportion.

It Is seldom, or never, the effect of Sadness, though it be a Passion that
contracts, and, as it were, ties up the orifices of the Heart; because there
is, for the most part, blood enough in the heart, sufficient to maintain the
heat, though the Orifices thereof should be almost closed.

Subordinate to Joy and Sadness, also, is Derision, Envy, Pity, Satisfaction,
Repentance, Gratitude, and Good Will, Indignation and Wrath, Glory and Shame,
Distrust, sorrow, and Light-heartedness.

Of Derision, and its Causes.
When a Man perceives some small evil in another, which he conceives him worthy
of, it occasions Derision. Whence it is apparently a kind of Joy mixed with
Hatred. But if the evil be great, he to whom it happens cannot be thought to
deserve it, but by such as are very ill-natured, or have much hatred against
him. When the evil comes unexpectedly, being surprised with Admiration, it
occasions Laughter. For Laughter (as was said) never proceeds of Joy, unless it
be very moderate, and some little Admiration, or Hatred be therewith
complicated. When the accident is good, it excites Joy and gladness when
another welfare is perceived by us. And this Joy is serious, and no ways
accompanied with Laughter, or Derision. But when we account him worthy of it,
it occasions Envy, as the unworthiness of the evil, Pity; and these two are the
Daughters of Sadness. Cause of Envy and Pity.
Envy is a Vice proceeding from a perverse Nature, causing a Man to molest, and
vex himself for the goods of Fortune he sees another possessor of; and so, is a
kind of Sadness mixed with Hatred, and a Passion that is not always vicious.
For, I may Lawfully Envy the Liberal distribution of the goods of Fortune on
unworthy, Illiterate, and base Fellows, that no ways deserve them; inasmuch as
my love of Justice compels me thereunto, because its Laws are violated by an
unjust distribution, or the like. Especially, if it go no farther, and extend
not to the Persons themselves. It Is somewhat difficult to be so just and
generous, as not to hate him that prevents me in the acquisition of any
commendable good, which is frequently seen in Honor, Glory, and Reputation,
though that of others hinders me not from endeavoring their attainment also,
though it render them more difficult to be achieved. Wherefore, Envy not thus
qualified, is no ways becoming a Gentleman, there being no Vice so hurtful
both to the Soul and bodily health of him that is possessed therewith. What
mischiefs does it not do by Detractions, Lies, Slanders, and several other
ways, beneath the Action of a Gentleman?

Cause of Pity.
Pity is a mixture of Love and sadness toward such whom we see (that we bear a
kindness to) suffer any evil which we think they deserve not. So that its
object is diametrically opposite to Envy and Derision, considering it in
another manner. And although it proceed rather from the Love we bear to our
selves, then to the pityed, those being most incident to it that find
themselves impotent, and subject to the frown of Fortune, thereby fancying
themselves possible to be in the same condition: yet, it is no ways unbecoming
a Gentleman, since the most high, generous, and great Spirits that contemn
want, as being above the frowns of Fortune, have been known to be highly
compassionate when they have heard the complaints, and seen the failings of
other men. Besides, to love, and bear good will to all men, is a part of
Generosity; and thus the sadness of this Pity is not extreme. Nay, none but
evil, mischievous, pernicious, and envious Spirits, want Pity; or such as are
fraught with an universal hatred, and destitute of love. For, it is chiefly
excited by Love; whence, it sending much blood to the Heart causes many
Vapors to pass through the eyes, and then, sadness, by its frigidity,
retarding the agitation of those vapors, condensing them into tears, is the
cause that Weeping often accompanies it. It Is much more to be preferred in a
Gentleman, than Derision, since the most defective in Body and Mind are the
greatest Deriders of others, desiring to see, and bring all Men equally into
disgrace with themselves. This proceeds from Hatred, that from Love.

Jesting exploded.
Nothing more vain then, than Jesting, so much now in use with such as assume
the name of Gentlemen, if thus grounded. Wit, in moderate Jesting, for the
detecting, or reprehending vice, may be allowed, it being a seemly quality in
the best and greatest, thereby discovering the Tranquillity of the Soul, and
liveliness of the disposition. Nay, even to Laughter at a Jest, provided, it be
harmless; for, so it may be, as the not doing it, may be accounted stupidity or
sottishness: But to laugh at his own, is ridiculous. Wit may be used, but not
abused (as was said) to the injury, slurr, or affront of another, in Body,
Name, Quality, or otherwise; or to the profanation of Religion and goodness.

Of Satisfaction.
Satisfaction proceeds of some good which we have done our selves, which being
really good, gives a most pleasant inward satisfaction, and is the most
delectable Passion. For in such who follow the steps of Virtue, it is the habit
in the Soul, which we call Tranquillity, or Quietness of Conscience. But when
we acquire ought anew, or have done any thing we think good, there is a foolish
sort of Joy, the cause depending only on our selves, and not on the real
goodness of the thing. And when it is not just, or the thing vicious, or not
sufficient to deduce satisfaction from it. It Is most unbecoming a Gentleman, it
causing an impertinent Pride and arrogance. As we see by many in every Town,
and Country, who, whilst they believe themselves to be Saints, and that the
only ones, are, notwithstanding, but Hypocrites all the while. For, whilst they
hear Sermon upon Sermon, three or four in a day, besides, Repetitions, make
long Prayers, be against all Order, and Government of the Church, perform this,
and the other Family Duty; they rest therein, conclude themselves Saints, and
that God is bound to do for them all things, since they have done so much (as
they think) for him: and so come up to the merits of the Papists, whilst none
farther off, and at a distance from them, as they idly fancy. Nay, some count
whatever their Passions prompt them to, Zeal, though never so abominable,
illegal, and impious. As, Murdering of Kings, Rebellion, Usurpation, Betraying
Cities, nay, their own Country; Ruining of Families, and whole Nations too;
and all, because they are not of their Brainsick opinion. A weighty Reason!

Repentance is Diametrically opposite to Satisfaction, and excited by evil; it
being a kind of Sadness, arising from a belief, we have done somewhat that is
evil. Cause of Repentance.
It Is the most grievous and tormenting of all Passions, in that the cause arises
from our selves, yet serves to this good end, to incite us to do better for the
future. It argues a weak Spirit, when an Action is repented of before it be
known whether it be evil or no, only on their fancy of its being evil; and so
if it had not been committed, they would also Repent of that too.

Of Good Will, and Gratitude, with tgeir Causes.
As Satisfaction is from some good that we have done our selves; so, Good Will
proceeds from good that has been done by others; for, whether it concern us, or
no, it causes a good will in us unto the Actor for it; But if it be done unto,
or concern us in particular, we thereunto add Gratitude; which is a sort of
Love stirred up in us by that good Action of his to whom we are grateful; and
that too whether it be really so or no, if we believe he has done us some good;
nay, if he had but an intention to do it. It Is much stronger than good will,
and includes all that it does; and this to boot, that it is grounded on an
Action we are sensible of, and desirous to requite. Good Will may, also, in
that it is exercised toward any that does good, though it concern not our
selves, be a kind of Love, not Desire, though it be still accompanied with a
desire of good to happen to him we wish well to: And, is frequently the
associate of Pity; for, when we see the disgraces that befall the unfortunate,
we are thereby constrained to make the more accurate inspection into their
merits.

Of Ingratitude, and Indignation.
Ingratitude is no Passion; Nature having never put any motion of the Spirits
so in us as to excite it. It Is only a Vice, then, directly opposite to
Gratitude, and accompanies only the more rude, weak, sottish, and foolish,
barbarous, and beastial Men, being the greatest hinderance to humane Society;
and therefore mostly to be abominated by a Gentleman.

Indignation is opposite to good will; and although it be frequently
accompanied with Envy, or Pity; yet, its object is quite different from them.
For, Indignation being a kind of aversion or Hatred to him that does some good,
or evil, to any undeserving it. But Envy is to him that receives this good, and
Pity to him that has the evil, especially if he bear any good will toward him;
if ill, it is joined with Derision. Indignation is to the Agent, Envy and Pity
to the Patient, and is more frequently in those that would seem Virtuous, than
those that are really so. Indignation, you see, is not always vicious; but
Envy can hardly be otherwise. It Is also frequently accompanied with Admiration;
as, when things fall out contrary to expectation, it surprises us with
Admiration. And, many times joined with Joy, but most frequently with Grief, or
Sadness. As, we are delighted when we consider the evil which we bear
Indignation against cannot hurt us, and that we would not do the like; and
hence, many times, this Passion is also accompanied with Laughter.

Wrath, also, is a kind of Aversion, or Hatred against such as have done any
evil against us, or any of ours which we love, whether it be real, or only
imagined, or so apprehended, and so comprehends Of Wrath, and Anger.
all that Indignation does; and this to boot, that it is grounded on an Action
we are sensible of, and which we desire to Revenge, and so is directly opposed
to Gratitude, and is more violent, being desirous to repel things hurtful, and
be Revenged. In some, it causes Paleness, and Tremblings; in others, Redness
of Face, and Weeping; according to the several tempers of Men, and the variety
of other passions therewith complicated.

Whence Redness, in Anger.
When wrath is so moved as that it only extends to words or looks for Revenge,
Redness of Face ensues; especially in good Natures; Whence Weeping, in Anger.
and oft-times sorrow and pity, through self-love, that there can be no other
Revenge, occasions Weeping. Whence Paleness in Anger, as also Tremblings, and
Coldness,
But when a greater Revenge is resolved, Sadness does not only follow from an
apprehension of the evil offered, but Paleness, Coldness, and Tremblings; also
through fear of the evil that may ensue on the Resolution taken of Revenge: So
that such are more to be feared, than they which at first are high-colored:
Though these also, when they come to execute their mischief, and are warmed,
grow red in the Face.

Outward, Momentary, and sudden Anger.
Whence we may describe Two sorts of Anger, or Wrath; the one outward,
momentary, and sudden, of small efficacy, and soon over, presently manifest and
most apparent. The other more close, occult, and inward; rooted, and fixed more
in the Heart; producing, oft-times, most dangerous effects. The best Natures,
most affectionate, loving, and such as have most goodness, are most prone, and
inclined to the first; proceeding only from a sudden Aversion that surprises
them, and not any deep hatred. For, being apt to imagine all things should be
in the way they conceive, as soon as any thing falls out contrary, they admire
it, and are often angry too, even when it concerns not themselves. For, being
full of affection, they concern themselves in the behalf of those they Love, as
for themselves: So that what would be an occasion only of Indignation to some,
is to them of wrath; but is not of any duration, because the surprise continues
not; and when they see the occasion that moved them was not of any moment to do
so, they Repent thereof. Yet they cannot forbear again when the least occasion
offers, in that their inclination to Love causes always much blood and heat in
their hearts; and the aversion that surprises them, driving never so little
Choler thither, causes a sudden, violent emotion in their blood.

Inward, Close, and Occult Anger.
The Inward, Close, and Occult Anger, is composed of hatred and sadness, of
which in it there is a very large proportion, and is hardly perceptible at
first, but by the aspect, and perhaps, paleness of Face; but increases, by
little and little, through the agitation which an ardent desire of Revenge
excites in the blood; which being mixed with Choler driven to the Heart from
the Liver and Spleen, excites therein a very sharp, pricking heat.

The proudest, meanest Spirited, and lowest, are most prone to this sort of
Anger (How befitting it is a Gentleman then!) As the most generous Souls are to
gratitude. For injuries are so much the greater, by how much Pride makes a Man
value himself: A Gentleman should be free of this above all; nothing more
unbecoming him then Pride, and this low, mean-spirited Anger; more becoming a
Pesant: and yet many madly, and rashly account this their shame, their glory;
by Duelling, and such rash fooling, and impious, as well as ungenrile Actions,
before condemned.

Of Glory, and shame.
Glory is a kind of Joy grounded on Self-love, and proceeding from an Opinion
or hope a Man has to be applauded, or esteemed by some others for some good
that is, or has been in him; (as evil excites shame) for this causes a man to
esteem of himself when he sees he is esteemed by others, and may become a
Gentleman well enough; provided, he bear not so great Sail as to over-set the
Bark. Besides, (as was said before) it excites to Virtue, and Noble
achievements by hope, as shame by fear.

Impudence is not a Passion, but a contempt of shame, and, many times, of Of
Impudence.
Glory too: Because there is not any peculiar motion in us that excites it.
It Is a vice opposite to both glory and shame while either of them are good, and
proceeds from the frequent receipt of great affronts, whereby a Man thinking
himself for ever degraded of Honor, and condemned by every one, he becomes
Impudent, and measuring good and evil only by the conveniences of the Body,
he, many times, lives more happy, than such as merit much more: Such a sway has
Impudence with most Men in the World; For though it be no Virtue, yet it will
beggar them all. However, very unbecoming a Gentleman.

Of Distaste.
Distaste is a kind of Sadness, arising from the too much continuance of a
good, which occasions weariness, or Distaste. As, our food is good unto us no
longer then we are eating ir, and afterward distastful.

Of Sorrow, and Light-Heartedness.
Sorrow is also a kind of Sadness, that has a peculiar bitterness, being ever
joined to some despair, and remembrance of the Delight taken in the thing lost,
or gone, having little hope of its Recovery.

As, from good past, proceeds discontent, a kind of Sorrow; so, from evil past,
Light-heartedness, a kind of Joy: whose sweetness is increased by remembrance
of past misfortunes.

And thus have I given an hint at every Passion; to show, not only how they
depend one on the other; but also, by knowing what we are incident to, their
Nature, Rise, and Causes, we may be the better able to regulate, and subdue
them; which is the part, especially, of a Gentleman.

SUB-DIVISION V. Passions Rectified.
IN the next place (having described unto you the several Passions we are all
incident to at one time or other) we are to endeavor a Regulation, or, at
least, a mitigation of them; which most of all becomes a Gentleman. Forasmuch
as he that can govern, and command himself the microcosm, is more then if he
governed, or conquered the macrocosm. Alexander, that subdued the World, was
himself a slave to his own Passions, and Lusts. Hic Labor, hoc opus est. For,
indeed, although now we have described, and explained them, with their Rise and
Causes, we have the less reason to fear their over-swaying us. Yet, since most
Men, through inadvertency not duly premeditating, and for want of Industry, in
separating the motions of the blood and Spirits in a Man's self, from the
thoughts and Imaginations wherewith they are usually joined (whereby Natures
defects should be corrected;) and since on the objects of Passions the motions
excited in the blood do so suddenly follow the impressions they make in the
Brain (although the Soul be no ways assistant) it is almost impossible for
even the wisest Man (if not sufficiently prepared) to oppose them.

However, the best way is, when thou perceivest thy blood and Spirits moved at
the object of any Passion, to remember, that whatsoever is presented to the
Imagination, tends to the delusion of the Soul, and therefore should weigh
the Reason, why thou art so, on what ground, what is the cause, and then,
whether it be just or no; and divert thy self by other thoughts, till time have
allayed that emotion of thy blood and Spirits. Learn Octavian's Lesson, to
repeat the Letters of the Alphabet, or rather the Lord's Prayer, for diversion;
so shall thy Passion be smothered for the present, and Reason will have the
more space to operate, and suppress it wholly (as elsewhere I have particularly
hinted touching Anger) or thou should counterbalance them with Reasons
directly repugnant to those they represent; or make them Familiar to thee, and
follow the Tract of Virtue, viz. Live so, as thy Conscience cannot accuse thee
of not doing all things which thou judge to be best.

Irresolution, Remorse, Cowardice, and Fear Rectified.
As, for instance, the Remedy against Irresolution and Remorse, is, to accustom
thy self to frame certain, and determinate Judgments of all things that
Represent themselves; and conceive thou do always thy Duty, when thou do
what thou conceivest best, though it may be thou have conceived amiss. As that
of Cowardice is Remedied by augmenting Hope, and Desire. And Fear, by using
premeditation so as to prepare thy self against all events. So, Generosity
checks Anger; which making a Man set no great value on such things as may be
taken away, and highly valuing the Liberty and absolute Empire over himself
(which he loses when any thing offends him) he only carries Indignation
against, or contempt of those Injuries others are Angry at. And, indeed,
rightly considered, it is a general Remedy against all the irregularities of
our unruly Passions.

Anger Rectified.
The truth is, Anger becomes rather a Savage Beast, than a Gentleman; For, as
Seneca well notes, Anger is like Ruin, which breaks it self upon what it
falls. It Is the worst of Vices, subjecting all other affections, nay, even the
severest Love, not sparing the Life of the dearest Friend when provoked.
Besides, it is the effect of Pride; for by how much the more a Man values
himself, by so much the more he resents an Injury, and excites his Anger. Nay,
it is a kind of baseness, and pusillanimity, and so, beneath a Gentleman. For we
see such as are weak, sickly, Aged, or else Children, Fools, and Women most
addicted to it. Men, especially Gentlemen, should vent their Anger rather with
scorn than fear, that they may seem to be rather above, than below the Injury.
To get meekness, a calmness of Spirit, is an excellent Antidote, and directly
opposite to it, and advances a Man's Honor. Patience and Humility are likewise
good to suppress it. Resist the first Assaults, or occasions of it. Consider
what a madness it is, how it robs a Man of Reason, and leaves him naked to be
laughed at by every Coxcomb, and troubles a Man's Life by its effects: The best
time to ponder it well, is, when thy Rage is past. As tenderness, curiosity,
and niceness, as also a bad construction of the Action, misapprehended and
aggravated, and joined with contempt, oft-times, with self-love, are the causes
of Anger, they must be counter-poysed with Wisdom. Curiosity, then, must be
avoided; for he that will have every thing neat and to a punctillio, shall
never have quietness, but be in continual wrath. Expect therefore from the best
carriages of Friends, Servants, and Children, as well as Enemies, miscarriages,
and let them pass. For, to be angry upon a fault, and, it may be, a small one,
is to commit a greater. As the best Actions of our best Friends and Relations,
if misapprehended, applied, and aggravated, may often cause Anger; So the worst
Actions and Words of our greatest Enemies cannot move us, if we move not our
selves. As the great conceit we have of our selves makes us think none should
touch us; So a meek Spirit would keep any injury from fastening on us. As a
Gentleman's Anger against his Superiors, is arrogance, madness, and folly;
against his Equals, an hazard: So against his Inferiors, it is baseness. If
the injury be from a Child, or an ignorant Person, it is beneath thy notice.
From a Droll, let him Droll on in his folly; perhaps, his words come not from
him with reflection, reflect them not on thy self. By making him wise by thy
application, thou make thy self a Fool. If from a Wise Man, rather distrust
thy own Judgment; From a good man, believe not thou art injured; From a
Servant, persuade, or Command him; From a Wife, convince her with mildness, or
bear with her; From a scurilous Person, wonder not, much less be Angry; but
rather pass it with contempt. And truly, thou should avoid the displeasure
of all, could thou but think seriously how advantageous such an one with
whom thou art Angry may be unto thee hereafter. For, to begin strife is more
easy, than to appease it. As Offenses are better Redeemed by merit, than
requited with wrath; so clemency, and pardon, oft-times, converts an Enemy into
a perfect Friend. Since the Quarrel cease, then, when Anger is but on one
side, lets requite good for evil: for he that is patient shall be sure to
overcome; which is the best and Noblest way of Conquest. But to be Angry with
such as can neither be overcome, nor won by it, is a madness as well as folly.
Let him that will be truly generous and magnanimous, resolve nothing shall move
him, whatever happens: For, should a wise Man take notice of, or be concerned
at every mad, and foolish Action of most Men, he would never be at rest, but
render himself unfortunate, and miserable: and thus a Fool would be more happy
than a wise Man. Yet he that is truly wise has nothing befalls him, but what he
expected. To which add, whosoever thinks himself contemned by another, looks on
himself as his Inferior: He must impute it rather to indiscretion,
sottishness, want of breeding, etc. or any thing else, than to contempt: For,
since a great and generous mind becomes a great Fortune, the most glorious
Conquest is, for a Gentleman to Conquer himself, and not be moved by another.
And, as such who are in any high degree of Honor, ought to have the motion of
their Passions more remiss, and temperate, inasmuch as their Actions are of
greatest importance, and, consequently, their faults hardliest repaired, or
palliated: So moderation, the Spirit of clemency, and mildness, adds a grace
and luster to him that bears them, and also pleasure, acceptance, and love of
all the Spectators.

Thus, were we careful, circumspect, and wise, we may easily subdue, and
overruled our Passions; or, at least, bridle their excess, and avoid the ill
use of them (for they are Naturally all good) by opposing the will, following
the Reasons Repugnant to those the Passion represents and subjects, so shall we
be Rulers over them, or at least so order them, as their evils may easily be
endured, and reap Joy and benefit from the worst of them. And since all are
compounded of some of those six Cardinal Passions, or, are sorts of them, I
shall not tire thee with giving Antidotes for every particular Passion, but run
over these six Primitives only; Admiration, Love, Hatred, Desire, Joy, and
Sadness.

Admiration Rectified.
Touching Admiration sufficient has been said before At the beginning of this
discourse of Passions.
in this particular. To which I shall only add, that true Generosity is a check
unto it, whose motions are ever constant, firm, and like themselves, viz. well
and rightly understanding the Reasons why they do this or that by way of
Admiration, nay, although it be of themselves. Yet it cannot be denied there
may be new Admiration very frequently, forasmuch as the causes are admirable,
and wonderful.

However, Generosity, and Humility may be Passions, though they are Virtues,
since the same motions that fortify an ill, may also fortify a good thought.
As, Generosity differs from Pride only in this (they both consisting in the
good opinion a Man has of himself) that that opinion is just, and the opinion
of Pride is unjust: So, being both excited by a motion compounded of
Admiration, Joy, and Love, they may be well attributed to one and the same
Passion; there being no more difference than this; in these motions of the
Spirits, that in Pride the surprise makes the Admiration more strong from the
beginning onwards increasing, and so in Dejection; Of Generosity, and Pride,
the difference.
whereas in Generosity, and Humility, the motion of the Spirits in the Brain is
equal, and so continues from the beginning. For, Vice proceeding, for the most
part, from Ignorance, we commonly see those that least understand themselves
are most prone to Pride, or Dejection, in that every new accident that happens
to them, causes these Vices, by their sudden surprise. For they attributing it
to themselves, they presently admire, and esteem themselves, as they judge the
accident advantageous or not, and change accordingly. But, Generosity is true
Virtue, and quite contrary (as was said;) and although the power of a free
Disposition makes a Man prize himself; yet the Infirmities of the Subject in
which this power is, causes him not to value himself too high, but keeps him
humble. By exercising of which, then, you see this may be Rectified (as was
said) and how to attain it, has been showed before. For, by how much a Man's
Soul is more Noble, or Generous, the less he gives way to inordinate
Admiration, and inclines to Justice, to walk humbly toward God, as well as
Piously, and Godly; and freely rendering all the Honor and Respects due to
Man. A peculiar reflection also, and attention, when the thing is worth the
time, may supply the defect, and prevent astonishment; which otherwise can
never be without an Universal Knowledge.

Heroic Love Rectified.
Love, which is a desire bred of likeing, is the product of folly; nay, it is
impossible to Love, and to be wise. How absurdly does he prize, and overvalue
his Love, insomuch as he not only discovers his weakness and folly therein to
others, but to his beloved also; who oft-times requites him with contempt. A
Gentleman, therefore, ought greatly to beware of this vanity, which frequently
loses it self too, as well as wisdom and wealth; for if it check once with
business, it is ten to one if it shipwreck thee not on the flats of Poverty. If
a strict Guard be not kept, it will surprise a Man in spite of great business,
Spirit, or parts; The most Heroic, Austere, Magnanimous, and Wise, have been
Captivated by her, and Subject to her. However, a Gentleman should not easily
yield, but endeavor to Conquer. To which purpose he should obstare principiis,
withstand the beginnings; for, by resisting at first, he shall overcome at last.

Or remove from the object, keep out of her Company, make a covenant with thine
eyes, and that is the best course; let all alone, see none of them. For, the
sight of Drink increases thirst, and the sight of Meat, appetite. It Is
Dangerous, therefore, so much as to see: Formosam videre periculocissimum.
Whence, as Gregory Records, St. Augustine would not live in the House with his
own Sister.

Consider her in a mean as well as sumptuous Dress, in the form of a Servant,
Scouring; or, as a Scullion; without, as well as in her clothes. Or have two
Mistresses at once, and go from one to the other. As, he that is by a good fire
in Winter, stormy weather, will hardly go from it to a better in the next Room.
Or frequent public meetings, where thou shall see variety, and so perhaps not
only loath the first choice, but, at last, be indifferent for all. As Paris
lost Aenones by seeing Helena, and Cresseida Troillus by conversing with
Diomede: As he confessed that loved Amey, till he saw Floriat, and when he
viewed Cynthia forgot them both; but fair Phillis he esteemed above all, Cloris
surpassed her, and yet when he spied Amarillis, she was his sole Mistress. O
Divine Amarillis! Quam procera cupressi ad instar, quam elegans, quam Decens!
etc, How lovely, how Tall, how comely she was! Till he see another that is more
fair than she; etc.

Good counsel also is of no small efficacy, especially seasonably given, when
the fury is somewhat allayed, by absence, or some other way; viz. From such as
have power, or Authority over the party in whom they stand in aw; or a
Judicious Friend; Sine magistro Discitur, vix sine magistro Deseritur. It Is
learnt of it self, but hardly left without a Tutor. It Is fit therefore, in this
hair-brained burning Lust, or Heroic passion of Love, a Gentleman should give
ear to friendly admonitions, since Love is blind, but not for want of eyes.

Besides, consider whether she thou love be an Honest Woman, or a Whore. A
Whore is but a Glucupicron, a bitter honey, sweet Poison, delicate Destruction,
a voluntary mischief. If from the beginning of the World any were Mala, Pejor,
Pessima, bad in the superlative Degree, it is a whore. Thou see what she is
without, but within a puddle of Iniquity, a sink of sin, a Pocky queen. If an
honest Maid, it is either to abuse, or Marry her; if to abuse, it is fornication,
a foul fact, and almost equal to adultery. If to marry, look before thou
leapest; compare her condition and estate with thine own; whether it be a fit
match, for fortune, years, Parentage, etc.

Pater non deperit filiam, nec frater sororem: A Father dotes not on his own
Daughter, nor a Brother on his Sister, though never so beautiful and fair,
because it is unlawful, unfit, unnatural.

She is a most delicate Creature in thine eyes, perhaps, but is she so in
another? Is it not an error in thy Judgment? Perhaps, if thou viewest her
near, or in a Morning, she would appear more ugly than a Beast. Si diligenter
consideres, quid pe ^os, and nares, and ceteros Corporis meatus egreditur,
vilius sterquilinium nunquam vidisti. But admit she be the Mirror of her Sex,
as thou fondly conceitest, a matchless Piece, a Phoenix, like Venus her self
when she was a Maid; how long will she continue so? Every day detracts from her
Person. Beauty is but a mere flash, a Venice Glass, quickly broken by any
Disease. She is really fair indeed, but she may be foolish (as the Adage goes;)
respect not then her outward Person, but inward Qualities rather, especially
since it is the Infirmity of the beholder and Lover makes her so amiable, not
Nature; neither is she really so, forasmuch as no Man else is of thy mind.
After she has been Married a while, has had two or three Children, she will be
so altered, her nearest Relations will hardly know her. But, at best, bethink
thy self, it is but Earth thou love. A mere excrement (as some will) that
vexes thee. Take her Skin from her Face, or see her open, and thou would
loath her. That Beauty thou so much admirest is but a superficial skin and
bones, Nerves, Blood, etc. Examine therefore all parts of Body and Mind; see
her Angry, Merry, Laugh, Weep, Hot, Cold, Sick, Sullen; In all Attires, Sites,
Gestures, Passions, and thou will not be so fond if thou observest her faults.
Especially those of the Mind; her Pride, Envy, Incontinency, Weakness,
Lightness, Self-wit, Jealousy, Insatiable Lust, etc.

Against Marriage.
If Women then, in general, be so bad, and Men, many times, worse, what an
hazard is it to Marry? Wherefore, as I noted before, it should be ventured on
not without great caution, consideration, and premeditation, since it is a
Disease not to be Cured but by Death. It Is often stuffed with many Miseries,
Cares, Fears, Discontents, and Troubles; The Atlantic, or Irish Seas are not
so Turbulent as a Litigious Wife; which made the Devil, when he had power to
Rob Job of all, leave him his Wife only to torment him. Better dwell on the
Housetop, than with a brawling Wife; or in the Wilderness with Dragons, and
Lions. No wickedness like unto her; she makes a sorry heart, an heavy
Countenance, a wounded Mind, weak hands, feeble knees. Marriage is a Bondage, a
Yoke; and, which is worst, oft-times an hinderance to all Noble, Good, and
Generous Enterprises; and, frequently, a let to Preferment. A Rock on which
more are cast away, than saved; and many times, an Hell it self, if the Persons
be not Wise, Discreet, and equally yoked. Otherwise, it is, in it self, full
of happiness, and contentment, if they be sober, wise, honest, and agree
together; an honorable State, and pleasing both to GOD, and Man. A Wife is a
Name of Honor, not of Levity.

If it cannot be so; a Single Life is much to be preferred on both hands. A
Bachelor lives free, secure, contentedly, wealthy, quietly, plentifully,
sweetly, merrily, and happily; He has none to care for but himself, none to
please, nor none to displease, and control him; no charge, he may live where
he will, he Praise of a single Life.
is his own master, and Courted by all, in hopes of being his Heir, in hopes of
marriage, etc. Reverenced, and Respected he is where ever he comes: Every one
invites him, strives to oblige him, for their own ends. And so, on the other
side, what an excellent State is Virginity! marriage fills the Earth, but
Virginity Paradise. It Is a never fading Flower; whence Daphne was metamorphosed
into a Bay Tree, which being ever green, shows Virginity to be Immortal. A
blessed thing in it self; and, as Papists maintain, meritorious.

I hope I am excusable, if I have been more large on Heroic Love, in this
place, knowing those to whom I write are most addicted to it, and proving, many
times, their Ruin.

The same Rules, for brevities sake, may suffice, Mutatis mutandis, for the
Rectification of the other sort of Love, viz. the Passion; as also Desire, and
the other Passions thereon depending, Benevolence, Concupiscence, Devotion,
Friendship, Ambition, Aversion, Fear, etc. before treated of. For, this Heroic
Love is but Desire occasioned by Likeing; as was said; I shall descend,
therefore, to the next.

Hatred Rectified.
Hatred is, many times, both laudable; and advantageous; it is but its excess,
and mis-application of it, that is to be Rectified. For, since you have heard,
it is only an emotion of the Soul endeavoring to be freed, or separated from
the objects represented to be evil, and noxious, we ought to consider, and be
well advised those objects be really so; for every thing is to us as we
receive, or apprehend them. For, if we carry our selves meekly, humbly, and
take things in good part, we shall find something good and amiable, even in
those things we hate, and contemn. And, since all things in the World are for
our advantage, and good; If it fall out otherwise, we have more cause to
complain, than to hate it; considering, as it drowns our Reason, we do our
selves more harm, than them. It would become a Gentleman therefore to convert
his Hatred into Pity, whereby he may Render those worthy his Love, which he has
(as he thinks) cause to hate.

Revenge Rectified.
And so, to Revenge is beastial, but to Pardon is King-like. Nothing more
honorable, than to pass by Offenses. To think of Revenge, is to complain of an
Injury; and to do so, is to confess thy self Inferior to him that gave it
thee, and this is pusillanimity.

A courageous insensibility, in this case, and a constant magnanimity, makes a
most glorious Conquest, and returns all on his Enemies pate. A generous Spirit
feels no injury, and he that is endued with such a Noble Soul cannot study
Revenge. Be the injury never so great, then, make thine enemy stoop by benefits
and doing good unto him. It Is Dishonorable indeed to suffer it, but vanquish it
by carrying thy self above it and him that offered it. Remembering that by how
much the more just revenge seems to be, by so much the more commendable is
clemency, which is a sweet mildness, and will temper and repress all our
inordinate motions in this kind. Besides, Revenge is beneath a Gentleman, since
it is irrational to make himself a Judge, being a party too, and therefore to
be avoided.

Joy Rectified.
To correct the passion of Joy, is only to consider the occasion, the reason,
the value of the thing, and see that it be not inordinate, that it do not
exceed. But you will say, Facile Concilium Damus aliis, we can easily give
counsel to others, but is not so easily performed. Thou think, oft-times,
thou have cause of Joy, it is not so; why? on what ground? Consider it, and thou will find, perhaps, more cause of mourning, or no cause at all of being merry.
A Gentleman should not be moved with Toys. Does it, think you, become him to be
thereunto moved by a little idle talk in Company, a Glass of Wine, Mistresses
Healths, and the like? Has he not rather cause of mourning, since in the midst
of this Joy there is Sadness? This is rather to be condemned, and derided when
it is past. Govern thy self, then, with Reason, satisfy thy self, accustom thy
self, wean thy self from such fond conceits, vain joys, of this, or any other
kind. I Will descend, therefore, to the last, for brevities sake, viz.

Sorrow Rectified.
Sorrow, which I have elsewhere handled. However, I shall here repeat as much
as concerns our present Subject. It may be some alleviation to consider there
is no condition free, from him that sits on the Throne, to her that grinds at
the mill; even in the midst of our highest jollity there is some Discontent;
our whole Life is a Glucupicron, we are all miserable and discontented, who
denies it? What art thou then, that hopest to go free? Why should thou then
be disquieted? Therefore comfort thy self, since the Calamity is universal to
all men. Since it must be endured, make a Virtue of necessity, and resolve to
undergo whatever happens. Especially being taught, all things shall work
together for thy good, if thou love GOD. Nay, to the very Elect, it is not
only given to believe, but also to suffer. And the LORD chasteneth whom he
loves, and scourges every Son whom he receives. He that is not thus dealt
with, may suspect he is rather a Bastard, than a Son. Resolve then, Nihil est
ab omni part Beatum. Whatever is under the moon is as changeable as her self,
that never stands at a stay. Increasing, or decreasing in Health, Strength,
Wealth, and subject to many casualties and misfortunes, as well from our selves
as others. Nothing better than a contented mind. GOD has but one Son without
Sin, but none without Affliction. Cast thy care on him, and trust in him, for
Worldly Sorrow causes Death. It Is but thy mistake, and over-weenedness to thy
self, to think thy misfortunes the greatest. Consider how many thousands want
what thou have. Compare conditions with thy Inferiors, as well as Superiors.
Be thankful for what thou have, and remember thou deservest nothing good at all
at Gods hand. It may be it would be worse with thee, were thou in better
condition. Shall a living Man complain? The wise disposer of all things knows
what is best for thee; be therefore content.

Comfort in sickness.
What can thou, then, complain of? Art thou sickly? Remember the Flesh Rebels
against the Spirit; and that which hurts the one, must needs help the other:
and it is for the good of thy Soul. 'Twill put thee in mind of Death and
Judgment, and bring thee out of thy self, wean thee from the World, and bring
thee nearer to God.

Against Losses.
Have thou Losses? Covet not Wealth and Honor overmuch, which rightly
considered, puff Men up with Pride, Insolency, Lust, Ambition, Cares, Fears,
Suspicion, Trouble, Anger, Emulation, Envy, all Diseases, both of Body and
Mind. Damning, indeed, more Souls, than all the Devils in Hell, being the
inlet of all manner of Sin and Vice. High-place macerateth a Man with fears of
Death, Perils, Degradations, Treasons, Treacheries, etc. It Is Lubrica statio,
and proxima praecipitio. Shrubs are more secure from storms, than lofty Oaks,
and Cedars. There is much more happiness in a meaner State. For Riches are the
Devils hooks by which he catches Men? And as the Moon is fullest of light, when
farthest from the Sun, that gives her that light; So, the more Wealth a Man
has, the farther commonly he is from GOD. Riches consist not in the multitude
of Gold and Silver; but in the use of it, and a contented mind: For, a Man
cannot be said to have more then he makes use of, though he has never so much
by him. He is Rich that has bread to eat; and a Potent Man, that is not
compelled to be a Slave. If Fortune take away other means, it should not take
away our Minds. Lets defy her, therefore, and come what will come. Bona men's
nullum tristioris Fortunae recipit incursum. If it can be amended, do it; if
not, make the best of a bad Market; but either way, let it not trouble thee.

Against Imprisonment, and Banishment.
Art Imprisoned? Be not troubled: we are all Prisoners in this Island. Nay, the
whole World is a Prison. Thy Soul is imprisoned in thy Body. How many take
delight to Navigate; and is a Ship any thing but a Prison? Nay, a Prison may
be, in some cases, desired. How many worthy Men have been Imprisoned all their
Lives; to the public good, and their great Honor.

Art Banished? What then? Patria est ubicunque been est. That Is a Man's
Country where he can live at ease. It Is a Childish humor to long after thine
own Chimney Corner. many would think it a Banishment to be sent to their Home.
How many Travel for pleasure, and it may be, to that very place whither thou
art Banished. Friends are every where to him that behaves himself well. mll
places are alike distant from Heaven, and GOD is as well in one place a
another: So, to a Wise anm, there is no difference of places.

Against Death of Friends.
Have thou a Friend Dead? Grieve not as without hope, thou must go to him.
Since he is taken from this miserable World, thou have more Reason to rejoice,
than mourn. Is it a Wife? Thou may happily find another as good, or make her
so; therefore never despair. Or, now thou art at Liberty, keep thy self so;
never be in Love with thy Fetters, though of Gold. many a Man would have been
rid of his, willingly, before thou wast bound.

'Twas a pretty Child, indeed; but who knew whether he would be an honest man
or a knave? we should rather rejoice for such as Dye well. All things must have
an End. Houses, Castles, Cities, Families; Provinces and Kingdoms have but
their times of living, only longer than we; they have their times of
Flourishing, Decaying, and Periods. How many Cities do we read of, famous in
former times, that are now scarce villages? Niniveh that great City is
Destroyed, and so is Jerusalem. That Glorious Temple, what is become of it?
Mycenae was the Fairest City in Greece. Jam Seges est ubi Troja fuit. And
Babylon has nothing remaining but Rubbish and Pieces of Walls; and yet was
once the greatest City in the World. Nay, we have Lived to see the Death of our
own ancient, and chiefest City, London, and its interment in Ashes. Greece, of
old, was the nursery of Sciences, and the seat of civility and Humanity; now a
Den of Thieves, and overrun with Barbarism. Italy, in the time of the Romans,
was Lady of the World; Rome the Queen of Cities; now Divided by many petty
Princes; and the Empire translated to Germany, of old time uncultivated and
rude. Epirus, a goodly Province in time past, now left desolate of good towns,
and almost Inhabitants. Seventy Citys overthrown by Paulus Aemilius. Sixty two
Cities in Macedonia, in Strabo's time. Thirty in Laconia, that now are hardly
villages. All the Cities in Peloponesus so Delicately built and adorned,
Destroyed. where are those 4000 Cities of Egypt? those 100. Cities in Crete?
Are they now come to two? in old Italy there were 1166. Cities, and now Leander
Albertus can find but 300. and nothing near so populous as in the time of
Augustus. They mustred 70 Legions in former time, which now the known World
will scarce yield. Nay the world it self must have an end. How is it that we
are so troubled then at the Death of one another, when we are less Durable?
This is also our folly, and great weakness.

Art Slighted, undervalued, and Contemned? This, I confess, would move some
tempers; but, to a stayed, wise Man, it is nothing. For he will counterpoize them
with their contraries, or make them familiar to him, that they Against
Contempt, and slights.
may be the less grievous: or, on mature deliberation, avoid, or remove the
cause. An Old Soldier in the World, methinks, should not be troubled, come
what will come; but ready to receive, and stand the brunt of all Encounters;
especially since Faber quisque est Fortunae suae, and nemo Laeditur nisi a
seipso. In some kind, Prosperity and Adversity are in our hands, and every man's
mind is stronger than Fortune, and leads him to what side he will. Our
Fortunes, Friends, Enjoyments, Wife, Children, Parents, etc. ebb, and flow with
our Conceits of them. Please, or displease, as we construe, apprehend, and
apply them to our selves. Thy present State is good, and in some men's Opinion,
to be preferred. Paul, therefore, was happy, who had learned, in what state
soever he was, therewith to be content. Let them rail on, scoff on, slander,
and lie on; Sapiens, contumelia non afficitur, quia contra Sycophantae morsum
non est remedium. It Is to no purpose to be troubled. Wicked People will use
their Tongues to detract from, and asperse their Neighbors. Who is free from
such Calumnies, Disgraces, Slights? Not the King himself, nor the most pious,
and best men, though never so circumspect. CHRIST himself was a Wine-bibber
with them. Company-keeper of Publicans and Sinners, a Devil; and what he did
was by the help of Beelzebub. Nay, GOD himself is Blasphemed by them. Been
facere, and male audire, Regium est. Let them scoff, defame, undervalue,
slander, abuse, and take their course. It Is an ordinary thing; keep Faith, and
a good Conscience within, commit thy case to God. Repay not evil for evil, but
overcome it rather with good.

Besides, it is some comfort to consider, that Honor, Respect, Esteem,
Employment in this World, are not always attained by desert or worth (neither
do they make a man really worthy;) but are commonly bought and sold, or
attained by some great men's Letters, Favor, Friendship, Affection, etc. For
it is Opinion and Interest only that carries things in this World. Whence we so
often find fools preferred, and wisemen neglected, little regarded, or
esteemed. It Is as ordinary as can be to see an Impertinent, Illiterate Ass
preferred before his betters, because he can put himself forwards, prate, and
temporize with every one, and has the countenance of Friends. 'Twas always
so, and ever will be. Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit vivere. Cardan, Lipsius,
Melancton, Budeus, Erasmus, men of great Learning, Parts, and to whom the whole
World is so much beholden, died all poor, as they lived, because they could
neither flatter, nor dissemble. The Race is not to the swift, nor the Battle to
the strong, but Time and Chance (and sometimes a mischance) happens unto us
all, the best of us. Sic Superis visum, GOD sees it good for us to be so
humbled; and therefore, perhaps, he has bid Shimei Curse. Good Men do not
always find Grace and Favor, lest they should be puffed up, grow Insolent and
proud; As St. Paul appologizes for himself, Lest I be exalted above measure.
Lets therefore endure, with patience, whatever happens; and through good or bad
Report enter into Immortallity.

And thus much shall suffice to be spoken of the Rectifying of the chief
Passions. For the rest, in the same manner they may be subdued, which, for
brevities sake, I willingly pretermit. And because, That Immortality, but now
named, ought to be the chief aim and care of a Gentleman, I shall conclude with
some Considerations of Life and Death.

CHAP. II. Of Life.
COncerning our Lives, I must needs say, and so it will appear, if we seriously
consider all things, it is but a fools Paradise, and the World but a great
Bedlam, or a common Prison of Gulls, Cheats, Flatterers. All conditions under
the Heavens, from the highest to the lowest, are out of Tune. As in Cebes
Table, Omnes errorem bibunt. Before we came into the World we were Intoxicated
with errors Cup, and all our Lives long macerated, and direfully cruciated
with Anger, Fear, Sorrow, Envy, Discontent, and the rest of those horrid
Passions before spoken of. Nay, all our days are sorrow, our Travel grief, and
our Heart takes no rest in the Night, as the wise Man notes. And the Hearts of
the Sons of Men are evil, and madness is in their hearts while they live; nay,
even the wisest. In the multitude of Wisdom is much grief, and he that
increases Knowledge, increases sorrow. All is sorrow, grief, vanity, and
vexation of Spirit, in the World; the Wisest Man, Solomon, will not justify
his own Actions. Surely (says he) I am more foolish then any Man, and have not
the understanding of a Man in me. Nothing pleased him, he hated his Labor and
Life it self. Impudence, Folly, and Fortune, (that care not what they do, or
say) shall Rule more in the World, then Virtue or Wisdom, which oft-times give
way; whence honest and wise men are termed Fools. How ordinary is it, for such
as cannot, or will not Lie, Dissemble, Shift, Flatter, Temporize, as others do,
but are honest, and plain-dealing, to be accounted Idiots, Asses, and no better
then fools. Again, if the Philosophers that gave Precepts of wisdom to others,
Inventers of Arts and Sciences, the seven Wise Men of Greece, be fools, as
Lactantius, in his Book of Wisdom, proves them Dizzards, Asses, and Madmen,
so full of absurd, and ridiculous tenets, and brainsick positions; that, to
his thinking, never any old Woman, or sick Person doted worse; Democritus took
all from Leucippus, and left the Inheritance of his folly to Epicurus: He makes
no difference between Plato, Xenophon, Aristippus, Aristotle, and the rest, and
Beasts, saving that they could speak: If, I say, these men had no more Brains
then so many Beetles, what shall we think of the commonalty, and the major
part, if not of the whole World? Supputius Traveled all over Europe, to find,
and confer with a wise man; but returned, at last, without his Errand. Cardan
thinks few men are well in their wits. And Tully concludes every thing to be
done foolishly, and unadvisedly. All dote, but not in the same kind, not alike;
one is proud, another ambitious, a third envious, a fourth avaritious, a fifth
poring ever in a Book, or writing Books, a sixth lascivious, a seventh given to
Wine, etc. The whole course of our Life is, indeed, but matter of Laughter; no
difference between us and Children; Majora Ludimus, and grandioribus pupis;
They play with Babies, and we with greater bables; it is the same thing.

Charon, in Lucian, was conducted by Mercury to such a place w^ere he might see
all the World at onc^. After he had sufficiently viewed it, Mercury would needs
know what he had observed. He told him, he saw a promiscuous multitude, whose
Habitations were like Molehills, they like Emmets; and Cities like so many
Hives of Bees, and every Be had a sting, and did nothing but sting one
another. Some domineering, like Hornets, greater then the rest; some like
filching Wasps, others as Drones. Over their heads hung a confused company of
perturbations, anger, fears, sorrows, cares, anxieties, hope, ignorance,
jealousy, Envy, avarice, revenge, etc. And innumerable Diseases, which by the
hooks of Disorder they were continually pulling on their own Heads. Some were
brawling, some fighting, riding, running, Solicit ambientes, callide
litigantes, for toys and trifles, and such momentary things. Their Towns, and
Provinces were factious; Rich against Poor, and Poor against Rich. And so,
condemned them all for Fools, Idiots, Asses.

The meditation of man's Life made Heraclitus Cry and weep continually, to see
its Madness: And Democritus, contrariwise, to Laugh at the folly of it. The
World alters every day; we change our Language, Habits, Laws, Customs,
Manners; but not Vices, not Diseases, nor the Symptoms of folly, they are the
same still. All is out of Order. Magistrates make Laws against Thieves, and yet
are the greatest Thieves themselves. Princes commend a private Life; private
Men itch for Honor. Judges give Judgment according to their own advantage; and
Juries, as they are bribed; wronging poor Innocents, to please others.
Attorneys alter Sentences, and for money lose their deeds. Some abuse heir
Parents, yea, corrupt their own Sisters; some rob one, some another. Some prank
up their Bodies, and have their minds full of execrable Vices. Who is free from
Avarice, Envy, Malice, Enormous Villainies, Mutinies, Unsatiable Desires,
Conspiracies, Dissimulation, Hypocricy, and other incurable Vices; bearing
deadly hatred to one another, and yet covering it with a plausible face? Some
trot about to bear false-witness, and say any thing for money. There is hardly
any Truth or Justice to be found among Men. For, they plead daily one against
another; Son against Father and Mother, Brother against Brother. Kindred, and
Friends of the same Quality, of one Profession, cannot agree; they are vieing
for place, Apparel, etc. And all this for Riches, or vain Honor, whereof,
after Death, they cannot be possessors. And yet, notwithstanding, for this they
will defame, kill one another, and commit all unlawful Actions, contemning GOD
and Man, Friend and Country. Some kill themselves, despair not obtaining their
desires. How many strange Humors are in Men? Some empty of all Virtuous
Actions, violently hunting after Riches, and to be favored of Men, and take
infinite pains for a little glory, having no end of ambition. When they are in
Peace, they desire War; deposing Kings, and raising others in their stead:
murdering some Men, to get Children of their Wives. When they are poor, they
seek wealth, and when they have it enjoy it not, but hoord it up, or spend it
extravagantly; whereas, if men would but consider the vicissitude of things,
and the mutability of this World, how it wheels about, there being nothing
constant, firm, or sure, they would be much wiser. He that is above, to morrow
is beneath. If, I say, we would attempt no more then what we can bear, we
should lead contented Lives; and learning to know our selves, limit our
ambition. Besides, we should soon perceive, Nature has enough without such
superfluities, and unprofitable things, that bring nothing with them but
molestation and grief.

Some are possessed with Religious folly and madness. How many professed
Christians! and yet how few followers, and Imitators of Christ? Much talk, much
knowledge, much hearing of Sermons, but little Conscience, and less practice.
What variety of Sects! etc. Some for Zeal, some for Fear, some for their own
private ends; they credit all, examine nothing, and yet ready to dye before
they will abjure any of their ways, or toys. Others out of Hypocrisy frequent
Sermons, knock their Breasts, turn up their eyes, pretend Zeal, desire
Reformation, and yet are professed Rebels to GOD, and the KING; Usurers,
Whoremasters, Drunkards, Harpies, Monsters of Men, Devils, and in their Lives
express nothing less then true Piety.

What streams of Blood have been in the World, able to turn Mills! Thousands
slain at once; many bloody Battles to make some Prince sport, without any just
cause, for vain Titles, Precedence, some Wench, or such like toy; or out of
vainglory, malice, revenge, folly, etc. Goodly causes all! Whilst Statesmen
themselves are secure at home, take their case, and are pampered with all
delights. At the Siege of Troy, that lasted ten years, there dyed 870000
Grecians, 670000 Trojans, at the taking of the City: And after were slain
276000. men, Women, and Children, of all sorts. Caesar killed a Million,
Mahomet the Second, 300000. At the Siege of Jerusalem 1100000 dyed with Sword
and Famine. At the Battle of Cannas, 70000 Men slain. At the Siege of Ostend,
120000. And in this beastial folly, it is very common for the Son to fight
against the Father, and Brother against Brother, Christians against Christians.
What depopulations of Countries, Desolations, Sacking, and Ruinating
flourishing Cities, consuming of Treasure, burning of Towns, deflouring of
Maids, and Women, perhaps, by those that but just before slew their Husbands;
and whatsoever else, misery, mischief, Hell it self, the Devil, Fury, and Rage
can invent, to their own Ruin and Destruction; so abominable a thing is War.
It Is Gods scourge. In the time of King Henry the Sixth, betwixt the Houses of
York and Lancaster, an hundred thousand Men were slain, and ten thousand
Families rooted out. They fight for Glory, and yet, perhaps, not one in an Army
is remembered ever after. It may be you shall find the Name of the General, an
Officer or two, or so; but for the rest, their Names are buried with their
Bodies. And that Name of Honor, Valor, Applause, lasts not neither; it is but
a mere flash, this Fame.

In most places one is rewarded, and raised, perhaps, to Honors, for which
another should have hung in Chains. A poor Man shall be hanged for stealing a
Sheep, when, it may be, compelled by necessity, for the preservation of his
own, as well as Wives, and Childrens lives: when as a great man in Office may
safely rob the whole Nation, undo thousands, enrich himself by the spoil of
others, and at last be Rewarded with Turgent Honors; and no Man must dare to
complain of him, or it. How many Crysallides have we? Fellows that are very
Rich and splendid in their Apparel, but inwardly are empty Drones, Fools,
Idiots, golden Asses; have good, wise, and Learned men, notwithstanding, attend
them with all submission; for this Reason alone, because they have more wealth,
and money, and therefore Honor them with glorious Titles, and Epithets, though
they know them to be Dizzards.

How many Lawyers, Advocates, Tribunals, and yet how little Justice! Many
Magistrates, but little care of common good; many good Laws, but never more
dissorders; they are seldom put in Execution, and often altered, misapplied,
mis-interpreted, as the Judge is made by Friends, Bribes, etc. like a nose of
Wax.

Every one is for his own private ends; no Charity, Love, Friendship, fear of
God, Alliance, Affinity, Consanguinity, Christianity, can check them; but if
they be any ways offended, or the string of commodity touched, they presently
fall foul; old friendship is turned into enmity, for toys, oft-times, and
trifles, small offenses; Dea moneta is the Goddess of the World, and whom they
adore; they Sacrifice to her. For by her men are raised, depressed, elevated,
esteemed; the sole commandress she is of their Actions; for which they pray,
run, ride, go, come, labor, and contend. It Is not Worth, Virtue, Wisdom,
Valor, Learning, Honesty, Religion, or any sufficiency, for which men are
respected in this World; But for money, greatness, Authority, Office; Honesty
is accounted folly. Knavery, Policy, and Wisdom. Such shifting, lying,
cogging, plotting, counter-plotting, temporizing, flattering, cozening,
dissembling! that, of necessity, one must highly offend God, if he be
conformable to the World: or else he must live in contempt, disgrace, and
misery all his Life. What difference between words and deeds, the Tongue and
Heart? How common is it for a Scholar to crouch to an illiterate Pesant, for a
meals meat? A Scrivener better paid for a Bond, or Bill, then a Student? A
Lawyer get more in a day, then a Philosopher in a year? Better rewarded for an
hour, then a Scholar for a twelve months study. If we have any bodily Disease,
we send for the Physician; but of the diseases of the mind we take no notice.
Lusts torment us on one side; Envy, Anger, Ambition, etc. on the other; we are
torn in pieces by our Passions: one in disposition, the other in Habit. But the
misery is, we seek for no Cure. Every man thinks with himself, I am well, I am
wise, laughs at others; when, indeed, all fools. But, now adays, we have Women
Politicians; Children Metaphysitians. Every silly fellow can square a Circle,
make perpetual motions, find out the Philosophers Stone, interpret the
Revelation, make new Theoricks, new Logic, new Philosophy, a new Body of
Physic, a new System of the World. For one Virtue, notwithstanding, you shall
find ten Vices in any individual Person on Earth. A wise man is a great wonder.

Our Life is but a span, or handbreadth, as David declares. We are but of
yesterday, and know nothing, because our days upon Earth are as a shadow;
Swifter than a Post, they fly away, and see no good. Few. Man that is born of a
Woman is of few days, and full of trouble; he comes up like a flower, and is
cut down, he flees also as a shadow, and continues not. St. August. Confess.
Lib. 10. Cap. 28.
Catena est vita nostra perpetuorum malorum, tentatio super terram, and quis
potest molestias, and Difficultates pati? All his days are sorrows, and his
Travel grief. Has he not an appointed time upon Earth? Are not his days all
like the days of an Hireling? Nay, his days are as grass, and as a flower of
the Field. Surely the People are grass. At the best estate, man is but Vanity,
and that every man. The King, as well as the Pesant; The Philosopher, as well
as the Dunce; The Noble, as well as the base. The Earth is cursed for his sake,
and in sorrow shall he eat of it all his days; it shall bring him out nothing
but Thorns and Thistles; and in the sweat of his Face shall he eat bread, till
he return unto the ground out of which he was taken, into which again he must
be transmuted: and while he remains in the Land of the Living he shall be
fraught with all manner of miseries and calamities. Man is full of miseries;
miseries of Soul, of Body; while he sleeps, wakes, whatever he does, or
wherever he turns; as St. Bernard well notes. Great travel is Created for all
men, and an heavy yoke on the Sons of Adam, from the day that they came out of
their Mothers Womb, unto that day they return unto the Mother of all things:
namely, their thoughts, and fear of their hearts, and their Imagination of
things they wait for, and the day of Death, from him that sits on the
glorious Throne, to him that sits beneath on the Earth; from him that is
clothed in blew silk, and wears a Crown, to him that is clothed in simple
Linen: wrath, envy, trouble, and unquietness, and fear of Death, and rigor,
and strife; and such things come to both man and Beast; but sevenfold to the
ungodly. If the World smile on us, we are thereby ensnared, puffed up, Dat
vitam animamque Pecunia. And Prout res nobis fluit, ita et animus se habet; we
thereupon forget our selves, and others. If we are poor and dejected, we rave,
take on, lament, repine, and covet wealth. Or, if we can carry our selves even
between these two; yet, to Riches we shall find cares, fears, anxieties, and
troubles annexed: To Poverty, disgrace, slights, derision, and affronts, etc.
And no condition we shall find without Inconveniences. To Idleness is Poverty
annexed. To Wisdom, Knowledge, Learning, much labor, pain, and trouble. To
Honor and Glory, Envy. To increase of Children, care and solicitude. To
Voluptuousness, and Riot, Diseases, and Infirmities. As if, (as the Platonists
hold) man were born into the World to be punished for such sins as he had
Maintaining very idly the Pre-existency of the Soul, and that it is sent into
the Body upon Earth to play, as it were, an after-game. A preposterous way of
Reformation, to put the Soul into such fatal prophasities of sinning, as it
must be here in this World. This must needs be the direct course to Ruin it,
and cast it on a fatal necessity of perishing, especially if cast on such times
and places as are overrun with Barbarism, and Vice. If our conditions of
Recovery be so near impossibility, our State is as bad as the Devils; and if
the nonperformance of these conditions be punished with greater penalties, it is
worse; Better be abandoned to eternal Despair, then have hopes to be Rescued by
such means only as, it is ten thousand to one but, will exceedingly increase our
torment and misery.
formerly committed. All this befalls man in this Life, and, perhaps, eternal
trouble in the Life to come.

Whence Pliny, on the consideration of the many miseries man brings with him
into the World, said, It were good for a Man not to be Born at all, or else, so
soon as he is Born, to dye. Which made the Scythians mourn at their Births, and
rejoice at the Funeral of their Children and Friends. They cease from their
Labors, etc. Job also cursed the day of his Birth. Why dyed I not from the
Womb? Why did I not give up the Ghost when I came out of the Belly? Why did the
Knees prevent me, or the Breasts, that I should suck? For now should I have
been still, and been quiet, I should have slept, then had I been at Rest. And
farther, in this manner, he exclaims; Wherefore have thou brought me then forth
out of the Womb? Oh, that I had given up the Ghost, and no eye had seen me. And
Solomon the wise, concludes the day of Death to be better then the day of ones
Birth.

In a word, it is a misery to be born into this wretched World, a pain to live,
and a trouble to dye. For the Lives of the best men, you see, are stuffed with
vexation, mischief, and trouble. To particularize all, is as great a task as to
perfect the motion of Mars and Mercury, which so puzzles our Astronomers; or to
Rectify the Gregorian Calendar, or Rectify those Chronological Errors in the
African Monarchy; find out the Quadrature of a Circle; The Creeks and Sounds of
the North-East, and North-West passages. I shall, therefore, content my self
with this hint only of the Vanity of the World, and therein of our Lives, that
we may endeavor to amend them for our future Happiness, and close this
Treatise with some considerations of Death, our last Enemy, or rather Friend.

CHAP. III. Against the fear of Death.
KIng of Terrors and Fears, it is somewhere called. But, methinks, since it
frees us of such a miserable world, such a miserable Life, it should not seem
so terrible. Stultum est timere quod vitari non potest; It Is a folly to fear
what cannot be avoided, as Death.

Death frees us, I say, of all our cares, fears, anxieties, troubles, miseries,
Enemies, and yet we abhor it, and will not consider our folly.

Who is more free from care, than he that sleeps? Death is but a long sleep,
and if we dye well, it will, without doubt, be a sweet one.

Methinks the considerations of our unhappy Lives should induce us rather to
meet, or pursue, then shun, or fly from Death; and account it rather our
Friend, then Enemy; since it opens the Door to fame, and extinguisheth Envy.

It Is a Debt we owe to Nature, and so, it is but Reason and Honesty to pay it;
That Is the best time, when a man has made his peace with GOD, and all the
World, and has achieved worthy expectations and ends, has been beneficial,
and helpful to others in his Generation, and done Noble Acts, or such as have
been praiseworthy.

The fear of Death is worse than Death it self, and is augmented with dreadful
Stories; when indeed, it is nothing so painful as they make it; the vital parts
being not the sensiblest. How many dye away so sweetly, and without noise,
though sensible, as if they only fell asleep?

It Is but a weak Opinion, therefore, makes us fear it. For there can be no
Reason to fear it, since no one can fear that he knows not.

It Is as Natural to Dye as to be Born; and to a Child, perhaps, one is as
painful as the other. To return from whence we came, what Burden, what Grief
is it, or what pain? It Is but the same Journey we have made from Death, viz.
from nothing to Life, without fear, without Passion, which we will make again
from life to death. It Is no more, it is the same thing.

Nay, it is the Birthday of Eternity, which we fear as our last, and carries us
from that Death that began in our Mothers Womb, to the life that shall never
end. We shall then see the whole Heavens together, and the glory thereof in its
due place, which we can now see but darkly, through the narrow passages of our
optic Nerves afar off. Instead of taking us from our selves, it sets us at
liberty, and makes us free to our selves. Instead of bringing us into darkness,
it takes it from us, and gives us a larger light, our Intellectuals.

You see then, there is nothing in Death that is terrible, or fearful. Diseases,
Sighs, Groans, ghastly looks, Lamentation of Friends and Allies, that make it
seem dreadful, are but the Mask and Vizard under which Death is only hid and
veild.

It Is great cowardice, then, and weakness to fear it. To what end have Men
Reason and Wisdom given them, but to help them in a good Action? They signify
nothing, if they cannot do more with them than a Fool does with his folly; and,
which time performs in a fool, and in the weakest Sex too.

But, to lay aside Wisdom and Reason; it is worth our remark, there is hardly a
Passion, before spoken of, so weak, but it clearly vanquisheth the fear of
Death. And therefore Death is no such kill-cow, such an Hector, such a terrible
Enemy. Honor and Glory aspire to it; Love contemns it; Grief and Despair
pursue it; Revenge carries it Captive; etc.

To fear Death, then, is to be an Enemy to thy self, and Life; since no man can
live at ease that fears to dye. It Is a madness to trouble thy life with the
fear of Death, and thy Death with the care of life; he is only a freeman that
fears it not; Nay, life it self is but a slavery, if it were not made free by
Death.

Our lives would be a burden, should they not end in Death; if it were quite
taken from us, we should desire it more than now we fear it: who would not dye
to avoid the toil and vexatious trouble of doing the same thing every day, and
all the days of his life over again?

Nay, it is unjust to fear Death; for, if it be good, why do we fear it? if
evil, why do we make it worse, and add evil to evil?

Since it is an obligation must be paid, the time and place uncertain where it
will attend us; lets therefore attend it in all places, and be ever ready to
receive it.

It Is a vain thing, then, to pretend unwillingness to dye, because of thy
Youth, flower, and strength; it is fatal to great and glorious Persons not to
live long. Great Virtue, and long life seldom go together. Life is measured by
the end, and if that be good, the quantity adds nothing to its perfection.

Consider, why art thou loath to leave the World? Have thou not seen all? One
day is like another; there is no other light, nor other night. You see the
World is made up only of a company of Fools and Knaves. Once in a few years, if
it be well observed, you will find the years fall out the same as formerly; the
same weather, as great Rains, as great Frosts, as great Droughts, as great
Plenty, as great scarcity, as cool Summers, as warm Winters; it is but the same
over again, one year is like another, and there is nothing new under the Sun.
So that he that has lived thirty, or five and thirty years, shall see as much
as if he had lived five and thirty thousand. It Is one and the same Sun, the
same course of the World.

If thou leavest Parents and Friends, thou art going to more, and these shall
quickly follow thee. If thou leavest small Children, what then? Are they more
thine, than Gods? Does not he, think you, love them best that loved them first?
How many such have come to greater preferment than other men?

It Is an excellent thing, therefore, to be prepared for Death at all times; and
to end our lives before our Death, that our sins may dye before our selves;
that when we come to dye we may have nothing else to do. This is an Honorable
Death, and becoming a Gentleman. This is the true Bed of Honor indeed. For, to
dye well, is to dye willingly.

Against the unlawful rash desire of Death.
As we should not fear, so we should not Desire Death. It Is injustice, and to be
out of Charity with the World, which our lives may benefit. It Is ingratitude to
Nature not to prize life, and improve it to the best advantage, since it is so
freely bestowed on us. Yet so, as, if need be, to contemn Death: for that is the
way to make thy life free. If thou can not contemn Death, thou shall never
perform any glorious Act; but rather expose thy self to many eminent dangers.
For while thou art sollicitous to preserve thy self thou hazzardest thine
Honor, Virtue, and Honesty. The contempt of Death produces the most Honorable
exploits, whether in good or evil. He that fears not Death fears nothing; for
he can do what he will, and is master both of his own, and another life.

That the self-murder of the Romans, and other Nations, was rather
pusillanimity and Cowardice, than Magnanimity, and Courage.
I know, the wisest were wont to say, That a Wise Man lives as long as he
should, not so long as he can. Death being no more at his command, and in his
power, than Life. There is but one way into the World, but ten hundred thousand
ways out of it. Every vein will set us free. This way has been much commended
by some, rather then live in care, trouble, misery, and accounted the best gift
of Nature, that no one is compelled to live against his will. Whence Timon, the
Athenian, employed all his skill in persuading his contrymen to shorten
their lives, by hanging themselves on Gibbets, which he had erected in a Field
that he bought for the same purpose; to whose persuasions many agreed. But,
whether this be a lawful course may be questioned. The Platonists approve of
it, so do the Cynicks, and Stoics, Socrates, and Seneca, who commend Dido,
Cato, and Lucretia. So likewise, Sr. Thomas More, In his Vtopia.
If a Man be troublesome to himself or others. Do thou see that precipice,
that Pit, that Pond, that Tree, that Well, that Knife, that Sword, that Pistol,
etc. There is Liberty at hand. Wherefore has our Mother Earth broughtforth so
many variety of Poisons, but that Men in distresses might make away themselves?
and so Seneca advises, we give God thanks, no one is compelled to live
perforce. And Lib. 8. Cap. 15.
Eusebius admires Sophronia, a Roman Matron, that to save her self from the
Lust of Maxentius the Tyrant, killed her self. Lib. 3: De Virginitate.
Ambrose likewise commends Pellagius, for the same fact.

But Lactantius explodes this opinion, and confutes it, Lib. 3. Cap. 18. De
Sapientia. So does St. Augustine, Epist. 52. ad Macedonium, Cap. 61. ad
Dulcitium Tribunum; St. Hierom to Marcella, of Blesilla's Death; and St.
Cyprian, de Duplici Martyrio.

It Is a profane act, abominated by GOD and all good Men; and expressly
prohibited in Scripture, Exodus 20.13. Thou shall not kill. Now, if we must not
kill our Neighbor, much less our selves. He that kills another, destroys but
his Mat. 10.28.
Body; but he that kills himself, destroys both Body and Soul. Romans 3.8.
No evil is to be done that good may come of it.

Yet if any (which is a sad case) be given over to such an act, they should
rather be objects of our greatest pity, then condemnation as murderers; damned
Creatures, and the like. For, it is possible even for Gods elect, having their
Judgments and Reasons depraved by madness, deep melancholy, or how otherwise
affected by Diseases of some sorts, to be their own executioners. We are but
flesh and blood the best of us, and know not how soon God may leave us to our
selves, and Deprive us of our Understanding. Wherefore, lets be slow to censure
in such cases.

Again, for a man to Kill himself, is an act of pusillanimity, and the greatest
cowardice imaginable (notwithstanding, in former times, it was held among the
Hebrews, Greeks, Romans, Egyptians, Medes, Persians, Britains, French, and
Indians, an act of virtue, courage, magnanimity, etc.) since thereby a man
hides himself Basely and sneakingly from the strokes of Fortune, which is
beneath a Gentleman. For, a true and lively virtue should never yield. That Is
true Fortitude, to contemn, and smile at the miseries of fortune. If the whole
World should fall on such a man, it might kill him, but never daunt him.

Well then; I shall close with this; That as we should not fear Death, but
rather contemn it; nor, on the other hand, pull it on our selves; So we should
be always walking, ready to meet it in any place, at any time, always
prepared. Remembering our whole life is but a continual dying, or death. We are
every day nearer to our end, every moment the less time to live. Let then our
Lives be with care and speed amended, that when this Life is ended, our souls
may be saved, and eternally glorified. Which of our Hope, Life, and Creation,
is the

END. Mors Ultima Linea Rerum.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. Line 17. Read Deficiunt. Page 10. in the Margin. line 10. read Rubra.
p. 12. l. 12. r. Aretia. p. 18. l. 22. r. Secundary. p. 26. l. 1. r. Deity. p.
30. l. 7. put; after it. p. 33. l. 5. r. In. p. 34. l. 27. r. Accounted. p. 38.
l. 26. r. quite Demolish. p. 40. l. 2. The Rags of the. p. 42. l. 25. r.
Contumacy. p. 46. l. 27. r. Plead. p. 56. l. 23. r. Metropolis. p. 62. l. 6. r.
This. p. 64. l. 27. r. Our good parts. p. 73. l. 24. r. Issue. p. 78. l, 9. r.
Virtue. p. 109. l. 20. r. (...). p. 118. l. 12. r. Hebetate. p. 119. l. 8. r.
Hebetates. p. 125. l. 8. r. Alleviate. p. 129. l. 16. after Fleteher, r.
Cleaveland, Howel. But who is Instar omnium, our Cowley, of Cambridge. p. 132.
l. 5. r. His. p. 149. l. 25. r.; before For the. p. 150. l. 3. r. To Love. p.
172. l. 16. r. That habit. Ibid. l. 25. r., after it. p. 174. in the margin, l.
19. r. their. p. 196. l. 24. r. Dotes. p. 207. l. 8. r. our means. p. 210: l.
21. r. Folly. p. 214. l. 2. r. The rest. p. 216. l. ^. r. as. Ibid l 7. r.
Proves. p. 220. l. 16. r. Now. above. p. 229. l. 9. in the margin. r.
Propensities.

Books Printed for, and Sold by Rowland Reynolds, at the Sun and Bible, in the
Poultrey.
A Discourse concerning the Precedence of Kings: Wherein the Reasons and
Arguments of the three Greatest Monarchs of Christendom, who claim a several
Right thereunto, are faithfully Collected, and Rendered; whereby occasion is
taken to make Great Britain better understood then some Foreign Authors,
either out of Ignorance, or Interest, have Represented her in Order to this
particular, with several Cuts, By James Howel, Esquire; Folio; price, bound, 6 s.

The Regular Architect, or the General Rule of the five Orders of Architecture
of M. Giacomo Borozzio Da Vignola, with a New Addition of Michael Angelo
Buonaroti, in Folio; price, 8 s.

A Description of the last Voyage to Bermoodos, Quarto; price, stitcht, 6 d.

The Expert Midwife's Handmaid, with thirty Brass Cuts, By James Wolveridge, in
Octavo; price, 3 s.

The Marrow of the Oracles of God, or diverse Treatises, containing Directions
about six of the weightiest things that can concern a Christian in this Life,
By N. Byfield, in large Twelves; price, 2 s. 6 d.

The Principles, or Pattern of wholesome words; containing a Collection of such
Truths as are of necessity to be believed unto Salvation, By N. Byfield; in
large Twelves; price, 1 s. 6 d.

Templum Musicum, or the Musical Synopsis of the Learned, and Famous Johannes
Henricus Alstedius; being a Compendium of the Rudiments book of the
Mathematical, and Practical part of Music, in large Octavo; price, 1 s. 6 d.

Scrutinia Sacra, or the Souls narrow search for Sin, in seven days solemn
Penitentials, by Tho. Fettiplace, in Octavo; price, 1 s. 6 d.

An Orthodox Plea for the Sanctuary of God. Common Service. White Robe of the
House.


Utilissimum Prosodiae Supplementum, in Octavo: price, bound, 10 d.

A Choice Banquet os Witty Jests, Rare Fancies, and Pleasant Novels, in Octavo;
price, 1 s.

The Problems of Aristotle, with oher Philosophers, and Physicians; wherein are
contained diverse Questions, with their Answers, touching the Estate of a Man's
body, in Octavo; Price, 1 s.


