(...) 42.

(...)

Vera Effigies Gulielmi Rames. Medicinae Doctori et Medici Regni ordinarii
Carolo IIdi

INDVSTRIA VINCIT



ELINTHOLOGIA.

OR, Some Physical Considerations of the Matter, Origination, and several
Species of WORMS, Macerating and Direfully Cruciating every part of the Bodies
of Mankind, of all Ages and Constitutions; whereby it does probably appear to
be an Epidemical Disease, Killing more, then either the Sword or Plague.

Together with their Various Causes, Signs, Diagnosticks, Prognostics, the
horrid Symptoms by them introduced, as also the Indications and Method of Cure.

All which is Medicinally, Philosophically, Astrologically, and Historically
handled.

By WILLIAM RAMESEY, Doctor of Physic, and Physiti^n in Ordinary to His
Majesty CHARLES the II.

Pro Captu Lectoris, habent sua fata Libelli. LONDON, Printed by John Streater,
for George Sawbridge, dwelling on Clerken-well Green. 1668.

The Epistle.
TO THE Right Worshipful, And his most honored Friend and Kinsman, Sir Roger
Burgoyne of Sutton in Bedford-shire, and Wroxall in Warwickshire, Knight and
Baronet; The truly virtuous, and unfeigned Lover of all Arts and Learning.
(...),
SIR,
IT was not my Wifes Consanguinity with you; but your own Innate virtues and
worth, that cast me on this Anchorage. I cannot think this small Present worthy
your Acceptance; However, I have thrust through the Press to beg that Favor:
And I hope, notwithstanding my rude intruding it on you without notice, you
will not refuse (which will be a farther Engagement on me) what comes Humbly,
Sincerely, and Cordially from him, who unfeignedly, and ( San's Complement) is
entirely

SIR, As your most Humble, and truly Devoted Servant, so the unworthiest of
your Debtors and Honourers.

A Praemonition.
IT IS exceeding pleasant to see how every one abounds in his own Sense,
according to the Dimentions of which is their Knowledge, it passing through the
Senses, as Pipes or Channels; whence their Judgments become generally
praecipite, proceeding rather from the Analogy of things with themselves, then
universe, being grounded rather on the Principles of their own Fancies and
Conceits, than on those of Nature. Whence that Saying of Physicians is
verified, Non a peritia, sed ab ornatu and vulgi vocibus habemur excellentes.
And that Monster Opinion is become Supreme Lord and Ruler of the World: It
being come to that pass, that, Ut Deus, sic Medicus, ab omnibus, postremo
cognoscuntur, etenim non nisi in extrema necessitate coluntur. They seldom are
acquainted with the Physician, or GOD himself, till the last gasp; any thing
serves turn till then: Nay, even such as make the greatest outward show of
Godliness, do in this particular, most grossly err, and resist the Ordinance of
GOD, who, notwithstanding, he has sent Physicians among them, they will, even
to the loss of their Lives, make use of Women, Illiterates, and intruding,
bold, confident Empericks, who, if they perform any Cures, is but by Accident,
and not being able to give a Reason for their Actions; and therefore, for the
most part, must needs be mistaken, since the ablest Physicians may be so, in
some Cases.

But it is no wonder to me, that some persons of quality, and in other matters,
wise men, so frequently make use of ignorant Chyrurgions and Empericks, that
can but brazen it out with them, since men are of late become as great admirers
of Sthimaticks, and Enthusiasts in Physic, as lately they were of the same in
Divinity; as if Ignorance and Impudence were the only requisite for a Physician.

But I shall add no more now, fince the subsequent Discourse will sufficiently
evince the necessity of such as are indeed worthily termed Physicians. It is
only an Essay, wherein it does probably appear, that not only all Ages, from
the Womb to the Tomb, as well as Sexes and Constitutions, may be macerated with
Worms; but also that they be engendered in every part of their Bodies, and that
more die by them, under the notion of Fevers of all sorts, Pleurisies, and
most other Distempers, then either by the Sword or Plague. Which I daily
perceiving, and that few, either Physicians or Patients suspect these grand
Destroyers of mankind, occasioned me to put Pen to Paper, and printed it when I
had done, to please my self; but it was not to Answer the Importunity of
Friends.

Although it be Calculated chiefly for the Meridian of Worms, yet a diligent
Reader will find, in most particulars, it indifferently answers, or serves for
the discovery of most other Diseases, especially the Scorby, another Epidemical
Malady.

Besides those three sorts in the Bowels, Lati, Teretes, and Ascarides, which
are only mentioned by Authors, both Ancients and Neotericks, you will find
multitudes of others, of strange forms, possessing the very vitals, Brain, and
all the other parts of the body.

I have ripped them all up, as near as I can, with their several various Causes,
hyperphysical and physical, general and particular, inward and outward,
necessary and non-necessary, innate and adventitious, natural and hereditary,
evident and remote, proximate, antecedent, and continuate, etc. with their
several Signs, Diagnosticks, and Prognostics; also their various and horrid^
Symptoms by them introduced; (Nam Terribilia Immania, Dira and terroris plena,
sunt Symptomata quae quotidie exvermibus oriri Conspicimus) with their
Indications and Method of Cure.

Wherein I take the liberty, now and then, for my own pleasure, a little to
expatiate, and digress; yet all along, have more respected Matter, than Words,
Nam verba propter Res, non Res propter verba, and therefore I considered, Quid
scribere, quam quomodo; rather what, then how: Well knowing, that he who is
conversant about Matter, many times, neglects Words; and they that excel in
the Art of Speaking, have most times, no profound Learning at all. And to say
truth, Non est orna^entum virile Concinnitas. Is (...) not a fine praise for a
man to have ^^at words, and sometimes full ^^ad great, and yet his matter
em^ty? Whence it is, so many Books ^^ve such large Bodies; but when ^^e look
narrowly into them, we and them without Souls. And ^^deed, since Multo melius
ex ^ermone, quam Lineamentis ^^e moribus Humanum Indica^us; nothing more
discovers a ^^an's genius, then his Writings; ^^u will find I have laid my self
^^en, and turned as it were, my In^^de outward; and therefore shall ref^rr you
to it.

But one thing more I shall premise, touching my Illustration of ^^me things,
by the Testimony of the ^^arned'st Authors I have met with, which some narrow,
low spirited, as well as ignorant Detractors, that are better skilled in Malice
then Manners, account Theft, slighting such Writings, as Translations and
Collections; though^ these Momuses were never capable of either. In some
places, I confess Sumpsi, but Non Surripui; it appears from whence I have taken
any thing; for I still say, these are such a man's words, these are his, and
yet it also appears another thing, then whence it was taken.

There is not the tenth part of those I quote, Physicians; for the tenth part
of those Physicians that ever writ of Worms; and of these few that have, none
in the way I go. The Method wholly is mine, and that is it that shows a Scholar
only. I may safely say, I have injured no Author, but given every man his due.
I tread an untrodden path, and for the most part, trace no one's steps that
have gone before me; so that generally, my Quotations are not the tracts of
such, as treat on the same things; but only as it lead them to some other
thwarting, and upon the by, and not directly in my Road.

Lastly, I have mingled Sacra Prophanis; but I hope, not profaned: my Matter
in some measure, lead me to it, or I had let it alone. What I have said, I have
said, and so

Farewell. Plymouth, Die Martis 1. Decembris, 1667.
ELINOLOGA.
Showing Worms to be an Epidemical Evil, Killing more then either the Sword or
Plague. And that, as every one is, or may be liable to them, it ought to be
every ones care to prevent their malignity and cure their Direful Symptoms.
CHAP. I. The Subject matter of the Discourse in General,
WORMS the Subject, and worms the Readers, and a worm the Author of this Book;
which must all ere long, be swallowed up of Eternity and be worm-eaten; the
Author himself and the proudest Reader as soon as the Book, we are enclosed but
in mud-walls, and paper-walls are as durable, What manner of persons therefore
ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness, looking for and
hastening unt^ the coming of the Day of God?

Most Physicians treating of worms d^^ rank them in the number of Diseases and
is vulgarly taken for a Disease, bu^ very improperly. Some have dispute^ the
point, whether it be a DISEASE or a CAUSE; many reduced it t^ the former,
others rank it only under the later head. To enter into Controversy in this
place, is not my intent; (...) shall only therefore, add this, that, sinc^
worms are properly to be reckoned among Non enim sunt parts viventes, sed toto
genere preter naturam.
Preternatural things as being in the body many times, if not at all times And,
although they may possess every part, yet are no parts of the body, (...)
cannot be a Disease perse: for this is a^^ accident, they a substance; and
though^ they be referred to a Disease because the natural disposition of the
parts i^ thereby vitiated, and Physicians ran^ them among Diseases, and treat
of them accordingly; yet properly, what w^ call the worms is not (I say) per
se, (...) Disease, but rather a As I have ^oted in my ^nel. Mediordium a
Treatise not ^et in print.
Cause.

However, for the better and more clearer manifestation of what I aimed at (
viz. to show, that (contrary to the fantastical opinion of the major part of
the world) most people (if not all) of both Sexes, of all ages of man from the
Womb to the Tomb, are incident ^o, and may be molested, and direfully ^ormented
and cruciated, with several ^orrid and intolerable pains and most ^aladies,
nay and death it self, from ^orms; And, that infinite multitudes of people die
by these vermin under the ^otion of other maladies, whilst neither the Patient
not Physician is either sensible or dream of any such matter; As also, that it
is a material, if not the most material enemy, a Physician is to ^end his whole
force against, in almost every Disease: And although I am, in a manner, herein,
singular; having never met with any Author that makes these vermin of so
generally an evil consequence (most, only treating of them as a Disease chiefly
incident to Children, and some few confess them to be sometimes complicated
with other distempers) yet I doubt not but to the more rational, the truth of
my Hypothesis will be evinced) I shall treat hereof as a Est enim morbus in
numero, tota substantia praeter naturam quemadimodum, Galenus testatur. Lib. de
Diff. Morb. and 14. Method. medend.
Disease chiefly. And that I may the better be understood, I shall herein
follow this method, viz. to examine,

1. The Subject on which I am to treat, viz. Worms, The Definition an^ Names in
General.

2. The matter and origination of them whence they are engendered and of wha^
humors.

3. Their several Species and Kinds.

4. The several parts of the Body (...) Man affected, or most incident to be
molested by them.

5. The Parties affected, or what age of man are most subject to them.

6. Their Causes introducing them.

7. The diverse signs, Diagnosticks whereby they are discovered to be in the
bodies of men.

8. The many direful symptoms thereb^ introduced.

9. The Prognostics they presage.

10. And Lastly, the Indications, an^ Method of Cure, with a Cautionar^
Direction how to prevent and remed^ those direful evils by them occasioned.

SECT. I. Definition, Names, etc. In General.
I May therefore without many Amb^ges define them thus. Worms are certa^^
vermicular and creeping creatures, in t^ whole kind preternatural, engendered in
the Intestines and all other parts of the body, of a thick gross, viscid humor
or matter, having a vital principle in it self of its kind, stirred up and
occasioned of a quickening and inlivening heat by putrefaction, hindering the
function of the Intestines and other parts of the body affected. They are by
the Greeks in general termed (...), Aphor. Sect. 3. Aphor. 26.
so Hypocrates has it. The Ancients likewise call them (...), i. e. Ut quae
fatocius in corpore saeviant.
Theras, as the same 6. Eid. Sect. 7. Sect. 6. and Sect. 1. Text. 3. and 4. De
Morb. Galeno.
Hypocrates. The Latins call them Lumbrici in general, and Vermes which does
also denote Earthworms: and by us here in England, Worms. For particular names
of the several kinds, see beneath, Chap. 3.

CHAP. II. Of the matter and origination of Worms.
LEt us now inquire a little, of wha^ matter these Vermin are generated. The
Definition tells us of what they most usually and most commonly proceed, viz.
From putrid, vicious and gross, viscid, corrupt matter of what nature soever,
having a vital principle in it self apt for generation. And although some opine
their origination is only from crude Pu^ or pituitous humors; denying adust or
choleric humors can occasion them, opposing their bitterness both to
putrefaction and their production; yet, it is evident they are engendered not
only of these, but of all and every humor, since there is no humor but is
subject to putrefaction, Et omne putridum ex se and sua natura generare vermes:
The adust and choleric, as well as the phlegmatic: but not so frequently; and
the curious may observe that wormwood and the bitterest herbs (as also
Vinegar) do produce a sort of worm, according to the quality, nature and
property of the matter or putrefaction whence they arise. So that as in the
(...), we ^ee Silkworms to proceed of Mulberry-^eaves; several sorts of Flies,
of several ^orts of Muck and Carrion; Bees of the ^arcass of a Calf, Wasps of
an Horses; and innumerable other sorts, of all kinds of Fruits, herbs of putrid
matter; and that the Earth also produces various, and monstrous Creatures by
diverse putredinous matters in the Caverns thereof, as Dragons, Serpents, Toads,
Spiders and innumerable Insects, of several forms, various colors and
magnitudes, from a various mixture of a moist, virulent, viscous and slymie
faeces joined with a putrid heat agreeable to its own nature: So that if the
matter be one, the production will be likewise one, if different, diverse
generations are occasioned. Even so in the (...), according as the humor
putrified in us is either simple, or compound, Hot, Cold, Moist, Dry, Bitter,
Acide, Sweet, etc. and the part affected is disposed as to it is degree of heat
or moisture, various As in the next Chapter does appear.
kinds of worms are engendered in us? In the subject matter where I say like as
in the Macrocosm.

And this must needs be so, since the Reasons and Causes of any Insects in
Humane as well as other bodies, are as ancient as the Creation it self, every
thing producing a several Creature, according to the nature and disposition of
the matter. Causa enim efficiens Calo^ putredinis est, is enim in materia
disposita (...) and (...), Aristot. in ^. De part. Animal. Cap. 11.
whence it is most certain, that Children abounding with vicious humors, being
the material Cause, and have a moist kind of heat, or a putrid heat joined with
moisture, which is the efficient cause of worms, must needs most abound, and be
much molested with these vermin; and adult less, by reason their heat is more
acute and their moisture less: But why so many of the Learned, and Qualis cum
sit in pueris non mirum est in illis ex his cibis vermes nasci, e quibus in
adultis, qu orum Calor est acnor nulli nascuntur.
Sennertus that most laborious Neoterick should conclude that such as are adult
are not at all molested with worms, I know not, since there is no age nor
constitution exempt from putrid humors at one time or other; as will be showed
Chap. 5.
beneath.

Besides these humors, worms may, sometimes, be engendered of the very Chyle
and Aliment of the Body, being mixed with putrid and excrementitious humors;
especially in such bodies as have not a good digestion, and in whom the
meseraick veins are deficient in their attractive virtue, and in such as ^at or
drink immoderately, before the ^ormer sustinance be concocted: For, ^hus the
Crude and half-digested Chyle, being mixed with what is well matura^ed, descend
both into the Intestines for want of being duly attracted by the meseraicks,
and so mixing themselves with the excrements, putrify,; and, by the heat of
the place, are converted into these Animals.

Again, they may have their origination in us by contagion, from certain
animated effluviums, or vermicular atome-like Corpuscules ^or Ferments which
flow out of gross, corrupted bodies, and fly through the Air, whereby they are
communicated to bodies capable of, and fitted to receive such impressions; and
so by their evil and venomous ferment, are inserted; which many times, so lurk
in the blood and humors (as I shall show Chap. ^.
beneath) that they occasion strange diseases and symptoms, and that such, as
as few Physicians take notice of; but ascribing them to other Causes, cause the
destruction of their Patients, as commonly as may be, when if they did but
consider the strange Fermental power of the animated Atoms or vermicular
Corpuscules, how they, by little and little when once deseminated, infest,
first the whole mass of Blood, next, the Bowels, and afterward the inmost
fibers of the whole man, altering the Constitution, and converting both blood
and humors into their own bad temper and nature, they might do much more good.

For although the seeds of several Insects, are, by the power of our spirits
subjugated, which are imbibed in our blood by the Air, our Diet, etc. and so
not able presently to show themselves; yet upon any disorder or disease they do
most effectually.

I know I shall meet with many find-faults for this tenet, being not common.
But such I shall referr to their own eyes to justify what I say, if they will
take but the pains to view any corrupt blood with a By which Instrument fitted
with glasses at each end, the smallest mite will appear in that magnitude as
you may discover every part thereof.
Microscope when it is cold, or Wounds, Ulcers, or any sore, Bubo's, or Botch,
where they shall plainly perceive innumerable vermines; And then I doubt not
but they will be of my mind, and endeavor to do more effectually, what I aim
at in this Essay, viz. To put both Physician and Patient in a Jealousy, on any
Distemper, that worms The Scorbie may be also as Epidemical a Cause.
are the original Cause; especially in those that have any thing of
Fermentation or Putrefaction. And ^ruly, I think I was hardly ever deceived ^n
this particular.

I could instance in above Threescore ^everal Patients in the year 1656. both
of old and young, of both Se^es, of all ages and strengths that I observed,
had, that, then almost Epidemical Disease the Dysentery; and all by reason of
worms, most of which never mended with the rational progress of that direful
Distemper, till I gave them that which killed the worms or brought off the
Helminthick matter.

The like I could say of some in the Measles, Smallpox, Convulsions in
Children, Fevers in both young and adult, as well before, as since that time,
that were to admiration cured, even beyond all hope (when no methodical course
would in the least, make the Distemper sloop) by fighting against the worms
only.

As it has been therefore, ever since, my custom, in all Diseases, chiefly to
suspect worms to be at the bottom (knowing what horrid mischief has been done
for want of this suspicion, the prevention of which, being the only cause of my
writing this Tract) So also I advise thee, since I have seldom failed of
success in that course of Cure.

So that then the Sum is, That worm may be engendered and have their origination
in Humane Bodies by animate^ Effluviums, Chyle, all and every humor, and that
of diverse forms, shape^ and natures, according to the nature and property of
the matter or putrefaction whence they have their origination. And so much the
more pernicious are they as the putrefaction is more virulent.

CHAP. III. Of the several Sorts and Kinds of Worms.
LOok how various the matter is, and so various and different must likewise the
Species be. Many of the Ancients and Neotericks have written confusedly of
them, and neither agree among themselves touching their Descrition nor Number.

Lib. 3. Aph. Aphor. 26.
Hypocrates speaks only of two, (...), and (...), giving them the name of (...)
in general, whence it ^s much controverted by some, whether ^here are any more
sorts; and that the ^ather, because our Latin Hypocrates, Lib. 4. D^ Re medie^
Cap. 17.
Aurelius Cornelius Celsus mentions also no more, viz. Lati and Teretes, giving
this reason why Hypocrates mentioned not those flat worms, Because they agree
with no determinate age, nor peculiarly belong to any; his business here, being
to name every Disease incident to each Age; and so Galen endeavors to excuse
him, because (he says) Youth are not troubled with them (of whom in the
afore-quoted Aphorism he was speaking) but rather the adult: But the contrary
is apparent to every diligent observer; nay, and Hypocrates himself in another
place ( viz. 4. De Morbis) or whoever else was the Author of that Book, is of
opinion, nay, and positively concludes, Youths may be affected with Cucurbitini.

Whence, some have made three kinds, adding that of Celsus which Hypocrates
omitted, according to that of Lib. 5. De Hist. Animalium, Cap. 19.
Aristotle, who reckons up three sorts, and so does Galen in his Comment on
that Aphorism, viz. 1. Teretes (which are those Hypocrates calls (...),) are
most common and like unto Earthworms 2. Lati (mentioned by Celsus) are a sor^
of long flat worms and more rate: 3. A^scarides which are a small slender sort
of worms as small as hairs some of them white, and as Riverius well notes,
resembling little bits of Thread; and are more frequently seen also then
flat-worms.

Many of our Neotericks have added a fourth sort, viz. Cucurbitini. Some divide
those Lati or flat-worms into two kinds, the one Long, the other Short (...)
the former of which they make to be Ascarides, the later Cucurbitini. Some
again, will have Cucurbitini to be a distinct kind by themselves. A Third with
Lib. de partium morbis and symptom^tis, Cap. 10.
Fernelius, reserve those Lat^ Lumbrici, which the Greeks call (...) appellant
quod vitiis and fasciis mulierum quibus capillum vinciunt similis.
Taenia so a sort of Cucurbitini denying that the gourd-seed like worms are
pieces of thos^ flat-worms (as many affirm) but makes i^ a kind. So does Amatus
Lucitanus refe^ them to Ascarides. And some against al^ these, make a question
whether there b^ any such worms like the seed of Gourds found in humane bodies.
Sennertus, to end the Controversy, out of Paulu^ Lib. 4. c. 18.
Aeginetus (who likewise took it from Lib. 4. de Morbis.
Hypocrates, or who ever else was the Author of that Book) shows that
Cucurbitinos enim vermes quod attinet, nihil aliud sunt quam parts Lati
Lumbrici quae quando abrum puntur, singulae cucurbitae semen refer videntur.
Cu^urbitini are nothing else but parts of those ^at-worms, which when they are
broken, ^esemble the seed of a Gourd.

Unum, quod fasciam referrat membraneam, intestinorum tenuiorum substantiae
similem, earum longitudinem adequantem, minime tamen uti illa, cavam. Sed
digitum transversum latum quae rectius Taenia intestinorum quam Lumbricus latus
appellatur, cum nec vivat ^ee loco moratur lumbricus nec titillationes aut
rosiones in Intestinis ^fficiat. Alterum vero genus lumbricorum numerum
admittit and Taeniam illam ex portionibus multis cohaerentibus and quae
obscedere ^^vicem possint, Cucurbitaeque semina quadrata nonnihil referunt,
^onstitui dicit, hocque vermis genus proprii Cucurbitum nominari ^enset, quod
r^rius integrum, plerumque in frusta divisum excernitur. (...) Ut qui Tricennum
sint pedum vel plurium.
Moreover those Lati, or flat-worms ^re of two sorts, which Plato and others
^escribe, the longest of all other worms ^e says, (and so does Galen Comment
in Aphorism, Hypoc. 26. lib. 3. extending it ^elf over all the Intrails)
affirming Pract. Med. Lib. 3. Part. 2. Cap. 5.) out of Pliny, Not. Hist. Lib.
11. Cap. 33. that the first sort (which does not so much resemble the seeds of
a Gourd as ^he last) has been bred in man's body of g three hundred foot in
length, and sometimes more: And I my self have been ^redibly informed by
several wise men of known Ingenuity yet living, that saw (...) worm voyded by a
Soldier of the ^ull length of his Pike, and one evacua^ed by a Youth six and
thirty Yards ^ong. But of the other sort the same Platerus says, he finds no
such large Relation: Yet Consiliator Diff. 10.^ mentions one of seventeen foot
lon^ And I my self had a Patient the ye^ 1657. a woman of above fifty years
(...) age that voyded a worm of that so^ most resembling the seeds of a Gour^
in links, of a yard and half long. Gal^ affirms, Loco Citato, those Lati
Lumbri^ to be seldom seen; and Prax. Med. lib. 10. cap. 9.
Lazarus R^verius says, one shall hardly rancount^ in a man's whole Practice or
life-tim^ three or four such examples. Now, those Cucurbitini, as the same
Galen an^ Riverius, as also Hypocrates, Paulus A^ginetus, Sennertus, and
infinite other maintain, be only those Lati Lumbri^ broken in pieces, I may
safely and tru^ averr that they are as common, if n^ more common then the other
sort (...) worms, as I have frequently observed several Patients of my own,
both o^ and young, of both Sexes and dive^ Constitutions. I suppose therefore
the mean those Lati Lumbrici unbroken.

Again, many opine that those L^ Lumbrici are only a white ab-roded kin^ of
matter, stripped as it were, off the I^trals, and that through the length, (...)
them, which being ejected with (...) excrements and so broken into piec^ A
Scheame Apodictically showing some Strong Helminthicke Vermin in the
Microcosme among Millions of others.
1 Teretes.

2. Latus. The whole Leangth of the Intestines, and sometimes above 300. foot
long.

3 Ascarides.

4 Cucurbitini.

5 Furcatus.

6 Curculio.

7 Acits Coru^ti.

8 Pinus.

9 Eruca.

10 Holophechion.

^^ (...)

12 Rostrum Anatis Octopedalis.

13 Anguilla.

14 Quinque Pedalis.

15 Lacertus.

16 Pedalis Bifurcatus.

17 Centumpedes.

18 Nonapedalis.

19 Dodroncalis long* Biceps.

20 Scarabeus.

^1 Scolopendra*

22

23 Hirudo.

24 Cornu rostrum.

25 Helminthocardia.

appeared like unto the seeds of Gourds, (...) being seldom or never evacuated
whole, therein confirming themselves; that it has neither life nor motion, and
^anifests it self only to be mere mucous, ^ituitous matter, condensed by the
frigidity of the Intestines, and thereby cir^umvolved and resembles a worm. And
^et Platerus confesses those ground-like-^orms move in it.

Thus amids so many various and contrary opinions, it is no easy matter to
^etermine which is the right and true Number; some make Five sorts with Petrus
Forestus; others Four only, with Hypocrates and the rest, rejecting
Cucur^itini. Yet the most rational maintain ^ut three distinct species of Worms
usual^y engendered in man's body, especially ^he Intralls, 1. Longi and Teretes,
2. Bre^ones and Cuburbitae seminis effigy, reser^ing Lati thereunto, 3.
Ascarides and ^xigui, as Fernelius loco Citato accounts; and of those they only
treat.

But there has been many sorts of ^orms known to be found in humane bo^ies
besides those, and that of most hor^id and strange shapes. (1) Lib. 2. Prax.
Admirand. Obs. 31.
As 1. Zacutus Lucitanus tells us of a Patient of his who ^oyded a black dead
worm of a pretty length and thickness with the body all over hairy a small Head
and a forked Tail. (2.) Lib. de Abditis, cap. 2.
And 2. Benivenius tells us of a worm that one vomited with a red head round
like a pease, and covered with hair like a Caterpiller, having four feet and
tail like an half moon Likewise, (3.) De simple Medicam 3. ex novo orb
delatorum, Cap. de verbena.
3. Nicholas Monardus speak^ of a worm that a Lady evacuated hirsute bigg, and
above a foot long with a doubl^ forked tail. (4.) Lib. 4. de Med. Histor.
mirab. cap. 26.
4. And Marcellus Donatu^ mentions one that vomited a red worm of the length of
a man's hand, having tw^ crooked horns and an hundred feet, marching in a
strange manner. (5.) In Scholia observe. and lib. 9. de variis Capitis Doloribus.
So 5. Forestus has a Patient affected with a blac^ worm in the shap^ of a
Weezle. In like manner. (6.) Observat. 4. ex observe. Commun. A. D. Petro
Pachequo medico luna elensi celeberrimo.
6. Riverius writes of one tha^ evacuated many black worms of the bigness and
length of a common or ordinary Needle, horned and friable, so that on^ might
crumble them to powder between one^ fingers. (7.) In suo Philonio.
Likewise 7. Valesius De Tarant^ says, (8.) In obs. med. lib. 21. In Schol.
obs. 26. So does Dodonaeus in annotat. ad Cap. 58. Beniven. de abditis.
he saw some worms that came from a young man in the form of Pine-seeds, only
bigger. Also the same afore-quoted Forestus tells us of one from the Testimony
of Henricus a Bra, who vomited a worm like unto a Palmer-worm. Morever 9. (9.)
Obs. 3. Cent. 3.
Riverius has a Patient in his Observations, who ejected a worm of a Cubit
long, and of the thickness of a man's finger. (10.) Lib. 4. De prestigiis
Daemonum Cap. 16.
So 10. Widrus writes of a ^ellow that voyded a worm of eight foot ^ong and
somewhat more, with a kind of a horned mouth, not unlike the bill of a Duck.
Likewise 11. (11.) Lib. 2. Cosmocrit. Cap. 2.
Cornelius Gemma tells us of a Wench that voyded an Ele-like-worm, or
resembling a Grigg, generated in the Colon. (12.) De Lumbricis Cap. 13.
And 12. Jabucinus speaks of one that expelled a black worm, hairy, five foot
long, and of the thickness of a Reed. Likewise Mortuus Records 13. (13.) Lib.
4. Cap. 4. and Cap. 19. Anast. morb.
one molested with the Cholick to eject a green four footed, Hirsute live worm,
like unto a Lizard. Such a like story is also mentioned by 14. (14.) In
Demonst. Juditii de Dente aurevo, Adversus Respons. Johan. Ingolstetteri
Norimberg.
Martin Rup. and Fill. Again 15. (15.) In libro Secretorum.
Fallopius speaks of a worm all over hairy, black, having two heads, and
Dodramalis longitudinis propulsus est, as he renders it, of nine ounces of
length, or rather weight. (16.) Lib. 3. Epist. 94. and ejusdem operis lib. 1.
page 22.
And 16. Gesner tells us of one that voyded by stool, a worm like unto a
Beetle, black, with long feet and horns. Likewise Guilielmus 17. (17.) Cap. 17.
De dignoscendis and Curandis morbis.
Rondeletius writes of a woman that expelled a worm of two Cubits in length,
like unto the worm called Scolopendra, having no eyes nor other part distinct;
the which he says (by reason of its rarity) he dried and kept a long time. And
the same aforequoted 18. (18.) Loco Citato.
Forestus speaks of a wench who vomited two Beetle-like-worms hal^ as long as a
man's finger, with two horn each of them on their heads, and tending to a
reddish color. Also from the Testimony of Henricus a Bra, he write of a person
that voyded by stool, a wor^ like unto a Horse-leech. (19.) Lib. de* Peste.
So 19. Johannes Hebenstreit, likewise tells us of white worm with a sharp and
horny nos^ found in a person. And Doctor 20. (20.) See his Book Sect. 2.
Edward May, our Countryman (to com^ near home) has written a Book of very
strange Worm, whitish, about a spa^ long, and the thickness of a man's finger
having toward the Tail, two branches, divided into diverse fibers of a fleshy
color the Head bloody, and in shape like unto (...) Serpents or Snakes. But
Examples are in finite.

Wherefore, by what has been said it is manifest, that although those Thre^
Kinds only before mentioned, do mo^^ frequently molest the bodies of mankind:
Diverse others of horrid shape and forms, may, and do oftentimes in fest them,
and are therein likewise engendered, Quemadmodum and in mund^ magno fieri
conspicimus, and according as the Matter and Cause is various an^ diversely
disposed, different and new Species are produced every day. So that as touching
the number of the several Species of Worms, I must conclude them indefinite,
and so descend to the Parts affected.

CHAP. IV. Of the Parts affected.
IN the next place, according to our method, we are to speak of the Parts
affected, which are as many as the Species or Kinds. For, if the matter of
worms be thick, gross, viscid, and putrid humors, joined with heat and
moisture, and so quickened and rendered ^apt to receive a vital property; and if
they be engendered of every humor, (as you have heard) what part of the body of
man can be free; Materia e qua vermes generantur in omnibus fere Corporis
partibus reperiri posse.
since there is no part wherein material and efficient Causes may not be
abundant and predominant? whence, perhaps, Fen. 16. Tract. 3. Ca. 1.
Avicenna concludes Raro Corpus nostrum esse sine vermibus.
our bodies are seldom without these Cattle. So that, (I say) the Kinds cannot
be more numerous, then the Parts affected.

Many, notwithstanding, make only the Belly and Intestines to be affected,
speaking of no other worms but Teretes, Lati and Ascarides; or, as others
account them, Teretes, Cucurbitini and Ascarides. Teretes affect the upper
Intrails and small Guts, being therein generated. Whence, sometimes, by the
Pilorus, for want of food, or by some other occasion, they creep into the
Stomach.

Which has occasioned that great Controversy among the Learned, whether they,
or any other sort of worm be generated in the Stomachs. 4. Metheor.
Aristotle denies it, whom Duncan Libdelius, Whether worms are generated in the
Stomach?
and many other approve and follow. Lib. 4. de Medica Historia mirabili. Cap.
26.
Marcellus Donatus is of the contrary opinion. So is Uxor Georgii Mayr
premebatur lateris Infamatione, ac infestabatur vermibus in ventriculo genitis.
Martin Ruland, who illustrates it by an example in Cent. 2. Curat. 53. Also in
Cent. 3. Curat. 94. And in Potissimum autem ventriculum arcebant.
Cent. 1. Curat. 34. and 80. So does In observat. med. lib. 21. In Schol. obs.
26.
Forestus in diverse places. And Zacutus Lucitanus Lib. 2. obs. 31. and 22.
Prax. Admirand. As also Cent. 1. observat. 28.
Riverius. And I my self knew a man, who by drinking hard, vomited two worms,
each of them a yard long and alive; and a Gentlewoman taken suddenly with
vomiting, ejected a worm of a quarter of a yard long; which no doubt, were bred
in the Stomach. Besides, that worms may be engendered in the Stomach, is farther
evinced by Lib. 1. De locis affectis Cap. 5.
Galen, Comment. De Lumbricis Cap. 13. Scholiograph. ad Cap. 54. Li. 1.
Hollerii De Herbis Internis.
Gabusinus, Hollerius, Brasavalus, Savanarola, Rondeletius, Theodorus,
Prisianus, Petrus Aponensis, and others of Learning and Credit.

Those that they call Lati, and Fasciae seu Taeniae extend themselves through
the whole Intrails, but affect the blind Gut and Colon chiefly, being engendered
in the Cells thereof, Liddelius and others.
some will have them engendered in the whole Intrails throughout, especially in
the larger guts, etc.

Ascarides affect the most inferior part of the great Gut, or Rectum
Intestinum, and the outermost Sphincter of the Anus.

These are the seats and parts affected by the more common and ordinary worms
which are more frequently found in our bodies. Yet, that many, nay most, if not
all parts of the body may be affected by certain vermicles, as well as the
Belly and Stomach, I have showed just now sufficiently; But for the more
illustration of our Tenet, in this particular, I shall set down some instances
from the writings of the Learnedest and most famous men.

To begin with the HEAD, S^ Lib. 3. Tract. 2. Cap. 3.
Avicen; as also Cent. 1. Cap. 9.
Rhasis: Likewis^ Sermon. 5. Tract. 7. Cap. 53.
Nicholas: And, In Scholia observe. 2. li. 9.
Forestus gives an instance of one wickedly vexed with the headache, which no
means easing, h^ commanded the sutures of his Craniu^ should be opened,
whereupon, the Surgeon found on the Dura matter an ill favored worm, which
being removed, his pain for ever after ceased. Nay, and in the very BRAIN it
self, as may be seen in those Authors recited Loco Citato.
by Marcellus Donatus. And in the NOSE, a^ testifies Cap. 100.
Benivenius, Cosmocrit. lib. 2. Cap. 4.
Cornelius Gemma, De Curandpart. affect. lib. 9. cap. 11.
Victorinus Trincavellus, In lib. Hollerii. De morbis internis.
Ludovicus Duretus, Lib. 5. De Part. Morb. and sympt. cap. 7.
Fernelius, moreover Observat. med. lib. 21. In Schol. obs. 26.
Forestus does not only affirm it, bu^ also to illustrate this truth, gives us
diverse examples, and assures us, he saw Vermes quoque e naribus projecto^ and
nos videmus.
them with his own eyes, and after tells us among the rest, of a wench that
voyded some from the Rejecit etiam vermes alterius formae per nares
Nostrils, of (...) strange shape, and different from what she ejected by
vomit, and in Observation 28. of the same Book, he mentions several notable
stories from the afore-quoted Authors. And so also Lib. 2. Prax. Admirand.
observe. 35.
Zacutus Lucitanus gives us another instance to this purpose. And, in the TOES,
as Tract. 7. Pract. Cap. 4.
Alsaharavius, Lib. 6. De Part. morb. and sympt. Cap. 10.
Johannes Fernelius, and the same Lucitanus. Libro citato
That they may be engendered in the EARS, is abundantly manifest from what
Galen, Diascorides and Aetius, have written of Calamint, especially when there
are or have been Ulcers, Imposthumes, and the like, without those parts; In suo
Philonio.
Valesius De Taranta, and Loco Citato.
Fernelius also, show the Ears are likewise affected.

They infest also sometimes the WINDPIPE or ROUGH ARTERY, if we may believe
the same Cap. de Tusse.
Alsaharavius, and P. Theisis, Tract. 11. Cap. 3.
Abynsoar: And the same is confirmed by Aphor. 79. lib. 4.
Antonius Musa, and Prax Admirand. lib. 2. observat. 36.
Zacutus Lucitanus.

Likewise the LUNGS, as Dialog. 4.
Aloysius Mundela, and Loco Citato.
Fernelius contend, so does Cap. 77.
Benivenius.

The BLADDER also may be affected, as the same Loco Citato.
Aloysius Mundela, Lib. 1. Gymnosticae. cap. 7. Gentilis in Com. P. 3. Tract.
cap. 3.
Hieronimus Mercurialis, In Scholia Cap. 77. Benivenii.
Rhembertus Dodonaeus, and De Morb. Intem.
Jacobus Hollerius note. Moreover In observat. Communicate. A. D. Petro Pachequo
obs. 4.
Riverius (as was before hinted) mentions one who voyded many worms by Urin,
black, horned, and friable, also Rondeletius and Argenterius have examples of
this truth.

In like manner the REINS, as Lib. 6. De Part. Morb. and Sympt. cap. 10.
Fernelius contends; proving they may be therein generated: as also Libro
Citato.
Hollerius; and, I my self had a Patient, who labored under all the symptoms
of a^ exulceration of the Reins, who was freed by a sweet Clyster, that caused
a large evacuation of worms.

Some also have been known to voy^ worms mixed with the Sperm.

The LIVER also has been known to be affected, as attests Lib. 2.
Cornelius Gemma and Gabusinus.

Nay, the PERICARDION, and HEART it self, is not exempt from these vermin; as
may be seen in Cap. de aegritudinibus cordis.
Mesues, Matthew. Lib. 2. Cap. 28. De Consut. Med.
Caruax, Lib. 7. De Curatione membr. cap. 1.
Vidius Junior In lib. De Peste.
Johannes Hebenstreit, Lib. 1. Secret. Scholiograph. ad cap. 29. lib. 1.
Hollerii de morb. Internis.
Pedemont, Pract. med. Lib. 2. Part. 4. Cap. 1.
Daniel Sennertus. But a Relation mos^ wonderful we have nearer at home from
Dr. May, who the 7th. of October 1637. found, in the left ventricle of the
Heart of one Mr. John Pennant, a young man of 21. years of age, a worm of about
a span long, of the thickness of a man's finger, having a red Head, of the exact
shape and form of a Serpent or Snake; the body thereof white, and the skin
pellucid and splendent as if it had been varnisht; divided toward the Tail
into two branches or thighs, as it were, and of a fleshy color, of the length
of a man's finger, especially the right branch, which likewise was something
thicker then the left, yet not exceeding the thickness of a small Goose quill,
at the end of which branches, on each side, there streamed forth five ^ong
fibers, strings, or nerves, much longer then the branches, but shorter then the
body of the worm it self. Likewise Observat. med. lib. 21. In Schol. obs. 26.
Forestus tells us of one from the Testimony of Henricus a Bra, who, for almost
two years being miserably macerated with a pain of the Head, was presently
freed by voyding a worm of a strange shape.

The Musclely parts of the Body may be also affected, as is well observed by In
his Epist. with others.
Scolgius. And the very habit of the Body, as Tetrab. 4. Sermon. 2. cap. 8.
Aetius, and Aeginetus Lib. 4. ca. 59.
note, agreeing with St. Acts 12.23.
Luke.

They may also possess the very Cutis and musculous parts, notwithstanding
their motion, Addrocantia they may be termed when so, such are frequently to be
found in men and women's Noses (and other parts too) if they were diligently
sought after; and if so, they will be found to dig their passage under and
through the skin as Moles under and through the superficies of the Earth; so
that Musset Insect.
many have been eaten to death with them.

In a word, not to insist on every part of the body in particular, in so clear
a case; it being evident, there is no part can be said to be free of both the
materia, and efficiens; So, I cannot see but that all parts, crecks and corners
of the Body may be affected then, with these vermin. Let us therefore consider
The Parties affected.

CHAP. V. Of the Parties affected.
AS all Parts of the Body are affected, so all Parties and Bodies, all Ages, as
well old as young; and Sexes, Male, as Female; and all Constitutions of mankind
are herewith affected.

According to the Ancients Lib. 1. Aphorism. Aphor. 13, 14.
Hypocrates, De vita and morte cap. 18.
Galen, Aristotle and Lib. 2. De temperamentis. Cap. 2.
Galen, the age of man is divided into three parts, (...), Puerilis, Virilis,
and Senilis aetas; The first, or increasing age is again sub-divided into
three, I. Infantia, commencing at the first minute of his birth, and
terminating at the seventh year of his age. 2. Pueritia, commencing at seven,
and ending at the fourteenth year, both of temperature hot and moist. 3.
Adolescentia, from the fourteenth to the twenty fifth or thirtieth, of
temperature the best, as Lib. 6. De Sanitate tuenda cap. 2.
Galen contends.

The middle-age Aetas virilis, wherein a man stands, as it were, at a stay, is
from the twenty fifth, to the forty ninth; and is subdivided into these two, 1.
Aetas Juventus, the flourishing state of man for vigor and strength,
commencing at the twenty fifth, and terminating at the thirtieth: of
temperature more hot and less moist, in some degree, then the former. 2. Aetas
Consistens, in which a man stands at a stay, beginning at the thirty fifth, and
ending at the forty ninth: of temperature hot and dry.

Aetas Senilis, the decrepid, declining and last age, is, from the forty ninth,
to the end of a man's life, it being the seventh and Clymacterical, and is
subdivided into three Degrees, 1. (...), the Spring time (as I may call it) or
infancy of old age, commencing at the forty ninth, and ends at the grand
Clymacterical sixty three, fatal to most men; as, Aristotle, Cicero, St.
Bernard, Bocas, Erasmus, Luther, Melancton, Sternitinus, and infinite others;
till which time a man is serviceable both in Church xoa tu day and State. 2. Is
that wherein a man is indisposed to the aforesaid action coveting a sedentary
and solitary lif^ commencing at sixty three, and term^nating at seventy,
according to Isiod^rus, agreeing with that of Moses, Psa^ 90.10. After which,
all is Labor an^ Sorrow, a burden to the flesh, and a^ incurable Disease,
ending in the grav^ which is the third Division, and term Dotage, or decrepid
old age, that is, generally it is so: but it does not always (as to the lesser)
hold true in every man some having more vigorous and health^ Constitutions then
others; whence, w^ see some older at forty, then others a^ threescore; and some
more extenuate^ at threescore, then others at ninty.

Or we may divide the several ages o^ man into With Hypocrates in his last
eight Aphorisms. Lib. 3.
Seven. 1. That of Infant^ newly born. 2. Such as breed Teeth 3. That of Youth
to the fourteenth year 4. Qui pubescere incipiunt, vel, in foemini^ cum menses
erumpunt. 5. That of youn^ men and women in strength. 6. Their standing at a
stay. 7. of Ancient People to their Death.

Whereby the frailty and vanity of the best of us is most obvious and
perspicuous in this transitory vile world. For with Which Sir Walter Raleighs
History of the Word, and Dr. Hackwel in his Apology upon occasion, likewise
recite from him though they name him not for their Author.
Rhodeginus 10.61.62. alluding to the even Planets, we may fitly compare ^ur
Infancy with the Moon; in which ^e seem only to live and grow as Plants, and
abound with humors. The Second ^ge to Mercury; wherein we are un^er tuition,
taught and instructed. The ^hird, to Venus; the time of Pleasure,
^morous-Love-sick toys, vanity; etc. ^he Fourth, to the Sun; the Summertime ^f
our lives, strong, beautiful and flou^^shing. The Fifth, to Mars; in which ^e
seek Honor, Victory, and have am^itious ends, designing to accomplish ^omewhat
praiseworthy, or act what ^ay redound to our glory. The Sixth, ^o Jupiter;
wherein we judge of our ^elves and others, of former actions, and take an
account of our times, arrive ^o the perfection of our Judgments,
Understanding, Reason, etc. The Se^enth and last, to Saturn; the Winter of ^ur
Days, wherein our Spirits, Lives and Souls, are obfuscated, overcast and
^louded, all fraught with a multitude of Cares, Sorrows, Fears and Anxieties,
(...) burden to our selves, a trouble to others, overspread with innumerable
Aches, Pains, Infirmities and Weaknesses, fit for no Society nor Employment;
but only to keep our Heirs from inheriting our Possessions; which, by how much
the greater they are, by so much the more is our end and dissolution hoped and
wished for, even b^ those which drew life and being from us which is vanity in
the abstract, and (...) great evil, if not the greatest. An^ this is the end
of all our Labors under the Sun, or, that can be expected i^ this Vale of
Misery, and Ocean of Fears wherefore, David might well exclaim Psalm. 39.5.
Mine Age is as nothing before thee; Verily every man at his best state, is
altogethe^ Vanity.

SECT. I. Showing that all Ages are subject to Worms
MY Assertion is as clear as the Su^ at noonday; I shall not therefore
multiply words; but only mind you, that since the material cause of worm^ (as
you have heard) is any corrupt humor; that all humors may corrupt that the
efficient cause is a putrid mois^ heat; that they may be engendered o^^ the very
Chyle, are in the very Blood^ and sollid, Muscley parts of the body, a^ ^s well
as the Intestines, and Vitals; and ^^so may be communicated by contagion ^^om
effluviums anima^ed, or Atome-like ^orpuscules or Ferments, flowing out of
^^oss, corrupt bodies, etc. There can be ^ut very few, or none, of any sort, or
^ondition of mankind, age, or comple^ion, which is not (sometimes, through
^ertain accidents from without (which ^e shall show in the next Chapter of
Causes) or disorders from within themselves, either occasioning Crudities, by
^bating their natural heat and radical ^umidity, or corrupting their Blood and
Humors) troubled with, and ex^osed to worms, Cap. 6. Se^^. 2. Subsect. 1.
memb. 1.
as will appear be^eath more fully.

SUBSECT. I. ^hewing that Infants from the Womb are molested with Worms.
I Shall therefore only give you some instances from the testimony of the most
Learned, to illustrate this Truth, and that of every age, according to
Hy^ocrates his Division (before mentioned) unto seven; beginning with Infants.
Now, although he does not mention worms, Aphor. 24. Lib. 3. where he recites
the Diseases incident to Infant^ new born, yet in Lib. 4. De Morbis h^ does, or
whoever else was the Autho^ of that Book, affirming, they are molested with
them even in the ver^ month, especially with those Lati Lumbrici by reason of
putrid Milk, the which he says, increases as the Child does by the corruption
of the food it takes even till it is dilated through the whol^ Intrails. And
Observat. m^d. Lib. 21. observat. 33.
Forestus has an instance of an Infant at Delph in Holland miserably macerated
with worms. Bu^ I shall not insist on so choice a point.

SUBSECT. II. That Childhood is incident to Worms.
UNder Childhood I comprehend al^ that time from breeding Teeth, to the six or
seventh year of their age; (which as to the exact time is not certain, in some
appearing sooner, in some later; however the most usual time is about the
seventh or eighth Month after they are born; yet I have known some above a year
old before there was the least appearance of Teeth,) and these are most
frequently troubled with these ^^rmin. De vermib.
Gabusinus tells us of a Girl (...) about two years old molested with ^^e
flat-worm. And Observat. med. lib. 21. In Scholia Observe. 35.
Forestus tells us (...) his own Sister, Maria Foresta, who ^hile she was yet
very young was much ^^^mented with worms. And in Observe. 31. Istius Libri.
an^ her place, he mentions several Chil^^en affected with them, one whereof
(...) as a Kinsmans Child of his of but two ^^ars old, that voided above forty
^^rms. I have known diverse Children, ^^so my self, who voyded worms before ^^ey
were a Twelvemonth old. And (...) Riverius has an example of a Child (...)
three years of age, troubled with ^^em in the Stomach and Intestines both;
^ikewise Observe. 16. Cent. 2.
he farther tells us of a Girl (...) the same age, in the same condition.
(...) does Curat. Emperic. Cent. 2. Curat. 19. and Curat. 21. and Cent. 6.
Curat. 19.
Martin Ruland in several pla^^s, and in Cent. 1. Cur. 52. and in Cent. 3.
Curat. 21.
another place, he instan^es one of four years of age infested ^ith worms. The
same does Cent. 1. obs. 91. and Cent. 2. obs. 5. and in observe. com. A. Dom.
Simione Jacoz. medico Costensi observe. 11.
Riverius: (...) like manner Martin Cent. 1. Curat. 34.
Ruland men^^ons one of seven years old, that voy^ed worms both by the mouth
and stool, which corroded both the Stomach and ^elly. But every house almost,
we come (...), affords us one, or more examples of ^is ages being incident to
worms, and Observe. med. Cent. 1. obs. 18.
notwithstanding Aphor. 25. lib. 3.
Hypocrates does (...) appropriate them thereunto: it is (...) evident to need
farther proof.

SUBSECT. III. That the Third Age of Man is incid^^^ to Worms.
DID we not follow the m^thod of Hypocrates in those Ap^^risms, this might
rather be termed (...) second age of mankind. Howsoev^^ it serves well enough
to administer ^^casion to us, to show that from (...) Initiation, to our
Dissolution, we m^^ be tortured by these mortal enemi^^ which is our main
drift. The whi^^ begins where the other terminated, a^^ ends at the thirteenth,
or fourteen^^ year of our lives. And to this A^^ Aphor. 26. lib. 3.
Hypocrates does particularly ascri^^ worms; especially (...) and (...) Lib.
21. obs. med. obs. 26.
Forestus illustrates this by an examp^^ of one of eight years old, who w^^^
therewith molested, together with d^vers faeral symptoms and at length
ev^cuated at one time twelve worms, excee^ing large and thick, as also more at
another time. Likewise Alexander Ben^dictus, De Cur. morb. cap. 26.
lib. 2. mentions a Wench of ^^e same age, who by worms, was af^^cted with the
Catalepsie. And the same ^orestus tells us of a Youth of nine years (...) age,
macerated so with worms, that he ^^y in a languishing consumptive condi^^on,
for three or four Months, feeling (...) pain, but only about his Navel, who
^^yding those worms, recovered. Curat. Emper. Cent. 10. Cur. 37.
Mar^^n Ruland also, instances one of ten ^ears old, macerated with worms. And
^^other of Cent. 5. Curat. 29.
eleven, as also of Cent. 6. Curat. 3.
twelve, ^^^ewise Cent. 8. Curat. 13.
elsewhere another, who was ^^erewith also troubled with an Epi^^sie, and yet
again Cent. 10. Cur. 6.
one, from whence ^^ose pains of the Colic, Termina in ^^e Bowels, etc. In
like manner Prax. Admirand. lib. 2. observe. 31.
Za^^us Lucitanus has a remarkable story (...) a Boy molested with worms, and
(...) Victorinus Trincavellus, records several (...) the same condition. Also
the afore^^oted Martin Cent. 1. Curat. 31.
Ruland speaks of a ^irle of fourteen years of age, tortured ^ith worms. So
does Cosmocrit. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Cornelius Gem^^a, and I my self have had many Pa^^nts under fourteen years
old, macera^^d with these vermin, and diverse not love eleven, affected with
those flat^^rms; as may be seen in the A Book not yet condemned to be Printed.
Obser^ations of my Practice: But I shall not Obs. 29. lib. Citat.
Lib. 9. de curand. morbis Cap. 11.
insist longer on what none denie^^

SUBSECT. IV. That the Fourth Age of Man is prone Worms.
EVery one, it may be, may not u^ stand how far we extend th^^ Fourth Age of
Man, which I sha^^ therefore limit thus, Ubi pubescere in^^ piunt masculi, and
in foeminis cum mens^erumpunt; De quo hac notandum, qua^^ vis Galenus Docet
pubescere Incipiu^^ Pueri post annum quartum decimum: T^^ men non unus est
omnibus certus statusq^^ Pubertatis terminus, propter Caliditatem frigiditatem
naturae: Calidiores enim ^^tius, frigidiores tardius Pubescunt. (...) that in
some, this Age may begin at t^^ thirteenth year, in some sooner, or in t^^
fifteenth, and in some later; but I co^fess, the most usual time is about the
fourteenth year, and continues till t^^ twentieth, including Adolescentia; when
perhaps, Hypocrates does not, in all the Aphorisms wherein he is showing t^^
diverse particular Diseases more pec^liarly belonging to each Age, so mu^^ as
mention Adolescentia, because the ^re prone and incident to the same Dis^ases,
Cum iis qui in pubertate sunt.

Lib. 21. ob med. obs. 27.
Forestus, for the clearer manifesta^on of this truth, mentions one of
^^ghteen, grievously molested with ^^orms. li. 21. obs. 34.
As also another affected ^ith Teretes. li. 21. obs. 36.
Likewise he writes of young man tormented with these Lati ^umbrici: li. 21.
obs. 37.
Moreover, he records a Lady much pestred with Ascarides. Also Cent. 2. Curat.
41.
Amatus Lucitanus speaks of a Maid, who evacuated upward and ^ownward, together
with stuff as black ^s Ink, many worms. So Cent. 1. Curat. 80.
Martin Ru^and writes of one, of one and twenty ^ears, troubled with these
vermin, and of another of seventeen, a young ^^an. Obs. 50.
Also he has one of two and ^wenty. Likewise Lib. 1. ^^e verm^bu.
Gabucinus has one of three and twenty. But every Author and Town is full of
such Instances.

SUBSECT. V. That the Fifth and most flourishing Age is not free and exempt
from Worms.
THat the most vigorous, strong and flourishing age of man's life also ( viz.
from the twenty fifth, to the thirtieth, including Juventus) is no Cent. 2.
Curat. 35. and in C. ^. 9, Curat. 93.
less subject to be tortured and infest with worms then the former, Fore^ Lib.
21. obs. med. obs. 34. and in obs. 37.
illustrates by an example of tw^^ Likewise Obs. med.
Felix Platerus mentions o^ above twenty, in whose Intrails, aft^^ he was dead,
was found an inn^rable company of worms, notwithstan^ing all the while he
lived, he seemed be in health; Cent. 2. Curat. 53.
and Martin Ruland ha^^ an instance of a woman, of twenty ni^^ years of age,
affected with worms in the Stomach. Also he Cent. 5. Curat. 94.
speaks of anoth^^ female of twenty six, in the same cond^tion. Observat.
Communi A. D. Petro Pachequo medico Lunellensi Celeberrimo. observat. 40.
Riverius writes of a young m^^ miserably cruciated with pains in (...) Reins,
that he evacuated by Urin, dive^ small worms. In like manner In Scholia obs. 2.
lib. 9. De variis capitis doloribus.
Forest^^ records one whom he knew tormente with Lue Venerea, and almost cured,
wa^ violently macerated with the Head-ach^^ by reason of a worm upon the Dura
m^^ter. And In suo Philonio.
Valescus de Taranta cites young man which labored of an Acu^^ Fever, that
voyded worms by the Ears And so the afore-quoted Observat. Communi. A. D.
Samuel Formio Chyrurgiae magistro. obs. 12.
Riverius tell us of a Citizen of Montpelier in France of thirty years old in a
Tertian that wa^ freed thereof, by taking an ounce o^ Aqua Benedicti, that
caused him to eva^cuate a flat-worm of seven soot long And Johannes Jacobus
Weckerus, speaks of (...) woman of thirty five years old, who ^oyded a worm
eighteen foot in length.

SUBSECT. VI. That the Sixth Age of Man, wherein he is at his strength, is
macerated with Worms.
Hypocrates Aphoris. 30. lib. 3.
does not in the least mention worms among those other Dis^ases he ascribes to
this Age, beginning at ^he 30. th, and ending at the forty ninth, viz. Aetas
Consistens and virilis; yet no ^ess subject to worms, then the rest; a
remarkable example of his, is of that man of forty, which Prax. Admirand lib.
2. obs. 31.
Zacutus Lucita^us tells us of from the authority of Lu^dovicus Nonnius, a
learned Physician of Antwerp, who being for many days direfully tormented, and
having taken diverse Medicines, at length, by evacu^ating a flat-worm four Else
long, Qui erat ^instar Taeniae, almost as thick as a man's thumb, was freed. And
D. In suis observationibus.
Theob. Cneulinus tells us also of one of forty years of age, who having a
swelling about his Groyn, and at last, breaking of its own accord, together
with much corruption, there issued out three gre^^^ worms, Likewise Obs. med.
lib. 7. obs. 35.
Forestus has an instance of a woman with Child, of th^^ same age, that at
several times void diverse worms by her Navel. In oratione.
Erasm^^ also has a notable story of a man, (...) the same age, an Italian
that had never been in Germany, and yet he spoke the German-tongue most
eligantly, being as one possessed by the Devil, notwithstanding was cured by a
Physician tha^ administered a Medicine which expelled an infinite number of
worms, whereb^ he was also, wholly freed of his know ledge of the
German-tongue: The man (he says) to his admiration he saw i^ Italy. The same
afore-quoted Lib. 6. Citat. obs. 32.
Lucitanus, tells us of a strong lusty fellow who having in his Groyn a great
swelling, for at least two months together, being launced by a Chyrurgion,
there tumbled out two great round worms, with much filth. And in the very next
Observation, he has a poor woman, who along time suffered great pain and
torment in her Belly, etc. and all by reason of worms. Again, Lib. de Abditis,
cap. 2.
Benivenius records a fellow of about forty years old, who for a long time was
macerated with a most insufferable pain of the Heart, that vomiting, with much
phlegmatic ^atter a strange kind of worm, did af^erwards recover. And De
Praestigiis Daemonum cap. 16. lib. 4.
Wierus writes ^f a Country Clown, who after a te^ious pain in his Belly,
voyded a mon^rous worm, and so was freed. And I ^^ny self, not many days since,
had a Pa^ient of thirty nine years old, who at several times, voyded many worms
of that ^ind which we call Teretes, by the injection only of an ordinary
Clyster. But I shall hasten.

SUBSECT. VII. Showing that the Seventh and last Age of Man, is likewise
incident to Worms.
REason and Example do both evince us; that this last, declining and decrepid
old age of man, viz. from the forty ninth year, to the end of his Days
(including those two parts thereof, Senectus and Decrepidus) is also frequently
vexed with worms, notwithstanding Aphoris. 31. lib. 3.
Hypocrates does not mention them among the Infirmities thereof, and if it be
not controverted by diverse, and denied by many. For, ancient and decrepid
people must needs be incident to worms, since as the natural heat decays and
consequently a due Consortion of the Aliment and Humors; so, Coldness and
Crudities are accumulated and bound in all parts, and thus being farciated with
the matter and seeds of worms and apt to putrify, consequently they can never
be free of them.

Neither is it my opinion alone, but the sollid judgment of many of the
Learned, who have given us plenteous examples in this kind. In suo Philonio
cap. 30.
Valescus De Taranta attests he has often seen old people have worms. Likewise
In Comment. Aph. 26. lib. 3.
Brasavorius reports of a Patient of his, an old man of above fourscore years
of age, which voyded above five hundred worms: and I my self had a Patient
within two Months of full fourscore, a woman that voyded such a company of
worms by a Medicine I gave her, that they were innumerable, and adjudged to be
some thousands, of diverse sorts and magnitudes, especially Teretes and
Ascarides. And Obs. med. obs. 3. Cent. 3.
Riverius tells us of a man of threescore years old, troubled with worms. In
like manner De varia lect. cap. 13.
Garrius Lopius, Scribit se vidisse m^tronam, per uteri Callum multitudinem
vermium Ascaridum mag. expulisse, quae postmodum dolor quo cruciabatur,
liberata est. Also we In Cl. v. Johanni Frant. Hildesii Comeniensi
observationibus.
find one of Seventy, voyding many worms. And Cap. 13. De Lumbricis.
Gabucinus mentions an ancient man, who evacuated a monstrous black worm.
Likewise I have been credibly informed of a Gentlewoman about Sixty, that
vomited a worm of a considerable length: But a Patient of Fifty I had, who
frequently voyded by Seidge in links, that Cucurbitin-like worm, of a yard and
half long. But, since this is so clear, and so commonly known; let us descend
to the next thing promised, viz. Causes.

CHAP. VI. Of the various Causes of Worms.
ANd now as touching the Causes from whence these Vermin arise, and are
ge^erated in our bodies, we are diligently ^o inquire; since it is in vain to
think of Cures, till we have first considered the Causes; for those Cures that
Illiterates, Empericks, Chyrurgions, Apothecarys and old Women perform, who are
igno^ant of the Causes, must needs be imperfect and accidental: whence we may
place a kind of necessity in the knowledge of the Causes, without which i^ is
impossible, in a rational way, to prevent or cure any the least Disease o^
Infirmity. For Medici causa morbi Juventa, curationem esse Juventam putent.
Physicians think the Cure half effected, when the Cause i^ known; whence it is
become a Proverb among us, and we may well add tha^ other, Sublata Causa
tollitur effectus.
Take but away the Cause, and the Effect cease: wherefore I may well conclude
with 2 Georg.
Virgil,

Faelix qui potuit Rerum cognoscere Causas. It is a most difficult thing (I
confess) to be able to discern all the Cause^ of these worms whence they are,
and in such variety; to say what the origination and primary Cause was. However
I will guess as near as I can, and rip them all up from the first to the last,
General and Particular; and, being guided by the Clew of my best Reason
endeavor to extricate my self out of (...) Labyrinth of Doubt.

SECT. I. Of General Causes.
MY Division of General Causes may again be subdivided into Hyperphysical and
Physical: Hyperphysical are from GOD and his Angels; or, by his per^ssion, from
the Devil and his Imps, ^agicians, Conjurers, Witches; of which (...) order.

SUBSECT. I. Of Hyper-physical Causes.
MEMBER. I. GOD a Cause and his Angels.
EVery one that knows but Heb. 11.6.
that GOD is, will confess he may be (...) Cause, and is able to produce these
^ermin in us. For, He that is Genesis 17.1. Psalm. 115.3. Matthew. 11.26. Ephesians.
1.11. Genesis 35.11. Omnipotentia, excludit omnes defectus qui sunt impotentiae
seu posse mentiri, mori, peccare, etc. Thomas Aquinas 2. quest. 25. Art 34.
omnipo^t, or that Psalm. 147. Deuteronomy. 32.4. Psalm. 18.30. Exodus 3.14. etc.
infinitely, Deuteronomy. 4.34, 35. ^os. 3.11. Ephesians. 1.5.11.
absolute, For GOD is either absolute in (...) efficiency, by which he can,
will, and do more then he willeth-and ^^th, Matthew. 3.9. and 26.23. Romans 9.18.
or else Actual, by which ^eed he does whatsoever he will, and hinders
whatsoever he will (...) have done, Psalm. 115.3. Matthew. 11.26. Ephesians. 1.11.
Genesis 17.1.35.11.
ef^ient, As, besides those Attributes, he is a Spirit, Joh. 4.2* Immense, Jer.
23.23.24. 1 King. 8.17. Inconprehensible, Ps^ 145.3. Omnipotent, and yet not
comprehended in any place, Ps. 13* 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. Eternal, Isa. 40.28. Romans
16.26. Immutab^^ Mal. 3.3.6. Jam. 1.17. He is again the most proper and perfect
^^ving GOD, Deuteronomy. 5.26. Psalm. 42.2. The most absolute, per^^ and righteous
Will, Ephesians. 1.5.11. He is most true in himself, De^^ 32.4. In his words. Joh.
17.17. Psalm. 119.142. and 147.5. M^^ good, Romans 2.4. None so immutably,
infinitely and essentially g^^ as GOD, no not CHRIST himself as Man, Matthew.
19.17. (...) is likewise in the abstract, Love, Mercy, Patience, Good tess, 1.
Joh^ 16. Psalm. 116.5. Psalm. 141.8. Exodus 34.6. Most just and righte^ Psalm.
11.17. Romans 16.5. Most Holy, Isa. 6.3. Romans 4.8. Most ^^fect, Matthew. 5.48. Most
excellent, Exodus 15.7. Job 31.23. O^^ ruling, Deuteronomy. 4.34.35. To conclude, he is
most blessed, Romans 1.^ Most infinite and glorious, Isa. 33.21. Exodus 15.11. All
i^ all, C^los. 3.^ For as Zanchius well notes,, I DEO nihil est quod non sit
ipse DE^
perfect, And yet, you must know there are none of his attributes that (...) or
does sufficiently express the infinite and ineffable essence of GO^ but helps
only to our understandings and apprehensions of him. At^^ buta DEI omnia ita ia
ipso sunt, ut sint ipsum; It^ i sunt ut nihil (...) tccedat nihil subsequatu,
sed ex intellectione nostra (quae perquam un^^ tilis est) alia aliis prius
dnimo comprehe ^nantur; Says Scaliger, Er^^ 365. Sect. 6. Et sic condescendit
nobis DEUS, ut nos consurgamus (...) As St. Austia. De Spir. Cap. 112. notes,
whom we are not able to (...) ceive otherwise then he has been pleased to
reveal himself in his w^^
and Divine essence, that ^aply and freely does all things, can cause ^seases,
and particularly this. But GOD (...) that omnipotent, infinite, absolute,
efficient, ^^fect and Divine essence, that can simply ^^d freely, according to
his good will and ^^asure, will and act whatsoever he plea^^h. Therefore GOD
can cause Diseases, ^ich none but Atheists will dare to deny.

Nam ens absolute primum est, quod (...) As touching those who object GOD is
not Scipso, for then the same thing would be the Cause and the Effect of it
self, it is a mere Sophism, or rather Amphiboia of the phrase; for we do not
thereby mean that he has Causes, but privatively, that he is not Aliunde, and
est ^^so, etc est (...), are the same. He is quod est, and sed, est Se^^; and
then if so, he is without Cause (for he is absolutely first) and ^^n without
end, being the first efficient and uncreated; for he is ^^ps^, and being
absolutely first, he is alone and none else; so that it ^^st follow, if there
be any act of other things, it must be from him, (...) he is absolute in every
thing, being the first mover of all things, etc.
seipso; therefore Atheists may soo^ doubt whether they themselves be, the
whether there be a GOD; for, (...) they be Entia a primo, as they can^ deny;
they must first know him tha^ Primum, before they can know the (...) selves;
for the Cause is before (...) Effect. But they deserve rather to (...) pityed,
then answered; I shall (...) therefore dwell hereon, but commend^^g them to
GODS mercy, show you ^ow GOD does many times, declare ^^mself the Cause of
Diseases, which ^^wer and Sovereignty the very Heaven acknowledge to be in
their Gods.

Thus we find In Valle Gorgone ad fontem limpidum recessit a Diana unda
conspecta, convitiis lacessitus est, atque in Cervum mutatus, quem sui ipsius
canes Discerpserunt.
Acton metamorpho^^d into a Stagg, by the Goddess Diana, ^^r presuming to peep
into a Fountain, here she and her Nymphs were bath^^g themselves, and
afterward hunted ^^d devoured by his own Hounds. ^^kewise Gallus in Alecton, a
favorite of ^^ars, whom he set to keep the door, ^^ilst he enjoyed the Goddess
Venus ^^e Wife of Vulcan the God of Smiths, ^eping (whilst Vulcan came and
caught ^em in his Iron Net which he had ham^pured out of his jealous hard-head,
^hereby he exposed them to the pub^k view of the rest of the Gods, and
^oclaimed himself God of the Cuckolds) (...) as by Mars metamorphosed into a
^^k, which Creature (ever since) as being sensible of his quondam Crime gives
notice of Sol's appearance by his Crowing: That Deeds of Darknes^ may be laid
aside. Likewise Apollo sen^ a Pestilence among the Grecians, because Agamemnon
their General, had take non^ of his Priests named Creyseis, as a Pray^^ And
Hinc proverbium Thamyris Insanit, in eos qui supra vires omnes incipiunt.
Thamyris for contending with the Muses (being overcome by them) had h^^ eyes
put out.

Much more must we confess of God GOD (for the punishment of Sin) an^ his
Angels that they are Causers and Inflicters of Diseases. The incestuous persons
that gathered about Lots house i^ Sodom (who like fools refused tw^ young
wenches) we see pressed so har^ upon Lot, that the Angels struck the^ Genesis
19.11.
blind. Genesis 19.26.
Lots Wife was transmuted into Pillar of Salt; and Nebuchadnezzar presently
metamorphosed into a Jument, an^ eat grass for seven years together, as (...)
From Dan. 4.23, 24, 25. and from verse. 31. to the end.
clear; His Heart was made like the Beasts of the field, his Dwelling was wi^^
wild Asses, and he was separated from the sons of men. Dan. 5.21.
So Miriam Numb. 12.10.
is strucke^ Leprous. He afflicts Levit. 26.16.
sometimes by the Consumption, Ague, or burning Feave^ Melancholy, and
Passions, as we see i^ Saul, ^^m. 16.14.
An evil Spirit from the LORD troubled him. Also Deuteronomy. 28.28.
astonishment and madness. Gout as in 2 Chronicles. 16.12.
Asah. The Deuteronomy. 28.21.
Pe^ilence and Epidemical Diseases, he sends likewise when he pleases; and 2
King. 5.17.
Here^itary Distempers, as Gehazi and his po^sterity was for ever made Leprous.
To ^^e short, it is without all dispute, not only these, but all Diseases, nay
and Death it self, as also abreviated Deuteronomy. 4.26.
Life. Whence it is that David complains, Ps. 107.17.
Fools, because of their transgressions, and because of their iniquities, are
afflicted. And Exclaims, Psalm. 38.8.
I am feeble and sore broken, I have roared by reason of the ^isquietness of my
heart. And particu^arly, he sometimes causes this of Worms, as he afflicts the
Court of Pha^aoh Exodus 8.17. Exodus 9.10.11.
with the Lousy Evil and Botch. And Diseases of the Bowels he lays on Joram,
(which may not unfitly be a^cribed in a particular manner to worms.) However
that of Herod is pertinent, whence it is said, He was immediately ^mitten,
because he gave not GOD the glory, and he was eaten of Worms. As also that
signal Judgment of GOD on the Antetipe Pilat that vile condemner of Majesty,
who was also eaten up with Lice, as I have been most credibly by ^mpartial
hands, and such of their own Exodus 12.29. Number. 16.32. 2 Samuel 6.6. Acts 5.5.10.
2 Chronicles. 21.15.
Acts 12.23.
gang, informed, notwithstanding h^ was most frequently shifted night an^ day.
So Job complains, Job. 7.5.
That his Fle^ was clothed with Worms.

MEMB. II. The Devil and his Imps, Magician^ Conjurers, Witches, how they m^ be
Causes.
SEcondly, the Devil, by GOD (...) permission, may cause Diseases, an^ by his
assistance, his Imps, Magician^ Conjurers, Witches; Some I know the^ are, and
too many, that deny there (...) any such thing as a Devil accounting all that
believ^ there are, Whether there be any such thing as a Devil.
melancholl^ fools, Dizzards, and fear full Creatures. But besides the
testimonies of ignorant and timorous people we have this truth evinced by the
Learned themselves, and such as wer^able to distinguish between Delusion and
Realities, Shows and Substances It was an ancient opinion of the Acts 23.8.
Sa^duces, who held there were neithe^ Resurrection, Angel nor Spirit; and
since has been mentioned by Aristotle, and ^^e Peripateticks, Epicurus and his
gang, ^alen and others; but they are refuted ^y the S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom,
S. Cyprian. etc.
Fathers of the Church, as also ^y the Stoics in general, although they ^ave
not so essentially cleared the point ^s others, Hermes Trismegistus,
Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Iamblicus, Prothus, Porphyrius, Plutarch, in
initio vitae Cimonis, Damonaeus, Plin. Secundus lib. de Phantasmate, Epist. 7.
Pausanias, Suetonius, in Caligul. occiso. Our King James, M. Paulus Venetus,
Haytonus in sua Sarmatorum Historia, Bedinus, Remigius, Sprangerus, Paulus
Scribonius, Psellus, Danaeus, Ulricus Melitor, Henricus Coloniensis,
Camerarius, Mamoreus, Tur^enedera, Hispanicus Hortus, Paracelsus, Erastus,
Cardanus, Scheretzes, ^cogna, Zanchi; Thom. Aquinas, Testatus, Delrio,
Michaelis, Lavatur ^ud. Vives, Bonasius, Spinaeus.
both Ancient and Modern ^ave. And if we may believe Paracel^s, he tells us he
has seen Devils di^ers times, and conferred with them, ^o does Alexander ab
Alexandro, who ^oubted before. And Marcus assures ^sellus (that accurate writer
of this Subject) he had often seen them. In Cap. 8. Com. lib. 1. Paraccisus de
vita Longa.
Leo ^uavius affirms the same, adding far^^er, that the Air is full of them, as
of ^now when it falls. (And we know ^^e is Ephesians. 2.2.
the Prince of the Air;) and more^^ver, Si irreverberatis oculis sole
splendente versus Caelum continuaverint obtutus, etc.
teaches how they may be seen.

Nay, and Lib. 2. De Divinatione and magia, and Lavatur lib. 1. De veritate
fidei, Benzo, etc. Also Boisardus de Spirituum operationibus; Petrus Loperus de
spectris; Euscbius, Johabnes Nierus, Nicephorus, Socrates, Sozomaenes, the
afere-named Lavatur and Vives, write also of their diverse kinds and orders; but
who is instar omnium, Psellus.
Ludovicus Vives evinceth ^s, nothing is more common, then their ^ppearance, in
Woods, Deserts, and ^^litary places in the West Indies, and ^e more ignorant
and barbarous parts ^f the world, where they also frequent^^ converse with men,
do their drudgery ^^ork i. e. These of the basest and lowest Order of them,
viz. Terrestrial Devils, i.e. Lares, Genii, Fauni, Trulli, Wood-Nymphs,
Foliots, Fayries. Rouzeus, Hyperius, Hemi^gius, Eoisardus, Scribo^ius,
Chytrellus, Arctius, cum multis aliis, etc.


go of Errands, and what else ^hey are employed about.

The Word of Genesis 3.1. Job. 1.6. and 2.1. etc. Luke 10 17. John 8.44 Ephe^^.
4.47. and 6.11 2 Timothy 2.46. Hen. 2.14. Jam. 4.7. 1 Pet. 5.8. 1. Joh. 3.8.
Matthew. 9.32, 33, 34. and 12.22.24.26, 27, 28. Mark 3.11. and 5.2.8.9.12. and
diverse other places.
GOD also tells us there are Devils, and that 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude verse. 6.
for their ambition and pride, they fell from their first state, and were cast
from Heaven into Hell; and delivered into everlasting Chains of Darkness,
(although Origin held that Devils, damned Spirits, and the Souls of men after a
certain time should be freed) to the resurrection of the Judgment of the great
Day. Formerly Angels of Light, but now Angels of Darkness; not begotten, as
some fondly maintain and conceive with the Thalmudists, who (as Pererius on
Genesis Cap: 3. verse. 23. affirms) held, that Adam by his first Wife (whom they
term Lilis) begat nothing but Devils. But created by GOD before the foundation
of the World, Spirits and glorious Bodies, and placed in Heaven, if they could
have stood in that first state without sinning. Neither are they the Souls of
men departed, as Tertullian, Nihil aliud sunt Daemones quam nudae animae quae
corpore deposito priorem miserati vitam, cognatis succurrunt commoti
misericordia, etc.
Tyrius and Porphyrius contend; For they maintain that the Souls of good men
departed, became Angels, or good spirits; of bad men Devils, and evil spirits;
who, through love to their friends yet living, or hatred to their enemies, did
help and assist them, or persecute and torment them at their pleasure, etc.

Now these Devils are diversely termed; as they are called Intelligences, Boni
and mali genii, etc. what Christians call Angels, those same Philosophers
understand to be Intelligences; others, Daemones or Devils, as the Platonists
call all spirits whether Good, or Bad, Devils. The Romans call them Boni and
mali genii, Heroes, Lords, if Good; Lemures, Larvae, if bad. Spectra, etc. And
umbrae mortuorum, if they appear in the likeness of any one dead. If they had
any carnal Copulation with men, they were called Succubae; if with women,
Incubi. For it has been known that they have not only layn a night or two with
them, but to have been married to men and women, See Hector Boethius, Olaus
magnus, Paracelsus De zilphis, etc.
as many show. If they appear like women bringing money into their Chambers,
Desks, Shoes, etc. they are called Fayries; Such were Ceres and Diana o^ old
among the Gentiles, such also were their Nymphs, etc. But notwithstanding all
the various names and acceptations of them, yet it is but the Devi^ still,
which turns himself into severa^ likenesses, and takes upon him diverse
appellations, the better to delude and insinuate himself into the hearts of
men; and therefore, he teaches his Instruments those innumerable Names and
Kinds of Spirits, Recorded and taught by Tritemius, and the rest of those
Masters of the Black Art: Whence indeed, as Lib. 3. Daemonol. cap. 1.
the King and others well S. Augustine, Tostatus quaest. 6. Genesis Cicogna lib. 4.
Cap. 4. Zanchie lib. 4. cap. 10. Thom. Aquinas, Delrio, Erastus, Sebastian
Michaelis, cap. 2. De Spectris.
note, they are these kind of Spirits, For all places are full, either of them
or Angels, above and beneath the Moon, Aetherial and Aerial; not so much as a
hairs breadth empty in Heaven, Earth, or Water, above or under the Earth, there
are fiery Spirits also.
viz. still Devils, of one sort or other.

I shall not here dispute how far the Power of Devils extends. As, whether they
particularly guard men, and Lord it over them, as we our Horses or Dogs; as the
Platonists hold. Or, whether they govern Kingdoms, Nations, Towns, Citys,
Castles, etc. or whether our Religion, Policy, Agreement with our Governors,
good or evil, depend upon their pleasure; whether they are the Causes of
public, Of the Power of Devils.
or private Quarrels, Rewarders of our Virtues, Punishers of our Vices: Send
Plenty, Dearth, Sword, Inundations, Earthquakes, Peace and Wars; whether they
live and die as we do, only longer, eight or nine hundred years, as some think:
and then, as they die, our Governments, Religion, etc. alters and dies with
them, or whether they eat and drink, as Cardan maintains, they feed on men's
Souls, and therefore thinks there is some great Feast toward when there is any
great Battle fought; taking as much delight, as some think, to see us fight, as
we do our Game-Cocks. That all men's Preferments and Prosperity in this World is
ordered by them, and therefore, But his Arrises from the partiality of man's
affection, or the fashioning, or not fashioning our selves according to the
nature of the time wherein we live. For, whosoever will live altogether out of
himself, study other men's humors and observe them, shall never be unfortunate.
many conceive the Virtuous, Honest, and Religious sort of men are so often put
by Honors, and continue poor; when base time-serving mean-spirited, unworthy
fellows, wickked, rude, and profane, nay, and oftentimes, Idiots are preferred,
enriched and thrive; when the Learned, more Ingenious and Judicious are
rejected. That they teach men all Arts and Sciences; and as Paracelsus
contends, none ever was eminent, either in Arts, or knowledge and success in
War, etc. but he was assisted by the Devil; Whence of old, among the Romans,
Heathens, and in this our Land, as In his Antiquities of Britain.
Verstegan observes, men worshipped and sacrificed to Devils, as their only
GODS: which, if we may believe Leo Suavius and Tritemius, they are greatly
ambitious of; coveting nothing more, then to be adored by men, and to have them
kiss his Arse. I say, I shall not dispute nor dwell upon these opinions, but
show the Power of these Spirits (then let loose and commissioned or permitted
by GOD) in the Causing and Curing of Diseases, especially this. For till then,
he has no Power at all, being confined unto the Day of Judgment, and limited
by a superior Power, as is evident from that of Mark 5.12. where we find a
whole Besides that of Job, Job. 2.6.7. and 1.12. and 2.6.
Legion of Devils begging leave of our SAVIOR to enter into the Herd of Swine;
which, till he permitted them, they could not do. And if it were not so, the
Elect were but in a sad Case; 1 Pet. 5.8.
For he goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour.

Yet by his Permission, for the trial of our Patience, punishment of Sin, and
the quickening of us to Duty; they oftentimes effect very strange things, as,
they can afflict both our Bodies and Estates, make love or hatred between men
and women, cause Impotency in the Act of Venery, Barrenness, Abortions, carry
Intelligence from remote places between Friends, walk in the Fire and not be
burnt, fly in the Air and Having uncloathed their Souls of their earthy
bodies; for Death consists not so much ^n the separation, as in the unfitness
of the body for a vital conjunction with the Soul.
carry others with them, as the As in Bell and the Dragon, ver. 36. and 39.
Angel did Habuccuck to Daniel; (But if the Apocrypha be of no Authority with
thee, that of Ezekiel. 8.3.
Ezekiel's being carried by a Lock of his Hair from the River Chebar, in the
Land of the Chaldeans, to Jerusalem, certainly will; (yet the King James in his
Demonologye. Osid.
King cannot be satisfied how such a quick motion should consist with the life
of the transported.) Acts 8.39.40.
And so Philip was carried away by the Spirit, when he had baptized the
Eunuch.) make men sword and shot-free, to feel no pain upon the Wrack, convert
themselves and others into diverse shapes, stanch Blood, destroy Corn, Cows,
Horses, and other Cattle, and Fruits, cause Storms, Tempests, etc. being Ephesians.
2.2.
Prince of the Air, by the mediation of the Four Elements; likewise they can
make Spirits haunt Houses, tepresent Armies and Castles in the Air. Example of
all which may be found in those Authors before named, and As, Cornelius Gemma,
Marcellus Donatus, Baptista Cadracus, Antonius Benivenius, Alexander
Benedictus, Johannes Langius, Niderius Formicus, Godelman, ^orasius.
others; who likewise recite many Feats of Witches; but this old Serpent
deludeth them, when he makes them believe they do this or that by their
Philters, Amulets, Sigils, Lamens, Pictures, Unctions, Frecasings, and
Roastings, with their several Incantations, Imprecations, Names, Characters,
Planetary hours, Particular Configurations, Aspects of the Planets, Circles,
and such like toys; which are of no force or efficacy as to the Feat intended,
but fear only to heighten their fancies and belief, whereby he draws them into
his snare, and fettereth them the faster to himself: when indeed, all the
while, it is he himself that effects all for them, and brings their wicked
Machinations to pass, and they do nothing but dream of their Feast: So that it
must be also concluded, that all that is ascribed to their Doings, or
Magicians, Conjurers, etc. is still the Devils Power and Actings.

Besides, as to the business in hand, it is not only my opinion, but of
infinite others, that he can cause Diseases, and particularly this, and cure
them when he has done, although Hypocrates Lib. De Sacro Morbo.
denies it stiffly, affirming to be their ignorance in the Nature of the
Falling Sickness that think it is caused by the Devil. So likewise Plotinus
Lib. 14. Advers. Gueff.
derides all such, as maintain Devils can cause Diseases: Yet, if we do but
consider the great and admirable knowledge of these Devils, or evil Spirits,
Whether the Devils can cause this or any other Disease.
how they know the virtues of all Herbs, Plants, Stones, Minerals, Birds,
Beasts, Fishes and other Creatures; the Elements, Stars, Planets; nay, and the
true Sympathy and Antipathy of things; the Constitutions and various Tempers of
men; and how to apply them, and stir up any humor in man's body, knowing which
thing, and at what times, will cause, and that most forcibly such a Distemper,
or excite such an humor; I say if we but consider of these things rightly; we
must needs be of another humor and judgment. The most illiterate Devil being
more knowing, then Quovis homine scientior, Cicogna.
any Man whatsoever; and as Lib. 19. De Subtilitate, fol. 363.
Cardan adds (In the story of the seven Devils that appeared to his Father)
they know all things, and the worst of them do far exceed our greatest Kings
and chiefest Philosophers in Parts and Excellencies, being perfect in all Arts
and Sciences, and can as well cause mutations in the Air, conquer Armies,
further and hinder men's Designs at their pleasure. De Civitate Dei, S. August.
Can join the Agents with the Patients, collect the seeds of things together,
and apply them when he has done; Tancellus.
he can without impediment penetrate through all the Parts of our bodies, and
cure our Maladies to us unknown, and that, whether they be caused by him or no.
Irrepentes corporibus occulto morbus lingunt, mentes torrent, membra
Distorquent. Lypsius, Phisiol. Stoicar. Lib. 1. cap. 19.
They can crucify men's Souls, and torment their bodies, and deceive our
Senses; and, Lib. 2. de Genesis cap. 17. S. August. Tertullian.
not only foretell many things, but also Cause and Cure most Diseases, etc.
Partim quia subtilioris sensus acumine, partim scientia validiore vigent and
experientiam propter magnam longitudinem vitae, partim ab Angelis Discunt.
Jason Praetensis.
For, The Devil being a subtle Spirit can easily insinuate and work himself
into the bodies of men and women, whereby he may vitiate our healths, overthrow
our Constitutions, terrify our minds, and shake our Souls; Nay, they mix
themselves with our evil humors, Levinus Lemnius.
and oftentimes by the mediation of them, he excites this, or that, or the
other Distemper. Avicenna, therefore, things that sine interventu humoris,
neither the Devil nor his Dam, or both joined with all their Devils-birds,
Imps, Witches, Magicians, can cause any the least Infirmity. Yet, if we may
believe Rhasis, Lib. 1. Tract. 9. Cent.
that Learned Arabian, and Aurelianus upon Rhasis, Montaltus, Psellus,
Sennertus and diverse others with Paracelsus, who give us some instances out of
Demonolatr. Sagar. lib. 2.
Remigius and the rest, he can as well effect his mischievous Designs in this
kind without any mediation of humors, or natural means, and so he sometimes
does, though not always. And sometimes, he stirrs up Fantasies so powerfully,
that no Reason is able to resist it; Melancholy especially, Part. 1. De
Spectris. cap. 1. Lavatur.
which of all other invites the Devil to it, and because most prone to the
Devils temptations and delusions, it is by some called the Devils Bath.

Sometimes he thrusts the humors to the Eyes, and makes men blind. Sometimes
the Ears, causing Deafness. Sometimes, again, he either stirrs up the humors
depraved, or causes such where before there were none, thrusting them to the
Nerves, thereby causing Spasmus, Cramps, Palsies, etc. or to the Joints, whence
ensue Gouts; or to the Brains, exciting Apoplexies, Catalepsies, Epilepsies,
Melancholies, and many times Despairs and Madnesses. Sometimes also, he
affects the Spirits, by corrupting or disappointing them; whence arises
intolerable pains and aches, especially in membranous parts.

These things being considered, and diligently weighed; it must needs be
granted, they may not only be the Causers, but the occasioners of the Cure of
most, if not all Diseases (he being as Lib. 1. cap. 18.
Godleman, and Lib De Lamiis.
Thomas Erastus styles him, An Excellent Physician and expert; through his
exquisite knowledge and experience) and in particular of this, by vitiating and
corrupting of our humors, in all and every part of our bodies. Cornelius
Cosmorit.
Gemma illustrates this by a notable example of a Wench, who was as if she had
been possessed of the Devil, and at sometimes could not be held by three men
(such were her strong convulsive passions) who evacuated by vomit twenty four
pounds of stuff of all colors, twice a day, for fourteen days together, and
afterward, great Balls of Hair, pieces of Wood, Pigeonsdung, Parchments,
Coals, etc. and after all this, two pound of pure Blood, and then again, Coals
and Stones, some of them bigger then a Wall-nut; besides, she had strange fits
of laughing, weeping and Ecstasies, and at length voyded a live Worm by stool,
like unto an Eelc, of a foot and half long, the which, he says, he not only
saw, but felt: And thus, when GOD gave him Commission, he clothed Job with
worms, Job 7.5. which was probable, came out of his imbroydred sores, which he
abounded with, from the Crown of the Head, to the Sole of the Foot; he makes
also some to be Mat. 17.18.
Lunatic, others he affects in another manner; as that crooked Woman in the
Luke 13.16.
Gospel, etc. Sometimes (as was said) by the mediation of Humors, and
sometimes again without them; so that it is a very difficult thing to
distinguish whether the Cause be natural or magical, and several Learned
Physicians have herein been deceived, as appears by their Writings (which we
shall speak more fully of beneath, Chap. 7.
Sennertus Pract. Med. Lib. 6. Part. 9. Cap. 5.
among others, cured several that were sorely affected with grievous and
intolerable pains and inflammations, which he could not in the least discern
to be from any Supernatural or Magical Cause; and yet, these were occasioned by
some Witches, who were then in Prison, and upon their Examinations, confessed as
much. And sometimes he destroys life and all, when he can; as appears by that
most remarkable story in Verstegan, of the Pied Piper, that carried away an
hundred and sixty Children from the Town of Hamel in Saxony, on the 22. of
July, Anno Dom. 1376. But Providence is not to be unridled by us in many
things, as the unequal Distribution of Good and Evil, the Ignorance of most
part of the World, the miseries of our Lives, the fatal Disadvantages we are
under, the Hazard we run of eternal Damnation; why Sin and Mischief is
permitted in the World, why all things are done by Chance, etc.
A wonderful permission of GOD to the Rage of the Devil.

SUBMEMB. I. His Imps a Cause, and how.
Erastus Li. de Lamiis, multa enim. mala non egisset Demon, nisi provocatus a
sagis.
thinks his Imps, are oftentimes, the occasion of more mischief, then the Devil
himself; who if he had not been excited by them, would not so frequently molest
men's Nec morbus vel hominibus vel Brutis insligeret, si Sagae quiescerent.
persons, and goods. Now these Imps of the Devil, his Instruments, by which he
acts his villainous Devillry, may chiefly be reduced to these two sorts; 1.
Magicians (which some call Conjurers) And 2. Witches; by the former he is
commanded [or in outward appearance,] by the later obeyed.

ARTICLE I. Of Magicians and Conjurers.
YOU must know now, that these Magicians and Conjurers, by a Contract with the
i. e. Those of the lowest rank and meanest quality out of an itching desire of
Rule, having none in their own dark Kingdom to lord it over, they are
ambitious to rule and tyrannize over these kind of people.
Devil, or League and Solemn Covenant, made by word of mouth, or by writing
(which then is signed with the Magicians own blood, and then the Devil touching
them in some part of their bodies (which in Witches causes a Stamped as a
magical Seal, and perhaps indeed with such a magical Ferment, as renders them
more capable of performing their feats and tricks.
mark) it is a Token of his taking possession of them) there ensues a perfect
outward seeming Amity between them; confirming it by several forms and effects,
and so he injoyns them to observe particular Constellations, Days, Planetary
hours, Long Prayers, Unctions, several Perfumes, diverse Circles, Bounds and
Figures, Triangular, Quadrangular, Simple, Double, in which oftentimes, are
diverse Figures and Characters, wherein they must stand and pray, or invocate
their new Friend [or old Enemy] the Devil, who at length, after many such silly
Ceremonies, using of Holy Water, and repeating the Attributes of GOD, by the
compassing his tena^ious body into some visible consistence and shape, best
suiting to their likeing, and his own designs; which compassing of their bodies
(for it, is no absurdity to affirm as well the evil as good Spirits and Angels
are embodied) is, no doubt, extremely dolorous; which may be the reason, there
are so few apparitions of Angels and Devils: 1 Cor. 15.42.
appears, where he is immediately presented with a Cat, Dog, or some other
living thing; yet, oftentimes he takes them too, if they have in the least,
erred in their Ceremonies, and therefore it is he ties and obliges them to
'um: when notwithstanding, they are no wise available to the purpose intended,
only thereby the Devil deludes them, making them believe, they may, in this
manner command him to come and go at their pleasure, and to do any thing they
enjoin him: which he too, a little observes to effect for them, that thereby he
may make them the more confident of his promises in greater matters, till at
last he bring them into his everlasting Snare.

The Forms performed on the Devils part, are to determine in what shapes he
shall appear unto them.

The Effects are those several sorts of Services, which he binds himself to be
subject to, and to do for them: and these are less, or greater, according to
the skill of the Magician; For, with some he is more familiar and conversant,
as with Flacius Cardanus, who was constantly attended by such Spirits, for the
space almost of thirty years together, as his Son Hieronimus Cardanus, lib. 19.
De Subtilitate, fol. 363.
declares and attests, he has several times heard him confess the same. For,
to the better sort of them, That is, the meaner sort of Demons, by his
Commission and command.
he becomes their Page, Footman, and Servant to attend them, as the same
Cardan reports Lib. 11. De Rerum vanitate.
his Father had one bound to him for twenty eight years. And is often confined
to their Amulets and Rings, or to one of the Nails of their Fingers, and the
like. Paracelsus (as Erastus notes) had one limited to the Pummel of his Sword
(wherein others imagined he kept the great Elixir.) Likewise in Livonia, it is
ordinary for Spirits to do their Drudgery-work, as carry Burdens, cleave Wood,
go on Errands, and fetch them Intelligence from all parts of the World, and
that in an Instant; as is By several Instances from Boizardus, Sprangerus,
Bodinus.
abundantly evinced to us. To others of the meaner sort of Conjurers, he gives
power to sell Wares at a dearer or cheaper rate, to Cure Diseases as well as
Cause them, answer all manner of Questions, and expound Dreams, etc. as is
frequent with those in Lapland (where it is usual for them to sell Mariners a
Saxo Grammaticus, in his History, De Ribus Danicis.
fair Wind for any Port or Voyage) and with the Indian Priests of old, as Olaus
Magnus Lib. 3.
affirms: From whose mouth were expected the Oracles. But I shall not too far
digress.

ARTICLE II. Of Witches.
Whether there are any such Creatures as Who by their Dissolute, envious and
wicked lives and natures, have driven away their Guardian Angel, fall into the
power of the Devil and evil Spirits. For till there ^^^iuch a Dereliction the
Devil can have no power over any one.
Witches, is much controverted by Michael Scot, Joannes Wierus, Ewichius,
Biarmanus, Ennealdus, Austin Lechemar a Dutchman, and others: But they are
incountred by St. Augustine, Zanchius, Paracelsus and his Antagonist Erastus,
Cam^rarius, King James the 6th. of Scotland and first of England, Boccatius,
Bodinus, Rousaeus, Paulus Grilandus, Whether there are any such things as
Witches.
Daniel Sennertus, Antonius Torquineda, and infinite others, with most of our
later Divines and Physicians. Nay, and common experience evinceth it, as may be
seen in such Records as testify the conviction of many hundreds in England, in
diverse parts, especially in Lancashire, Cheshire, Hereford-shire, Essex,
Sussex, etc. And in Scotland, almost in every place. I remember in 1644. I saw
nine burnt at one time in Leith-Links, who not only confessed themselves to be
Witches, but also some of them, that they had Carnal Copulation with the
Barbara Vortubers, nomine, Anno 1624. Die 5. Julii, confessa est se cum
Diabolo, concubuisse and ex eo gravidam faciam esse, ac per mensem semper
gestasse, and peperisse Duo animalcul. hirsuta scu pilosa, instar muris,
crassitie lumbricorum, capitibus nigris, quae hominibus ad nocendum. immiscrit,
Sennert. lib. 6. Part. 9. cap. 6. Infusing perhaps, by his diabolical Coition,
some poisonous ferment which adds a magical virtue to her Spirits at
Imagination, whereby they become devilish and mischievous.
Devil, who haunted them constantly, (as they said) for that very end; they had
also, the Devils Mark upon them, the nature of which is such, as if you thrust
a Pin, Needle, Aul, Bodkin, or what else you will thereinto, they are no more
sensible of it or pain, then if they were dead. And for beyond Seas Paulus,
Grilandus, and Sprangerus give us ample testimony of this truth, having written
the History of Multitudes, whom they judged, and executed; giving you their
names, places of abode, the year of their age, the year of the LORD, the day of
the Month when executed, and frequently the very week day; and sometimes, when
they were apprehended, and the Circumstances how, with their Confessions; which
(certainly) if false, the whole Nation and People where they Lived (who knew
all proceedings) or their Kindred and Relations would have disproved. Neither
is it to be imagined that such men of Worth, Honor and Learning, should be so
imprudent to attest in Print, in so plain and palpable a manner, such gross
untruths. Remigius and Bodin also, have written to the same purpose, whose
Authority is not to be doubted; telling us of many that were carried away into
remote places, by the use of an Leaving their Bodies behind them; for Death
consists not so much in the separation of Soul and Body, as in the unaptness or
unfitness of the Body for vital conjunction.
Ointment, to Banquets and meetings, whence perhaps, those green Circles and
Rings that are frequently found in Plains, may by their Sports and Dances be
occasioned: And I Will tell you Lib. 3. ca. 11.
Olaus Magnus is of this opinion. However, some maintain, that such Witches,
even while they are at their meetings, have been all that while in their Their
Souls being only separated from their Bodies for that time, as St. Paul speaks
in another sense. 2 Cor. 12.2. seeming thereby to approve of this opinion.
Beds, (as their Husbands have attested) But Part. 1. cap. 9. De Spect.
Sigismund Scheritzius says, he has often conferred with diverse himself, who
were carried many miles by night to their Sweet-hearts upon Goats backs, flying
in the Air, and that he heard Witches themselves confess as much: But that of
Habacuck, Ezechiel and Philip evinceth this truth, though it seem strange to
the King. And such instances are so common, that almost all those afore-quoted
Authors are stuffed with them.

But that there are Witches, is farther manifest from the Word of GOD, where he
expressly Exodus 22.18.
commands his people, Not to suffer a Witch to live. Now if they were Dreams
and Fancies, as some dreamingly conceit, GOD would never appoint punishments
for them, or condemn shadows to death. Likewise 1 Samuel 15.23.
Samuel declares, that Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft. Now, to compare
a thing to what is not in esse, were absurd; which, to imagine of this Author,
were more then impious. It is apparent also from the 1 Samuel 28.
Witch of Endor, although Wieru^, Scot and others, have wickedly, as well as
weakly, gone about to make only a Cheat, or a Deceiver of the Word, so
deceiving and cheating themselves, as well as others. So that the Scripture
does not only evince the truth, but also confirms it by Examples, as in Acts 19.
Simon Magus, and in her who had The Acts 16.16.
Spirit of Python, or Divination, notwithstanding these also, are by some made
to be rather Magicians, then Witches.

I confess, however, it is no easy matter to discover who is a Witch: since
there is hardly any certain way taken for their Detection. That of the
bewitched parties beating, scratching, and drawing Blood of the suspected
Witch, whereby they conceit themselves freed from the power of the Witch, and
absolutely cured of such Diseases and Fits, which they thought were caused by
the party whom they thus abuse, is but a mere Fancy. As also that of casting
them into the Water, concluding if they swim, they are Witches, and so proceed
to Condemnation; which may be done by the slights of the Devil; It is a
difficult thing to discover a Witch.
they no wise depending on any Reason in Nature, nor likely to proceed from
GODS miraculous workings which are only done for his glory. No less ridiculous
is the watching of them (and pinching of them if they fall asleep, or chance to
nod) sometimes for ten or twelve days together, or more, till they confess and
accuse themselves; which is the choicest means they use in Scotland for the
discovery of Witches: but how rational, I leave to the meanest Capacity to
judge; For, who of the best of them, might not, either through fear, be
terrified into such a Confession; or through love to themselves, to be freed of
such barbarous cruelty; or through stupidity, having been kept so long without
sleep, say any thing, though never so irrational, or destructive to themselves.

Neither is the voluntary Confession of the party sufficient to evince a
rational man of his or their being a Witch. For many times, melancholy and
deluded people may accuse themselves of what they are not in the least guilty,
and fancy to themselves, they do strange things; when they are altogether
indigent, impotent Souls, ignorant, and know neither what they say or do. As
him in Christophorus a Vega, who confidently believed that he was a King,
driven out of his Dominions; or that other in Francisco Gansavino, who could
not be persuaded, but that he was Pope, and thereupon would needs make
Cardinals, grant Indulgencies, Pardons, etc. And Marcellus Donatus Lib. 2. cap.
1. De medica Historia mirabili.
tells us of one, who confidently believed she could shake all the World with
her little Finger, and was afeard to shut her Hand close, lest she should
squeese the World to pieces like a rotten Apple. How easily therefore both
Judge and Jury may be deceived, is apparent.

Burning of the suspected persons Cattle, Tharch of their Houses, nailing of
Horse-shoos on their Thresholds and Doors, etc. are also as fallacious if not
more; there being no reason in Nature to be given why such effects should ensue
such means: wherefore, if any such things are done, it is rather to be imputed
to the strength of the parties Imagination, which gives him relief; or to the
power and operations of the Devil, who accordingly brings to pass their
Conceits, that he may farther ensnare, delude and bring about his manifold
Devices; which continually he labors to vent and act upon mankind.

Nay, he is so cunning, as to make the bewitched party able (as it were by way
of Prophecy) to discover the Witch, by describing the shape of his, or her
body, age, complexion, stature, habit, manner of life, nay, and secret moles
and marks about their bodies; whereby, although sometimes (to bring his own
Imps to shame) he tell truth; yet at other times, and most times, he flatly
answers many innocent people, and frequently (by GODS permission) is the
destruction of them. For it is a strange Argument with most, that the persons
thus described, and so punctually by the bewitched, must needs be the Witches,
or Wizards; and so through passion, ignorance, etc. not knowing how to
distinguish of Causes and Effects, precipitate themselves into this gross
Error, to the destruction many times, of diverse innocent Souls. For, as it is
usual with common Liars among men, to mix their stories with some real truths,
to make their deceits take better; so, much more subtle is the Devil the Father
of Lies and Liars, to set a gloss on his Delusions and Cheats. The which I
might illustrate by innumerable Instances; But one shall serve among the rest,
since I desire as much brevity as I can. The Story is recorded by Lib. De
Divinatione, Cap. 5.
Boisardus, and it is of a Gentleman of his familiar acquaintance, who being
about two Months married to a fair and delicate Lady, was forced by reason of a
Murder by him committed, to fly into an other Country and leave her: where,
in his exile and solitary thoughts, he was exceeding desirous to know, if
possible, what his Wife was doing in his absence. Whereupon he consulted a
Magician, living where he then was; who first exactly described unto him the
Frame, Building, and Ornaments of his House where his Wife was, then her Shape,
Countenance, Apparel, etc. which being all true, caused as well as Admiration,
a firm Belief of what he should farther discover. Then the Magician acquainted
him there was a very comely young man standing close unto her with his Breeches
about his Heels; whence he positively concludes to himself, all was naught, and
so resolved to steal home privately, and kill her without mercy. At length
coming near his own House, sent for her by a Ring she had given him at his
departure, and meeting, her courteous and loving entertainment, so allayed the
heat of his Fury and Revenge, that he had the patience and the happiness of
some small Discourse. In which he inquired of her, if at such a day she had not
on such Apparel, and of such a Color; which she (with much amazement)
confessed; then he examined more closely, what that was which she so smoothed
and stroak'd in her hand, and who that young man was that stood so near her
with his Breeches about his Heels. She thereupon, more and more admiring, and
perceiving the sudden change of a cruel, jealous, and revengeful aspect in her
Husbands Countenance, desiring his patience, and a right information should be
given him; which in some measure, he granting, she told the truth, viz. That
the young man was his own Brother (who could likewise attest the verity
thereof) and that which she stroak'd and smoothed with her hand, was a Plaster
which she was about to apply to his Hip, where he had a very grievous and
painful Ulcer: whereat, her Husband abominated the evil intended, and repented
him, detesting that excerable and damnable Art of Magic, and the
Lying-True-Devices of the Devil. Whence you may see, many men may be deceived,
amidst these ambiguous Oracles of his, in the discovery of Witches.

So that it is evident, that neither Magicians, nor these Witches, do any thing
of themselves; But are means, Imps and Instruments (as I have showed) to do his
Will: but it is he himself acts all for them. And thus, whatever he can himself
effect by GODS permission, or bring to pass, that they may be said to be able
to do by his assistance. And therefore, may be instrumental of causing
Diseases, and particularly Worms.

How to know when such Patients as are suspected to be bewitch't, are really
so, and whether their Diseases are Supernatural or no, I shall particularly
handle Chap. 7. Sect. 1.
beneath in its place. And thus much of Supernatural Causes.

SUBSECT. II. Of Natural Causes Universal.
I Come now to Natural Causes in general, which are either 1. Universal and
Primary, or 2. Secondary and Particular, Primary and Universal, are the
Heavens, Stars, Which many stiffly maintain are habitable Worlds, and if so,
question will be, whether they, or we are Lords of the World, or whether their
portion be better then ours, whether they have Souls to be saved, and whether
Christ came to save them as well as us. So Campanella, Kepler, Cajetan,
Democritus. The least fixed star, if we may believe Ticho Brahe and Gassendus
is eighteen times bigger then the Earth, the greater or those of the first
magnitude, 108. times: and distant 19000. Semidiameters of the Earth, from the
Earth: Each Semidiameter containing according to Gassendus, ^177. miles; and
^y^t the circuit of the Earth he accounts to be 26255. Italian miles; why is
it so difficult then, to believe these vast bodies have influence over us, that
are but a punctum in comparison?
Planets. Some I know are so nice, that this tenet will not down with them,
others so unwise, as to attribute no more to their Virtue, or the Power and
Influence of the Planets or Signs, then to the Signs at Innkeepers and
Alehouse doors, Whether the Stars have influence or all sublu^ary things, and
over men.
with Mr. Chamber; But he has been so fully answered by the famous and Learned
Sir Christopher Heydon, that neither he, nor any one else since for him, could
return the least satisfactory reply. And if any from Joannes Picus Mirandula
shall conceive he has, notwithstanding, sufficient matter against the Stars
Influencies; if they will but peruse Lucius Bellansius, in Answer to all his
Arguments, they will find themselves deceived. I know Sextus Empericus, Sextus
ad Heminga, Pererius and others, have exploded this truth; But it is, as I have
noted by Pirovanus, Gochlenius, Marasealertus, etc. as much applauded: as I do
not agree with them on the one extreme, who account the Stars to be vertuless,
made only to adorn the Heavens, and fools to gaze on: So on the other side, I
must as much condemn and disallow of the deluding practices of cheating
Impostors, under the name of Astrologers, so frequently practiced among us in
every Town and Country, pretending to satisfy, and answer all Doubts, find
out lost Goods, acquaint men and women with whom they shall marry, and indeed,
what not, by the time of asking the question, thereby deluding the multitude,
disgracing the study, and enriching themselves. But against these I have As in
my Apology Restored, Epist. to the Reader, fol. 3. and 6. and in lib. 1. cap.
13. and 20. Also in my Treatise of Poisons in the Epist. Dedicatory to the King.
elsewhere declared, and showed also how far the Stars have power over us. Yet
as to this matter, as also that they are Causes of Diseases, and particularly
of this, I shall add something.

For, since GOD has made nothing in vain, the Stars must have power and
efficacy; and if they be for Genesis 1.14.
Signs, and Seasons, and Days, and Years, they must signify something,
especially since they differ from one another in magnitude, as also in glory. 1
Cor. 15.41.
Therefore i^ cannot be doubted, but they are Instruments of far greater use,
then to give an obscure light, or for people to gaze o^ in the night; it being
evident that the diversity of Seasons, the Winters and Summers, more Hot and
Cold are not so uncertain by the Sun and Moon alone, who always keep one and the
same Course, but that the Stars have also therein, their working, according to
the places, and Configurations of the Luminaries with the other Planets and
Fixed Stars, as they are intended or remitted, as I have farther showed.
Astrol. Restored. lib. 1. cap. 6. Printed 1653.
But how can any one doubt of the admirable Virtues and Powers of the When he
considers what the Copernicans hold, that the great Orb it self, in which the
Earth moves about? the Sun (though it is Semidiameter be 1500. times bigger then
that of the Earth) is but a point in comparison of the Firmament; which he
says is distant from the Earth 28000. Semidiameters of the great Orb, viz.
42000000 Semidiameters of the Earth; or, according to the other account.
175434000000 of common miles.
Heavens and Stars, those numberless glorious Bodies, or that GOD in the
treasure of his infinite Wisdom can be wanting to give every Star a peculiar
Virtue, since we see every Spring cold Earth, Plants of all sorts, Fruits,
Flowers, Seeds, Stones, Minerals, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, and the very
excremental parts of the basest of them, has the like.

So that there is nothing more certain, then that they are (next under GOD the
first moving Cause) the secondary Causes of the generation and corruption,
production, and consummation of all things in this sublunary and elementary
World; and therefore he has, in his secret wisdom so disposed of the
Constitution of those Celestial Bodies, that his Will, by their operations and
several influencies, is from the beginning of the World, acted and performed by
them to the end thereof. Whence St. Augustine frequently inculcates these words
in his Works, Deus regit inferiora, per superiora, agreeing with that of
Hermes, In his Divi^^ Paemander.
Quod est superius, est sicut id quod est Inferius. And Gerson excellently
Propos. 2.
contends, Heaven is the Instrument of GOD, whereby he governs this
corruptible, inferior, elementary World. And Propos. 3.
further, That GOD foreknowing the Chances of men, had described certain
agreeable Tokens in Heaven concurring with the course of the World, even to the
Day of Judgment. And indeed, they are the unwritten Laws of GOD; or as the
same Gerson in another In Psalm. 104.
place, The Heavens are a Coach or Chariot of Divine Virtue, by whose motion,
light, and influence, GOD orders and disposes of elementary things, in this
inferior World. And St. Bazil, That they are a written Book, which indicates
and declares unto us the glory of GOD and his secret Divine Majesty: whence the
same Gerson, In his Trilaq^^um Astrologiae Thrologizita.
and P. De Ariano, In his Concordance of Astrology with Divinity.
admonish, that the Flood of Noah, Sects, Schisms, and other most notable
Accidents were signified in the Heavens long before. And St. Augustine (who
writes from Varro, and Varro from Castor) affirms, that Venus being a
forerunner of Ogyge's Flood, was changed in it is Color, Figure, Magnitude and
Motion. And in another Lib. 5. De Civit. Dei cap. 6.
place, he exempteth nothing in the Macrocosm or Microcosm, save only our
spiritual part; I confess they have no power on the Will of Man or his Soul,
but by accident, so far as the Soul with the faculties thereof follow the
temperature of the Body, and that Mores sequuntur temperaturam Corporis; In his
Book on that subject.
Galen proves with whom De Mania.
Jason Pratensis, De Atra bile.
Prosper Calenius, Lib. 4. ca. 16.
Levinus Lemnius, with many others, and all Divines consent: Nay, the Heavenly
Bodies make in us Habits, Complexions, and Dispositions, and incline the Will
by the mediation of the sensitive Appetite, which is also excited by the
Constitution. Neither is this power ascribed to the Stars in general, so as
that there is an impossibility for man to know their specifical virtues (as
some half-witted fellows fancy) but the same St. Lib. 2. De Genesis cap. 5.
Augustine concurrs with Astrologers, that the quality of Saturn is Cold.

Add to this, that Arius Montanus, Vatablus, Tremelius, Junius, Melancton,
Calcin, and our later Divines allow Stars Influencies to extend to the state
of the Wether, Plenty or Scarcity of the Year, Plagues, Sicknesses and Health
of our Bodies, and to the Direction of the Physician when to Purge by Pill,
when by Potion, or Phlebetomy: Nay and beyond the Air their Influences reach
even to, and into the bowels of the Earth to the maturating and producing all
sorts of Minerals, and those strange effects which we meet with in the world,
and this Asclepius Lib. 1. Ad Ammonen^.
confirms, where he said i. e. Solis and veterum Astrorum bonae operationes non
solum In Caelo and Aere, sed etiam supra terram in profundissimas terrae
cavernas, and in Abyssum penetrant.
(...).

Neither is the temperatures of men exempted according to Mat. 17.14.
Matthew, where it is said, the Lunatic is offered to CHRIST to be healed,
which Distemper, as Reason and common Experience evinceth, follows the Course
of the Moon, such a strange predominance it has on the Brain of Man; and
therefore Paracelsus ascribes more to Stars, then Humors; affirming
positively, that the Constellation alone, may be a Cause, without the mediation
of any humor at all. And truly, I see not, why it was not easy for the
Almighty so to form some men that they might be only affected with the
Influencies of Saturn, or Mars, or the Moon, and not at all of Jupiter, the
Sun, Venus, or Mercury; and so e contra, since mankind was fashioned and made
after the Stars of elementary matter.

Whence, perhaps Lib. De Acre, Aqua and Locis.
Hypocrates counsels Physicians to have an especial Care to observe the seasons
of the year, especially the Equinoctials and Solsteads; as also the risings and
settings of the Stars; teaching, that an excellent Physician, must be (...)
excelle^^ Philosopher, moreover adding a little after, That Astrology is of no
small use unto them that study and practice Physic; giving this Reason,
Because our Bodies alter in their temperatures with the Seasons, which change
according to the motion and place of the several Constellations. So does Galen
in several parts of his Works, as is abundantly and especially to be proved
from his Book De Diebus Decretoriis, Cap. 2, 3, 4, 5. The which is also
confirmed by Lib. 4. Fen. 2. Tract. 2. Cap. 2.
Avicenna, where he affirms the Moon to be Cause of Critical Days, proving it
by several Reasons; and then concludes, the alterations follow the square and
opposition of the Moon, and middle places between both, as they have respect to
her first place in which she was, at the time of the Patients Decumbiture. And
in Part. 1. Tract. 1. Text. 104.
another place, he ascribes Health to the Fortunate Stars, and Sickness to the
unfortunate. That is, per accidens, for per se, they are not evil; but this
inferior world, being contiguous to the motions of the superior Bodies, being
ruled, governed by, and receiving virtue from them, it necessarily follows,
that as well Corruption, as Generation, should proceed from the Heavens. As we
see many things hurt by Heat, and as many by Cold, and diverse Infirmities and
Diseases accumulated by both, notwithstanding the Heat in Summer, and Cold in
Winter are simply good in themselves and necessary. But in relation to us,
meeting with our bad humors, they are accounted bad. But I shall dwell no
longer on Stars Influencies, since I have been larger In my Lux Veritans, Vox
Stellarum, and Astrology Restored.
elsewhere, since it it is a truth clear to every rational man; but I hasten to
this point.

If then, we rightly consider of what has been premised, viz. That Man is not
exempt from the Influencies of the Stars and superior Celestial Bodies, being
an elementary Body; That Stars have Influencies in general, and particularly
are the Causes of all generation and corruption; That they are the Causes of
our Health and Sickness, etc. It will be no difficult matter to perceive the
truth aimed at in this my Digressive Discourse of Stars Influencies, Causes of
Diseases. And in a particular, and especial manner they may produce Worms, by a
secret property and innate virtue in the bodies of mankind of all Ages and
Constitutions, as well as by their Light and Heat, may excite, exagitate, and
augment this, or that, or the other humor, and dispose them to putrefaction
and corruption at certain times, and in certain bodies, having in them such
impure humors, The sum of all applied to the present Subject.
as are the Seeds of these Vermin. Whence we see that in Autumn, and in the
Spring men are most subject to the ingendring of them, the humors being by the
seasons disturbed, exagitated and exposed more to corruption and putrefaction,
then before; which seasons (as you have heard) with Winters Cold, and Summers
uncertain Heat (caused by the several Constellations and Positions of the
Stars and various Configurations of the Planets as they are engendered, or
remitted) are likewise occasioned. Whence in Winter, by its Cold and Crude Air,
many Crudities of the like nature are accumulated in our bodies indisposed; and
in Summer by its ardent heat, in impure Constitutions, and such as have an
aptitude for the ingendring of worms, are abundantly multiplied. At all times,
and in all Constitutions, more or less may this be verified; according as the
body is in temperature, or disposed: and the Celestial Influencies be tending
to Heat, Cold, Drought, or Moisture, or to any occult quality; For, we see
often both Beasts and Plants, nay and Men also, in great danger, by a
particular Constitution alone, and malignant Influence; whilst others in the
same company and condition, are free, and all nothing; and that without the
mediation of those manifest qualities, the temperature of the Air, Rain, Hail,
Snow, etc. and perhaps too, without the mediation of any humors at all: which,
if it should be asserted: the affection sometimes is so sudden, so strange and
diverse, it will be no easy matter to show the contrary. And we frequently find
by experience, that even when the Air has not inclined to putrefaction,
neither the Constitution of the Patient; yet the body by some occult influence,
has notwithstanding, been repleat with worms.

Neither is it almost possible, there should be any Constitution of the Air, or
Season; but in one other, these Vermin will be thereby engendered: since our
natural heat, and corruption, and putrefaction, differ only in Degree. For,
that which does help to digest and correct the faeculent and putrid humors in
me, may excite and increase them more in thee, or a third man, according as we
differ in temperature, and are more or less subject and exposed by our natural
Constitution, ill Customs, or Disorders, to the malignant influence of this, or
that Planet and Constellation.

They cause in us worms also, by their exhaling power and virtue, thereby
ingendring and stirring up Winds, Rain, Hail, Snow, Clouds, Mists, and other
noxious vapors, which corrupt the Air, and vitiate our humors, so as
consequently, those Creatures must be engendered. But of this more beneath.

Some object against all this I know, or may; from that Axiom, Forma viventis,
nobilioris forma solis, quae tantum est forma mixti. So concluding with that
Theorem, Nibil potest seipso nobilius generare. But this would run us into a
larger Dispute, then suits with this small Tract; wherefore I shall referr you
to Philosophers.

SECT. II. Of Particular and Secondary Causes.
LEt us now (having spoken briefly of General) descend to Particular Causes of
these Vermin. Particular and Secondary Causes, then, or peculiar efficient and
natural (as in respect of the other they may be termed) are either 1. Inward
and Innate, or 2. Outward and Adventitious.

SUBSECT. I. Of Inward and Innate Causes.
LIkewise Inbred Distempers may be also subdivided, into 1. Natural, or 2.
Hereditary.

MEMBER. I. Of Natural Causes Congenite.
I Shall begin with Congenite and Natutural Causes, which are all the Ages of
Man, from the Cradle to the Grave; which no one can avoid that lives in the
World, every one being in one or other of them; and if they live long, run
through all. All which being incident to Corruption, and apt to engender thick,
gross, viscid, and putrid faeculent humors and Crudities of all sorts and
kinds, as in some measure has Cap. 5. Sect. 1.
been hinted.

As we see Infancy is but (as it were) a mass of corruption and putrefaction,
and (in a manner) made up of nothing else according to that of Job, Job. 17.14.
I have said to Corruption, thou art my Father, to the Worm, thou art my
Mother, whence they oftentimes are born into the world with them, as was Chap.
5. Sect. 1. Subsect. 1.
showed.

And after they are born, how long do they live upon Milk and such a Diet as is
most prone to corrupt and engender them, to overthrow the tender frame of their
Constitutions, to subvert the Course of Nature, hinder Digestion, improve
Natural Heat, and introduce infinite sorts of Crudities, the Seeds not only of
these Vermin, but of most, if not all Diseases.

And when they are able to run about, the case is the same with them for matter
of Diet, or worse; meeting them more frequently with variety of Trash, and that
which is worst of all, exercising upon a full Stomach, and at unseasonable
times; being tied to no order, nor having reason to regulate themselves better.

Again, after the fourteenth year of their Age to the twenty fifth, who but
they? And how many hundred thousand, ways do they in their youth, by their
headstrong courses, inordinate drinking, extravagant gormandizing, sitting up
late at nights, whoring and other prodigal ways, subvert their healths,
extinguish natural heat, corrupt their blood and humors; and (thinking their
own Wit best) run into all manner of Riot and Excess, hating reproof and
admonition like Salomons Brute. g These Disorders hinder Natures operations,
whence ensue Crudities, ingendring worms.

The same may be said of the Fifth and Sixth Ages, since not one man or woman
of ten thousand, either know how to order their lives, to choose what is
advantageous, and avoid what is offensive or noxious; nay some that do know it
(such are men's sensual appetites naturally!) rather destroy their Healths and
Lives, then displease their Palates; corrupt all the humors in their bodies,
then cross one fantastical desire, or leave off one luxurious custom, though
never so destructive. They are no Changelings (they say) indeed: for their
obstinacy, and perseverance in evil, it is true, they are none; it were well,
notwithstanding, if they were: yet while they boast of this, they cannot acquit
themselves of being Fools, or Changelings in that sense. They are too wise to
be advised, or to amend; a short Life and a sweet pleases them best; and let
them take it for me.

And as for the Seventh and last Age, in which there is a decay of Natural
Heat, whereby Coldness and Crudities are abundant; and being (as it were)
repleat with the wormatrick water and Seeds of these worms which are apt to
putrify; it must needs be full of them, as I have by several Instances Chap.
5. Sect. 1. Subsect. 1.
showed.

MEMB. II. Of Parents how Causes by Generation
ANother Congenite, Iaward and Eminent Cause of Worms, is our Constitution and
Temperature in the whole, or in part, which we receive from our Parents: who,
if by their own disorderly living, have contracted virulent Diseases upon them,
or have them communicated to them by Tradition from their Parents, must needs
injure their Posterity. For such Parents as have corrupt and vitiated humors,
are Phlegmatic, Choleric, have indisposed and intemperate Stomachs, or Livers,
or however it be they are affected, they bring forth and procreate a Posterity
accordingly tempered and disposed, as I noted elsewhere; In my Refutation of
that vulgar Error of the Souls Infusion, Cap. 3. Sect. 3. Printed 1661.
whence Ludovicus Mercatus, who has largely and learnedly written of
Hereditary Diseases, advises all Families to make Choice of such as are
contrary to their own Nature and Temperature, for their Husbands and Wives;
that if possible, the ill Constitution in the one, may be corrected and amended
by the other. For, as is the Father in Temperature (says that famous Lib. 1.
Pathol. cap. 11.
Fernelius) so is the Son: So that look what Distemper or Infirmity the Father
had when he begat him, the Child will have the same. Instancing in ancient
people, crased and weak, who beget infirm Children, Weaklings, etc. And Lib. 2.
De occultis naturae miraculis Cap. 8.
Levinus Lemnius, That foolish and fantastical women beget wild and
runningpated Children. For, where the Complexion and Constitution of the
Parents are corrupt, there the Complexion and Constitution of the Children must
needs be also corrupt, and so it is introduced from the Father to the Son;
though not at all times, other Causes preventing: yet for the most part it is
of such force, as Nolphius excellently Saepe mutant Decreta Superna.
notes, that it alters even the Primary Causes and Decrees of Heaven.

So that from this depraved origination of our infirm Parents, we being also
infirm, our viscera essentially weak, no wonder Crudities ensue, and from
thence, not only worms; but most, if not all Diseases, and that irresistably;
for, according to Horace,

Naturam expellas furca, licet usque recurret. To prevent therefore, Hereditary
Maladies, many well-governed Nations in former times, did invent diverse strict
Laws against all Marriages where the parties were Deficient, or unsound in body
or mind. As Hector Boethius Lib. 1. De veterum Scotorum moribus.
writes of the Scots, among whom, it was formerly a Custom, that if any that
had the Falling Sickness, Madness, Gout, Leprosy, or any such virulent
Disease, that was likely to be conveyed from the Father to the Son should be
found, he was instantly gelded; if a woman, she was kept from all company of
men, and if they found any with some such disease, to be with Child, she with
her Brood were immediately buried alive. Whence perhaps it is, that most
commonly, the people of that Nation (especially the men) exceed in comeliness,
stature, strength of body, and healthiness, those of our Native Country of
England. It being usual, as the same Boethius De Insulis.
observes, for the people in the Island of Orchades to live an hundred and
twenty years, for the most part sound in body and mind, without the help of
Physic. But Sots as we are, in this most weighty matter we are too remiss,
marrying any deformed unwholesome piece of mortality for a little money, when we
are curious of the strain of our Horses, Dogs, Pigeons, Game-Cocks; and so
frequently, we leave a Crook-Back'd, Flat-nos'd, Bow-Leg'd, Squint-eyed,
Left Handed, ugly, infirm, Weesle-fac'd, Diseased, Half-Witted, Hair-braind,
Non-sensical, Goos-cappical and Coxcombical, Worm-eaten Idiot, not only to
possess our Estates, but our Names, and to build up our Families. And if so,
what profit has a man of all his Labor under the Sun? Wherefore, we may
justly admire the Wisdom and Providence of GOD, who in the midst of this our
careless Sensuality, does in all Ages, or (as Johannes Bodinus observes) De
Repub. Cap. De Periodis Reipub.
once in six hundred years, provide against these mischiefs, by causing a kind
of a transplantation of Nations, to purify and correct their Blood. But I
shall not farther digress.

SUBSECT. II. Of Outward and Adventitious Causes.
MY Method (having briefly spoken of Inward and Innate Causes) leads me to such
as are Outward and Adventitious, which happen unto us after we are born into
this Elementary World. And they are again, either 1. Evident and Remote, or 2.
Proximate, Antecedent and continuated, etc.

MEMB. I. Of Outward, Evident and Remote Causes.
I Shall begin with the first and chief of these outward Causes, viz. Evident
and Remote, which are again subdivided into 1. Necessary, and 2. Nonnecessary.

SUBMEMB. I. Of Necessary Causes.
UNder Necessary Causes are comprehended those Six Nonnatural things, viz. 1.
Air, 2. Diet, meat and drink, 3. Sleeping and Waking, 4. Retention and
Evacuation, 5. Rest and Exercise, 6. Animi (...), Passions and Perturbattons of
the mind. They are called Necessary Causes, because they necessarily alter us,
according as they are used, or abused by us: And Nonnatural things, Non, quod
non sint ex rerum naturalium numero; not that they are not to be numbered among
other things of the World, or are contrary to Nature. But because they do not
so appertain to the Constitution of our Bodies, neither are they unnatural, or
besides Nature, but as it were, a medium between preternaturals and the humors
whereby the Body subsisteth or is constituted. For they are accidental, but
such by which Nature does subsist, however they are not essentially natural
unto us so as that they frame the Constitution of our Bodies; yet they
inevitably alter them according as they are used. As, if rightly used, they
preserve the Body in strength and health; if abused, corrupt and destroy the
whole Constitution and good temperature thereof. Sennertus divides them into
four Classes. 1. Those that are received into our Bodies. 2. Those that are
carried about with us. 3. Those that are retained and evacuated. 4. And those
that are extrinsecal and without us. Some being External and some Evident, if
we rightly consider; the External, or those that may be most properly so
termed, are the two first, Air, Meat and Drink, cum extrinsecus accident; the
Evident are the four last, Sleeping and Waking, Rest and Exercise, Retentions
and Evacuations, Passions of the Mind. The which he justly terms (...), as
being rather Evident, then External Causes in a strict sense; however, they are
generally so received.

So that Division will be here necessary, viz. Evident and Manifest, and
Occult, Secret or Hidden; Evident and manifest Causes, or such as are
understood and are obvious to the senses whether they be without, or within the
Body. Hidden, Secret and Occult Causes are on the other side, such as are not
at all obvious to the Senses, but must be discovered by certain Signs and
Indications.

Those Nonnatural which are received into our Bodies, are 1. The Air, 2. Meat
and Drink, 3. Medicaments, etc. However, or in what part it be. 2. Those that
are carried about with us, are the motions of the Body and Soul. As
Perturbations, Anger, Joy, Grief, and Fear, with those diverse subordinate
Passions, as Discord, Strife, Emulation, Hatred, Choler, Indignation, Love,
Ambition, Covetousness, Pride, Jealousy, Mercy, Pity, Anxiety, Care,
Discontent, Despair, Molestation, Trouble, Lamentation, Misery, Heaviness,
Mourning, Terrors, Affrights, Amazements, Horrors, etc. Also Sleeping and
Waking, Exercises of the Soul and Body, Frictions, Walking, Running, Riding,
etc. 3. Those that are Retained and Evacuated, are the Sperm, Menses,
Hemorrhoids, Blood by Phlebotomie, Sweat, Tears, Urin, or other Faeces. 4.
Those that are extrinsecal, are those which inviron us, as the Air, Cloths,
Baths, Unctions, Frictions, etc. Of all which something ought to be said.

DIVISION. I. Of the Air, how a Cause.
Diverse Opinions there are touching the Air, and Disputes whether it be Cold,
according to the Stoics; or Hot and Moist, according as the Peripateticks
argue; but on these I shall not spend time; but content my self with that
Definition of Lib. 2. ca. 3. De gener. Air elementura est moderate callidum and
humidissimum complens omnem locum, nullo alio corpore repletum.
Aristotle's, (...). It surrounds and invirons our Bodies insinuating it self
thereinto by the Mouth, Nostrils, Pores, and such like passages. Wherefore, as
is the Air, such are our Spirits, and as our Spirits so likewise are our
Humors. Our Bodies must be consequently much advantaged or injured by it,
since they are continually exposed thereunto, for we cannot live, ne minimum
quidem temporis, without it; being constantly by respiration drawn into the
bodies of men and women, and being in a moment diffused into all the parts of
the body, according to its quality, substance, etc. It affects the Vitals and
Spirits first, then the Humors, and lastly the substantial parts. So that
there is a necessity in this nonnatural; for as it is the Cause of Life, so
likewise is it of Sickness, Diseases, and Death it self, if it be impure.

As a thick Air thickneth the Blood Aer nebulosus facit spiritus tenebrosus.
and Humors, so a vitiated Air and impure subverts the Natural Tempers and
Constitutions of our Bodies, and changes the good habit thereof, into its own
temper and quality. Southern Winds and Nocturnal Air, is thick and unwholesome,
thickening the Humors and obstructing the passages. A Tempestuous Air is
altogether as bad; Aer conturbatus sanguinem turbat ac conspurcat; a disturbed
Air troubles and polluteth the blood. For, as the Waves of the Sea, so are our
Humors and Spirits tossed with tempestuous winds or storms; and the Devil
oftentimes (as Lemnius thinks) takes occasion in such storms, when the Humors
are thereby perturbed, to enter into our bodies with them, and so exagitates
our Spirits, vexes our Souls, and corrupts our Humors. A thin Air on the other
side, resolves the Spirits, attenuates the Humors; and if joined with
moisture, exposes them as much to putrefaction as the other, if we may believe
our own Reason, and then that it may be the introducing cause of worms will not
be denied; I mean Aer in Substance.

In Quality also it may be no less a Cause, essentially to some certain
bodies, who, according to their diverse dispositions and the pravity of their
Humors, they become corrupted; for the Air affects our bodies either by
heating or cooling, drying or moistning. An hot Air renders the bodies of men
and women weak and faint, The quality of the Air a Cause.
resolves and decays natural heat, troubles the Heart, and consequently fills
them full of Futrifactio est corruption cal^ris proprii ac naturalis in
unoquoque humido a Calore Ambiente Aristot. lib. 4. Meteor. Calor naturalis
corrumpi dicitur, quiae ab ambiente calore intenditur, atque ita ex naturali ac
temperato calore, fit calor nonnaturalis atque intemperatus. Calor. and lib. 2.
De gener. and inter. cap. 9.
Crudities, whence ensues most Diseases, especially worms, and Death oftentimes
it self; as it is frequently seen in Arabia under the Dog-Starr, the Heart is
apparently heat by every breath a man draws, wherefore they sleep all Day, and
keep their Markets in the Night; and both Men and Cattle do frequently die
under the Equator, it is so intense. Whence it is that in Mesopotamia, Apuleia,
in Cyprus, Malta, the Holy Land, and very hot Countries, men seldom live long,
being accounted old at thirty. Nam naturalis calor evaporavit, defluit humidum
natural, and siccas parts destituit; in hac humidi and sicci separatione
consistit misti interitus.

A Cold Air on the other side, is as pernicious almost as Hot; for this Cold
being a forcible impugner of Heat, the best and choicest Neither this, nor
Heat, nor Dryness is absolutely to be accounted primary qualities, although
vulgarly so termed, because all other qualities have their rise from them, or
because of their precedence or dignity; Sed quod primis corporibus sublunaribus
(...) insint, and quod ex se invicem nos fiant; For it is their property to
constitute. prima sensibilia, that is tactile bodies, Quatenus talia sine
Differentia, as they affect the sense of feeling, and as they are in all
bodies, they are obnoxious both to generation and corruption, being contrary,
and apt both to act and suffer, and therefore is rightly defined that Quality
which gains Homoge^eals with Heterogeneals, as we see in Ice, things different
are joined together by Cold.
of the primary qualities, exceeding its due bounds, does frequently Frigus non
co^currit ad putrifactionem ut causa positiva, sed ut mera privatio caloris, as
Zabarel, lib. 2. D^ misti gener. cap. 8. Yet is it not to be este^med a bare
privation of Heat, as Car^ian accounts it: For it is an absolute quality since
it may be perceived by sense, and has certain powers of acting and resisting
Heat, which to a bare privation cannot be ascribed. It must therefore be
accounted one of the primary qualities (as we call them) and may be the cause
of putrefaction; yet the proper subject of putrefaction is measture.
corrupt and destroy that right mixture whereby Nature is preserved; and so
many times refrigerateth the body, constipateth the Pores, incrassateth the
Humors, offends the Brain, Spinal Marrow, Nerves, Bones, Breasts, Ribs, Uterus,
Intestines, Stomach and other parts, whence are engendered many vicious and
corrupt Humors, breeding not only worms, but most Diseases.

In like manner, a Moist Air is not only bad, but the worst of the three,
destroying Natural Heat, and that chiefly, if it be a cold moist Air, filling
the Bones, Intestines, and the whole man with Crudities and ill Humors; if hot
and moist, it begets Rottenness and Corruptions, stirring up infectious and
putrid Diseases. So that I may well conclude, then it must needs be an
introducing Cause of worms, and that of all sorts.

A Dry Air also, is very bad, and as Consil. 235.
Joannes Crato has it, Admodum Pesti adversatur, to be avoided, even as the
Plague it self, a causer of Obstructions, a waster and consumer of the Humors,
and if it be joined to moisture, it corrupts the Humors, destroys Natural
Heat, Interitus vere misti ex humidi and sicci dissolutione.
by which not only Corruption, but Dissolution is made.

Thus the Air, both in relation to its Substance and Quality, may be a Cause
both of worms and other Maladies; as also all things else, more remotely, which
have influence on, and can alter the Air in either of these manners.

SUBDIVISION. I. Showing how the Air may be altered, to become a Cause by way
of Digression.
EVery thing then that alters the Air, either in Quality or Substance, may be a
Cause; and we know it is incident to mutations Many ways. As 1. From the
Stars. 2. By the Seasons of the Year. 3. By Winds. 4. By Meteors. 5. By the
Zones. 6. By the several Climats. 7. By the Four Quarters of the World, 8. By
the several Regions. 9. By Cities and Scituations. 10. And lastly, By the
Particular Constitution and Nature of Places.

1. That the Air is altered by the Stars will be evident, if we but consider
how we are inclined more to Mirth, The Air is altered by the Stars.
Jollity and Lightsomeness in clear, fair and serene; and to be more heavy,
melancholy, sad, pensive and dejected jected in cloudy, dark, misty, rainy and
moist, durty and tempestuous wether; according to that true Song of Virgil's in
Georg.

Verna ubi tempestas, and coeli mobilis humor.
Cunctavere vires, and Jupiter humidus Austro:
Vertuntur species Animorum, and pectore motus
Concipiciunt alios.
Or that of Ovid 2. De Ponto, 7. Temperie Coeli corpusque animusque juvatur.

And it is commonly known, even to the meanest Capacity, that when the Sun
enters the Equinoctial point of Aries (or the Earth into Libra (as Copernicus,
Galileus and others will) the Spring forthwith shows it self, when he enters
the Summers Solstice, viz. The Tropic of Cancer, (or the Earth Capricorn) he
being then nearest our Zenith, Summer is occasioned. In the second Equinoctial
Libra (or the Earth in Aries) he makes Autumn. In the last Tropic of Capricorn
(or the Earth in Cancer) Winter. The other Stars by their several Aspects and
Configurations with them, as they are intended or remitted, cause the Heat in
Summer, and Cold in Winter, to be more violent or moderate. Again, we see when
he comes into Taurus, and stirs up the virtue of Pleyades, Hyades, or
Virgiliae, Athoray, or Atarage toward the latter end of Taurus, and the Haedi
to the North thereof, and Orion about the tenth of Gemini to the South, or
Rigel, Algenze, Algebar; as also Arcturus or Azamech in the Constellation of
Boots, then setting; these Constellations being all naturally violent and
tempestuous, Southern and moist winds are raised for certain days together,
Storms, Hail, sharp blasts, etc. And Saturn never leaves one Sign and enters
another, (without the Interposition of other Aspects) but he occasions
Tempests, Storms, and a turbulent Air, let it be what time it will. And we see
daily, the Air altered by the several Aspects and Configurations of the
Luminaries with the other Planets and Stars: As when they are in any Aspect of
Saturn their opposer, who has dominion over the opposite Signs to their Houses
(other Constellations and Configurations hindering not) incline the Air to
moisture, cold and darkness: whence it is colder in January when the days grow
longer, then in December when they are at the shortest, and the Sun most remote
from us; because he is then in Capricorn; yet in Aquarius, as in January, the
Sign opposite to Leo the Sun's Joy, the cold is more intense. And so on the
contrary, it is hotter in July when the days are shortning, then in June when
they are at the longest, and the Sun at his height; because he is then in his
own Sign and a fiery, when as in June he is in a cold, moist and watery Sign,
and the House of the Moon. And who can be ignorant that as soon as Mercury does
but change his Habit in the least, either in the Zodiac, or in his Orb, the
Air is thereupon immediately altered. And according to the nature of the Planet
to which he is joined in the opening of Gates the Air is diversely changed; as
if he be joined then to Saturn, he causes fierce, cold blasts, dark Air and
Rain. To Venus Clouds and Showers, in times and places convenient; to Jupiter
Wind and Rain, etc. And so judge of the rest according to their nature.
Likewise the Conjunction, Squares and Opposition of Saturn with Jupiter, Mars,
or any of the rest of the Planets, or when there is any apertio Portarum among
them, they alter the Air in a wonderful manner, according to the season of the
year, their places in the Heavens, Orientality, Occidentality, dignities, etc.
which, because I have already at full, delivered in my Lib. 4. Sect. 3. ca. 9,
10, 11, 12. Printed 1653.
Astrology Restored, I shall not particularize in this place, nor insist
longer on so clear a Truth.

2. And so the Air is altered by the Seasons of the Year, both in Quality and
Substance; who is not sensible of Cold in Winter and Heat in Summer. Wherefore
Lib. De Aere, agro, and locit.
Hypocrates, will have a Physician in the first place to regard the Quarters of
the Year. For according to its Seasons, many are made sick, or well; as he Lib.
De Septent. Partib.
farther notes: The which Comment. 1. Aphoris. 3. Hypocrat.
Galen Com. 3. in lib. Hypoc. De ^umor.
And elsewhere he shows, Si omnia Anni tempora suam naturam servarint, morbos
indicatu facillimos parient; sin minus, difficiles. The Autumn it is true, is
the worst and most apt to dispose our bodies to the generation of worms. And
although the Spring be indeed, the most healthy, and inoffensive Season in it
self; yet it is accidentally, coming after the Cold Winter, whereby the humors
are disposed, an introducer of these Vermin in a copious manner. Thus was he in
Jacobus Hollerius De morbis internis Schal. 47.
the ninth of April, 1653. who being molested with grievous pains in his Reins,
ejected by Urin, many worms. And I my self had Anno 1656. several Patients that
Spring, molested with the Dysentery, and all by reason of worms, etc.

3. It admits of no less change by Winds, For, Ex ventorum mutationibus and
alterationibus, transmutantur and alterantur corpora nostra. And look how the
temperature and constitution of the mind is, and such is the Air, and look how
the Winds are affected, and so likewise are our Bodies; for according as they
change or alter, so do we; it being a certain motion of Philosophers have not
agreed among themselves of the nature of Wind, whether it be Aer concitatus, or
fluens, and agitatus, or by what power and means it is moved; But I shall in
this place wave disputes.
Atoms raised by the Heat of the Sun, or other occasion.

The Easterly Winds do moderately heat and dry, if they are breathed out of the
Earth, if they proceed from the Sea, they moisten the Air; (...), seu vulturus,
one of its collaterals the East-south-east Wind, participating of the Southern
expirations, exposes the Air to more moisture and cloudiness, incrassating and
absuscating it. The other Collateral, viz. (...), Caecitas, as the Latins call
it, the East-north-east-wind is nothing at all serene, but obnubilateth the Air
with many vapors and clouds, rendering it thereby cold and unconstant, whence
that Proverb,

In 2. Ep. 6.
(...).
Ut Caecias nubem, perinde ad se trahens.
He draws Calamites upon himself, as the North-east and by East Wind does
Clouds.

Southerly Winds are hot and moist, bringing stormy rainy weather, thickning
and filling the Air with Clouds and moisture, inclining the humors to
putrefaction, it is the worst of winds, and pestilential, most powerfully
operating on our humors, as 1. Greg.
Virgil elegantly sings,

-- Ubi tempestas, and Coeli mobilis humor
Mutavere vices, and Jupitur humidus austris
Densat, erant quae rara modo, and quae densarelaxat,
Vertuntur species animorum, and pectora motus
Consipiunt alios --
It makes them heavy and lumpish, our humors being thereby colloquated and
rendered more fluid, so flowing into the parts, that they render the whole man
indisposed, relaxing the Nervs, by which motion is performed and perfected. Its
Collaterals are not altogether so bad; yet Libanatus the South-west wind is
more moist than hot, filling the Air with humid Vapors and Rain, and sometimes
Thunder. But Phaenicias the South-south-east wind is not so wet, participating
somewhat of the East Wind.

The West-wind is more moderately hot and moist, resisting Frost and Snow, and
correcting the sharpness of Winter, and producing Plants and Flowers, and
therefore called (...), quasi (...), Vitam ferens, quod fert quae sunt ad
vitam, etc. It is more healthy then the Southerly wind, but less then the
Easterly; yet Homer Odyss. 4. will have it to be the most healthy of all other
winds,

(...).
Sed zephyri assidue spirant, ventique salubres.
But 2. Meteor. Cap. 6.
Aristotle does not so esteem it, nay rather affirms the contrary; but this (as
the rest) must be understood with relation to the nature of the Soil, and
situation of the place; For, in Navarr and Gasconey, it is mightily feared,
because of its noxious quality there; among us here in England, it is more
tolerable. Its Collaterals are (...) Affricus the West-south-west wind, and
(...) Corus, the West-north-west wind; both which are cold, moist, rainy and
tempestuous, especially the West-south-west wind, whence Virgil,

-- i Creberque Procellis Aened.

Affricus, and vastos volvunt ad littora fluctus.
Corus is more cold, Snowy and Haily; but they are both Prognostics of
Pestilential Years, among others, you may take to be, when Roots, as Turnips,
Parsnips, etc. are more lushious then in other Years; also when Insects, and
such Creatures as proceed from putrefaction abound more then is usual, for this
argues a great putrefaction in the Air; also when they appear monstrous with
two Heads or Tayls, and such as these, the Lord Virulam Viscount St. Albans, in
his Natural History, attests himself to have seen, Anno. 1625. in which Year
there was a very great Mortality in London and other parts.
pestilential and dangerous.

Lastly, that the North winds dispose the Air to Dryness and Cold, is evident.
Its Collaterals are Boreas, the Northeast and by North wind, and Certias, the
North-north-west wind, the former is the Author of Cold, the later of Snow and
Hail, whence they become enemies to all the parts of the Thorax, Bladder and
Bowels, causing Coughs, pains, and diverse obstructions, etc.

So that by these variations of the Air and Winds, you may see that by the
Clouds, Mists, and other offensive Vapors, as well as by their qualities, our
humors must needs be vitiated, and these vermin frequently thereby engendered,
according as they meet with matter fit to corrupt an I receive their
Impressions, as each Body with its Humors are disposed.

4. The Air is also altered by other Meteors; of all sorts, both Airy and
Fiery, as Watery, as is clear to every ones Capacity. I shall not therefore, in
this small Tract, enter into that Large Discourse of Meteorologie; But referr
you to Plato, Aristotle, Seneca, Zabarel, Jovianus Pontanus, Fromundus,
Keckerman, Scaliger, our White and others; who have learnedly and largely
written of them all, the matter of their origination, and various Causes, etc.

5. As also no less by the Zones: Now that we may the better understand what
these Zones are, it will be requisite to know (a little by way of Digression)
that in the Sphere of the World, there are Diverse Circles; The Division of the
Heavens.
of which, some are moveable, some immovable; some greater, and some again,
less; The greater Circles are those that have the same Center with the Heavens:
The lesser have their Centers out of that of the Spear, viz. The two Tropicks
and the two They are so called because they are described about the Poles of
the World, and limit the deviation or the distance of the Poles, that which
invironeth the North Pole being called Artick, the other about the South Pole,
Arctartick.
Polary Circles. The greater are in number four, the Equnoctial It is so
called, because when the Sun is under the Line, he causes the equality of the
Day and Night through the whole World; and because this Circle is an equal
Line, it is called the Equator also.
and Zodiac It is so called (...), i. e. Ab Animalibus quae in eo Imaginantur,
or (...), Quod vitam and Calorem Animalibus dare creditur. It is likewise
called the Ecliptic, because the Sun and Moon are never Eclipsed, but in it.
It is also termed the Oblique Circle, because in respect of the Equator; it is
situate oblique.
being the two chief; the two other are named Colures. They are so denominated,
because they have an imperfect revolution in turning with the Sphere upon the
points of their Circumference, and not about their proper Poles, as other
Circles.
So that then movable Circles are in all, just eight.

Of the Immovable Circles, some are Parallel, some Vertigal, some Horary,
dividing the Hours of the Day and Night. Others divide the Heavens into twelve
equal Parts or Houses. But the immovable Circles, are the Horizon and the
Meridian, which to imagine to be solid, hard, and impenitrable substances, real
Orbs, and the like, are too absurd: for they are but Imaginary all, and
Inventions of our Astronomers and Mathematitions; admitted merely for Doctrins
sake. Some on the other side, feign to themselves many subdivisions of
Epicycles in Epicycles, and large Orbs of Eccentricks, and Eccentre Epicycles,
etc.

This Equator being placed diversely between the Poles, divides the whole
Sphere into two equal parts, the which again is in like manner divided by the
Zodiac, and those points where the Equator is cut by the Zodiac are called
Equinoctial points, and the points of the Zodiac which are the means between
the Equinoctials, are called Tropicks or Solsteads, viz. The Stays or Stations
of the Sun. The which Cardinal points do the Colures, the two other great
Circles cut likewise, dividing as well the Equator or Equinoctial Circles into
four parts, as the Zodiac; one passing by the beginning of Aries and Lybra the
Equinoctial points (and therefore called the Equinoctial Colure) the other by
the first points of Cancer and Capricorn (and is called the Solsticial Colure)
and both by the Poles of the World, whereby they are divided into three Angles:
So that the Ark of the Solsticial Colure betwixt one of the Equinoctials and
the next Solstead, is the measure of the greatest declination of the Sun, which
must needs be equal to the Ark of that Colure, which is between one of the
Poles of the World, and the next Pole or Tropic of the Zodiac. For by how
much one great Circle declineth from another, by so much the Poles of the one
are distant from the Poles of the other; because all greater Circles are equal,
and have one common Center, equally dividing themselves, having their
declination likewise just in the midst of their Intersections: Whence is
apparent, those four little Circles divide the whole Sphere into five principal
Parts or Regions, commonly called Zones, unto which as many Parts and Regions
answer upon the Terrestrial Globe, Of the Zones of the World.
differing in magnitude and disposition or nature, according to the tradition
of the Sun. The largest, or that which is most spacious, lies betwix the two
Tropicks, and is in the midst, divided by the Equator or Line of the World,
whereby it is most temperate under the Line, and in the midst; because the
Days and Nights are of an equal length, the Sun ever rising at six, and
setting at six; and by reason of the great Dews which fall in the Night, the
Heat of the Day is thereby compens't; besides, in the Daytime, there are
frequent Brizes and Gales of Wind which likewise temper the Air, so that it is
more cool at Noon, then about nine in the Morning before the ventilating of
those Brizes; again, the Sun in this part makes no long stay, only passes by,
or crosses the Equator, and so causes two Summers and two Winters. But about
the borders thereof, near the Tropic, it is most excessive Hot, because the
Sun by his reversion and turning still back again when he is come to the
vertical point, redoubleth the Heat; making one perpetual long Summer, without
any intermission of Winter; neither is there those fresh gales of wind in those
parts, nor that qualification of Heat by the coldness of the Night, because the
Day is so much the longer then the Night, that the ardent heat thereof is
impossible to be thereby allayed; wherefore this part is termed the Torrid Zone.

The two smalest Regions or Zones, or most extreme, are comprised about the
Poles of the World within the Artick and Artartick Circles; wherefore, one is
called the North, the other the South Zone, the which being so remote from the
Zodiac, the Cold must needs be the more intense, and so are termed the frigid
Zones.

The other two are menes between the great one (which is in the midst of them
all) and those two being most extreme and least, being larger toward the
Tropicks, then toward the Polary Circles by which they are bounded, whence
they become more temperate, and are therefore called Temperate Zones; the Sun's
Course being neither too oblique nor direct. Thus we see the disposition of the
Air is also varied. For Immovable Circles, I referr you to Who have written
largely of them.
Astronomers, since I desire not to digress farther then I needs must.

6. The Air is also altered by Climates, which are nothing else but the Spaces
of the Terrestrial Globe between two Paralels toward the same Pole from the
Equator, each Region differing from another bounds the space of half an hour
of a day; yet this difference is not in those which are near the Pole; of
which, the seventh which passes between the twelfth and the fourteenth
Parallel, is counted the most temperate; that is comparatively. For this admits
of Intemperancie sometimes; but not in that excessive degree of the rest more
extremely situated, as is evident.

7. Likewise it is altered by the Cardinal Regions of the Woild. For Eastern
Regions are moderately temperate, furnished with pure, clear, sweet water, etc.
And Polybius commends Lucitania; and Spain is also by Justin, for an healthy
Country, and free from all noxious vapors. And Egypt to be of that excellent
temperature, that neither Cold in Winter, nor Heat in Summer do so exceed as to
hurt. So does De bello Punico.
Appinianus cry up Numidia and the major part of Africa for their exceeding
good temperature, nay he preferrs it far before Egypt. Again, in Perue under
the And yet, which is wonderful, under the Equator ( As Aresta. lib. 11. cap.
7. notes) amongst the Sierra's, James, Audes, etc. there is such wether, ut
merito exerceat Ingenium. For no Philosophy can find out the true cause
thereof, it being extremely various.
Line, and in the temperate Zone, it is (as you have heard) much more
temperate, then in it is Borders, or in Barbary; and yet in other places under
the Line, as in St. Thomas Isle, and Manamotapa in Africa; it is most excessive
hot, and their Inhabitants Cole Black, when those in Peru and other places
under the same Line are White, and in the same parallel the Air temperate; yet
some have reported, that in Peru on the one side of the Mountains, it is hot,
and on the other cold, etc. and which is not a little wonderful, in one and the
same Latitude, there should be such difference in the Complexions, Natures and
Constitutions of men, and quality of the Air and Soil. As, the Inhabitants
about the Straits of Magelan are White; and yet they lie in the same degree of
Latitude, and equally distant from the Equator as those Negroes and Whence we
may conclude, is no impertinent Inquisition of the Reason and Cause of Black
Mores, it being as difficult as nice.
Black Mores do. Also the Italians and Spaniards are White, who are in the same
Latitude with the Inhabitants of Cape of good Hope (as we term it) that are
Black. In some parts of Ethiopia they are Dun and Tauny; in Zeilan again and
Malabar parallel with them, absolutely Black. And although Africa be an healthy
place, yet it breeds multitudes of poisonous Creatures; and Ireland which is
not so healthy (especially in Boggy parts) has no venomous thing in it,
neither will any live therein.

The Western Regions on the other side are more sickly and unhealthy, the Sun
and other Planets drawing all the Mists and Vapors which they exhale in the
daytime toward the West, and being nearer the Sea, etc. whereby they are
furnished with muddy, troubled waters, impure and unwholesome. As Sir Richard
Hawkins, therefore, speaks of the Isles of Cape de Verd, I may pronounce of
these Regions; That they are the most unhealthy in the World, for Fevers,
Calentures, Frenzies, Fluxes and putrid distempers.

Neither are the Southern much better, by reason of multiplicity of vapors,
and gross exhalations, breeding Lasks, and filling the Brains, Bodies and
Vitals of Men and Women with putrid humors and vicious, dulling and stupifying
them; as Horace sang of the Baeotians,

Baeotum in Crasso jurares Aere natum. Whereas on the contrary, the Northern
people by reason of the sharp, clear, cold Air, wherewith they do abound; the
Inhabitants of those Regions are more quick-witted, ingenious, more tall,
comely, and long-lived. As Leo Affer commends the Egyptians for mirth and
^ollity; because of the serenity and purity of their Air. And Lib. de fato and
de Natura Deorum lib. 1.
Cicero says, the Athenians are more quick-witted then the dull block-headed
Thebeans and others, because they live in a more pure, clear and serene Air,
and truly a foggy, thick Air, does not only dull the Senses, but also makes men
thick, fat, and gross bodied that live in it, as the Thebeans were, and Dutch
are.

8. The Air is altered according to the position of Regions and Provinces. For,
what brings health to one place, is oftentimes most pernicious and mortal to
another. As, we see the Western Winds are very noxious to the Gascoins; yet
most grateful to the Italians and Grecians. The North-north-west wind also,
every one knows, is very grateful and serene to us in Europe: to the Borderers
the West-south-west wind is rainy and stormy. In Locris and Croto (if we may
believe Lib. 2. Cap. 99.
Pliny) the Plague was never known, nor in that part of Ethiopia by the Black
Sea; yet in Mauritania it ruins all; and at Toulouse it has continued seven
years together. So it is usually more violent in Northern than Southern parts.
In Mare Pacifico, or that which some call Del Zur, there is seldom or never
any wind stirring; and yet in the Atlantic Seas, there are perpetual storms.
Bohemia, by reason it lies along to the North, is cold; when as again in
Toledo, it is as hot: In this our Island of Great Britain there is frequently
or perpetually Clouds; which some think is because it is an Island; but I think
that no satisfactory Reason, since Rhoads, over which there was scarce ever any
Cloud seen, is likewise an Island. And Egypt where it never yet rained (save
only Hail mingled with Exodus 9.23.24.
Fire) is not far from the Sea. In some Countries, Foggs and Mists infest them;
in others they have a constant serene Air. Under the Equinoctial Line are
certain winds at such and such times of the day, as was said, and in some parts
of the world, the wind blows constantly one way for half a year together, and
the other half year, the contrary way. In Mosco in 53. degrees of La^itude, and
Buttons Bay in 52. Snow and ^ard Frosts all the Winter long, nay, and most part
of the Summer too; and here again in this our Island in the same Latitude, we
have more open and temperate weather.

9. The Air is altered by the situation of Houses and Cities; wherefore,
according to the diversity of places, Houses ought accordingly to be built, and
so likewise Cities; as we see in most Cities of Italy and Spain, their Streets
are built narrow, and the Houses almost close at the Top, to refract the
Sunbeams; and we in England not being so molested with Heat, build more large
and spacious Streets; and if any such narrow there are, it was rather contrived
for commodity of Trade, and that they might lose no room, etc.

10. And lastly, It may be altered by the particular Constitution and Nature of
places. As, from certain Ditches, where the Carkases of Creatures have been
thrown, Caves and Holes in the ground, do very noxious, and pernicious Vapors
pours proceed. As, near In Sinnessano agro and Puteolano.
Baias, where is such an infectious Den, breathing forth such venomous Air, as
the very Birds that fly over it, are said to fall down dead thereinto;
according to that of Virgil, Aeneid. 6.

Spelunca alta fuit, vastoque; Immanis Hiatu,
Scrupea, tuta lacu nigro, nemorumque tenebris:
Quam super haud ullae poterant Impune volantes
Tendere iter pennis; talis sese halities Atris
Fansibus effundens supera ad convexa ferebat:
Unde Locum Graii dixerunt nomine Aornon.
So also, as one travels from Peru into Chila, as Liburius De origin rerum.
notes, men meet with such a deadly Air, that their limbs before they are
sensible, fall from their bodies. Haldromot in like manner, tells us of a wind
that kills people on which it blows. And that in the time of Philip of Macedon,
many died by passing between two Mountains, by a mineral Air stufft with
vicious and sulphurious Spirits: and such are frequent in many Caves in
Hungaria, Sweden, and even among our selves where there are Mines. Again, we
see the best and richest Soil, yields the worst Air; and the most steril Plats,
Sandy dry grounds, afford the most wholesome Air. So on the Hilly grounds, the
Air is more cold and sharp; in Vales and Bottoms, more thick, foggy and misty,
and many times fraught with very noisome Vapors. Likewise woodland Vales breed
most gross and seculent Air: as Rivers, Ponds, Moats, and marshey grounds, make
the Air more moist, thick and gross. For although Cato commends the situation
of Houses upon Rivers sides, as also Columella near to a City, in rich grounds
and highwayes, it is rather for profit then pleasure, wealth then health. Yet
the Seaside and Saltwater Rivers, are not to be condemned; since the Air is by
its Saltness, rather purged and purified from its grossness and corruption.

Thus have I given you briefly in this Digression, a survey of the Airs
mutability both in Substance and Quality, which must accordingly affect our
Humors, either to health or corruption: wherefore, this shall suffice to be
spoken of the first nonnatural Cause of these Vermin, viz. Air. Proceed we now
to the Second.

DIVISION. II. Of Diet, Meat and Drink, how a Cause.
THE various Causes of worms, are innumerable and intricate; for though we have
asserted they are engendered in our Bodies of putrid humors, joined with heat
(which is excited by the Putrefaction) yet it is not so apparent how that
Putrefaction, or putrefying heat, does produce such Creatures, or how they
assume their form. For, we are not to conceit this proceeds merely from
putrifactions, and concoction meeting therewith, or heat acting on the putrid
humors; since neither of these can of themselves bring forth a more noble
thing then themselves; but, as is most rational, to attribute something to the
nature of the matter or humor it self, in which the seed of the production is,
or somewhat equivalent thereunto, having the proximate principle and peculiar
power of receiving such a form included and latent in it self. Whence it is,
according to the disposition of the matter and humor, this, or the other, or
that kind of worm is generated; it is therefore requisite we consider Diet,
Meat and Drink, whence those humors themselves are engendered.

SUBDIVISION I. Of the several sorts of Food, Causes.
HE that shall consider it, will find our Food to have much more power to alter
our humors, if it offend either in Quantity or Quality, then the Air, nay, and
change our Constitutions; it having a mavelous efficacy in generating
Diseases, yielding the very matter and seeds of them. For, neither the Air, nor
the Perturbations of the mind, nor any of those nonnatural Causes, take place
or work this effect, except the Constitution of the Body and preparation of the
Humors do concur. So that I may say, this Diet is the Mother of all Diseases,
let the Father be what it will: wherefore it is most requisite, we have an
especial care how we use or abuse it, there being nothing in which we more
frequently err, being for the most part guided rather by our sensual Appetites,
then Reason, verifying that old true saying, Plures Corpula, quam gladius. For
of these two, I may justly say, as the Children of Israel of Saul and David;
The Sword has slain it is Thousands; but the Board, those devouring Guts of
ours their ten thousands: wherefore the right knowledge of this Diatetick part
of Physic is not only most excellent, but most necessary.

The various Causes of worms.
My work is here to show you what kind of Food breeds either a Terrene,
Emplastick, Slymie or Phlegmatic Juice, or is Pugnotick, or Stegnotick, or
Emphractick, is Septick, Iddiocratically or Symptomatically, or soon converted
into putrefaction is dyspeptick, or being received into the ventricle,
Septifies what it meets with there; and the like, since all these ways worms
are by them engendered, which may serve for a general Rule.

And that I may be the more plain, I shall prosecute this method. 1. To speak
of the several sorts of Plants for Food. 2. Of Four-footed Creatures, or
Beasts: 3. Of Foul. And 4. and lastly, of Fishes of the Sea and Fresh Water;
under which, all kind of Food is comprehended.

TITLE I. Of Plants for Food, Causes.
RIghtly under Plants may be comprehended 1. Bread-Corn. 2. Pulse. 3. Leaves,
Herbs and Sprouts. 4. Roots. 5. Fruits.

1. Under Bread-Corn, again is comprehended 1. Wheat. 2. Beer-Barly, a
Cousin-german to Wheat. 3. Rye, a kind of wild Wheat 4. Barley. 5. Rice. 6.
Panick, a grain used more in Africa then with us. 7. Millet, a grain also used
in the Eastern parts of the World, 8. And lastly, Frumentum Saracenicum (as
Mathiolus calls it, but why, no one knows) or Buck-wheat. All which may be the
occasions of several faeral evils, especially worms: Many of them are more fit
for Horses, Pigeons, Capons and Geese then men; as Oats, (the chief Food of the
Scots and Irish) and Panick; others are very unwholesome, hard of digestion as
Barley, Rice, Millet, Panick and Buck-wheat not excluding Rye. Most of them
being but Hologotrophick, and affording but an Emplastick, Slymie Juice, as
Oats; wind, gripings and pains of the Belly, as Rye, as well as Crudities, and
so does Barley; as also obstructions, so does Buck-wheat: Nay, and Wheat it
self, though accounted the best Bread, if it be unleavened is exceeding
unwholesome, and no less a Cause then any of the Rest. It is good for no one
sick or well, of what Age, Sex, or Constitution soever, being heavy, gross,
glutinous, hard of digestion, ingendring abundance of Crudities and ill
Humors, which occasion worms and many other Diseases, if it is emplastick and
glutinuous quality be not corrected by Leven. And therefore all Physicians
unanimously condemn it, accompting it sit for nothing but Cataplasms. 2. Can.
Treet. 2. Cap. 572.
Avicenna adds, That the nourishment proceeding from unlevened Bread, is very
offensive to the Liver, obstructing it, increasing and breeding weaknesses of
the Spleen, and ingendring the Stone in the Reins. Likewise, if it be hot, too
new or too old, it is very offensive. Hot Bread puffs up, stopps, and obstructs
the Bowels, occasioning Crudities and putrefaction, by impediting the Chyles
free passage. Old Bread on the other side, dry and moldy, renders the Body
Costive, shuts up the Sink of the Body, ingenders melancholy, and the seeds of
these vermin. Wherefore I conclude with Schola Salernitana, for what is more to
be said on this point.

Panis non Callidus, nec sit nimis inveteratus,
Sed Fermentatusque. eculatus, sit been coctus,
Et salsus modice, ex gravis validis electus.
Non Commedas Crustam, Choleram quia gignitadustam,
Et Panis salsus fermentatus been coctus,
Purus sit sanus; non talis sit tibi vanus.
2. Pulse, which are either 1. Beans. 2. Pease. 3. Lentills. 4. Civers, which
are more fit for Physic in the Stone, etc. then for food. 5. Cichlings,
seldom or never used among us. 6. And lastly Tares, which are fitter for
Pigeons and Hogs, then men. For they all breed in the Bodies of such as eat
constantly on them, or frequently, a gross Juice, black and thick Blood, many
Crudities, much wind and excrementious humors, ingendring worms and other
evils; nay, and are hard of digestion, cause obstructions, and send up many
pernicious, fuliginous fumes to the Brain, causing melancholy, etc.

3. Leaves, Herbs and Sprouts are no less a Cause, rightly considered. For
although they have their several good uses in Physic; yet to make them or any
of them our daily food, is most unholsome. They breed Crudities, especially
worms; corrupt the Blood, yield a feculent juice, cause Melancholy, and the
Scorbie; most Physicians therefore, disallow of them: and although Chrysippus
extolls Cabbidge for an wholesome food, and excellent in Physic, curing most,
if not all Diseases (having written an whole Volum in the Commendation thereof)
I say, notwithstanding his large Encomiums (and what others maintain, that the
Romans six hundred years together (after they had banished all Physicians)
preserved themselves found in health by Cabbidge alone) it is the worst of
Plants.

4. Roots are altogether as bad to be constantly fed on, or worse, being windy,
crude, troublesome to the Bowels, etc. breeding many gross, crude, and
indigested humors, and fuliginous fumes; especially Garlic, Onions and Leeks,
offending the Brain, and causing worms. And indeed, Garlic is fitter for
Physic then Food, which the Countryman therefore esteems as his Mithridate;
nay he preferrs it to Aurum Potabile, or Hermes his Elixir of Life, S. Devogius
his Philosophers Stone, Pontanus his Fire, Artethius his secret Antimonial, his
Water and Vinagre, or Quintessence, by which he lived a thousand years; as
Roger Bacon and others report; Riply his Toad, Agrippa his Soul of the World,
etc. And although some may think it rather a Remedy against worms, then a
Cause, it being usually given to Children for that very end, boiled in milk;
yet being eaten inordinately, it does not only breed worms in the Bowels; but
also in the very flesh, as was seen in As Cranz. lib. 3. cap. 3. Hist. Saxon.
Arnulphus the Emperor. Radishes are almost as bad, being hard of digestion,
breeding but bad Blood, little nourishment, and are more offensive to the
Stomach then any of the rest, causing filthy, sharp, hard evacuations, so
filling the Body with Crudities, wind, etc. And although Turnips be accounted
by some an wholesome Root, yet they breed but a thick Juice, and are not very
quick of digestion neither, and if they be not well boiled, breed many
Crudities, and if they do not soon digest, afford but a melancholy,
scorbutic, gross, putrid blood. Navenes also, though bad enough; yet are much
better and sweeter, and more nourishing. Some have allowed of Parsneps and
Potatoes as less crude, gross and wndy, then the rest; but nourish not so much
as Turnips, if we may believe Lib. 2. De Alimentorum facultatibus.
Galen, and being eaten in any large quantity, yield but a bad juice.
Bruerinus, Magninus, Crato, Scolgius, Montanus, Afoncea, Trincavellus,
Savanaxola and others, will not have them eaten at all. The same may be said of
Potatoes andd Scirits, the best of the three. Carrats are in a more copious
degree windy, then either Turnips or Parsneps, and afford a less nourishment,
and that worse; breeding a gross, praved, fuliginous, juice, full of crude
humors, offending the whole man.

5. Fruits are a principal Cause of these vermin; and they are either such as
proceed from Plants, or from Trees; either, or both of which eaten in any large
quantity to satisfy the appetite, is most unwholesome, breeding gross, praved
humors, a malignant Juice corrupting the Blood, and ingendring Crudities, and
not only worms, but in a manner, all Diseases: For they yield but a moist,
thin, crude, unsound nourishment to the Body at the best; whence perhaps, Lib.
De rerum varietatem.
Cardan puts this as the principal Cause, why the people of that great City of
Fessa, are so unsound and perpetually Sick, because they eat such a quantity of
Fruit, as thrice a day constantly; for if they corrupt (as nothing more apt) in
the Stomach, they septifie our humors, and poison the whole Body. Bruerinus
condemns all but Grapes and Figgs, from Galen; yet Grapes yield none of the
most laudable Juices, and are Hologotrophick, engender wind and Loosnesses, and
if they stay long in the Body, cause Crudities, in that they soon putrify, and
fill the Liver and Stomach with these praved humors, whence are engendered
these vermin. Figgs it is true, nourish as much, if not more then any other
Fruit; yet yield none of the best nor wholsomest nourishment neither, and their
seeds and skins nourish not at all, neither well digest; wherefore to eat them
in any large quantity is not so safe, especially for such as are molested with
obstructions of the Liver, have depraved humors and Constitutions, or are
stricken in years. Paulus Jovianus tells us, that In vita ejus
Pomponius Columbus the Viceroy of Naples, by eating liberally of them, died
suddenly. And although Lib. 2. De Alimentorum facultatibus.
Galen affirms them, if they be ripe, very harmless: Yet the same Galen in In
Lib. De Enchymia and Cacochimia.
another place confesses, if they continue long in the body, they yield but a
bad Juice, and breed Lice; for the truth is, being frequently and liberally
eaten by us, they breed a very bad Blood, putrid, and subject to corrupt all it
rancounters with; whence not only Lice, but also other worms are produced. And
I remember Lib. 7. Cap. 4.
Athanaeus records of Plato the Philosopher this sad Story, That he was eaten
up of Lice, by his frequent feeding on this Fruit, which he so exceedingly
loved; as he was thence called (...). Crato admits of no Fruit at all, Via Cibi
and quantitate magna. For, if we should examine the best of them; first those of
Plants, Strawberrys, Respas, Artichoaks, Cucumbers, Pumpions, Mellons, etc. we
shall find them not worth the eating: Since Strawberrys, which are accounted by
all, the harmlessest Fruit that is, yields but a thin, cold Juice, and soon
corrupts in the Stomach, and so may frequently breed worms. And although it be
believed of some, that no one can surfeit on them; yet Cranz. Hist. vandal.
lib. 9. cap. 9.
tells us, that Melchior Duke of Brunswick by a surfeit on them, burst asunder;
we may affirm the same evils then well of Respas, being worse. Artichoaks I
confess, are pleasing to the Palate; yet if we may credit Galen, Lib. 2. De
Alimentorum facultatibus.
they afford but a praved Juice; besides, they are hard of digestion, and breed
not so good a nourishment as other Herbs; whence they must needs breed
Crudities, as also worms. Cucumbers are much more an unwholesome Food, hard of
digestion, yielding but a gross, scorbutic, melancholy Juice, also sometimes,
a crude and phlegmatic matter, which occasions worms, and being distributed to
the Veins, causes the matter of most putrid affections. Pompions are more cold
and moist then Cucumbers, and therefore more unwholesome; for they yield a worse
Juice, and more apt to corrupt, vicious and purulent, whence arises a most
malignant humor which produces worms. Lastly, Mellons are more cold and moist
then Cucumbers; yet more hot and dry then Pompions, and worse then Cucumbers:
Yet the degrees wherein they differ in Crudity is so small, that they deserve
as much condemnation as the worst; for they easily corrupt and prove extreme
pernicious, and bring many direful evils, as well as Worms and Scorbie upon us,
as may abundantly be seen in Histories. Abertus Secundus the Emperor (as
Caspianus records) was by eating part of a Mellon, cast into a deadly Flux.
Platina also tells us, that Paulus Secundus Pope of Rome, rhereby became
Appoplectick, and so died. Likewise Sophia Queen of Coland, was surprised with
the Palsy (as Cronerus witnesses) by feeding too liberally on them.

Neither are Tree-Fruits much better, being all apt to corrupt quickly in the
Stomach, especially Peatches, Apricocks, all sorts of Plumbs (though the Damsin
is the most harmless, if any can be so termed) Gooseberryes, Mulberryes and
Cherries, all which yield a cold, waterish crude Juice, and therefore ought not
to be eaten at all, especially after Meals, for they not only turn to
corruption upon the other Food, but likewise endanger the corruption of the
whole Repast. On the other side, Medlers, Services and Quinces, and whatever
are stegnotick, notick, eaten before Meals, close the orifice of the Stomach,
and hinders Concoction, Lib. 2. de Alimentorum facultatibus. Cap. 22.
Galen himself confesses, by giving Pratus the Rhetorition order to eat Quinces
before Meat, he had almost cost him his Life, by closing up the Pilorous, or
lower Orifice of the Stomach; but they are not to be eaten raw as Food, but as
Marmalad, or otherwise preserved; wherefore I shall speak no more of them.
Medlers and Services are altogether as restringent and hard of digestion, eaten
in wantonness; but better let alone. Apples and Pears are of diverse kinds or
sorts, as Apples may be reduced to these five sorts, Sweet, Sower, or unsavory,
Watrish, or a mixture, or more of these. Quorum omnia natura pro diversitate
saporis, Diversa est. But all of them most unwholesome, eaten as Food, or in too
great a quantity; causing a vicious, gross, corrupt Juice, and soon putrify in
the Stomach, especially they that are sweet, waterish, and very ^ipe. Pears are
of as many sorts, every Nation, Province, and almost Shire, affords us a
different kind, but for the most part, are either Sacharine, Amoniacal,
Aluminous, Vi^^iolate, or Choaky (as we call i^) or ^^^dous, and although the
three last are worst; yet none are encymick, nor breed a good Juice, but offend
the Stomach; are dyspeptick, especially the Amoniacal and Vitriolate, so that
eaten raw, they are in a manner, no better then poison, especially to weak and
infirm bodies. Nuts come also under Fruits of Trees, but I think none so mad to
feed much upon them; wherefore I shall say the less of them, but recommend the
Wall-Nut for the best and wholsomest, unless it be eaten old, and then as well
as Chestnuts, Small-Nuts, Philberts and Hasle, they yield a feculent, immune,
noxious stegnotick Juice, are flatulent and empractick, and may several ways
septefie, and consequently prove the Introducers of worms. As for Cocarnuts,
Pisticks, or other Nuts, growing in Syria, Egypt, and the Western Islands, I
shall not speak, since they are not used among us for Food; only advise all
ancient men to avoid meddling with Pisticks, since nothing more unseemly, then
to see an old Dotard, holding his Fescue in Venus School. To these Fruits
growing upon Trees, we may here add Mushrooms, or Toad-Stools (as some call
them) a Food more to be shunned, as being more unwholesome, then the worst that
have been yet named. For, although some may be eaten, yet there are other some
rank poison, especially those grayish and bluish, as I noted in my Class. 2.
Division 7. Sect. 5. Printed Anne 1661. and Dedicated to the King.
Book of Poisons. The truth is, none can be well accounted wholesome, the best
being but a bundle of putrefaction, arising of a cold, moist, viscous matter of
the Earth, or Tree on which they grow, and apt to attract all poisonous vapors
from any thing that frequent about them; many therefore have died suddenly by
eating of them. And Claudius Caesar was by his Wife Agrippa, poisoned with
them, that her Son Nero might be Emperor, whence that Tyrant would frequently
say, they were Meat for the Gods. And thus much of Plants for Food, how Causes.

TITLE II. Of Beasts of the Field, or Fourfooted Animals, how Causes.
A Second sort of Food is from Fourfooted Creatures, and Beasts of the Field.
And although in some Sense, and in some Cases, and to some Bodies, all manner
of Beasts for Food, may here justly be ranked up and condemned, as apt to
engender gross, melancholy, viscid, phlegmatic, and corrupt humors in our
bodies, or occasion the putrefaction of our humors, whereby either worms may
be engendered, or the seeds of them accumulated in us; especially since they may
proceed from all, and every humor; and since the best Constitution upon some
accidents, may convert the best nutriment to putrefaction. Yet, I shall only
content my self to particularize such as are most frequently in use with us: As
Beef, Veal, Mutton, Lamb, Goat, Kid, Venison, Hare, Rabbit or Cony, and
Swines-flesh, and show how they may be causes. It Is true, Plants may serve for
Food; but the flesh of Beasts is much more agreeable to man's nature, and
therefore is not only sooner digested, but converted into much the better and
more agreeable nourishment; yet, notwithstanding, cannot be exempted.

However, those are the worst that nourish but little; are of temperature cold
and dry, or cold and moist, are apt to putrify, are hard of digestion, or
yield an evil or praved suce, such as are black when dressed, of a watrish taste,
slymie, crude, and unconcocted by Nature, or are thick, gross, and not easily
penitrated, viscous, terrene, heavy, salt, bitter, too cold, or too hot, etc.
For, they may be the Causes and Introducers of these worms several ways; as
may be collected from what has been said before. So that whatever Meat it be,
that upon examination, we find in any of those ways qualified, may justly fall
under our condemnation in this place.

1. Beef, It Is true, is the staid and beloved Dish of an Englishman, and no
contemptible Meat, provided it be of an Ox, being killed young (or the new
flesh of a fatted old Ox or Cow, that was exeeding poor before) and not come
to his full growth, a little corned with Salt, and otherwise well ordered and
dressed. Nay, I may affirm it, as harmless and innocent to our bodies, as any
food whatsoever, and as nourishing. But if of a Cow, or Bull, or extremely
salted and indurated, such as we call Martilmas Beef, it is as unwholsom, and
breeds not only Crudities, whence ensue worms; but also scorbutic humors,
melancholy, and innumerable evils, obstructeth the Spleen and other visera, is
hard of digestion, and a gross Food; fit only for strong laboring men, and not
for nicer Stomachs, Students, etc. or such as lead a solitary and sedentary
Life. Lib. 3. de Alimentorum sacultatibus, Cap. 1.
Galen condemns all Beef, affirming they are of so corrupt a nourishment, as
that they breed Leprosies, Scabs, Cancers, Obstructions of the Spleen and
Liver, Quartane Agues, and the like. And Christopherus a Vega Lib. de Art
medendi, ca. 9. Sect. 3.
adds a peculiar Cause of that corruption which ingenders the Small Pox;
concluding it of a cold and malignant nature. Also Consil. med. Consil. 41.
Joannes Baptista Montanus for an Epileptick Patient of his, among other Meats,
condemns Beef, of having a certain Innate and peculiar Quality in it, of
causing the Falling Sickness. Lib. 4. de vict. Rat. in morb. acut. Aphor. 99.
Hypocrates in like manner disallows of all Beef.

2. Veal, the Sucklings or Weanlings of these kind of Cattle, are more
temperate; yet, if eaten very young, are full of moist, gross, impure, slymie,
crude, and putrid humors; and are rather to be accounted congealed humors, or
gelly, then flesh, and so are more apt to engender the seeds of all sorts of
these vermin, then afford a laudable nourishment to the body.

3. So Swines-flesh, according to the Age and Sex, differs also much in the
nature and temperature. As, if it be very young, sucking, and such as we
commonly call Piggs, though of a month old, yet soon corrupts in the Stomach,
is not easy of digestion, especially the Coat, and yields none of the best
nourishment, although some fondly conceive otherwise, it being a vulgar error,
that Pigg nourishes well, or yields a good nourishment; it is true, it
nourishes, and that highly, but it is so bad a nourishment, as it may well be
termed the Mother of many Mischiefs. For a sucking Piggs flesh is the moistest,
simply, of all other, ingendring Crudities, Palsies, Agues, Gouts, Apoplexies,
and the Stone, weakening the Memory (for it is moist of the third Degree)
procuring fluxes of the Belly, and ingendring most viscous, flashy, and corrupt
humors: Nay, it is a dangerous Food, breeding a phlegmatic, slymie, gross,
clammy Juice, which occasion worms; much more unwholesome must they be, but of
eight days old, or less, which some idle Brains, and praved Fancies so much
covet without any reason, imitating those Heathen Romans, who (as Plutarch Lib.
de Es. Caru.
records) would frequently eat them cut out of the Sows Belly, a little before
her farrowing, and bruising them a while in their menstruous blood (as I may
call it, being equivalent thereunto) Cannibal-like, eat them blood and all; the
younger, the worse. For, how is it possible, that such a Brat as a Pigg,
proceeding from so immund a Dam as a Sow (whose Belly is perpetually Scurfie,
Throat full of kernelly Imposthumes, oftentimes over the whole body measly, and
whose Milk is so impure, that it fills such as drink it with Scabs, Tetters,
Leprosy, Scorbie, etc. as the same Plutarch Lib. D. Isid.
notes) should be clean or wholesome? For, what is bred in the Flesh (we say)
will never out of the Bone.

4. By what has been said, the flesh of a Sow, may plainly appear to be more
feculent.

5. The Barrow-Hogg, which is the best of Swines-flesh; yet for the most part,
carries signatures of mainginess about it, and feeds on any the corruptest or
vilest Carrion and filth it can meet with. Its true, Swines-flesh comes the
nearest to Man's-flesh in taste, smell, and look, and therefore perhaps, Lib.
3. de Alimentorum ^^ultatibus, in two or three places.
Galen commends it above all other flesh: But Savanaxala concludes it most
noxious, affirming the use thereof, may breed a Quartan Ague; and even the
Barrow Hogg, though never so good (as they call it) and young, breeds but a
thick, slymie, viscous Juice, filling the bodies of such as feed much on it,
with many excrementitious humors; (unless in strong bodies, and laborious)
causing many obstructions, especially of the Liver, breeding the Stone in the
Reins, etc. much more then if it be old, or of a Sow: and the Bore is worse,
and melancholy, as Galen maintains (yet Sennertus thinks Brawn made of a young
Bore, the best of Swines-flesh) it is hard of digestion, breeding the Scorbie
and many Opilations and Crudities, especially if it be fatted up in a Sty (as
we are forced here in England) for so his substance is rather to be termed a
cloud of foggy, gross, feculent humors, then fat or firm flesh, and so must
consequently yield a feculent Juice, send many fumes to the Brain, dull the
Spirits, accumulate corruption in the Bowels and other parts, and engender
these vermin. Yet if Bores-flesh be otherwise eaten, as only powdered, etc. it
is the worst of all flesh, of the grossest Juice, and most difficult to
concoct, and so excrementitious, as it yields the most abundance of matter for
generation of all ill humors, whence ensue not only worms, but the Scorbie,
and what not; as may be seen in Saxony, Westphalia and Friezland, who were wont
to feed much on it:

6. Mutton, or Sheeps-flesh, is the best of all other four-footed Creatures for
Food, and most agreeing with the temperature of man's-flesh. viz. the fat
Weather.
Likewise the most profitable both in Life and Death, as Ovid Metamorph. 15.
well notes.

Quid meruistis oves, placidum pecus, inque tuendo
Natum homines, pleno quae fertis in ubere nectar?
Mallia quae nobis vestras velamina lanas
Praebetis: vitaque magis quam morte juvatis.
Yet, I must say, the Ram and Ewe yield a better Fleece, then Flesh. The Ram is
too hot, gross, and unsavory, the Ewe excrementitious; and both of a bad Juice:
Being of temperature vicious, hard of Concoction, and yielding an evil, fleshy
and slymie Juice, as Sennertus Contends.

7. Lamb also is but a watery, slymie, moist, phlegmatic, and gross Food,
filling the body with many ill humors, apt to putrify in the Stomach, and
pass through before it be digested, increases Choler in hot Stomachs, slyme
and viscosities in cold, Phlegm and moist humors in ancient people, and no good
nourishment in those that are young: In a word, to all Ages, Sexes,
Constitutions almost, sick or well, it is unwholesome, especially eaten whilst
it sucks, as many of our nice fantastic Dames rashly presume upon it, even
whilst it is little bigger then a Cat. It is condemned by Halyabbas, Isaac the
Jew; and the younger, the worse. Sennertus also, affirms it has a moist,
slymie, viscous flesh, and yields but an excrementitious, gross Juice, and a
nourishment not easily distributed. And therefore, that it may be a Cause of
worms, will not by any rational man be denied: and had in less esteem in former
times then now, as appears by that in 1 Epig. 15.
Horace,

-- Patinis Caenabis omasi,
vilis and agninae --
8. Wherefore, proceed we to Venison, which, of what kind soever, is but gross,
melancholy Food, and breeds but a bad blood, especially baked, and a thick
Opilating nourishment, obstructing both the Liver and Spleen, and accumulating
Crudities, whence worms are in an abundant manner engendered. Some extol the
Roe-Buck and Capreol, but they are also unwholesome, and not fit to be eaten
frequently of; and then roasted, or powdered and boiled is best, that some of
their gross feculent Juice might be exhaled. Heart and Red Deer are more gross,
and great grained, next unto an Horse, condemned by Lib. 3. de Alimentorum
facultatibus.
Galen, as hard of digestion, breeding a viscous Juice, and likening it to
Asses-flesh; which he says, is also eaten by certain people, as in Chyna; as
among the Tartars, Horseflesh.

9. Goats-flesh is of a worse Juice, more heavy and excrementitious then they;
breeding a vicious and acrimonious Juice, melancholy, Scorbie, and but a rank
filthy nourishment, being a filthy Ramish Creature, as may be seen by that
Fencer of Thebes mentioned by Athaenaeus, Lib. 9. Cap. 24.
whose Sweat was so fulsome and offensive by frequent feeding on this Creature,
that no body could endure to come near him when he was hot, or in the Summer
time.

10. In like manner Hares-flesh, though better, breeds but a gross, heavy,
impure and feculent Juice: it is a black meat, hard of digestion, breeding
melancholy, according to that of Schola Salerna,

-- Leporina, Caprina, Bovina,
Atrabile nocent; atque insirmis Inimica.
Nay, and some think it has a peculiar property, being frequently fed on, to
engender the Incubus. Wherefore let such as are infirm, lead a solitary and
sedentary life, beware of it, if they would avoid the aforementioned evils,
this of worms, and diverse others.

11. Conies or Rabits differ little from them in Nature, save only these are of
a a whiter flesh, yet have as gross a grain (as Bruerinus well notes) whence
perhaps, Magninus Reg. Sanitat. Part. 3. Cap. 17.
compares them to Beef, Pigg and Goat, making them altogether as bad: Wherefore
I need say no more of them, since you have heard already what they are. They
are one sort of the unclean Levit. 11.5.
Beasts, which the Jews refused to eat; and although under the Gospel, we may
eat of them, yet the seldomer and more sparingly the better, since they are now
no less unclean, than then: wherefore it may be, Hypocrates, Galen, and the
rest of the Ancients, say little or nothing of them; but how voluminous,
Sennertus passes them over in silence, is somewhat strange.

Neither are the other parts of Beasts to be exempted from being Causes more
then the Muskly flesh of them, which we have briefly run over; and they may be
comprehended under these four, as either 1. Belonging to the Head, or upper
Region. 2. The Breasts, or middle Region, or Thorax. 3. The Abdomen, or lower
Region; or 4. and Lastly, to the extreme and more remote parts.

1. Unto the Heads, belong the Brains, Eyes, Ears, Lips, Snouts, Cheeks, and
Tongue: Which two last, come not within the virge of Causes, but by accident.
But the five first do, and prove very pernicious to our bodies many other ways.
As 1. Brains are a phlegmatic Meat, of a gross Juice, hard of digestion, and
not easily distributed, heavy and offensive to the Stomach, breeding Crudities,
which not only cause loathings, and oftentimes vomitings, but also these
vermin. And oftentimes are very hurtful otherwise to such as eat them,
Varignana veneris confere dixit, forte propter visciditatem, qua ventriculi
parietes obtinuntur. Conferring the very Diseases of the Beasts to such as eat
them, as Vertigo, Epilepsie, Melancholy, Mania, Rabies, Lycanthropia and
Hydrophabia, nay, and the very Nature and Dispositions of the Creatures, may,
by eating their Brains be contracted; as I have In my Book of Poisons, Cl^s. 3.
Division 1. Sect. 2.
elsewhere showed. And we frequently see that Sheep and Lambs are many times
affected with the Vertigo. Therefore it is best to refrain their Brains
altogether. 2. Eyes are no less to be rejected, being also hard of digestion,
yielding abundance of praved Juice: for the humors whereof they are composed,
are watery, the skins invironing them, hard and dry, and altogether cold and
crude. 3. Ears also, by reason of their Cartilaginous and sinewy nature, being
without blood, are more phlegmatic and viscous, hard of digestion, yielding but
little, and that a praved nourishment. 4. Likewise Snouts and Lips, being so
sinewy, are consequently hard of digestion, cold, affording but a bad Juice,
etc. ingendring worms.

2. In the Thorax, or middle Region, is comprehended the Vitals, viz. The Heart
and Lungs (or as the vulgar term them, Lights) Hearts are of a fibrous hard
substance, and therefore not easily concocted nor distributed, although never
so young, and of the tenderest sort of Creature. Lights are much worse,
yielding but a frothy, phlegmatic Juice, apt to putrify in the Stomach, nay,
they are oftentimes very unsound, and infected with some Disease or other, and
frequently are full of these very vermin we treat of.

3. The Abdomen, or Lower Region, comprehends the Liver, Spleen, Kidneys,
Testicles, Matrix, Panches, or Tryps, Intrals, or Guts, Udder, and
Sweet-Breads. All which are hard, gross, noxious, and vicious Food, especially
Spleens or Milts, being more fit for Dogs then men. And Livers are little
better, being of a most gross Juice, hardly concocted, and slowly distributed,
Naturam enim habet concreti sanguinis; whence Crudities and worms must needs be
engendered. Kidneys are also as hard of digestion, gross, and burdensome to the
Stomach, of an ill Juice, and so becomes a Cause. Testicles being of a
glandulous nature, and sometimes better; yet the best are bad enough, and
indeed, if they be not young, and taken before Coition, or before the Creature
be capable of such a work, they are not fit to be eaten. And the youngest,
tenderest, and of the wholsomest Creature, is but a gross, fulsome meat, and
hard of digestion, causing Opilations and Crudities; wherefore better let
alone, being but a fantastical Dish, invented first by Wantons, and not fit for
sober, solid, and grave peoples Tables, or Mouths. Much less those other
foolish Dishes, which some have been wont to make of the Matrixes of Beasts,
especially Sows, according to those in 13. Epig. 51.
Martial,

Te fortasse magis capiet de virgin Porca,
Me materna gravi de sue vulva Capit.
And many among us, esteem highly of this part of a Barren Do; but the truth
is, they are ugly food, sinewy, and hard of digestion, yielding but a crude,
cold, praved Juice. However, I must needs consent with 1. Epig. 15.
Horace,

Nil vulva pulcrius Ampla. But not laid in a Dish to be eaten -- But I cannot
stand long in this place. Panches or Trypes are little better then are Guts,
Intrals, or Chitterlings (as they call them) being membranous, hard of
digestion, yielding little or no nourishment, and that none of the best, a cold
crude Juice, feculent and excrementitious, so unwholesome, and breeding such
corruption in the bodies of such as eat frequently of them, as they not only
are the Iutroducers of worms; but of the Itch, Scab, Scorbie, and Leprosy
oftentimes. Udders and Sweet-Breads, I confess, being the nearest to the nature
of flesh, are better then all the rest, yet they are Kernelly, and if they do
not well concoct, afford but a raw, phlegmatic Juice, as Lib. 3. de Alimentorum
facultatibus.
Galen well observes. Sweet-breads are a moist, and Udders a crude Aliment.
Nay, Udders are but a gross, hard, fuliginous food; and therefore may justly be
accounted a Cause.

4. And Lastly, among extreme and remote parts, we may rank Fat, Marrow, Feet,
Grisles, Sinews, and Skins. All which being unwholesome and excrementitious,
gross, fuliginous and hard of digestion, must needs occasion worms. For Fat
nourishes but little, is very hard of digestion, glutting the Stomach, and
turns rather into excrementitious humors then good nourishment, and weakens
the digestive faculty, sends many fuliginous vapors to the Head and Brain,
easily degenerates into Choler, and other praved humors and Crudities, sowing
the seeds of all manner of worms; wherefore, no better then Poison to
melancholy and choleric people. The like may be said of Marrow, though it be
somewhat less offensive then Fat; as the Wether carries away the Bell from all
other Beasts, for the goodness of its flesh, so does it is Marrow deserve to be
put in the front, and next unto it is that of an Oxes, then a Deers, and next a
Lambs, fifthly a Kids, sixthly a Goats, and lastly a Calves; as for Swines
Marrow, it is fit for none but Boors or Hoggs, not rational men. They are all
fulsome, hard of digestion, and soon convert into Choler, and other gross, and
offensive humors. There is another sort of Marrow, called by the Latins,
Spinalis Medulla, the Marrow of the Chyne-bone, proceeding from the Brain, and
passing all along through the Spondils of the Back, down to the Os Sacrum or
Coccyx: By the vulgar, termed the Pith of the Back, hard of digestion also,
heavy and gross, yet not so loathsome to the Stomach as Brains.

Feet, Sinnews, and Grisly-parts, as they have no Blood in them, so they afford
but little nourishment, and that cold, frigid, dry and crude; the very youngest
being hard of concoction, seldom or never elabourated in the Stomach, nor duly
distributed, whereby are, diverse ways, many Crudities accumulated, and these
virmin consequently engendered; much more unwholesome therefore, must Cow, and
Oxe-Heels be, and all old Feet and Sinews. Skins likewise are as hard of
digestion, or harder; for they hardly ever digest, are less nourishing, a
gross, hard, and dry food, causing Opilations; whence diverse evils, as well as
this, do necessarily follow. And thus much of the Flesh and Parts of Beasts,
how they may be Causes.

SUBTITLE. I. Of eadable things, proceeding from Beasts, or four-footed
Creatures, how Causes.
MIlk and Honey, which the Land of Canaan flowed with, are not parts of Living
Creatures, but proceeding from them, and being eminent Causes, I cannot
pretermit them in this place. Milk therefore, and all that comes of it, as
Butter, Cheese, Curds, etc. ( Whey only excepted) is gross, crude, hard of
digestion, especially Curds and Cheese, bad for such as have any affections of
the Head, foul Stomachs, green wounds, or are troubled with the Stone; and the
most likely producers of these vermin of all other food whatsoever, and that in
very healthy Constitutions.

Milk is only Blood, made white by the kernelly substance of the Breasts, Paps,
or Udders of Creatures, for nourishing up the Fruit of their Womb. Whence it is
of as various a nature, temperature and quality, as the Creatures from whence
it proceeds: Yet the most usually used among us, is Women's, Cows, Asses, Goats
and Ews Milk; though in other parts of the world, Camels and Mares Milk, are in
familiar use; of all which, Women's Milk is the most nourishing and best, it
being most near and agreeable to the nature of Man; especially if it be not
corrupted by any Disease, be new, and of an wholesome Woman, sound as well in
body as mind, it must needs be, as the most suitable, so the most desirable of
all other Milk: Yet it is not at all of a cleansing nature; wherefore, most fit
for Children and ancient people, Consumptive, etc. And because it is more
subtle, of a more penitrative nature, more cold and moist, and easier of
digestion then other Creatures milk. It is prescribed by Herodotes, Eurephontes
and others, to such as are mad, by the bite of a mad Dog.

And here we may justly admire the goodness and providence of GOD, in providing
so sweet and pleasing a white food, out of blood, a terrifying color, and that
menstruous blood, little better indeed then poison. Wherefore, Milk proceeding
of Blood, and we having not yet spoken of it; it will not be amiss to speak a
word of it. It is bad in taste, but worse in operation, stirring up Anger and
Revenge in such as eat it, as Dion reports of Caligula's Cru^lty, which could
neither be conveyed to him from Father nor Mother, but from his Barbarous Nurse
alone, who, when he sucked her, always anointed her Paps with blood: Neither
does it yield much, or good nourishment. For all blood is hard of digostion,
gross, suliginous, and excrementitious, and therefore unfit to be eaten by any
man; for it sends not only many cloads and vapors to the Brain; but causes
putrefaction, and ingenders these verman, and that Hoggs-blood it self, which
Galen esteems the best, Heildisherin does not only condemn Blood simply; but
all that is made of it, or compounded therewith, seeming to allude to
Black-Puddings, a foolish unwholesome Dish, yet as highly fancied in some
Countries here in England, as Horses-blood was among the Tartars and Sythians;
Bulls-blood in Aegira, and those Black Pottage of the Laconians, made of
Kidds-blood. Likewise Jason Pratensis disallows of all such Quelkeshoses made
with blood, and so does De Art medendi lib. 2. Sect. 3. Cap. 9.
Christopherus a Vega, who although he preferrs before all other blood, the
blood of an Hare, has in the same place, these very words, Omnes tamen, paucum
and melancholicum succum tribuunt: Nay, it is forbidden by GOD, the great
Physician. Levit. 17.10.11.
For, it being eaten in any great quantity, is of most admirable force to alter
both the natures and manners of men, especially the Arterial blood, for it
being more hot and spiritual then other, and since in the Blood (especially
this) is contained the nature of the Creature, and all the Animal Actions, also
the Spirits and natural Heat; it being eaten or drank by men, must needs cause
a change in their Spirits and Heat, and consequently in their Humors and
sollid parts, Omne enim alteratum naturam alterantis sequitur. To this purpose,
I remember, Martinus De monst. Cap. 15.
Creinrichius (which Inst. med. lib. 2. Part. 3. Sect. 1. Cap. 7.
Sennertus also records from him) has a remarkable story of a maid, who by
drinking of Cats-blood, degenerated into the disposition and nature of a Cat,
and by fits, would imitate a Cat, both in Actions and Voice; and in private
would catch Mice, and contract her self so, (which was strange) to pass through
holes, that no body else of her bigness could. Likewise, in the same place, a
little farther, tells us of one that by eating much of Swines-blood, delighted
to wallow and puddle in the Mire and Mud, to the loathing of such as beheld
him. And In med. Diastatica.
Andrea Tenzelius informs us of one, who by drinking his own blood, lost his
Reason and Understanding ever after, and became a natural fool. So Zacutus
Lucitanus Prax. Admir. Lib. 3. O^^. 79.
tells us of a fellow, that by drinking the Blood of a red-hair'd man, was for
ever after foolish. But examples are infinite.

Those Creatures without Horns, as the Ass, Mare, Camel, yield a Milk more fit
for Physic then Food, being more thin, wheyish, and cold then others, free
from any Acrimonyish, or obstructive quality: Yet some account Asses Milk both
Physic and Food, equally cleansing, as nourishing, and therefore excellent in
Consumptions, Rheumatisms, and to allay sharp pains, there being no better
natural anodyne then Milk; nor better Milk in those Distempers, as also in
Phthisiis, then Asses; according to Schola Salerna,

Lac (...) sanum Caprinum, postque Cameli
At Nutrilivum plus omnibus est Asinimur.
Avicenna commends Camels Milk, for its sweetness and thinness above all other,
and so did Galen before him. And therefore do not only commend it in the same
Distempers, but also in affections of the Liver, and to resist Dropsies, and
other superfluities and defects of the body. Mares Milk he extolls next to it,
as being of a mild nature. But the best of Horned Beasts for Food, is that of a
Cow, coming nearest to the nature of a woman's, of which Avicenna Lib. 2. Cano.
Cap. 142.
gives this reason, because a Cow goes as long with Calf, as a Woman does with
Child. It is more thick and fat then any other Milk, and therefore is the most
nourishing. Ews Milk is more thick and terrene, fuller of Curds, more caseus,
and therefore more opilative. Goats Milk is a little more hot, more thin, and
nourishing less, passing soon through the Body, and is of a middle nature, both
in digesting and nourishing, and every thing else, wherefore fitter for
Physic, then Food.

All which are to be shunned by young and strong men, as Avicenna advises; for
in such it breeds Choler, Opilations, and consequently worms: And Lib. 3. de
Alimentorum facultatibus.
Galen disswades all from Milk, that have unsound Heads and Brains; or are any
wise troubled with Hypochondriacal passions, because it is full of Vapors, and
turns easily to Wind, is obstructive to the Liver, ingenders the Stone
increases Agues, Rheums, and fills the Bowels with many Crudities. And
therefore, that it is a main and principal Cause of worms, none will deny, and
that in the best, and most unlikely bodies that feed much on it; especially in
such as are any wise distempered, weak and infirm, have cold Stomachs, which
makes it acide, or very hot, turning into Choler, adust, and many obstructions
by it is coagulating. And in such as eat it with other viands, or immediately
after, or before, whereby it is coagulated into a flood of Crudities;
wherefore, to prevent Fermentation, and its coagulation, it ought to be eaten
only fasting, and on a clean Stomach, or with Sugar, Salt, or Honey, or as
Isaac Hollandus, Quersitanus, and others write, having taken ten Pills of Wax,
about the bigness of an Hemp Seed, a little before. For otherwise, the best
Milk may sometimes prove very pernicious. How much more, if the Beast yielding
the Milk, be not sound, and in health, or be impregnated; for so it must needs
be unwholesome, thin, wheyish and crude; so likewise if it be old, or the beast
fed upon young tender Grass, the Milk will be watrish and unwholesome; if on
Grains, windy and feculent; if on Scamony, or other Cathartick, or pernicious
Herbs, the Milk will be accordingly affected; wherefore the Diet of the Nurse
is very considerable: For Beasts, Hay, and the tender Grass at the later end of
the Spring, is the best Food to afford a thick, and fat good Milk, etc.

Honey (to omit that which is found upon Herbs and Trees, called Meldew,
distilled from the Heavens, by the power and influence of the Stars; as also
Suggar growing in Canes, which Galen, Lib. 3. De Alimentorum facultatibus.
and since, several (from him) have put as a sort of Honey; Likewise Manna and
its sorts, abundantly treated of by that famous and learned Donatus Antonius ab
Altomaro.
Neapolitan, who has written an whole Treatise of them) is a kind of
Quintessence of many, if not most Herbs; Hermetically extracted, by that
excellent Spagerist the Be; that being the best which is made, where they feed
upon Thime, and other Herbs of an hot and dry nature; the yellower it is, the
better it is, and more intense, that is reddish. It soon converts into Choler,
therefore bad for strong and Justy people, fit for none but ancient people and
Children, and to them neither, not to be admitted via Cibi, for all Honey
breeds but a very thin Juice, Crudities and Wind in the Bowels, Phlegm and much
Spittle, and therefore must needs breed these vermin. And thus much shall serve
to be spoken of Causes from the second sort of Food.

TITLE III. Of Foul, and Birds of the Air for Food, Causes.
EIther Fowl belong to the Land, or Water. Land-fowl again, are either Tame or
Wild, or such as are both; and these again, are either Small or Great. Among
Tame Land-Fowl, is the House-Cock and his Species; the Indian-Cock or Turkey,
the Peacock. The House-Cock and it is Species, it is true, although they may be
compared to the best of flesh, and wholsomest; yet the Cock especially, if old,
is none of the best; being dry, and hard of digestion, tough, and
excrementitious, as also restringent; and so more apt for the generating these
vermin: Yet the Broth is as much applauded, as his flesh is exploded, it being
excellent to moisten and loosen the Belly, if we may credit Galen; Lib. 11. de
simplicium medicamentorum facultatibus cap. 38. Et in lib. 3. de simplicium
med. facult. Cap. 14.
when as an old and laying Hen, is quite contrary; for the flesh is of a
Solutive, and the broth of a Restringent nature. Nay, and the flesh is but dry,
hard of digestion, and but little better than a Cocks. As for Chickens,
Pullets, and especially Capons, I may exempt them from being Causes, no flesh
so innocent, so temperate, or so wholesome in the whole Universe, if eaten
alone, without the mixture of other Meats that may cause putrefaction, or
impead concoction. Yet 24. Con.
Rhasis stiffly maintains, they have in them, a secret property of breeding the
Gout and Hemorroids And if they breed such gross and peccant humors, we may
not well wholly exclude them.

Turkies are more gross, and harder of digestion; and therefore more apt to
engender those seeds of these vermin, or a worm-like matter.

The Pea-Cock's flesh is worst of all. For, he must be none of the worst Cooks,
that can make them good, take them either old or young, or order them how you
will, they shall be still black, melancholy, unwholesome mea^, hard of
digestion, and excrementitious, sinewy, fibrous, and not fit to be eaten:
wherefore, perhaps Sennertus accounts them not worth the mentioning; they being
no wise pleasing but in their Feathers. Besides, they yield a very praved
Juice, and so malignant, as it was the Death of Hortensius the Roman Orator,
as Pliny Lib. 10. Not. Hist. Cap. 20.
records: For it is of that strange quality, it becomes raw within few hours
after it is dressed, or so in appearance.

SUBTITLE. I. Of Wild Land-Fowl, how Causes.
SEveral sorts of Wild Land-fowl are abundant among us; but such as are
eadable, are chiefly, 1. Pheasants. 2. Heath-Cocks. 3. Herons. 4. Bustards. 5.
Storks. 6. Partridges. 7. Quails. 8. Railes. 9. Rooks. 10. Cuckoes. 11. Owls.
12. Plovers. 13. Feldefares. 14. Godwits. 15. Thrushes. 16. Black-Birds. 17.
Stares. 18. Woodcocks. 19. Snipes. 20. Cranes. 21. Larks. 22. Robin-red-brests.
23. Sparrows. 24. Yellowhammers. 25. Linets. 26. Finches. 27. Wagtails. Of all
which, the best are Pheasants, Heath-Cocks, Partridges, Railes, Thrushes,
Black-birds, Plovers, Feldefares, Woodcocks, Snipes, Larks, Robin-red-brests,
and Sparrows; and therefore we might have excluded them out of our Catalogue of
Causes, were we but sure they should be eaten by none, but such as digest them
well, and eat no other meats with them, that they may impead their Digestion
and Distribution, or convert them into putrefaction as is too freequent; for,
though they are of themselves light, delitious, delicate nourishing food, and
fit for the Table of Princes: Yet, if they be disorderly eaten, or when they
are old, they soon corrupt in the Stomach and Bowels (and that-sooner then
grosser meat) and engender the morbifick matter of worms; especially Sparrows,
which Christopherus a Vega says, yield but a praved and hot Juice; and De
rerum Proprietatibus, lib. 12. cap. 22.
Bartholomeus affirms them to breed the Falling Sickness, and Leprosy, because
they feed much on Henbane.

How much more noxious then, must Herons, Bustards, Storks, Rooks, Quails,
Cuckoes, Owls, Godwits, Stares, Cranes, Yellow-hammers, Hedge-Sparrows,
Wagtales, Finches, and Linets be? breeding naturally a gross, feculent Juice,
apt to stagnate in the body; especially Storks; (which as De Anim.
Isadorus and others observe, frequently feed themselves, and young, with the
flesh and eggs of Adders, whence Juvinal 13.

-- Serpente Ciconia Pullos.
Nutrit, and juventa per divia rara Lacerta.
And yet are so wise, Jer. 87.
that as Heldelinus notes, In Epist. ad Gesaer.
unless they be almost starved, they will not venture upon a Toad) and Cranes
being hard, tough, dry melancholy food, are not worth the eating. Quails are
little better, being hard of digestion and distribution, of had nourishment,
yielding much excrement, and an hot Juice. Wherefore, being frequently fed
upon, engender Fevers, as well as these vermin. Avicenna Fen. 14. Tract. 3.
Cap. 21.
will have them breed also Convulsions, Palsies, Apoplexies, and Epilepsies;
because they feed much upon Helebore and Hemlock; and a little farther affirms,
they are introduced by an innate and peculiar property in them, to such as feed
much on them; as Athenaeus observes in Hercules; whence the Falling Sickness
was denominated Morbus Herculeus. Wherefore In 3^ Euporist.
Galen prescribes the Brains of a Quail, as a remedy against that Infirmity.
To which we may join Cuckoes, who, however they yield an excrementitious and
corrupt Juice, breeding not only worms, but several other evils; yet is a
convenient food in Fevers: one I knew in a violent Calenture (as he credibly
informs me) by eating of Cuckoes only, was not only in the end cured, but found
present ease, although his Physicians despaired of his life: Yet Lib. 3. de
Avibus.
Gesner asks how any man dares be so rash, as to eat of them. Also Owls,
another unclean Bird, although pleasant enough to the Palate, and therefore
compared by some, to a Partridge, affords but a melancholy, thick, gross Juice,
and the seeds of these vermin. Rooks are little better, though accounted by
some equivalent to a Pigeon or Chicken, being taken young out of the Nest,
flead, then roasted or baked; for order them how you will, they are but a black
food, not easy of digestion, affording but a gross Juice, whence ensue worms.
And Godwits, though a nice, is no wholesome Dish; for they feed about Lakes,
Ponds, and River-banks, ingendring therefore, a most gross, excrementitious
Juice, producing worms. And Stares or Starlings much more, being much worse;
However Christopherus a Vega, puts them as a kind of Partridge; they feed upon
Hemlock, and other poisonous things, as Lib. 1. de Alimentorum facultatibus.
Cap. 6.
Galen notes. And though Arnoldus De Villa. Nova, with Joannes Curio Supra
Silialam Salernitanam, applaud them for good meat; Apitius calls their flesh a
Diabolical Food, by reason of the dangerous fumes and vapors that proceed from
the Hemlock through the pores. Nay, the best of them, viz. Finches, of which
there are diverse, as the Chaffinch, Gold-finch, Green-finch, Bul-finch, etc.
with those other small Birds, as Yellow-hammers, Hedge-sparrows, Oxe-eyes,
Linets, Wagtayls, etc. are but unsavory, dry, bitter and obstructive, unless
they be very fat, plump, and digest well, (which is very seldom) and
therefore, not worth the eating, breeding for the most part Opilations,
Crudities, and these worms.

As for Herons, Bustards, and those other lubberly Fowl, which I may account
neither Land, nor Waterfowl, or rather both, feeding on Fish, Newts, and
Froggs, are likewise altogether bad, breeding a gross and feculent Juice.
Villanovanus preferrs the Heron; but they nourish but poorly and badly. The
Bustard is the wholsomest and pleasantest, although they feed upon dead flesh,
Garbidge, and any trash they find; yet both accumulate many ill humors in our
bodies, Crudities and worms.

SUBTITLE II. Of such Fowl as are both Tame and Wild, Causes.
EVery one knows that such as are both, are denominated by us, if Tame,
Pigeons: if Wild, Doves. Of both which, there are diverse sorts; as of Pigeons,
there are those we call 1. Circumvolutors or Turners. 2. Finitius. 3. Carryers.
4. Jacobins. 5. Barberries. 6. Mahomets. 7. Turbuts. 8. Bastard-bills. 9.
Croppers. 10. Spots-Black: 11. Spots-Red. 12. Broad-tayl'd-shakers. 13.
Narrowtayl'd-shakers. 14. Helmets-Black. 15. Helmets-Red. 16. Tumblers, 17.
Peteets. 18. Small English Runts. 19. Great Runts, or Spanish, or Portugal
Pigeons. 20. The ordinary Dove-coat-Pigeon, such as are rough-footed, are not
to be reckoned as a different sort, since it is many times accidental.

Of Doves, there is 1. The Turtle. 2. The Ring-Dove. 3. The Rock-Dove. 4. The
Stock-Dove, or Wood-Dave, or as some term it, the Wood-Pigeon, 24. in all; yet
do they not differ one from the other in Taste or Operation; for they are all
very pleasant to the Taste, and yet, all a dark, gross flesh, hard of
digestion, ingendring a melancholy and excrementitious Juice, causing putrid
Fevers, as well as worms, notwithstanding what Villanovanus and Avicenna say
of Turtles, that they are a light and good nourishment, not so gross as other.
And some affirm of the Ring-Dove, though they breed as gross a Juice as the
rest, yet are less excrementitious: However, they are recorded to have a great
property in resisting the Pestilence; and therefore, the Egyptians were wont in
an infectious time, to eat nothing else but Pigeons, as Apolon. Nitiar.
records. Wherefore, in such times, it is approved very good to have them about
men's Houses, that by their flying about, they may ventulate and purify the Air
with their wings. But thus much of Land-Fowl: Waterfowl follow.

SUBTITLE. III. Of Waterfowl, how Causes.
YOU must know that there are diverse sorts of Waterfowl, some are both Wild
and Tame (yet none are simply Tame, but the same Species are also Wild) As 1.
Swans. 2. Geese. 2. To speak after the common phrase of the vulgar, who thereby
include the Drake, as well as the Gander when they mention Geese.
Ducks; others only Wild, As Brant Geese, or Barmiles, Which grow upon
Firr-Trees in the North of Scotland, and other parts Northward in the Sea,
hanging by the Bill as it were, yet having no perfect shape whilst they are
upon the Tree, which growing ripe, fall off into the water, and there become
Geese; which, although Mr. Parkinson in his H^^bal accounts a Fable; I must
needs although Mr. Parkinson in his H^^bal accounts a Fable; I must needs say,
in that, he talks like an Apothecary: And even at their full growth (they being
no bigger then a Capon) they retain a kind of a taste of Firr: If when they
fall from the Tree, they light upon the Land, they perish, and come to naught.
2. Which build for the most part, upon Rocks in the Sea, as upon the Bass
between England and Scotland, where there are infinite numbers, and upon the
May, there are not a few.
Solen-Geese. 3. Sheldrakes. 4. Coots. 5. Divedappers. 6. Morehens. 7. Teale.
8. Widgins. 9. Curs, or Curlews. 10. Pool-Snites. 11. Dopchicks. 12.
Water-Rails. 13. Water-Red-shanks. 14. Sea-Pies. 15. Sea-Mews. 16. Cormorants.
17. Shovelours. 18. Sea-Gulls. 19. Puffins. Which as I may say, is a kind of
feathered-fish, they being substantially Fish, to outward appearance Birds; a
Dish for the Devil.
Peckled-Fowl, resorting into our parts in Winter, from Green-land and
Freezland, which for half the Year together, are frozen up, and covered over
with Snow; as also from Muscovy, Scandia, and those colder Countries, are all
unwholesome, dark, sinewy, bad meat, ingendring crude, gross, melancholy, and
excrementitious Juice, for the most part, although some may be less offensive,
more tolerable and pleasant to the Palate; as Geese, Ducks, Sheldrakes, Teale,
Widgins, Water-Railes, Morehens; yet they are more rare and delicate, then
wholesome, Gravant and Putrefatiunt Stomachum; They are generally hard of
digestion, filling the bodies of such as feed constantly on them with gross
humors, excrementitious and crude, whereby worms are engendered, and that in a
far greater measure, then by Land-Fowls, being naturally more cold and moist,
living in the Water, morish and marshy places, which renders them also more
excrementitious. And although Ducks and Geese are accounted the most wholesome,
and the wild preferred before the tame. Yet Jason Pratensis, Lib. 1. de and.
gives this Reason why the Jews are ill-conditioned, loathsome in favor, have
such hard flesh, and so foul Skins; because they feed so much upon Geese.

Touching the Brains, Tongues, Necks, Hearts, Lungs, or Soles, Gizards, Livers,
Testicles, Skins, Fat, Marrow, Pinions, Feet, and other parts of Birds
(especially the inner parts) are hardly worth the eating, unless they be of
such Birds as are most temperate, sound and healthy, as of Chickens, Pullets,
Hens, Capons, Cocks, Pheasants, Woodcocks, Snipes, and Mountain-Fowl. Yet, if
these be eaten by such as have foul Stomachs, opilated Livers, or are fraught
with vitiated humors, they may soon corrupt, and sew the seeds of worms, and
many other Diseases. Those of Waterfowl, and such as live in Mores and Fens,
are much worse.

SUBTITLE IV. Of Eggs being a Food, proceeding from Birds, how Causes.
WE must not omit Eggs in this place, Nam ut Lac ex Quadrupedibus; mel ex
apibus, ita ( ut Inquit Ennius.)

Ova parire solet genu pennis condecoratum.

Eggs are laid by all feathered-fowl; yet are they not produced by those
Creatures alone, For, Tortoises, Serpents, Adders; Snakes, Lizards, and
Camelians likewise, lay Eggs; out of which their species and the like are
produced, all which, unless it be those of a Tortoise, are more fit for Storks,
then Men- And indeed, all Eggs soon corrupt in the Stomach, especially such as
are of Seafowl, and of all unclean Birds, being little better then poison; none
therefore ought to be eaten, but such as come from the wholsomest and best
tempered Birds, especially Hens: For, since Eggs are a kind of Quintessence of
Flesh, or a Liquid Flesh: and so, if they digest well, yield a most excellent
Juice, of little or no excrement, no wise feculent or obstructive, but highly
restorative; yet if they be not dressed rare, boiled, roasted, or poch't, and
eaten alone by themselves, nothing more unwholesome; for being mixed with other
Food, or eaten immediately before, or after, or meeting with an impure Stomach,
they soon corrupt (I say) and putrify in the Stomach, and breed many faeral
evils, as will as worms; or if the Stomach be pure, if the Eggs are old, dressed
hard, or fried; whereby they become hard of digestion, and obstructive. And
thus much of Birds, the third sort of Food.

TITLE IV. Of Eishes of the Waters for Food, how Causes.
I shall proceed therefore to the last sort of Food before proposed, viz.
Fishes. How many several sorts of Fishes there are, is an endless Inquisition;
there being infinitely more diversity of Creatures in the Seas, then on the
Land; However, Pliny has adventured to reckon up 167. several kinds. I shall
not be so conceitedly curious, but only insist on, and nominate such as are
most commonly known, and fed on among us, at least, the chiefest of them.

SUBTITLE I. The several Sorts.
LET us but consider the several places in which Fish live, and we shall be
forced to divide them into three several Classes, As 1. Seafish, or
Saltwater-fish. 2. Fresh Water, or River-fish. 3. Pond, or standing-water-fish.

CLAS. I. Of Salt Water Fish. LIkewise Salwater-fish may be again divided into
such as are 1. without Skales, as these Seventeen, viz. 1. Cod. 2. Conger. 3.
Hadock. 4. Scate. 5. Thornback. 6. Turbuts, 7. Thunnys. 8. Ling. 9. Maids. 10.
Mackarel. 11. Soles. 12. Plaise. 13. Guilt-heads. 14. Gurnads. 15 Rotchets. 16.
Whitings. 17. Anchoves, or Minos. 2. or with Scales, as these Nine. 1.
Sturgion. 2. Bream. 3. Mullets. 4. Shadds. 5. Herrings. 6. Pilchers. 7. Curs or
Hakes. 8. Smelts. 9. Sprats. And 3. Such as are shel'd, In number also Nine, As
1. Lobsters. 2. Crabs. 3. Oysters. 4. Scallops. 5. Muscles. 6. Perewinacles. 7.
Cockles. 8. Cervices, or Cray-fish. 9. Skimps.

CLAS. II. Of Fresh Water Fish. I May well here put River and Pondfish
together, since they are only transplanted into Ponds, for the more convenience
of having them ready at hand, and these are also some Scaled, some without, and
some Testaceous. Such with Scales, are chiefly these eight, 1. Salmon, 2. Pike,
3. Perch, 4. Carp, 5. Barble, 6. Mullet, 7. Roch, 8. Gudgion. Those without
Scales are these seven, 1. Tench, 2. Trouts, 3. Flounders, 4. Lampries, 5.
Eeles, 6. Minos, 7. Millers-Thumbs. The Testaceout have been nominated before.

All which are more cold and moist, the flesh of Beasts and Birds; yielding at
the best, but a cold, moist, crude, excrementitious Suce and Chyle, unwholesome
the best of them, and nourish but little, if at all, and are the Causes, if not
the main Causes of worms, and most other Diseases, Scorbie, Gout, Leprosy,
Melancholy, etc. For Meats have a kind of Analogy with our Humors; so that if
they be not right and sound, they engender the seeds of all Infirmities.
Wherefore, not unjustly, did Plutarch 4. Syn. 4. and in Ap.
couclude, It impossible for that City to be sound and in health, in which
there came more Fish then Oxen. For they are a slymie nourishment, full of
viscosities and praved humors. And although some may object that which Pliny
Lib. 7. Not. Hist. cap. 2.
records of some Nations, that used no other food then Fish, Quos unguibus
Dissertos, Sole torrent, atque ita panem ex his faciunt. Baking, and making
even Bread of them: They must needs be very barbarous and uncivilized people,
or want other necessary Provisions. For the same Pliny Lib. 6. Not. Hist. cap.
23.
tells us likewise, that Alexander the Great, prohibired Fish-eating by (...),
those grand Fish-eaters, that fed not only themselves, but their Cattle with
them; for that they fill the bodies of such as eat them, with many corruptions
and purulent matter, whereby he thought them rendered incapable of serving him
in his Wars.

Diphilus apud Stob. 449.
(...)
(...).
Which may be thus translated,

Nam quae est apudipsos Piscium frequentia,
Mucosos omnes and Pituitosos facit.
Especially such as live in Ponds, Lakes, Standing-Pools, not refresht with
Springs; feeding on Mudd, Garbidge, and Filth; for Bonsuetus well signs,

Nam Pisces omnes. qui stagna lacusque frequentant,
Semper plus succi deterioris habent.
easily putrefying and converting into gross humors, little better then poison.

They are not altogether so bad that live in Fresh Water Rivers; yet if there
be not a strong Current, and the bottom gravelly, stony, or chalky, running
Eastward, or exposed to Eastern and Northern winds, they are but little better:
Especially such Rivers as lie before, or near great Cities, because they feed
chiefly on Dung and Garbidge, Salt-Mud, etc. And so they become more
gluttinous, slymie and unsavory. Such as are in Rivulets, small Brooks, and
Currents, and impure Waters, differ not much from such as are in Lakes. And
although they that live in the Seas, especially the deepest, northern-most, and
most stormy, be the best; being tumbled, tossed, and exercised, whereby they
are rendered less phlegmatic, and more firm; yet to feed much on them, or the
best among them, as Smelts, the Sea Larks; Whitings, the Sea Capon; Plaise, the
Sea Sparrow; Soles, the Sea Partridge; Rochets, the Sea Feldfairs; Gurnad
(which are a little bigger, and not so red) the Sea Plover; to which we may add
Guiltheads, the Sea Gold-Finch; being in shape much like a Gurnad, but not so
easy of digestion, or so wholesome. I say, to feed much on them, or others, is
not good; for they fill the bodies of such, with abundance of humors and
corruptions. And I have observed the Scots and Irish, that feed frequently on
Fish, to be exceedingly molested with worms. And Forestus Observat. Med. lib.
10. De Crebri osorbis, Observat. 16.
gives this Reason why Carthusian Friars are more dull and melancholy, then any
other Order, because they live wholly upon Fish.

How much more such as are Thunys, of which our Train-Oyl is often made,
Pilchers, Red or Bloted Herrings, all dried fish, as Stock Fish made of Cod,
and Poor John of Haddock, etc. Therefore, they must be very poor in Reason and
Understanding, and no better then Stocks, that eat them in any great quantity.
And although some praise the Cod, preferring their Palates before the health of
their Bodies, they way well be termed Codsheads, for it it is but a slymie and
phlegmatic Fish, having whilst it is new, a more loose and watrish flesh then
is requisite to make it wholesome; and although it be not very hard of
digestion, yet affords no laudable nourishment. It is better therefore salted,
which we call Green-fiish. The same may be said of Haberdine, being a kind of
Island-Cod: As also of Hadocks, which are but small Cods. not that they are of
the same kind, but much like them in color and taste, and therefore may be so
termed.
Many extol a Conger, the Sea Eele, merely because it pleases their Palates,
never considering, that if it be eaten cold, it ingenders Wind and the
Chollick, if hot, it corrupts the Blood, and Causes Leprosies, as well as
worms. Others esteem a Thornback a dainty Dish, but Athenaeus lib. 8. cap. 5.
Dorion the Musician, accounted a sodden Thornback, no better then a sodden
piece of Cloth. The same may be said of Scale, only they are sweeter and
tenderer then Thornback. and although the Turbet was preferred to all Fish;
whence the Proverb, Nihil ad Rombum; yet this is nothing to the purpose, for
Magnius (as well as I) condemns it as excrementitious, and breeding melancholy,
and the Scorbie, as well as worms. They that can eat Ling, may was well eat a
worse thing, and drink Piss, for it cannot be eaten without Sauce (nor hardly
any Fish) besides; it burdens the Stomach, offends the Brain, accumulates many
ill humors, being very excrementitious; and therefore the King James the first
of England and sixth of Scotland.
might well account it a Dish for the Devil. Neither are Maids much better,
though some think they nourish Weaklings, and such as have sported themselves
off their Legs, which is contrary to their Nature. And the Band, Mackarel, (for
so it signifies in French) is worse, being of a gross gluttinous, and
suffocating substance, causing Drowsiness, stupifying the Senses and Nerves,
exciting Lethargies, Palsies, Epilepsies, Catalepsies, Apoplexies, Vertigoes,
Opilations, etc. as well as worms.

Sturgion for it is firmness and substantialness, is called the Beef of the Sea,
and highly extolled by some fantastical Pallats; but unless it be very young,
is very hard of digestion, yielding a gross, thick Juice, breeding melancholy,
and many Crudities, ingendring Gouts, Deflections, and other Distempers, as
well as worms. And Bream, though a firm and a white flesh, and not hard of
digestion; yet soon corrupts in the Stomach; some have likened it to a Carp,
but if it be of the Sea, it far exceeds a Carp, both in whiteness, flatness,
and goodness. Also Shadds, though tender, and pleasant to the taste; breed but
an excrementitious Juice, and nourish not much, therefore the danger of eating
them (being so full of Bones) should cause us to look on them as not worth our
labor. Likewise Mullets, though much commended by Lib. 3. de Alimentorum
facultatibus Cap. 23.
Galen, as white, tender, pleasant, and wholesome, easy of digestion, etc. Yet
being frequently sodden, breed not only the seeds of most sorts of worms, but
also as Not. Hist. lib. 32. Capt. 7.
Pliny and others note, hinder Conception in Women, causing sterillity, etc.
which is not a little strange, if it be true what is reported of them, viz.
That they are so prone to Venery themselves, that a thousand Females are not
enough to satisfy one Male. Currs or Hakes, are much worse, though a firm,
white and dry Fish, if frequently fed on. Sprats again, are worse then they,
being very apt to corrupt in the Stomach, as well as Herrings, and so are
exceeding apt to breed, besides worms, Fevers and the Scorbie also.

Neither are those foolish Dishes made of Fish and their Roes, as Anchoves,
Cavialies and Botargo, any better.

Anchoves so called when they are prepared, are only a sort of Fish called
Minos, taken in Sardinia and Provence, in great multitudes, and there pickled,
and sent afterward to us for Qualkechoses; we have naturally in England, a
love to Exorticks; however, they are not to be eaten via cibi, but as Sauce,
for they engender not only worms, but also Choler, Melancholy, the Scorby, and
yield a very bad Juice, offending the Brain, Stomach and Senses. Caviale also,
is a fond Dish of the Italians, made of the Roes of Sturgion, and altogether as
unwholesome, if not much worse; invented by idle Brains, and fansied by none but
such as are ignorant what it is; wherefore I would have them consider the
Italian Proverb,

Chi mangia di Caviale,
Mangia moschi, Merdi, and Sale.
Which may be Englished thus,

He that eats Cavialies,
Eats Salt, Dung and Flies.
For it is only (as was said) the Roes of Sturgion powdered, pickled, and finely
denominated Caviale, to be a Bait for such Woodcocks and Dotrils, that account
every Exotic Fancy a real good. And so Botargo, another whimsical Dish of the
Italians, made of the Roes or Eggs of Mullets, together with their Blood, and
some Salt, is very unwholesome, breeding not only worms; but sterillity in both
men and women that eat much of it, and impotencie in the acts of Venus:
therefore a Dish more fit for the Devil, then fair Ladies. So that if they
would be ruled by me, those slovenly Italians, should not only invent Dishes,
but eat them too, when they have done: which would make them more solid, and us
less dirided.

If any fish be good, then it must be the Testaseous; yet of them, we may
absolutely condemn, and explode the Periwinkle, Cockle, Musle, as dangerous
food, offending the Brain, are hard of digestion, afford an ill Juice, being
Aguish, hot and Feverish, offend the Stomach, Liver and Head, especially
Muscles; and ingendring many feral evils besides this. And if we may give
credit to Alexander Benedictus, some by eating too many Cocles, have become
natural fools. And truly the best of them, unless it be the Oyster, are hard of
digestion, especially Scallops, Crabs, and Lobsters, besides the Cream in their
bodies; so that if they meet not with good Stomachs, pure, healthy, and that
digest them well, they soon corrupt, and engender worms no less then any other
Fish; nay, the very Oyster it self (which is the softest flesh of all shell'd
fish, the best, easiest of digestion, and soonest past through the body; for
their watrish-liquor does subducere alvum) especially if you tak not out the
blood.

Much more unwholesome must needs fresh-water-fish be, especially Mullets,
Barbles, Tench, Eeles, and Lampries, being a slymie, moist, flashy, viscous,
and crude food, and very offensive to such as are affected with the Gout, or
any distemper of the sinews (especially Lampries, though extolled by some for
their taste) are inclining to worms: Nay, the best of them, Perch, Pike,
Salmon, Carp, Cud-Bream, Roches, Gudgions, Trouts, Flownd^rs, Minos* and
Millers-Thumbs, do plentifully breed worms, and many other Diseases in such as
feed too frequently on them, being soon apt to corrupt in the stomach, and
yield no very good nourishment to the body, and the Perch it self, which is
the best (especially when prickled on the Back) and therefore by some called
the River-Partridge, notwithstanding, nourishes but slenderly, if we may
believe one of the best Physicians that ever writ, Sennertus. And although it
may with Cud-Breams (so called, because its chaps are always going, as if it
chewed the Cudd, which some think also, it really does like an Ox) flownders,
Minos, Gudgeons, Millers-Thumbs, and Pike, be admitted to such who are sick,
and in Fevers; yet they that would live in health, must eat but seldom of
them: much more if they be taken out of muddy and immund waters. Roches are
worse, and so are Trouts, especially the Gray-Trouts, the Red come somewhat
near a Salmon, and therefore called Salmon-Trouts; yet both they and Salmon,
however they may please some Palats, afford no very good nourishment, and as
Lib. 22. Cap. 17.
Bruerinus thinks, ingenders Melancholy, especially if it be salted, filling
the body with may praved humors, and grievous Diseases; and Carp is but a
slymie, watrish and muddy food, ingendring an excrementitious Juice; therefore
they are not worth the eating, if they be not taken out of very pure and clean
water. Mullets and Barbles, which some take to be only Mullets bearded, are
much worse. Roches are little better, but a Tench worst of all, being slymie,
muddy, viscous, and of an hard flesh, tending to blackness; whence perhaps it
was, that Alexander Benedictus said, it breeds a most unwholesome and damnable
nourishment: and a secret poison, as Antonius Gezius contends, affirming a
fried Tench to be no better.

And indeed, the manner of Dressing, may much alter the Fish; as Athenaeus Lib.
8. ca. 6.
records of Diocles, who being demanded which was the best, a Pike or a Conger,
answered, a Pike boiled, and a Conger broiled. Some in general conclude, boiled
Fish best, next roasted or broiled, and lastly fried. But that is to humor
their Palates; but look how flashy and flymie one Fish is more then other, and
that kind of Fish ought to be rather roasted, broiled or fried, then boiled, to
correct it is viscous nature: Wherefore I do conclude, that all salt and
obdurate Fish, is more exerementitious then fresh; and consequently more apt to
engender worms. And those that are fresh, are no wise fit to be constantly fed
on, although the best sort of Fish, taken in the best Waters, nourished with
the the purest Herbs or Food, and Cooked with the best Artifice; for all this
shall never make them afford a sound, wholesome, firm and temperate Juice, or
engender good blood: Yielding at the best, but a cold, moist, crude,
excrementitious Suce and Chyle. Sic sua sunt unicuique Cibo dotes, sua sunt
incommoda. Whence we may perceive, that not only our Spirits and Humors, by
which we are preserved; but also, our whole Constitutions, and parts of our
Bodies, are altered by the Meat we eat. Hinc subite mortes, atque intestata
Sennertus: Hence sudden Death, and many Evils fall upon us; Hence follow
Distempers; Hence come Impurities; Hence are those many Opilations;
Chacochimia, Plethora, Cachexia, Quae vitia gravissimorum morborum Causae
Antecedentis continentesque fiunt; Hinc vermae. And thus much shall suffice,
briefly to be spoken of the Kinds of Food, How Causes, as relating to their
Quality.


TITLE. V. Of Compound-meats, and Sauces, how Causes.
AMong the Ancients, there was no other Sauce known, or at least used, save
Hunger and Salt: Hunger they called the Night of Sauses, and Salt the Light,
intimating, that as in the Night all Colors are alike; so nothing comes amiss,
or is unsavory to an hungry Stomach; and as by the Light, we distinguish of
Colors, so Salt shows the variety and excellency of all Tastes. And truly,
this simplicity of their Diet, might be one cause, if not the chiefest, why
they lived so long over what we do now, who live sensually in Riot and Excess.

For, all those Compound-meats, and artificial Quelkechoses, which our Cooks so
pl^ntifully afford us, as Pies, Salsages, Links, Black-Puddings, and those
innumerable Bak't-meats, soured, and indurated with those various Sauses and
Slapps, treated of by Apitius and Athen^w, made either of the Juices of Plants,
or Plants themselves; Pepper, Ginger, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Sugar, Oil,
Verjuice, Which is only Wine degenerated by the Acolation of some subtle
sulphurious spirits, whence the remaining parts become acide, somewhat fixed
and corrosive, and yet this recess of spirits is not perceptible by any
sensible diminution of the Liquor.
Vinager, Alager, etc. to stir up our Appetites, to eat more then nature
requires, are very unwholesome; of themselves, ingendring gross humors, filling
the stomach with Crudities; and the bodies of such as eat much of those mixed
Meats and Sauses, with many Opilations, which occasion not only worms, but
abundance of Melancholy and unwholesome Blood, Choler, and many other
Infirmities, nay, even Salt it self, and all salt-meats: And although those
several species may have their convenient praise, being rightly used, yet via
cibi and quantitate magna, are not to be allowed; for they burn up the Blood,
destroy and extinguish natural heat, molest the Stomach, Head, and Brain, and
subvert the good temperature of both Body and Mind. Consil. med. de Stupore
cons. 22.
Montanus tells us of a Jew, who was generally misaffected in all parts of his
body, and operation of his Soul, by eating much Spices, and such hot trifles.
But such like Instances are frequent. I must needs say, for any reason I can
yet see, they are altogether useless or needless, both for the sound, and
unsound: For, Nature requires not food, but when hunger excites thereunto, and
then is satisfied with a little; but these Sauses and compounded Meats stir up
the Appetite, and cause both the firm, and infirm, to eat more then Nature
requires, or can well digest: whence in weak bodies, ensue many Crudities,
occasioning innumerable weaknesses, as well as worms, and frequently Death it
self: And in strong and sound bodies, if they do sometimes thoroughly digest
what they have needlessly and superfluously eaten, yet in time, they shall not
only be fraught with worms, but also many corrupt humors, causing oother
Infirmities. As for Oringes, Lemons, Olives, Capers, Citrons, etc. They are
better Physic, then Food; wherefore we shall proceed.

TITLE. VI. Quantity of Meat, how a Cause.
MUch more hurt is done by the Quantity, Intemperance, overmuch, or over-little
taking of Food, then by the careless and unadvised choice of the Substance and
Quality of Meats; For, it is a mortal evil, and as bad as poison, when men
shall still throw on more and more upon their stomachs, when what they first
received, is not well di^ested; thereby destroying and murdering themselves,
and all to please that Omni-vorantia and homicida gula, that all-devouring Gut
of theirs: For, as one well exclaims, Pernitiosa sentina est abdomen
insatiabile, An insatiable Panch is a pernicious Sink, and the Fountain of all
Diseases, both of Body and Soul. It subverts and perverts the good temperature
of the Body, stifles the Senses and Wits, strangles Nature, being not able to
digest the meat thoroughly, whence ensue Crudities, and the ground and seeds of
many Diseases, as pains of the Belly, Belchings, Loathings, Vomitings,
Opilations of the Liver, putrid Fevers, dullness of Wit, loss of Memory, a
general obstruction of the Reason, Judgment, and the faculties of the Soul,
and Debilitation of the powers of the body, the Stone in the Reins and Bladder,
pains in the Joints, Consumptions, Gouts, and all manner of weaknesses,
Cachexia, Plethora, Bradiopepsia, Cacochimia, Wind, Opilations in several
parts, Decreppidness; for it is the fountain (as I said before) of all
Diseases, arising out of the repugnancie of gross humors corrupting: whence
also worms, sudden Death, and indeed, what not? For, as a little fire is
extinguished by too much Wood thrown upon it; so is our natural heat, into
immoderate eating, suffocated in our bodies; or as a Lamp that is choked with
a superabundance of Oil; for if it digests what we thus eat excessively, our
bodies are filled with many Plethorick affections, the root of all manner of
Infirmities, as well as this; If it do not digest, then follow many Crudities,
Cacochimia, and various bad nourishments. Thus we exactly verify that saying,
Plures Crapula quam gladius. And by too much eating, men dig their graves with
their Teeth, and as Seneca.
one notes, Edunt ut vomant, and vomunt ut Edant.

And so on the other side, if we eat and drink too sprringly, and not so much
as nature requires, it does not only consume the humors in the vessels, but
also the substance of the parts themselves, the Spirits and natural heat;
whence the whole Constitution must needs be weakened, and fall to decay,
exsicating and atrophiating the whole man, and occasioning many other
Distempers; as the praved humors arising from Innanition, being for want of
better, drawn to the Liver, prove not a ^^ttle prejudicial, and by consent,
affect ^oth the Heart and Brain, so that some^^mes, there follows Lipothymia
and ^pilepsia; and particularly, if through ^his defect Choler abounds, it is
con^eyed to the stomach, and hence come (...), or pains of the Heart, and ^^mes
to the Heart and Brain; If Phlegm ^bounds, it causes nautiousness, vomit^^ngs,
eructations, lassitude and indispo^edness; If Melancholy, there ensues
Heart-burnings as we call them, or un^avory acidities from the stomach,
overwatchings, sadness, grief, heaviness of heart, etc. as well as worms, which
frequently are engendered of any of those humors putrified.

TITLE VII. The Time and Order of Eating, how Causes.
IT will not be amiss here to add a word also touching the Time and Order of
Eating, since if we elect the best Meats, and most agreeable to our bodies,
feed soberly and sparingly on them, and yet observe not fit Times and
convenient Seasons, we shall as much prejudice our health by erring i^ this one
Circumstance, as if we had erred in both the other. He that observes not Time
in this particular, is unseasonable; the Heart of the wise man therefore, will
observe Time; For (...) Meat given opportunely, is the best Physic that is.

So that if we break our Custome^ and fast too long, our stomachs will b^
thereby filled with abundance of prave^ humors, which will not only ingende^
worms, but diverse other evils; for empty veins draw deepest, and wh^^ they
first receive, good or bad, that the^ mix with the blood. Choler also is
o^tentimes increased in the Belly by fas^ing long, and the excrements rendre^
sharp and corroding. On the other side, to eat too soon, before the stomac^ be
unburthened of the former Repas^ or have thoroughly digested and distr^buted it,
breeds not only many Opilations and Crudities, which occasion worms; but diverse
other Diseases. Thu^ we see every day, that this (...) an^ greediness of eating
in Children, casting in every hour of the day almost, on^ food or other upon
what is yet in their stomachs undigested, is a main Cause o^ their being most
frequently troubled with ^orms: especially the food they so irregularly
gormundize, be apt soon to cor^upt, or be inclined to engender worms.

Wherefore, nothing worse then to ^at out of order, of variety of Meats, and
protract the time of eating longer ^hen is requisite, it being the Fountain,
^ot only of worms, but of all Diseases; ^s an innumerable company of Crudi^ies
and vicious humors, Gout, Stone, ^oth in the Reins and Bladder, Wind-Cholick,
Cancers, Fevers, and such ^ike feral Diseases, nay, and Death it ^elf. For
variety of Meats excites a ^resh appetite, whence ensues Gluttony; ^hus the
stomach being crammed full of ^everal Meats, some light, some heavy, ^ome good,
some bad, etc. Some sooner digested then other, some corrupting before others
be half concocted, must ^eeds Engender abundance of Crudities, worms, and
subvert our healths. Nay, variety of Dishes, though all good, wholesome, and
easy of digestion, breed great disturbance, and much confusion in our
stomachs. Besides, protracting of time in eating, hinders concoction, by
keeping the mouth of the stomach Hiant, and thus throwing fresh fuel on the
fire, many Crudities and Opilations are a^ cumulated: Thus, many Dishes yo^^
see, bring many Diseases. Nay, a simp^^ Diet, though it be best; yet if eaten
before, or without a good appetite, (...) also exceeding pernicious, for if
the^^ be little or no appetite, it is an infallib^^ sign, the meat formerly
eaten, or the C^^dities thereof, lie yet in the Stomach, (...) in the Veins.

TITLE VIII. Of Custom of Diet, Delight, Appetite, N^cessity, how they Cause
or Mitigate.
UNless I should here show ho^ Custom of Diet, Delight an^ Appetite in eating,
and necessity of eating sometimes, do alter and mitigate what I have said
touching the mischiefs that some meats by their very quality bring upon us,
and most by their quantity, time and manner of eating, I might fright many, if
not most people, from their most beloved food.

There is no Rule so general, which admits not of some exception; wherefore to
what has been hitherto said, (...), Dandum aliquid tempori, Regioni, aetati
and consuetudini. Aphor. 17. l. 1.
i^ ^ell said of Hypocrates, and in Lib. 2. Aph. (...). Such things as we have
been long accu^^omed to, although they be evil in their ^^wn nature, yet are
they less offensive; and therefore allows of moist meats to such ^s are
accustomed to them, Lib. 1. Aphor. 16. So Cardan out of Galen advi^es, by all
means, That we keep our Cu^^oms although they be bad: For Nature re^oyces in
such things as it is wonted to, but ^bhorrs such unto which it has not been
^sed; whence we see, a bad Diet, conduces more to health, then any sudden
al^eration to a better. And that men ^etter bear those meats to which they ^re
accustomed, although by nature, they are naught. For it is not only a Second
Nature, but is of force even to ^lter Nature it self; whence bad meats become
wholesome to such as are ^sed to them, and unseasonable times, cause no
disorder. If not so, that old saying Qui medice vivit, misere vivit, would be
one of the greatest truths in the world. In Westphalia, as Lipsius notes,
people eat for the most part, nothing but Cabbidge or Colworts in Fat, which
they call Cerebrum Jovis; In Italy and Spain they live upon Roots and Fruits
most part, and Raw Herbs; in Holland, Roots, Fish, Butter, Cheese, and such
like trash. In Muscovy, their chie^ fare is Garlic, Onions, etc. which would
kill us that are not accustomed to such fiery meats. The Tartars eat for the
most part, raw flesh, and commonly Horse flesh, and frequently on the Road
their bait is a Pudding made with Mea^ by letting their Horse blood, which they
stir together, and eat heartily; and yet if we may believe Scaliger, they are a
sound, witty, nay and healthy people, living ordinarily, an hundred years. The
Turks, as Bellonius Lib. 3. Cap. 15.
records, do familiarly eat Opium, a dram at a time which we dare not take in
grains. And Gartius ab Horto Lib. 1. Aromat. Indiae, Cap. 4.
says, he knew one that could, and did eat every day, ten drams and more, and
yet never the worse. Phidrid, Not Hist. Lib. 7. Cap. 2.
likewise tells us of some Nations that used no other food then Fish. And in
another place, he says of the Ichthyophago, a people in Ethiopia, that they
not only feed themselves, but their cattle also with Fish. But what need we go
so far to evince this truth, we in England as liberally feed on flesh, and
exceed in all luxury, eat more flesh at a great Dinner, then they do in all
Spain in a quarter of a year; and yet they and we continuing our Customs, are
well contented, and in health. A Pipe of Tobacco being chew^ed by one
unaccustomed to it, shall cause giddiness, vomitings, and much illness; and yet
I knew one or two in London, that would eat a pound, chewing all day long, and
never find the least alteration. You have heard what has been said before of
Beef; and yet among us it is esteemed The King of all Meats; for Custom and
continual use has so habituated our Bodies thereunto, that it does not in the
least prejudice them. And so nothing more condemned, then Unleavened-Bread; and
yet there is scarce any other Bread eaten, even among our daintiest, and
sickliest people.

In like manner, touching the Quantity, Time, and Order of eating; how few are
there living, that regard how much they eat, what, where, or when, in what
manner, which first, or which last, mixing at every meal, Flesh, Fish, Roots,
Fruits, and all together, not regarding the nature of the one, or other, which
they begin, or which they make an end with, nor any other Rule; and yet for all
this, the variety, and mixtures, and disorders, work no disorder, but agree in
them, through their constant Custom; as Mithridates his poison did with him.
And we see Husbandmen, Laborers and such as are brought up to such orders, or
rather disorders, can eat any thing, in any measure, and sleep, go to bed, or
work upon a full stomach, and observe no rule, and yet be healthy, which to
some people, would be present death. So that Custom is all in all. Therefore,
if it be suddenly altered, although it be never so bad, there follows much
inconveniency, and the more contrary the change is, the more dangerous.

Delight and Appetite do not a little mitigate also; for ardent desire to such
and such meats, although they be unwholesome, bad, and pernicious in their own
nature; yet at such a time the stomach willingly receives, retains, and readily
digests them; and on the other side, abhors such as we distaste, although never
so wholesome and good. De Part. Morb. and Sympt. lib. 6. Cap. 3.
Fernelius tells us of a man, who having a long time had a longing to eat Calx
vive, did at length, devour as much as the quantity of a man's fist, without any
hurt at all to his stomach or bowels. A Woman with Child, did greedilv^ at some
pounds of Ginger, with mar^^^^ous delight at one time, without the least
inconveniencie, as Felix Platerus observes; Observat. med. lib. 1.
and which he most of all wonders at (as well he might) yet felt not the least
sense of heat in her stomach, mouth or tongue. Nicholas also reports, he saw a
man of about fifty years of age, who eat so much Tartar as was incredible. And
he knew another (he says) that vehemently coveted the eating of Clay. I
remember I saw a young Lady, says Lib 7. Cap. 5. De Rot. Curand. Part. Hum.
Corp. Affectus.
Victorinus Trincavellus, who would draw out the Threads of her Clothes she
wore, and eat them. And a Knights Daughter, an Associate of my Wifes, eat above
half the Shagg off of the Rugg of her Bed, and many Woollen Clothes; which was
never discovered, till one day by chance, meeting with a Stocking, which one of
the Tenants had brought home for one of the Servants, and devouring it, not
being washed from the Oil that was in the Wool, grew thereupon sick, and
vomiting it up again, confessed she had eaten her Rugg, and diverse other
woollen things about the House; but examples of this kind are infinite. On the
other side, if the stomach distasts, or has a prejudice against any meat,
although in it self, never so wholesome and good, it does not only not agree
therewith, but also mightily offend by a secret antipathy; and which is most
strange, they are prejudiced at one part, and yet can eat any other; as there
was a Gentleman in Darby-shire, Sir George Greasly of Darklow.
who only by eating a little of a Shoulder of Mutton, which he had an antipathy
against, was cast into such a Fever, as it had almost cost him his life, yet
there was very little mixed with a hasht, or other minz'd meat; who
notwithstanding, could eat any other part of Mutton.

Lastly, Necessity, which we say will break through stone walls; and therefore,
will more easily break through the force of these Rules, and strict Dictates
before recited: For, Poverty, Want and Hunger, will make that delightful,
good, and wholesome, which otherwise in it self, is detestable, noxious and
naught; as may abundantly be verified in long Sieges, and tedious Voyages at
Sea, I have read, that in the Wars of Germany and others, Dogs, Cats, Horses,
Rats, Mice, and other Vermin, have been esteemed delicious food, n^y, and men
and women's flesh dug out of their graves, when they have been buried two or
three days before, and sometimes a week. These things then you see, do
mitigate, or disanull, as it were, all I have said to Meats, Causes of Worms,
making them more tolerable: But such as live in plenty, lead a solitary and
sedentary life, ought to take their choice, and refrain what is likely to
corrupt their humors, as they tender their healths: But if they will not, but
go on to Riot, live intemperatly and disorderly, let them thank themselves, if
they shorten their days.

SUBDIVISION II. Of the several sorts of Drink, Causes.
DRink is that non-natural thing which restores that moist substance of man's
body, allaying thirst, causing the mixture, concoction, and distribution of the
Aliment, as also suppressing and allaying hot vapors, inflammations, and
chollerick affections. And indeed, such is the necessity of Drink, that we can
live no less without it, then Meat, our bodies constantly requiring a supply of
both, being in a continual flux or reflux: Wherefore it will be no wonder, it
unwhosome Drink, offending in Quality; or more wholesome, taken in too great, or
too little a Quantity, at unseasonable times, etc. cause innumerable direful
Diseases in our bodies, besides worms. Since that is most true, Cibus atque
Potus quoniam permanentem ac inhaerescentem corpora materiam suppeditant,
validius contumatiusque afficiunt, and morbos pariunt. For as is our
nourishment, so are our humors; and as our humors, so are our solid parts. Of
Drinks there are diverse kinds, As 1. Water. 2. Wine. 3. Cervisia, or
Corn-Drink. 4. Mulsa, or Honyed mixed Drinks. 5. And lastly, Liquors; which
being examined, will be found to be Causes.

TITLE I. Water, how a Cause.
EVery one knows there are diverse sorts of Which has the largest proportion of
the Spirit of the World in it, of any Element. In which S. is contained and a
Radical Substance, a vivisying Fire, and Radical Moisture, whence all things
are produced out of the Water. The Sperm and Menstruum of the World. The Sperm
because it includes the Seed of every thing. The Me^struum, because the Sperm
of Nature is putrified in it, increased and nourished. Whence the predominancy
of either of those three, occasion various productions.
Water,; As 1. Rainwater. 2. Snow-water. 3. Spring Water. 4. River-water. 5.
Well-water. 6. Standing-water in Lakes and Ponds, which are all unwholesome
Drink, Cold, Phlegmatic and Crude; for all Water it windy, hardly digested, and
not without great difficulty distributed; and is naturally cold and moist,
wherefore it ought to be sparingly, and advisedly drank; for the evils of Water
depend on its frigidity; So that if it be frequently and abundantly drank, it
hurts the Bowels, Head and Brain especially, and causes worms; being apt to
corrupt in the stomach, it converts into wind, whereby the tone, as also the
strength of the stomach, is resolved, and concoction weakened; for it overrules
the stomach, and occasions innumerable Crudities. Nay, Rainwater it self, which
although it be the purest and lightest, exhaled by the heat of the Sun; yet
proceeds of diverse mixed vapors, and so is the sooner apt to corrupt, nay,
soonest of all other Water, as Hypocrates thinks; Lib. de Aere, Aqua and locis.
and at the best, has but a bad smell. Tetrab. 1. Sermon. 3. cap. 175. Er Russo.
Aetius without any exceptions or ambages, affirms positively, For, though it
seems to be a body so very Homogenial, as nothing more in Nature, yet is it
extremely Heterogenious; as appears by those Plants that grow in water, with
Roots not fixed to any thing, as Mint, etc. And the and of the Vine converts
the incipid water of it into not only leaves and branches, but wine also, out
of which may be extracted again, a Burning Alcohal, etc.
Rainwater to be very noxious in feverish choleric, and hot Distempers*
because it is easily it self converted into Choler. And a little farther he
says It is hard of digestion and distribution, in gendring many distillations,
especially, if (...) be drank cold. And that Plus Constipationis habere, quam
sontanae, and therefore it neither is so abstersive, so easy of digestion, or
so moistening, but hinders the expulsion of the Excrements, and therefore must
needs be a cause.

Snow-water in every respect, worse Nay, Hipocrates De Acre Aquis and Locis lib.
accounts it the wor^ of Waters for all uses; and being drank, occasions
Consumptions, an^ diverse feral evils in the Bowels (as we^ as worms) as also
grievous tormentin^ pains in the Reins; besides, it hinder Concoction, stops
the passages of the Urin, hurts the Breast, Lungs and Stomach, and causes
Convulsions, pains i^ the sides, and wind. For, such Wate^ as proceeds of Snow
or Ice; being Water congealed, must needs be more gros^ then other Waters;
since before they can be thus frozen, the rare and thi^ parts thereof is
evaporated; wherefore nothing worse, besides it is excessiv^ cold.

Spring Water The best abonnds with a mucilaginous and which fires it into
stones, whence we find so many small stones in Springs (which the earth about
it has not) and gravel, which by the constant motion of the water, are hindered
from uniting.
is either for Food, o^ Physic: As such as pass through any Niter, Sulphur, or
Mercurial Substance, or any Mine, are to be used rather as Physic; and
according to the nature of the Mine or Mineral, so will the water be. Such as
are free from these, are used in Meats, and instead of Drink of a better nature
sometimes, still partaking of the nature of the Soil through which it passes,
and that is worst which goes through noxious, slimie, clayie matter or soil;
for accordingly, must their bodies be affected that drink it, and consequently,
their spirits and minds; for the filthyness and malignant quality of Waters,
convey the same malignity and immundity to our bodies; whence Bodin Method.
Hist. Cap. 5.
puts this as a prime and special cause of some Families stuttering, about
Lubden in Aquitain, from the feculencie of their Waters. Galen in like manner,
condemns such as are conveyed through Leaded Pipes; contracting thereby an
unctious Ceruse, which causes Dysenteries, and other fluxes of the Belly, as
well as worms. Such as proceed out of a Rock, if it lie toward the North, is
also bad, and Hypocrates Lib. De Acre, Aquis and Locis.
affirms, such as pass over Stones to be hard; and they are worse which are in
Dales, sheltred and obscured from the heat of the Sun, being thereby rendered
more gross and terrene; and so engender gross, terrene, and muddy humors.

River-water is worse, being composed or mixed with all other Waters, Spring,
Rain, and Snow, descending from the Hills and Land; So that according to it is
various mixtures, and the nature of the several Earths through which. Rivers
pass, are their Waters diverse, and so much the worse, by how much the more they
are mixed; especially such as are near great Towns and Cities, being the
recepticles of all impurities, Sinks, Jakes, Common-shores, Garbidges, Carrion
etc. So that such waters must needs fill the bodies of such as drink them, with
abundance of malignant humors, as well as putrid, ingendring worms, and
vapors, offending the Head and Brain, molesting the Spirits, and in a word,
affecting the whole man, and laying the foundation of all Diseases.

Well-water is yet worse than any of the former; since it is subterranean,
ascending only by Art, Buckets or Pumps, gross and heavy, staying long in the
Bowels, cold and terrene, grievously hurting and molesting the viscera, and
ingendring worms.

But the worst of all waters are, those ^nding-waters in Lakes, Ponds, Moats,
^here Hemp has been steeped, Moors, (...) where slymie fishes live, putrified,
^^d full of Mites, The in the being by the heart of resolved, is greedily
conceived by the water, wanting the siccity of (...): and wanting the humidity
of the covets it as much, in ^^ich also is occultly hid the humidity of the,
and in the the ^ity of and so the requires siccity from and by his mutual ^^ion
on each other, a conception is made in the. Trudgid, gross, (...) slymie,
casting up the Spermt, in which appear black specks that (...) the seed of the
Froggs, which by the heart of come to perfection.
Froggs and worms, ^^e muddy because of their still-stand^^g and the heat of
the Sun; and there^^re must needs be a Cause of worms, ^^d most other
Distempers, if drank.

TITLE II. Of wine, how a Cause.
THere is no less variety also of Wine, both in relation to the Taste, Color,
^ell, Substance, Age, Virtue, and place (...) which it grows; As Canary is but
^enish transplanted, and most of the ^ines in France, Hungaria, Spain, Italy,
^^d Greece, were originally from one ^^d the same Plants, although the Soil ^^d
Region makes them now very dif^^^ent.

All which, if inordinately drank at unseasonable times, immoderately, bring
many For the true Spirit that does not inebriate, is but the twentieth part of
the Wine: of which being well rectified, a man may, without intoxication, drink
as much as can be extracted from 10. pints: which argues it is the phlegm only
which is an incipid, cold, narcotick that causes drunkenness, and all these
evils: and if the phlegm be distilled off; there will remain a corrosive water,
which is the cause of Obstructions, Stone, Gout, and Cholick. The Spirit is
only Balsamic and Radical, containing in it a Sal Armoniack, an essential
Sulphur, and (...) Mercurial, subtle, yet incipid water.
Inconveniences upon us; for they extinguish natural heat, destroy the
strength of the body, hurts the sinews, Head and Brain, causing Convulsions,
Palsies, Apoplexy, Epilepsie Tremor, Coma, etc. overthrow the digestion,
engender many crude humors, and cause worms: for though they be virtually hot;
yet being taken in excess, increase Phlegm, occasion many cold distempers,
hebitate the Ingenuity Wit, Reason, and the other faculties o^ the Soul; and
nothing worse for such as are troubled with the Gout, as Sennertus Lib. de
Arthritide, cap. 2.
well notes. Neither are they admitted to such as are hot of Constitution,
strong young people, but rather to ancient people, and such as are o^ cold and
moist, phlegmatic, and melancholy Constitutions; all Wine being hot and dry
more or less, according as it is newer or older.

New Wine, especially in the Must, is very unwholesome, sweet, of a gross
substance, and ingendring a gross Juice, Inflations, is hardly digested and
distributed, whence arise many Crudities in the Bowels, occasioning worms. New
Wine, which is somewhat more defeculated, yet retaining a sweetness of the
Must, is also bard of digestion, and excrementitious, ingendring phlegm, and
consequently, no less a Cause.

Old Wine is altogether as bad, if not worse; that is, if it be too old,
heating he body inordinately, and neither breeds a good Juice, nor nourishes
much, but destroys nature, taken immoderately.

Sweet Wine, although very pleasant to the Palate, and nourishes plentifully;
yet soon degenerates into Choler, hurts the stomach, and because it is thick
and gross, troubles and afflicts the Bowels and Intralls, fills the
Hypochondries with wind, obstructs the Liver and Spleen, occasions Crudities,
and these vermin. Austeer, or more Harsh and Crabbid Wine, are more dimetick,
and less offensive to the stomach, and not so obstructive; yet nourish but
slenderly, slowly distribute, hurt the breast and Lungs, by stopping the flux of
the Spittle, hinders Concoction, are very flatulent and cold, and may not be
excepted from being a cause. Neither thin, nor thick Wines, especially taken
unseasonably, and too largely, as shall be showed beneath.

TITLE III. Of Corn Drink, Causes.
HEre we might reckon up diverse sorts, according to the manner of making, which
is as various, as the Countries in which they are made, every Shire differing,
and almost Town, especially in Holland, as the Fancies of men differ, or the
Water of which it is made, or Corn; some making it with Wheat, others with
Barley, a third son^ with Oats, a fourth with Wheat and Barley mixed, a fifth with
Wheat and Oats, a sixth with Oats and Barley, a seventh with all together, and
eighth, mixerh Hops with each; others, other Ingredients, multiplying the sorts
almost ad infinitum: But are all commonly reduced to these two kinds, Beer and
Ale, and that either strong, or small, as it is composed of more or less Corn;
and these are the chief and most common Drinks of the Northern people of the
World, who, through the coldness of their Region abounds not with Vines.

So that, the property of these sorts of Drinks, must needs be various; some
moistning and nourishing more, others less; some being more hot, others more
cool, as they have more or less of Wheat, or Barley in them; some binding, some
loosening; some more abstersive, others more opilating; some diuretic; some
ingendring Wind; some Crudities, or rather all; of which in particular, it is
an easy matter to judge, if their composition be once known, having but
recourse to the nature of their several Ingredients of Corn, which you have
heard before examined, and most condemned, as main causes, and therefore Beer
and Ale cannot be exempt; especially if they be New; for then they are
obstructive, very noxious to such as are molested with the Cholick or Stone,
are hard of digestion and distribution, stay long in the body, and fill it with
many crude humors, and gross nourishment, whence ensue these vermin; and
besides, sends up many fuliginous vapors to the Head and Brain, and many times
obstruct the passages of the Animal Spirits therein, occasioning many direful
evils. If Old, it is little better, especially Beer, and Forestus Obs. Med.
lib. 25. obs. 2.
puts it as a Cause of the Strangury, for example, in himself, but worst of
all, if tainted, too sharp or sour, dead and flat, or tastes of the Cask with
the mother floating on it (as we call it) etc. for they fret, gall, are
unwholesome, and altogether as bad as putrid meat, or stinking flesh; and cause
diverse putrid distempers, as well as worms, in us.

TITLE IV. Of Honyed Drinks, Causes.
REason will tell us, that if Honey it self does soon convert into Choler, and
fill the Bowels with Wind, Phlegm and many Crudities, ingendring worms; that all
Drinks made thereof, will do the like, as Mead, Metheglin, Bragot, etc. of
which, as some think, there are thirty several kinds in Muscovy, having
likewise in them several Compositions, of Spice of all sorts, Herbs, and other
Ingredients. Therefore I need say the less here, but referr you to what has
been said before.

TITLE. V. Of other Liquors, Causes.
AND so I may say of Liquors, being the Juice of Apples or Pears, commonly
termed Cider and Perry, that they are of diverse and various qualities,
according to the nature of the Fruit of which they are composed; and what they
are inclined to, has been already showed; which for brevities sake shall
suffice.

TITLE VI. Of the Quantity of Drink, a Cause.
MEat taken in excess, does not more injure our Health, then Drink, the
Epidemical Malady of our Age; for as the French are for the most part Gluttons,
the Germans and Dutch Drunkards, so are we in England both; nay, it is come to
that pass, that he that will not Drink, Rant, Revel, etc. is accounted no
Gentleman, a Clown, of no breeding, a lost Creature, a Milk-sop, and fit for no
Company. He is your Gallant, and most complete Spark, that can drink stoutest,
fox his Companion soonest, and lay him asleep (as they ridiculously term their
Conquest) and bear his Drink clearly, when as a Drayhorse will bear much more
Drink, or a filthy Swine, then the sturdiest Drunkard of them all: Nay, they
are so addicted to this Vice, that they daily invent new Drinks, and salt Bits
to cause their Liquor to relish and go down the better; so that if they study
at all, it is to satiate their ungodly bellies; if they are witty in any thing,
it is ad gulam, to please their Palate, or fox him they pretend outwardly most
kindness to; and yet will be very much displeased (if it prove not an
irreconsilable Crime) if we run not with them into the same excess of Riot,
speaking evil of us. Thus men (or rather beasts in the shape of men) often
times carelessly, (though too often wilfully) overthrow the good temperature of
their bodies, by their intemperance in drinking, whereby they hebitate their
Reasons, extinguish natural heat, strangle nature, accumulate many Crudities
and Opilations, whence worms, and is the root of all Diseases, both of Body and
Mind. For the best of Drinks, Wine, and the best of Wine, Canary and Rhenish,
taken immoderately, subverts our healths: For as Jesus the Son of Sirach well
notes, Eccles. 31.20.
The pains of Watching and Choler, and pains of the Belly, are with an
insatiable man; meaning the unsatiableness of drinking; for he thus prosecuteth
it, in verse. 29.30. Wine drank with excess, makes bitterness of the mind, with
brawling and quarrelling; drunkenness increases the rage of a fool till he
offend, it diminishes strength, and makes wounds; Agreeing with that of the
Wise Man, who had tried all things; and although he says, There is nothing
better, then to eat and to drink, and to be merry; yet also asks this
Question, Prove. 23.29.
Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has contrition? who has babbling? who has
wounds without cause? who has redness of eyes? And answers himself, They
that tarry long at the Wine, they that go to seek mixed Wine. verse. 30.
Wherefore, as Solon said of Meat, I may well affirm of Drink, That it is the
divinest good thing not to drink at all, and the next unto that, and most
natural, to drink as sparingly as may be. I wish that saying of Anacharsis
might be their Rule, That the first draught was to quench thirst, the second to
nourish the body, and the third for pleasure, but the fourth he thought (as all
wise men) was of madness. Whence Pithagoras the Philosopher, would never drink
Wine, because he said, The Vine brought forth three sorts of Grapes, whereof
the first quench thirst, the second troubles, and the third altogether dulleth
and offends. And Alphonsus King of Aragon and Sicilia, being one day demanded
by one of his Nobles, why he did always refuse Wine; answered, Because Wisdom
is hindered through Wine, and Prudence darkened; which two things are alone able
t^ make a King worthy of that name he beareth^ As if he had learned Lemnels
Lesson. Prove. 31.4.
I^ is not for Kings, O Lemnel, It is not for Kings to drink Wine, nor for
Princes stron^ Drink; lest they drink and forget the Law (...) and pervert the
Judgment of the afflicte^^ Likewise Cyrus, the Monarch of the Persians, being
asked (when he was (...) Youth) by his Grandfather Astyage^ why he would drink
no Wine, returned this Answer, For fear lest I be poisoned; for I observed
yesterday, when y^^ celebrated the Day of your Nativity; the it could not be,
but that some body had mi^^ poison among all that Wine which ye the drank;
because in the closure of your Fea^^ not one of your Guests was in his right
mind.

Now I would but ask the sturdiest Drunkard of them all, whether it be not
better to follow these good examples, then that of Lot, who lay with his two
Daughters; or that of Herod, that slew John the Baptist; or that of Alexander
the Great, who in a Drunken Fit, slew Clitus, one of the valiantest Captains he
had; and in another such humor, commanded Aspastes, one of his Provincial
Governors to be put to death, being in his Cups, and yet Clitus had formerly
saved his life; or that of Cyrillus, who in a drunken humor, killed his Mother
great with Child, as also his Father, hurt both his Sisters, and ravished one
of them; or that of a mad Fellow, in the time of our uncivil Wars at Salisbury,
who being drunk, in a Bravado, drank an health to the Devil, saying, that if he
did not come and pledge him, he would not believe there was either a Devil or a
GOD, his Associates trembling at his expressions, retired all into another
Room, and left him, and never saw him more; for immediately the Devil came and
carried him away, as it is thought out of the Window, the Bar thereof being
bowed; but that is certain, he never was heard of after. Thus you see, such as
are in Drink, are prone to all Vices, it being the Root and Inlet of all manner
of Sins. As the Spaniards report of one in Drink, that killed his Father, and
ravished his Mother; and therefore, they accounting it worse then either
Murder or Incest, will give their Children Money to go to a Bawdy House,
rather than to a Tavern.

On the other extreme, to Drink too little, or less then nature requires, is as
bad, if not worse for the health of the body; for thereby Nature is starved,
Concoction impedited, Crudities accumulated, the Humors, humid parts,
strength, and natural heat impaired, and in a word, the Body, Life, and
Spirits, wasted and exhausted, as well as worms engendered.

TITLE. VII. Time of Drinking, a Cause.
EVery particular almost, that I said concerning the unseasonableness of
Eating, may be averted, and is verified in Drinking: For if the Drink be never
so wholesome and good, and taken but moderately; yet, if at unfitting times,
causes no small number of, nor petty Diseases; besides, it is so far from
quenching of thirst, that contrariwise, it augmenteth thirst. Now Drink may be
unseasonably taken several ways; as first, in a morning fasting, which our
Drunkards and good-fellows (or rather lewd-fellows) call a mornings-draught,
eating nothing at all therewith: for the sinews are thereby hurt, the Head and
Brain, and many Crudities accumulated, the whole man rendered heavy and dull,
and the stronger the Drink or Wine, the worse. Secondly, between Meals, when
thirst compels not, not nature requires it, especially, before the meat be
thoroughly concocted; for throwing on fresh Drinks frequently, and in great
quantities, must needs, not only keep the mouth of the Stomach Hiant, but
impead the Concoction of the Stomach, which is then about it is office; even as
we see a spoonful of water thrown into a great pot boiling, shall hinder and
stop it; whence many Crudities and most Diseases, as well as worms. Thirdly,
immediately upon Bathing, Sweating, or any other hard or violent exercise,
which warms the Blood, stirrs the Humors, and opens the Pores; especially
Water or small Drink, which serve rather to expel and extinguish natural heat,
when rather Canary, and such comfortable Drinks, are then to corroborate
Nature, comfort and strengthen the Spirits, and gently awake the ambient and
expelled heat from the remote, to the internal parts. And lastly, Drinking
Bedwards, and late at night, is also extremely pernicious, ingendring many
Indigestions, Distillations, Catarrhs, Consumptions, and many feral evils,
besides worms.

TITLE VIII. Custom of Drinking.
SO Custom of Drinking, both in relation to it is Quality, Quantity, Time and
Order, does no less mitigate, then in eating. The Indians make a Drink called
Chica, which is composed of Water, Molosses, and sometimes Honey, some Roots in
those parts, and the Leaves of Tobacco, with the largest Toad they can get,
which they close up altogether in a large Jar, close stopped for three weeks or a
months time, and that is their most delicious Drink for their choicest friends;
and it agrees as well with them, as Canary with us, through their constant
custom; when notwithstanding, the very smell of the Jar, is of force
sufficient to strike a stranger down, if not dead. The Egyptians for the most
part, drink no other Water, then what is very impure, muddy, and slymie, as
Galen Lib. 1. de simplitium medicamentorum facultatibus. Cap. 4.
notes. And the same Indian Americans, in some places, Laert. occident. Ind.
Descript. lib. 11. Cap. 11.
drink nothing but salt water, and yet contiue in strength and health. We have
before condemned River-water, especially running along great Towns and Cities;
and yet most of the Beer and Ale in this Metropolis of England, London; is made
of the water of the River of Thames running by it, and receiving all its
impurities, and yet is so far from altring of us that are accustomed to those
Drinks, that we account them the best of that sort the Nation affords. And
Water running through Leaden Pipes, though very noxious; yet in Italy and
France, as also here in England, we find no City prejudiced by them, through
their constant use. Cider and Perry, although for the most part bad Drinks,
windy, griping the Bowels, streightening the Breast, hurting the Stomach, Head
and Brain, Sinews, is crude, etc. yet it is almost their only Drink in
Guipuscoa in Spain; Normandy in France, and in many parts in England, as in
Worcestershire, Hereford-shire, Gloucester-shire, Devonshire and Cornwall. And
I know a Gentleman, that never drank any thing but Cider, and yet is in perfect
health and strength.

And for the Quantity of Drinking, we frequently see, men make as it were,
Barrels of their Bellies; for each man to devour a Gallon is nothing, three
Pints of Canary one after another, without any respit, in a health to a
Mistress, is a small soop among our Hectors, Cutters, and Taring Ladds, the
weakest of them can do as much, and never flinch for the matter, or be
disturbed, otherwise then what they are naturally, which is enough you will say,
or they would never be so mad.

And so for Time, they matter it not; no time comes amiss to them, morning,
evening, at noon day, and at midnight, nay, and all the hours both of day and
night round too, without eating a bit in two or three days; nay, their custom
is such, they are sick if they do not thus continue; for they are no more of
Hercules his breed, then thee or me; and therefore would all soon be
disturbed, should they live as temperately. And thus much of Meat and Drink,
the second non-natural, or necessary remote, outward, precedent Cause of worms.

DVISION III. Sleeping and Waking, how a Cause.
EAch of these, Sleep and Watchfulness, taking their turns once in twenty four
hours, GOD having created the Day for man to labor in, and the Night to rest
and sleep in: It must needs follow that irregularity in these, must likewise be
a cause, not only of worms, but also of many grievous, if not incurable
Diseases.

Who would think that thou, O sweet Sleep! which art the quiet repose of all
the external Senses, and the common Sense or the Ligament, Band or Tie of the
Senses, created to preserve Health, recall and restore distributed Spirits, and
natural heat, and as Metamorph. 11.
Ovid sings, to drive away Care, Fear, and Discontent, to comfort the whole
man, and refresh the tired and wearied Limbs.

Pax animi, quem cura fugit, qui corpora duris
Festa ministeriis mulcet, reparatque labori.
Who would think (I say) that thou should be a cause of this and other
Maladies? yet so thou art these two ways; when immoderate, and when
unseasonable.(...), says Somnus and vigilia modum si excesserint, malum. lib.
2. Aphorism. 3. and in lib. 7. Aphor. 71.
Hypocrates. It hurts the senstive faculties, viz. immoderate sleep, retains
the excrements, dulls the Head, and fills the Brain with vapors. And that
Sleep may well be accounted immoderate, which is beyond the concoction of the
meat, or after the Aliment is digested; for it hinders distribution, Unde
excrementorum provectus, unde vermes, and pravitas corporis. Long and tedious
sleeps, engender many phlegmatic humors subject to putrify in the Veins,
especially in the Brain; it resolves also, refrigerates and stupifies the
Nerves, dulls the Spirits and Senses, causes Defluxions and Catarrhs, and
extinguisheth natural heat, and the radical moisture: For by sleep, the natural
heat is drawn to the internal parts, where if it find no food to work upon,
being its office to digest, it destroys and consumes the profitable humidity of
the more solid parts, and so consequently, must needs dry up and extenuate the
body.

Again, Sleep used unseasonably, or at unfitting times, is likewise very bad
and dangerous in some cases: As 1. After Bleeding, many have never awaked more.
2. After the taking of a Purge or Vomit, if it be strong, causes many
inconveniences, by corrupting the Blood and Humors. 3. On an empty Stomach,
refrigerates and attenuates the moisture of the body. 4. After eating
immediately, or within two hours, fills the head and Brain with many vapors,
whence ensue Defluxions and Rheums, as also many Crudities through want of a
due concoction in the stomach, whence worms. 5. In the Daytime, hinders the
expulsion of the excrements, fills the Brain with many Fumes and Rheumes,
hinders concoction both in the Stomach and Liver, increases the Spleen,
debilitateth the Nerves, corrupts the Memory, and is a main cause; besides it
weakens the Appetite, ingenders Fevers, and oftentimes Impostumes.

However, we must also here allow something to Custom, which in this, does
also as well as in Meat and Drink, a little mitigate.

Lastly, to sleep in the light, or beams of the Moon, filling such men's Heads
with dullness, and their Brains with moisture, paleness and wanness over all
the body, and corrupting their humors: For when the Body is asleep, and all
the Senses and Vapors thereof at rest, it is exposed to the nature of outward
accidents, and the disposition of the ambient Air. Sleep being as Lib. 3. de
Cause. pulsium.
Ovid well notes, the Image of Death.

Stulte, quid est somnus, gelidae nisi mortis Imago. Or Death's Brother, as
Galen excellently observes; and so much more does it resemble Death, by how
much the longer sleep is; like that poor Creature mentioned by John Stonus,
who slept many days.

Inordinate Waking on the other side, is as bad, and a main cause; for as sleep
is a quiet repose of all the Senses; so waking, they are all continually
employed on their several objects, and the Spirits being moved from within to
the external organs for the performing of the animal actions, are by immoderate
watchings, confumed and dissipated, the whole body dried, especially the Brain,
which is sometimes thereby corrupted, and the good temperature thereof
subverted, Choler increased, the humors rendered adust, the whole man squaled,
and his eyes sink in the head; besides, natural heat is thereby destroyed,
concoction impedited, Crudities accumulated, and so worm^ engendered, and many
other distempers both Chronick, and Acute; also Frensies and madness it self.
Yet Fernelius (...) tells us of one that slept not for fourtee^ Months
together. Lib de providentia.
Seneca likewise relates one to have continued three whole years without sleep;
also Pliny Lib. 7. Not. Hist. Cap. 51.
has such another story of a man that slep^ not a minute of an hour in above
thre^ years time. But Cap. 16. de morbis Capitis.
Henricus maket^ mention of one that lived in the like condition ten whole
years. But the mos^ wonderful of them all, is that (...) Anost. lib. 1. Cap.
23.
Montuus, who says, he knew a noble Lady, who lived in health, and without the
least inconveniency or hurt, without sleep, thirty five years. Which stories,
might to some seem fabulous, were not some of these Authors of so great
Authority, or if it could be imagined there could be any advantage to them, to
write such untruths, or if we did not meet with the like in this our own
Country; as it is well known to all Rostern Parish, near Knutsford in
Cheshire, that a Shooemakers Wife in the said Parish, did not sleep for several
years, and yet continued Lib. 5. de Part. morb. and Sympt. Cap. 2.
well and in health; wherefore I would have every one learn this modest Lesson,
not to condemn what they are ignorant of.

DIVISION IV. Retention and evacuation of Ordure a Cause.
YOU must know, Retention and Evacuation, is as notable a nonnatural cause, not
only of worms, but also of many other Diseases, as any whatsoever. For since
for the nourishing and restoring of our bodies and strength, we have daily need
of food, and since in the digesting of that Aliment, it is seldom all
converted into pure nourishment, of necessity there must remain a faeces, or an
excrementitious useless part, the retention of which beyond the time requisite,
must cause Diseases, and especially this. Untimely and intemperate evacuations,
on the other side are worse; for thereby the profitable nourishments are
therewith ejected, and the whole body rendered thus debil and consumptive, it
must needs be, that worms must follow, as well as several other direful
distempers.

Now as there are diverse concoctions in the body; as in the Stomach, Liver,
Heart, Brain, and other Members; so are there diverse excrements therein
generated; whence there follows diverse evacuations and retentions: Of which,
some are simply necessary, as faeces of the bowels, and Urin; others not so
simply necessary, but at some times: As Choler, Melancholy, Phlegm, Menstrues,
Hemroids, Bleeding, Purging, Bathing, Wind, Sweat, fuliginous Fumes or
Atom-like Effluviums, Teers, Scurf on the Skin, Snot, Spittle, Sperm (if it may
be properly termed an Exploded in my book of the Soul, an Extraduce.
excrement) all which, being seasonably, moderately, and in a due measure
evacuated, conduce much to the conservation of life and health; but if not,
cause many incurable Diseases, like unto themselves; as is vulgarly known,
besides worms.

I shall give therefore a hint to the chiefest of them, and omit the rest; for
worms are not only engendered by the overlong retention of the Ordure, causing
a slagnation and putrefaction of the excrements, etc. but also the Head is
especially thereby affected with Inflammations, pains, dullness, etc. It molests
also the other parts, ingenders wind, pains of the Cholick, hinders concoction
by putrid vapors, whence also worms, and many other evils; as it fills the
veins, and obstructs the passages of the body, a chief cause of the Apoplexy,
an enemy to Nature, and occasioner of sudden Death. Too frequent evacuation you
have heard, is little better; for the Intralls are not only thereby pressed,
grypt, and forced beyond their due; but also extremely weakened, and all
evacuation before a due concoction, whether of it self, or by Physic, is very
pernicious; for they are superfluous, and all superfluous evacuations, secundum
plurimum, engender putrid Fevers and worms.

Retention also of Urin, is no less a cause, but of many other Infirmities
also, and death it self, so extending the Bladder and Uritary passages with the
neighboring parts, that it cannot sometimes compress it self; and thus in four
days time, I remember this present Earl of Lautherdale's Father died about the
end of 1644. or beginning of 1645. It causes also the Strangury, Ischury,
Dysurie, and many other Maladies, according to the nature of the retention; for
if the serious humidity be not by the Reins drawn thereunto, it remains mixed
with the blood, where corrupting, causes worms, and being an excrement of the
Liver, and by this suppression, distributed into all the parts of the body,
there follows also Cachexia, Hydropical affections, and the like. Excessive
evacuations of Urin, does likewise cause grievous Maladies; for thereby the
moist parts of the body are consumed, and in time the more solid; for it
weakens concoction, and occasions not only worms, but also Consumptions,
Diabetes, and wastes both body and mind, nay, and the very brain it self.

Item, si menstrua fuerint suppressa, accidunt Morbi, scilicet, Melancholia,
Mania, Capitis dolores lassitudo, spatulorum and lumborum gravedo, furor
uterinus, Incontinentia, Catalepsia, Epilepsia, Gnappititiis seu Anorexia,
Clyloseas and Coctionis Laesio, and vermes, etc. Si menstrua plura fiunt,
accidunt appetentia prostrata, Coctio omnis Imbecilla, virium omnium dejectio,
totius corporis refrigeratio, Decoloratio, Emaciatio, vermes, Sterillitas,
pedum Inflatio, Hydrops, Bilis Ferror, Febres Biliosae, Herticae, Cachexia,
Lipothymia, Syncope, Mors senibus repentina, Junioribus tandem superveniens.

Any other evacuation, as Issue, old Ulcer, and the like, stopped suddenly, is
not only a Cause of worms by corrupting the humors, or not evacuating what are
already corrupted, or nature is overcharged with, but of diverse other evils; as
him in Lucitanus, Cent. 5. Curat. 83.
who fell first into the yellow Jaundies, and then into the Dysentery, by the
stopping of an old Ulcer.

And so the like may be said of Hemorrhoids, if unadvisedly stopped, causing not
only worms, but also Melancholy, Scorbie, and several other Infirmities; and
the immoderate flowing of them, vehemently debilitates the whole Constitution
on the other side.

Bathing also, according as the Bath is hot or cold, and the nature of the
Infirmity; as in all Catarrhs Hot Baths are very prejudicial, rendering the
humors fluid, whereby they disperse over all the Body, causing several
Diseases besides worms. To stay also too long in a Bath, go in too often, or at
unseasonable times, putrifies the whole mass of humors, and is a main cause.
Bathing also on a full stomach, or before there be due concoction, disperses
the humors, crude into all the parts, and is no less a cause. Cold Baths are
worse, especially for such as are growing, young people, or such as are
declining, and infirm bodies, or such as feed grossly, for the Pores being
thereby constipated, the fuliginous malignant vapors being hindered from
transpiring, corrupt in the body, and prove a virulent Cause.

Wind is also no less a Cause then any of the rest, by hindering evacuations,
and corrupting the humors; nay, it is the cause of all Diseases. As Hypocrates
and Fienus have showed at large in particular Tracts on that Subject.

Semen denique intempestive retentum, Corporis totius gravitatem inducit,
ciborum fastidium, febres, quia transit in venenum, and Concoctionis
imbecilitatem parit, and vermes generat, Item si corrumpatur, gravissima
accidentia excitat, ad Cor and Cerebrum venenatos mittit vapores, and
Epilepsiam inducit, Melancholiam, etc. Novi quosdam (ait Mathiolus) Epist. 5.
lib. Penult.
Prae pindore a Coitu abstinentes turpidos, pigrosque factos; nonnullos etiam
melancholicos praeter modum maestos, timidosque. Abstinentia enim a venere,
plus mulieribus, quam viris nocet: Scribit Art. med. Cap. 9.
Dominicus Leonus se vidisse in oppido Zuccani in Agro Lunensi Patria ejus,
mulierem temperaturae biliosae, ob spermatis retentionem, and Creundi
Desiderium (erat enim juvinis viginti quinque annorum and nondum nupta fuerat,
neque virum cognoverat) maniacam, and furiosam factam, ita ut per agros, and
per sylvas erraret, and unum quemque obviam factum, ut secum coiret,
provocabat, and renuentes lapidibus, and conviciis insectabatur. Denique
hujusmodi furorem Coitu sedavit; nupsit enim cuidem Rustico, unde convenientem
adepta Medicinam, pristinae sanitati fuit restituta. Confimilem Historiam
narrat Felix Platerus. Obser. Med. lib. 1. fol. 88.
Et sic e Contra, Nimium excretum, calorem nativum dissipat, corpus universum
debilitat, Cruditates cumulat and vermes generat, Spiritus depopulat, Cerebrum
and nervos ledit, Podagra and alios dolores efficit, Calorem nativum dissipat,
Habitum Corporis solvit, unde omnes Coctiones Laeduntur, and multa excrementa
cumulantur, unde etiam vermes, Senectutem accelerat, Canos maturat, Sensus
Hebitat, and virium corporis omnium functionumque ab his manantium infirmitatem
facit. Nam si quid seminis supra quam natura ferat coitu profluat, obesse
magis, quam si quadragies tantundem sanguinis emanaret.

DIVISION V. Rest and Exercise, a Cause.
WE must know, that Rest and Exercise is no less a Cause then any of the
preceding non-naturals. To begin more pernicious to our Souls; for it is one of
the seven deadly sins, odious both to GOD and all good men, consuming the Mind
and Soul as Rust does Iron; the Nurse of all manner of wickedness, and that of
which comes no goodness, for it is the Devils Cushion, and the cause of
Melancholy, which is the Devils Bath.

Neither is there any thing more destructive to our bodies; for it weakens the
body, extinguisheth natural heat, hinders concoction and evacuation, causes
obstructions, fills the body full of phlegm and many gross, corrupt,
excrementitious humors, whence these vermin are abundantly engendered: Nay, it
is the proximate cause of all manner of Infirmities. For as a standing Pool
corrupts, breeds worms, and putrefaction, so does out bodies and humors being
idle; whence Ovid might well 1. De Ponto. 6.
sing,

Ceruis ut Ignorum corrumpant otia corpus,
Ut vitium capiant, in moviantur Aquae?
Opposite to these, are Exercise, Labor, Diligence, which on the other hand,
if in excess, or unseasonably used, are as pernicious and destructive. Much
exercise and weariness consumes the Spirits and substantial parts of the body,
and such humors which nature would have otherwise concocted, it irritates, and
being so irritated, diversely affect both the body and mind, tundring
concoction, and sometimes breaks the vessels, and frequently it extravasateth
the blood, and causes inflammations in the external parts and skin, invironing
the Ribs, whence come The peccant matter being conveyed by the ascending
branches of the Vena Cava, which disperse themselves into the four upper Ribs,
or else the Azygos or vena sine pari, whose circles are disposed into the other
lower, whereby the Plara or membrane investing the Ribs, is inflamed.
Plurisies; and if the Blood being thus violently irritated remain still in the
veins, it excites putrid Fevers. Likewise if the body be replete with vicious
and corrupt humors, many evils especially follow on violent exercise, for thus
being excited, and being dispersed through the several parts of the Body, the
Brain is filled with many fuliginous vapors, and in some weak parts, whereof
they cannot so well dilate, they corrupt and putrify, whence not only Botches,
Boiles, Ulcers, and such like are occasioned, but worms, and many times Lasks
and Vomitings.

Exercise at unseasonable times, on a full stomach is as bad; for it corrupts
the Aliment in the stomach, and carries the same Juice raw and undigested into
the veins, which there putrefying, ingenders worms. Exercise on a full stomach
also, counfounds the Animal Spirits.

Likewise when the body is not cleansed of its excrements, exercise is as
unfitting; lest when the body is hot, and the pores open, their feculencies be
mixed with, or transported to the good humors, and other parts; and so it is
not fitting before concoction be perfected, for the heat being thereby evoked,
concoction must needs be impedited, ill humors accumulated, and worms
engendered.

DIVISION VI. Passions and Perturbations of the Mind, Causes.
IN the last place, Passions and Perturbations of the Mind, are in some cases,
the worst non-natural; for as the dregs are the bitterest of the Cup, so is
this the most pernicious of all the rest; violently shaking the whole frame of
our natures, subverting the good temperature of our bodies, and oftentimes
causing death it self. For as the body by it is bad humors, works upon the
mind, soul, and all the faculties thereof; so does the soul again, as variously
affect the body, by Anger, Joy, Fear, Sorrow, which four Passions St. Ser. 35.
Bernard says, Hae quatuor passiones sunt tanquam rotae in curru quibus
vehemur in hoc mundo.
are as the Wheels in a Coach, by which We are carried in this World.
Subordinate to these are Love, Hatred, Envy, Emulation, Jealousy, Pride,
Anxiety, Mercy, Pity, Ambition, Avarice, Shame, Discontent, Despair,
Indignation, etc.

Now, these Passions and Perturbations of the Soul, dwell between Reason and
Sense; but for the most part, follow rather Sense, then Reason. For by the
Memory and Common Sense is conveyed to the Imagination some object to be known,
which being thereby misconceived, applied and agravated, immediately it
communicates it to the Heart, the Seat of all Affections; whence presently the
Spirits hasten from the Brain to the Heart, signifying what good or bad object
was presented, which forthwith it bends it self to prosecure or avoid, drawing
with it other humors to help it; and hence in pleasure concur the greater
store of purer Spirits, as also in Joy; in Grief and Sadness, more melancholy
blood, and impure spirits, as also in Fear; in Anger more Choleric.

So that the original of all the Perturbations and Passions of the Mind and
Soul, proceeds from a praved Imagination, misinforming the Heart: For as the
Fancy or Imagination is more or less intended or remitted, apprehensive or
violent, and the humors disposed; so the Perturbations and Passions move more
or less, take deeper impression, and cause the greater tumult; whence the
Spirits are so altered and confused, that there necessarily follows an increase
of gross, thick Spirits and Crudities, a multitude of bad humors are
occasioned, concoction impedited, the nutriment abated, and in a word, all the
operations, both of Soul and Body are let, distracted and confounded; and
consequently, worms and other direful Maladies, both of Body and Mind, are
occasioned.

In Charmides.
Plato therefore, ascribes all miseries of the Body to the Soul, because it
should have ruled it better; for then must the Ship of our Healths needs be in
danger of wracking, when Fancy, and Idle Imagination sits at the Helm, instead
of Reason, that ought to be Pilate; which is to be seen in the best of us, more
or less, at some time or other to break forth in spite of all Education or
Religion, they being natural unto us, and inherent. Wherefore I shall hint at
those few Cardinal Passions only; and because all Perturbations as was said,
proceeding from a depraved Fancy, misapprehending and wrongfully applying the
object, I shall first premise a word of the force of Imagination.

SUBDIVISION I. Of the force of Imagination.
LET us consider first, what Imagination is; and truly I think it may well be
defined, That Internal Sense which examines the several species of the Common
Sense, whether of things present or absent, keeping and retaining of them
longer, and recalling them to mind again, or making new of his own, and is free
when the rest of the Senses sleep. (As appears by diverse strange conceptions in
Dreams.) It Is objects are all the species communicated thereunto by the common
sense, whereby it imagines infinite other; and ought in Man, to be ruled by
Reason; which we oftentimes by woeful experience find is not, through defect of
the organs of the body, by which the Soul works; or some inward or outward
distemper; as is seen in Night-walkers, who, whilst they are asleep, will yet
walk up and down, and do their work in their Callings. Likewise in that direful
distemper Hydrophobia and Lyconthropia, treated of elsewhere, In my Book of
Poisons.
they imagine they see a Wolf or Dog in the water or Liquor, and so, though
ready to die with thirst, will not drink, etc.

Some refer all Heresies, Superstition and Vice, to a depraved and false
Imagination: and Paracelsus goes higher, ascribing to Imagination, the power of
Miracle-working-faith: Concluding what Hypocrates or Galen did as to Cures, was
merely by the force of Imagination in them or their Patients, accounting them
but mere Children in Physic. Others have imputed all Apparitions, Prodigious
Sights, Frights, Tricks and Devices of Witches, Transformations, Ridings,
Dancings, Incubus, Fairies, flying in the Air, Feasting with the Devil, and the
like, to a depraved Fancy, and But therein they show themselves infinitely
more idle and fantastical.
idle Imagination. Some again, will have all Transes, and Ecstasies, to be by
the force of their Imagination; as it was frequent among the Indian Priests, to
separate themselves from their Senses when they pleased, as Olans Lib. 3. Cap.
18.
Magnus affirms, and answer all manner of Questions, and deliver their Oracles
in an Ecstasy. And Rondeletius Lib. 1. de Curandis morbis. cap. 20.
tells us of a Romish Priest that he saw at Rome, that could and did do the
like, persuading the world he could not help it, when he heard those words of
our Savior upon the Cross, Consumatum est, but Rondiletius quickly cured him,
by threatening to Cudgel him, as you may see in the Author at large.

But it is most certain, the power of Imagination is apparent in these three
respects or kinds. 1. Upon the Body of the Imaginant, including likewise the
Child in the Mothers Womb. 2. Upon Dead Bodies, as Wood, Stone, Metal, etc. 3.
Upon the Spirits of Men and living Creatures.

Upon the Body the Imaginant; we see nothing more frequent, then far one to
yawn, if he sees another; laugh, be angry, make water, sigh, sweat, tremble,
blush, as different objects offer; to have the Teeth set on edge by an
ungrateful noise, or by seeing Lemons cut or eat. Many women will be ready to
swoon, to see men fight; some men cannot look on a fore or a wound, but they
are troubled, nay even at the very discourse thereof. Lib. 18. de Subtilitate.
Hieronimus Cardanus tells us of one who died outright, by but seeing one let
blood. A Minister, a Patient of mine 1656. when I had caused my Apothecary to
make an Issue in his Arm, swooned away several times, not only to the
amazement, but terror of the company, who thought he would have died. In his
Book of Wisdom. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Charon tells us of a man, that having his eyes covered, to be put to death, as
he Imagined, being condemned, and uncovering them again to receive his pardon,
was really dead on the Scaffold. And we find Pyrocles falling in a swoon
through Musidorus his words misconceived, wrongly applied and agravated by his
Imagination, as that noble Knight most excellently fancies; Sir Philip Syday in
his Arcadia. fo. 37.
delivering Truth under a Romantic Dress.

But the power of Imagination is not only in the affections; but in the very
humors themselves; and is of force sufficient to Cause, and not only so, but
to cure most, if not all Diseases; and bring Death it self by another mean,
then you have already heard. If we look but down an high place, we are amazed,
and ready to fall, and even tremble; if we see any one turn round, we are
giddy: So we fall deadly sick, and contract all manner of diseases, as we see
others, in whose company we come. How many thousands have fallen sick of the
Small Pox, by seeing one perfectly recovered, with only the marks in his face,
and several other diseases, nay but by hearing them discoursed of in a sickly
time; nothing worse therefore then a Childish Imagination and fear, in an
infectious time. I have heard of a man, who accidentally happening into the
company of another, who being reported to have had the Plague, at the very
apprehension thereof (although he was as free as himself) fell down suddenly
dead. So if a Fortune Tellers, or Wiseman (as they term him) or Physician, tells
one he shall be sick of such a Disease, at such a time; a thousand to one, but
when the time comes, he be sick indeed, and grievously indisposed, if his
Imagination run on it. Dr. Cotta In his Discovery of Ignorant Practitioners.
cap. 8.
has two pertinent examples to this purpose, one of a Parsons Wife in
Northamptonshire, who asking a Physitian's Advice, he told her she was, as he
did conceive, troubled with the Sciatica, whereupon she was really affected
with it that very night, though before as free as himself. The other was of a
good woman, who upon the like occasion, hearing her Physician but name the
Cramp, was soon after therewith macerated. Lib. 3. de Anima cap. de Melancholia.
Ludovicus vives reports of a Jew, who in France, rode by accident over a
dangerous precipice, there being only a plank for the passage, not knowing what
peril he was in, being in the dark; but the next day showing him the place,
immediately fell down dead. The like is reported of a man that rode over
Rochester Bridge when it was mending, there being only a plank laid for foot
passengers. And all men know it forcibly corrupts the humors, and so causes
worms.

Neither does Fancy only cause, but also as easily cure Diseases; as I may
justly refer all magical and juggling cures thereunto; performed as is thought,
by Saints, Images, Relicts, Holy-waters, Shrines, Avemarys, Crucifixes,
Benedictions, Charms, Characters, Sigils of the Planets, and of the Signs,
inverted words, etc. which serve to no purpose but only to help, farther and
excite the Imagination, and stir up the humors and spirits, and so by the
power of the Fancy the cause of the distemper may be removed, and therefore
all such Cures, are rather to be ascribed to the force of Imagination, then any
virtue in them, or their Rings Amulets, Lamens, etc. As one that confides in
Astrology, or that part which hatcheth the Resolution of Questions, if we find
a figure promising indifferent well, it so stirts up his Fancy, that the
strength of his Imagination does many times bring the thing to pass; not the
Stars and Planets, there being no ground in reason or nature for it; or else
the Devil, to bring them into the greater snare, so stirrs up the fancy of the
Astrologer, that he strangely hits upon truth, or brings it afterward
accordingly to pass. As in my youthful time, for sport among my friends, I have
desired them many times, to propound a question of any one absent and unknown
to me, which I have answered so exactly, as if I had been acquainted with
parties and actions; nay, and sometimes, when the figure has been wrong set
(as at four in the morning, instead of four afternoon) to the admiration, not
only of them all, but of my self too. And this is clear, since I had no fancy
to it, I can prognosticate nothing right, though I understand ten times more,
then when I scarce ever judged amiss. We may likewise hereunto refer all Cures
done by silly Women, braging Empericks, Quacks, Knavish Mountibanks, ignorant
Chyrurgions, and Pragmatical Apothecaries, whom we oftentimes see do more
wonderful Cures (o^ so in appearance) then a Rational an^ Learned Physician,
and that too many times, when they apply very contrary Medicines, and such as
in a sober man's judgment, would do rather hurt then good, merely by the
confidence of the Patient and Emprick, and the strength of his Imagination; for
it is of more validity, then all the Physic he can use: whence Hypocrates Lib.
de sapientia.
affirms, That Physician does most Cures, in whom most confide. Again, nothing
more frequent then for melanlancholy people to fancy strange things of
themselves, and be cured by another Fancy; as he that would not piss for fear
of drowining the world, till the House being on fire, and persuaded to quench
it that way, did not only perceive his former error, but was cured of it; or
she in Trallianus, that would not be persuaded but she had swallowed a Snake;
at length the Physicians complied with her humor, but told her they did not
doubt, but if she would take such a Vomit as they would give her, they would
bring it away, which she consenting to, they secretly conveyed a dead Snake
into the Basin where she vomited, and so was cured: Or him in Hollerius, Lib.
1. de Morb. internis Cap. 15.
who conceited himself dead, and thereupon, would neither ^at nor drink; yet
was cured by counter-ballancing his Imagination with one conveyed into his
Chamber in a Coffin, in a winding sheet, with bottles of wine and good meat by
him, and both eat and drank, and so persuading him dead men did eat and drink,
he did both, and was cured. But Instances in this kind, are innumerable.

No less common are the Instances of the Mothers Imagination on the Child in
her womb, every house affording one or more; as Paraeus tells us of one who
brought forth a Blackemoor, only by looking on such a Picture, at such Viz. the
tim o^ Conc^^tio.
a time; and Marcellus Donatus Med. (...) rab. lib. 2 cap. 1.
tells us of one that by looking on a wound, brought forth a Child wounded
accordingly, and in the same place: As Genesis 30.
Jacobs Lambs were Ring-straked, speckled, spotted and grizled, as the Rods
that lay before them; and Lemanius Lib. 1. de occult. naturis Mirac. cap. 4.
well notes, If a woman at the time of Conception, think of another man absent,
the Child will be like that man; for the species of the object being fresh in
the memory (as I noted elsewhere In my book of the Souls Traduction. Cap. 3.
Sect. 3.
) and strong in the Fancy, How the Child in the womb b^comes marked by the
Mothers Imagination.
are necessarily carried down together with the spirits into the Seed, whence
consequently, when the Sperm begins to separate, and distribute it self to the
forming of the Embaryon and it is several parts, the Spirits which resolve into
the Brain of the Child, and from hence finish all the outward parts, do
sometimes happen to fill certain places of the Child's body with the infection
and tincture of this object, according to the impression with which they were
in the Mothers Fancy.

2. The force of Imagination is such, as Alkindus, Avicenna, Paracelsus, and
others maintain, that it will move Stone, Wood, and Plants, out of their
places, and cure Diseases at a distance. But I shall not insist on this.

3. It has most power on such things as are lightest and easiest moved; and
therefore above all, on the Spirits of men, and on such men to, as are weak and
feeble in Fancy, Mind and Spirits, as the Poet sings, Virgill.


Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos. For Being susceptible and
passtive bodies.
young Creatures, Children, and the like, are soonest bewitch't in this kind;
and of such as are of more mature years, weaklings, sick and crazed people,
timorous and superstitious persons, women, the ignorant, etc. whence we see,
the strong Imagination of one man, does often bind up and change the spirits of
another. And who is so ignorant that has not observed, that the boldness,
forwardness, and confidence of some men, though Idiots and Illiterates, has
put him to silence against his own knowledge and n="" For there are a^ real
communic^tions between men's Spirits, as between material Agents, though we know
not the way of their acting.
reason; when in other company more learned, he shall more freely argue the
Case. Thus briefly, by way of digression of the force of Imagination, the thing
on which our passions move. Now to the Cardinal Passions themselves.

SUBDIVISION. II. Of Anger, how a Cause.
LET us begin with Anger, a Passion of the Soul moving the Blood and Spirits,
first inwardly to the internal parts, and then outwardly, being the most
violent and most pernicious of all Perturbations, Irafuror brevis, differing
indeed nothing at all from madness but in degr^e; for it renders a man void of
understanding, blind, monstrous, bestial, and irrational, being an irrational
perturbation of the mind; in which he swears, stares, brawls, roars, fights,
flings, and does he knows not what, being a cruel tempest of the mind; it
inflaming the blood about the Heart and Spirits also, which being sent into the
other parts more remote, oftentimes corrupt the whole mass of blood, and excite
Fevers of all sorts, as well as worms, and the Pestilence it self, and all
other Diseases arising of Choler, disturbed and corrupted humors; besides, it
not only debilitates, but destroys the spirits and natural heat, and sometimes
causes death it self. But the Heart and Brain are chiefly affected, being
inordinately heated by the inflamed blood and spirits, whence ensue moreover
Epilepsies, Catalepsies, Apoplexies, Convulsions, Vertigoes, Madness,
Melancholy, palpetations of the Heart, Syncope, etc. If the blood ascend to the
Head, the Face becomes red in their passion, if it retire to the Heart,
paleness ensues.

SUBDIVISON III. Too much Joy, a Cause.
JOY is a passion moving the blood and spirits to the outward parts; and
although we think it less dangerous, and so oftentimes, give way thereunto; yet
if it be immoderate, it not only causes this, and most Diseases; but death it
self: For it carrys a man not only out of a mean, but himself also, it
dissipates and pours out the spirits, brings Quotidian Fevers, and through
pucilanimity of spirit, some do yield up the Ghost. For inordinate Joy carries
the natural heat and spirits so violently from the Heart, and so disperses them
into the more remore parts, which being left destitute, immediately either
swooneth or dies away. Genesis 45.26.
As when Jacob heard of his Son Joseph, it is said, Jacobs Heart sainted. And
so of the Queen of Sheba, when she saw the glory of Solomon, that she had no
more spirit in her. 1 King. 10.5.
Likewise old Simeon, at the first sight of our Savior, through extreme Joy,
burst forth into these words, being hardly able to contain his Soul in his
body, Luke 2.29.
Now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, according to thy Word. But this
is frequent, many men and women we see, if any Estate, Honor, or other good
unexpected fall unto them, through inordinate Joy, are so transported beyond
themselves, that they can neither rest, sleep, or know what they do, or whence
they are, as Massaniello the late Usurper in Naples, who from a Fisher-mans
boy, in less then a weeks time, had more power then any Prince there had. And
so Punid Not. Hist. lib. 3. Cap. 53.
Sophocles and Dyonitius the Tyrant, King of Cicily, being informed of a great
Victory, through excessive Joy, died; or that Poet in Lib. 3. ca. 15.
Agellious, that contrary to expectation, got the victory and applause; or
Laertius in vita ejus.
Crysippus, who died in a fit of laughter, when he saw an Ass eat Figs; the
like did my Grand-father's second Wife, at a Jest at Table. Much more
frequently does Joy, and easily corrupt our humors, subvert our good
constitutions, and cause this, and diverse other Diseases.

SUBDIVISION IV. Of Grief and Sorrow, how a Cause.
AN opposer of Joy is Grief, as also Sorrow, drawing in the blood and Spirits
by degrees from the external parts to the Heart and Vitals. Every perturbation
is grievous, but Grief is a^^ heavy executioner; nothing more crucifies the
Soul, nor overthrows the health of the body, then Sorrow: It refrigerates the
whole man, especially the Heart, and dries it up, subverts and destroys the
spirits and natural heat, causes watchfulness, by reason of its drying nature,
hinders concoction, ingendreth worms, thickens the blood and humors, and
abundantly increases melancholy; so that miriads have thereby perished; worldy
sorrow causes death, 2 Cor. 7.10.
and that not suddenly, as in other passions, but by degrees; Psalm. 119. Part.
4. ver. 4.
as David complains, My Soul melts away for very heaviness: And sometimes
causes sudden death, through the concourse of much melancholy blood about the
Heart, whereby the good spirits are extinguished. Likewise there being
abundance of fuliginous black blood attracted from the Spleen to the Heart, and
diffused under the Ribs, on the left side: those dangerous Hypochondriacal
Passions and Convulsions, which happen to sad, sorrowful and pensive people,
are occasioned. But we see Eli through a sudden seizure of grief and sorrow,
fell backwards off his Seat, and died. 1 Samuel 4.8.
And so his Daughter in Law, the Wife of Phineas. 1 Samuel 4.20.
So also Plantus.
Publius Rutillus, died more of Grief, then any sickness he had. And Severus
the Emperor, Herodianus lib. 3.
through grief and sorrow, lost his life.

SUBDIVISION V. Fear, how a Cause.
MEtus inter omnes res terribiles maximo impetu animos percellit. It is a
Cancer consuming and wasting both body and mind, destroying the spirits and the
whole man, as Rust does Iron, the Vulture which the Poets feigned, to gnaw
Promethius his Heart, Cozen-german to Sorrow, they are Hypocrates his Twins;
like Jacob and Esau, one holds by the others heel; or like Naomi and Ruth, they
go hand in hand together. For as sorrow draws in the blood and spirits to the
internal parts by degrees; Fear likewise draws them in, but more violently;
whence paleness, frigidity of the more remote parts, an universal terror, and
excretion of the excrements, and sometimes blood by several parts o^ the body,
as that woman mentioned by Florentinus Lendanus; In Marlsocologia.
also speechlessness, terror and palpitation of the Heart, amazeth many, that
they know not where they are, what they do, or say; for the most part proving
worse by many degrees, then the thing feared; and frequently frustrates nature,
so that sudden death ensues by the violent and impetuous concourse of the
Blood and Spirits to the Heart; what a multitude of Instances have we of some,
who, through fear of death, have become gray in a night, and so continued all
the days of their lives after. Donatus.
Others so changed, both in Features, Complexion, strength of body, comeliness,
etc. that their very associates and intimates could not know them. Lemnius.
Some also, by a sudden fright have become bald, and so continued all their
lives after: Schenckius.
Nay, even by sudden News, surprised with the falling sickness; others have
lost their Wits by the mistake of an Echo. Cardanus.
And one I knew that became a natural fool by a fright, caused by a sudden
screech of her Mother, apprehending the young maiden was dying. Lastly,
Pla^erus tells us Obs. Med. lib. 1. fol. 151.
of one that died by Fears, Amazements and Frights suggested to her self, and
agravated in her ^wn mind: For Fear makes our Imagination apprehend what it
lists, and ^yrannize more over our Fancies, then any other passion
whatsoever. As is evident in some sort of people, at every ^urn, upon every
accident, how are they ^herewith terrified? If a Crow fly but ^ver the house
and Croak thrice, how do they fear, they, Superstitious Predictions by
Astrology, Augury Auraspice, Physiognomie, Palmist^y, and the rest of these
genethlical Arts condemned.
^r some one else in ^he Family shatl die? ^r if but a Cricket ^nusually
appear; or ^hey hear but the clicking of a Death-watch, as they call it; if an
Hare do ^ut cross their way, they suspect they shall be robbed, or come to some
mis^hance forthwith; or if the salt fall but ^owards them; or the fire, then
they ^xpect Anger; and an hundred such ^^ke foolish and groundless conceits.

Many men are again, as much troubled with their Destinies, Fates, or Fortunes
(if they have been told they shall be hanged, drowned, be sick at such a time,
imprisoned, die, or come to some mischance, the fear thereof eats them up,
and destroys both soul and body; and it is often seen by the force of their
Imagination, and the Devils Craft, by the just judgment and permition of GOD
for their punishment, the thing that they feared comes upon them, according to
that of the wise man: Prove. 10.24.
Because they feared the Devil his Gins and Devices) as Suetonius in vita.
Domician and Adrian were. For whatsoever a man imagines, doubtingly, or with
fear, must needs be hurt, i^ Imagination has any power at all, a man
representing always, that oftener which he fears, then the contrary.
Wherefore, away with all those vai^ conceits; and remember that the Starts do
but incline, and that so gently, that if we will be ruled by reason, they have
no power at all over us; (that is, to compel us to this or that action) but i^
we follow our own nature, and be led by sense as bruit beasts, they do as much
in us as in them, and we are no better, although we differ in shape, as I have
elsewhere showed. in my Astrology Restored.
So that to conclude of Fear, there is no greater misery upon Earth, or on this
side Hell; for it draws the Devil to it, as Cardan well notes: Lib. 18. de
subtilitate.
And as Peter Martyr records of the Americans in Hispaniola, such as are afraid
of the Devil, are by him assaulted; and from such as fear not, he vanishes.
And thus much shall suffice to be spoken of Passions and Perturbations, how
Causes; as also of the six non-natural things, in like manner of evident,
remote, outward, precedent, and necessary Causes of Diseases. For, as touching
those other Passions and Affections before named, they are all reduceable to
these four.

MEMB. II. Of Non-necessary, Proximate, Adventitious, Continuate, and
Antecedent Causes.
I Come now to contingent, non-necessary, proximate, and antecedent Causes;
Quae mihi latissimum campum ostendit, adeo ut ad finem rem ipsam perducere, and
tam longum iter peragrare, nemo sine Herculiano labor possit. For they are
innumerable, comprehending all Administrations of Physic, both inward and
outward, Fumes, Vapors, Odours, all Accidents by Sun, Moon, or Stars,
venomous Creatures, bad Education, evil Communication, and other Chances
whatsoever, Casualties and Contingencies; which, who so can reckon up, Erit
mihi magnus Apollo; of Poisons I have already spoken in a Treatise by it self,
also of the Influencies of the Stars and Planets, both in my Astrology
Restored; and in this very Tract, how they may be Causes Chap. 6. Sect. 1.
Subsect. 2.
more immediately and universally, as also Chap. 6. Sect. 2. Subfect. 2. Memb.
1. Submemb. 1. Division 1. Subdivis. 1.
how they are sometimes more remotely and accidentally; wherefore, since most
of the rest are reduceable to those necessary remote Causes, already spoken of,
or to some other head, I shall enlarge no more on them, only touch upon one,
viz.

A bad Nurse, which of all outward non-necessary accidents, is a most powerful
Cause, not only of worms, but of all Diseases both of body and mind. For as it
is no small happiness to be well born; so our felicity in the next place,
chiefly consists in the choice of a good wholesome Nurse; and it were better
never let Children suck at all, then to suck weak, unwholesome, inferior women,
diseased either in body or mind, whether (...) it be the Mother or no: For as
the Nurse is, so likewise will the Child be, and whatsoever distemper of body,
or ill condition This I have showed elsewhere, in my book An Anima sit ex
Tradure Chap. 3. Sect. 3. Subsect. 1.
of mind she has, the Infant will no question, be infected with the same; the
Milk being of force sufficient to alter it is whole constitution and
temperature. For there is the same property and virtue in the Milk, as in the
Sperm; and that not only in women, but in all other Creatures. A Slut at
Packwood near Knole in Warwickshire, did put a nurse-by-blow-child often to
such a Mastive Bitch, who at the same instant had Puppies, the Child throve
well enough, but showed the fruits and disposition of his Nurs, as he grew
bigger, by his churlish behavior, and never could sit or lie down, without
turning two or three times round. Phavorinus an excellent Philosopher, tells
us, if either a Kid or a Lamb suck the others milk, will be altered thereby; as
the Lamb sucking the Goat, or the Kid the Ewe, the wool of the Lamb will be
almost as hard as the Goats hair, and the hair of the Kid, almost as soft as
the Sheeps wool. And Franciscus Barbarus De re uxoria lib. 2. Cap. ult.
stiffly maintains, that if the Nurse be a Dolt, a Fool, etc. the Child she
nourishes, will take after her. So that special care is to be had in the
choosing of a Nurse. I am not of Phavorinus his opinion, the Mother is best; for
she may be as very a fool, ill conditioned, cross, or unhealthy as another.
Such therefore ought to be chosen contrary, to correct those defects. Thus you
see what an easy matter it is for a Nurse to subvert the good temperature of a
Child, and make him full of corrupt humors, worms, and all other Diseases.

MEMB. III. Of Continent, Inward, Antecedent, Proximate and Inordinate Causes,
viz. Blood and Humors.
UNder this Member, having spoken of outward, ambient, and more remote Causes,
we shall only add a word of such Causes, as are caused by those Causes, viz.
Inward, Proximate, and Immediate Causes, proceeding chiefly from the Heart,
Spirits, Humors; all that are comprehended under the name of contained parts,
being internal Causes. For as they are purer, or impurer, so is the being,
Health, mind and Soul affected. The Body molesting and disturbing the Animal
Faculties, no less then the Passions and Perturbations of the mind, the body.
And whether is most mischievous, is by some controverted. Many with Plato,
excusing the Body, condemn the Soul, as not ruling the Body better. Others more
rationally condemn the Body, and excuse the Soul. Nona Corpus est Domicilium
Animae, and that by which it works, being of it self inorganical and
incorporeal, so that then, as are the Organs of the Body, so is the Soul
disposed. Mores sequuntur temperaturam Corporis. Whence proceeds else, those
varieties in men's Dispositions and Inclinations, Sympathies, and Antipathies?
why is a melancholy man else sad, cogitative, pensive? the Sanguin, jovial,
cheerful, merry? the Phlegmatic, Lunatic, Heavy, Dull? the Choleric, Angry,
Hasty, Furious? so that according to the predominant humor, is the Mind and
Soul inclined, and both the Understanding and Will captivated; for the
Understanding working by the inferior and subordinate Senses, can effect
nothing without their help; and the Will being hereby weakened, cannot in the
least restrain the other parts, but is easily carried away and overruled by
them. The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, so that ye cannot do the the things
that ye would. The good that I would, I do not; but the evil which I would not,
that I do. And so we see daily, that old people dote, are dull, and want spirit
and vivacity, and perform neither the rational, nor natural actions, with that
vigor as formerly, when young; which cannot proceed from the agedness of the
Soul, but in that the Body is so, according to whose strength, vigor and
temper, the Soul acts.

Neither does the Indisposition of the Body, it is Humors and Spirits, macerate
and torment the Soul alone, n="" By the mediation of Humors and Spirits.
but perverts the good temperature of our Constitutions, and causes not only
worms, but all Diseases.

Humors are in number four, Blood, Phlegm, Choler, and Melancholy. To which we
may add the Serum of the Blood. Now the Blood, from whence all other Humors
proceed, is made of the Chyle and the thinner parts of the Aliment, pr^st down
to the Intestines, which passing through the Lacteals to the Chyle, and
amalgamated with a Serum from the Lymphaticks, passes through the Subclavals,
whence mingled with the Blood, it rushes into the vena Cava, and so goes into
the left Ventricle of the Heart, and by it is motion, is cast into the Lungs
through the pulmonary Arteries, to be there as well defaecated from some
Emplastick Immundities and excrementitious Crudities, as by the niter of the
Air, attracted by respiration, impregnated, and more exactly mingled with the
Blood, and then through the pulmonary veins, is conveyed to the right Ventricle
of the Heart, out of which again, when more refined, is by the Aorta, sent to
all parts of the Body; whence for its farther exaltation, it undergoes various
separations in the Liver (which depurates it of it is choleric quality) Kidneys
(whence it is defaecated of it is Serum;) and Fermentations in the Spleen,
Testicles, Uterus, etc. by which it is endowed with more vigor and life. But
the Heart is however, the chief Sanguifier and Finger: For by it is innate niter
and ferment, fermenting the Chyle, which is full of volatile Salt and Sulphur,
it becomes red; for upon it is first rushing into the Heart, a strange
ebulition (as it is thought by Des Carts) is made, like the pouring almost of
Spirit of Niter on Butter of Antimony.

Now all defects of the Humors are divided into Plethoram, and Cachochymiam.

Plethora is a plentidude, redundancy, or fullness of the Blood in the Body, and
other Humors, viz. when they abound beyond their due mean, they are called
(...). If there be not blood mixed with this plentitude, it is rather a
Cachochymia, as Galen Lib. de Ple^itudine.
notes, it being improper to call the redundancy of Phlegm, Choler, or
Melancholy, a Plethora. Yet if the other good humors abound with blood, it is
a pure Plethora; but if together with the redundancy of good humors, there be
also mixed such as are bad and vicious; it is a spurious Plethora, corrupting
the good humors and nutriments, and ingendring worms. So does many times the
Pure, by several Accidents.

Cachochymia is an excess in either quantity, or quality of natural, or
preternatural excrementitious humors, or whilst either of these putrify, and
introduce worms, and an alteration of the habit of the body and constitution.
So that Cachochymia is diverse; for sometimes Choler, sometimes Melancholy,
sometimes times Phlegm, sometimes serous humors, and sometimes two or more, of
these mixed abound; whence it differs from Plethora in seat; for Plethora is in
the veins only, Cachochymia is over all the body, and in every part, and in
some one part or member sometimes, as well as in the veins. For a Plethora is
one of these ways to be considered; 1. (...), 2. (...); Quo ad vasa, Quo ad
vires. Plentitude in relation to the vessels, I call the great concourse of
blood and humors, extending the veins beyond their ordinary magnitude. In
relation to the strength, is when the strength of the body is burdened,
oppressed, and born down, although the vessels be not extended. Some have made
a mixed kind of Plethora, as when the vessels are not only filled and extended,
but pains at the same time affect the body, bearing down the strength: all
extinguishing natural heat; and putrefying, yet herein does Cachochimia agree
with it, that it is also twofold, Pure and Spurious. A Pure Cachochymiae, is
when there is more plenty of ill humors then is convenient, without any
mixture at all of any good. Spurious is, when together with abundance of bad
humors and juices, there is an allay, more or less, of good humors with them.
And as is the one destructive to our healths, being apt to putrify and cause
worms, with a thousand other distempers; so is the other. The worst being
Cachochymick, having its residence as well without as within the vessels, and
in every part of the body, especially the bowels, it is most apt to offend, and
is a most frequent cause of this, and almost all Diseases.

Now I would not be here mistaken, that the Melancholy, Choleric, and
Phlegmatic humors in the mass of Blood, are excrements, being often so called,
from their similitude with excrements, and because they soon degenerate
thereinto; for they retain the form of blood, fit for nourishing the body, and
soon converted into blood; therefore more aptly termed Choleric, Phlegmatic,
and Melancholic Blood, then excrements.

For all these Humors are either Natural, or Preternatural. The Natural is a
cold and moist Juice or Blood, sweet in taste, and not perfectly concocted (to
speak of Phlegm first) the most cold and crude of all the other humors, that is
comparitively, and in respect of the second concoction, not in respect of that
which ^s performed in the stomach, for in the Chyle are heterogenial parts; and
that which therein is the more cold, moist and trude, is prepared, and began to
be sanguified, and is so disposed, that it be^omes nourishment to the cold and
moist ^arts, and is capable of better concoction; although, yet, in comparison
of ^ure and perfect blood, it be also termed crude; and this is the Phlegm in
the mass of Blood. Preternatural Phlegm, is all other Phlegm besides, abounding
in the body, and can never be transmuted unto blood, or nourishment; of which
there are diverse kinds. As 1. Sweet, or insipid. 2. Acide, or sharp. 3. Salt.
And 4. Vitreous, resembling molten grass.

1. Incypid Phlegm, (for indeed, the denomination of Sweet, belongs more
properly to natural Phlegm) is a crude ^umour in the stomach, ob defectum
concoctionis, arising of too much eating and drinking, idleness, etc. or else
by eating crude and unwholesome meats and drinks, feeding on variety of dishes,
and at unseasonable times; or from an ^ndisposition of the Intrals. Now there
are several Crudities belonging to several Concoctions, some being more hot,
some more cold; yet that is generally received for the crude humor that for
want of digestion, is not perfected in the stomach, and can in no part of the
body be converted into good nourishment (the defect of the first Concoction,
being not amended in the second (...) but so remains crude; and upon the
least occasion putrifies, ingenders worms* and causes a multitude of other
diseases*

2. Acide Phlegm is also crude, arising of the same causes as the former. And
therefore must needs produce the same effects; it is rendered Acide through want
of Heat, and is worse then Incypid.

3. Salt Phlegm, arises of Incypid Flegm^ putrified, and serous humors mixed,
growing salt through putrefaction; Nam quum dulcis pituitae portiones quaedam,
vi putridinis astae, reliquae dulcis substantiae permiscentur, salsum in ea
saporem efficient: quem admodum etiam in maris aqua fieri ceruimus. And must
therefore also needs be a Cause.

4. Vitreous Phlegm is exceeding cold, viscid and thick, causing intolerable
pains where it is lodged, and is no less a Cause, then any of the rest.

Choler also, is either Natural, or Preter-^atural; Natural and not
excrementitious, ^s that hotter and dryer part of the mass of Blood, serving to
nourish the body, ^eing together with the Blood, sent through the veins into
all the parts thereof; and therefore may be termed Alimen^ary Choler. It is made
of the more thin and hot part of the Chyle, and nourish^th the dryer parts of
the body. But ^his is not properly to be called Choler, but rather a Choleric
Blood.

Now there is another Natural Choler, that is excrementitious, and that is
abso^ute Choler, and an excrement of the second Concoction, whose receptacle is
the Gall, made of the hottest and sharpest parts of the Chyle and Blood; and
sent into the Bowels as a natural Cathartick to the Body, and if detained,
being soon apt to corrupt, it degenerates into worms, and innumerable other
direful Diseases.

That which is Preternatural, arises through defect of concoction, too much
Care, Anxiety of Mind, Anger, Grief, too much and over frequent exercise,
watchings, hunger and fasting, an hot and dry distemperature of the Bowels,
youth and strength of Age, the Summer time, an hot constitution of the Air,
Diet ho^ and dry, of a thin substance, and especially all Fat and sweet things,
and i^ fourfold. 1. Veteline Choler, resembling the yolk of an Egg in color,
hotter and thicker, then Natural Choler, ye^ generated thereof, and of
Burnt-Chole^, by a preternatural heat. This is Ve^elin^*

2. Porracea, or Leek-green Choler, arises of vicious and unwholesome meats,
especially of Garlic, Leeks, Onions, Milk, or whatever is apt soon to corrupt,
by the means of an hot stomach; and becomes green through crudity and the
corruption of the nutriment, which nature cannot perfectly digest nor master.

3. Eruginous Choler, Eruginosa, resembling the ternise of Copper or Silver;
engendered in the Stomach by a more intense heat, as also in the Heart and
Liver, and inordinate heat in the Viscera, and Veins.

4. Isatida, being of complexion like unto the herb Isatidis, which we commonly
denominate Wood, of a bluish green color. It proceeds of Eruginous Choler
more adusted, and so comes more near unto Black Choler, is the most sharp,
corroding and malignant of any of the rest. Thus you may easily perceive, ^hey
are all causes of worms and other Maladies.

Lastly, Melancholy is either Excrementitious, or not Excrementitious. The
^atter is nothing else, but the cold and ^ry part of the mass of Blood, and is
Alimentary Melancholy, nourishing the ^old and dry parts of the Body, and is
engendered of the more gross, thick, cold and dry part of the Chyle, and so more
properly termed Melancholy Blood, then any else, it being sanguifiable.

The Excrementitious is Natural, or Preternatural, the former is that
faecu^ent, gross, thick excrement, which is ge^erated in the Spleen and other
parts ^n Sanguification; yet being sent to the ^omach, causes an appetite; it
is oc^asioned by a cold and dry temperature ^f the Bowels, old Age, the
Autumnal ^^me of the year, of an unconstant tem^erature of the Air,
over-watchings, ^ares, fears, sadness, immoderate exer^ise, meats of qualitity
cold and dry, or ^ielding a gross, thick, and terrene sub^^ance.

Preternatural Melancholy, proceeds ^om adustion; of temperature hot and ^ry,
and is termed Adust Melancholy, or Black Melancholy. It is twofold for the
^hey are all causes of worms and other Maladies.

Lastly, Melancholy is either Excre^entitious, or not Excrementitious. The
^atter is nothing else, but the cold and ^ry part of the mass of Blood, and is
Alimentary Melancholy, nourishing the old and dry parts of the Body, and is
in^endred of the more gross, thick, cold and dry part of the Chyle, and so more
^roperly termed Melancholy Blood, then any else, it being sanguifiable.

The Excrementitious is Natural, or ^reternatural, the former is that faecuent,
gross, thick excrement, which is ge^erated in the Spleen and other parts (...)
Sanguification; yet being sent to the ^^omach, causes an appetite; it is
oc^asioned by a cold and dry temperature ^f the Bowels, old Age, the Autumnal
^^me of the year, of an unconstant tem^erature of the Air, over-watchings,
^ares, fears, sadness, immoderate exer^ise, meats of qualitity cold and dry, or
^ielding a gross, thick, and terrene sub^^ance.

Preternatural Melancholy, proceeds from adustion; of temperature hot and ^ry,
and is termed Adust Melancholy, or ^lack Melancholy. It is twofold for the
most part, the one arising of Natural Melancholy, or Melancholy Suc, the other
of Veteline, or yellow Choler. But sometimes by some accidents, phlegm is
converted into melancholy, especially Acide Phlegm; for it being apt to
putrify, it soon degenerates into Melancholy. And all these humors being as
apt to putrify in our bodies as any thing, do as soon convert into worms; nay,
what is the distemper they produce not?

We may here also add this of the Serum, since it is no less a Cause of
Cacochymia, then any of the four humors, it being a watrish, thin humor (as I
may say) proceeding from the other humors; nay, look how many kinds of Juices,
are contained in the Veins, and so many several sorts of Serums are there,
every humor having its peculiar whey; and is as it were, the excrement of the
humors. It is divided into mild, and sharp; the sharp and salin is for the
most part, converted into Urin; yet some part is still retained in the blood
and other humors, to clarify them, Swea^ is also from the same, to which I
may add Teers, only they are expelled several ways, as by the Eyes, Pores,
Uritary passages; which, if it be not duly digested, distributed, and
evacuated; but diverted and obstructed, it stagnates the body, corrupts the
other humors, and ingenders not only worms, but Cacochymia's, and is the
fountain of most Diseases. And so much shall suffice to be spoken of Humors,
how Causes; yet they are not confined to the first qualities, but have likewise
in them secondary qualities, some being Bitter, Acide, Saline, etc. by which
they may also be a Cause in as forcible a manner, If we but consider how the
blood and other liquors, as also the Urin abounds with Sulphur Vitriol, and
that the several Sulphurs and Vitriols in our bodies may operate variously one
upon another. As also that the bitter, acide, salin, incypid, tough, etc.
juices in our bodies abide in us without disturbance whilst they duly allay
each other, and grow not predominant. And our very Aliment is turned in and
that of very Milk, as we see in Children.
as by the primary qualities, as we see aluminent and nitrous humors are
apparent in several other distempers, as the Gout, Canker, Scorby; or, to speak
spagyrically, they may be referred to SALT, SULPHUR, and MERCURY; of which,
there are diverse sorts in our bodies. As of SALTS, there is a sweet Salt, the
subject of the Balsamic Mercury, and is Nature's great friend. But the Nitrous
Salt is quite contrary, and destructive to her, causing many Diseases. The
Aluminous Salt, is to the Viscera, extremely emphractick; as Vitriolate Salt
Cathoiretick to the pulmonary vessels, and urinary passages, and is the materia
of Scorbies, and podagrical Affections, as well as Catarths. There is also an
Armoniack Salt, that is dysepulotick to the Skin and Flesh. Also a Saline Salt
that occasions thirst.

In like manner there are no less variety of SULPHURS: As there is a vinous
Sulphur, resembling the Archeus, or Vital Spirit, or Sulphur which is the
director of Life. And there is a Sulpurous Sulphur, that is most fiery, and the
occasion of Fevers especially continent; as Stibial Sulphur is of putrid, with
vomits and sickness of the stomach. So Cinabrious Sulphur ingenders malignant
Fevers, and is phagedainick to the skin and flesh. Arsenical Sulphur does also
occasion malignant Fevers, the small Pox, Dysenteries, Syncopes, etc. And so
does Eruginous Sulphur cause Dysenteries, pains in the Ventricle, Cholera, etc.

Of MERCURIES also, there are not a few; as there is a Balsamic Mercury, which
is all one with the Humidum Radicale, and is the stay of our Lives. Again there
is a Glutinous Mercury, that, on the contrary, diseases the body; is
emphractick to bowels, and is that we call Tenacious Phlegm. As Mercurial
Mercury, is the same which we call Serum. And so Glacial Mercury, is what we
denominate Vitreal Phlegm, being Pugnotified. There is also a Lunary Mercury,
which is that Crystalline Liquor which perfuses the Brain; but becoming
accidentally sulphurous or saline, is the occasion of many dreadful evils in
the Brain. And Acetose Mercury, is only that acid Vinger-like phlegm, that
renders the body meagre, squalid, etc. and is very offensive to the Bowels.

These, by their various amalgamamations one with another, and ten thousand
other ways besides, may not only subvert our good Temperatures and
Constitutions, and prepare them, but also subjugate them to the Helmintick
matter, and most, if not all other Diseases.

We may ascribe all to Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury; which denominations in some
Cases, we ought not to despise; nor, on the other hand, the Galenical Doctrine
of Humorous Causes, lest we make our selves ridiculous.

Thus amidst so many various Causes, no wonder if so many various forms of
worms, of diverse colors and magnitudes be engendered in us, as has Chap. 3.
been before described.

CHAP. VII. Of the Signs of Worms, and the Fountain of Signs in general.
DEscend we, in the next place, according to our proposed method, to the Signs
Diagnostick, whereby these vermin are discovered to be in the bodies of
Mankind, having spoken of Causes.

Now this word Sign in this place, is not to be taken in that strict sense
which commonly our Philosophers do, understanding thereby, only the Effect; but
in a more large sense, according to the general acceptance of Physicians. For
whatsoever is presented to the Senses, manifesting any thing else, secret or
hidden, is a Sign. Cognoscitur enim Signatu^ ex Signo demonstratione (...) ab
effectu, vel a causa, vel iterum ab Essentia. Medici vero hic omne id, quod
aliquod eorum quae in method^ medendi indicant, Significare and monstrare,
notumque reddere potest, signum appellant. For by the name Signs, we understand
all those evident things, which lay open an hidden matter. Seu, ut Author
Definitionum medicarum loquitur. Signum est (...); or Signum est, quod sub
sensum aliquem cadit, and quiddam significat, quod latebat: Or we may say,
Signa sunt quae conspectui nobis exhibent ea quae in obscuro sunt. For a Sign
must signify and indicate something, else it is a sign it is no Sign.

Signs then are threefold, wholesome, indicating a healthy sound body; or
unwholesome, showing weakness and Infirmities; or neutral, indicating a
disposition to neither, but contain some signs of health, and some of sickness;
whence they were wont by the Ancients (before Galen) to be called (...),
Deloticks, or Diagnosticks, which are demonstrative, making the present state
and condition of the body apparent or the disease, whether natural or
preternatural. Likewise (...), Prognostics, which indicate and foretell what
shall happen upon the Disease. And (...), Anamnesticks, which declare the
quondam-state of the Body, or condition past. Some again, are common Signs,
some Proper, and thence arise these several denominations (...), which are such
Symptoms as of necessity follow the Disease, having in them all the notes and
indications of the distemper; and therefore, they are always present at the
beginning of a Disease agreeing therewith, demonstrating the present malady,
and cannot be separated from it; and they are constituted and made up of many
Signs, which being taken severally, are not Pathognomonicks; as, difficulty of
breathing, a dry Cough, a feverish Distemper, with Pain, etc. are the
Pathognomonick signs of a Pleurisy, yet an Authelitus, Cough, a Fever, Pains,
etc. considered severally of themselves, are not. Likewise (...), which the
Latins call Assidentia, Supervenientia, mox seu post Apparentia.

Synedruous Assidentia, are sociable Signs; yet such as do not necessarily
cohear to the essence of a Disease, neither are they inseparable from a
Disease, nor always present; but sometimes (besides the Pathognomonicks) they
appear presently at the beginning of a Disease, sometimes they follow
afterward, and sometimes again, they appear not at all, at any time of the
Disease; and therefore, they declare not the Disease it self, or it is kinds;
but some Condition thereof only.

Galen and his followers comprehend Epiginomena's under Synedruous; therefore
Fuchsius and others, mention only Synedruous, confounding the other therewith.
And Fernelius speaks not a word of Epiginomena's; yet they are different Signs.

Epiginomena's and Epiphanomena's, are such Signs as neither show the kind of a
Disease, nor the quality thereof; but only it is mutation. And they are
threefold, as 1. Some are signs of Crudities and Indigestions. 2. Others denote
Life and Death. And lastly, others indicate the Crisis, and are Critical,
presaging the termination of a Disease.

So that, although there are many and diverse Fountains of Signs; yet may they
all be reduced to these three following, viz. First to the essence of the thing
it self, whether it be a Disease, a Cause, or a Symptom; to wit, when a thing
is so manifest in it is own nature, and obvious to the Senses, that there needs
no other signs to make it more apparent. 2ly. from the effects, or all things
that follow health, a disease, and causes of a disease, Accidents, and
Symptoms, whether the Actions are hurt, or the Excrements, Retentions, or
Qualities. Thirdly, from Causes which go before the Effect, whether they are
external, as Air, Meat and Drink, Custom, etc. or internal, as Humors, Age,
Temperament, Sex, etc. by themselves, or by accident, or what other way soever,
etc. But I shall only insist of the Diagnostick signs of Worms in this place
and so proceed to Symptoms and Prognostics, and then to a conclusion.

SECT. I. Of the Diagnostick Signs of Worms.
ERE we can come to the Cures, it is most requisite we consider the signs of
the Disease, that we be rightly informed of the nature thereof, or our Remedies
will but be in vain; for the Disease being latent in the body, we can never
discover it without the signs.

And truly, it is no easy matter to discover the signs of worms, or, at least,
by those signs infallibly to conclude any one molested by them; since all the
signs that discover them, are common signatures and indications also of other
Diseases. Neither do all the signs appear in all people, but in some more, in
some less.

However, the signs of worms in the Intestines and latent there, viz. the most
common and frequent are, squallidness of face, and sometimes by fits, high
colored, then again, pale; hollowness of the eyes, and yet sometimes, a kind
of shining about them; itching of the Nose, an unusual defluxion of Spittle, a
stinking Breath, mixed sometimes with an acid respiration; a grating of the
Teeth, especially in the sleep; an universal trembling over the whole body;
unquiet sleep, with frequent startings; an assiduous dry Cough; in some a
continual loathing, and often vomitings, and sometimes an insatiable appetite;
a Hickop, a dryness of the Tongue and Lips, a pain and heaviness in the Head,
propension to sleep; an extension and swelling of the Belly, so as that, being
struck, will sound like a Drum; with many times a rumbling noise, through wind;
in some again, the Belly is rendered on the other extreme, very lank; also
looseness of the Belly, in which their excrements are exceeding corrupt, and
frequently resembling Ox or Cowdung; a gnawing and biting about the stomach,
especially fasting; frightfull and terrible Dreams and Fancies in the sleep;
extreme thirst; if Teretes are at any time dejected, which occasioning most
grievous Symptoms, it is a sign they are most abundant and peccant at that
time; especially if in a morning, whilst the Patient is fasting, if any cold
liquor be sprinkled upon his stomach, and find them run all together: Many
times the body decays, and grows lean. If there be any emission of cucurbitin
morsels, the Patient is assuredly molested with your Lati Lumbrici. If there be
an itching in Ano, it indicates Ascarides offend. And so of others you may
judge by the part affected. Lastly, the Pulse is for the most part unequal.

It is no easy matter many times, to discover whether they be from a natural
or magical cause, since as you have heard, the Devil oftentimes, and most
times, works by natural means, and by the mediation of men's humors. Whence
several able Physicians have been herein deceived; as may be seen in their
Writings. Sennertus tells us, he cured several that were sorely affected with
intolerable pains, and inflammations; the which he could not in the least
imagine proceeded from any supernatural, or magical Cause. Yet some Witches,
then in prison, were the Causes thereof, as upon their examination they
confessed. For in that the depraved humors were by them excited, they were the
causes of the ensuing distempers; in that they did it only by the mediation of
humors, it was the hardlier discovered to be magical.

The chief Signs however, are these,

1. When the Patient is extraordinarily affected, and that, sometimes, without
the least appearance of any natural cause whatsoever. Diverse Instances to to
this purpose, we have in Daemonalatr. Sagar. lib. 2.
Remigius.

2. When the Patient speaks an unknown Language he was never taught; describes
parties, habits, and actions at a distance, with whom he was never acquainted.

3. When Physicians of known abilities, are gravelled and puzzled about ordinary
and known Distempers (which is commonly seen about worms) so as they know not
neither what to determine, even within themselves; also when all ordinary
Infirmities, stoop not to proper and specifical Remedies.

4. When Knives, Scissers, Pinns, Needls, Coals, Parchment, Pigionsdung, lumps
of Hair, or any thing else, that cannot be naturally bred in the body, be
evacuated by themselves, stool, or issue out of any sore or ulcer.

5. When a disease suddenly changes, and runs into another without any apparent
natural cause; or suddenly surprises any in health, without any seeming cause;
as that Youth mentioned by the afore-quoted Author, who being well, and only
going to ease himself, suddenly gave a loud screech, and then fell down as
dead, and so continued in spite of all means, in so much as his Parents had
thoughts of his Burial; but being by one, wiser than the rest by, persuaded to
desist for three days at least; the third day about the same hour he was
taken, came to himself again; but with such intolerable and grievous pains,
etc. such Concussions and Contorsions of his body, miserably yelling, howling,
and exclaiming for three days together, without intermission; all that while
neither eating nor drinking, nor taking any thing, but when they used strong
Ligatures against his Convulsions, which were fierce upon him, etc. till at
length he evacuated eleven worms of his own accord in bed, of the length of a
man's middle finger, with black heads, and innumerable feet, etc. He continued
many years in this sad condition; yet worse at sometimes than others of the
Moon.

6. If any thing be evacuated extraordinary or no, if it be not tangible, or
vanishes in a short time after.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Direful Symptoms introduced by Worms.
THE eighth Head which we promised to insist on, is that Preternatural, that of
right follows a Disease, even as the shadow does a body; and by Physicians
called (...) properly: Yet this word Symptom, is variously taken; for if we
consider the signification of the word, which the Latins interpret Con-casus, a
(...), i. e. Simul Cado, is nothing but (...), a (...), which signifying the
same thing, or an Accident; so that whatsoever happens to any one, or follows
any thing, Sive secundum, sive praeter naturam, ipsius (...) dici poterit.
Notwithstanding, Physicians account what follows fickness, or sickly bodies,
(...), a Symptom, or Symp^omes; and what follows an healthy constitution of
body (...), Accidents, according to Galen, li. 1. Meth. Med. Cap. 9. Yet
sometimes, it is generally taken for all that happens preternaturally to man's
body, and to denote not only what follows upon a Disease, but also all Diseases
and their causes. But we are not to understand it in this latitude, but
distinguish it from both, a Disease and it is Cause. For a Symptom follows a
Disease, as the Effect does the Cause; whence it may also be denominated (...),
i. e. Superveniens and Supergenitum. It being evident, that that which Actionem
laedit, is a Disease; that which Morbum producit, is the Cause; and that which
Morbum consequitur is properly a Symptom only. Neither can Symptoms ever assume
the nature of a Disease, because they cannot hurt the actions perse. Yet many
Diseases are justly termed sometimes, symptomatical, following other
Distempers; as a Fever, when it follows a Pleurisy, or Phrenitis a Fever,
which in themselves however, are truly Diseases, and would be so accounted, did
they not depend upon another. So that a Symptom may be defined, A
preternatural affection which ^ollows a Disease, as a shadow does a body, ^r
the effect the cause, and without it cannot subsist; or, A Symptom is an
affection pre^ernatural in those things which without the constitution of the
parts, are necessary to action, following somewhat else, preternatural.

Having thus given you an hint what a Symptom is, I shall proceed to show the
many direful Symptoms that has and may follow upon worms. As, to speak of
Distempers of the Head; A young Girl about Alexander Benedictus li. 2. de Cur.
Motb. Cap. 16.
eight years of age, was by worms, affected with a Catalepsie. It has likewise
occasioned Mart. Rul. Cent. 8. Cur. 13. Dan. Sennert. Pract. Med. lib. 2. Part.
4. Cap. 1.
Epilepsies, and indeed nothing more frequent then Epilepsies from fumes of
dead worms, offending the Brain and most occult Cells and Ventricles thereof,
with their malignant quality; many times also from the worms gnawing the mouth
of the stomach, whereby the matter is easily As also Headache, Anhelitus,
Cough, from such gnawing, Mart. Rul. Cent. 1. Cur. 80.
moved, and Convulsions excited.

A Maid affected with the Falling Sickness, in a grievous manner, was cured by
a Medicine that caused her to evacuate above an hundred worms, great and small,
and so was never molested with it more. Zac. Lucit. Prax. Ad. lib. 2. obs. 33.
A poor woman a long time macerated with anxiety and pains Mart. Rul. Cant. 8.
Cur. 13. and Forest. li. 10. obs. 117.
in the stomach, fell afterward into a^ Epilepsie, Syncope, trembling of the
Heart, and Cholick by fits, and then into a Bulimos, so that she seemed
unsatiable, one day feeling as it were, a sudden leap in her belly, as if she
had been strangled, and taken with a Sopor, she voyded by the mouth four worms
of that sort we call Teretes; and coming to her self again, she complained of
most grievous pain and gnawing about her Navel, from whence issued three nimble
brisk round worms, of the length of a man's hand. Likewise such as have been
molested with Pet. Forestus med. obs. l. 21. observat. 28.
Convulsions, have been cured by voyding worms by the nose. And Trincavel.
tells us, Lib. 9. c. 11. de cur. morb.
he has seen some, that by worms, were so direfully affected with the
Convulsion Opisthotonis, that their heels were made to touch their heads; which
is confirmed by Obs. 34.
Lucitanus, one affected with a malignant Fever, and on a recovery, was
suddenly Zac. Lucit. Prax. Ad. l. 2. observe. 35.
taken with an Apoplexy, lying in bed, as one dead, without sense or motion:
his Physician spying at length, between his Teeth, something to move, his mouth
being forced open, there were three live worms, which being taken away, the
Patient in a little time came to his Senses, and presently after evacuated two
more live worms by the Nose, and afterward four by stool, and so recovered.
And what is wonderful and worth our serious consideration, Zac. Lus. Prax. Ad.
l. 2. observe. 36.
a woman of about eighteen, who being recovered of a Quartane Fever, and in
her Senses, etc. became surprised with Aphonia, so that she did not speak in
forty days without Coughing up worms, of the shape of palmer-worms, small,
short, and alive, notwithstanding all the help of means she used, which by
their contaminating venomous vapors, molested and impedited the instruments of
speech. A Gentleman affected with a Lues Venerea, and almost cured, being
direfully molested Forest. in schol. obs. lib. 9. de variis capitis doloribus.
with pain in his Head, after the trial in vain, of the best means in that
case, was at length cured by the having of the Cranium opened, and a worm taken
away, which was on the Dura Matter, in the form of a Weesel. Ut refert Interpres
H^lle^ii.
A Maiden extremely cruciated with the Headache for two days, voided a white
worm, pretty thick, and longer than a man's hand, by the Nose, and so was cured.
Z^c. Lus. lib. 1. obs. 6.
One troubled with an inveterate Headache night and day, was thought by the
Physicians to have had the Pox, and accordingly prescribed their Medicines; but
to no purpose; and after they had put the poor Creature to unsufferable
torment, and administered many Purges; by a sternutatory of Pepper and Castor
only, she expelled a black worm by the Nose, round, plump, much like to those
in an old Cheese, only the beak was sharper, which she being freed of, her
pains vanished. Forest. lib. 21. obs. 31.
In some they cause Watchfulness, unquietness, Anger, and Madness. And
sometimes many Z^c. Lusit. lib. 2. obs. 31. Prax. Admir.
Exclamations, as that Boy was macerated with a terrible pain in his Stomach,
who by a Medicine, voiding much unctous phlegm, with a black dead worm, half the
length of a man's hand, pretty thick, all over hairy, a smooth head and a forked
tail, was restored to health. And so that Fellow about forty, who was for many
days with perplexing pains tormented, as soon as he had voided that flat-worm
of four Else long, and the thickness of a man's thumb almost, was presently
well. Likewise that Fellow, that was for two years together tortured with pains
of the Heart, Forest. Ab Hen. a Bra obs. med. lib. 21. In Schol. obs. 26.
was cured as soon as he evacuated a worm of a strange shape. Beniventus lib.
de abditis, Cap. 2.
Another also, was freed of pains of the Heart by vomiting, with much
phlegmatic matter, a strange kind of worm. Garrius Lopius scribit fe vidisse
matronam per uteri collum multitudinem vermium Ascaridum magn. expulisse, quae
postmodum dolor quo cruciabatur liberata est. And I my self had a Patient, who
labored under all the Symptoms of an exulceration of the Reins, and
inflammation of the Kidneys, with that intolerable pain, he could neither,
rest, sleep, nor lie any manner of way, but on his Back, nor endure the least
touch with a finger on the region of the Reins, and was wholly freed by the
evacuation of worms, of that kind which we call Teretes, which came away upon
the injection of an ordinary Clyster somewhat sweet. And we Riv. ex obs.
Commun. A. D. Pet. Pachequo obs. 40.
find a young man grievously macerated with pains in the Reins, voyded with his
Urin a great number of black worms, of the length and bigness of an ordinary
Needle, horned, and friable. Alex. Tralianus.
A woman that used to eat very much, and immoderately, digesting, and never
satisfied, and complaining of a gnawing in her stomach, etc. who at length, by
taking a Purge of Hiera, voyded a worm of twelve Cubits long, and upward;
whereby that Boulimus, or Caninus appetitus ceased. Another in our own time, a
poor fellow, who had more then an ordinary stroke with his Teeth, and yet was
never the fatter, who by the ejection of a worm by stool, was freed of his
continual hunger, and well he might, for it was no small matter would feed such
a worm, being sixteen foot long. Sudden, violent, and unaccustomed vomitings,
do also oftentimes follow upon, or by reason of these vermin. Forest. li. 21.
obs. med.
One was wont by fits, to vomit up certain long white worms out of his stomach.
And another Mart. Rul. Cent. 1. Cur. 34.
vomited many worms, which had grievously infested the body, and corroded the
stomach. And not long since, a Gentlewoman at Table, being suddenly taken with
a vomiting, ejected a black worm, of a quarter of a yard long, and so was well.
Avicennae Fen. 16.3. Tract. P. ca. 4.
Sometimes they so obstruct the oesophagus, that the Patient is in danger of
suffocation, and a Boy, Anton. Beniventus de Abdit. morb. Cap. and Cur. Cap. 28.
who by reason of worms, could not rest any manner of way, Sed semper hinc inde
temerario quodam impetu ac inordinato motu ferebatur, ut etiam stare volens
iterum titubaret and caderet; yet, by evacuating of the worms, was cured. In
like manner a Wench Gabutinus Cap. 13.
in whom was apparent all the signs of a Pleurisy. And I my self had a Patient
but very few days before the writing of this, in an absolute Pleurisy to
outward appearance, having a remiss Fever, a dry Cough at first, anbelitus, a
pungent pain in the side, and afterward cough'd up purulent matter, with now
and then some blood, etc. who was cured by taking such things which evacuated
worms, which he did many times, and the first was a quarter of a yard long.
Cornel. Gem. Cosmocrit. l. 2. Cap. 2.
A wench about fourteen years of Age, after inexpressable tormenting gripings
in her belly, and under her right Hypochondrie, evacuating by siege, a live
Eele-like worm, a Cubit long, which she bore (as if she had been with Child)
nine months, and engendered in the Colon, was cured of those affections. Laz.
Riv. Cent. 3. obs. 3.
A Gentleman of about threescore years of age, was macerated with a Dysentery
for many days, and then with a Tertian Fever, and when he began to amend to
appearance, he had an intermitting Pulse for three or four days, with Anger of
Mind and Soul, as also great weakness of body, the cause of all which, the
Physicians were ignorant, till it manifested it self by voiding at length a
worm a Cubit long, and the thickness of a man's finger, on which, the Pulse
returned to its former equality, all the other Symptoms ceased, and he
perfectly recovered to his pristine health. Such another Amat. Lucit. Cent. 1.
Cur. 48.
story is that of an Youth, who through worms, was affected with an Anorexia,
nauseated all food, restless in every place, moving from place to place, as one
mad; and his Pulse so unequal, low, weak and recurrent, so that all his
Physicians left him over for dead; but at length going to stool, ejected a kind
of bladder, as round as a ball, in which, being opened, they found miriads of
worms, to the admiration of the spectators, and so was perfectly restored to
his former strength. And multitudes of Patients I have had my self, molested
with the Dysentery, occasioned only by worms, which distemper never stopped,
till they, or the vermiculous matter was evacuated. Some also, who have had
universal pains. Another I had in a Consumption, and brought to that weakness,
she could neither stand nor walk, and all through worms; with a Diarrhaea, a
dry Cough, etc. and to cause Ulcers in the Lungs, is also frequent, since many
have been known to spit up worms on their expectoration of emplastick
purulencies. Beniventus.
Sometimes they lie dead, as it were, without sense or motion, Beredictus
Veroaensis lib. 5. cap. 15.
One lay eight days speechless, rigentibus oculis, etc. who voiding forty two
worms in a lump together, without any excrement, was freed. Forest. lib. 21.
obs. 29.
A youth of about nine years of age was so assailed with worms, that he lay in
a languishing Condition three or four months together, feeling no pain, but
only about his Navel, but voiding those worms, he recovered. obs. 26. lib.
Citat.
Another hollow-Eyed, a tumefied Belly, an emaciated Body, with a turbulent dry
Cough, etc. and all by reason of worms. Obs. 35. lib. Citat.
So one was afflicted with a Fever most violently, together with a Looseness,
and a forcible Cough, that expectorated much purulent matter, and at length
languished so, as every one lest him for dead; and all from worms. They
occasion also intolerable gripings and tormina in the Obs. 36. lib. Citat.
Bowels. Wierus de Praestigiis Daemonum. lib. 4. Cap. 16.
A Country Clown, who, after a tedious pain in his Belly, voided a monstrous
worm, was cured. It has been also known, that worms will make the Patient lie
as if he were dead. Sometimes they dissolve into Riv. obs. fol. 308.
bad humors and putrid. A Girl we find Amatus Cen. 2. Cur. 41.
who after worms, ejected both upwards and downwards,, voided a great thing, as
black as Ink. Forest. l. 21. De intest. affect. In Schol. 31.
They often occasion also, Iliack and Mart. Rul. Cent. 10. Cur. 6.
Colic Passions, extend the Belly, rendering it tumid, hard, costive, sometimes
with a Fever Tertian, sometimes Lasks ensue, Lienteric^, Diarrhaea, Chyliaca,
etc. as well as Dysenteries, A Riv. obs. 353. fol.
Citizen of Monpieleur in France in a Tertian Fever, was cured by a medicine
that evacuated a flat-worm seven foot long. Cent. 1. obs. 91. and fol. 340.
Item Valesc. de Taranta in suo Philonio.
Another in a Fever, vomited much Poraceous Choler, and nauseated every thing;
but nothing more frequently introduced by them, then Fevers of all sorts;
Forest, lib 6. de feb. obs. 38.
nay, and Pestilential Fevers too: as also Abundantly to be found in that
sixth book.
Epidemical Diseases. Erasmus Ignoratione.
tells us a notable story of an Italian, that had never been in Germany, whom
he himself (he says) saw in Italy, that notwithstanding he had never been
taught, when the Moon was in Combustion of the Sun, would speak the German
Tongue most elegantly, being as one possessed by the Devil; and yet was cured by
a Physician that administered only a Medicine, which expelled an infinite number
of Worms, whereby he wholly lost his German Tongue. Sometimes they perforate
even the Bowels and Intrals in a Obs. med. lib. 7. obs. 35. Fore^l. See more in
Paulus lib. 4. Cap. 53. Avicenna Fen. 16. Tract. 3. Cap. 2. Paraeus lib. 19.
Cap. 3. Solinander lib. 5. Consil. 15.
strange manner, and causes death it self, not only in that particular, but
diverse other ways, as daily experience evinceth us, under the notion of
Epilepsies, Calepsies, Apoplexies, Scholiograph. ad Cap. 29. Hollerii de morb.
internis.
Syncopes, Pestilential Fevers, and all other Fevers, Palpitations of the
Heart, Pleurisies, Lypothymia, Convulsions, Anginae, Sopores, Deliria,
Maerores, and infinite other Diseases; nay, indeed, under what Disease may they
not kill, since they may be the Introducers of all other Maladies? I shall
therefore say no more of Symptoms: But advise all men, both Patients and
Physicians, in every Distemper, to suspect these vermin, the grand Devourers
and Destroyers of Mankind.

CHAP. IX. Of the Prognostics presaged by Worms.
HAving thus briefly dispatched the Symptoms, let us, in the next place,
examine the Prognostic Signs of Worms, that we may the more plainly discover
the danger of them; and so, consequently, be induced to take the more care to
avoid them.

And for as much, as they are the forerunners and introducers of those direful
and hideous Symptoms before spoken of, and indeed of most, if not all Diseases;
they may very well be Prognostics of them all, according as the Party, and
parts of the Body are affected; sometimes threatening this, sometimes that
Distemper; sometimes more, sometimes fewer Diseases.

Of the three ordinary sorts, Ascarides are less offensive, being most remote
from the Vitals, and are easily expelled by the help of almost any thing,
Purges, or sweet Clysters, any sort.
and frequently of themselves; unless they are large, which argues they arise
of worse matter, and then they are worse, and more dangerous.

Teretes are worse again, and occasion most horrid Symptoms oftentimes; if they
come from any body on a Crisis, it is a good sign. But, if at the beginning of
a Disease, it is bad, whether they be evacuated alive or dead; especially if
alone, without any mixture of excrements; if they be alive, it notes abundance
of Crudity, want of nourishment, and malignity in the Distemper; if dead, much
putrefaction, which has killed them, and is a bad sign; arguing their
expulsion to be rather from the Disease, than Nature: or if they come away of
their own accord, it notes either the multitude of them, or that the Patient,
being for death, by an instinct, leave their habitation to seek better. But if
^hey are evacuated on the declining of a Disease, it is a good sign; arguing
Nature prevails, and that Health is like to ^nsue, if they be emitted together
with ^xcrements, especially; for that shows ^igestion. If in healthy bodies,
they ^reep out at the Mouth or Nostrils, it ^s no ill sign; in regard, they are
apt to ^ave recourse to those parts, through which the nourishment is conveyed
into ^he stomach. If they are bloody when ^hey come out, it argues the Intrals
are ^orroded with them.

The flat-worm is worse than they, being more difficulty cured. Sometimes
(notwithstanding it many times kills; ^ccasioning Consumptions, Dropsies, etc.)
it lies lurking in the body for ma^y years, doing no hurt at all; and ma^y
times comes away of it self, without ^he help of any Medicine.

Red are more direful then White: and ^ll those monstrous shaped worms, which
^ou have heard before described, are worst of all. And so much the more
pernicious are they, by how much the ^ore occult they are in our bodies, and
^he parts affected more noble; and especially being least suspected.

If they proceed from any supernatural cause, whether magical or other, i^ is
doubtful, and very dangerous; it being then inflicted as an immediat^ Judgment
of GOD: who, many times permits the Devil, for the chastening of Mankind, so
to torment and afflict the bodies of men and women. Whence many Distempers,
occasioned by him and his Imps, are not to be remedied by the Physitian's Art.

CHAP. X. Of the Indications, and Method of Cure.
REgard ought to be had to our last promise, now having proceeded so far.
Indicationes and Curatio Lumbricorum, cum sint toto genere praeter naturam, ad
eorum expulsionem dirigendasunt: Quid fit comode, si Interficiantur, quae
Amara, Salsa, Arria, tota proprietate infesta sunt; per superiora, sed dulcibus
mista semper; per inferiora, dulcibus praemissis, tum cum insimis locis, vel in
Intestino recto subsistunt, exhiberi debent: Illis oleum, ut in eo suffocentur
His, butyrum, quod vehementur ^eformidant, immiscendum. Et per al^um
expellantur, quod cathartriis perfi^ietur, quae simul vermes enecant, tum etiam
putridam and mucosam materiam, ex qua generantur, evacuant. Teretes vehementior
a medicamenta desiderent; sed tamen synuptomata, tum febres, si adsint, talia
non admittunt. Quando ^gitur vermes rejiciuntur in morbis acu^is, non statim
debemus ad illos nostram ^otam intentionem convertere, ut mu^ierculae faciunt,
and medici mulieribus ^nservientes: Nam hoc facit ut aegri intereant, cum
neglecto morbo, magis ad vermes curationem convertunt quam ad morbum: ut si
febris continua, aut alius morbus biliosus, aut fulxus ventris aliquem
occuparit, aut si quis in morbis acutis in principio vermes rejecerit, semen
contra eos dare solent, quod tamen febrem majoren accedit, vel corallum, vel
alia quae adstringunt, ad vermes accidendos oportuna solent administrate. Quae
omnia affectibus praecipuis adversantur, ut multum amara, febri and fluxin
ventris, adstringentia and exsiccantia febribus. Quare oportet medicum
diligenter distinguere utrum morbus a vermibus dependeat, an vero vermes
rejiciantur ab aliam causam. Nam si Cognoverimus morbo aliquando fieri a
vermibus, non ea medicamenta prescribends quae affectui, sed praecipuo vermibus
conveniant. Praecipua ex Enecantibus su^ Frigida, cornu cervi ustum, aqua
graminis, cum pauxillo aceti and Sachari. Succus endiviae, Aqua Portulaca,
Calid^. Corallina, Sem. Santonici, Aloe, Myrrha, Zedoaria, Centaureu^ minus,
Flore Persicaru^, Succus Nasturii and Raphani Expellentia sunt praecipue,
Diaturbit^ cum Rhabaro, Pilula, Ruffi, de tribus, etc. Extra, Laudatur Cerotum
ex Myrrha, Aloes, Croci, cum fell Bovis and ace^^ Rosarum compositum; and tum
ori ventriculi, tum dorso applicatum. This is enough to be said of Indications
and Method of Cure, since, if all the Physic Books in the World, and Receipts,
w^^^ Englished; there would still be a Necessity of Phsitians: since it is not
the knowing of Medicines, but the knowing how, and when (...) administer them,
does the Cure.


If they proceed of a supernatural Cause, a supernatural Cure must be
administered: To prescribe the fuming o^ the Horns, Hoofs, and Dung of Beasts,
to drive away the Devil, or to carry Herbs Roots, etc. about one, for the same
purpose, is an idle Fancy; since the Devi^ is a Spirit, and having no Organs,
cannot be affected or offended with these natural things.

If there be any Cure attempted in such Cases, it must be either Natural,
Magical, or Divine.

As touching the Natural, it may be doubted by some, whether natural Remedies
are avoidable in such Diseases, as are occasioned by Devils or Witches, etc.
and truly in some Cases, it is ^o no purpose to use them. As, when ^he
Distemper is merely from the Devil, without any mediation of humors at all:
But if it be by the mediation of humors, natural means may lawfully ^e used,
and many times, (it has been ^nown) to good effect. 1. By eva^uating those
vicious humors, disturbed or corrupted by the Devil; and that by vomit
especially, if the part affected be the Stomach, Mesentery, or about the Spleen
or Liver. If in the Intestines and Bowels, by Purge. 2: By Altera^ives, and
proper Alexipharenicks, which may be contrary to the Distemper, or Humor
excited by the Devil. And these Alteratives are again, either in^ard or
outward, described by De morb. venif. lib. 4. Cap. 2.
Codron^hus, Obs. med. rar's.
Henrecus ab Here, etc. But none of these Natural Cures are to be relied ^n as
certain Cures, since the Devil cannot only introduce many things to the
Patients prejudice, which are unknown to the Physician; but also cross his
designs, by rendering his Medicines ineffectual.

As touching the Magical Cure, performed by Magicians, Conjurers, Witches, by
the mediation of certain Words, Characters, Philters, Charms, Amulets, and the
like, is unlawful. For Cures thereby performed, if any be, are merely by the
power of the Devil, and not by any power or virtue in those Fancies or Toys; as
I have formerly In my Book of Poisons, Epist. to the Readers.
noted. However Leo Suavius, Pistorius, and others, account it an Art to Cure
in this manner, and that they are requisite, fit and lawful means, and ought to
be used. Nay, Lib. 1. de occult. Phil.
Paracelsus, Lib. 3. Rerum Indic.
Erodius, Lib. 4.
Constantius, allow so far of these Practices, that they call the Artists
Magnus Ministeret Vicarius Dei.
Gods Ministers and Viccars. It matters not (says Paracelsus) whether it be GOD
or the Devil, Angels, or unclean Spirits Cure us, so that we be eased. But
Thomas Erastus condemns him, and that justly, for his ignorance and impiety,
and for affirming, If his patients have a strong Imagination, they shall find
the benefit, and the effect, whatever Divines say to the contrary. But these
kind of Cures, I say, are exploded by all good men; nay, and by GOD himself.
Romans 8.19.
Evil is not to be done, that Good may come of it. And that it is evil, will
appear elsewhere. Deuteronomy. 18.11.
Delrio Diquis. mag. lib. 2. cap. 2. Sect. Quest. 1. Tome 3.
thinks much better to die, then be so cured; and so does St. Augustine; The
Devil is the most inveterate Enemy of Mankind, and a murderer from the
beginning; wherefore, there is no good, or the cure of any Disease, to be hope
for from him. Potius mortem homini Christiano obeundam, quam vitam Hominis
Ligaturis redimendam.

It is the duty therefore, of every good man and Christian, to have recourse in
such Cases, chiefly to GOD, whose Judgments, although they are many times
occult; yet, are at all times just. Let Repentance then, for the former sins,
resolution of amendment, and Prayer be thy Medicaments, so shall thou never
need to fear the Devil, nor all his Imps and Devils-birds; provided, thou
relyest wholly upon GOD.

SECT. I. Wherein Air is Rectified.
AND thus I have given you in short, the Indications and Method of Cure; to be
as good as my word, I shall here add a cautionary word, how to prevent their
generation in our bodies, as much as in us lies, that so those direful Symptoms
that follow on them, may never take hold in us. And since the six non-naturals
are the main and most common Causes, I shall close up this my Discourse, with
some short Rules how to rectify and mitigate their evil effects.

As it is easier to prevent a Disease, than to cure it; so it ought to be a
good Physitian's study, as well to preserve Health where it is, as to restore
it, where it is lost. Much more should it be the care of the Patient to take
this wholesome advice gratis; for he must needs know, it proceeds from a real
desire to do him good; since, if I sought my own profit, I should in this
particular be silent, wherein I show men how they may keep themselves in
Health, without any Physic at all; (we seldom meeting with any that advise
with us, how they may keep themselves well; but how they may be cured when
sick) and that is, by Temperance, a Jewel of inestimable value, yet easily
purchased; and cheaper than any one Disease; this being the Issue of Vice,
Disorder and Intemperance.

Now, that I may be the better understood, I shall in short admonish you, that
Health is nothing else, but a power of the due exercise of all the natural,
vital, and animal actions of both Body and Soul, according to the course of
Nature, consisting in a well tempered constitution of the Blood and Spirits,
and of all the similar parts, as also a proportionable frame and Symetry, of
all the organical parts, whereby there follows a just number of every one, a
due magnitude, an exact situation, passage and conservation, with their
continuity and union. But if in any of these particulars, there be a defect, it
is no longer Health.

The subject matter of our Healths (you have heard) are these six non-natural
things, before spoken of; being essentially necessary to it is preservation, ^f
rightly used; and if abused, you see how destructive: I shall therefore briefly
run them over; and show how we may rightly use them to our best advantage, and
prolongation of our Lives, (and so conclude this Book) that is, extend them to
their utmost possibility of subsisting in this finite world, with the least
sickness and inconveniency as may be.

I am not of opinion, that Health is always preserved by Meats and Drinks of
the same temperature of the body receiving it; though, for the most part it be.
For we see melancholy men would soon be destroyed, should they eat such
melancholy meats, as have an Analogy with their Constitutions, by increasing
their evil habit of Body; and therefore such Meats and Drinks as rather
quailfie, alter, and correct their cold and dry Constitutions, will be found
much more convenient for such. And so, Mutati^ Mutandis; the same may be said
of the Sanguine, Choleric and Phlegmatic. And so we see old people, that are
cold and dry, better agree with Wine that i^ ho^ and moist, than with other
Liquors of their own temperature. Also, tha^ Choleric people are destroyed by
Wine* Spice, and Hot Meats. i.e. that are Potentially so; and their Dyscracy by
contrary Aliments, amended and altered.

But as I have said before, somewhat ought to be allowed Custom, which is as a
second nature, gradually gaining upon us, by multiplied actions and frequent
exercise, and in time, arriving even to the power of Nature it self. Wherefore,
whatsoever a man is accustomed to, though in it is own nature bad; yet is it
less hurtful to him, than it is contrary; working less resistance, and
consequently, less disturbance in our bodies, because of it is agreement in
equality, with what is before in the body. Wherefore, as this ought rather to
teach us to enure our selves to what is laudable and good, than evil: since it
is so powerful in it is self, and so difficult to be altered. So on he other
side, we are not suddenly to break off a Custom, though pernicious, lest we run
into worse Inconveniences, then that would have afforded us; for nothing is
more destructive to men's bodies, than sudden alterations. It must be done
therefore, (...), Gradatim. Nay, even such as have been long accustomed to
Wine, or other thing worse, Tobacco, etc. whereby they have perhaps, subverted
their Healths and good Temperatures; even in Fevers, or any other Distemper,
their Custom ought to be indulged, since otherwise, Nature being prohibited her
delight, will despond and yield so to the Disease, as may be her ruin. A
Physician therefore, ought to be very cautious and prudent in this particular,
and not presently to prohibit all, and injoin a strict observation o^ Medical
Rules, as many too frequently and easily do, although there be no contrariety
between the Disease and the Custom. And if a violent Distemper come t^ any one,
let him only prohibit the use i^ quantity of Natures Customs if evil, but
continue the quality, or modera^^ use of them, and of Natures longings because
of the Sympathy, similitude, an^ Analogy, they have with her self.

Having premised this, I shall begi^ as I said, with the first non-natural, A^
which in our present business is to b^ considered, either, as it is in it self,
or i^ relation to the Body receiving it. As in self, a clear, pure, serene Air
is best and men Constitutions for the mo^ part, follow the nature and
temperatu^ of the Air they live in, as you have be^ sufficiently showed before.
But if it b^ never so pure and clear from filthy mi^tures of fumes and vapors
from Mar^hes, Lakes, Muddy, or standing Pools, Jakes, Sinks, Common-shores,
Slaugh^er-houses, Carrion, etc. yet, in relation ^o the Body receiving it, it
may be bad; and that is only to be accounted a good Air, which is proper and
most conve^ient for the constitution and condition of him that is to receive
it, and have ^ower to alter, correct the bad humors, ^r expel, or mitigate
the Distemper; ^s thin, spare, lean, or Consumptive ^odies require not a thin,
but rather a thick, and more gross Air: corpulent, gross bodies, a more thin;
dry bodies, a moist; moist, a dry. Wherefore men ought diligently to consider
their present condition and temperature, and choose their Air according^y. As
if weak, and recovered out of some sickness, a dry Champain Air is ^onvenient,
or to follow the Plough. ^f they fear worms, by all means they are ^o avoid
such Air as does any wise in^line their humors to putrefaction; which in
regard it does so variously, if ^hou art not able to direct thy self, it will
be thy best way, to advise with some real Physician, and not ignorant
In^ruders, since it is not to be determined by every one: wherefore, I shall
need to say no more, but advise such as are in Health, not to be too curious in
the choice of their Air, for by their frequent imaginating this and that Air is
best for them, and slighting or fearing that they live in, they tempt and
deject Nature, and oftentimes opinionate themselves into some ugly Disease or
other, they most feared; and we know that many live in perfect health, in very
immund Air, unpleasant and slinking, being accustomed thereunto. But if
necessity compells a remove into another Air for Healths sake, and the sick man
is by necessity compelled to stay, the Air ought to be corrected with good
Fires, cool Herbs, Vinegar, Roses* Perfumes, etc. as the able Physician will,
according to the condition, bes^ advise. Lastly, there is nothing better, than
change of Air, not only in worms, or where the humors are inclined to
putrefaction; but generally in most Diseases; and to preserve Health.

SECT. II. Diet, Meat and Drink Rectified.
MEAT and Drink, have been before largely handled; I shall therefore in this
place, consider them only in relation to their rectification in Substance or
Quality, Quantity, Time of taking them, Order and Custom. As for the Quality
or Substance of Meat, it must be the care of all prudent men, to avoid all such
Food or Drink, as breed cither a gross, or viscid, slimy, or phlegmatic Juice,
Crudities that bind up the body, or cause obstructions, yield a corrupt matter,
or accidentally corrupt our humors, or may be themselves easily converted into
putrefaction, are hard of digestion, or hinder concoction, or being received
into the stomach, corrupts what it meets with there, etc. If they will live
free from these vermin, and if they know not how to direct themselves, let them
take the Direction of the Learned; still remembering it be easy of digestion
and simple, whereby Nature will be the better able to digest it, and being a
Remedy against Intemperance, nothing better to avoid Crudities; also Sauces
that provoke appetite, and cause excess of eating, are to be avoided. Yet
respect in all this ought to be had to the Constitution of the person, and his
Customs.

As for the Quantity, to prescribe an exact Rule in this particular, for all
Ages, Sexes and Constitutions, when we see by experience, that one and the same
man, cannot live in health with the same food that suffices for quantity at an
other time; that what will suffice in Summer, is too little in Winter; that
what will satiate one, and less then that, will surfeit another, should he eat
as much, and e contra, etc. is not only an idle conceit, and a nicity, but a
madness: Since there is such variety in men's bodies, Strengths, Constitutions,
Dispositions, and manner of Living.

The Quantity of Food then, ought to be proportioned by no other Rule, How to
know the exact measure of meat every man is eat.
but the Quality and Condition of the Stomach; and that measure is exactly
proportioned, we may conclude which the stomach has so much power over, as
perfectly to concoct and digest in the midst of any Employment, either of body
or mind; and then the body will be thereby, more lightsome and refreshed. But
if by eating we find our Wits hebitated, our Fancies and Reasons obscured, our
Appetites satiated, our Bodies lassated and ingrassated, our Senses nautiated,
our Stomachs replete with acid and flatulent eructations, and our Heads with
Catarths, etc. we may conclude we have exceeded in Quantity. Wherefore, in all
our Banquetings and Feastings, let us remember that good Rule, To rise with an
Appetite; considering, we have two Guests to entertain, the Body and the Soul,
and that therefore we have a care, that we destroy not the powers of the one,
nor the faculties of the other. For though the Belly have no Ears, yet it has
Intelligence to beg its due, and wisdom to discern when it has enough.

To point out a time also, for all Ages, Constitutions and Conditions of men,
and limit them therewith, were more then a madness: Since Custom alters much,
and laboring men we know, can, and do eat often and heartily; Children also,
being growing, are frequent eaters, and so require a constant supply of
Aliment; when such as are at maturity that lead a solitary or sedentary life,
are weak and infirm, can eat but at their accustomary times, and that but once
or twice in four and twenty hours. The best Guide in this particular, is
Hunger, eat not therefore, till ye have an appetite, and then not till ye have
none: For when appetite excites not, it most part argues, nature has not fully
digested the former meat, or overcome the former disorder; therefore at such
times, if we eat at all, it ought to be very sparingly. This Rule accurately
observed, would not only conduce to the avoiding of worms, but of indeed most,
if not all Diseases; keep the Bowels clean, and preserve Health better by far,
than Physic. We must herein also, observe our Customs; for fasting too long
on the other side, is extremely pernicious, as was showed before. So that
eating of Break-fasts, and Dinners presently after, must needs be as bad; since
the former cannot be digested, before the later be mixed with it.

The same may be said of Yet note that Claret, of all other Wine, most resists
these vermin; besides I may, without offense, pronounce it the harmlessest
French wine that is.
Drink, which ought not to be med^ed with, if Thirst compel not, in too large
a quantity, at unseasonable times, as in a morning, more then a Draught, (to
keep the body soluble) between Meals; cold Drinks, i. e. potentially so, when
the Pores are open, and after any violent exercise.

There ought also, to be a Right Order observed in eating and drinking, if we
will avoid these vermin, and many other Diseases; to feed on a simple Diet (as
was said) is best, but if that cannot be observed, let what is lightest of
digestion, or empeptick be first eaten, that they may serve to open the bowels,
and not last, to corrupt all the Aliment, as we foolishly use to eat in Summer
time, Cherries, Plumbs, and other moist fruits after Dinner. And let such as
are more Stegnotick, Desiccative, such as Quince, Angelica, Orange Rinds and
Lemons Condite, and the like, be eaten last, if at all, but better let them
alone, then mingle them with meat. Away also with long and tedious Meals. etc.
The Reasons of all this I have showed before, when I spoke of Causes. But
however, in all, somewhat must be allowed to Custom; the same may be said of
Drink.

SECT. III. Sleeping and Waking, Rectified.
ELsewhere in Causes, you have heard the horrid evils, ensuing on sleeping and
waking; therefore the excess of both are to be avoided. In overwatchings, sleep
is to be procured, by either Nature, or Art; inward or outward Hypnotick
Medicines; for some think sleep the chiefest thing in Physic. The fittest time
is when the Aliment is somewhat digested, and settled at the bottom of the
stomach. The best posture is to lie on the right side, for so the Liver rests
under the Stomach, whereby it is warmed, and serves instead of fire to a pot,
to help digestion. After the first sleep, it is most convenient to turn on the
left, that the Aliment may the better descend, and to prevent Crudities, the
mother of worms, and many other Diseases. At the first Decumbiture, it is
requisite also, the body be laid a little incurvating with the legs, and not
stretched at length; with the Arms across, the right hand upon the left
shoulder, and the left upon the right. To procure sleep, it is best to remove
what hinders (if possible) and then to use such convenient Medicines, But
beware of Narcoticks and Opiates.
as may occasion Rest. However, remember it is unseasonable and naught, on a
full stomach in the daytime, when Fears, Cares are in their Heads, it is
usually disturbed in the open Air, and in the Moonlight; also on an empty
stomach; immediately after Purges, Vomits, or Bleeding. If sleep be in excess,
the cause must be removed also, as soon as may be, by proper means; which must
be applied according to the present condition of the party.

SECT. IV. Retention and Evacuation, Rectified.
SEveral Excrements from several Digestions, you have heard (where we spoke of
Causes) there are in the Body, which ought duly to be evacuated, to prevent
those many evils they introduce; especially if there be any wormatick matter,
it ought to be by art, duly evacuated. It were good also, by way of prevention,
to keep the body With stu'd Prunes, roasted Apples, a little before Dinner, a
draught of small Beer in a morning, with a Toast and Sugar, a little Cassia,
Manna, Tamarinds, Syrup of Damask Roses, Pilul. Ruffi, Aloes, Rosata, Pil. Ante
Cibum, clarified Whay, with Epithimum, Senna, and other convenient Ingredients.
In the Summertime, with a draught of Milk with Sugar in a morning fasting.
soluble, to have the benefit of Nature, once a day at least; and therefore we
ought never to check Natures Dictates, for modesty, or any other business
whatsoever; for as much as Health is to be preserved before all. The best
proportion of the Excrements to the Aliment, is about the third part, including
also, Urin and Sweat. Evacuations, unless they exceed, are to be indulged, in
regard Nature often times thereby, frees it self of the morbifick matter, and
the very worms themselves. But if it be in excess, and violent, and the stomach
thereby taken away, it ought to be carefully and speedily remedied, as the
rational Physician will direct as he sees the case requires. And therefore it
is requisite in such cases to advise with such: And so for all the other
Evacuations and Retentions before mentioned; the Remedies of which, would make
a Book alone, bigger then all this Tract. But if they were to be delivered, in
a word, it is against my Conscience, to encourage Empericks, and bold
Intruders, to ruin men's lives, there being too many of them already.

SECT. V. Rest and Exercise, Rectified.
EVery Disease almost, as well as this, proceeds from Idleness, Sloth, and too
much Rest; as has been showed. Therefore great care ought to be had, we use
moderate exercise, ad Ruborem at least, and that daily; though not ad Sudorem,
unless necessity compells and requires, which ought to be daily, as the Causes
daily inviron us. Nothing better then walking, to help Digestion; and such
moderate exercise, to stir up natural heat, fortify the stomach, correct and
resist Crudities. But whatever the Exercise be, care must be had it be
seasonable; not before an evacuation by stool, not immediately on a full
stomach; but rather when digestion is almost perfected: Yet as to every
individual person, it is requisite he take such advice, as may direct him to
what is most suitable to his condition. However, in general, it is best before
Meals, for it clears the stomach, and excites appetites; but then a little time
must be allowed to settle the humors in the body, before you eat, lest your
appetite be lost. Let all violent exercises be always avoided, especially by
such as are not constantly used to them.

SECT. VI. Passions and Perturbations, Rectified.
YOU must know, although the Passions are most violent Perturbers, Irritaters,
and Corrupters of our Humors, and consequently (as was shown) powerful and
eminent causes of, not only worms, but also of most, if not all other Diseases;
yet are not Diseases of the Body, but of the Mind and Soul rather. So that here
may seem requisite the directions of the Learned Divines. But notwithstanding
the unncharitable Censurers of the Pharisees of our times, who condemn all as
out of the Faith, that agree not point-voire in every punctilio with them, or
but contradict their Fancies. I say, notwithstanding their uncharitable
Censures, and Condemnation of all Physicians, as Atheists; as if Atheism were
an inseparable Companion of the Profession. I shall endeavor the Cure of these
unruly Passions, by giving some moral and Divine Antidotes.

Anger, it is an excellent thing (to oppose this mad Passion) to get Meekness,
Patience and Humility; for you shall seldom see Anger in any but proud people,
it being indeed, the effect of Pride. Let Us also examine our selves, why we are
so, on what ground, what is the cause, or what occasion, and then, whether it
be just or no. Meekness is a calmness and quietness of Spirit, in direct
opposition to Anger; and may be exercised toward GOD, or toward our
Neighbor. As for that toward GOD, I shall say nothing, since I think the
vilest of men dare not be angry with him. That toward our Neighbor, is
chiefly to be spoken of; therefore, let us labor by all means, to get
meekness, which is the sobriety of the mind, and that which makes us both
blessed here, and hereafter; for indeed, none but the meek enjoy this world,
Matthew. 5.5.
in regard such as are prone to Anger, are like crazed and sick people, who
cannot enjoy the greatest prosperities; for let all go never so well without,
they spoil all by creating storms and tempests within themselves. Whereas by
meekness, we conquer our selves, like this unruly Son of Zervias, behave our
selves like men, and gain the love of all we converse with; nay, it is that
which makes us Mat. 11.29.
like Christ himself. Moreover, as Anger unmans a man; so Meekness advances a
man's honor.

This virtue, I say, we owe to out Neighbors, and all we converse with, viz.
such as may bridle that mad Anger, being both mischievous to them and our
selves, being especially thereunto 1 These. 5.14, 15. 2 Timothy 2.25.
injoined, whatever provocations we meet with; especially being that, which
Christ himself (who came to plant peace in the world among men) injoins us.
It Is opposite, Anger, making a man unfit to be either a Friend, or Companion,
rendering him intolerable to all he Prove. 21.19.
converses with; wherefore, we ought not, if we be wise, to have any thing to
do with Prove. 22.24.
such. For their Anger does not end usually in reproaches and opprobrious
words, but breaks for the most part, into Curses also; and sometimes, without
any cause at all; contrary to the Rule given us. Mat. 5.44. Romans 12.14.
This is a kind of Witchcraft, and many times, brings us into the snare of the
Devil, who purposely moves and excites our passions to destroy us. Therefore,
let all Ephesians. 4.
bitterness, and anger, and wrath, and clamor, and evil speaking, be put away
from us, with all malice.

Patience and Humility will work much the same on us, if we rightly consider
them in opposition to Anger, it being an effect of Pride.

And truly, if we may speak according to Reason, and morally, our affections
are indeed (...), unreasonable; but yet they are also (...), subject to our own
command. And therefore, one chief work of a man, that is really so, ought to
be, to subdue them. And although, through Custom, this with other vices, may
be habitual to us, and usurp over Reason, overruling it, etc. yet is it not to
be ascribed to its nature, or theirs; but to our own neglect and indulgence to
it or them, by GOD'S just Judgment, for our giving way to them.

Therefore, in a moral and prudent way, let us resist the first assaults, or
occasions of Anger; if an Ass kick me, let me not be such a fool, as to kick
him again; for Reason has no place, if Passion be once kindled, and then Rage
will be too strong to be curbed. 2. Consider Anger in it self, what a madness
it is, how it devests a man of Reason; I, and Detunakes him too, and leaves him
naked, for every Coxcomb to laugh at, rendering him rather the Son of Cerberus,
then Moses. 3. Let us leave it with the greatest Celerity that may be, lest the
custom of this Devil-like-sin, take away the sense of it. 4. Let us never show
our Teeth when we cannot bite, and never to be angry, therefore with such as we
cannot oversway and win by it; for to begin strife, is more easy, then to
oppose it; never let us therefore contend, either with equals or strangers; nor
with friends neither, but in a friendly way, lest we make them our enemies. 5.
In all our Converses, it were well also, if we considered, and duly weighed the
disposition of the party, and his intention and will who we suspect to give the
offense, or occasion of Anger, for if a Child, it is beneath our notice; or
from an ignorant person, whether man or woman, of any age or quality; for so,
if we be angry, they have more cause to be angry with us for mistaking of them:
Perhaps he is a Droll, let him alone in his conceited folly, and Droll on; it
may be his words come not from him with any intention of reflection, reflect
them not on thy self, and make not such a fool of thy self, as to make him wise
by thy application; when it may be, he spoke simply, if not, look upon him as a
simpleton. If it be a Father, a Friend, or above us in quality, let us pass it
by for his former good works, or what we may expect from him; or let us do it on
the account of Civility to oblige him. If a wise man, rather distrust thy own
Judgment. If he be a good man, do not believe thou art at all injured. If a
King, if thou art guilty, confess his Justice; if innocent, submit to thy
fates. If a Servant, never be angry, but persuade or command him. If a Wife,
convince her with mildness, or bear with her. If a scurrilous and wicked man,
wonder not, much less be angry; for one or other will repay him in his own Coin
again; besides, in so doing, he will bring mischief on his own pate. If it be
from GOD, we lose as much time in being angry, as in praying against our
enemies. 6. Upon all occasions of Injury, seemingly offered, it were very well,
if we would observe Octavian's Lesson, to repeat the Letters of the Alphabet,
for diversion; or rather the Lords Prayer, that so Anger being smothered for
the present; Reason may have the more space to operate and suppress it wholly.
Or 7. It were to be wished we could say, as Architus Tarentinus.
one said to his Bailiff, If I were not angry, I would beat thee. 8. That we
would wean our selves from that arrogance and self-love that is in us, and
esteem less of our selves then we do; so shall we never find an injury to
fasten on us, either suddenly or wrongfully. For it is only the too great
conceit we have of our selves, that makes us think none should touch us; and
upon the apprehension thereof, it being sudden, we are presently moved, for
every man naturally, has an aspiring mind, and is an opiniator, aiming at
Authority and Rule over all. 9. Curiosity must be avoided; for he that will
have every thing neat, and to a punctilio, shall never have quietness, but be
in continual wrath: Expect therefore, from the best carriages of Friends,
Servants, Children, as well as Enemies, miscarriages, and let them pass,
humanum est errare; for to commit such a fault as Anger, upon a fault; and it
may be, a trivial one, is as great a fault as can be committed, so that it is
so far from amending the first fault, that thou give him occasion to chide
thee. 10. Remember it is beneath thee, and baseness to be angry with thy
inferior, or take exceptions at his words or actions, with thy Superiors,
arrogance, madness and folly; with other Equals, hazardus: we should avoid
displeasure of all, could we but think seriously how advantageous such an one,
with whom we are angry, may be unto us hereafter; offenses are better redeemed
by merit, then requited with wrath; a soft answer turns away wrath, and
clemency and pardon, many times, so wins upon an Enemy, as he becomes a perfect
good Friend ever after. 11. Let us requite good for evil, for so the quarrel
cease, when Anger is but on one side, and he that is patient, shall be sure
to overcome. 12. Consider, Anger is the worst of vices, subjecting all other
affections, nay, the ferventest love; for it has been known, they have
murdered those, they have had most love for. Nay, what evil is it, that it
will not plunge us in? And truly, if we consider its inconveniences and
ruinous nature, nothing will make us, or help us more to avoid it. 13. Let such
as will show themselves truly magnanimous, resolve that nothing shall move
them, whatever befalls them; for if a wise man should take notice of all the
mad and foolish actions of most men, he should never be quiet, and so it would
render a man most unfortunate and miserable that is wise, and fools would be
more happy. He that is indeed wise, therefore has nothing befalls him, but
what he expected. Lastly, if thou can not choose, but be moved; let it not
break forth, but stifle the fire in thy bosom.

As touching Fear (for I have, I fear, been too long upon Anger) of Calamities,
Mischances, and other accidental inconveniences; to doubt nothing is best, to
prepare our selves for them, and resist them. Stultum est timere quod vitari
non potest, It Is a folly to fear that which cannot be avoided, as Death. Nay, a
man thereby unmans himself, by yielding to his Passion, throws away his own
Arms, and pulls many times, the evil upon him he most feared, representing that
oftener in his Imagination, then the contrary. Let us rely therefore upon GOD,
and on him only, let us put our trust; and so we shall not need to fear any
thing.

Sorrow, there is no Condition free; from him that sits on the Throne, to him
that grindeth at the Mill; even in the midst of our highest Jollity, there is
some Discontent; our whole life is a Glucupricon, a Dulcomare Passion. We are
all miserable and discontent; who denis it? Then I may well say, what art thou,
that hopest to go free? And why should we then be disquieted; therefore comfort
thy self, since the Calamity is universal to all men; so that nill we, or will
we, it must be endured: Therefore, let us make a virtue of necessity, and
resolve to undergo whatever happens, especially since we are taught, All things
shall work together for our good, if we love GOD. Romans 8.28.
Nay to the very Elect it is not only given to believe, but also to suffer;
Phil. 1.29.
and the Lord chasteneth whom he loves, and scourges every Son whom he
receives. Heb. 12.6.
Nay, he that is not thus dealt with, may suspect he is rather a Bastard, then
a Son. Let us resolve then, Nihil est ab omni part beatum. Whatever is under
the Moon, is as changeable as her self, that never stands at a stay; increasing
or decreasing in Health, Strength, Wealth, and subject to many casualties or
misfortunes, as well from our selves as others.

But thou wit say, None so unfortunate as thy self. This is but thy mistake,
and over-weinedness to thy self; every man knows his own, but not another
miseries. Consider how many thousands want what thou have; look rather to such
as are beneath thee, then those that are above thee, and compare conditions. As
it is feigned of the Hares, being sensible of their misery, resolved all to
drown themselves; but meeting with a company of silly Frogs, that were more
fearful then they; they began to take courage again, and comfort themselves: Be
therefore thankful for what thou have, when thou deservest nothing at all at
GOD'S hand, shall a living man complain? Lam. 3.29.
It may be, it would be worse with us, if we were in another condition: The
wise Disposer of all things knows what is best for us, let us therefore be
content. S. Augustine.
GOD has but one Son without sin, but none without affliction. Nothing better
then a contented mind, let us then with an holy submission, cast all our Care
on GOD, and trust him. 1 Pet. 5.7.
Remembering, that worldly Sorrow causes Death; 2 Cor. 7.10.
but God is our hope and strength in time of trouble. Psalm. 46.1.


What can thou complain then of? Art thou sickly? Remember the Flesh rebels
against the Spirit, and that which hurts the one, must needs help the other,
and it is for the good of the Soul. It puts us in mind of Death and Judgment,
and brings us out of our selves, weans us from the world, and brings us nearer
to GOD. And truly so it would indeed, could we, when well, perform what we
promised, when sick.

Art thou poor? Which is the greatest misery that can befall a man, either in
his own, or others esteem: Yet if we rightly consider it, Poverty is one of the
greatest blessings that is; we are not then to think it as a Curse of GOD, as
many, idly did. For Angustin ^^dantur quidem benis, nequis male eftimet; malis
autem, ne quis nimis bona.
GOD gives Riches to wicked men, and denis them many times, to good, to show
that in themselves, they are neither good nor evil. We see CHRIST himself was
poor, born in a stable, and laid in a manger, and had not an house (all his
life) wherein to put his head. Mat. 8.20.
That Proph^ts also were all poor, and so were the Apostles; As sorrowing, yet
always rejoicing, as having nothing, yet possessing all things. 1 Cor. 6.10.
Silver and Gold have I none, says Peter. Acts 3.6.
Why should any man so covet Wealth and Honor, which rightly considered, puff
men up with Pride, Insolency, Lust, Ambition, Cares, Fears, Suspicion, Trouble,
Anger, Emulation, Envy, all Diseases, both of Mind and Body; damning indeed
more Souls, then Eccles. 4.12. 1 Timothy 6.9. Eccles. 8.2. James 5.12.3.
all the Devils in Hell, being the inlet of all manner of sin and vice. Whereas
those that are poor, live more innocent, and free from all these evils and
maladies; it may be he has better Qui Christum curat, non multum curat quam de
preciosis cibis stercus conficiat. Hieronym.
meat, but what is he the near, when he cannot eat for the Gout, Pox, Fever, or
the like; and thou can feed heartily on thy homely Fare, look fresh, and be
strong upon it. His Sauces are many and delicate; but thy stomach is better, and
that is the best of Sauses. Thou live securely, without Envy, he is not only
macerated therewith, but Perils, fears of Death, Degradations, Treasons, etc.
invirons him. It Is Lubrica statio and proxima praecipitio; and Shrubs are more
secure from Storms, then large lofty Oaks, or Elms. There is much more
happiness, in a meaner state; for Riches are the Devils hooks, by which he
catches men; and as the Moon is fullest of light, when farthest from the Sun
that gives her that light; ^o that the more wealth a man has, the farther
commonly, he is from God. Whereas on the other side, Poverty is the way to
Heaven. Austin in Psalm.
The Mistress of Philosophers, the Muses, and Mother of Ingenuity, Religion,
Virtue, Sobriety, etc. and Sister to Honesty and Innocence; nay, a wise poor
Man is better then a foolish King. Eccles. 2.23.
Fortunatos ^imium bona si sua novint. They are in a haypy condition, if they
did but know it that are poor, and make a good use of it. He that despises a
man for his poverty, is irrational; it is Fortune's fault, not his; and if he
could be but content, he were happier than the Richest; for Riches consists not
in the the multitude of God and Silver, but in the use of it, and a contented
mind, and a man cannot be said to have more then he makes use of, though he
have never so much by him: But here is the misery, he will not take notice of
his happiness, but will be ever repining at rich men's wealth and pomp. Be not
angry for what thou have not, but give GOD thanks for what thou have received,
Chrys^st.
For he if rich that has bread to eat, and a potent man, that is not compelled
to be a Slave; Hunger is not ambitious, so that it have to eat, and Thirst does
not prefer a Cup of Gold. Hierom.
And he that is not satisfied with a little, will never have enough.

Fret not thy self then, because thou art poor, contemned, or not so well for
the present, as thou would be; not respected as thou ought to be by thy
Birth, Place, Quality, Worth. If thy Money be gone, thou art so much the
lighter, Gold and Silver are too heavy for such to carry, as are seekers of
Heaven; If they had not been lost by thee, thou would have been lost by
them. Fortune can take away our means, but not our minds; let us defy her
therefore, and come what will come, Bona meus nullum tristioris fortunae
recipit incursum. Submit to God's will in all things. If it can be amended, do;
if it cannot, make the best of a bad market; but either way, let it not trouble
thee.

Art thou Imprisoned? be not troubled, we are all prisoners in this Island;
nay, the whole world is a prison; thy Soul is imprisoned in the Body. How many
take delight to Navigate, and yet is a Ship any thing but a Prison? How many
confine themselves to their Muses, years together, and never go out; and how
many are constrained by sickness, weaknesses, etc. Which is the best? Nay, a
Prison may be in some Cases, preferred; for many worthy men have been
imprisoned all their Lives, to their great Honor, and the public good. Paul
writ most of his Epistles in Prison, and John the Revelation. Art thou
banished? a great piece of business! Patria est ubicunque been est. That Is a
man's Country, where he can live at ease. It Is a childish humor, to long
after thine own Chimney Corner; many would think it a banishment to be sent to
their home. Seneca.
And how many travel for Pleasure s and it may be, to that very place, whether
thou art banished? Friends are every where to him that behaves himself well,
all places arc alike distant from Heaven; and GOD is as well in one place, as
another: So that to a wise man, there is no difference of places.

Have thou a Friend dead, or Relation? What is in this world, that we should so
much bewail their being taken away from it? Who is more free from Pains,
Cares, Fears then he that sleeps, Death is a perpetual Sleep, why then should
it so much affright us? The lives of the best men, are stuffed with vexation,
mischief, and Trouble. It is a misery to be born, a pain to live, and a trouble
to die; Death frees us of all, and yet we abhor it, and will not consider our
folly. Is He, or She gone, then, grieve not, as without hope; 1 These. 4.13. 2 Samuel 22.
we shall go to them, they shall not return again to us. We have more reason to
rejoice then mourn, being taken from this miserable world. But thou will say, I
have lost a good Wife, a young Wife, never man had a better; but if she were as
thou say, Seneca.
Did thou find her so, or make her so; If the former, thou may as luckily
find another; if thou made her so, thou may as cheap, inform and tutor
another. Therefore, never despair: Now thou art at liberty, keep thy self so,
never be in love with thy Fetters, though of Gold; many a man would have been
rid of his willingly, before thou wast bound. If thou covet thy Wise,
E^^ictetus.
Friends, Children should live always, thou art a fool. It was a pretty Child
indeed, but who knows whether he would a-prov'd an honest man, or a Knave,
taken good or evil Courses? Seneca.
The Thracians therefore, wept when a Child was born, and feasted when any was
buried. And so should we, rather be glad for such as die well. Every man and
woman must have an end in this Life; Houses, Castles, Citys, Familys,
Provinces, Kingdoms, have but their times of living, only longer than we; their
time of flourishing, their decayings, and periods. How many famous Cities that
we read of, in former times, that are now scarce Villages. Niniveh, that great
City is destroyed, and so is Jerusalem; that glorious Temple, what became of
it? Mycenae was the fairest City in Greece. Jam seges est ubi Troja fuit; and
Babylon has nothing of it remaining, but Rubbish, and pieces of Walls; and yet
was once the greatest City in the world. Nay, we have lived to see the death of
our own Ancient and Chief City of LONDON, and it is Interment in Ashes. Greece
of old was the Nurser of Sciences, and the Seat of Civility and Humanity, now a
Den of Thieves, and overrun with Barbarism. Italy in the time of the was Lady
of the World; Rome, the Queen or Cities; now divided by many petty Princes, and
the Empire translated to Germany, of old time uncultivated and rude: Nay, the
World it self must have an end. How is it, that we are so troubled then, at the
death of one or other, when we are less durable? This is also our folly!

Art thou slighted, contemned, dispraised, undervalued? I confess these would a
little move a man, and some humors; but to a staid wise man, these are
nothing: For he will counterpoise them with their contraries, or make them
familiar to him, that they may be the less grievous; or on mature deliberation,
avoid or remove the Cause; an old Soldier in the world, methinks, should not
be troubled, come what will come, but ready to receive and stand the brunt of
all encounters. Especially, since Faber quisque est, fortunae suae: and nemo
laeditur, nisi a seipso. In some kind, Prosperity and Adversity are in our own
hands, Seneca.
and every man's Mind is stronger then Fortune, as that wise man says, And
leads him to what side he will. Our Fortunes, Friends, Enjoyments, Wife
Children, Parents, etc. ebb and flow with our Conceits of them: please, or
displease, as we construe, apprehend, and apply them to our selves. If we could
be but content, our present state is good, and in some men's opinion, to be
preferred. Paul therefore was happy, who had learned in what state soever he
was, therewith to be content. Phil. 1.11.
Let them rail on, scoff on, slander and lie on, Sapiens, contumelia non
afficitur, Quia contra Sycophantae morsum, non est remedium. It is to no
purpose to be troubled, For the tongue is s et on fire of Hell. James 3.6. And
admit they should applaud a man, what does it signify? It brings no real
advantage to him, making a man never the wiser, or learneder, or honester, or
better for being termed so.
wicked people will use their tongues to detract from, and asperse their
Neighbors. Who is free from such Disgraces, Slights and Calumnies? Not the
King himself, nor the best and piousest men, though never so circumspect,
CHRIST himself was a wine-bibber with them, a company keeper of publicans and
sinners; a Devil, and what he did, was by the help of Beelzebub: Nay, GOD
himself is blasphemed by them. Been facere, and male audire Regium est; let
them scoff, defame, undervalue, slander, abuse, and take their course, it is an
ordinary thing: Keep Faith and a good Conscience within, commit thy Case to
GOD, repay not evil for evil, but overcome it with good, and thou shall see,
what will be the end of such wicked men; for GOD, who must be thy Judge and
theirs too, knows the truth.

Besides, it will be some comfort to consider, that Honor, Respect, Esteem,
Employment in this world, are not always attained by Desert, or Worth, Neither
do they make a man really worthy.
but are commonly bought and sold, or attained by some great men's Letters,
Favor, Friendship, Affection, etc. For it is Opinion and Interest only, that
carries things in the world. Whence we so often find Fools preferred, and wise
men neglected, little regarded or esteemed. It Is as ordinary a thing as can be,
to see an impertinent, illiterate Ass, preferred before his betters, because he
can put himself forward, prate, and temporize with every one, and has the
countenance of Friends. It was always so, and ever will be. Qui Nescit
Dissimulare, nescit vivere. Cardan, Lipsius, Melancton, Budaeus, Erasmus, men
of great Learning, Parts, and to whom the whole world is so much beholding,
died all poor, as they lived, because they could neither flatter nor dissemble.
Eccles. 9.11.
The Race is not to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong; but as the wisest
man says, Time and Yet some brainsick people, that are more nice, then wise,
will not admit of this expression of the wise man.
Chance (and sometimes, an untimely Chance, or a Mischance) happens unto us.
Sic Superis visum; GOD sees it is good for us to be thus humbled, and therefore
perhaps, he has bid Shimei Curse. Good men do not always find grace and
favor, lest they should be As S. Paul Apologizes for himself; Lest I be
eralied above measure. 2 Cor. 12.7.10.
puffed up, grow insolent and proud. Let us therefore, endure it with patience
whatever happens, and through good or bad Report, enter into Immortality. But I
fear, I have been too tedious on this point of Sorrow; yet they being so many
and diverse, I hope I am pardonable, since it was requisite to say somewhat to
the materiallest of them; If what has been said may not be sufficient, for the
rest, you may take these few Sayings of wise men: And so I shall hasten to
conclude.

Love GOD above all, and thy Neighbor as thy self; do as you would be done by,
know thy self; be contented with thy Lot; trust not Beauty, Wealth, nor
Parasites, have peace with all men, war with Vice, be not Idle, consider the
event of things, be temperate in these four things, Lingua, Loculis, Oculis,
and Poculis; watch thine Eye, moderate thy Tongue and thy Expenses, hear much,
but speak little, mend in thy self, what thou see amiss in others; keep thine
own Counsel as to thy Secrets and Intentions; give not ear to Tale-bearers;
give no man cause of offense; beware of Suretyship, Fide, and Diffide: Be not a
slave to thy Money, yet live not beyond thy Means: Take Time by the fore-lock;
be humble to thy superiors, respective to thine equals, affable to all, but
not familiar: Lay no Wagers, make no Comparisons, find no Faults, meddle not
with other men's matters, admire not thy self, insult not, be not proud nor
popular; neither flatter, lie, nor dissemble; keep thy word and promise, be
constant, be not opinionative; fear not that which cannot be avoided, grieve
not for that which cannot be recalled; neither arrogate, nor derogate; accuse
no man, praise none rashly, go not to Law, save on great Cause; strive not with
thy Superior, cast not off an old Friend; take heed of a reconciled enemy, be
patient, meek, merciful and grateful; keep friendship with thy friends, win
upon thy enemies; withdraw thy foot sometimes from thy Neighbor's house, lest
he be weary of thee; moderate thy passions, think no place without a witness,
do good to all, be not fond of fair words, keep good company, admonish thy
friend in secret, commend him publicly, provide for a storm, make not a fool
of thy self to make others merry; marry not only for wealth, be not too
curious, seem no geater then thou art, live as merrily as thou can, take thy
pleasures soberly, take heed by other men's examples, walk as thou would be
met, sit as thou would be found, yield to the time, follow the stream; live
innocently; whilst thou live here on Earth, let thy conversation be in
Heaven, etc. whereby, neither Fears, Cares, or Sorrows shall annoy thee.

Joy. But because I have all along, as the Subject would give leave, studied
brevity. And especially, since the present affairs of the world, affords not
much Joy to any, rightly considered.
I shall here conclude, since the nature of this passion of Joy being
considered, there has been sufficient said to bridle and mitigate it is
inordinance, sprinkled here and there, among the good Sayings and Counsels, for
the Rectification of Anger and Sorrow.

An Appendix. Touching some things in the Book unpreliminated in the Epistle.
THat my Reader may be Encincted with Reason able to Renix the Halucinations of
that Pangenerical evil of Envy and Ignorance, which is a Cacoethick Malady; But
especially that he may enjoy an Orthostadian Judgment, and not be Depasct with
that Truculent Credulity which proves Sontick to most men, and an assured
Prodromos of Ruin; I thought it not amiss here to aedepize some things, and
Indigitate thee, wherefore others in this Book are handled in that manner they
are: Whereby I doubt not, but the Judicious will Suffragate for me, and
Parastate for my Integrity and Candor in it.

It Is Dispesct into ten Heads, in which, though the Discourse be chiefly suited
to the Helmintick Meridian; yet the Ingenious and diligent Reader may find the
Analysis of many Doubts, both in Physics and Medicks in general, and that out
of this Discourse, the whole Art does as it were Expullulate, as also cast an
uncorrugated Aspect on the most Epidemical Diseases now Reigning and
Inquinating humane bodies Metaptotically, and Metastatically. The Periphery of
my Discourse, ought therefore to be looked on as the Extine Parts, which yet
serve for completing the whole.

The Scorby not more familiar to our Bodies in this, then in former Ages.
And although there is a great Hue-and-Cry after the Scorby, most people being
judged to be therewith affected now of late years, in which I confess, there is
very much of truth; (as I have showed all along in the Book) yet should we
examine the Era of that Distemper, we shall find it an Endemial Malady to us in
England, and all Maritine Places, and Northern Countries; the very temperature
of the Air in such places, being sufficient to dispose our Blood, Humors and
Ferments that Respire in it, to such a Dyscrasy; But why it should now be
Interpolated more then at other times, I know not; or why we must needs impute
the Cause of almost all Distempers thereunto, and their Cure to the Alleviation
of the Scorby, wherein no man can be indeed, accounted healthy or wise, that is
not Scorbutic Naturally. (according to my distinction of Natural Melancholy)
Because the Blood is more depurated and mundified by Scorbutic Ferments, than
any other: Whence the Spirits, both Vital and Animal, become more denubilated,
pure and sublime.

Some may perhaps Opi^e (As it is the vain conceit of most, Why the Author
multiplies not Receipts in his Discourse of Cures; and of Cacopoick and
Blaptick Practitioners of Physic.
they can cure themselves, if they understood but Books) I have been too
sparing in the Therapeutick part, and have not communicated so many Receipts as
they desire; I shall clear my self by this Paradigm: admit a Child should cry
for somewhat that the Parent, or he that has Charge of it, knows would be
extremely Thanasimal, if not Deleterial, would you not very much tax, or call
in question the Parents or Rulers Judgment, Discretion, Wisdom, Care and love
to the Child? Even so would a DOCTOR, a Teacher of others, if he should furnish
his Patients with Receipts and Medicines for their Destruction only to please
their Idle Fancies. Receipts, not sufficient to make a Physician, or so much as
a Practitioner.
For it is not the knowledge of Medicines, but the Adapting them pro Re nata
that makes the Physician; and how can any one then, ignorant in the
Phisiological part of Medicks be the better, should he have all the Receipts in
the world done into English, or vernaculated: Let men be cautious therefore,
how they make use of Illiterates, Quacks, Mountebanks, and such bold Intruders;
much more how they adventure on Receipts themselves.

I have therefore only given you the Indications and Method of Cure in general;
and (as I think becomes me) reserved the judging of your present Condition to
some DOCTOR, that can rationally advise; since it is impossible for any man,
amids so many various Complications of Diseases that daily occur, and where not
two of twice two hundred, are taken in the same manner in all Respects, and
from the same Cause, to give an exact Rule of Cure in any Distemper whatsoever.

For although impudent Intruders, and Quacks venture on all things rashly, and
at a distance, their Ignorance not being able to detect the Danger; yet a sober
and rational Physician, will do nothing till he has seen his Patient,
considered the Distemper, weighed every Circumstance for Denudating and
Expunging the Cause. For if the Body be Cacochymick, it must be by rational
means, reduced to an Euchymick Constitution, by refraining Stegnoticks and
Stypticks, Pygnoticks, Emphracticks, Dyspepticks, Hologotrophicks, and the
like. And using orderly and rationally Secundum Artem, and from the hand of one
that is INDEED A DOCTOR, Learned and able to advise Analepticks, Araioticks,
Chalasticks, Leptynticks, Ecphracticks, Pepticks, Eupepticks, and Threpticks.
And so if the Case be of another Nature; as in Astma's, Phthisis, etc. Bechicks
are to be administered; in some Cephalic Distempers Ptarmicks are admitted, in
others rejected; in many Distempers of Women, Hemenagogicks prove an absolute
Cure. When the Viscera are Emphracted, Rupticks alone avail, or such as may
malax them. Thus I could instance almost in every Disease, to show you that the
Practice of Physic is of more weight, then the major part of men illiterate do
imagine, whilst they rashly adventure their lives with Empericks, and the like;
only on the bare ridiculous boasts of such Intruding Quacks Experience; when
the truth is, all rational men must needs know they can never have experience
in anything of Physic. Aristotle defines Experience thus, Metaph. lib. 1.
Experientia Singularium Cognitio est. Now if Experience consists in the
knowledge of every Particular in the thing experimented, and will easily
appear, Ignorant Practioners in Physic can never have Experience.
these bold fellows can never have that Experience they so vaunt of.

Something I must say also, touching the Scheme of some very strange
Microcosmical Helmintick Vermin, How worms of strange forms come to be in us.
which may seem to some incredible; but I shall only say thus much, it will not
be strange to any man, that such deformed, monstrous productions should be in
us, who but considers, that both by the Air, our Meats and Drinks, the Salts
and Semenalties of several Insects, may be infused and conveyed into us, and
allegated with our Blood, (which (as I have said at the Liminare of my
Discourse) although subjugated by the power of our Spirits, and incarserated
so, that they cannot for some time execute their own Operations, nor instantly
Denudate themselves; yet upon the disorders of our Bodies, or accosting a
Disease, they combat most furiously.

Worms not more frequent, or of greater concernment now, then in former ages.
Neither would I be mistaken, when I assert WORMS in any place of the Book to be
Causes of other Feral Maladies, as if I held them only so now in our Age; and
not formerly even in all Ages. Or that now they do more frequently show
themselves in us, than in times past. Or that they do any way alter the Nature
of Diseases so, from what they ever were, as the Method of Cure set down by the
Ancients, is now to be accounted invallid. But, as they are of general
concernment, we may not pass them with that negligence we do those in the Field
or Dunghill. Since (as you have heard) they may expullulate from any Chyme in
the Body. Neither do I deny them to be oft-times an Effect and Symptom of
diverse Diseases, That they are Effects as well as Causes.
especially Putrid Fevers, Cachexia's, Consumptions, etc. as well as a Cause.

Touching Ferments, which I often hint at, though by Gallenists too much
slighted, as among the Spagerists as much admired. Yet as I said, if we were
but well acquainted with every Chyme and Juice in our Bodies, how they are most
of them replete with Sulphurious and Saline parts, and that there are many
Sulphurious Saits in us, as well as Acid of a strange Nature, especially in the
Stomach (the part first affected almost in every Distemper) which does
strangely, and by a peculiar property Chylefie the Aliment of what nature
soever in a very short time, such is the Power of that Menstruum (whether sent
from the Spleen out of the Mass of Blood by the Arteries, or from some other
part) as all the fire in the world can never do. Even as Mercury dissolves
Gold, and Aquafortis Iron, and almost all other Metals, and yet will not fix
upon Gold, more than Mercury on a more porous Body. I say, if this be
considered and weighed, and the Energy of Microcosmical Salts, and that they
may, and do work variously one on the other, we shall find them (the Blood and
Urin abounding with Sulphurious Salts) to have much more power in Causing
Diseases, than the first Qualities.

Which notwithstanding, whilst they allay each other, make no disturbance; but
if they grow predominant, and sever from the rest, a strange Ebulition and
Fermentation is made, or rather a perturbed motion of the Menstruums
Corpuscles, as we see in Fevers certain Effervescences in the Blood, without
Fermentation at all; where by the way, we may observe, it is not Heat alone, is
the chief Efficient of Digestion; for Fishes that have little or no Heat, do
yet strangely, by that Acid Menstruum in their Ventricles, depasce their
Aliment so, as to become Threptick. And it is also known that the Alcohol of
Wine, being anatically allegated with Spirit of Urin, migrate immediately into
a Stone, even as powder of Alabaster, tied up in a Rag, and thrown into a Basin
of Water. Just so do Microcosmical Salts work strange Effects in us, when they
fall foul one on another. Whence also we may note, that the Stone is not only
engendered of an Emplastick Humor, as it were Torrified and Pugnotified by the
Heat of the Body, and Siccity of the Part affected, but rather by the
petrifying quality, and the abundance of those parts in the matter accosting a
fit Menstruum.

To which we may add, there are two sorts of Ferments, as that worthy Dr.
Willis Lib. de Fermentatione.
notes. The first is wonderfully Energetical in all it is Particles, and
vigorously active in all it is motions; so as that it may be indeed termed
absolute, in that whatever it is Allegated with, that admits of Fermentation,
although never so dull and unactive before, it so agitates the Particles
thereof, as to carry all with it in its own Motions. The other consists of
Particles of one certain kind, which will only ferment the Particles of the
Body of another particular Nature, when they accost each other, and so is
rather Respective; as we see Salt of Wormwood with the Juice of Lemons; and
Salt of Tartar with the Spirit of Vitriol Ferment effectually, and so do all
fluid Salts with fixed, as when Acide Liquors are poured on Hartshorn, Coral,
Steel, etc. or Spirit of Niter, on Butter of Antimony; for it is not any
Sulphurious matter will hebitate the Acuity of sharp Liquors, but a Salin; as
we see in the Cure of the Gout, Scorby, Spleenitick, and Hypochondriack
Affections, the Acidity and Acrimony of the Blood extremely checked and
Dulcified by Tartarous Medicines. So the simple Juice of Barberries or Lemons,
will quickly dissolve Coral and Pearl, and Vinager Coral and Lapis Cancrorum.
And that Honorable person, the learned and judicious Mr. Boil, Not. Phil.
Part. 2. fol. 78.
tells us of a certain Menstruum or Tincture drawn from Rye or Wheat-Bread,
which will effectually extract a Tincture from Precious Stones, Minerals, etc;
which perhaps, a stronger of another Nature, will not do; as we see fluid Salts
quickly dilute, making not the least Ebulition; whereas the fixed and fluid
Salts meeting, do most furiously. So the violent Emetick and Cathartick
qualities of Antimony are destroyed by Calcining it only with Saltpeter: And
Helmon* Cap. 23.
Asarums Emetick quality, is also taken away, and converted into a Diuretic,
by only boiling a while in common water; which boiling in wine will not do.
Diverse other Instances I might give to Illucidate the diverse ways the Chymes
and Humors in our Bodies may be Fermented by this, not that, or the other
thing; but what has been said shall suffice.

FINIS.
There is lately published, Astronomia Britannica, containing Five Treatises.
1. LOgistica Astronomiac, or the Doctrine of Astronomical Fractions, both in
Nautral and Artificial Numbers. 2. Trigonomatria, or the Doctrine of Triangles,
both plain and Spherical, by which the Planetary Motions may be computed. 3.
Doctrina Spherica, or the Doctrine of the Sphere, exhibiting the Longitudes,
and other positions of the Planets. 4. Theoria Planetarum, or a new and
accurate Theory of the Planets, founded upon the Copernican Hypothesis. 5.
Tabulae Novae Astronomicae, or New Astronomical Tables of the Planetary
Motions, and Eclipses, according to the same Hypothesis. By Vincent Wing. To be
sold by George Sawbridge.

READER,
THE Author being abseat from the Press, and his Hand being mor Intricate then
usual, as well as his Language, in many places, there has more Faults then is
customary escaped the Press. Therefore you are desired to Correct the Errata
before you venture to yead the Book.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 1. read (...), p. 9. l. 21. r. Infected, p. 10. l. 25. r.
Vermicles, p. 14. l. 18. r. refer, p. 14. l. 20. r. to, p. 17. l. 9.
Gourd-like, p. 17. l. 20. r. Breviores, p. 17. ibid. referring, p. 19. l. 2. r.
Wierus, p. 19. l. 9. r. Gabucinus, p. 19. l. 12. r. Montuus. p. 19. l. 16. r.
Rul. p. 19. l. 19. r. Dodroncalis, p. 22. l. 16. r. Liddelius, p. 24. l. 29. r.
Teeth, p. 25. l. 7. r. vitiating, p. 26. l. 14. r. Cornax, p. 27. l. 22. r.
Dracontia, p. 30. l. 13. r. Letter, p. 43. l. 25. r. Is, p. 44. l. 5. r.
abound, p. 49. l. 13. r. Acteon, p. 50. l. 11. dele. God, p. 50. l. 29. r.
Possessions, p. 51. l. 9. r. abreviate, p. 55. l. 19. r. Lares. p. 58. l. 15.
r. when. p. 60. l. 17. r. serve, p. 61. l. 4. r. it, p. 64. l. 8. 1.
dissipating, p. 68. l. 19. r. Title, p. 76. l. 25. r. Accuses, p. 76. l. 28. r.
strong, p, 89. l. 18. r. intended, p. 95. l. 20. r. Matter, p. 97. l. 14. r.
traduced, p. 97. l. 38. r. Wolphius, p. 100. l. 4. r. continuate, p. 102. l.
11. r. are, p. 102. l. 18. r. Nonnaturals, p. 103. l. 3. dele Soul and, p. 103.
l. 23. r. (...), p. 106. l. 12. r. Cum, p. 109. l. 5. r. verum, p. 109. l. 7.
r. mutavere, p. 109. l. 9. r. Animarum, p. 109. l. 11. r. Concipiunt, p. 112.
l. 22. r. s^cus, p. 113. l. 2. r. 1553. l. 12. r. Wind, l. 22. r. (...), l. 28.
r. (...), p. 115. l. 3. Libanotus, p. 118. l. 4. r. Sphere, l. 29. r. Is, p.
120. l. 21. Radiation, p. 121. l. 28. r. Antartick, p. 128. l. 23. Faucibus, p.
118. l. 14. r. Afo^seca. l. 15. 1. Savanarola, p. 142. l. 7. Albertus, l. 14.
r. Poland, p. 143. l. 4. r. Pro^us, l. 6. r. Pilorns, l. last, r. Aqueous, p.
144. l. 2. r. Euchymick, l. 15. r. immund, l. 16. r. Emphractick, p. 145. l.
15. r. Agrippi^a, p. 150. l. 29. r. Savararola, p. 156. l. 20. r. Venenis,
ibid. r. confer, l. 22. r. Oblinuntur, l. 25. r. Hydrophobia, p. 158. l. 17.
r. something, p. 164. ^. 22. r. Heildisheim, p. 165. l. 25. r. Wei^richius, p.
167. l. 3. r. Asiainum, ^. 12. r. middle, p. 176. l. 15. r. Scholam, p. 179. l.
15. r. Barnicles, p. 181. ^. 3. r. savor, p. 185. l. 3. r. Perewinckles, l.
22. r. Then, p. 189. ^. 27, r. Seat, p. 190. l. 17 r. Baud, p. 192. l. 13. r.
Exoticks, p. 197. ^. 18. r. Senectus, l. 24. r. vermes, p. 198. l. 22. r.
souced, p. 202. l. 4. ^. By, p. 205. l. 3. r. Being, p. 208. l. 20. r. Pliny,
p. 220. l. 4. r. hurt, ^. 221. l. 2. r. Defaecated, p. 222. l. 16. r. an, p.
223. l. 24. r. send, ^ 17. l. 19. r. Contention, 232. l. 18. r. Evoke, p. 239.
l. 14. r. Iohn^mus, p. 243. l. 25. r. serous, p. 244. l. 15. r. Inappetitus, l.
22. He^^itae, p. 246. l. 26. Coju^di, p. 253. l. 21. r. proceed, p. 253. r.
Olaus, pl. 256. l. 23. r. body of the, p. 259. l. 28. r. teaches, p. 262. l.
21. r. Lemnius, p. 263. l. 3. r. Embrion, p. 264. l. 14. r. Hinge, p. 27^. l
16. r. do, p. 274. l. 29. r. inferm, p. 277. l. 10. 1. Man, l. 21. r. ^umpish,
p. 279. l. 20. r. where, l. 25. r. Tinger, p. 283. l. 19. r. Glass, p. 289. l.
27. r. Cathairetick, p. 291. l. 20. r. These we may, and ib. r. I say, l. 24.
r. Humors, p. 304. l. 19. pist^^ct^^es, p. 309. l. 24. r. Angor, p. 311. l.
28. r. and voided, p. 312. l. 28. r. cause, p. 316. l. 20. r. Acrio, p. 317. l.
3. r. Cathartecis, l. 8. r. Sympt^me, p. 318. l. 11. r. Nasturtii, l. 13. r.
Rhabarbaro, p. 319. l. 22. Aleripharmicks, p. 326. l. 11. r. Simply, p. 331. l.
7. r. Irgr^vated, p. 333. l. 12. r. Eupeptick, p. 342. l. 3. r. Detunicks, p.
349. l. 27. r. The, p. 351. l. 12. r. Noverirt, l. 20. r. Gold.

In the Margin.

Page 68. l. 1. r. Compressing, p. 106. l. 29. r. Joins, p. 125. l. 7. r.
Acosta, p. 199. l. 4. r. Avolation, p. 312. l 14. r. In oratione, p. 214. l. 6.
for r. Salt, ib. for Sulphur, p. 215. l. 16. for r. Sulphur, ib. for r. Salt,
p. 216. l. 4. for r. Salt, l. 5. for r. Salt, p. 219. l. 1. for r. Sulphur, l.
2. for r. Water, l. 9. for r. Sulphur, and for r. Water, l. 10. for r. Salt,
for r. Sulphur, l. 11. for r. Salt, for r. Sulphur.

In the Appendix.

Page 363. l. 14. r. Oedepize, p. 364. l. 10. r. Extime, p. 365. l. 3. r.
whereas, p. 368. l. 13. read, It, 369. l. 7. r. Cambiate.


