The Witch of Edmonton: A known true STORY.

Composed into A TRAGI-COMEDY By diverse well-esteemed Poets; William Rowley,
Thomas Dekker, John Ford, etc.

Acted by the Princes Servants, often at the Cockpit in Drury Lane, once at
Court, with singular Applause.

Never printed till now.



London, Printed by J. Cottrel, for Edward Blackmore, at the Angel in P^ul's
Churchyard. 1658.

Actors Names.
Sir Arthur Clarington. Old Thorney, a Gentleman. Old Carter, a rich Yeoman.
Old Banks, a Countryman. W. Mago. two Countrymen. W. Hamluc. Three other
Countrymen. Warbeck. Suitors to Carter's Daughters. Somerton. Frank, Thorney's
Son. Young Cuddy Banks, the Clown. Four Morice-Dancers. Old Ratcliffe. Sawgut,
an old Fiddler. Poldavis, a Barbers boy. Justice. Constable. Officers.
Servingmen. Dog, a Familiar. A Spirit.
Women.
Mother Sawyer, the Witch. Anne, Ratcliffs Wife. Susan. Carters Daughters.
Katharine. Winnifride, Sir Arthur's Maid.
The whole Argument is this Dystich.
Forced Marriage, Murder; Murder, Blood requires:
Reproach, Revenge; Revenge, Hells help desires.
PROLOGUE.
THe Town of Edmonton has lent the Stage
A Devil and a Witch, both in an age.
To make comparisons it were uncivil,
Between so even a pair, a Witch and Devil.
But as the year does with his plenty bring
As well a latter as a former Spring;
So has this Witch enjoyed the first, and reason
Presumes she may partake the other season:
In Acts deserving name, the Proverb says,
Once good, and ever; Why not so in Plays?
Why not in this? since (Gentlemen) we flatter
No Expectation: here is Mirth and Matter.
Mr. Bird.

The Witch of Edmonton.
ACT. I.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Frank Thorney, Winnifride with-child.
Frank. COme, Wench; why here is a business soon dispatched.
Thy heart I know is now at ease: thou needst not
Fear what the tattling Gossips in their cups
Can speak against thy fame: thy child shall know
Who to call Dad now.

Win. You have discharged the true part of an honest man;
I cannot request a fuller satisfaction
Then you have freely granted: yet methinks
It Is an hard case, being lawful man and wife,
We should not live together.

Frank. Had I failed
In promise of my truth to thee, we must
Have then been ever sundred; now the longest
Of our forbearing eithers company,
Is only but to gain a little time
For our continuing thrift, that so hereafter
The Heir that shall be born may not have cause
To curse his hour of birth, which made him feel
The misery of beggary and want;
Two Devils that are occasions to enforce
A shameful end. My plots aim but to keep
My father's love.

Win. And that will be as difficult
To be preserved, when he shall understand
How you are married, as it will be now,
Should you confess it to him.

Frank. Fathers are
Won by degrees, not bluntly as our masters,
Or wronged friends are: and besides, I Will use
Such dutiful and ready means, that ere
He can have notice of what is past, the inheritance
To which I am born Heir, shall be assured:
That done, why let him know it; if he like it not,
Yet he shall have no power in him left
To cross the thriving of it.

Win. You who had
The conquest of my Maiden-love, may easily
Conquer the fears of my distrust. And whither
Must I be hurried?

Frank. Prithee do not use
A word so much unsuitable to the constant
Affections of thy Husband: thou shall live
Near Waltham Abbey, with thy Uncle S^lman:
I have acquainted him with all at large:
He Will use thee kindly: thou shall want no pleasures,
Nor any other fit supplies whatever
Thou can in heart desire.

Win. All these are nothing
Without your company.

Frank. Which thou shall have
Once every month at least.

Win. Once every month!
Is this to have an Husband?

Frank. Perhaps oftener:
That Is as occasion serves.

Win. I, I, in case
No other Beauty tempt your eye, whom you
Like better, I may chance to be remembered,
And see you now and then. Faith, I did hope
You Would not have used me so: it is but my fortune.
And yet, if not for my sake, have some pity
Upon the child I go with, that is your own.
And, less you will be a cruel hearted Father,
You cannot but remember that.
Heaven knows how.

Frank. To quit which fear at once,
As by the ceremony late performed,
I plighted thee a faith, as free from challenge,
As any double thought; Once more in hearing
Of Heaven and thee, I vow, that never henceforth
Disgrace, reproof, lawless affections, threats,
Or what can be suggested against our Marriage,
Shall cause me falsify that Bridal-Oath
That binds me thine. And, Winnifride, when ever
The wanton heat of youth by subtle baits
Of beauty, or what woman's Art can practice,
Draw me from only loving thee; let Heaven
Inflict upon my life some fearful ruin.
I hope thou do believe me.

Win. Swear no more;
I am confirmed, and will resolve to do
What you think most behoofeful for us.

Frank. Thus then; make thy self ready: at the furthest house
Upon the Green, without the Town, your Uncle
Expects you. For a little time farewell.

Win. Sweet,
We shall meet again as soon as thou can possibly?

Frank. We shall. One kiss. Away.
Ent. Sir Art. Clarington.
Sir Art. Frank Thorney.

Frank. Here Sir.

Sir Art. Alone? then must I tell thee in plain terms, thou have wronged thy
Master's house basely and lewdly.


Frank. Your house, Sir?

Sir Art. Yes, Sir, if the nimble devil
That wantoned in your blood, rebelled against
All rules of honest duty. You might, Sir,
Have found out some more fitting place then here,
To have built a Stews in. All the Country whispers
How shamefully thou have undone a Maid,
Approved for modest life, for civil carriage,
Till thy prevailing perjuries enticed her
To forfeit shame. Will you be honest yet?
Make her amends and marry her?

Frank. So, Sir,
I might bring both my self and her to beggary;
And that would be a shame worse then the other.

Sir Art. You should have thought on this before, and then
Your reason would have oversway'd the passion
Of your unruly lust. But that you may
Be left without excuse, to salve the infamy
Of my disgraced house, and 'cause you are
A Gentleman, and both of you my servants,
I Will make the Maid a portion.

Frank. So you promised me
Before, in case I married her. I know
Sir Arthur Clarington deserves the credit
Report has lent him; and presume you are
A Debtor to your promise: but upon
What certainty shall I resolve? Excuse me
For being somewhat rude.

Sir Art. It Is but reason.
Well Frank, what think thou of 200 l.
And a continual friend?

Fra. Though my poor fortunes
Might happily prefer me to a choice
Of a far greater portion; yet to right
A wronged Maid, and to preserve your favor,
I am content to accept your proffer.

Sir Art. Art thou?

Frank. Sir, we shall every day have need to employ
The use of what you please to give.

Sir Art. Thou shall have't.

Fran. Then I claim your promise.
We are man and wife.

Sir Art. Already?

Frank. And more then so, I have promised her
Free entertainment in her Unkle's house,
Near Waltham Abbey, where she may securely
So journe, till time and my endeavors work
My fathers love and liking.

Sir Art. Honest Frank.

Frank. I hope, Sir, you will think I cannot keep her
Without a daily charge.

Sir Art. As for the money,
It Is all thine own; and though I cannot make thee
A present payment, yet thou shall be sure
I will not fail thee.

Frank. But our occasions.

Sir Art. Nay, nay, talk not of your occasions, trust my bounty: it shall not
sleep. Have married her, in faith Frank?

It Is well, it is passing well: then Winnifride,
Once more thou art an honest woman. Frank,
Thou have a Jewel. Love her; she will deserve it.
And when to Waltham?

Frank. She is making ready.
Her Uncle stays for her.

Sir Art. Most provident speed.
Frank, I will be friend, and such a friend.
Thou Wilt bring her thither?

Fran. Sir, I cannot: newly
My father sent me word I should come to him.

Sir Art. Marry, and do: I know thou have a wit
To handle him.

Frank. I have a suit to ye.

Sir Art. What is it?
Any thing, Frank, command it.

Frank. That you will please,
By Letters to assure my Father, that
I am not married.

Sir Art. How?

Frank. Some one or other
Has certainly informed him that I purposed
To marry Winnifride; on which he threatened
To dis-inherit me, to prevent it,
Lowly I crave your Letters, which he seeing
Will credit; and I hope ere I return,
On such conditions as I Will frame, his Lands
Shall be assured.

Sir Art. But what is that to quit
My knowledge of the marriage?

Frank. Why you were not
A witness to it.

Sir Art. I conceive: and then,
His Land confirmed, thou will acquaint him thoroughly
With all that is past.

Frank. I mean no less.

Sir Art. Provided,
I never was made privy to it.

Frank. Alas, Sir,
Am I a talker?

Sir Art. Draw thy self the Letter,
I Will put my hand to it. I commend thy policy
Thou Art witty, witty Frank; nay, nay, it is fit,
Dispatch it.

Frank. I shall write effectually.
Exit.
Sir Art. Go thy way Cuckoo; have I caught the young man?
One trouble then is freed. He that will feast
At others cost, must be a bold faced guest.
Enter Win. in a riding-suit.
Win. I have heard the news, all now is safe.
The worst is past.

Sir Art. Thy lip, wench: I must bid
Farewell, for fashions sake; but I will visit thee
Suddenly, Girl. This was cleanly carried:
Ha! was it not Win?

Win. Then were my happiness,
That I in heart repent I did not bring him
The Dower of a Virginity. Sir, forgive me;
I have been much to blame. Had not my Laundress
Given way to your immoderate waste of Virtue,
You had not with such eagerness pursued
The error of your goodness.

Sir Art. Dear, dear Win.
I hug this Art of thine, it snews how cleanly
Thou can beguile in case occasion serve,
To practice. It becomes thee, now we share
Free scope enough, without control or fear,
To interchange our pleasures; we will surfeit
In our embraces, Wench. Come, tell me, when
Will thou appoint a meeting?

Win. What to do?

Sir Art. Good, good, to con the lesson of our loves,
Our secret game.

Win. O blush to speak it further!
As y' are a noble Gentleman, forget
A sin so monstrous: it is not gently done,
To open a cured wound. I know you speak
For trial; troth you need not.

Sir Art. I for trial?
Not I, by this good Sunshine.

Win. Can you name
That syllable of good, and yet not tremble,
To think to what a foul and black intent,
You use it for an Oath? Let me resolve you,
If you appear in any Visitation
That brings not with it pity for the wrongs
Done to abused Thorney, my kind husband;
If you infect mine ear with any breath
That is not thoroughly perfumed with sighs
For former deeds of lust: May I be cursed
Even in my prayers, when I vouchsafe
To see or hear you. I will change my life,
From a loose whore, to a repentant wife.

Sir Art. Will thou turn monster now? art not ashamed
After so many months to be honest at last?
Away, away, fie on it.

Win. My resolution
Is built upon a Rock. This very day
Young Thorney vowed with Oaths not to be doubted,
That never any change of love should cancel
The bonds in which we are to either bound,
Of lasting truth. And shall I then for my part
Unfile the sacred Oath set on Record
In Heaven's Book? Sir Arthur, do not study
To add to your lascivious lust, the sin
Of Sacrilege: for if you but endeavor
By any unchaste word to tempt my constancy,
You strive as much as in you lies to ruin
A Temple hallowed to the purity
Of holy Marriage. I have said enough:
You may believe me.

Sir Art. Get you to your Nunnery,
There freeze in your old Cloister. This is fine.

Win. Good Angels guide me. Sir, you will give me leave
To weep and pray for your co^^ersion.

Sir Art. Yes, away to Waltham. Pox on your honesty.
Had you no other trick to fool me? Well,
You may want money yet.

Win. None that I Will send for
To you, for hire of a damnation.
When I am gone, think on my just complaint:
I was your Devil, O be you my Saint!
Exit Win.
Sir Art. Go, go thy ways, as changeable a baggage
As ever cozened Knight. I Am glad I Am rid of her.
Honest? marry hang her. Thorney is my Debtor,
I thought to have paid him too: but fools have fortune.
Exit S. A.
SCAEN. 2.
Enter Old Thorney, and Old Carter.
O. Thor. You offer Mr. Carter, like a Gentleman,
I cannot find fault with it, it is so fair.

O. Cart. No Gentleman, I, Mr. Thorney; spare the Mastership, call me by my
name, John Carter; Master is a title my Father, nor his before him, were
acquainted with. Honest Hertforshire Yeomen, such an one am I; my word and my
deed shall be proved one at all times. I mean to give you no security for the
Marriagemoney.


O. Thor. How? no security? although it need not, so long as you live; yet who
is he has surety of his life one hour? Men, the Proverb says, are mortal: else,
for my part, I distrust you not, were the sum double.


O. Cart. Double, trebble, more or less; I tell you, Mr. Thorney, I Will give no
security. Bonds and Bills are but Tarriers to catch Fools, and keep lazy Knaves
busy; my security shall be present payment. And we here, about Edmonton, hold
present payment as sure as an Alderman's Bond in London, Mr. Thorney.


O. Thor. I cry you mercy, Sir, I understood you not.

O. Cart. I like young Frank well, so does my Susan too. The Girl has a fancy
to him, which makes me ready in my Purse. There be other Suitors within, that
make much noise to little purpose. If Frank love Sue, Sue shall have none but
Frank. It Is a mannerly Girl, Mr. Thorney, though but an homely man's Daughter.
There have worse Faces looked out of black Bags, Man.


O. Thor. You speak your mind freely and honestly. I marvel my Son comes not:
I am sure he will be here sometime to day.


O. Cart. To day or to morrow, when he comes he shall be welcome to Bread, Beer
and Beef, Yoeman's fare; we have no Kickshaws: full Dishes, whole belly-fulls.
Should I diet three days at one of the slender City-Suppers, you might send me
to Barber-Surgeons Hall the fourth day, to hang up for an Anatomy. -- Here come
they that --

How now Girls? every day play-day with you? Enter VVarbeck with Susan,
Somerton with Katherine. Valentine's day too, all by couples? Thus will young
folks do when we are laid in our Graves, Mr. Thorney. Here Is all the care they
take. And how do you find the Wenches, Gentlemen? have they any mind to a
loose Gown and a strait Shoe? VVin'em, and wear'em. They shall choose for
themselves by my consent.


Warb. You speak like a kind Father. Sue, thou hear the liberty that 's
granted thee. What say thou? will thou be mine?


Sus. Your what, Sir? I dare swear, never your wife.

Warb. Can thou be so unkind? considering how dearly I affect thee; nay,
dote on thy perfections.


Sus. You are studied too Scholar-like in words: I understand not. I am too
course for such a Gallants love as you are.


Warb. By the honor of Gentility.

Sus. Good Sir, no swearing: yea and nay with us
Prevails above all oaths you can invent.

Warb. By this white hand of thine.

Sus. Take a false oath? Fie, fie, flatter the wise: fools not regard it; and
one of these am I.


Warb. Do thou despise me?

O. Cart. Let 'em talk on, Mr. Thorney. I know Sue's mind. The Fly may buz
about the Candle, he shall but singe his VVings when all 's done. Frank, Frank
is he has her heart.


Some. But shall I live in hope, Kate?

Kat. Better so, then be a desperate man.

Some. Perhaps thou think it is thy Portion
I level at: were thou as poor in Fortunes,
As thou art rich in Goodness; I would rather
Be Suitor for the Dower of thy Virtues,
Then twice thy Father 's whole Estate; and prithee
Be thou resolved so.

Kat. Mr. Somerton, it is an easy labor to deceive
A Maid that will believe Men's subtle promises:
Yet I conceive of you as worthily
As I presume you do deserve.

Some. Which is
As worthily in loving thee sincerely,
As thou art worthy to be so beloved.

Kat. I shall find time to try you.

Some. Do, Kate, do:
And when I fail, may all my joys forsake me.

O. Cart. Warbeck and Sue are at it still. I laugh to my self, Mr. Thorney, to
see how earnestly he beats the Bush, while the Bird is flown into another
bosom. A very unthrift, Mr. Thorney; one of the Country roaring Lads: we have
such as well as the City, and as arrant Rake-hells as they are, though not so
nimble at their prizes of wit. Sue knows the Raskal to an hairs breadth, and
will fit him accordingly.


O. Thor. What is the other Gentleman?

O. Cart. One Somerton, the honester man of the two, by 5 l. in every
stone-weight. A civil Fellow. He has a fine convenient Estate of land in
West-ham by Essex. M. Ranges that dwells by Enfield, sent him hither. He likes
Kate well. I may tell you, I think she likes him as well. If they agree, I Will
not hinder the match for my part. But that Warbeck is such another --. I use
him kindly for Mr. Somerton's sake: for he came hither first as a Companion of
his. Honest men, Mr. Thorney, may fall into Knaves company, now and then.


Warb. Three hundred a year Jointure, Sue.

Sus. Where lies it, by Sea or by Land? I think by Sea.

Warb. Do I look like a Captain?

Sus. Not a whit, Sir.
Should all that use the Seas be reckoned Captains,
There 's not a Ship should have a Scullion in her
To keep her clean.

Warb. Do you scorn me, Mrs. Susan*
Am I a subject to be jeered at?

Sus. Neither
Am I a property for you to use
As stale to your fond wanton loose discourse.
Pray Sir be civil.

Warb. VVilt be angry, VVasp?

O. Cart. God-a-mercy, Sue. She Will firk him on my life, if he fumble with her.

Enter Frank. Mr. Francis Thorney, you are welcome indeed.
Your Father expected your coming. How does the right worshipful Knight, Sir
Arthur Clarington, your Master?


Frank. In health this morning. Sir, my duty.

O. Thor. Now
You come as I could wish.

Warb. Frank Thorney, ha!

Sus. You must excuse me.

Frank. Virtuous. Mrs Susan.
Kind Mrs. Katherine. Gentlemen, to both
Salutes them. Good time of the day.

Some. The like to you.

Warb. It Is he.
A word, Friend. On my life, this is the Man
Stands fair in crossing Susan's love to me.

Some. I think no less. Be wise, and take no notice on it.
He that can wi^ her, best deserves her.

Warb. Marry
A Servingman? mew.

Some. Prithee Friend no more.

O. Cart. Gentlemen all, there is within a slight Dinner ready, if you please to
taste of it: Mr. Thorney, Mr. Francis, Mr. Somerton. Why Girls? what,
Huswives, will you spend all your forenoon in tittle-tattles? away: It Is well
in faith. Will you go in, Gentlemen?


O. Thor. We Will follow presently: my Son and I
Have a few words of business.

O. Cart. At your pleasure.
Ex. the rest.
O. Thor. I think you guess the reason, Frank, for which
I sent for you.

Frank. Yes, Sir.

O. Thor. I need not tell you.
With what a labyrinth of dangers daily
The best part of my whole Estate's encumbred:
Nor have I any Clew to wind it out,
But what occasion proffers me. Wherein
If you should faulter, I shall have the shame,
And you the loss. On these two points rely
Our ha^piness or ruin. If you marry
With wealthy Carter's Daughter, there is a Portion
Will free my Land: all which I will instate
Upon the marriage to you. Otherwise.
I must be of necessity enforced
To make a present sale of all: and yet,
For oug^t I know, live in as poor distress,
Or worse, then now I do. You hear the sum:
I told you thus before. Have you considered on it?

Frank. I have, Sir. And however I could wish
To enjoy the benefit of single Freedom,
For that I find no disposition in me
To undergo the burden of that care
That Marriage brings with it; Yet to secure
And settle the continuance of your Credit,
I humbly yield to be directed by you
In all commands.

O. Thor. You have already used
Such thriving protestations to the Maid.
That she is wholly yours. And speak the truth,
You love her, do you not?

Frank. 'Twere pity, Sir,
I should deceive her.

O. Thor. Better y had been unborn.
But is your love so steady that you mean,
Nay, more, desire to make her your Wife?

Frank. Else, Sir,
It were a wrong not to be righted.

O. Thor. True,
It were: and you will marry her?

Frank. Heaven prosper it:
I do intend it.

O. Thor. O thou art a Villain!
A Devil like a Man. Wherein have I
Offended all the Powers so much, to be
Father to such a graceless godless Son?

Frank. To me, Sir, this? O my cleft heart!

O. Thor. To thee,
Son of my curse. Speak truth, and blush, thou monster,
Have thou not married Winnifride? a Maid
Was fellow servants with thee.

Fra. Some swift spirit
Has blown this news abroad. I must outface it.

O. Thor. Do You study for excuse? why all the country
Is full on it.

Fra. With your license, it is not charitable,
I am sure it is not fatherly, so much
To be o'resway'd with credulous conceit
Of mere impossibilities. But Fathers
Are priviledg'd to think and talk at pleasure.

O. Thor. Why can thou yet deny thou have no wise?

Frank. What do you take me for? an Atheist?
One that nor hopes the blessedness of life
Hereafter, neither fears the vengeance due
To such as make the Marriage Bed an Inn,
Which Travelers day and night,
After a toylsome lodging leave at pleasure?
Am I become so insensible of losing
The glory of Creations work? My soul!
O I have lived too long.

O. Thor. Thou have, dissembler;
Dare thou persevere yet? and pull down wrath
As hot as flames of hell, to strike thee quick
Into the Grave of horror? I believe thee not.
Get from my sight.

Fran. Sir, though mine innocence
Needs not a stronger witness then the cleerness
Of an unperish'd conscience; yet for that
I was enform'd, how mainly you had been
Possessed of this untruth, To quit all scruple
Please you peruse this Letter: it is to you.

O. Thor. From whom?

Fran. Sir Arthur Clarington my Master.

O. Thor. Well, Sir.

Fran. On every side I am distracted: Am waded deeper into mischief, then
virtue can avoid. But on I must: Fate leads me: I will follow. There you read
what may confirm you.


O. Thor. Yes, and wonder at it. Forgive me, Frank. Credulity abused me. My
tears express my joy: and I am sorry I injured innocence.


Frank. Alas! I knew your rage and grief proceeded from your love to me: so I
conceived it.


O. Thor. My good Son, I Will bear with many faults in thee hereafter. Bear thou
with mine.


Frank. The peace is soon concluded.
Enter Old Carter.
O. Cart. Why Mr. Thorney, do you mean to talk out your dinner? the Company
attends your coming. What must it be, Mr. Frank* or Son Frank? I am plain
Dunstable.


O. Thor. Son, Brother, if your Daughter like to have it so.

Frank. I dare be confident, she is not altered
From what I left her at our parting last:
Are you, fair Maid?

Sus. You took too sure possession
Of an engaged heart.

Frank. Which now I challenge.

O. Cart. Marry and much good may it do thee, Son. Take her to thee. Get me a
brace of Boys at a burden, Frank. The nursing shall not stand thee in a
pennyworth of Milk. Reach her home and spare not. VVhen's the day?


O. Thor. To morrow, if you please. To use ceremony
Of charge and custom, were to little purpose:
Their loves are married fast enough already.

O. Cart. A good motion. We Will even have an household Dinner; and let the
Fiddlers go scrape. Let the Bride and Bridegroom dance at night together: no
matter for the Guests. To morrow, Sue, to morrow. Shall's to Dinner now?


O. Thor. We are on all sides pleased, I hope.

Sus. Pray Heaven I may deserve the blessing sent me.
Now my heart is settled.

Frank. So is mine.

O. Cart. Your Marriage-money shall be received before your
VVedding-shooes can be pulled on. Blessing on you both.

Frank. No Man can hide his shame from Heaven that views him.
In vain he flees, whose destiny pursues him.
Exeunt Omnes.
ACT. II.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Elizabeth Sawyer, gathering sticks.
Sawy. ANd why on me? why should the envious world
Throw all their scandalous malice upon me?
'Cause I am poor, deformed and ignorant,
And like a Bow buckl'd and bent together,
By some more strong in mischiefs then my self?
Must I for that be made a common sink,
For all the filth and rubbish of Men's tongues
To fall and run into? Some call me VVitch;
And being ignorant of my self, they go
About to teach me how to be one: urging,
That my bad tongue (by their bad usage made so)
Forespeaks their Cattle, does bewitch their Corn,
Themselves, their Servants, and their Babes at nurse.
This they enforce upon me: and in part
Enter O. Banks. Make me to credit it. And here comes one
Of my chief Adversaries.

O. Bank. Out, out upon thee, VVitch.

Sawy. Do call me VVitch?

O. Bank. I do, VVitch, I do: and worse I would, knew I a name more hateful.
What make thou upon my ground?


Sawy. Gather a few rotten sticks to warm me.

O. Bank. Down with them when I bid thee, quickly;
I Will make thy bones rattle in thy skin else.

Sawy. You-won't, Churl. Cutthroat, Miser: there they be. Would they stuck
cross thy throat, thy bowels, thy maw, thy midriff.


O. Bank. Say thou me so? Hag, out of my ground.

Sawy. Do strike me* slave? curmudgeon now thy bones aches, thy joints
cramps, and convulsions stretch and crack thy sinews.


O. Bank. Cursing, thou Hag! take that, and that.
Exit.
Sawy. Strike, do, and withered may that hand and arm
Whose blows have lamed me, drop from the rotten Trunk.
Abuse me! beat me! call me Hag and Witch!
What is the name? where and by what Art learned?
What spells, what charms, or invocations?
May the thing called Familiar be purchased?
Enter Young Banks, and three or four more.
Y. Bank. A new head for the Tabor, and silver tipping for the Pipe. Remember
that, and forget not five lesh of new Bells.


1. Double Bells: Crooked Lane ye shall have 'em straight in.
Crooked Lane: double Bells all, if it be possible.

Y. Bank. Double Bells? double Coxcombs; Trebles: buy me Trebles, all Trebles:
for our purpose is to be in the Altitudes.


2. All Trebles? not a Mean?

Y. Bank. Not one: The Morris is so cast, we'll have neither Mean nor Base in
our company, Fellow Rowland.


3. What? nor a Counter?

Y. Bank. By no means, no hunting Counter; leave that to Envile Chase-Men: all
Trebles, all in the Altitudes. Now for the disposing of Parts in the Morris,
little or no labor will serve.


2. If you that be minded to follow your Leader, know me, an ancient Honor
belonging to our house, for a Fore-horse, team, and for gallant in a Morris:
my Father's Stable is not unfurnished.


3. So much for the Fore-horse: but how for a good Hobbyhorse?

Y. Bank. For a Hobbyhorse? Let me see an Almanac. Midsummer-Moon, let me see
ye. When the Moon's in the full, then is wit in the wane. No more. Use your
best skill. Your Morris will suffer an Eclipse.


1. An Eclipse?

Y. Bank. A strange one.

2. Strange?

Y. Bank. Yes, and most sudden. Remember the For^ gallant, and forget the
Hobbyhorse. The whole body of your Morris will be darkened. There be of us.
But it is no matter. Forget the Ho^by-horse.


1. Cuddy Banks, have you forgot since he paced it from Envile Chase to
Edmonton? Cuddy, honest Cuddy, cast thy stuff.


Y. Bank. Suffer may ye all. It shall be known, I can take mine ease as well as
another Man. Seek your Hobbyhorse where you can get him.


1. Cuddy, honest Cuddy, we confess, and are sorry for our neglect.

2. The old Horse shall have a new Bridle.

3. The Caparisons new painted.

4. The Tail repaired.

1. The Snaffle and the Bosses new saffron'd over.

1. Kind:

2. Honest:

3. Loving, ingenious:

4. Affable Cuddy.

Y. Bank. To show I am not flint; but affable, as you say, very well stuffed, a
kind of warm Dowe or Puff-paste, I relent, I connive, most affable Jack: let
the Hobbyhorse provide a strong back, he shall not want a belly when I am in
'em. But Uds me, Mother Sawyer.


1. The old Witch of Edmonton. If our mirth be not crossed.

2. Bless us, Cuddy, and let her curse her the other eye out. What do now?


Y. Bank. Ungirt, unblessed, says the Proverb. But my Girdle shall serve a
riding knit: and a fig for all the Witches in Christendom. What would thou?


1. The Devil cannot abide to be crossed.

2. And scorns to come at any man's whistle.

3. Away

4. With the VVitch.

Omn. Away with the VVitch of Edmonton.
Ex. in strange postur.
Sawy. Still vexed? still tortured? That Curmudgeon Banks
Is ground of all my scandal. I am shunned
And hated like a sickness: made a scorn
To all degrees and sexes. I have heard old Beldames
Talk of Familiars in the shape of Mice,
Rats, Ferrets, VVeasels, and I wot not what,
That have appeared, and sucked, some say, their blood.
But by what means they came acquainted with them,
I Am now ignorant: would some power good or bad
Instruct me which way I might be revenged
Upon this Churl, I Would go out of my self,
And give this Fury leave to dwell within
This ruined Cottage, ready to fall with age:
Abjure all goodness: be at hate with prayer;
And study Curses, Imprecations,
Blasphemous speeches, Oaths, detested Oaths,
Or any thing that is ill; so I might work
Revenge upon this Miser, this black Cur,
That barks, and bites, and sucks the very blood
Of me, and of my credit. It Is all one,
To be a VVitch, as to be counted one.
Vengeance, shame, ruin, light upon that Canker.
Enter Dog.
Dog. Ho! have I found thee cursing? now thou art mine own.

Sawy. Thine? what art thou?

Dog. He thou have so often importuned to appear to thee, the Devil.

Sawy. Bless me! the Devil?

Dog. Come, do not fear, I love thee much too well
To hurt or fright thee. If I seem terrible,
It is to such as hate me. I have found
Thy love unfeigned; have seen and pitied
Thy open wrongs, and come out of my love
To give thee just revenge against thy foes.

Sawy. May I believe thee?

Dog. To confirm't, command me
Do any mischief unto Man or Beast,
And I Will effect it, on condition,
That uncompell'd thou make a deed of Gift
Of Soul and Body to me.

Sawy. Out, alas!
My Soul and Body?

Dog. And that instantly,
And seal it with thy blood: if thou deniest,
I Will tear thy body in a thousand pieces.

Sawy. I know not where to seek relief: But shall I
After such Covenants sealed, see full revenge
On all that wrong me?

Dog. Ha, ha, silly woman!
The Devil is no liar to such as he loves.
Did ever know or hear the Devil a liar
To such as he affects?

Sawy. When I am thine, at least so much of me,
As I can call mine own.

Dog. Equivocations?
Art mine or no? speak, or I Will tear.

Sawy. All thine.

Dog. Seal't with thy blood.
[Sucks her arm, thunder and lightning. See, now I dare call thee mine;
For proof, command me, instantly I Will run,
To any mischief, goodness can I none.

Sawy. And I desire as little. There Is an old Churl, one Banks --

Dog. That wronged thee: he lamed thee, called thee VVitch.

Sawy. The same: first upon him I Would be revenged.

Dog. Thou shall: Do but name how.

Sawy. Go, touch his life.

Dog. I cannot.

Sawy. Have thou not vowed? Go, kill the slave.

Dog. I wonnot.

Sawy. I Will cancel then my gift.

Dog. Ha, ha!

Sawy. Do laugh?
Why wilt not kill him?

Dog. Fool, because I cannot.
Though we have power, know, it is circumscribed,
And ti'd in limits: though he be cursed to thee,
Yet of himself he is loving to the world,
And charitable to the poor. Now Men
That, as he, love goodness, though in smallest measure,
Live without compass of our reach. His Cattle
And Corn, I Will kill and mildew: but his life
(Until I take him, as I late found thee,
Cursing and swearing) I have no power to touch.

Saw. Work on his corn and cattle then.

Dog. I shall.
The VVitch of Edmonton shall see his fall.
If she at least put credit in my power,
And in mine only; make Orisons to me,
And none but me.

Saw. Say how, and in what manner?

Dog. I Will tell thee, when thou wishest ill;
Corn, Man or Beast, would spoil or kill,
Turn thy back against the Sun,
And mumble this short Orison:
If thou to death or shame pursue 'em,
Sanctibicetur nomen tuum.

Sawy. If thou to death or shame pursue 'em,
Sanctibecetur nomen tuum.

Dog. Perfect. Farewell. Our first-made promises
We'll put in execution against Banks.
Exit.
Sawy. Contaminetur nomen tuum. I Am an expert Scholar;
Speak Latin, or I know not well what Language,
As well as the best of 'em. But who comes he^e?
Enter Y. Ba. The Son of my worst Foe. To death pursue 'em,
Et sanctabecetur nomen tuum.

Y. Bank. What 's that she mumbles? the Devils Pater noster?
Would it were else. Mother Sawyer, Good morrow.

Sawy. Ill morrow to thee, and all the world, that flout a poor old woman. To
death pursue 'em, and sanctabacetur nomen tuum.


Y. Bank. Nay, good Gammer Sawyer, what e're it pleases my
Father to call you, I know you are

Sawy. A Witch.

Y. Bank. A Witch? would you were else in faith.

Sawy. Your Father knows I am by this.

Y. Bank. I would he did.

Sawy. And so in time may you.

Y. Bank. I would I might else. But Witch or no Witch, you are a motherly
woman: and though my Father be a kind of God bless us, as they say, I have an
earnest suit to you; and if you will be so kind to ka me one good turn, I Will be
so courteous as to kob you another.


Sawy. What Is that? to spurn, beat me, and call me VVitch, as your kind
Father does?


Y. Bank. My Father? I am ashamed to own him. If he has hurt the head of thy
credit, there is money to buy thee a Plaster: and a small courtesy I would
require at thy hands.


Sawy. You seem a good young Man, and I must dissemble, the better to
accomplish my revenge. But for this silver, what would have me do? bewitch
thee?


Y. Bank. No, by no means; I am bewitched already. I would have thee so good as
to unwitch me, or witch another with me for company.


Sawy. I understand thee not. Be plain, my Son.

Y. Bank. As a Pike-staff, Mother: you know Kate Carter.

Sawy. The wealthy Yeomans Daughter. What of her?

Y. Bank. That same Party has bewitched me.

Sawy. Bewitched thee?

Y. Bank. Bewitched me, Hisce auribus. I saw a little Devil fly out of her eye
like a Burbolt, which sticks at this hour up to the Feathers in my heart. Now
my request is, to send one of thy what do you call 'ems, either to pluck that
out, or stick another as fast in hers. Do, and here is my hand, I am thine for
three lives.


Sawy. We shall have sport. Thou art in love with her.


Y. Bank. Up to the very hilts, Mother.


Sawy. And thou'ldst have me make her love thee too.


Y. Bank. I think she will prove a VVitch in earnest. Yes, I could find in my
heart to strike her three quarters deep in love with me too.


Sawy. But do thou think that I can do it, and I alone?

Y. Bank. Truly, Mother Witch, I do verily believe so: and when I see it done,
I shall be half persuaded so too.


Sawy. It Is enough. What Art can do, be sure of: turn to the West, and
whatsoever thou hear or see, stand silent, and be not afraid.

She stamps. Enter the Dog; he fawns and leaps upon her.
Y. Bank. Afraid, Mother Witch? turn my face to the West? I said I should
always have a back-friend of her; and now it is out. And her little Devil should
be hungry, come sneaking behind me, like a cowardly Catchpole, and clap his
Talents on my Haunches. It Is woundy cold sure. I dudder and shake like an
Aspen-leaf every joint of me.


Sawy. To scandal and disgrace pursue 'em,
Et sanctabicetur nomen tuum.
How now, my Son, how is it?
Exit Dog.
Y. Bank. Scarce in a clean life, Mother Witch. But did your Gobblin and you
spout Latin together?


Sawy. A kind of Charm I work by. Did thou hear me?

Y. Bank. I heard I know not the Devil what mumble in a scurvy base tone, like
a Drum that had taken cold in the head the last Muster. Very comfortable words:
what were they? and who taught them you?


Sawy. A great learned Man.

Y. Bank. Learned Man? learned Devil it was as soon? But what? what comfortable
news about the Party?


Sawy. Who? Kate Carter? I Will tell thee, thou know the Style at the West End
of thy Father's Pease-Field, be there to morrownight after Sunset; and the
first live thing thou see, be sure to follow, and that shall bring thee to
thy Love.


Y. Bank. In the Pease-field? Has she a mind to Codlings already? The first
living thing I meet, you say, shall bring me to her.


Sawy. To a sight of her, I mean. She will seem wantonly coy, and flee thee:
but follow her close, and boldly: do but embrace her in thy arms once, and she
is thine own.


Y. Bank. At the Style, at the West End of my Father's Peaseland, the first
live thing I see, follow and embrace her, and she shall be thine. Nay, and I
come to embracing once, she shall be mine; I Will go near to make at Eaglet else.

Exit.
Sawy. A ball well bandied: now the set 's half won:
The Father's wrong I Will wreak upon the Son.
Exit.
SCAEN. 2.
Enter Carter, Warbeck, Somerton.
Cart. How now Gentlemen, cloudy? I know Mr. Warbeck, you are in a fog about my
Daughters marriage.


Warb. And can you blame me, Sir?

Cart. Nor you me justly. Wedding and hanging are tied up both in a Proverb;
and Destiny is the Juggler that unties the knot. My hope is, you are reserved
to a richer fortune then my poor Daughter.


Warb. However, your promise.

Cart. Is a kind of debt, I confess it.

Warb. Which honest men should pay.

Cart. Yet some Gentlemen break in that point, now and then, by your leave, Sir.


Some. I confess thou have had a little wrong in the VVench: but patience is the
only salve to cure it. Since Thorney has won the VVench, he has most reason to
wear her.


Warb. Love in this kind admits no reason to wear her.

Cart. Then love's a fool, and what wise man will take exception?

Some. Come, frolic Ned, were every man master of his own fortune, Fate might
pick straws; and Destiny go a wool-gathering.


Warb. You hold yours in a string though. It Is well: but if there be any
equity, look thou to meet the like usage e're long.


Some. In my love to her Sister Katherine? Indeed, they are a pair of Arrows
drawn out of one Quiver, and should fly at an even length, if she do run after
her Sister.


Warb. Look for the same mercy at my hands, as I have received at thine.


Some. She Will keep a surer compass. I have too strong a confidence to mistrust
her.


Warb. And that confidence is a wind, that has blown many a married Man ashore
at Cuckolds Haven, I can tell you: I wish yours more prosperous though.


Cart. VVhate're you wish, I Will master my promise to him.

Warb. Yes, as you did to me.

Cart. No more of that, if you love me. But for the more assurance, the next
offered occasion shall consummate the Marriage: and that once sealed,

Enter Young Thorney and Susan.
Some. Leave the manage of the rest to my care. But see, the Bridegroom and
Bride comes; the new pair of Sheffeild-Knives fitted both to one sheath.


Warb. The Sheath might have been better fitted, if some body had their due.
But --


Cart. No harsh language, if thou love me. Frank Thorney has done --


Warb. No more then I, or thou, or any man, things so standing, would have
attempted.


Some. Good morrow Mr. Bridegroom.

Warb. Come, give thee joy. May thou live long and happy in thy fair choice.


Y. Thor. I thank ye Gentlemen. Kind Mr. Warbeck, I find you loving.


Warb. Thorney, that creature, (much good do thee with her)
Virtue and beauty hold fair mixture in her.
She Is rich no doubt in both. Yet were she fairer,
Thou art right worthy of her. Love her, Thorney,
It Is nobleness in thee, in her but duty.
The match is fair and equal: the success
I leave to censure. Farewell, Mrs. Bride:
Till now elected, thy old scorn deride.
Exit.
Some. Good, Mr. Thorney.

Cart. Nay, you shall not part till you see the Barrels run a-tilt, Gentlemen.

Exit.
Sus. Why change you your face, Sweetheart?

Y. Thor. Who? I? For nothing.

Sus. Dear, say not so: a Spirit of your constancy cannot endure his change for
nothing. I have observed strange variations in you.


Y. Thor. In me?

Sus. In you, Sir. Awake: you seem to dream, and in your sleep (...)ou utter
sudden and distracted accents, like one at enmity with (...)eace. Dear loving
Husband, if I may dare to challenge any (...)nterest in you, give me the reason
fully: you may trust my breast as (...)afely as your own.


Y. Thor. With what? you half amaze me, prithee.

Sus. Come, you shall not; indeed, you shall not shut me from partaking the
least dislike that grieves you. I am all yours.


Y. Thor. And I all thine.

Sus. You are not, if you keep the least grief from me: but I find the cause;
it grew from me.


Y. Thor. From you?

Sus. From some distaste in me or my behavior: you are not kind in the
concealment. Alas, Sir, I am young, silly, and plain; more strange to those
contents a wife should offer. Say but in what I fail, I Will study satisfaction.


Y. Thor. Come, in nothing.

Sus. I know I do. Knew I as well in what, you should not long be sullen.
Prithee Love, if I have been immodest or too bold, speak't in a frown: if
peevishly too nice, shew't in a smile. Thy liking is the glass by which I Will
habit my behavior.


Y. Thor. Wherefore do weep now?

Sus. You, Sweet, have the power to make me passionate as an April-day: now
smile, then weep; now pale, then crimson red. You are the powerful Moon of my
bloods Sea, to make it ebb or flow into my face, as your looks change.


Y. Thor. Change thy conceit, I prithee:
Thou art all perfection: Diana her self
Swells in thy thoughts, and moderates thy beauty.
Within thy left eye amorous Cupid fits
Feathering Love-shafts, whose golden heads he dipped
-- In thy chaste breast. In the other lies
Blushing Adonis scarft in modesties.
And still as wanton Cupid blows Love-fires,
Adonis quenches our unchaste desires.
And from these two I briefly do imply
A perfect Emblem of thy modesty.
Then, prithee Dear, maintain no more dispute,
For where thou speakst, it is fit all tongues be mute.

Sus. Come, come, those golden strings of flattery
Shall not tie up my speech, Sir; I must know
The ground of your disturbance.

Y. Thor. Then look here;
For here, here is the fen in which this Hydra
Of discontent grows rank.

Sus. Heaven shield it: where?

Y. Tho. In mine own bosom: here the cause has root;
The poisoned Leeches twist about my heart,
And will, I hope, confound me.

Sus. You speak Riddles.

Y. Tho. Take It plainly then: 'twas told me by a woman
Known and approved in Palmestry,
I should have two wives.

Sus. Two wives? Sir, I take it exceeding likely. But let not conceit hurt you:
you are afraid to bury me?


Y. Thor. No, no, my Winnifride.

Sus. How say you? Winnifride? you forget me.

Y. Thor. No, I forget my self, Susan.

Sus. In what?

Y. Thor. Talking of wives, I pretend Winnifride,
A Maid that at my Mothers waited on me
Before thy self.

Sus. I hope, Sir, she may live to take my place. But why should all this move
you?


Y. Thor. The poor Girl, she has't before thee, and that is the Fiend torments
me.


Sus. Yet why should this raise mutiny within you? such presages prove often
false: or say it should be true?


Y. Thor. That I should have another wife?

Sus. Yes, many; if they be good, the better.

Y. Thor. Never any equal to thee in goodness.

Sus. Sir, I could wish I were much better for you;
Yet if I knew your fate
Ordained you for another, I could wish
(So well I love you, and your hopeful pleasure)
Me in my grave, and my poor virtues added
To my successor.

Y. Thorn. Pritheee, prithe, talk not of death or graves; thou (...)rt so rare
a goodness, as Death would rather put it self to death, (...)hen murder thee.
But we, as all things else, are mutable and hanging.


Sus. Yet you still move in your first sphere of discontent. Sweet, chase those
clouds of sorrow, and shine clearly on me.


Y. Thor. At my return I will.

Sus. Return? ah me! will you then leave me?

Y. Thor. For a time I must: but how? as Birds their young, or loving Bees
their Hives, to fetch home richer dainties.


Sus. Leave me? Now has my fear met its effect. You shall not, cost it my life,
you shall not.


Y. Thor. Why? your reason?

Sus. Like to the Lap-wing have you all this while with your false love deluded
me? pretending counterfeit senses for your discontent, and now at last it is by
chance stole from you.


Y. Thor. What? what by chance?

Sus. Your pre-appointed meeting of single combat with young Warbeck.


Y. Thor. Hah!

Sus. Even so: dissemble not; it is too apparent. Then in his look I read it:
deny it not; I see it apparent: cost it my undoing, and unto that my life, I
will not leave you.


Y. Thor. Not until when?

Sus. Till he and you be Friends.
Was this your cunning? and then flam me off
With an old VVitch, two Wives, and Winnifride?
You Are not so kind indeed as I imagined.

Y. Thor. And you more fond by far then I expected.
It is a virtue that attends thy kind.
But of our business within: and by this kiss,
I Will anger thee no more; troth Chuck I will not.

Sus. You shall have no just cause,

Y. Thor. Dear Sue, I shall not.
Exeunt.
ACT. III.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Cuddy Banks, and Morice-dancers.
1. NAy, Cuddy, prithee do not leave us now: if we part all this night, we
shall not meet before day.


1. I prithee, Banks, let us keep together now.

Clow. If you were wise, a word would serve: but as you are, I must be forced
to tell you again, I have a little private business, an hours work; it may
prove but an half hours, as luck may serve; and then I take horse and along
with you. Have we e're a Witch in the Morice?


1. No, no; no woman's part, but Maid-marian, and the Hobbyhorse.


Clow. I Will have a Witch; I love a Witch.

1. Faith, Witches themselves are so common now a days, that the counterfeit
will not be regarded. They say we have three or four in Edmonton, besides
Mother Sawyer.


2. I would she would dance her part with us.

3. So would not I; for if she comes, the Devil and all comes along with her.


Clow. Well, I Will have a Witch: I have loved a VVitch ever since I played at
Cherry-pit. Leave me, and get my horse dressed: give him Oats; but water him
not till I come. VVhither do we foot it first?


2. To Sir Arthur Clarington's first, then whither thou will.

Clow. Well, I Am content: but we must up to Carter's, the rich Yeoman. I must
be seen on Hobbyhorse there.


1. O, I smell him now: I Will lay my ears Banks is in love, and that is the
reason he would walk melancholy by himself.


Clow. Hah! who was that said I was in love?

1. Not I.

2. Not I.

Clow. Go to: no more of that. When I understand what you speak, I know what
you say: believe that.


1. Well, 'twas I, I Will not deny it: I meant no hurt in it. I have seen you
walk up to Carter's of Chessum. Banks, were not you there last Shrovetide?


Clow. Yes, I was ten days together there the last Shrovetide.

2. How could that be, when there are but seven days in the week?


Clow. Prithee peace, I reckon stila nova, as a Traveller: thou understandest
as a fresh water Farmer, that never saw a week beyond Sea. Ask any Soldier
that ever received his pay but in the Low Countries, and he will tell thee there
are eight days in the week there, hard by. How do thou think they rise in
high Germany, Italy, and those remoter places?


3. I, but simply there are but seven days in the week yet.

Clow. No, simply as thou understandest. Prithee, look but in the Lover's
Almanac, when he has been but three days absent; Oh, says he, I have not seen
my Love these seven yeets: there is a long cut. When he comes to her again, and
embraces her, O, says he, now methinks I am in Heaven; and that is a pretty
step: he that can get up to Heaven in ten days, need not repent his journey.
You may ride a hundred days in a Caroch, and be further off then when you set
forth. But I pray you, good Morrice-mates, now leave me. I will be with you by
midnight.


1. Well, since he will be alone, we'll back again, and trouble him no more.


Omn. But remember, Banks.

Clow. The Hobbyhorse shall be remembered. But hark you: get Poldavis, the
Barber's Boy for the Witch; because he can show his Art better then another.

Exeunt. Well, now to my walk. I am near the place where I should meet I know
not what: say I meet a Thief, I must follow him, if to the Gallows: say I meet
a Horse, or Hare, or Hound, still I must follow; some slow-paced Beast, I hope:
yet Love is full of lightness in the heaviest Lovers. Ha! my Guide is come. A
VVater-Dog. I am thy first man, Sculler: I go with thee: ply no other but my
self: away with the Boat: land me but at Katherine's Dock, my sweet Katherine's
Dock, and I Will be a Fare to thee. That way? nay, which way thou will, thou
know the way better then I. Fine gentle Cur it is, and well brought up, I
warrant him. We go a ducking, Spaniel; thou shall fetch me the Ducks, pretty
kind Rascal.

Enter Spirit in shape of Katherine, vizarded, and takes it off.
Spir. Thus throw I off mine own essential horror,
And take the shape of a sweet lovely Maid
Whom this Fool doats on. We can meet his folly,
But from his Virtues must be Run-aways.
We'll sport with him: but when we reckoning call,
We know where to receive: the Witch pays for all.
(Dog barks.
Clow. I? is that the watchword? She Is come. Well, if ever we be married, it
shall be at Barking-Church, in memory of thee. Now come behind, kind Cur.

And have I met thee, sweet Kate?
I will teach thee to walk so late.
O see, we meet in Meter. What? do thou trip from me? Oh that I were upon my
Hobbyhorse, I would mount after thee so nimble. Stay, Nymph, stay, Nymph,
singed Apollo: tarry and kiss me; sweet Nymph stay: tarry and kiss me, Sweet.
We will to Chessum-street, and then to the house stands in the highway. Nay,
by your leave, I must embrace you. Oh help, help, I am drowned, I am drowned.

Ex. Spir. and Banks.
Dog. Ha, ha, ha, ha.
Enter wet.
Clow. This was an ill night to go a wooing in; I find it now in Pond'^
Almanac: thinking to land at Katherine's Dock, I was almost at Gravesend. I Will
never go to a Wench in the Dog Days again; yet it is cool enough. Had you never
a paw in this Dog-trick? a mangie take that black hide of yours: I Will throw you
in at Limehouse in some Tanner's Pit or other.


Dog. Ha, ha, ha, ha.

Clow. How now? who is that laughs at me? Hist to him. [Dog braks.] Peace,
peace; thou did but thy kind neither. 'Twas my own fault.


Dog. Take heed how thou trustest the Devil another time.

Clow. How now? who is that speaks? I hope you have not your reading Tongue
about you.


Dog. Yes, I can speak.

Clow. The Devil you can. You have read Esop's Fables then: I have played one
of your parts then; the Dog that caught at the shadow in the water. Pray you,
let me catechize you a little: What might one call your name, Dog?


Dog. My Dame calls me Tom.

Clow. It Is well; and she may call me Ass: so there is an whole one betwixt us,
Tom-Ass. She said, I should follow you, indeed. Well, Tom, give me thy fist;
we are Friends: you shall be mine Ingle: I love you; but I pray you let us have
no more of these ducking devices.


Dog. Not, if you love me. Dogs love where they are beloved. Cherish me, and
I Will do any thing for thee.


Clow. Well, you shall have Jowls and Livers: I have Butchets to my Friends
that shall bestow 'em: and I will keep Crusts and Bones for you, if you will be a
kind Dog, Tom.


Dog. Any thing: I Will help thee to thy Love.

Clow. Will thou? That promise shall cost me a brown Loaf, though I steal it
out of my Father's Cupboard. You Will eat stolen Goods, Tom, will you not?


Dog. Oh best of all. The sweetest bits, those.

Clow. You shall not starve, Ningle Tom; believe that, if you love Fish, I Will
help you to Maids and Soles. I Am acquainted with a Fishmonger.


Dog. Maids and Soles? Oh, sweet bits! Banqueting stuff, those.

Clow. One thing I would request you, Ningle, as you have played the Knavish
Cur with me a little, that you would mingle amongst our Morrice-Dancers in the
morning. You can dance?


Dog. Yes, yes, any thing: I Will be there, but unseen to any but thy self. Get
thee gone before: fear not my presence. I have work to night. I serve more
Masters, more Dames then one.


Clow. He can serve Mammon and the Devil too.

Dog. It shall concern thee, and thy Loves purchase:
There Is a gallant Rival loves the Maid;
And likely is to have her. Mark what a mischief
Before the Morris ends, shall light on him.

Clow. On sweet Ningle, thy neuse once again. Friends must part for a time:
farewell, with this remembrance; shall have bread too when we meet again. If
ever there were an honest Devil, 'twill be the Devil of Edmonton, I see.
Farewell Tom. I prithee dog me as soon as thou can.

Ex. Banks.
Dog. I Will not miss thee, and be merry with thee.
Those that are joys denied, must take delight
In sins and mischiefs, it is the Devil's right.
Ex. Dog. Enter Young Thorney, VVinnifride as a Boy.
Frank. Prithee no more: those tears give nourishment
To weeds and briers in me, which shortly will
O'regrow and top my head: my shame will sit
And cover all that can be seen of me.

Win. I have not shown this check in company,
Pardon me now: thus singled with your self,
It calls a thousand sorrows round about.
Some going before, and some on either side;
But infinite behind: all chained together.
Your second adulterous Marriage leads;
That Is the sad Eclipse, the effects must follow.
As, plagues of shame, spite, scorn, and obloquy.

Y. Tho. Why? have thou not left one hours patience
To add to all the rest? One hour bears us
Beyond the reach of all these Enemies.
Are we not now set forward in the flight,
Provided with the Dowry of my sin,
To keep us in some other Nation?
While we together are, we are at home
In any place.

Win. It Is fowl ill gotten coin,
Far worse then Usury or Extortion.

Y. Thor. Let my Father then make the restitution,
Who forced me take the bribe: it is his gift
And patrimony to me; so I receive it.
He would not bless, not look a Father on me,
Until I satisfied his angry will.
When I was sold, I sold my self again
(Some Knaves have done't in Lands, and I in Body)
For money, and I have the hire. But, sweet, no more,
It Is hazard of discovery, our discourse;
And then prevention takes off all our hopes.
For only but to take her leave of me,
My Wife is coming.

Win. Who coming? your Wife?

Y. Tho. No, no, thou art here: the woman; I knew
Not how to call her now: but after this day
She shall be quite forgot, and have no name
In my remembrance. See, see, she is come.
Enter Susan. Co lead the horses to the hills top, there I Will meet thee.

Sus. Nay, with your favor, let him stay a little.
I would part with him too, because he is
Your sole Companion; and I Will begin with him,
Reserving you the last.

Y. Thor. I, with all my heart.

Sus. You may hear, if it please you, Sir.

Y. Thor. No, it is not fit.
Some rudiments, I conceive, they must be,
To overlook my slippery footings. And so.

Sus. No, indeed, Sir.

Y. Thor. Tush, I know it must be so, and it is necessary.
On, but be brief.

Win. What charge so'ere you lay upon me, Mistress,
I shall support it faithfully (being honest)
To my best strength.

Sus. Believe 't shall be no other. I know you were
Commended to my husband by a noble Knight.

Win. Oh Gods! Oh, mine eyes!

Sus. How now? what ailst thou, Lad?

Win. Something hit mine eye, it makes it water still,
Even as you said, Commended to my Husband.
Some door I think it was. I was, forsooth,
Commended to him by Sir Arth^r Clarington.

Sus. Whose Servant once my Thorney was himself.
That title methinks should make you almost Fellows,
Or at the least much more then a Servant;
And I am sure he will respect you so.
Your love to him then needs no spur for me,
And what for my sake you will ever do;
It Is fit it should be bought with something more
Then fair entreats. Look here is a Jewel for thee,
A pretty wanton Label for thine ear;
And I would have it hang there, still to whisper
These words to thee, Thou have my Jewel with thee.
It is but earnest of a larger bounty,
When thou returnst, with praises of thy service,
Which I am confident thou will deserve.
Why, thou art many now, besides thy self:
Thou may be Servant, Friend, and Wife to him.
A good Wife is then all. A Friend can play
The Wife and Servants part, and shift enough.
No less the Servant can the Friend and Wife.
It Is all but sweet society, good counsel,
Enterchang'd loves; yes, and counsel-keeping.

Y. Thor. Not done yet?

Sus. Even now, Sir.

Win. Mistress, believe my vow, your severe eye
Were it present to command; your bounteous hand,
Were it then by to buy or bribe my service,
Shall not make me more dear or near unto him,
Then I shall voluntary. I Will be all your charge,
Servant, Friend, Wife to him.

Sus. VVilt thou?
Now blessings go with thee for it: courtesies
Shall meet thee coming home.

Win. Pray you say plainly, Mistress,
Are you jealous of him? if you be,
I Will look to him that way too.

Sus. Say thou so?
I would thou had a woman's bosom now.
We have weak thoughts within us. Alas,
There Is nothing so strong in us as suspicion:
But I dare not, nay, I will not think
So hardly of my Thorney.

Win. Believe it, Mistress,
I Will be no Pander to him; and if I find
Any loose lubrick scapes in him, I Will watch him,
And at my return, protest I Will show you all.
He shall hardly offend without my knowledge.

Sus. Thine own diligence is that I press,
And not the curious eye over his faults.
Farewell: if I should never see thee more,
Take it for ever.

Y. Thor. Prithee take that along with thee,
Gives his sword. And haste thee to the hills top; I Will be there instantly.
Ex. Win.
Sus. No haste I prithee, slowly as thou can.
Pray let him obey me now: it is happily his last
Service to me. My power is even a going out of sight.

Y. Thor. Why would you delay? we have no other
Business now but to part.

Sus. And will not that, sweet heart, ask a long time?
Methinks it is the hardest piece of work
That e're I took in hand.

Y. Thor. Fie, fie, why look,
I Will make it plain and easy to you: Farewell.
Kisses.
Sus. Ah, alas! I am not half perfect in it yet.
I must have it read over an hundred times.
Pray you take some pains, I confess my dullness.

Y. Thor. What a Thorn this Rose grows on? parting were sweet.
But what a trouble 'twill be to obtain it?
Come, again and again, farewell. Yet wilt return?
Kisses. All questions of my journey, my stay, employment,
And revisitation, fully I have answered all.
There Is nothing now behind, but nothing.

Sus. And that nothing is more hard then any thing,
Then all the every things. This Request.

Y. Thor. What is it?

Sus. That I may bring you through one pasture more
Up to you knot of trees: amongst those shadows
I Will vanish from you, they shall teach me how.

Y. Thor. Why, it is granted: come, walk then.

Sus. Nay, not too fast.
They say slow things have best perfection:
The gentle shower wets to fertility.
The churlish storm may mischief with his bounty.
The baser beasts take strength, even from the womb:
But the Lord Lion's whelp is feeble long.
exeunt. Enter Dog.
Dog. Now for an early mischief and a sudden:
The minde's about it now. One touch from me
Soon sets the body forward.
Enter Young Thorney, Susan.
Y. Thor. Your request is out: yet will you leave me?

Sus. What? so churlishly? you will make me stay for ever,
Rather then part with such a sound from you.

Y. Thor. Why you almost anger me. Pray you be gone.
You have no company, and it is very early;
Some hurt may betide you homewards.

Sus. Tush, I fear none.
To leave you, is the greatest hurt I can suffer:
Besides, I expect your Father and mine own,
To meet me back, or overtake me with you.
They began to stir when I came after you:
I know they will not be long.

Y. Thor. So, I shall have more trouble.
[Dog rubs him. Thank you for that. Then I Will ease all at once.
It Is done now: what I never thought on. You shall not go back.

Sus. Why? shall I go along with thee? sweet music!

Y. Thor. No, to a better place.

Sus. Any place, I:
I Am there at home, where thou please to have me.

Y. Thor. At home? I Will leave you in your last lodging.
I must kill you.

Sus. Oh fine! you would fright me from you.

Y. Thor. You see I had no purpose: I Am unarmed. It Is this minutes decree, and
it must be. Look, this will serve your turn.


Sus. I Will not turn from it, if you be erst, Sir. Yet you may tell me
wherefore you will kill me.


Y. Thor. Because you are a whore.

Sus. There Is one deep wound already: a whore?
'Twas ever further from me then the thought
Of this black hour: a whore?

Y. Thor. Yes, I Will prove it,
And you shall confess it. You are my whore,
No wife of mine. The word admits no second.
I was before wedded to another, have her still.
I do not lay the sin unto your charge,
It Is all mine own. Your marriage was my theft.
For I espoused your dowry, and I have it:
I did not purpose to have added murder;
The Devil did not prompt me: till this minute
You might have safe returned; now you cannot:
You have dogged your own death.
[Stabs her.
Sus. And I deserve it.
I Am glad my fate was so intelligent.
'Twas some good Spirits motion. Die? oh, 'twas time!
How many years might I have slept in sin?
Sin of my most hatred too, Adultery?

Y. Thor. Nay, sure 'twas likely that the most was past;
For I meant never to return to you
After this parting.

Sus. Why then I thank you more,
You have done lovingly, leaving your self,
That you would thus bestow me on another.
Thou art my Husband, Death, and I embrace thee
With all the love I have. Forget the stain
Of my unwitting sin: and then I come
A Crystal Virgin to thee. My Soul's purity
Shall with bold Wings ascend the Doors of Mercy;
For Innocence is ever her Companion.

Y. Thor. Not yet mortal? I would not linger you,
Or leave you a tongue to blab.

Sus. Now heaven reward you never the worse for me.
I did not think that death had been so sweet;
Nor I so apt to love him. I could never die better,
Had I staid forty years for preparation:
For I Am in charity with all the World.
Let me for once be thine example, Heaven;
Do to this man as I him free forgive.
And may he better die, and better live.
Moritur.
Y. Tho. It Is done; and I am in: once past our height,
We scorn the deepst Abyss. This follows now,
To heal her VVounds by dressing of the VVeapon:
Arms, thighs, hands, any place; we must not fail,
[Wounds himself. Light scratches giving such deep ones. The best I can
To bind my self to this Tree. Now Is the storm,
Which if blown over, many fair days may follow.
[Dog ties him. So, so, I Am fast; I did not think I could
Have done so well behind me. How prosperous
And effectual mischief sometimes is? Help, help;
Murder, murder, murder.
Enter Carter, and Old Thorney.
Cart. Ha! Whom tolls the Bell for?

Y. Thor. Oh, oh!

O. Thor. Ah me! the cause appears too soon: my Child, my Son.

Cart. Susan, Girl, Child. Not speak to thy Father? Hah!

Y. Tho. O lend me some assistance to overtake this hapless woman.

O. Thor. Let Us overtake the murderers. Speak whilst thou can; anon may be
too late. I fear thou have deaths mark upon thee too.


Y. Thor. I know them both; yet such an Oath is passed,
As pulls damnation up if it be broke;
I dare not name 'em: think what forced men do.

O. Thor. Keep oath with murderers? that were a conscience to hold the Devil
in.


Y. Thor. Nay, Sir, I can describe 'em;
Shall show them as familiar as their names.
The Taller of the two at this time wears
His Satten-doublet white, but Crimson lined;
Hose of black Satin, Cloak of Scarlet.

O. Thor. Warbeck, Warbeck, Warbeck: Do you list to this, Sir?

Cart. Yes, yes, I listen you: here is nothing to be heard.

Y. Thor. The others Cloak branched Velvet black, Velvet lined his Suit.


O. Thor. I have 'em already: Somerton, Somerton.
Binal revenge, all this. Come, Sir, the first work
Is to pursue the Murderers, when we have removed
These mangled bodies hence.

Cart. Sir, take that Carcass there, and give me this.
I Will not own her now; she is none of mine.
Bob me off with a dumb show? No, I Will have life.
This is my Son too, and while there is life in him,
It Is half mine; take you half that silence for 't.
When I speak, I look to be spoken to: forgetful Slut?

O. Thor. Alas! what grief may do now?
Look, Sir, I Will take this load of sorrow with me.

Cart. I, do, and I Will h^re this. How do you, Sir?

Y. Thor. O, very ill, Sir.

Cart. Yes, I think so; but it is well you can speak yet.
There Is no music but in sound, sound it must be.
I have not wept these twenty years before,
And that I guess was e're that Girl was born:
Yet now methinks, if I but knew the way,
My heart's so full, I could weep night and day.
Exeunt. Enter Sir Arthur Clarington, Warbeck, Somerton.
Sir Art. Come, Gentlemen, we must all help to grace
The nimble-footed youth of Edmonton, that are so kind
To call us up to day with an high Morris.

Warb. I could wish it for the best, it were the worst now.
Absurditie's in my opinion ever the best Dancer in a Morris.

Some. I could rather sleep then see 'em.

Sir Art. Not well, Sir?

Some. Faith not ever thus leaden; yet I know no cause for 't.

Warb. Now am I beyond mine own condition highly disposed to mirth.


Sir Art. Well, you may have yet a Morris to help both;
To strike you in a dump, and make him merry.
Enter Fiddler and Morris; all but Banks.
Fidl. Come, will you set your selves in Morrice-ray? the fore-Bell, second
Bell, Tenor and great Bell; Maid-marion for the same Bell. But where is the
Weathercock now? the Hobbyhorse?


1. Is not Banks come yet? What a spite it is?

Sir Art. When set you forward, Gentlemen?

1. We stay but for the Hobbyhorse, Sir: all our Footmen are ready.


Some. It Is marvel your Horse should be behind your Foot.

2. Yes, Sir: he goes further about: we can come in at the
VVicket, but the broad Gate must be opened for him.
Enter Banks, Hobbyhorse and Dog.
Sir Art. Oh, we staid for you, Sir.

Clow. Only my Horse wanted a Shoe, Sir: but we shall make you amends e're we
part.


Sir Art. I? well said, make 'em drink e're they begin.
[Ent. serve.
Clow. A bowl, I prithee, and a little for my Horse, [with beer. he will mount
the better. Nay, give me, I must drink to him, he will not pledge else. Here
Hobby. [Holds him the bowl.] I pray you: No? not drink? You see, Gentlemen, we
can but bring our horse to the Water; he may choose whether he will drink or no.


Some. A good Moral made plain by History.

1. Strike up, Father Sawgut, strike up.

Fidl. Even when you will, Children. Now in the name of the best foot forward.
How now? not a word in thy Guts? I think, Children, my Instrument has caught
cold on the sudden.


Clow. My Ningle's knavery: black Tom's doing.

Omn. Why what mean you, Father Sawgut?

Clow. Why what would you have him do? You hear his Fiddle is speechless.


Fidl. I Will lay mine Ear to my Instrument, that my poor Fiddle is bewitched. I
played The Flowers in May, even now, as sweet as a Violet; now 'twill not go
against the hair: you see I can make no more Music then a Beetle of a Cow-turd.


Clow. Let me see, Father Sawgut, say, once you had a brave Hobbyhorse, that
you were beholding to. I Will play and dance too. Ningle, away with it.

[Dog plays the Morris; which ended, enter a Constable and Officers.
Omn. I marry, Sir!

Constable. Away with jollity, it is too sad an hour.
Sir Arthur Clarington, your own assistance,
In the Kings Name, I charge, for apprehension
Of these two Murderers, Warbeck and Somerton.

Sir Art. Ha! flat Murderers?

Some. Ha, ha, ha, this has awakened my melancholy.

Warb. And struck my mirth down flat. Murderers?

Constable. The accusation is flat against you, Gentlemen.
Sir, you may be satisfied with this. I hope
You Will quietly obey my power;
'Twill make your cause the fairer.

Ambo. Oh! with all our hearts, Sir.

Clow. There Is my Rival taken up for Hang-man's meat. Tom told me he was about
a piece of Villainy. Mates and Morricemen, you see here is no longer piping, no
longer dancing. This news of Murder has slain the Morris. You that go the
footway, fare ye well: I am for a Gallop. Come, Ningle.

Exe.
Fidl. [Strikes his Fiddle.] I? Nay and my Fiddle be come to himself again, I
care not. I think the Devil has been abroad amongst us to day. I Will keep thee
out of thy fit now if I can.

Exe.
Sir Art. These things are full of horror, full of pity.
But if this time be constant to the proof,
The guilt of both these Gentlemen I dare take
Upon mine own danger; yet howsoever, Sir,
Your power must be obeyed.

Warb. Oh most willingly, Sir.
It Is a most sweet affliction. I could not meet
A joy in the best shape with better will.
Come, fear not, Sir; nor Judge, nor Evidence,
Can bind him over, who is freed by conscience.

Some. Mine stands so upright to the middle Zone,
It takes no shadow to it, it goes alone.
Exeunt.
ACT. IV.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Old Banks, and two or three Countrymen.
O. Bank. MY Horse this morning runs most pitiously of the Glaunders, whose
nose yesternight was as clean as any Man's here now coming from the Barbers;
and this I Will take my death upon it is long of this Jadish Witch, Mother Sawyer.


1. I took my Wife and a Servingman in our Town of Edmonton, thrashing in my
Barn together, such Corn as Country-VVenches carry to Market; and examining my
Polecat why she did so, she swore in her conscience she was bewitched: and what
Witch have we about us, but Mother Sawyer?


2. Rid the Town of her, else all our Wives will do nothing else but dance al
out other Country May-poles.


3. Our Cattle fall, our Wives fall, our Daughters fall, and Maidservants
fall; and we our selves shall not be able to stand, if this Beast be suffered
to graze amongst us.

Enter W. Hamlac, with Thatch and a Link.
Haml. Burn the Witch, the Witch, the Witch, the Witch.

Omn. What have got there?

Haml. A handful of Thatch plucked off a Hovel of hers: and they say, when it is
burning, if she be a VVitch, she will come running in.


O. Bank. Fire it, fire it: I Will stand between thee and home for any danger.

As that burns, enter the Witch.
Sawy. Diseases, Plagues; the curse of an old Woman follow and fall upon you.


Omn. Are you come, you old Trot?

O. Bank. You hot Whore, must we fetch you with fire in your tail?

1. This Thatch is as good as a Jury to prove she is a Witch.

Omn. Out Witch; beat her, kick her, set fire on her.

Sawy. Shall I be murdered by a bed of Serpents? help, help!
Enter Sir Arthur Clarington, and a Justice.
Omn. Hang her, beat her, kill her.

Just. How now? Forbear this violence.

Sawy. A crew of Villains, a knot of bloody Hang-men set to torment me I know
not why.


Just. Alas, neighbor Banks, are you a Ringleader in mischief:
Fie, to abuse an aged woman!

O. Bank. Woman? a She-hell-cat, a Witch: to prove her one, we no sooner set
fire on the Thatch of her House, but in she came running, as if the Devil had
sent her in a Barrel of Gunpowder; which trick as surely proves her a VVitch,
as the Pox in a snuffling nose, is a sign a Man is a Whore-master.


Just. Come, come; firing her Thatch? ridiculous: take heed Sirs what you do:
unless your proofs come better armed, instead of turning her into a VVitch,
you will prove your selves stark Fools.


Omn. Fools?

Just. Arrant Fools.

O. Bank. Pray, Mr. Justice what do you call 'em, hear me but in one thing:
This grumbling Devil owes me I know no good will ever since I fell out with her.


Sawy. And brakedst my back with beating me.

O. Bank. I Will break it worse.

Sawy. VVilt thou?

Just. You must not threaten her: it is against Law. Go on.

O. Bank. So, Sir, ever since, having a Dun-Cow tied up in my Backside, let me
go thither, or but cast mine eye at her, and if I should be hanged, I cannot
choose, though it be ten times in an hour, but run to the Cow, and taking up her
tail, kiss (saving your Worship's Reverence) my Gow behind; That the whole
Town of Edmonton has been ready to be-piss themselves with laughing me to scorn.


Just. And this is long of her?

O. Bank. Who the Devil else? for is any man such an Ass, to be such a Baby,
if he were not bewitched?


Sir Art. Nay, if she be a VVitch, and the harms she does end in such sports,
she may escape burning.


Just. Go, go; pray vex her not: she is a Subject, and you must not be Judges
of the Law to strike her as you please.


Omn. No, no, we'll find cudgel enough to strike her.

O. Bank. I, no lips to kiss but my Cows --?
Exeunt.
Sawy. Rots and foul maladies eat up thee and thine.

Just. Here Is none now, Mother Sawyer, but this Gentleman, my self and you; let
us to some mild Questions, have you mild Answers? Tell us honestly, and with
a free confession, (we'll do our best to wean you from it) are you a VVitch, or
no?


Sawy. I am none.

Just. Be not so furious.

Sawy. I am none. None but base Curs so bark at me. I am none. Or would I were:
if every poor old Woman be trod on thus by staves, reviled, kicked, beaten, as
I am daily, she to be revenged had need turn VVitch.


Sir Art. And you to be revenged have sold your Soul to th'Devil.

Sawy. Keep thine own from him.

Just. You are too saucy, and too bitter.

Sawy. Saucy? by what commission can he send my Soul on the Divel's Errand,
more then I can his? is he a Landlord of my Soul, to thrust it when he list out
of door?


Just. Know whom you speak to.

Sawy. A Man: perhaps, no Man. Men in gay clothes, whose Backs are laden with
Titles and Honors, are within far more crooked then I am; and if I be a
VVitch, more VVitch-like.


Sir Art. Y' are a base Hell-hound. And now, Sir, let me tell you, Far and near
she is bruited for a woman that maintains a Spirit that sucks her.


Sawy. I defy thee.

Sir Arth. Go, go, I can, if need be, bring an hundred voices even here in
Edmonton, that shall loud proclaim thee for a secret and pernicious Witch.


Sawy. Ha, ha!

Just. Do you laugh? why laugh you?

Sawy. At my name: the brave name this Knight gives me, Witch.

Just. Is the Name of Witch so pleasing to thine Ear?

Sir Art. Pray, Sir, give way, and let her Tongue gallop on.

Sawy. A Witch? who is not?
Hold not that universal Name in scorn then.
What are your painted things in Princes Courts?
Upon whose Eyelids Lust sits blowing fires
To burn Men's Souls in sensual hot desires:
Upon whose naked Paps, a Leachers thought
Acts Sin in fouler shapes then can be wrought.

Just. But those work not as you do.

Sawy. No, but far worse:
These, by Enchantments, can whole Lordships change
To Trunks of rich Attire: turn Ploughs and Teams
To Flanders Mares and Coaches; and huge trains
Of servitors, to a French Butter-Flie.
Have you not City-witches who can turn
Their husbands wares, whole standing shops of wares,
To sumptuous Tables, Gardens of stolen sin?
In one year wasting, what scarce twenty win.
Are not these Witches?

Just. Yes, yes, but the Law
Casts not an eye on these.

Sawy. Why then on me,
Or any lean old Beldame? Reverence once
Had wont to wait on age. Now an old woman
Ill favored grown with years, if she be poor,
Must be called Bawd or VVitch. Such so abused
Are the course Witches: the other are the fine,
Spun for the Devil's own wearing.

Sir Art. And so is thine.

Sawy. She on whose tongue a whirlwind sits to blow
A man out of himself, from his soft pillow,
To lean his head on Rocks and fighting waves,
Is not that Scold a Witch? The Man of Law
Whose honeyed hopes the credulous Client draws,
(As Bees by tinkling Basins) to swarm to him,
From his own Hive, to work the Wax in his;
He is no VVitch, not he.

Sir Art. But these Men-VVitches
Are not in trading with Hells Merchandise,
Like such as you are, that for a word, a look,
Denial of a Coal of fire, kill Men,
Children and Cattle.

Sawy. Tell them, Sir, that do so:
Am I accused for such an one?

Sir Art. Yes, 'twill be sworn.

Sawy. Dare any swear I ever tempted Maiden
With golden hooks flung at her chastity,
To come and lose her honor? and being lost,
To pay not a Denier for it? Some slaves have done it.
Men-witches can without the Fangs of Law,
Drawing once one drop of blood, put counterfeit pieces
Away for true Gold.

Sir Art. By one thing she speaks,
I know now she is a VVitch, and dare no longer
Hold conference with the Fury.

Just. Let Us then away:
Old woman, mend thy life, get home and pray.
Exeunt.
Sawy. For his confusion. [Enter Dog.] My dear Tom-boy welcome.

I am torn in pieces by a pack of Curs
Clapped all upon me, and for want of thee:
Comfort me: thou shall have the Teat anon.

Dog. Bough wough: I Will have it now.

Sawy. I am dried up
With cursing and with madness; and have yet
No blood to moysten these sweet lips of thine.
Stand on thy hind-legs up. Kiss me, my Tommy,
And rub away some wrinkles on my brow,
By making my old ribs to shrug for joy
Of thy fine tricks. What have thou done? Let Us tickle.
Have thou struck the horse lame as I bid thee?

Dog. Yes, and nip'd the sucking-childe.

Sawy. Ho, ho, my dainty,
My little Pearl. No Lady loves her Hound,
Monkey, or Parakeet, as I do thee.

Dog. The Maid has been churming Butter nine hours; but it shall not come.


Sawy. Let 'em eat Cheese and choke.

Dog. I had rare sport
Among the Clowns in the Morris.

Sawy. I could dance
Out of my skin to hear thee. But my Curl-pare,
That Jade, that foul-tongu'd whore, Nan Ratcliff,
Who for a little Soap licked by my Sow,
Struck, and almost had lamed it; Did not I charge thee,
To pinch that Queen to the heart?

Dog. Bough, wough, wough: Look here else.
Enter Anne Ratcliff mad.
Ratc. See, see, see; the Man in the Moon has built a new Windmill, and what
running there is from all quarters of the City to learn the Art of Grinding!


Sawy. Ho, ho, ho! I thank thee, my sweet Mungrel.

Ratc. Hoyda! a-pox of the Devil's false Hopper! all the golden Meal runs into
the rich Knaves purses, and the poor have nothing but Bran. Hey derry down! Are
not you Mother Sawyer?


Sawy. No, I am a Lawyer.

Ratc. Art thou? I prithee let me scratch thy Face; for thy Pen has flayed off
a great many men's skins. You Will have brave doings in the Vacation; for Knaves
and Fools are at variance in every Village. I Will sue Mother Sawyer, and her own
Sow shall give in evidence against her.


Sawy. Touch her.

Ratc. Oh my Ribs are made of a paynd Hose, and they break. There Is a
Lancashire Horn-pipe in my throat: hark how it tickles it, with Doodle, Doodle,
Doodle, Doodle. VVelcome Sergeants: welcome Devil. Hands, hands; hold hands,
and dance a-round, a-round, a-round.

Enter Old Banks, his Son the Clown, Old Ratcliff, Country-fellows.
O. Ratc. She Is here; alas, my poor wife is here.

O. Bank. Catch her fast, and have her into some close Chamber: do, for she is
as many Wives are, stark mad.


Clow. The witch, Mother Sawyer, the witch, the devil. [Car. her off.

O. Ratc. O my dear Wife! help, Sirs!

O. Bank. You see your work, Mother Bumby.

Saw. My work? should she and all you here run mad, is the work mine?

Clow. No, on my conscience, she would not hurt a Devil of two years old.

Enter Old Ratcliff, and the rest. How now? what is become of her?

O. Ratc. Nothing: she is become nothing, but the miserable trunk of a wretched
woman. We were in her hands as Reeds in a mighty Tempest: spite of our
strengths, away she brake; and nothing in her mouth being heard, but the Devil,
the VVitch, the VVitch, the Devil; she beat out her own brains, and so died.


Clow. It Is any Man's case, be he never so wise, to die when his brains go a
wool-gathering.


O. Banks. Masters, be ruled by me; let us all to a Justice. Hag, thou have done
this, and thou shall answer it.


Sawy. Banks, I defy thee.

O. Bank. Get a VVarrant first to examine her, then ship her to Newgate: here is
enough, if all her other villainies were pardoned, to burn her for a VVitch. You
have a Spirit, they say, comes to you in the likeness of a Dog; we shall see
your Cur at one time or other: if we do, unless it be the Devil himself, he
shall go howling to the Goal in one chain, and thou in another.


Sawy. Be hanged thou in a third, and do thy worst.

Clow. How, Father? you send the poor dumb thing howling to th'Goal? He that
makes him howl, makes me roar.


O. Bank. Why, foolish Boy, do thou know him?

Clow. No matter, if I do or not. He Is baylable I am sure by Law. But if the
Dog's word will not be taken, mine shall.


O. Bank. Thou Bayl for a Dog?

Clow. Yes, or a Bitch either, being my Friend. I Will lie by the heels my self,
before Puppison shall: his Dog Days are not come yet, I hope.


O. Bank. What manner of Dog is it? did ever see him?

Clow. See him? yes, and given him a bone to gnaw twenty times. The Dog is no
Court foysting Hound, that fills his belly full by base wagging his tail;
neither is it a Citizens VVater-Spaniel, enticing his Master to go a-ducking
twice or thrice a week, whilst his Wife makes Ducks and Drakes at home: this
is no Paris-Garden Bandog neither, that keeps a Bough, wough, woughing, to have
Butchers bring their Curs thither; and when all comes to all, they run away
like Sheep: neither is this the black Dog of Newgate.


O. Bank. No, Good Man Son-fool, but the Dog of Hell-gate.

Clow. I say, Good Man Father-fool, it is a lie.

Omn. He Is bewitched.

Clow. A gross lie as big as my self. The Devil in St. Dunstan's will as soon
drink with this poor Cur, as with any Temple-Bar-Laundress, that washes and
wrings Lawyers.


Dog. Bough, wough, wough, wough.

Omn. O the Dog's here, the Dog's here.

O. Bank. It was the voice of a Dog.

Clow. The voice of a Dog? if that voice were a Dog's, what voice had my
Mother? so am I a Dog: bough, wough, wough: it was I that barked so, Father, to
make Cocks-combs of these Clowns.


O. Bank. However, we'll be Cocks-comb'd no longer: away therefore to the
Justice for a Warrant; and then, Gammer Gurton, have at your Needle of
VVitch-craft.


Sawy. And prick thine own eyes out. Go, peevish Fools.
Exe.
Clow. Ningle, you had like to have spoiled all with your Boughings. I was glad
to put 'em off with one of my Dog-tricks, on a sudden, I am bewitched, little
Cost-me-nought, to love thee -- a Pox, that Morris makes me spit in thy mouth.
I dare not stay. Farewell, Ningle; you whoreson Dogs-nose. Farewell Witch.

Exit.
Dog. Bough, wough, wough, wough.

Sawy. Mind him not, he is not worth thy worrying: run at a fairer Game: that
fowl-mouth'd Knight, scurvy Sir Arthur, fly at him, my Tommy; and pluck out's
throat.


Dog. No, there a Dog already biting's conscience.

Sawy. That Is a sure Blood-hound. Come, let us home and play.
Our black work ended, we'll make holiday.
Exeunt.
SCAEN. 2.
Enter Katherine: a Bed thrust forth, on it Frank in a slumber.
Kat. Brother, Brother! So sound a sleep? that is well.

Frank. No, not I, Sister: he that is wounded here,
As I am; (all my other hurts are bitings
Of a poor flea) but he that here once bleeds,
Is maimed incurably.

Kat. My good sweet Brother,
(For now my Sister must grow up in you)
Though her loss strikes you through, and that I feel
The blow as deep, I pray thee be not cruel
To kill me too, by seeing you cast away
In your own helpless sorrow. Good Love, sit up:
And if you can give Physic to your self,
I shall be well.

Frank. I Will do my best.

Kat. I thank you. What do you look about for?

Frank. Nothing, nothing; but I was thinking, Sister.

Kat. Dear heart, what?

Fran. Who but a fool would thus be bound to a bed,
Having this Room to walk in?

Kat. Why do you talk so? would you were fast asleep.

Frank. No, no, I Am not idle:
But here is my meaning: being robbed as I am,
Why should my Soul, which married was to hers,
Live in divorce, and not fly after her?
Why should not I walk hand in hand with death
To find my Love out?

Kat. That were well, indeed.
Your time being come, when death is sent to call you,
No doubt you shall meet her.

Frank. Why should not I go without calling?

Kat. Yes, Brother, so you might, were there no place
To go to when you are gone, but only this.

Frank. Troth, Sister, thou say true:
For when a man has been an hundred years,
Hard traveling over the tottering bridge of age,
He Is not the thousand part upon his way.
All life is but a wandering to find home:
When we are gone, we are there. Hapyy were man,
Could here his Voyage end; he should not then
Answer how well or ill he steered his Soul,
By Heaven's or by Hell's Compass; how he put in
(Loosing blessed Goodness shore) at such a sin;
Nor how life's dear provision he has spent:
Nor how far he in's Navigation went
Beyond Commission. This were a fine Reign,
To do ill, and not hear of it again.
Yet then were Man more wretched then a Beast:
For, Sister, our dead pay is sure the best.

Kat. It Is so, the best or worst. And I wish Heaven
To pay (and so I know it will) that Traitor,
That Devil Somerton (who stood in mine eye
Once as an Angel) home to his deservings.
What Villain but himself, once loving me,
With Warbeck's Soul would pawn his own to Hell,
To be revenged on my poor Sister?

Frank. Slaves! a pair of merciless Slaves!
Speak no more of them.

Kate. I think this talking hurts you.

Frank. Does me no good, I Am sure,
I pay for it everywhere.

Kat. I have done then.
Eat, if you cannot sleep: you have these two days
Not tasted any food. Jane, is it ready?

Frank. What Is ready? what is ready?

Kat. I have made ready a roasted Chicken for you.
Sweet, will thou eat?

Frank. A pretty stomach on a sudden -- yes --
There Is one in the house can play upon a Lute:
Good Girl, let us hear him too.

Kat. You shall, dear Brother.
Would I were a Musician, you should hear
Lute plays. How I would feast your ear.
Stay, mend your Pillow, and raise you higher.

Frank. I am up too high: am I not, Sister, now?

Kat. No, no; it is well: fall to, fall to. A Knife: here is never a Knife,
Brother, I Will look out yours.

Enter Dog, shrugging as it were for joy, and dances.
Frank. Sister, O Sister, I am ill upon a sudden; and can eat nothing.


Kat. In very deed you shall. The want of Food makes you so faint. Ha! here is
none in your pocket. I Will go fetch a Knife.

Exit.
Frank. Will you? It Is well, all is well.
[She gone, he searches first one, then the other Pocket-Knife found. Dog runs
off. He lies on one side: the Spirit of Susan his second Wife comes to the
Beds-side. He stares at it; and turning to the other side, it is there too. In
the mean time, Winnifride as a Page comes in, stands at his Beds-feet sadly: he
frighted, sits upright. The Spirit vanishes.
Frank. What art thou?

Win. A lost Creature.

Frank. So am I too.

Win? Ah, my She-Page!

Win. For your sake I put on a shape that is false; yet do I wear a heart true
to you as your own.


Frank. Would mine and thine were Fellows in one house. Kneel by me here: on
this side now? How dare thou come to mock me on both sides of my bed?


Win. When?

Frank. But just now: outface me, stare upon me with strange postures: turn my
Soul wild by a face in which were drawn a thousand Ghosts leaped newly from
their Graves, to pluck me into a Winding Sheet.


Win. Believe it, I came no nearer to you then you place, at your beds-feet;
and of the house had leave, calling my self your Horseboy, in to come, and
visit my sick Master.


Frank. Then 'twas my Fancy. Some Windmill in my brains for want of sleep.


Win. Would I might never sleep, so you could rest.
But you have plucked a Thunder on your head.
Whose noise cannot cease suddenly: why should you
Dance at the wedding of a second wife?
When scarce the Music which you heard at mine
Had taken a farewell of you. O this was ill!
And they who thus can give both hands away,
In the end shall want their best Limbs.

Frank. Winnifride, the Chamber door fast?

Win. Yes.

Frank. Sit thee then down;
And when thou have heard me speak, melt into tears:
Yet I to save those eyes of thine from weeping,
Being to write a Story of us two,
In stead of Ink, dipped my sad Pen in blood.
When of thee I took leave, I went abroad
Only for Pillage, as a Freebooter,
What Gold soere I got, to make it thine.
To please a Father, I have Heaven displeased.
Striving to cast two wedding Rings in one,
Through my bad workmanship I now have none.
I have lost her and thee.

Win. I know she is dead: but you have me still.

Frank. Nay, her this hand murdered; and so I lose thee too.

Win. Oh me!

Frank. Be quiet, for thou my evidence art,
Jurie and Judge: sit quiet, and I Will tell all.
As they whisper, enter at one end of the Stage Old Carter and Katharine, Dog at
the other, pawing softly at Frank.
Kat. I have run madding up and down to find you, being laden with the heaviest
News that ever poor Daughter carried.


Cart. Why? is the Boy dead?

Kat. Dead, Sir! O Father, we are cozened: you are told the Murderer sings in
Prison, and he laughs here.

This Villain killed my Sister: see else, see,
A bloody Knife in's Pocket.

Cart. Bless me, patience!

Frank. The Knife, the Knife, the Knife!

Kat. What Knife?
Exit Dog.
Frank. To cut my Chicken up, my Chicken; be you my Carver, Father.


Cart. That I will.

Kat. How the Devil steels our brows after doing ill!

Frank. My stomach and my sight are taken from me; all is not well within me.


Cart. I believe thee, Boy: I that have seen so many Moons clap their Horns on
other men's Foreheads to strike them sick, yet mine to escape, and be well! I
that never cast away a Fee upon Urinals, but am as sound as an honest man's
Conscience when he is dying, I should cry out as thou do, All is not well
within me, felt I but the Bag of thy imposthumes. Ah poor Villain! Ah my
wounded Rascal! all my grief is, I have now small hope of thee.


Frank. Do the Surgeons say, My wounds are dangerous then?

Cart. Ye, yes, and there is no way with thee but one.

Frank. Would he were here to open them.

Cart. I Will go to fetch him: I Will make an holiday to see thee as I wish.

Exit to fetch Officers.
Frank. A wondrous kind old man.

Win. Your sins the blacker, so to abuse his goodness. Master, how do you?


Frank. Pretty well now, boy: I have such odd qualms come cross my stomach! I Will
fall too: boy, cut me.


Win. You have cut me, I Am sure, a Leg or Wing, Sir.

Frank. No, no, no: a Wing? would I had Wings but to soar up you Tower: but
here is a Clog that hinders me. What Is that?

[Father with her in a Coffin.]
Cart. That? what? O now I see her; it is a young Wench, my Daughter, Sirrah,
sick to the death: and hearing thee to be an excellent Rascal for letting
blood, she looks out at a Casement, and cries, Help, help, stay that man; him I
must have, or none.


Frank. For pities sake, remove her: see, she stares with one broad open eye
still in my face.


Cart. Thou put both hers out, like a Villain as thou art; yet see, she is
willing to lend thee one again to find out the Murderer, and that is thy self.


Frank. Old man, thou lie.

Cart. So shall thou in the Goal. Run for Officers.

Kat. O thou merciless Slave! she was (though yet above ground) in her Grave to
me, but thou have torn it up again. Mine eyes too much drowned, now must feel
more rain.


Cart. Fetch Officers.
Exit Katharaine.
Frank. For whom?

Cart. For thee, sirrah, sirrah: some knives have foolish Posies upon them, but
thine has a villainous one; look, Oh! it is enammeld with the Heart-Blood of thy
hated Wife, my beloved Daughter. What say thou to this evidence? is it not
sharp? does't not strike home? thou can not answer honestly, and without a
trembling heart, to this one point, this terrible bloody point.


Win. I beseech you, Sir, strike him no more; you see he is dead already.


Cart. O, Sir! you held his Horses, you are as arrant a Rogue as he: up, go you
too.


Frank. As you are a man, throw not upon that Woman your loads of tyranny, for
she is innocent.


Cart. How? how? a woman? is it grown to a fashion for women in all Countries to
wear the Breeches?


Win. I am not as my disguise speaks me, Sir, his Page; but his first only
wife, his lawful wife.


Cart. How? how? more fire in the Bed-straw?

Win. The wrongs which singly fell on your Daughter, on me are multiplied: she
lost a life, but I, an Husband and my self must lose, if you call him to a Bar
for what he has done.


Cart. He has done it then?

Win. Yes, it is confessed to me.

Frank. Do thou betray me?

Win. O pardon me, dear heart! I am mad to lose thee, and know not what I
speak: but if thou did, I must arraigne this Father for two sins, Adultery
and Murder.


Kat. Sir, they are come.
Enter Katherine.
Cart. Arraigne me for what thou will, all Middlesex knows me better for an
honest man, then the middle of a Market place knows thee for an honest woman:
rise, Sirrah, and don your Tacklings, rig your self for the Gallows, or I Will
carry thee thither on my back: your Trull shall to the Goal go with you; there
be as fine Newgate birds as she, that can draw him in. Pox on's wounds.


Frank. I have served thee, and my wages now are paid, Yet my worst punishment
shall, I hope, be staid.

Exeunt.
ACT. V.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Mother Sawyer alone.
Sawy. STill wronged by every Slave? and not a Dog
Bark in his Dames defense? I am called Witch,
Yet am my self bewitched from doing harm.
Have I given up my self to thy black lust
Thus to be scorned? not see me in three days?
I Am lost without my Tomalin: prithee come,
Revenge to me is sweeter far then life;
Thou art my Raven, on whose cole - black wings
Revenge comes flying to me: O my best love!
I am on fire, (even in the midst of Ice)
Raking my blood up, till my shrunk knees feel
Thy curled head leaning on them. Come then, my Darling,
If in the Air thou hover'st, fall upon me
In some dark Cloud; and as I often have seen
Dragons and Serpents in the Elements,
Appear thou now so to me. Art thou in the Sea?
Muster up all the Monsters from the deep,
And be the ugliest of them: so that my bulch
Show but his swarth cheek to me, let earth cleave,
And break from Hell, I care not: could I run
Like a swift Powder-Mine beneath the world,
Up would I blow it, all to find out thee,
Though I lay ruined in it. Not yet come!
I must then fall to my old Prayer:
Sanctibiceter nomem tuum.
Not yet come! worrying of Wolves, biting of mad Dogs, the Manges and the --
Enter Dog.
Dog. How now! whom art thou cursing?

Sawy. Thee. Ha! No, it is my black Cur I am cursing, for not attending* on me.


Dog. I am that Cur.

Sawy. Thou lie: hence, come not nigh me.

Dog. Baugh, waugh.

Sawy. Why do thou thus appear to me in white, as if thou were the Ghost of
my dear love?


Dog. I am dogged, list not to tell thee, yet to torment thee: my whiteness
puts thee in mind of thy winding Sweet.


Sawy. Am I near death?

Dog. Yes, if the Dog of Hell be near thee. When the Devil comes to thee as a
Lamb, have at thy Throat.


Sawy. Off, Cur.

Dog. He has the back of a Sheep, but the belly of an Otter: devours by Sea and
Land. Why am I in white? did thou not pray to me?


Sawy. Yes, thou dissembling Hell-hound: why now in white more then at other
times?


Dog. Be blasted with the News; whiteness is days Footboy, a forerunner to
light, which shows thy old rivel'd face: Villains are stripped naked, the Witch
must be beaten out of her Cockpit.


Sawy. Must she? she shall not; thou art a lying Spirit:
Why to mine eyes art thou a Flag of truce?
I am at peace with none; it is the black color
Or none, which I fight under: I do not like
Thy puritan-paleness: glowing Furnaces
Are far more hot then they which flame outright.
If thou my old Dog art, go and bite such as I shall set thee on.

Dog. I will not.

Sawy. I Will sell my self to twenty thousand Fiends, to have thee orn in pieces
then.


Dog. Thou can not: thou art so ripe to fall into Hell, that no note of my
Kennel will so much as bark at him that hangs thee.


Sawy. I shall run mad.

Dog. Do so, thy time is come, to curse, and rave and die.
The Glass of thy sins is full, and it must run out at Gallows.

Sawy. It cannot, ugly Cur, I Will confess nothing;
And not confessing, who dare come and swear
have bewitched them? I Will not confess one mouthful.

Dog. Choose, and be hanged or burned.

Sawy. Spite of the Devil and thee, I Will muzzle up my Tongue from telling
Tales.


Dog. Spite of thee and the Devil, thou wilt be condemned.

Sawy. Yes, when?

Dog. And ere the Executioner catch thee full in's Claws, thou wilt confess all.


Sawy. Out Dog!

Dog. Out Witch! Thy trial is at hand:
Our prey being had, the Devil does laughing stand.
The Dog stands aloof. Enter Old Banks, Ratchiff, and Countrymen.
O. Bank. She Is here; attach her: Witch, you must go with us.

Sawy. Whither? to Hell?

O. Bank. No, no, no, old Crone; your Mittimus shall be made thither, but your
own Jaylors shall receive you. Away with her.


Sawy. My Tommie! my sweet Tom-boy! O thou Dog! do thou now fly to thy Kennel
and forsake me? Plagues and Consumptions --

Exeunt.
Dog. Ha, ha, ha, ha!
Let not the World, Witches or Devils condemn,
They follow us, and then we follow them.
[Young Banks to the Dog.]
Clown. I would fain meet with mine Ingle once more; he has had a Claw amongst
'um: my Rival that loved my VVench, is like to be hanged like an innocent; a
kind Cur, where he takes; but where he takes not, a dogged Rascal. I know the
Villain loves me: no. [Barks.] Art thou there? that 's Toms voice, but it is
not he: this is a Dog of another hair: this? bark and not speak to me? not Tom
then: there is as much difference betwixt Tom and this, as betwixt white and
black.


Dog. Have thou forgot me?

Clown. That Is Tom again: prithee Ningle speak, is thy name Tom?

Dog. Whilst I served my old Dame Sawyer, 'twas: I Am gone from her now.


Dog. Gone? away with the VVitch then too: she will never thrive if thou leave
her; she knows no more how to kill a Cow, or a Horse, or a Sow, without thee,
then she does to kill a Goose.


Dog. No, she has done killing now, but must be killed for what she has done:
she is shortly to be hanged.


Clown. Is she? in my conscience if she be, it is thou have brought her to the
Gallows, Tom.


Dog. Right: I served her to that purpose, 'twas part of my Wages.


Clown. This was no honest Servants part, by your leave Tom: this remember, I
pray you, between you and I; I entertained you ever as a Dog, not as a Devil.


Dog. True; and so I used thee doggedly, not divellishly.
I have deluded thee for sport to laugh at.
The VVench thou seek'st after, thou never spakest with,
But a Spirit in her form, habit and likeness. Ha, ha!

Clown. I do not then wonder at the change of your garments, if you can enter
into shapes of Women too.


Dog. Any shape, to blind such silly eyes as thine; but chiefly those course
Creatures, Dog or Cat, Hare, Ferret, Frog, Toad.


Clown. Louse or Flea?

Dog. Any poor Vermin.

Clown. It seems you Devils have poor thin souls, that you can bestow your
selves in such small bodies: but pray you Tom, one question at parting, I think
I shall never see you more; where do you borrow those Bodies that are none of
your own? the garmentshape you may hire at Brokers.


Dog. Why would thou know that? fool, it availes thee not.

Clown. Only for my minds sake, Tom, and to tell some of my Friends.


Dog. I Will thus much tell thee: Thou never art so distant
From an evil Spirit, but that thy Oaths,
Curses and Blasphemies pull him to thine Elbow:
Thou never telst a lie, but that a Devil
Is within hearing it; thy evil purposes
Are ever haunted; but when they come to act,
As thy Tongue slaundering, bearing false witness.
Thy hand stabbing, stealing, cozening, cheating,
He Is then within thee: thou play'st, he bets upon thy part;
Although thou lose, yet he will gain by thee.

Clown. I? then he comes in the shape of a Rook.

Dog. The old Cadaver of some selfe-strangled wretch
We sometimes borrow, and appear humane.
The Carcass of some disease-slain strumpet,
We varnish fresh, and wear as her first Beauty.
Did never hear? if not, it has been done.
An hot luxurious Leacher in his Twines,
When he has thought to clip his Dalliance,
There has provided been for his embrace
A fine hot flaming Devil in her place.

Clow. Yes, I am partly a witness to this, but I never could embrace her: I
thank thee for that, Tom; well, again I thank thee, Tom, for all this counsel,
without a Fee too; there is few Lawyers of thy mind now: certainly Tom, I begin
to pity thee.


Dog. Pity me? for what?

Clow. Were it not possible for thee to become an honest Dog yet? it is a base
life that you lead, Tom, to serve Witches, to kill innocent Children, to kill
harmless Cattle, to stroy Corn and Fruit, etc. 'twere better yet to be a
Butcher, and kill for your self.


Dog. Why? these are all my delights, my pleasures, fool.

Clow. Or Tom, if you could give your mind to ducking, I know you can swim,
fetch and carry, some Shopkeeper in London would take great delight in you,
and be a tender master over you: or if you have a mind to the Game, either at
Bull or Bear, I think I could prefer you to Mal-Cutpurse.


Dog. Ha, ha! I should kill all the Game, Bulls, Bears, Dogs, and all, not a
Cub to be left.


Clow. You could do, Tom, but you must play fair, you should be stav'd off
else: or if your stomach did better like to serve in some Noble Man's, Knights
or Gentleman's Kitchen, if you could brook the wheel, and turn the spit, your
labor could not be much; when they have Rost-meat, that is but once or twice in
the week at most, here you might lick you own Toes very well: Or if you could
translate your self into a Ladies Arming-puppy, there you might lick sweet
lips, and do many pretty Offices; but to creep under an old Witches Coats, and
suck like a great Puppy, Fie upon it! I have heard beastly things of you, Tom.


Dog. Ha, ha! The worse thou heardst of me, the better it is.
Shall I serve thee, Fool, at the self-same rate?

Clow. No, I Will see thee hanged, thou shall be damned first; I know thy
qualities too well, I Will give no suck to such VVhelps; therefore henceforth I
defy thee; out and avaunt.


Dog. Nor will I serve for such a silly Soul.
I am for greatness now, corrupted greatness;
There I Will shug in, and get a noble countenance:
Serve some Briarean Footcloth-strider,
That has an hundred hands to catch at Bribes,
But not a Fingers nayl of Charity.
Such, like the Dragons Tail, shall pull down hundreds
To drop and sink with him: I Will stretch my self,
And draw this Bulk small as a Silver-wire,
Enter at the least pore Tobacco fume
Can make a breach for: hence silly fool,
I scorn to prey on such an Atome soul.

Clow. Come out, come out, you Cur; I will beat thee out of the bounds of
Edmonton, and to morrow we go in Procession, and after thou shall never come in
again: if thou go to London, I Will make thee go about by Tiburn, stealing in
by Theeving Lane: if thou can rub thy Shoulder against a Lawyers Gown, as
thou passest by Westminster Hall, do; if not, to the Stayers amongst the
Bandogs, take water, and the Devil go with thee.

Exeunt Y. Banks, Dog barking. Enter Justice, Sir Arthur, Warbeck, Carter,
Kate.
Just. Sir Arthur, though the Bench has mildly censured your Errors, yet you
have indeed been the Instrument that wrought all their misfortunes: I would
wish you paid down your Fine speedily and willingly.


Sir Art. I Will need no urging to it.

Cart. If you should, 'twere a shame to you; for if I should speak my
conscience, you are worthier to be hanged of the two, all things considered;
and now make what you can of it: but I am glad these Gentlemen are freed.


Warb. We knew our innocence.

Some. And therefore feared it not.

Kat. But I am glad that I have you safe.
Noise within.
Just. How now! what noise is that?

Cart. Young Frank is going the wrong way: Alas, poor youth! now I begin to
pity him.

Enter Y. Thorney and Holberts. Enter as to see the Execution, O. Carter, O.
Thorney, Katharine, Winnifride weeping.
O. Thor. Here let our sorrows wait him: to press nearer
The place of his sad death, some apprehensions
May tempt our grief too much, at height already.
Daughter, be comforted.

Win. Comfort and I
Are too far separated to be joined
But in eternity. I share too much of him that is going thither.

Cart. Poor woman, 'twas not thy fault: I grieve to see
Thee weep for him that has my pity too.

Win. My fault was lust, my punishment was shame;
Yet I am happy that my soul is free
Both from consent, foreknowledge and intent
Of any Murder, but of mine own Honor.
Restored again by a fair satisfaction, and since not to be wounded.

O. Thor. Daughter, grieve not for what necessity forces; rather resolve to
conquer it with patience. Alas, she faints!


Win. My griefs are strong upon me: my weakness scarce can bear them.


Within. Away with her! hang her, Witch!
Enter Sawyes to Execution, Officers with Holberts, country people.
Cart. The Witch, that instrument of mischief! did not she witch the Devil into
my Son-in-law, when he killed my poor Daughter? do you hear, Mother Sawyer?


Sawy. What would you have? cannot a poor old woman have your leave to die
without vexation?


Cart. Did not you bewitch Frank to kill his wife? he could never have don't
without the Devil.


Sawy. Who doubts it? but is every Devil mine?
Would I had one now whom I might command
To tear you all in pieces: Tom would have don't before he left me.

Cart. Thou did bewitch Anne Ratcliff to kill her self.

Sawy. Churl, thou lie; I never did her hurt: would you were all as near your
ends as I am, that gave evidence against me for it.


Countr. I Will be sworn, Mr. Carter, she bewitched Gammer Wa^^bowls Sow, to cast
her Pigs a day before she would have farried; et they were sent up to London,
and sold for as good Westminster Dog-Pigs, at Bartholomew Fair, as ever great
bellied Ale-wife longed for.


Sawy. These Dogs will mad me: I was well resolved
To die in my repentance; though it is true.
I would live longer if I might: yet since
I cannot, pray torment me not; my conscience
Is settled as it shall be, all take heed
How they believe the Devil, at last he will cheat you.

Cart. Thou Had best confess all truly.

Sawy. Yet again?
Have I scarce breath enough to say my Prayers?
And would you force me to spend that in bawling?
Bear witness, I repent all former evil*
There is no damned Conjurer like the Devil.

Omn. Away with her, away!
Fnter Frank to Execution, Officers, Justice, Sir Arthur. Warbeck, Somerton.
O. Thor. Here Is the sad Object which I yet must meet
With hope of comfort, if a repentant end
Make him more happy then misfortune would
Suffer him here to be.

Frank. Good Sire, turn from me;
You will revive affliction almost killed
With my continual sorrow.

O Thor. O Frank, Frank!
Would I had sunk in mine own wants, or died
But one bare minute ere thy fault was acted.

Frank. To look upon your sorrows, executes me before my Execution.


Win. Let me pray you, Sir.

Frank. Thou much wronged woman, I must sigh for thee,
As he that is only loath to leave the World,
For that he leaves thee in it unprovided,
Unfriended; and for me to beg a pity
From any man to thee when I am gone,
Is more then I can hope; nor to say truth,
Have I deserved it: but there is a payment
Belongs to goodness from the great Exchequer
Above, it will not fail thee, Winnifride;
Be that thy comfort.

O. Thor. Let it be thine too,
Untimely lost young man.

Frank. He is not lost,
Who bears his peace within him: had I spun
My Web of life out at full length, and dreamed
Away my many years in lusts, in surfeits,
Murders of Reputations, gallant fins
Commended or approved; then though I had
Died easily, as great and rich men do,
Upon my own Bed, not compelled by Justice,
You might have mourned for me indeed; my miseries
Had been as everlasting, as remediless:
But now the Law has not arraigned, condemned
With greater rigor my unhappy Fact,
Then I my self have every little sin
My memory can reckon from my Childhood:
A Court has been kept here, where I am found
Guilty; the difference is, my impartial Judge
Is much more gracious then my Faults
Are monstrous to be named; yet they are monstrous.

O. Thor. Here Is comfort in this penitence.

Win. It speaks
How truly you are reconciled, and quickens
My dying comfort, that was near expiring
With my last breath: now this Repentance makes thee
As white as innocence; and my first sin with thee,
Since which I knew none like it, by my sorrow,
Is clearly cancelled: might our Souls together
Climb to the height of their eternity,
And there enjoy what earth denied us, Happiness:
But since I must survive, and be the monument
Of thy loved memory, I will preserve it
With a Religious care, and pay thy ashes
A Widows duty, calling that end best,
Which though it stain the name, makes the soul blessed

Frank. Give me thy hand, poor woman: do not weep:
Farewell. Thou do forgive me?

Win. It Is my part
To use that Language

Frank. Oh that my Example
Might teach the World hereafter what a curse
Hangs on their heads, who rather choose to marry
A goodly Portion, then a Dowr of Virtues!
Are you there, Gentlemen? there is not one
Amongst you whom I have not wronged: you most;
robbed you of a Daughter; but she is
In Heaven; and I must suffer for it willingly.

Cart. I, I, she is in Heaven, and I am glad to see
Thee so well prepared to follow her:
I forgive thee with all my heart; if thou
Had not had ill counsel, thou would not have
Done as thou did: the more shame for them.

Some. Spare your excuse to me, I do conceive
What you would speak: I would you could as easily
Make satisfaction to the Law, as to my wrongs.
I am sorry for you.

Warb. And so am I, and heartily forgive you.

Kate. I will pray for you, for her sake, who, I am sure, did love you dearly.


Sir Art. Let us part friendly too: I am ashamed of my part in thy wrongs.


Frank. You are all merciful, and send me to my Grave in peace. Sir Arthur,
Heavens send you a new heart. Lastly to you, Sir; and though I have deserved
not to be called your Son, yet give me leave upon my knees, to beg a blessing.


O. Thor. Take it: let me wet thy Cheeks with the last
Tears my griefs have left me. O Frank, Frank, Frank!

Frank. Let me beseech you, Gentlemen, to
Comfort my old Father; keep him with ye;
Love this distressed VVidow; and as often
As you remember what a graceless man
I was, remember likewise that these are
Both free, both worthy of a better Fate,
Then such a Son or Husband as I have been.
All help me with your prayers. On, on, it is just
That Law should purge the guilt of blood and lust.
Exit.
Cart. Go thy ways: I did not think to have shed one tear for thee, but thou
have made me water my plants spite of my heart. M. Thorney, cheer up, man;
whilst I can stand by you, you shall not want help to keep you from falling. We
have lost our Children both on's the wrong way, but we cannot help it: better
or worse, it is now as it is.


O. Thor. I thank you, Sir, you are more kind then I have cause to hope or
look for.


Cart. Mr. Somerton, is Kate yours or no?

Some. We are agreed,

Kat. And, but my Faith is passed, I should fear to bemarried Husbands are so
cruelly unkind: excuse me that I am thus troubled.


Some. Thou shall have no cause.

Cart. Take comfort Mistress Winnifride. Sir Arthur,
For his abuse to you, and to your Husband,
Is by the Bench enjoined to pay you down
A thousand Marks.

Sir Art. Which I will soon discharge.

Win. Sir, it is too great a sum to be employed upon my Funeral.

Cart. Come, come, if luck had served, Sir Arthur, and every ma(...) had his
due, somebody might have tottered ere this, without paying Fines: like it as
you list. Come to me Winnifride, shall be well come: make much of her, Kate, I
charge you: I do not think bu(...) she is a good Wench, and has has wrong as
well as we. So let' every man home to Edmonton with heavy hearts, yet as merry
a we can, though not as we would.


Just. Join Friends in sorrow; make of all the best:
Harms past may be lamented, not redrest.
Exeum
EPILOGUE.
Win. I Am a Widow still, and must not sort
A second choice, without a good report;
Which though some Widows find, and few deserve,
Yet I dare not presume, but will not swerve
From modest hopes. All noble tongues are free;
The gentle may speak one kind word for me.

FINIS.

