Tragi-Comaedia. BEING A BRIEF RELATION OF THE STRANGE, AND Wonderful hand of
God discovered at WITNY, in the Comedy Acted there February the third, where
there were some Slain, many Hurt, with several other Remarkable PASSAGES.
Together with what was Preached in three Sermons on that occasion from Romans
1.18. Both which May serve as some Check to the Growing Atheism of the Present
Age. By JOHN ROW of G. C. C. in Oxford, Lecturer in the Town of WITNY.

It is time for thee, Lord to work, for they have made void thy Law.

Psalm. 119.126. Verily he is a God that judges in the Earth.

Psalm. 58.11. (...). Onatus apud Stobaeum.

OXFORD, Printed by L. LICEFIELD, For HENRY CRIPPS. Anno Dom. 1653.

TO MY HONORED and much beloved Friends, the Inhabitants of the Town, and
Parish of WITNY.
Dearly beloved in the LORD,
THE publishing of these few Papers, both the precedent Narrative, and the
ensuing Sermons of right belong to You, and you may challenge them as your
own. Among you it was that these wonders of the Lord were seen, and upon you
it was that the Lord has shown himself marvelous. Do not quarrel with the
Almighty for setting you up as the publik Theater whereon he would manifest his
holiness, justice, and other Attributes to the world. We are his Creatures,
and it were enough if we could say no more, but It is his pleasure to have it
so. Yet there is other reason why we should quiet, and compose our selves, and
shake off all thoughts, and reasonings that are apt to arise, saying as the
Church does. We will bear the indignation of the Lord, because we have sinned
against him. Though you are the people that do only suffer, yet you are not
they that are only aimed at. The Lord has spoken from heaven to the whole
Nation, by what he has done amongst you, and testified by a clear and eminent
stroke against the monstrous unparraleld Atheism, irreligion, profanesse,
which is walking up and down in all places.

Though the Lord has began with you, yet he may not end with you. If his
dealing with you make not others wise, their plagues may be far greater then
yours have been; and if so, it will be a mercy that you were corrected so
soon, and not suffered to go on in your sins; which would have brought
heavier sorrows in the end. Amongst you it was that these mean Sermons had
their rise, which were not in the least intended for the Press, when first
they were Preached. But the desires of some amongst you to have written Coppies
of them, the longings and importunity of others to have them published, the
good of the Town in general (which might seem to require a standing, and
lasting remembrance of these things) seemed to be some call to me for the
publishing of them. To which I may add the consideration of some little good
the Lord I hope was pleased to do by these plain and mean Sermons: the hearts
of some being a little awakened, and the affection of others stirred, and
raised, and some provoked to attend on the word thereby. Which sparks being of
the Lords own kindling, I thought it my duty to keep them alive as much as lay
in me. I hope you will bear with my rudeness of speech, and plain speaking:
the Lord being my witness, that it is not a pleasure to me, to make bare your
nakedness, or discover your shame, my aim only being, that you may lay to
heart your sins, seek pardon for them, and reformation of them. My care has
been as much as may be, to abstain from all personal reflections, and not to
make use of any ones Name, that I might not grieve the spirits of any by making
them public to the world, although if I had insisted on some particulars, the
story might have been set forth with more adva^tage in the eyes of some. Some
enlargments there have been in the Sermons, and some larger explications of a
few Scriptures, it being not possible within such a scantling of time, as is
allotted, to speak fully to all things. Yet this you will find, you have
scarce any material passage omitted of what was Preached, and the Additions
which are (I hope) not altogether unprofitable or unnecessary. Some Notes are
put into the Margin, which need not trouble the less skillful Reader, all
obscurity being avoided in the body of the Sermons themselves. My humble
desire, and request to you is, that you will not lay aside this little Book as
soon as it comes into your hands, though the things are mean and contemptible,
if you consider the person, parts, and years of him that brings them unto you,
and the manner of his delivering them; yet are they great, and of moment, if
you consider him that sends them to you, so far forth as the mind of God is
revealed in them, and his particular will made known concerning you. Some few
hours will serve to Read over the whole Book, and if at leisure times, you
put your Children or Servants to read but a little, it may be better then to
let it lie moulding in your Windows. Possibly you may meet with such a
remembrace, if the Lord work with it by his Spirit, as you may bless him for
all your days. I can only say as the Apostle does with a little change.
Brethren my hearts desire, and prayer to God for the people of Witny is, that
they may be saved. I trust the Lord has some of his election yet scattered
amongst you, sure I am there are some of his called, and faithful ones already
to be found in the midst of you. How long I may be left to speak to you, I
know not. This I can asure you, I pray, and sigh at the throne of Grace for
you, as well as I can. And I could wish I had better prayers, and more sighs
and groans, then my poor barren heart can afford. There could not be a
greater joy to me, then to see the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus taking place in
greaer power in your souls: to see that high valuation, and eager thirsts in
the hearts of many of you after a poor despised, neglected, forsaken Christ,
whom the world (but it may break our hearts to speak it) begins to grow weary
of, though the world be not worthy of such a one.

Now the God and Father of our Lord Jesus bless you with the knowledge of
himself, and this his dear Son, and grant that the savor of his knowledge
may be spread amongst you more abundantly. These are the constant prayers of

Your unworthy Friend, and Servant, in the Gospel John Row.

A BRIEF NARRATIVE OF The Play Acted at Witny the third of February 1652.
Together with its sad and Tragical End.
IT may not seem so proper, nor be so pleasing to every Reader, to set down all
the Circumstances about this Play, forasmuch that somewhat might be said
touching the rise and original of it, the nature of the Play it self, and the
book from whence it was taken, the motives, grounds, and ends of the Actors,
concerning all which I might speak more then here shall be inserted, having
taken some pains to satisfy my self in those particulars. But I thought it
meet to insist on those things, which did most discover the hand of God in so
eminent and remarkable a Providence, and lightly touch on other things, so far
as they may give light to that which is the name. This Play was and old Play,
and had been Acted by some of Santon-Har-court men many years since. The Title
of it is, A most pleasant Comedy of Mucedorus the Kings Son of Valentia, and
Amadine the Kings Daughter of Aragon: with the merry conceits of Mouse, etc.
The Actors of the Play were Countrymen; most of them, and for any thing I can
hear, all of Stanton-Harcourt Parish. The punctual time of their first
Learning the Play, cannot be certainly set down: but this we have been told,
they had been learning it ever since Michaelmas, and had been Acting privately
every week. This we are informed upon more certain grounds, that they began to
Act it in a more public manner about Christmas, and Acted it three or four
times in their own Parish, they Acted it likewise in several neighbowring
Parishes, as Moore, Stanlake, South-Leigh, Cumner. The last place that they
came at was Witny, where it pleased the Lord to discover his displeasure,
against such wicked and ungodly Plays by an eminent hand. Some few days
before the Play was to be Acted, one of Stanton came to the Baylife of Witny
telling him that there were some Country men that had learned to make a Play,
and desired his Leave to show it, his aim being (as the Baylife conceived)
that they might have the Liberty of the Towne-Hall. Leave also was desired of
the other Baylife, but they being denied by both the Baylifs, they pitched on
the White Heart, a chief Inn of the Town to Act their Play there. The day
when it was Acted, was the third of February, the same day when many Godly
People, Townsmen and Scholars of Oxford, kept a Solemn Day of Fast at
Carfax. About seven a Clock at Night they caused a Drum to beat, and a Trumpet
to be sounded to gather the People together. The people flocked in great
multitudes, Men, Women, and Children, to the number (as is guessed) of three
Hundred, some say four hundred, and the Chamber where the Play was Acted being
full, others in the Yard pressed sorely to get in. The people which were in the
Room were exceeding Joviall, and merry before the Play began, Young men and
Maids dancing together, and so merry and frolic were many of the Spectators,
that the Players could hardly get Liberty that they themselves might Act, but
at last a little Liberty being obtained, the Play it self began. In the
beginning of it Enters a Person that took the name of Comedy, and speaks as
follows.

Why so thus do I hope to please;
Music revives, and Mirth is tolerable,
Comedy play thy part, and please:
Make merry them that come to joy with thee.
With two or three verses more.

Upon this enters Envy, another person, and speaks as follows.

Nay stay Minion stay there lies a block;
What all on mirth? I Will interrupt your tale,
And mix your Music with a Tragickend.
Upon which Comedy replies. Envy makesanswer again in several verses, and
among the rest these: Harken thou shall hear noise
Shall fill the air with shrilling sound,
And thunder Music to the Gods above.


Three verses after it follows, In this brave Music Envy takes delight
Where I may see them wallow in their blood,
To spurn at Arms and Legs quite shivered off,
And hear the cries of many thousand slain.


After this Comedy speaks, Envy replies Trebble death shall cross thee with
dispight,
And make thee mourn where most thou joyest,
Turning thy mirth into a deadly dole,
Whirling thy pleasurs with a peale of death,
And drench thy methods in a Sea of blood.


Which passages if the Reader carry along with him, he will see how far they
were made good by the Divine hand, both on the Actors and Spectators. The
matter of the Play is scurrilous, impious, blasphemous in several passages.
One passage of it has such a bitter Taunt against all Godly persons under the
name of Puritans, and at Religion it self, under the phrase of observing
Fasting days, that it may not be omitted, it was almost in the beginning of the
Play, and they were some of the Clownes words when he first began to Act, Well
I Will see my Father hanged before I Will serve his Horse any more, well I Will carry
home my bottle of Hay and for once make my Fathers Horse turn Puritan, and
observe Fasting days, for he gets not a bitt. How remarkable was this that
some of them that were called Puritans in the days of old, had spent that very
day in Oxford in Fasting, and Prayer; and that the Lord by so eminent an hand
should testify against such, who were not only scoffers at Godly persons, but
at Religion it self. Another passage was of so horrid an aspect, as that the
Actor who was to speak it durst not vent it without a change. The verses as
they are Printed are these.

Ah Bremo, Bremo, what a foil had thou, that yet at no time was afraid
To dare the greatest Gods to fight with thee
At the end of which verses it follows, He strikes: and probable enough it
is, that he used some action at that time; but the words were so ghastly, and
had such a face of impiety in them, that he durst not say Gods, but (as one
that excused him would have us believe) he sai'd Gobs. And indeed so insolent
were these, and other expressions in the Play, that some of the Spectators
thought they were not fit to be used, and when they heard them, wished
themselves out of the room. We might instance in some other passages, but
there has been enough already. The modest, and ingenuous reader would blush to
read some passages. Thus had they continued their sport for an hour, and half,
as some of the Spectators say, but as is more probable, about two hours, for
they were ordinarily three hours in acting it (as the Players say) and there
were above two parts in three of the play that were passed over in this Action.
At which time it pleased God to put a stop to their mirth, and by an immediate
hand of his own, in causing the chamber to sink, and fall under them, to put
an end to this ungodly Play before it was thought, or intended by them.

The Actors who were now in action were Bremo a wild man, (courting, and
soliciting his Lady, and among other things, begging a Kiss in this verse.

Come kiss me (Sweet) for all my favors past) And Amadine the Kings daughter
(as named in the Play) but in truth a young man attired in a woman's Habit. The
words which were then speaking, were these, the words of Bremo to his Lady Thou
shall be fed with Quails, and Partridges,
With Black-birds, Larkes, Thrushes, and Nightingales.


Various reports there have been concerning the words spoken at that time, as
that it should be said, the Devil was now come to act his part: some of the
People might say so, observing the wild man's carriage, and some other passages
that went before, where there was mention made of the Devil in a Bares dublet,
the wild man then acting the Bares part: and indeed we have it upon good
information that there were such words spoken; only they were the spectators
words, and not the Actors: but this we are assured of, the words then spoken by
the Actor were those above mentioned, as he himself acknowledged, and we find
them printed so in the Book.

The Place wherein the Play was acted, was not a Stage erected on purpose, but
a Chamber belonging to the Inn, a larg Chamber, and which sometime had been a
Malting room, having a part of it covered with earth to that purpose. It had
two Beams to support it, of which one Sc: the shorter was a great, sound and
substantial one, and lay between the two side walls; the other had one end
shooting into the middle of the shorter beam, and the other end of it fastened
in the wall, of which you may see a description.

stage setup The 2 end Walls. A. The 2 Beams B. The sid-Walls C. The short
Beam, which broke near the middle, was betwixt 13 and 14 Inches square, one
end lying even, or a little within the Wall upon a shoulder of Stone, the other
end almost a foot in the Wall, the short Beam breaking the other fell with it.


The fall was not very quick, but somewhat slow, and gentle, in so much that
so^e that were present thought it was a part of the play, (but it proved the
saddest part) and expected when they should be taken up again, yet was it not
so slow as that they were able to recover themselves, for the actors then in
action fell down, and a great number of people with them into the under room,
which was a Shufle-board-roome, and the table it self broken in pieces by the
fall of the Timber. The Chamber did not fall down quite, but lay somewhat
pendulous, and hanging, broad at the top, and narrow at the bottom, that end
of the long beam, which lay in the short falling down, the other end not
falling, and the ends of the short Beam where it brake hanging down, the
bottom where the people lay was of a very narrow compass, the people falling
as it were into a Pit: and such were the apprehentions of some of the
Spectators, seeing the chamber sink in that manner as if the earth was opening,
and swallowing them up. After the Crack of the beam which was exceeding great,
and the fall of the Chamber (in the manner as is before described) all was
quiet, and still, and a kind of silence for a pretty space of time, the people
being astonished, and bereft of their senses. One that was present was so much
affrighted (as was said) that she thought her self verily to be in Hell, which
we do the rather insert because whoever shall put the circumstances together
may well say it was a little resemblance of that black, and dismal place,
there being so many taken in the midst of their sinful practices, and thrust
into a pit together where they were left in darkness, the Lights being put out
by the fall, where the dust that was raised made a kind of Mist, and Smoke,
where there were the most lamentable skreekes, and outcries that may be
imagined; where they were shut up as in a prison, and could not get themselves
out, (the door of the under room being blocked up, and their leg's being so
pinioned, and wedged together by faggots, and other things, that fell down
together with them from the upper room, that they could not stir to help
themselves.) Another (as is said) supposing his limbs to be all plucked asunder
cried out, that they should cut off his head: this is certain, the fright was
exceeding great, and many were dead for a time that afterward came to
themselves. When the people were come to themselves, there was a fearful, and
most lamentable cry, so^e crying one thing, so^e another, some crying aid for
the Lords sake, others crying Lord have mercy on us, Christ have mercy on us,
others cried oh my Husband! a second, oh my Wife! a third, Oh my child! and
another said, No body loves me so well as to see where my child is. Others
cried out for Ladders, and Hatchets to make their passage out, for the chamber
falling, the door of the under room was so Blocked up that they could not get
out there, so that they were fain to break the bars of the window, and most
of the people got out that way though it were a good space of time before they
could get forth. The other Players that were not in action were in the
Attiring-roome which was joining to the chamber that fell, and they helped to
save some of the people which were near that part. Those of the people that
fell not down, but were preserved by that means got out at the window of the
upper room. There were five slain outright, whereof three were Boys, two of
which being about seven, or eight years old or thereabout; the other near
twelve: the other two were Girls, the elder of which being fourteen, or
fiveteen, and the younger twelve, or thirteen years old. A woman also had her
leg sorely broken that the surgeons were forced to cut it off, and she dyed
within three or four days after it was cut off. Many were hurt, and sorely
bruised, to the number of about threescore, that we have certain information
of, besides those that conceal their greifes, and some of the Contry of which
there were diverse present, it being market day when this Play was acted.

The Surgeon that dressed the wounded people, told me that the next day after
this was done he was counting with himself how many he had dressed, and as
near as he could reckon he had dressed about forty five, and twelve after
that as he had supposed, and two or three after he had cut off the woman's leg.
Which therefore I thought good to insert that the reader may know upon what
grounds he may take this relation.

Some others were dressed by others in the town the just number of which I have
not learned But it is generally conceaved that there were diverse did receive
hurt which would not suffer it to be known. Among those that were hurt there
were about a dozen broken arms, and legs, and some two or three dislocations,
as we were likewise informed by the Surgeon. Some of the people came out with
bloody faces, neither could it be otherwise, they having trod one upon another
in a most sad, and lamentable manner. Certain it is there was much hurt done
that way; the children that were killed, being stifled as was supposed. The man
in woman's apparel lay panting for breath, and had it not been for Bremo his
fellow Actor, he had been stifled; but Bremo having recovered himself a
little, bare up the others head with his arm, whereby he got some breath, and
so was preserved; but both the one, and the other were hurt; Bremo being so
sorely bruised, as that he was fain to keep his bed for two days after, and
the Lady had her beuty marred, her face being swollen by the hurt taken in the
fall. Some had their mouths so stuf'd with dust that they could hardly speak,
the people that came from the house made a pitiful moan, some going in the
streets, and complaining, here is a Play, a sad Play indeed, others crying out
to them that met them, (as they are wont that have received some deadly wound)
oh I am killed! Some cried out that their Arms were broken, others that their
Legs were broken, some cursed the Players that ever they came to Witny, and
the players themselves wished that they had never came thither. They that
received no hurt were exceedingly affrighted, insomuch that one of them that
were present, as I am credibly informed, did say, that he would not, for as
much as Witny was worth, be in the like affright again, though he were sure he
should have no hurt. Others said they would never go to a play more, and that
it was a judgment. Others have been so profane; as we hear, to make a
laughing stock of it, and some so desperate, as to say, they would go again,
if it were to morrow next: and too many apt to say it was but a chance, a
misfortune, the beam was weak, there were so many load of people there, and
the like. But how slight so ever the matter was made afterward, sure enough
it is, it was sad enough then. It was one of the saddest, and blackest nights
that ever came on Witny. Sad it was to see Parents carry home their Children
dead in their arms, sad it was to see so many bruised, hurt, and maimed, and
some, as it were, half dead that were not able to help themselves, but were
fain to be carried away by their friends, some on their backs, some on chaires,
sad it was to hear the pitteous cries of those that were not there bemoaning
their distressed friends. This was the sad end of this ungodly play. And what
was spoken in jest in the beginning of it, by the just hand of God, was made
good in earnest. The Comedy being turned into a Tragedy, it had a sad
Catastrophe, ending with the deaths of some, and hurts of many. And as it was
said before And make thee mourn where most thou joy'st

So by the just hand of God came it to pass. For in the midst of their mirth,
and jollity did this fall out, in the midst of these amorous passages between
Bremo, and his Lady was this stroke given; yea, immediately before they
expected the greatest pleasure, and contentment. For the Actors said the best
of the play was still behind, and a little after the hearts, and fancyes of the
Spectators were to be filled with the love-complements between Mucedorus, and
his Amadine. So true was that Turning thy mirth into a deadly Dole.

The Lord from heaven, having given a check to such wanton sports, teaching men
what they must look for, and that he will not bear with such gross open
profaneness in such an age of light as this is. That he will so far take
notice of the Atheism, and profaneness of men in this world, as shall keep
the world in order, though he has reserved the great, and full recompense for
another day, and place.

ROMANS I. XVIII. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in
unrighteousness.


IT may seem strange to some of you to hear such a text read. The Preface.
What, is love so soon turned into wrath? The last time I was called to speak
unto you upon a Lords day, the first words of the text were God is love; 1 John
4.8.9.
pure love, goodness, and sweetness, all love as it were, made up of love.
Now the text begins with the wrath of God, heavy wrath, dreadful,
astonishing wrath; enough to break in pieces the hardest heart to hear it but
so much as mentioned. Its the wrath of God; Its wrath from heaven, its revealed
wrath, it is manifested, and declared in open sight. This is a great change
indeed may some one say to pass from the sweetest Love to the most terrible
and dismal wrath. But the Lord himself has changed the text, and it is he
that has given it, by that which he has wrought in the midst of you, and done
in the face of the whole Town. Can you look back upon that late sad and
astonishing Providence, of which as many as hear, their ears tingle at it,
their hearts shake and tremble at it: can you, I say, look upon this strange
and wonderful Providence, and not see this written in Broad and Capital
letters, and even laid before you in what is come to pass. That the wrath of
God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of
men.

Be not prejudiced, my Brethren, do not mistake me: I am not come to grate
upon your soars, neither to make wider your yet bleeding wounds: God foribd;
no, I pity and pray for those among you, that are yet weak and infirm,
beseeching the Lord to heal them, and restore them, that they may live to
testify their thankfulness, and Repentance. My work is, as a poor unworthy
Ambassador, and serva^t of the Lord, to help you to understand what the
meaning of the Lord is; for certainly so great a thing could not be in vain.
The Lords voice cries unto the city, says the Prophet Micah. 6.95 And the
man of wisdom shall see thy Name: hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it.
There is a voice gone out to you of this place, and it is the Lords voice, his
Name is written upon what was done but the other week, this name of his is
wrirten with fair and legible characters, that he which runs may read: this
voice of his, it does not whisper, it does not mutter, no, it cries, it speaks
aloud, it will be your wisdom to hear this voice. Every rod has a voice in
it, the meanest and most petty afflictions speak something from God. Great and
mighty strokes, eminent and remarkable Judgments from heaven, they have a loud
voice, and if such be not heard, they bring speedy ruin.

Let not any among you say, the Preacher is come to vent himself, and his own
Passions, and we expected some thundering sermon after this: No, no, I am not
come to that purpose, but in all humility and seriousness to beseech you to
consider what the mind of the Lord is, and I have begged from the Lord (as well
as I could) wisdom and direction to know what I should speak: be not such
enemies to your selves, and to that good the Lord intends you this day, as to
say when you come home, we have heard a sermon of Judgment, and that is all; we
expected some such thing. Do not so ill requite the Lord and his word, but
harken to the counsels of his word, and be obedient to the same.

The scope of the Apostle in this Epistle, The Coherence.
is to set down the true way of men's Justification, and salvation; which he
affirms to be by the pure grace of God, and not by the works of men. This way,
or model of God in saving men, the material principle from whence both their
Justification and Salvation must arise, viz imputed righteousness, he calls
the righteousness of God in the verse before the text, which is so called,
because the righteousness by which men are saved is a righteousness of Gods
finding out, and of his own bestowing, and not any such thing as men have
either framed, and devised themselves; or were able to work out by any thing
that they could do. This righteousness, he says, is revealed in the Gospel:
it is the Gospel that chalkes out this model, and plat-forme of
righteousness and life, and by this way must men be justified and saved, and
not by their own works: this is the maine proposition which he lays down in
the 17 verse. In the text we have the first proof, or argument to make that
assertion good, and the argument stands thus.

The works of all men in the world, whether Jews or Gentiles, ever since the
fall of Adam, they are wicked, ungodly, unrighteous works, therefore they
cannot be saved by them: the argument is very clear, and strong here. All men
deserve wrath, the utmost wrath, displeasure, and vengeance of God by their
own works, therefore they cannot deserve his love, favor, or good will: they
are so far from deserving his love, that they deserve the quite contrary. This
is the coherence.

For explication of the words,

The wrath of God] By wrath, we are to understand wrath in the Root, and in the
Fruit; in the cause, The opening of the Text.
and in the effect. God is highly displeased with men by reason of sin, he
loathes their ways and abhorres their practices, he bears a bitter, and a
deadly hatred against all the wickedness which men commit; and he has an
inward quarrel, (if we may so speak) a secret grudge in his heart against men
themselves for the same: this is wrath in the root, or cause. And then again
he inflicts plagues and punishments, the most dreadful curses, and fearful
judgments on men by reason of sin; all which are visible and signal tokens of
his displeasure, and manifest proofs, that he cannot endure them, nor any of
their ways: this is wrath in the fruit, or effect.

Is revealed from heaven.

There may be a twofold sense of this. (...). Simpliciter significat Pau lus,
manifestius esse quam ut quisquam inficiari possit, Dominum e caelo in omnes ac
singulos homines indignari Beza.


1. The sense may be, it is revealed clearly and manifestly, as much as if it
were by a voice from heaven. The Lord God Almighty, the blessed and most holy
God, he proclaims it from heaven, and cries aloud in the ears of all the
world, that he is deeply offended with all the ungodliness, and
unrighteousness which men commit, that he will certainly call them to an
account, and punish them for it. In Psalm: 14: 2. it is said The Lord looked
from HEAVEN upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did
understand, and seek God; now here it is said, his wrath is revealed from
heaven. God is no idle spectator, he does not carelessly behold the actions of
men, as if so be they might do what they listed, and he not discern, or not
be moved at it: no, he looks down from heaven upon the children of men. Jehovah
from the heavens looked down upon the sons of Adam; so one reads it: He looks
with a watchful observant eye; his eye is intent and fixed upon all the sons of
Adam, upon the whole raceof mankind, and for what is all this curious search
made? it is to see if there were any that did understand and seek God: But was
he well pleased when he found it otherwise? no surely, finding all to be
corrupt, that they were all gone aside, that they were all together beco^e
filthy, that there was none that did good no not one, that they were workers of
iniquity. v. 1.3.4. he gives out the sentence, he pronou^ceth it from heaven,
he proclaims it in the ears of all the world, that he is highly offended, and
his wrath is gone out against men by reason of these things. Psalm: 4.2. O ye
sons of men how long will ye love vanity, and seek after leasing? how long will
ye run mad on sin, and be so desperately adventerous in the ways in which you
walk? But know that the Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself.
verse 3: Take it for granted, that JEHOVAH, that is, the Highest Lord, the
Majesty of heaven and earth, he is provoked, and incensed by all these ways,
and it is the godly man that he looks after: know ye, Jehovah has marvelously
separated a gracious saint to him; so Ainsworth. It is the pious, devout, holy
soul that Jehovah regards, and he has marvelously separated him, or selected
in wondrous sort, segregavit, Graecum, and Latinum, mirificavit, quod verbum
non est alienum a proposito ubi by de opilione ad regiam dignitatem evecto
agitur; neque a, Grammatica, cum verba, quae mirabile facere and separare
Hebraice significant, fimilia sint, atque idcirco suas fignificatio^es facile
confundere possint ex regula Grammaticorum, and usn Hebraicae linguae. Muis in
loc.
he has put him in another rank, set a mark of excellency upon him, he has
set him in opposition to the wicked ungodly men, and such as love vanity, whom
he has set on another file, whose names are written in his black book, and
has marked them out as the objects of his wrath. this is illustrated Psalm.
11.4: 5: ver. The Lord is in his holy temple, The Lords throne is in heaven:
his eyes behold, his eyelids tries the children of men.

The Lord tries the righteous: but the wicked, and him that loves violence
his soul hates

Another sense may be, the wrath of God is revealed from heaven, that is, it is
manifested by evident, clear, remarkable plagues, and Judgments from heaven.
God has discovered to all the world, that he is an utter enemy to all the sin,
wickedness, and ungodliness of men, because he has punished in all
generations wicked, and ungodly men with most fearful plagues and judgments;
he has shown signs, and tokens from heaven, so that all men have seen his
hand. Pareus.
A learned expositor understands this phrase from Heaven, as that which is
opposed to the opinion of profane men, who ascribe the punishments that are
ever now and then lighting upon men, to chance, or second causes, the position
of the stars, the malignity of the elements, the mutability of the matter:
whereas the Apostle shows clearly that this wrath desce^ds from heaven, and is
even the scourge and whip of God, whereby he revengeth the impiety and
injustice of the world.

Against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men: by ungodliness, we are
to understand sins against the first Table, all contempt of God, of religion,
of the worship of God, of the ways and ordinances of God, the wrong and injury
that is done to God himself more immediately, or to any part of his worship.
(...). Phav.


By unrighteousness is meant sins against the second Table, (...). Gr. Scho
l. in Ro^ 1.
all oppression, injustice, riot, excess; and the like.

Against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness because there are several sins
comprehended under either head

Here also ungodliness and unrighteousness is put for persons committing such
things, the Abstract being put for the Concrete. Who hold the truth etc.

This is added as an aggravation of the sin of men, that men sin against
light and knowledge, and therefore do more abundantly deserve that wrath which
is revealed from heaven against them. The doctrine arising hence is this.

The Blessed, Doctrine
and most holy God has all along manifested, and declared his utter hatred,
abhorrence, and detestation of all ungodly, and unrighteous persons; and of all
the ungodliness and unrighteousness which they commit: and at sundry times
has confirmed, and made good that displeasure of his by fearful, and terrible
Judgments inflicted on men in this world.

Or more briefly that you may all remember it. God is certainly angry with sin,
and sinners, and does oftentimes in this world show his displeasure against
them by remarkable Judgments.

In the prosecution of this we must show

1. what this hatred, or wrath of God means. 2. Prove in a scripture or two,
that this wrath of God so opened, and unfolded has been manifested to have
been in God. 3. how, or by what ways, and means it has been manifested. 4.
Give proof, that it has been confirmed by Judgments inflicted on men from time
to time. 5. Why God takes this course to manifest his wrath by plagues, and
judgments in this world.
1. What is this wrath of God?

It implies two things: the Holiness of his will: the Justice of his will.

1. The Holiness of his will: the will of God is absolutely, universally set
against all sin, he dislikes it, he abhorres it, he hates it to the very death,
it is that which goes against him, he cannot endure it, neither will he, it
strikes at his own blessedness, and therefore he must needs hate it. Omne
impediens a beatitudine debet odiri Aquin.
Heb. 1.9. Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity. That, which a
man hates, he wishes the death of. God has taken up an irreconcilable, and
eternal hatred against sin, it never stood with his holiness to like it,
neither ever will it. Nay; he is so holy he cannot but hate it. The wrath of
God therefore is the displeasure, which he has conceived in his heart against
sin, the secret grudge, and quarrel which he bears to every man that is a
sinner, and cannot but bear to him considered as such, and remaining in that
estate. (...). Aristot.
Wrath, as the Philosophers define it, is a desire of revenge for some seeming
slight, or disrespect shown to a man. As a Prince when he is disgraced,
reviled, reproched or any way struck at by one of his subjects, Sola
parvipensio causat iram, and omne provocans iram est aliquid sub ratione
injusti. Aquin.
he is presently inflamed, his blood is up, Ira est (...). Eustratius referent.
Grot.
and he resolves to right himself, and to revenge the quarrel of his honor
on such a man. But God has no such passions, only so far we may say, the
blessed God looks upon sin as a slight, as a disrespect shown unto him, he
looks upon and sinners as contemning his holy majesty, as scorning him, and
setting him at naught, and this he hates, and cannot but hate.

2. The (...) Phavor.
wrath of God implies the justice of his will, the will of God hates sin, and
it is resolved to punish sin, the will of God is carried with utter dislike of
sin, and it will be revenged for sin, it will inflict punishment for sin. Wrath
in our sense is a desire of revenge, when there is some evil inflicted
proportionable to the wrong a man suffers, and this is properly called
punishment. Est autem paena generali significatu malum passionis quod
instigitur ob malum actionis. Grotins de jure belli and pacis.
Now there are no passions in God, as was said before, but thus we must
conceive it; God resolves to lay a meet recompense, a just reward upon men for
sin; sin in its own nature, deserves the heaviest curses, and therefore these
are measured out by the just, (...) jus Dei.
and upright will of God, as the fittest recompense thereunto.

This is the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are Ad jus
autem pertinet aptitudo quam Aristoreles (...) id est dignitatem vocat. Michael
Ephesius id quod secundum eam aequale dicitur interpretatur (...) quod
convenit. Grotius de jure belli and pacis.
worthy of death. Romans 1.32. God will render to every man according to his
works. Chap. 2.6. This is another thing that must be understood by the wrath
of God, the distributive justice of God whereby he lay's actual plagues, and
punishments on men according to their deserts. Psalm. 2.5. Then shall he speak
unto unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure. Here is
wrath, and the fruit of wrath; the Lord is angry, and he makes it known that he
is so; his anger is a vexing, troubling anger, it leaves not men at ease in
their sins, but it quickly disquiets them.

2. The Second particular for the prosecuting of the doctrine, was to instance
in a Scripture or two, whereby it apeares that there is such anger in God
toward sin, and sinners; and to prove that there is such wrath indeed, which
has been manifested as hanging over men by reason of sin. One or two places
will be enough for this. Ezra. 8.22. The hand of our God is upon all them for
good that seek him, but his power, and his wrath is against all them that
forsake him. Nahum. 1.2. God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth; the Lord
revengeth, and is furious; the Lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, and
he reserveth wrath for his enemies. The Prophet is here describing the nature
of God, and he begins with jealousy.

Aquinas. 1ma: 2dae. Quaest. 28. Art. 4.
Jealousy is an affection proceeding from strength, and intensnes of love, and
that which stirs it up is somewhat that would rob a man of the quiet, and
sole enjoyment of what he desires. God loves himself and his own glory above
all, and good reason for it, he being the highest and most supreme good. Sin in
its proper nature, and intention goes about to rob him of what is nearest to
him and therefore no wonder if he be jealous. This jealousy of his is
manifested in the next words, The Lord revengeth, the Lord revengeth, the Lord
takes vengeance. Cum vero ait Dominus semper est in Heb: (...), ut intelligant
Deum verum, and omnipotente^ sibi esse iratum, qui nullins potentia prohiberi,
aut impediri possit. Ribera.
The name of Jehovah is thrice repeated in this one verse, this he does to show
that it is the true, and living God, he that is omnipotent, whose power and
wrath none can resist, that was fallen out with them, and become their enemy.
And Ter autem ulciscens, sive ultor dicitur, quod asseverationem magnam habet,
maximamque in dicat, and certissimam ultionem: etenim Ternarius magnam vim
habet ad amplificandum. Ribera.
the name of vengeance is as often attributed to him, the Lord revengeth,
revengeth, will take vengeance, which shows the terriblenesse of his wrath,
and the certainty of it. There are also two other expressions that set forth
the greatness, and certainty of his wrath, he is furious, or as the Margin
has it that has fury, which best suits with the Original which has it,
Dominum irae vocat, ira and indignatione praeditum q.d. nonnunquam ostendit se
esse iratum, quu^ infligit graves poenas. Vatabl.
the Lord of Anger, that is, one that is armed with wrath, and indignation
against his enemies, and shows himself to be angry by inflicting grievous
punishments on the^. Ego (...) non Simpliciter accipio pro ira sed pro efectu
irae. Calv. in loc.
This is intimated in the other expression, he reserveth wrath for his enemies.
The word wrath is not again repeated in the original, but is taken from that
which went before to make the sense complete. He is the Lord of wrath, he has
plagues and punishments enough at his command: these he reserves and keeps by
him for a fit time, and then, be sure, he will execute them to the utmost. 3.
The third Particular. By what ways, and means has this wrath of God been
manifested to men?

Answ. These two ways.

1. By natural light. 2. By the light of the word.

1. By the light of nature, or of conscience. There is such a power left in all
men's hearts, (which is called conscience) that upon (...). Sic Hie ocles in
versum.
sin committed, or good omitted summons men to the tribunal of the supreme
Majesty, telling them, that they owe punishment to that sovereign justice for
the commission of the one, and the omission of the other. The Gentiles, who had
nothing but the light of nature, had this court of (...). appellat idem Hieroc.
judicature erected in them. Romans 1. last. Who knowing the judgment of God that
they which commit such things are worthy of Death etc. This was a principle
rivetted, and seated in all their hearts, this they knew full well, they (...)
vid. Bez. in textum.
acknowlegd it as true, (though they were ignorant of, and denied many other
truths) that they which committed such, and such sins were worthy of Gods
wrath: for that is meant by Death, that bearing the name of death here, which
is called wrath in the 18. verse. Hence it was that many of the Heathens spoke
of a (...) Plut. adv. Col.
golden eye, a revengefull eye, an eye of justice that saw all, and would be
revenged for all the wickedness, that men committed.

This is farther set forth in that famous text; Rom 2.15. where the apostle
speaking of the Gentiles, says, their conscience also bearing witness, and
their thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one another. When they
had sinned their consciences accused them, and told them, this they ought not to
have done, and there was one that saw and would take vengeance for this: the
Neque enim sensus esse videtur, cogitationes se mutuo, i.e. aliam aliam
accusasse, aut excusasse, sed inter se, and quasi alternatim, aciper vices eum
in quo reperiebantur prout nempe unus idemque nunc oene, nunc male ageret
operaque virtutum ac vitiorum vices quasdam inter se obtinerent, similiter
cogitationes inter se vices nunc excusa ndi nunc accusandi habu isse. Ladov. de
Dieu.
meaning is not (so much as the letter of the word seems to import) as if so be
the thoughts themselves did grate one upon another, one thought allowing it
self when it was good, and condemning it self when it was evil: but the
plainer sense seems to be; that they had accusing thoughts when they did evil,
and excusing thoughts when they did well; the man, or person acquitting, or
accusing himself in his own thoughts according to the difference of his
actions, his own thoughts (which is no more then the exercise of conscience)
justifying him when he did well, and condemning him when he did otherwise.

Most men, if not all, especially when they fall into some gross sin, (...).
Plut. de his qui sero a numine puniuntur.
they have this warning, or remembrance from Conscience, thou have sinned, and
thou will be damned for this another day. Now God by this means discovers his
hatred against sin, and his wrath hanging over the sinner. Conscience is Gods
officer, it is his Herald to proclaim his wrath to men. If one Prince send his
Herald at arms to another Prince, or a General of an Army sends his challenge
by drum or trumpet, there is then open war, and all men know it. God has set
up this light in men by which he proclaims open war to them in case they sin
against him. Would thou know whether God be angry yea or no? look within,
do thou feel no gripes, or prickings there? does not thy heart secretly
(...) Idem.
sink and fall after such a sin? Oh miserable man what have I done! certainly I
have brought my (...). Hiercel.
self under the displeasure of the Almighty. If thy conscience be not stupid,
or seared there are such secret remembrances as these are: (...) Idem.
And this is one way by which God instructs the sons of men, what the nature of
sin is, and what they must expect, if so be they venture on it,

2. The second way whereby the wrath of God is manifested is, the light of the
word. Now this is twofold,

1. The light of the Law. 2. The light of the Gospel.
1. It is manifested by the light of the Law, the Law threatening nothing but
death, curses, plagues, and vengeance to all sin, and ungodliness whatsoever:
Genesis 2.17. In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye. Cursed is
every one that continues not in all things which are written in the book of
the Law to do them. Gal. 3.10. would thou know whether the wrath of God
hangs over men by reason of sin, do but read the 28. Chap. of Deuteron. There
you shall find curse upon curse. In the 15. verse. it is said all these curses
shall come upon thee, and overtake thee. Cursed shall thou be in the city, and
cursed in the field, cursed shall be thy basket, and cursed in thy store, v.
20. The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke in all that
thou set thine hand unto for to do, until thou be destroyed, and until
thou perish quickly, because of the wickedness of thy doings, whereby thou
have forsaken me. The Law threatens nothing but wrath: it works wrath. Romans
4.15. It causes a sense of wrath, by threatening wrath to all the transgressors
of it.

2. Is it otherwise in the gospel? no: the gospel, that reveals wrath too. The
wrath of God is revealed from heaven. As much as if the Apostle should say: we
the Apostles and Ambassadors of God do bring this message from heaven, and
publish it in our gospel to the world: that the wrath of God is due to men by
reason of sin: all men by nature are under wrath already, they are children of
wrath Ephesians. 2. and there is a day which is coming, when this wrath shall come
upon them to the utmost, if they do not believe, and repent.

Obj. Yea, but the gospel reveals Christ, salvation, pardon of sin?

An. True, this is the first intention of the gospel, Heb, 2.3.
and the first offer which it makes: but if men neglect so great salvation, if
they will not stoop to gospel terms, and submit to what it commands, if they
will not repent, and believe, then there is so much the more wrath, Mark
1.14.15.
and the heavyer vengeance Heb. 10.28.29. He that despised Moses Law, died
without mercy, under two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment,
suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the son of
God.

Besides, the gospel teaches, that God will judge the secrets of men's hearts.
Romans 2.16. In the day when God shall judge the hearts of men by Jesus Christ,
according to my Gospel. Thy secret pride, covetousness, ambition, thy secret
thefts, adulteries, thy secret scorning of the word and ordinances; these must
be all judged, the Gospel that has said so much in effect. It is according to
the Doctrine of the gospel, that there must a general judgment pass on all a
man's sins, and therefore on the secrets of their hearts, his inward, and most
secret sins. It is according to my gospel, says the Apostle, that men must be
judged: why, where had Paul said so? In that samous sermon of his: Acts:
17.30.31. And the times of this ignorance God winked at, but now commands all
men every where to repent: because he has appointed a day in the which he will
judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he has ordained, whereof he
has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the Dead. Or
else he says according to his gospel, because this was the tenor of the
gospel, a part and portion of the gospel, one of the most ordinary and usual
Doctrines therein revealed, he, and the rest of the Apostles going up and down,
and preaching the day of judgment unto men, bringing that as a maine argument
why they should repent, and believe; because that there was a day a coming,
when they must be called to a reckoning for all their sins. So likewise it is
the gospel that says 2. These. 1.7.8.9. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that
know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and
from the glory of his power.

4. 4. Part.
The fourth thing for the prosecution of the Doctrine was, to make proof that
this wrath of God toward sin, and sinners has been confirmed, and made good
by sundry judgments inflicted upon sinners from time to time. Now here we need
not stand long, the whole Book of God is full of clear, and pregnant examples
to this purpose. You all know the story of the old world: it is said expressly,
God brought in the flood upon the world of the ungodly. 2. Peter. 2.5. You have
all read, or heard the judgment that befell Sodom, and Gomorrah: It is recorded
with a special note, Genesis 19 24. Then the Lord rained upon Sodom, and Gomorrah
brimstone, and fire from the Lord out of heaven. The name of the Lord is used
twice here, to show, that it was a special hand from heaven that brought this.
Hebraismus est, pluit Dominus a Domino de coelo, pro Dominus pluit a se de
coelo. Vatab.
The Lord did this by himself, as it were: it was not a chance, or accident;
(as some call the most fearful judgments that ever have been executed) it was
not the ill Crasis, and disposition of second causes, no, it was an immediate
hand from heaven, it was Jehovah that did it.

We might instance in the examples of Exodus 14.
Pharaoh and his Host, which were drowned in the red sea in the examples of
Numb. 16.
Korah, Dathan, Abiram, of Isai 37.
Senacherib, and diverse others.

From the old Testament we might pass to the New, and speak of the ends of
Judas; Ananias, and Saphira; Herod. These things you all know, much also might
be fetched from Histories sacred, and profane to consirme this.
Ecclesiastical Histories are full of examples in this kind. M. Fox in his Book
of Martyrs has a special tract to show the fearful ends of several of the
most Eminent persecutors of the Church, and people of God.

5. 5 Partic.
The Last thing for the clearing of the Doctrine is to show the grounds, and
reasons of this, why God takes this course many times in this world to inflict
upon notorious sinners some remarkable judgments: might it not be thought
sufficient, that there are eternal punishments reserved for them? The reasons
therefore why God does this are these.

1. Reason 1.
He does it to put a stop to the Atheism that is in the world. The fool has
said in his heart there is no God. Psalm. 14.1. The Atheist says, we may do as
we list, the Lord sees not, neither does he consider; good, and evil are all
one to him, and he regards it not: or as they which are described in Job. chap.
21. v. 14.15. They say unto God, depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways. what is the almighty that we should serve him? and what
profit should we have if we pray unto him? Now, when men are come to this
pass, he will make them acknowledge him, whether they will or no. The Lord is
marvelous patient, and long-suffering, he knows how to right himself, and to
be even with the sinner in the end: but if men will break all bounds, if they
will deny the majesty above, if they will soff at his word, and make a mock of
sin, if they will pluck up all religion by the very roots: he will not, he
cannot any longer endure it, it stands him upon to keep up his authority in the
world, he will be owned, and acknowledged as God among his creatures. If
nothing else will make the proud, and sturdy hearts of men to stoop, and yield
to him, his Judgments shall Psalm 46.10. Be still, and know that I am God. It is
the voice of the Lord to the proud ones of the world. It seems they would not
know that there was a God, or at least that the God of Israel was he, that was
the true God; therefore was it that they were so mad against his people, v. 6.
the Heathen raged: but, what is the next news that we hear? He uttered his
voice; the earth melted. As proud, and as stout as they are, no sooner does He
speak, but their spirits flag, and faint; those great, and mighty ones who
feared none, and cared for none, they became as dead men: he uttered his voice,
or as some read it he gave his voice. Who is this He? look back upon the former
verse, and you will quickly see, it is God that utters his voice. No sooner does
God speak a word, but their hearts fail them. Let him but show himself, of
whom they made a mock but a little before, and questioned whether there was any
such one, and then they fear, and tremble; they shrink, and dare not hold up
their heads. And why does the Lord do all this? Why does he drive them to such
a stand? The end is set down at the 11. verse. He will be known as God, amongst
the worst of men. Be still, and know that I am God, and then it follows, I
will be exalted among the heathen, I will be exalted in the earth. That wicked
Pharaoh, one of the worst of me^, who blasphe^ed against heaven and said, who
is the Lord, that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not the
Lord, neither will I let Israel go. Exodus 5.2. This bold, this proud wretch,
after he had seen the hand of the Lord lifted up, and felt his plagues, he is
forced to know who the Lord was, and to let Israel go.

2. 2 Reason.
The Lord does this to render men in excusable Romans 2.1. Therefore thou art
inexcusable O man, whosoever thou art that judge. Judge, how is that? that
judge men worthy of death by sin: that was Gods verdict, and sentence
touching sinners, and this all men knew by the light of nature, and had the
same judgment and apprehention of it in themseves: as it is c. 1. v. 32 when
as a man knows by the light, and checks of his own conscience, that the wrath
of God is due unto him by reason of sin, when he sees all the curses that are
revealed in the Law, and the fearful vengeance denounced in the gospel
against all unbelieving, and unrepenting sinners, this makes him greatly
inexcusable: but when he shall see the judgments of God executed before his
eyes, and many of the same rank, and kind of sinners struck dead in the midst
of their abominations, if yet he go on in the same sins, this makes him beyond
measure inexcusable. If a man should see an hundred thieves, or robbers hung up
one after another at several assizes, and yet after this, this man himself
should play the thief, who would pity that man if he came to the same end? he
knows thee. very to be an unwarrantable, and dangerous thing, the law if
against it, and many have been punished for it from time to time before his
eyes, this makes him inexcusable: so it is in this case: If God take other men
in the midst of their sins, if he take them in the midst of their drinking,
quaffing, and carousing, as he did Belshazzar in the midst of his cups, or
strike them with some secret, and sudden blow in the midst of their chambering
and wantonness, as he did the young man in the proverbs, who when he went to
the harlots house, had a dart struck through his liver. Chap. 7.23. or by an
immediate hand from heaven, and an Angel sent to that purpose, shall punish
them in the midst of their pride, tyranny, and persecution, as he dealt with
Herod. If after all this, when a man has seen such clear, and manifest
Judgments from heaven, on the persons of others, he shall live in the same, or
worse sins; if he shall continue a drunkard, an adulterer, a persecutor, and
opposer of the saints, and of religion after all this, who can say this man is
not justly punished? The word is plain, and express against such, and such
sins; the end and issue of them is there revealed, and the judgments of God
have ratifyed it, and confirmed it; this man is left without all excuse. Now
God will have every mouth to be stopped; and all the world become guilty before
God. Romans 3.19.

3. Reas. 3.
The Lord inflicts judgments upon some, that they might be for examples unto
others. 2. Peter. 2.6. Turning the cities of sodom, and Gomorrah into ashes,
condemning them with an overthrow, making them an ensample unto those that
after should live ungodly. Here is both the judgment, and the reason of it
expressed. He turned them into ashes; and he condemned them with an overthrow:
he had condemned their wickedness before in his own thoughs, and adjudg'd
them worthy of some severe plague, (...) Phav.
and that plague must be nothing less then a total destruction, a total
overthrow; he would so destroy them as to make an utter end of them: for that
is the meaning of the word. And why would he do so? it was to make the^ an
example; he set them up as an example, he had prepared the^ for an example in
his own thoughts before, he had fitted, and designed them for it; now this is
the edition, and setting forth as it were, of what he had framed, and contrived
before. Saint Peter had mentioned two great editions of the wrath of God
before, one was in the Angels that fell: He cast them down to hell, v. 4. Here
was wrath indeed. Another was in the old world. He brought in the flood upon a
whole world. v. 5. here was the second great edition of his wrath, if I may so
speak. And the third was in that of Sodom, and Gommorah, these he (...)
constituit. ^ez. pone^s Vulg.
constituted, and framed for an (...). Hesych.
example; that is, for a sign, a token, a sure, a standing remembrance of what
he meant to do with others in the like kind: And therefore is it said, unto
those that (...). Ph. (...) Hes.
after should live ungodly. If any had a mind after this to play the Atheists,
to cast off all the thoughts of God, of religion, and to riot it in their
lusts, as the Sodomites, they might here see as in a map, what their doom was
like to be. S. Paul reckons up a whole Catalogue of Judgments which befell the
Israelites. 1. Cor. 10.11. It is said, now all these things happened to them
for ensamples. the meaning is not that those Judgments came by chance upon them
for how could they then be intended as examples, as he says they were. Neither
does he say divisim, and a part, that these things happened, and were examples,
but he speaks conjunc^im, knitting them up both in one sentence, they happened
as examples, or for examples, that is, those things which corrupt, and carnal
hearts look upon as chances, and misfortunes, he in the course of his
providence orders that they should come to pass, that they might be examples,
therefore in the 6. verse it is said, these things were our examples, or they
were (...)
made our examples, being ordained, and appointed of him so to be. Examples]
that is patterns, (...). Phav.
samplers, and similitudes, of what he intended to do in after times. These
were some of the first draughts, and coppies of his judgments, that men might
see, as he had begun, so he intended to go on and therefore they are said to
be examples, written for instruction, or admonition. Examples they were so in
their primitive intendment: and they are written too, left upon record, that we
might take warning by them on whom the ends of the world are come. The last age
of this world is like to be the worst, and therefore is it said, in the last
days perilous times shall come, for there shall be sinners of such and such a
sort,. 2. Tim. 3.1. Now God has provided for this before hand, he has given
many noteable examples of his judgments in former ages, which men, if they were
wise, would hide in their hearts, and keep ever by them; and that was his end
in making such examples, that they might be for admonition: (...)
Admonitione^: pretiosum vocabulum, ^uo significatur rectis monitis men's quasi
prius emota suo loco restitui, vel antea fluctuans componi. Eez. in 1. Cor. 10
a precious word (as one calls it) signifying the bringing of the mind back to
it self againeby some wholesome rebuke or other, that was formerly out of its
place; or else it signifies the settling of the mind, that before was
fluctuating, and wavering. All men are apt to think slightly of sin, they look
upon sin, as a harmless thing, that has no venom, nor sting in it, they play
and dally with it, as little children would do with a Snake. All this while the
understanding is a sleep, the mind is out of its place, it judges not of things
according to the nature of them. But when the Lord from heaven begins to
shoot his arrows, when they see men taken in the midst of their impieties, and
punished with some grievous, and fearful judgments, then the mind begins to
be awakened, and a man's thoughts begin to recollect themselves, certainly sin
is not such a trifle, it is not a toy, an empty notion, as the most of men do
make it. These are the warnigs of God to men: his judgments executed in the
world, are as so many monu^ents, standing remembrances of his displeasure
against sin. This is the last reason of the point.

The Application follows.

The first use may be a word of Terror, and it is able to shake the heart of
every unrepentant sinner under heaven. Is there such wrath in God as has been
opened? has it been all along manifested and revealed? have his judgments
confirmed it? this may strike a dampe, a terror on the heart of every wretched,
unrepenting sinner in the world. Here thou may see what thy case is, and
what thy doom will certainly be: the wrath of the great God, the God of
heaven, and earth is kindled against thee, it burns, and waxes hot against
thee, yea it will one day consume thee, and destroy thee: it will tumble
theeodwn into endless, easelesse, and remediless torments. This were enough
to shake the proudest Nimrods of the world, and to make the most stout hearted
sinner tremble like an aspen leaf, would he but consider it. The case is
plain, and clear: the judgment sure and certain.

The wrath of God is revealed from heaven, its a plain, a manifest thing, its
written with a sunbeame, and there needs be no question of it, thine own
conscience, that araignes, accuses, and condemns thee: its the voice and cry
of conscience, if thou lie in such, and such abominations, thou must be
damned, the word says it, the Law has pronounced it a thousand times over and
over, the gospel that ratifyes, and confirms it, and the judgments of God
executed in the world, they put it out of doubt.

Oh miserable man or woman, who ever thou be, be thou young or old, rich or
poor, be thy rank or condition whatsoever it be, that lie in thy secret
thefts, adulteries, oaths, prophanations of the sabbath, whose heart rises at
God, and his ways, that love thy ignorance, wordlinesse, or what ever sin it
be, that I cannot name in which thou live, and art resolved so to do! Oh
miserable, forlorn creature! The God of heaven and earth is set against thee,
the God of heaven, and earth is resolved to plague and punish thee.

Art thou able to dwell with everlasting burnings, or to stand before a
devouring fire? Art thou a fit match for the Almighty? can thou grapple with
thy maker? art thou strong enough to overcome his Almightynesse? What is become
of all the mighty sinners in the world? what is become of the world of the
ungodly? Were they not all swllowed up together, and devoured as in a moment?
What is become of the wicked Sodomites? Were they not consumed with fire and
brim-stone? Nay, that's not all, they suffer the vengeance of eternal fire,
Jude 5.7.
they lie flaming in the fire of hell, and are scorched with the wrath of God
there for ever. What is become of Cain, and Judas, and all the rabble of the
ungodly? Has not this wrath of the Lord lighted on them, and are they not for
ever miserable this is thy doom and portion also, who continuest in thine
abominations. Tophet is ordained of old: yea, Isai. 30.33.
for the King it is prepared, he has made it deep, and large: the the pile
thereof is fire, and much wood; the breath of the Lord, like a stream of
brimstone, does kindle it. There is elbow room enough in hell for all the
drunkards, swearers, Atheists in the world. He has made it deep, and large,
it will hold them all, there is no fear of it: this is the place prepared for
thee. Be thou a great sinner, or little sinner, it matters not, if so be thou
be an unrepenting sinner, it may be thy sin is so secret way of u^ just gain,
it may be it is wilful ignorance, constant neglect of holy duties, be it what
it will be, if thou be an unrepentant sinner, if thou keep thy sin in thy
bosom, if thou hide it as a sweet morsel under thy tongue, the wrath of the
Lord is gone out against thee. Oh how great, how dreadful is that wrath?
Jerem. 10. v. 10. The Lord is the true God, he is the liveing God, and an
everlasting King: at his wrath the earth shall tremble: and the nations shall
not be able to abide his indignation. Revel. 6.14, 15, 16, 17. And the heaven
departed as a scrole, when it is rolled together, and every mountain and Island
were moved out of their places: And the Kings of the earth, and the great men,
and the rich me^, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every
bondman, and every freeman hid themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of
the mountains, And said to the mountains, and rocks fall on us, and hide us
from the face of him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb: For the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?

Thou may mock at the word now, and despise the messengers of the Lord, and
make a light matter of sin, hell, wrath, and judgment, and every such thing.
Yea but then shall thou cry to the rocks, and mountains to fall on thee, and
to shelter thee from the wrath of the Lord, and the siercenesse of his anger.
The wrath of the King is as the roaring of a Lion, but what is the wrath of the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords? when the Almighty shall strech forth his own
hand against a poor rebellious creature, one that had wallowed in his
filthiness, and took his swinge in his base, and swinish lusts, and he shall
set his own almightynesse on work to make him miferable, Oh how great must
that misery be! Revelation 1.7. Behold He comes, and every eye shall see
him, all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him. There is a mighty
emphasis lies on it, it is he that comes, who is that? look back at the 5.
verse, and you will see it is Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the first
begotten of the dead, the prince of the Kings of the earth, unto whom glory,
and dominion is due for ever and ever. Behold he comes it is ushered in with
a note of astonishment and amazement: it is not a poor despised Christ, it is
not a carpenters son that now appears, he comes not in that mean, low,
and abject way as once he did; no, it is the glorious Lord Jesus, it is the the
faithful witness, one that has received public testimony in heaven of his
truth and faithfulness in his fathers work, it is he that was raised up by
the glory of the Father, whom he has set at his own right hand, Far above all
principality and powers, and might and dominion, and every name that is named,
not only in this world, but also in that which is to come. It Is he comes, he
comes not in a poor mean and abject manner, no he comes with clouds, he
shall come in the glory of his father, and all the holy Angels with him.
Behold he comes. Or else we may refer this to the following verse. v. 8. I am
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending says the Lord, which is, and
which was, and which is to come; the Almighty. It is that Eternal, that
Almighty one. Behold he comeeth. So in the Epistle of Jude v. 14. Behold the
Lord comes. Here we have a behold too. The Lord comes with ten-thousands of
his Saints. To see ten thousand Saints, and thousand thousands of Angels
coming to Judgment, Oh what a dreadful sight would this be! but it is the
Lord that comes in the front, and head of these, they are but his followers
and attendants. The Lord] he whom thou have hated, scorned, opposed all this
while, it is the Lord that comes whose commands thou have made bold withal,
and regarded no more then the dust under thy feet. The Lord comes to execute
vengeance v. 15. who said expressly thou should not be drunken, riotous,
unjust, abuse his mercies and the like: this glorious mighty Lord, he himself
comes, he whom thou have dishonored, provoked, blasphemed so many years
together, and yet he let thee alone, but now thou shall pay for all, he comes
to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly amongst
them, he will spare none, high nor low, rich nor poor, all shall stand before
the judgment seat. But is that all, it follows, he will convince them of all
their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed. Thou can be tipsy in
a corner, and commit filthiness in secret, and reserve some hidden close
haunts of sin which are remote from the eyes of men, but thou shall not carry
it so, the Lord will convince all that are ungodly among them, as subtle, and
as cunning an hypocrite as thou art, thou shall be unmasked, the Lord will lay
thee open before men, and Angels, thy baseness, and underhand dealing, thy
dodging, and dawbing in matters of religion shall be brought to light at that
day. Thou say as those mockers did, where is the promise of his coming? What
is this day of Judgment, hell, and wrath that ministers tell us so much off?
Tush these are but Bug-beares to fright little children with; and Preachers are
grown so proud now a days as they will have all men come to their bows, and
have an awe, and reverence of them: but let us not be so weak to hearken to
such tales. But what follows? He will convince them of all their hard
speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. Alas! for thee poor
man. It is not the minister thou speak against, those thy wicked, thy
accursed, thy hard speeches, they are against him. The Lord will not be mocked,
neither will he suffer his creatures to laugh him to scorn. He will convince
thee one day, that sin, hell, and wrath are not dreams, fancies, and idle
tales, and when thou have lain some millions of years in those insufferable
torments, and have eternity, for ever lying before thee to think what thou have
still to endure, then thou will see, whether sin be sin, yea, or no, whether
the wrath of God be a rediculous thing yea or no. Oh fear and tremble at the
thoughts of these things: that which has been said might make the heart of
every unrepentant sinner shake, and his joints to tremble. This is the first
use.

The second use, and all the use in the general, that shall be made of the
point in hand, Us^ 2.
is an exhortation to Repentance: Is the wrath of God gone out against all the
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men? Oh Repent, Repent betimes, ere this
wrath come upon you. I have lately exhorted you to repentance, by the mercies
of God, by his love and goodness, and the sweet provision that he has made,
he has raised up his son the Lord Jesus to give that blessing to you. You need
not say the work is too hard, it is a thing impossible for us to repent. You
have heard where your strength lies: I must now go another way to work, and
exhort you to repentance by the Judgments of the Lord, the text which I am
handling calls for it, and the providence of the Lord, they call for it also.
Knowing the terror of the Lord we persuade men, says the Apostle: so must we
do likewise. Let me speak to every soul of you that belongs to this place, be
thy rank, or condition whatsoever it be, be thou in higher or meaner place,
Repent, and that speedily before the indignation of the Lord come upon you to
the uttermost. I remember what John Baptist said to the Pharisees, and Sadduces
that came to his baptism: it may be looked upon as a kind of argument to
press the doctrine of repentance more closely on them, Math. 3.7. who has
warned you to flee from the wrath to come. I may say concerning you of this
place, the wrath of God is already come, it has already appeared, it is
revealed from heaven in the face of the open sun, that all that pass by you
cannot but take notice of it. Oh repent, repent, lest this wrath come upon you
to the uttermost: Luke 13:4.5 Suppose ye those eighteen upon whom the tower
in Siloam fell and slew them, think ye that they were sinners above all men
that dwell in Jerusalem, I tell you nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish. He does not say that they which suffered those things were no
sinners at all, or that they were little sinners, but he would not have them
that escaped that danger put off the business from themselves, as if so be
they that were slain, and made the immediate examples of Gods displeasure,
were the only sinners in Jerusalem: no, he tells them, their sins might be as
great as any of the rest; and therefore he advises them to look about
themselves, for unless they repented, they likewise should perish. Do not
think my brethren, that the poor children that were crushed to death, the
men and women that had their arms and legs broken, or disioynted, their bodies
sorely bruised were sinners above all the people in Witney, or that there are
no other sinners but the^ amongst you. Nay I tell you all, except ye repent,
ye shall all likewise perish. Unless thou, o man, or woman, who ever thou art,
repent of thy drunkenness, lying, covetuousnesse, of thy coldness and
indifferency in religion thou shall one day perish, the word says it,
conscience tells thee so, the damned in Hell they feel it to be so.

Oh what a strange pass are men come unto! the wrath of God is revealed from
heaven, and yet they will not believe. God has testified it from heaven, that
every drunkard, and swearer, and profane person shall certainly be damned; and
yet men will not believe. 1. Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that the unrighteous, etc.
why, This is a plain thing, an evident, a manifest thing, a man may say it is
dark at noone day, if he will, but this is clear and beyond all doubt it
self. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.
The gate of heaven shall never be opened to any unrighteous soul, no unclean
thing shall ever enter there. No, if the holy, and righteous God be in
heaven-thou which art an unholy and an unrighteous soul shall never get there;
and if the Saints and Angels stay in heaven, thou which art so unlike them
shall never come there. Oh think on this for the Lords sake. From heaven thou
art pointed out to destruction, all the leaves in the Bible make against thee,
all the Judgments that ever God has executed are clear and plain before
thine eyes, and yet men will not believe! What will become of this Atheistical
generation? There is no man fears, there is no man considers his way. Though
the blessed God from heaven tell men that their ungodliness and unrighteousnes
does bring his wrath upon them, and will damn the^ in the end, they will not
believe it, they will not lay it to heart. The word that threatens wrath, the
Judgme^ts of God, they reveal and make known this wrath, the devils in hell
they believe and tremble at it, and the damned, they feel it, and yet the stout
hearted sons of men they care not for it. 1. Cor. 10.22. Do we provoke the
Lord to jealousy, are we stronger then he? Do we incense, (...). Pha.
exasperate, and put the Lord himself to it to show what he can do? are we
content the Lord should do his worst? do we (...). Hes^ch.
equal and compare our selves with him? dare we justle, and contend with him
for mastery? Oh fearful! are you come to this point? let the Lord do his
worst, we shall deal with him and his wrath well enough. Oh desperate forlorn
man! It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Oh
repent, repent. Heb. 10.1.
It was one of the dying words of a famous Martyr. Repent O England, repent,
repent, so say I to you, O Witney, repent, repent, otherwise I fear some more
dreadful plagues will befall you. You that have ungodly neighbors, servants,
or friends go to the^ and ask them, what mean you to lie in your ignorance,
profaneness, neglect of God and holy things still? What do you love to be
damned? and are you well pleased to be sent packing to hell as soon as you
dye? For the Lords sake set upon this work speedily, if you do not I fear some
worse thing will come next. Certainly, my Brethren, the hand of the Lord is
gone out against you in this late Tragedy; (for so it should be called it was
not a Comedy, no, no, it was a Tragedy, a doleful Play, it had a doleful end,
a bloody, a sad end. Those of you that heard the screekings and bitter
complaints, the fearful heart-piercing cries, that saw the broken bones, the
disioynted arms, the dead carcasses of so many children, will say it was a
Tragedy indeed, a doleful play) and the wrath of God has been revealed from
heaven, it is revealed from heaven against thee O Witny. If there be any
mockers or scoffers in the congregation that are come to deride the word, I say
if there be any such, though I hope better things of the most of you, yet if
there be any secret scoffer in a corner, I shall say to him as Job did to his
friends, when they had made light of his calamity, and said, it was just. Job.
11.3. Suffer me that I may speak, and after that I have spoken, mock on. You
that make so light of the hand of God, and laugh at all his judgments, hear
the message which the Lord sent, and if after that ye have a mind to mock, then
mock ye on, take your fill of laughter, and it may be you may have your belly
full of mocking another day.

Brethren, mistake me not, my aim is not to make you sad, (though it is fit,
indeed, you should be humbled for your sins.) Alas, what pleasure can it be to
the proor servants, and messengers of the Lord to make any one sad? No, no, it
is your good, and happiness, it is the welfare and happiness of this place I
aim at, and I hope by that time you have heard all I have to say, you will be
convinced, that it is so indeed. Let me speak to you as the Apostle does to his
Corinthians. 2. Cor. 11.1. Would to God you could bare with me a little in my
folly, and indeed bear with me. And then at the 20 verse. for ye suffer, if a
man bring you into bondage, if a man devour you, if a man take of you, if a
man exalt himself, if a man smite you on the face. Many, I fear, are apt to
plead for their lusts and corruptions, for their games and sports, which have
devoured them, and consumed them, and brought them low, and is there not as
much reason they should bear with the word which comes in all plainness, and
faithfulness to do them good? Certainly my brethren the hand of the Lord is
lifted up, the great and dreadful God, the King of the whole earth has shown
himself in the midst of you. I could have hoped there would not be found a man
in this place, that was come to that height of Atheism, as to say, this not
was the hand of God, this was not a judgment, it was only a chance, a
misfortune, and such a thing might fall out, the house was weak, the beam was
not strong enough to support such a multitude. I could here cease speaking to
such a man, and desire a corner to turn aside and weep in, and even power out
rivers of tears in his behalf. It was that which made the Prophet cry out in the
like case. Isai. 26.11. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see.
How was the Lords hand lifted up? Do but read the former verses and you will
find, in the 9. verse we hear of his judgments being abroad, and in the 10.
verse, we hear of favor shown to the wicked. Let favor be shown to the
wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness. The Lords hand was lifted up in
a way of judgment, and in a way of mercy, it was his righteous judgment that
some were cut off, and it was his mercy that others were spared, and yet when
his hand was lifted up so Emenently, they would not see. The Lord has shown
both his severity, and his goodness amongst you, severity to them that
sufferred, and goodness to you that were preserved. Is it not the Lords
goodness? or to return to the Prophets expression, is it not a favor shown
to thee, that thou have thy life giventhee, when others were crushed to death?
is it not a favor that thou art safe and sound, when others had their limbs
broken, their bodies grievously bruised? Oh this was that which so moved the
Prophet, or the church her self that is brought in speaking in that chapt.
that she knew not well how to bear it. Lord when thy hand is lifted up they
will not see. It is a patheticall speech, and it savours of somewhat a grieved
and troubled spirit. Oh the hard-heartednesse, the pride and stoutnesse that is
in men, not to see when the Lords hand is so lifted up. What is thy heart
flint, and thy Bowels made of brass? will not wrath from heaven, great wrath
affect thee? Read what follows in the same verse. They will not see, but they
shall see. Thou winkest with thine eyes now, but the Lord will open them at
last, thou will not believe this is the wrath of God, thou will believe it to
purpose another day, and it may be that day is not far off. That I may show you
the wretchedness of this disposition, not to see and acknowledge the Lord in
such great things, but to lay them upon chance, misfortune second causes, and
the like. Consider, 1 This is a mere heathenish temper, the Heathens could not
do worse then so, the Philistines they said if the matter fell not out so and
so, as they had cast it, it was not the hand of the Lord that smote them, but
it was a chance that happened. 1. Sam. 6.9. shall we make our selves
Philistines? shall we compare our selves with the worst of the heathens? Nay,
some of the heathens have acknowledged the Vide Lipsium Physiolog. Stoic. l. 1.
Dissert. undecima et seq. Arrian. lib. 1. cap. 6. and 12 mo Jamblich. de vita
Pythag. cap. 28. Stobaeum Eclog. Physic. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Providence of God in such (...). Hiero^l. in aur. carm. paulo post. (...).
matters, Nec Homerus hoc nescivit: qui de Graecis adflictis causam reddit. --
(...). Lips. diss. 16. (...). Eurip. apud S^obaeum in Phys.
they looked upon evils befalling them as the just punishments of their sins,
they have feared and trembled at the things that have come to pass, as
acknowledging a Divine Power that was the cause of them. (...). Hieroc. in Aur.
Car.


The Circa religi^n^^ talem accepim^^. Tomtrua and sulgura paulo ^n^^rmius
e^pavescchat Suct. in August^.
Roman Emperors, yea those among them who have been most Ausus interdum non
solum vultum attollere: sed etiam (...). Refert. Casaub. de Caligula ex Dione.
profane and wicked, and at sometimes have contemned God, religion it self,
and have looked the judgments of God in the face, with pride, and scorn, at
other times they have been surprised with a Panick fear. If they heard but Nam
qui De os tantopere contemneret, ad minima tonitrna and fulgura connivere,
caput obvolvere, advero majora proripere se estrato, sub lectuque condere
solebat. Sue: Calig.
thundering, and lightning, they would croutch under their bedds, and hide
their heads, fearing that some plague from heaven was coming upon them. The
Historian reports of Caligula, that wicked Emperor, that he which did so much
despise the Gods, upon the least crack of thunder, or flash of lightning was
wont to wink, and to wrap up his head; and if the thunder, and lightening were
a little greater then ordinary, he would get off the bed on which he lay, and
hide himself under the bed. Yea, it was a Moris fnit cum tonaret aut fulgeret,
aut terra mo veret, continuo pro mutua salute diis vota fundere Causab. ex
Philostrato Cusus verba apponit
Custom among some of the Heathens, when there was thunder, or lightening, or
an earthquake to pray to their Dietyes for on another safety and
preservation. Nay, the very devils in hell believe, and tremble, the scripture
says it, and it is so: they have seen all the judgments that have been already
executed, they know them to be his judgments, and tremble at them. They know
all the threatenings of the word to be true; and believe they shall be
a-complished. They know that the day of judgment will come, they look for it,
and tremble at the thoughts of it. What art thou worse then the wickedest
heathen that ever was? then the blackest Fiend in hell? Oh wretched creature!
Pluck off the vizard, show what thou art. Do not defile, and abuse that
precious name of Christian: thou a Christian, and worse then a Heathen, worse
then the very devils in hell?

2. Not to acknowledge God in such terrible astonishing things as these are, it
is the flattest most down right Atheism that ever was. It is to deny God
himself, that there is such a Majesty as the Majesty of heaven and earth, it
is to deny the word, it is to deny all his judgments, it is in effect to call
all the great works of God that ever he has wrought in the world mere
accidents, and chances: it is to make the flood a mere chance, it is to make
the burning of Sodom, and Gomorah a mere chance, in a word it is to make every
thing that is recorded in scripture as a punishment of sin and sinners mere
casualities and chances. Oh monstrous, abominable blasphemy! was there ever
greater blasphemy then this? This is to deny God, to deny his word, to become a
stark downright (...). Hier. (...). Tragieus quidam apud Lyps.
Atheist. Do thou believe there are any such things as judgments: certainly
if there be this was one What is a judgment, but only a punishment laid on men
for sin, and that which makes it more remarkeably a judgment is, when men are
taken in the midst of their sins. Now that stage-plaies, are sins, fearful and
abominable sins, both in them that act them, and them that behold them, we need
not labor much to prove.

1. We might urge, where does the word of God tolerate such Pas-times? the word
says we should redeem the time, be swift to speak, watch unto prayer. If thou
can not afford one hour to hear a Sermon, to pray, to perform religious
duties in, Ephesians. 5.16. James 1.19. 1 Pet. 4.7.
does the word afford thee, three, four hours, or whole nights to sit up at a
play?

2. But this is least of all; stage plays are absolutely against the word, the
word forbids idle words, foolish words, jesting, it forbids unchaste looks,
unchaste apparel, unchaste gestures, every thing that might be an occasion of
sin: the Scripture says, Whosoever looks upon a woman to lust after her,
Math. 5.28.
has committed adultery with her already in his heart. Again it says The
light of the body is the eye, if thine eye be evil thy whole body is full of
darkness: Math. 6.22.23.
stage plays are stuffed with scarrilous, filthy, unbecomming speeches,
passages, and gestures: they are the incentives, and occasions of all lust:
stage plays are the very acting of wickedness, they are a teaching of men to
be vile, and wicked. What are all your Comedies, but only bringing the wanton
lusts of men upon the stage? as if so be the hearts of men were not corrupt
enough by nature, but they must needs see lewdness, and folly acted before
their eyes, to provoke them to be wicked. Oh horrible! men are not content to
be lascivious, unchaste in their thoughts, desires, and inclinations when they
are at home, but they would faigne see lust acted in the life of it, they would
faigne see it displayed in its colors. Is not this abominable? Ezekiel.
23.14.15.16. When she saw men pourtrayed upon the wall the images of the
Chaldeans pourtrayed with virmilion, girded with girdles upon their loins,
exceeding in dyed attire upon their heads, all of them Princes to look to,
after the manner of the Babylonians of Chaldea the land of their nativity, and
as soon as she saw them with her eyes, she doted upon them, and sent messengers
unto them in Caldea. Could dead pictures do so much, a few painted images on a
wall? what then will living pictures do? The persons of men acting the part of
some found and wanton lover, or in another habit representing the amorous
looks, carriage, and deportment of some lewd and wanton Queen. They, when they
saw the pictures in the wall Doted on them, and does not the sight of lustful
amorous spectacles beget and stir up lust? does it not bewitch and enchant the
hearts of men? There are two sad See D Reynolds, overthrow of stage plays. p.
51.
examples of this in Histories. Besides, do not men attire themselves in woman's
habits, and is not this a sin? Deuteron. 5.22. The woman shall not wear that
which pertains to a man, Prinus Histriom mastix. p. 392. and scy.
neither shall a man put on a woman's garment, for all that do so, are an
abomination to the Lord thy God. Is there any thing more clear, or more
express? How frequent is this in stage plays? was it not so in the late play?
was there not one that acted a woman's part in woman's garments? If we believe
the word, these were not ordinary sins, no, they are unnatural, abominable
practices, the authors of them are abominable, they are Abo^inabilis est apud
Deum hoc est Deus abhorret ab his monstrjs. Johannes Wolphius. in Deuteronomy.
monsters in Gods account as a learned man explaines that text.

3. The hand of God has remarkably appeared against the actors and frequenters
of stage plays. Theater of Gods judgments.
There was a woman that went to the Theater to see a play, and returned home
possessed with an unclean spirit: who being rebuked in a conjuration, for
daring to assault one of the faith, that professed Christ; answered, that he
had done well, because he had found her upon his own ground. Here you have the
devils own confession, he acknowledges stage plays to be sins, he had her
upon his own ground, where he would have her, and therefore he claims a right
to do what he did. Many instances there are in this kind. He that has a mind
to satisfy himself may read Mr Prin's Histrio-Mastix, where there are many
Pages to this purpose. There is one instance so near a kin to that of Witny,
that it may not be omitted. Upon the 13 of January, Anno 1583. being the Lords
day, an infinite number of people, men, women, and children, resorted unto
Paris garden to see Beare-baiting, plays and other pas-times and being all
together mounted aloft upon their scaffolds and galleries, and in the midst of
all their jollity and pastime, all the whole building (not so much as one stick
standing) fell down miraculously to the ground with much terror and confusion
in the fall of it; five men and two women were slain out right, and above one
hundred and fifty persons more sore wounded and bruised, whereof many dyed
shortly after, some of them having their brains dashed out, some their heads
all to quasht, some their legs broken some their arms, some their backs, some
one hurt some another: there being nothing heard there, but woeful screekes
and cries, which did even pieree the skies: children there bewailng the death and
hurts of their parents, Parents of their children: wives of their Husbands, and
Husbands of their Wives; so that every way from four of the Clock in the
afternoon till nine at night, especially over London bridge; many were carried
in and led betwixt their friends, and so brought home to their houses with
sorrowful heavy hearts, like lame cripples.

4. Much more might be said to prove the abominablenesse of these plays, from
the rise and original of them, they being the inventions of the Heathens,
devised and framed on purpose to honor their Graeci omnium su^rum ^udorum
^^lennita^um atque adeo (...)
Gods withal, especially Bacchus their Drunken God, from whence stage players
were called Bacchus his handy-crafts-men. From the maine ends looked at in them,
ai^ Ath^nam (...). Sed cum very Dei notitiam a^^^serunt id^ Bacchum
festivitatis authorem dixerunt, have scenicos ludos consecrarunt: huic
dramaticam poe^m and universam (...) dicarunt, qua^ antiqui^mi ho^^n^: came ob
ca^sam (...) appellarunt, s^enic^ hi^^ienes ideo (...) se^ per dicti. IIs;aa.
Casaub. de Satvr. Grae. Po^s. and Romans Saty^a. m Equidem Comaediae smis non
fere alius crat Gracis, quam latitia and hilaritus Cael Rhod. lib 6. at quae
sequuntur, ne referam vetat pudor and (...).
sinful mirth and jollity. From the ordinary concomitants, effects, and fruits
of them. But these have been so largely handed by Dr. Reynolds, Mr. Prinne, and
others, that it would be needless to repeat them. There has been said enough
already to prove stage plays to be sinful. And if so, (that we may return to
that where we left) Is it not a judgment if a man be taken in the midst of his
sins? When Nadab and Abihu were smitten by the Lord in the midst of their
sins, was it not a judgment, a sore judgment? The story you have, Levit.
10.1.2. Oh cease to speak against the God of heaven any more in this sort.
Certainly it was a judgment, and a manifest judgment, it was wrath from heaven,
yea it was wrath from heaven against you in this place. Suffer me to give you
this observation. All that were killed were the people of Witny; they were your
children, your sons and your daughters that were slain; Why should five of
Witny be slain outright, and not any one of other places. This Co^edy was
acted in other places, but it was in Witny only that it proved a Tragedy. O
Witny, Witny, the Lord is angry with thee, and there are several sins among
you, that the Lord points out by this judgment.

1. There is the sin of Profaneness amongst you, how many are there in this
place, that are given only to drinking, sporting, merriments, and pas-times? I
have too sadly observed it in passing the streets, people will sit drinking in
an Alehouse making themselves merry with a Fiddle, whereas they will not step
over their threshold to hear a Sermon. Oh this is the very depth of
profaneness, when men care not for God, they care not for his word, they care
not for his ordinances, they care not for the great things of salvation, but
are still calling for their sports and merriments, they will be jovall and
merry, that they will.

Heb. 12.16. Lest there be any profane person as Esau, that is an unhallowed,
and unsanctifyed person, one that still lies in his natural filth. (...)
Why what is the Character of such a one? it is added, who for one morsel of
meat sold his birthright. You of this place have had the Gospel amongst you,
Christ and salvation is offered, heaven and happiness stand waiting on men,
few men care for this, few men bid Christ and salvation welcome: are not many
apt to say, what need of all this preaching was it not better with us when we
had less? Many think it much to afford one hour in a week to hear a Sermon,
but they say, come let us eat, and drink, and make our selves merry, let us
dance it, and card it, and be joviall whilst we may: and I would to God there
may be none such found among you, that will sit up whole nights at Cards and
Dice, that can sit day after day, many hours together in an Asehouse, that
grudge a few minnutes to be spent in the service of God. Oh! desperate
profaneness, abominable wickedness! the God of heaven has revenged this
profaneness this day. Do but think with your selves, what the place was,
where the hand of the Lord was seen: was it not in such a Kind of place, where
such meetings use to be: I speak not of that Particular house, but that it
should be in an Inn, Tavern, or Alehouse, such a Kind of place to which the
people of this place are so much adicted, which they haunt so much, and spend
so much time in. Is there nothing to be learned from this? Does the Lord point
out nothing of the sin of this place herein? The sin of drunkenness is to rife
and common amongst you? the drunkards are reeling in your streets, they are
open and obvious, to the view of all, I my self have been too sad an
eyewitness.

2. Another sin that may be feared to be amongst, you is the sin of
uncleanness. Is there no fornication, no adultery in secret corners? no such
things as chambering and wantonness to be found amongst you? Examine well what
all your songs, and carolls are, which are so often sung at your doors, and in
your houses? are there none of them base, filthy, obscene. It argues too too
light and wanton a spirit, that so many scores, yea some hundreds should be at
a lascivious play. Oh this is a fearful sin, the sin of uncleanness,
fornication, adultery, and those things that border on it. These sins bring
astonishing judgments. Some sins of this nature were they that destroyed Sodom,
and caused fire to come down from heaven upon it. viz: the sin of uncleanness,
and unnatural lusts. These things are too foul to be named, these things are
enough to make the sun in the firmament to blush and be ashamed, and the light
of the day to hide and cover it self, in which there is mention made of such
things.

3. A third sin, which is too visible and apparent, is, Neglect of the word and
ordinances. Some of them that did attend upon the ordinances have turned their
back upon them, and the generality amongst you do apparently slight them.
Formerly what flockinge has there been to sermons? how has this place been
filled every Alley, and corner crowded? No people so famous for readiness, and
diligence in hearing the word as the people of Witny: Ministers that have
occasionally preached among you have observed it, your Name has been famous
amongst others. How thin are your Congregations grown upon the lords day? how
small an handful there are upon Lecture days, I am to sad a witness?
Brethren, suffer me to speak my fears. I fear one of the great sins that bath
pluct down this judgment, was the neglect of the Gospel. It was not long
since, the last time that ever I preached amongst you on the Lords day, in a
full assembly, I beseeched you, I entreated you by all the arguments of love,
gentleness, sweetness, that possibly I could to attend upon the word. I
beseecht you by the love of God, by the mercies of the Lord, by the bowels of
his goodness, that you would not slight the word. The Text was from that of
St. John, 1 John: 4.8, 9.
God is love, and the point from it was, that the Love of God monifested to the
world in the dispensation of himself by Jesus Christ, it was the most
peerless, matchless, incomperable love, that ever was. Hence were you called
upon in such exhortations as these in the Applciation.

Oh do not grieve such a Love! do not slight it! do not abuse it! Oh unkind
sinner! Oh hard-hearted sinner! worse then the blackest devil in hell! that
can be drunk, that can swear, that can laugh at holiness in the face of
that very Love which is come to save thee, to pardon thee; that has sent the
only begotten son that thou might have life through him. Do not sin
against this love, do not grieve it: suffer this love to attain its ends, to
accomplish its desires. The design of love is to bring thee unto life, and it
has cost it dear to bring about that design, the son of God must come
down from heaven to bring this to pass, and is that so small a matter? why
should any of us be willing to stop this love in its workings, to hinder it in
its aims and intentions: all the design of this love is to bring us unto
life, and is there any harm in that? Ah, my Brethren, is Death spiritual,
Eternal death, such a sweet, such a pleasant thing, that we should be in love
with it? Is wrath, the wrath of the Almighty, everlasting wrath a thing to be
desired? that we should refuse to accept of the offers of eternal love, when
it comes to offer life and salvation. With many more Reasonings in this kind.
After this you were exhorted to make use of the means of life and of
salvation, in some such words as these. If you are willing to come to the Lord
Jesus for life, you cannot be unwilling to attend upon those means, and that
word, that holds forth Christ and salvation. Will any one say that that man
prizes a pardon, that will not vouchsafe so much as to look upon it, nor to
read it, when it is sent unto him? Oh my Brethren! the Gospel is the word of
life, the word of peace, of pardon, and of salvation, can he be said to prize
salvation and Christ, that will not come to that word which brings Christ,
salvation, and all? Is that man willing in good earnest to be saved (however
all men say they are willing, God forbid else, but is he so in good earnest?)
that will not step over his threshold to hear a Sermon, where this gospel is
brought, and the mea^s of salvation te^dred? I beseech you suffer me to speak
to you in the name of the Lord; I beseech you in the name of Jesus Christ, I
beseech you in the bowels of Jesus Christ, if you think this love of God the
greatest love that reveals pardon, life, happiness, salvation, do not think
it much to wait upon the word that reveals it, and makes it manifest. Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing is the ordinary means to beget Faith, and so
to bring to Christ, and to salvation. I beseech you do not slight this
Exhortation; if you do, I must tell you, (though I am loath so to do, yet I am
constrained) this Sermon will rise up in judgment against you at the last day,
and I must come in as a witness against you.

These were some of the arguments wher-withall you were pressed; yet
not-with-standing all these beseechings, and entreaties, to my grief I
observed it, scarce were there any, that did the more frequent the word
preached, and has not the Lord shown his hand severely? whereas there are
scarce many Scores that will come to hear the word, there are some Hu^dreds will
go to see a wicked and an ungodly play. Certainly the Lord has bin ave^ged for
this. Do but read that 10. of Lu. from the be ginning and so on, at the 5.
verse it is said, Into whatsoever house you enter, first say, Peace be to this
house. but what follows? in the 10 verse it is said, But into whatsoever city
ye enter, and they recieve you not, go your ways out into the streets of the
same, and say even the very dust of your city which cleaves on us, we do wipe
off against you. And then there is a sad close in v. 12. But I say unto you
that it shall be more tolerable for Tire, and Sidon at the day of judgment,
then for you.

4. Another provoking sin, is the sin of Atheism, and irreligion. Do but read
what the Lord Jesus speaks to the Church of Pergamos. Rev. 2.14. I have a few
things against thee, why? what is the matter? Thou have there them that hold
the Doctrine of Balaam: and then again at the 15. ve. So have thou also them
that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans. The doctrine of Balaam is expressed,
He taught Balaack to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to
eat things sacrificed unto Idols, and to commit fornication. The Doctrine of
the (...). Epiphanius de Nicolao.
Nicolaitans was much of the same nature, and I blush to tell you what it was,
they did not only hold a liberty of uncleanness, but a necessity of it. Now
what was the quarrel which Christ had with this church? thou have there them
that hold such and such things: In thee, O Pergamos, are found such monstrous,
and abominable Doctrines, in thee are found such as maintain the^, and will
stand for them: with thee it is that they have their seat, and residence. Are
there not to be found in thee, O Witny, corrupt, licentious, abominable
Doctrines? have thou not also them, that hold them, that contend for them with
might and maine? Are there none amongst you that make a mock of sin, that make
sin nothing, that hold there is no such thing as sin? Are there none amongst
you, that deny the great fundamental Doctrines, (which are the very hinges,
pillars, and foundations of all religion) denying the resurrection, the
immortality of the soul, election and reprobation, Heaven and hell, that deny
the damnation of any, and maintain the salvation of all, that can take away
the scriptures, the whole Bible, and religion it self all at once, are there
none such as these are? These are sad provocations, black and dismal
provocations! I would feign believe some poor souls are led aside through
weakness, and simplicity, and are beguiled through the subtility of that old
serpent whose wiles they are ignorant of. The good Lord deliver them, that they
perish not. Its a dangerous thing to stumble at the fundamentalls of religion,
and godliness, although it be through weakness. But if there be any such who
obstinately, and pertinatiously maintain such Doctrines, against clear and
convincing light formerly shining on them, against the truth which sometimes
they owned and professed, they are in a sad and fearful case. Read the
Epistles of St. Peter, and Jude, and there you will see the ends of those men
2. Pet. 2.1. They bring upon themselves swift destruction. v. 3. Their Judgment
now of a long time lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth not. Ep. Jude,
v. 4. who were before of old ordained to this condemnation. If a man out of
despite make a mock of Preaching, sabbaths, ordinances, if there be any worse
place in hell it is reserved for that man.

You see what the sins are which are found amongst you, I have now shown you
your wounds, my next work is to endeavor the healing of them, and indeed that
was my maine intention, it was not a pleasure to me to search and lance your
your soars, yet that was necessary to a cure.

The maine exhortation pressed on you, has been an exhortation to repentance,
to serious, to speedy repentance. And that which remains, is to give more
particular direction, what your carriage and deportment ought to be under the
present hand of God. There are these four things you ought to set before you,
and to have in your eye.

1. The work of Humiliation. 2. The work of Reconciliation. 3. The work of
Reformation. 4. The work of Remembrance: (for so it may be called) laying it as
a solemn charge upon your selves to keep in remembrance this strange and
wonderful providence.
1. The first Duty to be set upon is the work of Humiliation. I do not mean
you should set upon it in your own strength, but take the strength of Christ
with you, and the strength of the spirit with you, and then you may go on. You
have sinned greatly, oh humble your selves greatly before the Lord! Manasseth
did so after his great sins, 2. Chron. 33.12. And when he was in affliction,
he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of
his fathers. Every particular soul should humble himself for his particular
sins, and say, Good Lord! what have my sins been, that such wrath should
come upon Witny in my days! Every family should mourn, and lament over the
sins of that family: Husbands should mourn apart, and the Wives a part,
children a part, and servants a part; every one mourning for his own personal
sins, and the family sins. In the 12. Zachar. 11. we read of a great
mourning, a great mourning indeed, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley
of Megiddon. When was that? When that good King Josiah was slain. 2. Chron.
35.23.24.25. Oh that was a dreadful, a terrible Judgment to have such a Prince
taken from them! and this occasioned a great mourning, the text says, all
Judah, and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. All were turned mourners then, and
there was no one but bare a part in these lamentations. Jeremiah the Prophet,
he lamented for Josiah, and the singing men, and the singing women spoke of
Josiah in their lamentations unto this day. Their singing was turned into
mourning, and their rejoicing into lamentation. You have had a great many
singing men, and singing women in this place, such as would go from door to
door singing their songs and carolls to make themselves and others mirth Oh!
it were well if your singers were turned into mourners! if your harpers were
turned into lamenters! if instead of al your songs and carols, and da^cings,
you would now come and weep together, and say as Jeremiah does. Lament. 3.1.
How has the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud in his anger? How
has the Lord covered poor Witney with a cloud in his anger? and as it is in
the 4. verse. He has bent his bow like an enemy, he stood with his right hand
as an adversary, he powered our his fury like fire. Complain as the Church also
does in Lam. 3. with a little change in the expression. We are the people that
have seen affliction by the rod of his wrath. v. 3. Surely against us is he
turned, he turns his hand all the day. v. 4. our flesh, and our skin has he
made old, he has broken our bones. Thus I say come and weep together, every
soul should weep, and every family should weep, and the whole Town should
weep, and indeed it were well if God would put it into your hearts to keep a
day of weeping, to set apart some solemn day, to fast and pray, and weep, and
humble your selves before the Lord. Say unto the Lord as it is Lam. 1, 18. The
Lord is righteous, for we have rebelled against his commandments: and as the
Church bemoanes her self, Lam: 3.39, 40, 41, etc. Wherefore does a living man
complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? let us search and try our
ways, and turn again to the Lord. Let us lift up our heart with our hands
unto God in the heavens. We have transgressed, and rebelled, thou have not
pardoned. Thou have covered with anger, and persecuted us: thou have slain,
thou have not pitied.

2. Aim at Reconciliation. The Lord is displeased, he has been highly
provoked: oh labor to get his anger removed, and his wrath pacifyed! Run apace
to the Lord Jesus, entreat him to stand between you, and his fathers wrath: go
to, him speedily, go to him immediately, before farther wrath break forth. It
is not all our tears (though we could pour out whole rivers of the^) that can
wash away one sin: no, no, in that day ('it is spoken immediately after the
mention of that great mourning) there shall be a fountain opened for sin,
Zach. 13.1.
and for uncleannesle. Mourn you must, mourn greatly, mourn bitterly, yea,
but it is the fountain that must wash away sin, it must be the fountain of
the Lord Christ's blood, that must wash away the foul, and horrible sins of
Witney. Come then, wash in this fountain, wash, and you shall be clean. In
the 16 of Numbers we read of great wrath: no sooner had God executed that
fearful judgment upon Korah, and his rebellious compa^y, but the people fell
to murmering immediately. v. 41. But on the morrow, all the congregation of the
children of Israel murmered against Moses, and against Aaron, saying, ye have
killed the people of the Lord. Oh desperate, and adventrous sinners! that when
they saw the judgment of God executed the very day before, yet they fell into
the same sins, which they were guilty of, which had been so plagued. How angry
is the Lord for this, v: 44, 45. And the Lord spoke unto Moses saying, get you
up from among this congregation, that I may consume them as in a moment. But
what does Moses do in this case? v: 46. And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a
censer, and put fire therein from off the Alter, and put on incense, and go
quickly unto the congregation, and make an atonement for them, for there is
wrath gone out from the Lord, the plague is begun. This represented the
mediation of Jesus Christ, Isa. 53.12.
who is said to make intercession for the transgressors. He is that Angel in
the Revelation, that stands at the Alter, having a golden censer, and much
incense given to him, that he should offer it with the prayers of thee Saints.
chapt. 8.3. Now Moses says to Aaron, go quickly: or as it may be read, make to
go with speed, that is, as the Chaldee, and Greek translateth it, carry
quickly, or in haste. (...)
Make haste to the Lord Jesus, away to him every soul of you: all you that
have not known what the worth of the Lord Jesus is till this hour, know now
how to prize him, it is he that must pacify the wrath of God that is gone out
against thee for thy profaneness, and thine uncleanness, and thy neglect of
the word, and thine Atheism, Oh fall in love with the incomperably precious
Lord Jesus this day, as soon as ever thou come home fall upon thy knees, and
beg thou may have a Christ given to thee: the wrath of the Almighty is gone
out against thee, and will otherwise certainly consume thee. There is no
dealing with a sin-revenging Majesty, but only in, and by a Mediator. As for
you that have interest in this pretions Name, O make use of it, present the
righteousness, and satisfaction of the Lord Jesus Christ unto the father. It
is he that must stand between the dead, and the living: some are cut off
already, and the wrath of the Lord is not yet appeased. If you interpose not
the Lord Jesus, you may expect more wrath, and more plagues. This I commend to
you as the chief, and maine direction of all the rest: it is not all thy
carelessness, and security, it is not all thy sleighting, and despising the
judgments of God, that will be able to keep off the wrath of the Lord in the
end. No, this will bring on thee so much the more wrath, and heavyer vengeance:
Get into the Lord Jesus, hide your selves in the clefts of that rock till this
indignation be over past. If ever Christ be worth having, now is the time. You
that cared not for Christ when you were at ease, and when you lived in
pleasure, my thinks you should long after Christ, and be restless till you
have gotten him now judgment is come upon you. Oh, Brethren, if the Judgments
of God in this world be so terrible, that they are enough to abash, and appale
the stoutest sinners, how terrible, and how dreadful will that last, and great
day of judgment be? If thou can not stand before an angry God now without a
Savior, without an advocate to plead thy cause, when he does but manifest a
little of his displeasure, and gives but a gentle touch of his finger, how will thou stand before him without a Savior, and an advocate? when he shall come
with millions of Saints and Angels, when the Books must be opened, and every
man's life ripped open, and it shall be said, There wast thou drunk in such a
corner, there had thou thy wanton dalliances upon such a bed, at such a time
did thou revile at the Ministers of God, and mock at his ways and the
professors of them, so many years thou livedst in the world, and yet never
did study how thou might come to the knowledge of God, or the way to life
and happiness; when all this, and much more shall be said; and then the Lord
shall not come to let in a vein of his wrath only; but he will pluck up all
the sluices, and open all the floud-gates of his wrath, and vengeance, when that
dismal place of torment shall be set before thee, where those unquencheable
flames are, where thou shall hear the devils roaring, the damned yelling, and
see all this prepared for thee, how will thou be able to hold up thy head at
such a day? Make sure of Christ betimes. They were the last, and dying words of
one, who in his life time was the Jewel, and Paragon of Religion, and piety in
the country where he lived. Make sure of Christ. He is better then all the gold
and treasures in the world, better then the Rubies, or the Onyx stone. Thou art
eternally happy if thou get him, and Eternally miserable if thou come short of
him.

3. The next thing that is to be studied, and endeavored after is Reformation.
It is Reformation that the Lord looks after. Do you think that the Lord
delights in the death of your children? that he takes pleasure in the
breaking, bruising of your bones? is it matter of joy to him to see the hurts,
and hear the doleful complaints of your wives, servants, and near relations?
No, no, God is love, as you have many times heard had not your sins put him
upon it, there had not been so sad a spectacle found amongst you. Put away
therefore that evil thing which is in the midst of you. When the children of
Israel had fallen before their enemies, Achan who had taken the accursed thing,
and been the occasion of the misery, and distress that fell upon them, must be
found out, and stoned: You have seen already some of the Achans that have
troubled your peace, stone them now, and put them to death. You have heard it
was the profaneness, the u^cleannesse, the contempt of the Gospel, the
Atheism, and irreligion that is among you, that has caused all your trouble:
put away these accursed things. And here let me speak more fully to you under
these four heads.

1. To the looser, and prophaner sort. 2. To them that formerly have been
professors, but now are fallen off. 3. To them that do still fear the Lord,
and hold on in his way. 4. To all the people of the place in general.
1 To the looser, and prophaner sort, the exhortation is, Oh put away all your
drunkenness, formication, uncleanness, oaths, blasphemies; let him that was
filthy be filthy no more; let him that stole steal no more: oh that you would
think of leaving all these base, unworthy, desperately foolish ways, and think
of turning to the Lord with your whole heart, and your whole soul! You that
have layen rotting, and stinking in your lusts many years together, thou that
art an old grayheaded sinner, think at last of returning to the Lord. Ah poor
creatures! what mean you? will you ruin the place you live in, and damn your
own souls eternally? If men had but common humanity in them they would not
continue in their gross, and hideous abominations, that would pull down wrath
upon their wives and children, friends and neighbors, the town and place in
which they live. But this is a small matter in comparison; if they had but a
tender regard of their own souls, if they made any account of their own
salvation, if they had but so much as a principle of self-love in them, they
would cast away those sins, that will certainly damn them in the end. There
is none of the sins which thoulovest so dearly and huggest them with so much
tenderness, and will not be brought to part with them upon any terms, (thou
had rather part with thy life then with such a lust) there is none of these
thy most beloved sinnnes, but it will cost thee the loss of everlasting life,
it will cost thee the loss of God, It will cost thee the loss of the Kingdom
of Heaven. The word speaks it out aloud. No fornicator, nor Idolater, nor
adulterer, nor effeminate person, nor thief, nor covetuous person, nor
drunkard, nor reviler shall ever inherit the kingdom of God. 1. Cor: 6. Poor
man, do thou know what the Kingdom of God means, from whence thou art for
ever to be shut out? or do thou know what that for ever is, which is the
line and measure of thy torments? Sit down, and pause a while, and think what
eternity is: thy life is but a minnute, a dream, a shadow, it is gone before
thou think of it: count over the hours of the day, and is the day so long a
thing, it is but the running of a few such, and then there is a period set to
all thy pleasures. How quickly may thou on thy deathbed look over all thy
life past, and account it as a very little thing, as a mere point, and
beginning only of that which is life? but can thou look beyond eternity?
can thon conceive when everlastingnesse will have an end? all thy pleasures
are gone and passed, they are passed over as in a dream, and now thou art in
the midst of eternity before thou art aware. How fearful then will these
thoughts be: what must I be ever thus? Must I be tormented in these flames
without end? Is there no hope, no possibilities of being otherwise then I am?
After I have suffered so many millions of years; is there for ever still
behind? Try a little in thine own thoughts, and see where thou can put
bonds, and limits to that which is for ever. Try where thou can put a stop,
beyond which thou can think of no more: is it better to be everlastingly
happy, or everlastingly miserable after a score for two of years? Think of
these things, I beseech you by all the calls, mercies, judgments of the Lord,
by all the riches of his patience, forbearance, long-suffering exercised
toward you. Oh do not put off the thoughts of these things, Do not any more
choose abominable things which his soul hates. Seek ye the Lord, while he may
be found, call ye upon him while he is near. Let the wicked for sake his way,
and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

2. To those that have forsaken their former profession, the exhortation to
them is, O Return, Return to the good old way of God, return to the
ordinances, return to the use and exercise of holy duetyes, to the use of
prayer, confession of fin, and the like: if you do not, fearful will your
Judgment be. I hope some of them that are gone astray do belong to the Lord,
but truly you must come back by weeping-crosse.

I could tell you sad stories in this kind. I speak not by hearsay: I have
known them that have smarted deeply for sleighting the ordinances, neglecting
prayer, for low and undervaluing thoughts of Christ and his blood. I could tell
you of some, that living under such a temptation but for a week, or two, in
that short time had lost all their former communion with God, and being
delivered from the snare accounted their recovery as a new conversio^. The
experience of one in this kind was so eminent, that I thought I was bound to
make it public, that it might serve to stop, and restrain them which are so
prone to apostasy in the present age, and I shall set it down, as near as I
can, in the same words and expressions, as I had it from the persons own hand.
Being not well established, I was soon drawn away in my heart, secretly to
decline from that good old way which formerly I walked in, I heard one upon
justification, and Christ's coming in the flesh, and upon that place, Christ in
you the hope of glory, in such a manner as I never heard the like before, that
I was struck with amazement with the manner of his plansible speech. And having
heard a good report of the man, and had some experience before that he was an
able man to minister comfort to them that were in distress, I was exceedingly
taken with what came from him. And in his point of Justification, he did labor
to beat off from repentance, and from confession of sin, or begging of pardon
for sin, and held it out, that these were a calling in question the
faithfulness of God; for he showed that all that the Saints had to do, was to
believe, and render praise; and as he said, he spoke his own experience, that
he had found more of God in one days walking in believing, then in many years
in walking in that strict course of praying, and fasting, and keeping days of
humiliation, and blamed those Ministers that did hold forth such doctrines.
These things he backed on with such Arguments, that it did take much upon the
affections of them that heard him. For I never heard him pray, but he would
sometimes give thanks and that so sweetly, that it, did even ravish the souls
of them that heard him and did much press on to that duty.

Thus hearing him at several times, by degrees I fell from the good old ways
I was trained up in by my parents, and especially that which God had taught me
by faithful Ministers, and soon was I poisoned with that Doctrine, which my
corrupt nature did soon close with; to the great dishonor of the precious
Gospel, to the grieving of the good spirit of God, and the wounding of mine
own conscience, which was not soon healed. I began to try conclusions with
God, and and walked as a loose libertine, and cast of the duty of prayer to God
in private, and so quickly I lost my communion with God, and he withdraw
himself from me, and left me for a time: and no sooner had God left me, but
Satan came in with his delusions, and formed himself into an Angel of light,
and carried me up into a fools Paradise, and lulled me asleep in security, and
carried me on in that condition for the space of an year and half before the
Lord awakenened me. And no sooner had I left seeking of God in private, but the
Lord left me to public shame; for my heart, and strength was let out in an
eager persuit of the world, and love of the creatures, and a fearful
sleighting of the Sabbath, which began to be a burden to me, and I had an
odious sleighting esteem of the Ministers of God, and questioned their
judgments in holding forth the word to the people, and I was exceedingly
perplexed with vain thoughts, and by degrees led into such thoughts as I aw
ashamed to name, and by this the Lord awakened me, for I was exceedingly
startled at it, and began to consider with my self, that I was out of Gods way,
and therefore out of Gods protection. Then I began to remember from whence I
was fallen, but it was long ere I could do my first works, but I was resolved
to turn to my first husband, for then it was better with me then now. But I
found it a hard pluck before I found my God a reconciled father, pardoning my
sin of Apostasy, though I sought it with bitter tears for the space of half
an year. And I thought to have kept it to my self, and none should have
known my trouble, but the anguish of my spirit was so exceeding great, that I
could not hide it from God or man, for I was afraid the Lord would have made me
a public example to all that knew me, and that I should have been quite
distracted, and ran about the streets like one of those that children run
after. But when I saw there was no remedy, I made my case known, and got all
the helps I could to seek God for me. When I made my approach to God I was
beaten back by mine adversary, and by mine own accusing conscience, which was
more to me then a thousand witnesses. And often those words were sounding in
mine ears. Him that draws back my soul abhors, and he that puts his
hand to the plough and looks back, is not fit for the kingdom of heaven, and
woe to you Scribes, and Pharisees hypocrites, and that in the 6. of the Hebrews,
them that have tasted of the good word of God, and the powers of the world to
come, if they fall away, it is impossible to renew them by repentance, with
many more places: and when I would have prayed in private, it was told me that
God would not hear me, then I replied that I hoped God would hear him that
sat at his right hand, but it was replied to me again the Lord had said to
him, (as he had to Jeremiah) pray not for this people, I was so lamentably
tortured, I could not sleep, nor eat, nor take any contentment in any relation
I had, and had not the Lord witheld me from that which the devil tempted me
unto, I had surely ended my life. So low was this poor soul brought, and so
deep was the distress in which the Lord left it before it was recovered and
indeed I cannot declare all, least this relation should seem too tedious. But
it pleased the Lordat last mercifuly to recover this poor distressed soul,
though it were long first, (that I may use some of its own expressions) before
the Lord did seal unto it its pardon, many a bitter day, and night it did
undergo: and to this very day it makes sad, and heavy complaints, and
undergoes many a sharp conflict, but the Lord is pleased to sanctify these and
former dispensations in fuch a way as that there are few Christians in which
there is so much humility, mortifyednesse, such sweet breathings after God,
such high prizings of his presence, and humble attendance on the ordinances,
and frequent use of holy duetyes to be found.

So famous an instance as this is might serve to poyse, and balance the loose
and ficle spirits of such who begin to hang off from, and to be indifferent
unto the good ways of God. Beware of Apostasy. Apostasy is a fearful sin, it
is the high way to the sin against the Holy Ghost, that sin which shall never
be pardoned in this world or in the world to come. Take heed how you meddle with
edgetooles, as the proverb is. Whoever falls on this stone it will grind him
to powder. Who ever shall clash with the great Fundamental Doctrines, the
Doctrines about sin, whether there be any such thing yea or no, touching the
resurrection, Heaven, hell, the last Judgment, he that shall play, and dally
with these things, and take liberty to speak for them or against them, such
wantonness as this is will prove his ruin in the end. Did you not once
believe these things? were they not once Articles of your faith? how is it that
you come to cast them off? Oh it is the most dangerous thing in the world for a
man to be meddling, and tampering with, and at last come to a flat downright
denying of the great fundamental truths of religion, the things which
sometimes he believed and professed the belief off! this man is in a fair way
to the unpardonable sin: I do not say this is that sin, but he that is come to
this had need look to himself, he is in the way thereunto without abundance of
mercy to recover him. Much have those to answer for, and fearful is their
Judgment like to be, who peremptorily, and obstinately maintain such desperate
opinions, that all men shall be saved alike, that sin is nothing, but only that
men make it something by their own Melancholy fancies, and timorous
apprehentions. (...) (repete ex superioribis (...), Hierocl.
This is the very Bane, and cutthroat of all religion, this is that which cuts
the very sinews of Godliness, this is that which undermines the worship of
God in the world, and plucks it up by the very roots. Take away the name, and
notion of sin, make it nothing, who then will regard to worship, fear, obey
the great God? who will care for any of his commands? Do you not think the Lord
is Jealous for these things? Brethren, my heart will hardly serve me to speak
of these things, its even ready to dye, and sink within me. Good Lord! what
will thou do for thy great Name? how poor? how slight? how contemptible a
thing do men make of thee in the world? men begin to forget that they are thy
creatures, and that thou have made them! I could even here break forth into
tears, and say Oh that my head were waters and mine eyes a fountain of tears
that I might weep day, and night for the dishonor, scorn, and contempt that
iscast upon the blessed God by these things.

It is time for the Angels of the Churches, the Ministers, A brief addition
touching Atheism.
and Messengers of Jesus Christ to carry that piece of the everlasting Gospel,
and to preach unto them that dwell on earth, and to every nation, and kindred,
and tongue, and people, Revel. 14.6.7.
saying with a loud voice: Fear God, and give glory to him, worship him that
made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of water. It was said
in Athanasius his time, that the world was become an Arrian, and now it may be
said that the world begins to turn Atheist. Some there are that
dareprofesse it. One upon that passage: The fool has said in his heart, there
is no God, was not afraid to utter such words, That fool spoke the truth. Oh
monster! eternity will be a thing long enough to torment thee, and make thee
feel whether there be a God yea, or no. But it is not all thy blasphemy can
rid thee of thy folly. Can thou produce the records of the world for six, or
seven thousand years ago? can thou confute the book of Genesis, and bring
to light somewhat more ancient, and authentic then it? Can thou tell who
was Adams Father? and what the generations of men were before him? rise up as
high in thy thoughts as thou can, will thou not at last come to some first
man? was this man made yea, or no? who was it that made him? was it himself.
then he was before himself, but was he made by some other? who was that? or
was he from everlasting? why then does he not continue to everlasting? will any
thing destroy it self? Durst thou trust thine own sense? are there any such
things as spirits? if not; why are there so many wretched creatures suffer for
their familiar converse with them? if thou do believe that there are such
things as evil spirits, who is it that keeps the^ in order, and setts bounds
to their malice? But such mo^sters who deny the Principles of their being
should be rather hissed out of the world with abhorrence, the^ disputed against.

As there are many that dare profess Atheism, so there are many that durst
live it. How peremtory and resolved are men in ways of sin? how light a thing
do they make of the word commands and threats of God, and of every thing thing
that might keep them in awe, and retain them in their obedience to their
acknowledgement, and observance of the great God? Men begin to think they are
above the word, above hell above damnation, and in effect above God. What a
poor, and contemptible thing is religion grown in the world? Certainly, if
religion be the keeping of an awe of God upon a man's spirit, the religation,
and binding of the soul over to him, the constant observance of him, and
strict conformity to his will, there is little of this religion to be found in
the world.

In all these respects it becomes the servants of the Lord to bestirre
themselves, to contend zealously for God, for the cause of religion, and not
patiently to suffer the name of God, his worship, religion it self to dye, and
be forgotten in the thoughts, and lives of men

3. To you that fear the Lord, and walk on in his ways, the exhortation to
you is, be more holy, be more humble, be more heavenly minded, be more
fruitful in good works: Zeph. 2, 3. Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the
earth which have wrought his Judgment, seek righteousness, seek meekness. Ye
that are meek already, seek more meekness, ye that have wrought
righteousness, be more righteous, and abound in all the fruits of
righteousness.

The Lords eye is more especially set upon you, he observes in a more peculiar
manner what your carriage will be, the Lord expects you should not only
mourn for your own sins, but for the sins of the place in which you live.
Brethren, me thinks there is not that growth amongst you which I could wish, I
could be glad to see more life, more sweet breathings after God amongst you. Me
thinks you do not love God, and the Lord Jesus Christ enough, you discourse of
him but seldom, and speak of him but coldly. Ignatius had his heart so
inflamed with the love of Christ, that when he spoke of him, he would say, My
love was crucified. Some are so full of love to him, as that they are ravished
when they think of him, they break out, and say, oh that excellent! that
incomperable one how precious is the Lord Jesus! how precious is he! Men, and
Angels are too little to love him, and admire him. For the Lords sake stir up
your selves, entertain Christ better, and entertain the Gospel better. When
the Gentiles heard, that the Gospel was sent to them, and thatit appertained
to them as well as to the Jews, it is said, they were glad, and glorified the
word of the Lord. Acts. 13.48. Oh this was welcome news, joyful tidings to
them indeed! their hearts were even ravished, and transported with such blessed
tidings as these, that Christ should become salvation to them, as well to the
Jews, for that was it which was made known to them in v. 47. They glorified
the word, they magnifyed, and advanced the word. Oh this was the best word that
ever they heard! an excellent, and a sweet word! I beseech you, my brethren,
stir up your selves, and provoke one another to love, and to good works. It
is a great fault in the professors of this place, that they maintain such a
distance, and strangeness one toward another. The ancient Saints spoke often
one to another. Malachy: 3.16. The Primitive Saints in the Apostles times met
often, they prayed together, and conferred together. So it should be with you,
you should be often visiting one another, and asking each other, Oh my Friend!
what are your temptations? what are your comforts? what have the dealings of
God been with your spirit since we met last? is grace kept alive? or is it
more dead? This is the way to be a thriving people. I would feign that you of
this place should be patterns to all that are round about you for humility,
for heavenlymindednesse, for soundness in the faith, for experience, for
holiness.

4. To all in general, the Exhortation is, Labor to set up religion in this
place, set it up in your hearts, set it up in your families, set it up, as much
as may be, in the whole town. Away now with all your sinful sports, and
merriments, away with all your cards, and dice, singing, dancing, and such like
vanities. Instead of these things set up Catechizing, praying in the family
morning, and evening, and let one neighbor come to another, and say, come let
us go to heaven together, and seek the Lord together. Jerem. 50, 4.5. In those
days, and in that time says the Lord, the children of Israel shall come,
they, and the children of Judah together, going and weeping: they shall ge, and
seek the Lord their God. They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces
thitherward saying, come, and let us join our selves to the Lord in a
perpetual covenant that shall not be forgotten. Oh what a blessed change would
this be, if young, and old, rich, and poor, husbands, and wives, parents, and
children, masters, and servants would all join together; if they would come
weeping together, and seek the Lord, if all the people in this place would set
their faces toward Heaven, and toward Religion, and say, Come let us join our
selves in a perpetual Covenant, we will strike in with the Lord this day, and
we will never alter our choice more, it shall be a Covenant that shall never be
forgotten. If you would all resolve this day, Come, we will go to Zion with
our faces thitherward. We will go where the word is preached, and where the
ordinances are set up, and where the worship of God is celebrated, oh we will
neglect the word no more, and we will neglect the ordinances no longer. This is
one of the last requests I have to leave with you, oh do not neglect the
opertunityes of hearing the word, and coming to the Ordinances as you have
done For the Lords sake, you that are masters of families come your selves, and
bring your children, and servants along with you; you that have friends, bring
your friends with you. Go weeping (as they did) and say, oh we have neglected
the word, and neglected Christ, and neglected salvation, but we will neglect
them no more. Let that prophecy be fulfilled of you which was spoken, Isai.
2.3. And many people shall go, and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the
mountain of the Load, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us
of his ways, and we will walk in his paths, for out of Zion shall go forth
the Law, and the word of the Lord out of Jerusalem. Redeem an hour in the
week day to hear the word, your callings will not prosper ever the worse.

4, The last thing I have to propound to you by way of direction, is the Duty
of Remembrance. Forget not the Wondrous works which the Lord has wrought.
When mercyes, or Judgments are new, and fresh, we are apt to speak of them,
and to be affected with them, but a little time wears them out of our minds,
and blots them quite out of our Remembrance. Oh take heed of this. Bind this
sad Providence for a sign upon your hands, and let it be as Frontlets between
your eyes. Set it down in your Almanacks, and keep a Register of the Day: oh
this was the black, and dismal day of Gods visitation on poor Witny. It were
good if you kept some solemn day every year as a remembrance of this sad, and
heavy stroke. For as great mercyes require great, and and solemn praises, so
do great judgments require great, aed solemn humiliation. They speak of
Josiah in their lamentations to this day, and made them an Ordinance in Israel:
and behold they are written in the Lamentations. 2. Chron. 35.25. It seems
they had a constant remembrance of that judgment (the loss of good Josiah)
they speak of him to this day. It was a constant practice amongst them to
remember that sad stroke: and they had a solemn Book of Lamentations appointed
to mourn for this judgment. Luke. 17.32. Remember Lots wife. We have not many
such Remembers in all the Book of God upon so special an occasion, (they may
easily be all reckoned up) and therefore here is some special thing hinted to
us. Here was a special monument of Gods judgment on a woman that was hankering
after her old pleasures, she had been used to the delights, and contentments of
Sodom, and she was loath to part with these: she looked back to the Sodom of her
former pleasures, and contentments, and whilst she is looking back she became a
Pillar of salt. Oh remember this, (says our Savior) Remember Lots Wife. There
is an accent put on this. You of this place have been hankering after sports,
and merriments, you have been mightily set on these things, and the Lord has
shown his displeasure by an Eminent hand, and a streched out arm. Oh remember
this, remember the Tragical story at the White Heart.

You have heard now at large what your duty is; in general it is to fall upon
the work of Repentance. You have likewise been directed particularly how to
carry your selves in that work; and what the particular Duetyes are which are
to be done by you, and what the Lord expects from each of you in your several
ranks, and places. That which remains is only, in the close of all, to add a
motive, or two (to that which has been already said) to press that which is
your duty on you.

1. If you do not repent, some worse thing will come upon you. It may be the
Lord may send a Fire next to consume all your houses, it may be he may send the
pestilence among you to devour you, or if not that, a famine: the Lord has
ways enough to punish unrepentant sinners. Read over that 26. of Leviticus,
and there you will see what the Lord threatens in such a case, v. 23.24. If ye
will not be reformed by these things, but will walk contrary unto me: then will
I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven times for your
sins. v. 27 And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk
contrary unto me: then I will walk contrary unto you also in fury; and I, even
I, will chastise you seven times for your sins. If you think to wax stout
and stubborn against the Lord, he will be as stout against you, if you walk
contrary to him he will do so to you, and if one judgment will not do it, he
will follow you with a second, and a third, and if you still harden your hearts
against him, he will come against you in Fury, he will summon up all his wrath,
and vengeance, and if he be able to break, and ruin you, to be sure he will do
it. Oh it is a dreadful word. v. 17. I will set my face against you, and that
in the 28. verse. I, even I will chastise you. As much as if he should say, I
the great God, I that made heaven, and earth, and can turn the foundation of
it upsidedown when I please, I will set my self against you, I will engage all
my wisedo^e, and all my power, I will put forth all my glory, and excellency to
destroy you.

If temporal judgments will not prevail, God has eternal punishents in a
readiness for obstinate, and incorrigible sinners. Tophet is prepared, etc.
Hell is in readiness, eternal flames, everlasting burnings are prepared; and
those that would not be tamed, and brought into order by the judgments of God
in this world, will be still and calm enough when they are thrown there. Then
thy pride and stoutnesse of heart against the Lord, thy stubbornness, and
incorrigiblenesse will do thee little good. This has God prepared, Ps. 7.11,
12, 13. God is angry with the wicked every day: if he turn not, he will whet
his sword, he has bent his bow, and made it ready; he has also prepared for
him the instruments of death. Are not the judgments of God in this world
terrible enough? do they not strike deep enough? do men bear up themselves
against the Almighty, and wax proud against him notwithstanding these? Oh! he
has yet a deadly instrument left behind, he can strike them into hell, and
then they are struck to purpose. Art thou not afraid of the first death, (the
worst as thou supposest of temporal evils) because that is but a short
passage? But there is the second death, when thou shall be ever dying, and yet
never dye: thou shall be always in the pangs, and agonyes of death, and yet
never past death it self. The judgments of God in this world they are but as
the Alphabet, as the A.B.C. to that great, O quantum erit istud Consistorium,
quod Majestate divina apparente, and to millibus Angelorum celebrabitur, and
quanto majoris Majestatis, tanto majoris terroris, and horror is erit impi is.
Luth.
and last judgment. It was Luthers expression. Oh how great (says he again)
shall that consistory be, When the Divine majesty shall appear, and so many
thousand Angels and by how much the greater the Majesty of that court shall be,
so much greater will the dread, and horror be that will fall upon wicked men.

2. If you be a reformed people, the Lord will delight in this place, as much
as ever he has loathed it. The Lord does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the
children of men. No, Judgment is his strange work; had you not put him to it,
he had never done that which he has,

Return now unto the Lord make a covenant with him this day to serve him with
a perfect heart, and a willing mind. Choose the Lord for your God, and give up
your selves in Christ Jesus to him, to walk with him unto all well pleasing,
then will he rejoice over you to do you good he will set himself to bless you
with his whole heart, and with his whole soul, Blessed shall you be in the
town, blessed in the field, blessed in your basket, and blessed in your store.
Blessed when you rise up, and blessed when you lie down. All the people that
pass by you shall say. Behold Witny, the Place which the Lord has blessed.
The Lord shall take away your reproach, and it shall no more be said, this is
Witny, whom the the Lord has plagued, but this is Witny whom the Lord has
loved, whom the Lord delights in. Yea, the Lord himself shall Bless you out
of Lion. You shall have all the Gospel mercyes, knowledge shall increase, and
the fear of the Lord abound amongst you: others shall be provoked by your
zeal, they shall come, and see the religion that is in Witny, and say: Behold
the place that was eminent for sin, and judgment, is now become eminent for
Holiness, and mercy. And now I may say as Moses did, after he had thundered
out all the curses, and sweetly laid forth all the blessings of the Lord upon
their obedience or disobedience to the Law, I have set life, and death before
you this day. Oh choose the way of life, and you are blessed, blessed shall you
here, and blessed for evermore.

FINIS.

