THE ROUTING OF DE-RUYTER, OR THE BARBADOS BRAVERY. By the Author of the
Broadside.
LOng looked for, thou have haled many a Rope,
Fraught with thy Countries Poor distressed hope.
Thy Fleet is taking Castles in the Air,
Whilst they at home are drowned, drowned in despair.
Your Admirals that looked like floating Towers,
More Water drew by thrice Ten Foot than Ours;
Our Mackrel Boats took their forsaken Rags,
What matter? Colors where the courage Flags.
Opdam, and Stillinswerfe, and all the rest,
Whose mouth-confounding Names cannot be expressed
(Or if they could, good faith I have forget 'em)
Are Crawling with the Crabs now in the bottom.
Trump had been crawling too, but that,
Though twice he sunk, He played the Water-Rat;
O how they swam about! you might discern
Many a Poop, but never a Countenance Stern.
There up and down they tossed Boar and mine Here,
Wishing the narrow Seas much narrower.
Some escaped, yet had great reason to complain,
Who, beaten home, were beaten back again:
Fore-stroke, and back-stroke, this is for a need,
For they were beaten fore and off indeed.
The Trident-bearer Banquets now in State,
Their Admirals have furnished Him with Plate.
And lest he want to try his Kitching stuff,
Their Ships have Him supplied with Fire enuffe.
De-Ruyter, thus I have before thee set,
Not a Diurnal, nor a Dutch Gazet;
But Truth it self, which Truth while I impart,
May Boreas break thy Cables, this thy Heart;
Thou fledst a loof, as something did inform
Thy quicker Genius of a following Storm.
Just so, the Swallow and Prophetic Mouse,
This shuns the Winter, that the falling House.
Go Noah's Raven, rove about, and sharck
For rest, there is no returning to the Ark.
Thy flatter Hopes thou may on Capers ground,
For, alas, there is no Olive to be found.
What do thou else, but like thy Trojans Sire,
Embrace the Water to escape the Fire?
Or rather, I may say Vlysses-like,
Thou now do Sail in Unknown Harbors strike.
To which Opinion I must needs incline,
For thy Companions are already Swine,
Before Our Isle thou came with great Bravadoes;
But we had Boars enough in the Barbados.
And Men, that made it to thy Teeth appear,
There was no Planting for a Dutchman there.
And therefore some of Your wild Blood we spilled,
A Boar is never good till he be killed.
In a Plantation, do but let him forth,
He Will do more mischief than his Neck is worth.
But to prevent Your Snouts of such a chance,
We Rung them with a Peal of Ordinance.
Whence, by the way, though we Plant Sugar, You
May see that we can Plant Our Canons too.
Your Licorish Tooth, it seems for Sugar came,
It Is well, but we have can'd You for the same.
May be for Indico You came, and truly
It Is like enuffe, 'cause ye came off so blewly.
Of this attempt Your Boarships need not crack ho;
Barbados gave y' a base Pipe of Tobacco.
But stalk as many as you please, with which
You may set down and cure ye of the Itch.
Pray then that your Attempt may be forgoten,
For you and the Barbados cannot cotton.
Thou now have Alexanders Portion, hope
And if that fails, thy Ship affords a Rope.
But stay, hold fast mine Here were it not a Ninny,
To hazard seven brave Provinces for Guynny.
Thus Aesops Dog, and say was he not mad ho,
Lost a substantial shoulder for a shadow.
Thus Dutch Don Quixot, rambles up and down,
To take more Countries in, and lose his own.
London Printed by R. Davenport. 1665.


