The ROYAL GENERAL Or the Camp at PUTNEY HEATH
To the Tune of State and Ambition etc.
NOw the great Monarch of England's bright Splendour,
does shine over Europe like Jove in his Throne
Makes France to the Empire, and Spanierd surrender,
The peace and the plenty of what is their own;
The Turk and the Teiklites thereby are over powerd
And crushed by the conduct of Christians strong Arms,
Such successful blessing the heavens have showred,
The Turks and the Tartars are lost in the Storms.
II.
Great Charles and his Highness they bravly have Conquered
Our pretended Protestant Turks of the Race,
Of Haslrig, Bradshaw and Tapskie who Scamper'd,
And left his desciples to hang in disgrace:
With pollitick prudence and mercy they have turned
The Sceam of the Kingdom as it was before,
The saucy proud Presbyter formerly scorned,
Are fore't to their Sovereign to whine and adore.
III.
Come brave daring Tories that is warlike affected,
O'th offspring of Mars and delights in a Drum;
At which the Phanaticks are vex't and affrighted;
Where none but Heroic brave souls are to come:
At Putney you will see his brave Highness restored
Chief General by Land as well as by Sea,
His Merits deserving the god's have implored,
That none but the right in succession should sway.
IV.
Great Chalres more than Caesar an Army has raised
To protect his Friends, and keep Rebels in awe,
Not to be disbantled at Parliament pleasure;
We Will make those damd'd hot-spurs Alegeance to know;
The Hoboys and trumpets sounds tan, ta, ra, ra, ra
The Colors do flourish Drums beat dub, a dub
Each loyal Commander his Soldiers does cherist
They Will make Jack Presbyter fly from his tub.
V.
No Theater, Opera nor garden of pleasure,
Can equal the harmony of English Camp;
Three Kingdom's Protection and Monarchs chief Treasure,
A terror to our English Turks of the same stamp
Our New-Castl^ Rebels and Scotch apprehended,
Must lay by their hopes of rasing the Croude;
Rumbold now taken shall be recommended,
With Argile on Gibbet as high as a Cloud.
VI.
The Guards and Malitia in real Emulation,
Each Soldier deserving Commissioners place;
Their souls are aspired above Elevation,
And every Commander Achilles's grace:
The King and the Duke and Prince are Triumphant,
With loud Acclamations, and Trophies of joys,
To see proud opposers subdued that were Rampant.
With huzza's let us drink their health Tory-Boys.
VII.
All that in warlike Discipline delights,
Pray for the success of the Christians Arms,
And for all that contribut's to pay those that fights
In the Holy Wars and their Duty performs;
And those that discovered the last Plot in Scotlland,
Wherein Sterling-Castle was to be surprised;
And for the perservation of peace in old England;
And let those be hanged that trims in disguise.
FINIS.
London Printed for J. Dean, Bookseller in Cranborn-Street near Newport-House
in Leicesterfields, 1684.


