ARCHAEOLOGIAE ATTICAE LIBRI SEPTEM.

SEVEN BOOKS OF THE ATTICK Antiquities.

CONTAINING, The description of the Cities glory, Government, division of the
People, and Towns within the Athenian Territories, their Religion,
Superstition, Sacrifices, account of the Year, a full relation of their
Judicatories. By FRANCIS ROUS Scholar of Merton College in Oxon.

With an addition of their customs in Marriages, Burialls, Feastings,
Divinations etc. in the four last books. By ZACHARY BOGAN Scholar of C.C.C.
in Oxon.

The fourth Edition corrected and enlarged with a twofold Index Rerum and
Vocabulorum.

Aristid: (...). OXFORD, Printed by LEO. LICHFIELD, and HEN. HALL, for John
Adams, and Ed. Forest.1654.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir NATHANIEL BRENT Knight Vicar General, and the
most vigilant Warden of Merton College in OXFORD, Health, etc.
IT is the custom of most, to impose a patronage of their errors upon some
eminent person. But it shall be my ambition in this my Dedication, to manifest
my observancie. Others make their choice of potent men, thereby to shun the
darts of envy. It shall be my glory to be thought worthy of invidency; whose
ignorance is not so great but well knows that ever some will bite in secret;
and scourge these errors of my youth with private reproaches. But such malignant
tongues I will counterpoise with the wind* and set as lightly by as they are
vain. And although I am confidently persuaded that the covert of your wings,
be sufficiently able to shelter my faults, yet had I rather to express my duty
toward you in these naked infirmities, whose goodness truly knows Ausis
literarum ignoscere Vegetius in Prolog.
how to parden the bold adventures of learning. I present you therefore with
Athens, whose deplorable raggedness my papers well resemble: which may
challenge this excuse, that they assimulate themselves to the Treatise in them
contained. Which of all men, I my self am conscious most unfitly to have
handled. That City once the Cic. Epist.
nurse of reason; Patercul in fine Lib. 1.
which flourisht in eloquence, and brave achievements more then all Greece,
could not, unless in her miserable ruins, have without her disgrace been
spoken of by me* That Athens Whence the learned Fathers of the Church sucked
rare literature, Basil his eloquence, Nazianzen his strength, and others their
flowing Oratory. That Athens which who had no^ seen is by Apud Dicaearchum
(...).
Lypsius accounted a block. Accept, Honored Sir, these Relics of that famous
University, though by me offered, as Devotion paid to Antiquity, by you well
esteemed of, though among most of these our days accounted dirt; whose labor
it is to seek new fashions, and like naught but what may be accounted novelty.
Resembling the brute, of which Cicero. Ad id solum quod adest, quodque praesens
est se accommodat, paulum admodum sentiens praeteritum, etc. never caring for
what is past. But you weigh well the excellency of talking with those Champions
of Learning, hundreds of years since gathered to their former dust: By whose
pensills we see drawn the lively Images of deceased Monarchs, the forms of
government, and very lives of states. Out of which patterns, if you please to
deem the least part of this to have been taken, it shall heap to my joy that
the follovving Tract will not seem a spurious and degenerate of spring. Upon
presumption of which I fear not, as the Eagles do their young, to expose my
brood to the rays of the open Sun. Thus with continual wishes for addition
to your happiness, I take leave,

From my Study in Merton College June 9. 1637. Your VVorship's in all humility
to be commanded F. ROVS.

To the Reader.
IT is not a thirst of empty glory that makes me run hazard of your censure,
but a consideration of the weakness of Schoolmasters, who undertake to read
the Greek Orators to raw Scholars, themselves being not ripe in the Attick
custumes. I have therefore so far endeavored as you see. If any thing may
afford a scruple to any, he shall engage me that will require satisfaction. If
any thing seem amiss, it shall be taken by me as a favor to hear of it from
any. For I am not of those whose ears are stopped, when their errors are told
them. If this please it shall add spurs to the finishing of this course
intended; and as occasion may give leave, you shall have the rest that may be
spoken.

Yours F. R.

Index Vocabulorum.
Lib. 1.
Cap. 1. Iavan, Ias, Iaones, Ionia, (...). Athenae in acta, Cecropiae, Cranaae,
Atthis, Attica, Athenae sub Cecrope. Certamen Palladis and Neptuni, Plutarchi
ea de re sententia, Alii sub Erectheo volunt nominari, Justinius sub
Amphictyone, Salenos, Selines, Satinae, Sethina. 2 Athenarum situs, (...),
Herbae lucentes, Murus, Pelasgicus and Cimonicus, Propylaea circuitus veteris
urbis, and novae, (...) and (...). Piraeei brachia. Murus phalericus, Porta,
Aer, Laus passim apud Scriptores, Cephissus fluvius. page 6. 3 (...). Mores and
ingenia. (...). Quantum hodi^rni differunt a veteribus; and qual^m vita
rationem modumque habent. page 14 4 De populi divisione, (...). Quid
Atheniensibus cum Aegyptiis commune. p. 18 5 Tribus quatuor sub Cecrope, Mutata
earum nomina, Augentur a Clisthene, duae addite. (...). Tribulium (...). page
20 6 Graecia vicatim habitata. (...) quid? Atheniensibus proprium habere (...).
Quot. Templa and sacra pagatim. page 23. 7 (...). Atheniensium status mutatio.
(...). page 28
Lib. 2.
Cap. 1. Duodecem Dii Atheniensium. Idolatria septifariam commissa. Dii
ass^riptitii. (...). page 36. Cap 2 Jupiter (...). Modii salis edendi, Tesera
hospitalis, seu symbolum. Apollo (...). Paean and ejus verbi origo. Mercurius
(...) page 39. 3 De Saturno, Neptuno, Vulcano, Mart, Hercule (...). page* 42. 4
De Minerva, Cerere, and Proserpina, Baccho, Venere, Eumenidibus. Hecate,
Iuvene, Prometheo etc p. 43. 5. (...). Phaccasiani Dii page 45. 6 De
superstitione Atheniensium and vaticiniis page 47. 7 De Templis and Asylis p.
52. Cap. 8. De Sacerdotiis page 55. 9 De Sacrificiis page 57. 10 De Anno Attico
page 60. 11 De Tragaedia, Satyra and Comaedia page 80.
LIB 3.
Cap. 1. De Legum-latoribus Attici^. (...). De Sanciendis Legibus page 94. 2 De
Comitiis. (...) etc. page 101. CAP. III. SECT. I. De Tribunalibus Atticis and
primum de senatu (...). page 104. CAP. III. SECT. II. De Areopago and ejus
appellatione. Areopagitae page 122. CAP. III. SECT. III. De judicio (...) page
129. CAp. III. SECT. 4. De judiciis (...) p. 133. CAP. III. SECT. V. Ee
Tribunalibus reliquis. (...). page 133. Cap 4 De nominibus Iudicialibus. page
136.
LIB. 4
De ritibus Nuptialibus and amatoriis. Cap. 1 De venere and Cupidine 2 De
Paederastia page 152. 3 De Amore mulierum. p. 154. 4 De Amoris Indiciis page
156. 5 De Philtris and incantamentis. page 158. Cap. 6 De usitato more
significandi Amorem. page 163 7 De Nuptiis pap. 166 8 Quo tempore optime
ducatur uxor page 185 9 Quae requirantur in Marito page 187 10 Quae requirantur
in Vxore page 189 11 De divortiis page 192 12 De Mulierum Scleragogia and
servilibus Ministeriis page 194. 13 De mulierum honestioribus opificiis page
196. 14 De Vxorum, and Filiarum Oecuria page 118. 15 De Adulterio page 201
LIB. V.
Cap. 1. De puerperarum religione etc. page 204 2 De Puerperio and foetu
Masculo page 208 3 De infantibus lavandis and ungendis page 209 4 De cunabulis
etc. page 211 5 De infantis gestatione circaf^cum and de nominis impositione p.
214 7 De nutricibus page 216. 8 De expositione infantu^ p. 217. 9 De liberoru^
diversitate p. 221 10 Liberorum educatione p. 223 11 De puerorum castigatione
etc. page 224. 12 De ascriptione in (...) page 226 13. De ascriptione in
Epheborum censum and in album Lexiarchicum. page 229 14 Alimenta parentibus
Alumnis praebenda page 231 15 De Adoptione, Testament^ and Hereditate page 232
16 De necessitate sepulturae page 234 17 De ter vocanda anima, and cenotaphiis
page 236 18. De mortui mutilatione and iis quae in Homicidiis fleri solebant
page 238 19 De claudendis oculis, pulsandis aeneis vasis, and amiciendo Corpore
page 241 20 De offa Cerberi, and Naulo Charontis page 242 21 De ablutione
Mortuorum, Pollinctura and amiculo ferali p. 244 22 De ablutione a mortuis, de
coronis quibus corpora ornabantur, de Lecto and Collocatione; page 246 23 De
ritu afferendi and Portandi Corporis 24 De Ministerio funerarum and siticinum
page 250 25 De capillis in Luctu tondendis page 251 26. De ritu lugendi in
funere page 254 27 De via per quam efferebatur corpus and de loco Sepulturae
page 257 28 De Corporis Crematione page 259 29 De ritu cremandi sive comburendi
Corporis. De loculis and reliquiis page 262 30 De Tumulis page 264 31 De
Inferiis page 265 32 De coronandis Tumulis and de Phyllobolia page 268 33 De
Columnis, de oratione, and ludis Funebribus and de Aquilis page 269 34 De
Lustratione domus Funestae, and de parentalibus page 271
LIB. VI.
SECT. I. De supplicationibus and Iuramentis Cap. 1 De supplicibus Sacris, and
de asylis and aris page 274 2 De tangendis genis, manibus, genibus page 277 3 De
generibus and locis sacrificiorum page 280 4 De generibus and formulis jurandi
page 282 5 De ritibus in Iuramento Magno p. 284 6 De juramento parve and ejus
ritibus page 286 7 De perjurii religione Sect. 2 de ritu convivandi. Cap. 1 De
Leschis and de tempore victus capiendi page 291 2 De ritibus and variis modis
convivandi page 275 3 De more salutandi, Symposiarcho Coronis, Vnguentis, modo
accumbendi, and de mensis page 295 4 De cibo and potu page 299 5 De iis quae a
discumbembus fieri solebant page 303 De cantu convivali and Scoliis page 64
Cap. 7 De peregrinis excipiendis. page 308 8 De Hospitibus excipiendis page 210
9 De pauperibus subl^vandis page 315 Sect 3. De ritibus Bellicis. Cap. De
militibus page 315 2 De armis quibus vim propulsabant page 319 3 De armis
quibus vim inferebant page 323 4 De ritu excipiendi legatos, indicendi bellum*
Consulendi Deos, observandi dies, and trajiciendi Fluvios page 324 5 De ^itu
committendi praelium and de usu Tubarum page 326 6 De Scytale, de Militum
poenis, Praemiis and Sepultura page 328 7 De Trophaeis page 331
Lib. 7.
Sect. 1. De ritu divinandi per motum furentem and Somniantem page 334 Cap. 1
De Oraculo Pythio p. 336 2 De Templo Delphico, de Theoris and Oraculi
cessatione page 241 3 De Divinatione per somnium, super Melotas, in Templis cum
observatione diaetae page 347 4 De duabus portissomniorum p. 350 5 De Somni^rum
variis generibus and de earum lustratione. Sect. 2 De Divinatione Artificiosa
and primo de Ornithomantia page 356 Cap. 1 De Extispicina and quibusdam aliis
page 360 2 De ritu divinandi ex vocibus and rebus ^minatis page 365 3 De
Sortibus etc. page 371
ARCHAEOLOGIAE ATTICAE LIB. I.
CAP. I. Iavan, Ias, Iaones, Ionia, (...). Athenae in acta, Cecropiae, Cranaae,
Atthis, Attica, Athenae sub Cecrope. Certamen Palladis and Neptuni, Plutarchi
ea de re sententia, alii sub Erectheo volunt nominari, Justinius sub
Amphictyone. Salenos. Selines. Satinae. Sethina.
BY the sons of Noah Genesis 10.5.
were the Isles of the Gentiles divided in their lands, every one after his
tongue; when by their audacious folly they would have mounted up to heaven,
thinking to leave a name to posterity, by building Castles in the air. From
which attempt proceeded that which before they were jealous of, namely, a
scattering abroad upon the face of the earth; he having so spoken it, whose
breath alone affords a fair wind. Hoyst then their sails they must, and,
bidding adieu to the plain in the land of Shenar, seek out some new habitation.
Travelers they were of yore, and yet still must journey: Each one in as
different a course, as of a diverse language: The sons of Shem their way: the
sons of Iaphet, theirs; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Iavan; with whom I
purpose one furlong to keep company, leaving the rest on one side or other, or
behind, looking only to my proposed scope. Joseph. Antiq. l. 1. c. 7. p. 13.
(...). From Iavan came Ionia and all the Greeks. And in Scripture we have
Iavan put for Greece; in Daniel twice, Dan. 10.20.
And when I am gone forth, lo the Prince of Grecia shall come. And again,
Cap. 11.2.
He shall stir up all against the Realm of Grecia. Where although the old
translation renders it not Iavan, yet it is so found in the original. He then
coming into the country called afterward Attica, left unto it his own name,
whence it was termed Ionia and Ias. (...). Strabo l. 9. p. 392.
For Attica was anciently called Ionia and Ias. In which words we still retain
some relics of the radix, notwithstanding the small difference of the
termination. But if we please to view after what title the sons of Iavan were
styled Iaones, we shall come nearer home. Strabo in the above quoted place,
(...). Homer when he says, There the Boeotians and Iaones, speaks of the
Athenians. The Scholiast of Aeschylus on these words, In Persis p. 133.
(...)
(...). It is to be understood, quoth he, that the Athenians are termed
Iaones, from one Iaon (he means Iavan) that was their King. Neither is it
strange that the vau or (...) is left out; for though it be not written, yet
persuaded I am that it was as much pronounced, as other au Dipthongs were. For
the Donat. in Ter. p. 130.
antique Latins and the Greeks spoke it as broad a, as if it had been
thesaros, not thesauros. Sr Walter Raleigh is of opinion, That Asia the less
had people before Greece had any, and that Iavan did not fly from Babylonia
into Greece, but took Asia the less in his passage, and from thence past over
the nearest way, leaving his own name to some maritimate province on that
side, as he did to that part so called. In which, although the authority of so
worthy and judicious a man might move much, yet it shall be sufficient for me,
only to go so far, as antiquity will bear me out. Lib. 1. p. 2.
Thucydides reports, that it is manifest that all Greece was not (...), firmly
inhabited, but that there were continual pilgrimages, or removings of the
inhabitants, forsaking their former places, being driven out by a stronger and
greater number. Wherefore when there was no safe traffic or commerce by sea
or land, each manured his grounds for to have provent, alone to serve for
present necessity, desiring no more then from hand to mouth; it being
uncertain, how soon they might be compelled to get them thence. Whereupon they
did more willingly change their seats; not taking grievous that sharp charge,
veteres migrate coloni, Be gone you ancient Boores. But the more fertile soil
had hard bickrings. Thessaly, Boeotia, and a great part of Peloponnesus, except
Arcadia, was often invaded, and the old Lords expelled. Thucyd.
(...). But Attica, by reason of the thinness or barrenness of the ground,
was always inhabited by the same men (none it seems being willing to leave his
better, for a worse) not affording fuel to contention. Out of which peace
sprung up so great a multitude, that Attica, even now swarming, and (...), not
able to contain and feed so many, is constrained to send forth Colonies into
Ionia, a region of Asia the less, which is reported by the Greeks to borrow
denomination from Ion the son of Xuthus, or, as the Poets say, Apollo and
Creusa, who in the words of Euripides is thought to be In Ione. T. 2. p. 619.
(...), the maker or founder of Asia. The mother Ionia (for so I please to say)
kept not still her former name. For in process of time she owned Actaea; from
Actaeon, as Li. 9. p. 397.
Strabo says, or from Actaeus, according to In At. p. 2.
Pausanias, who was the first king thereof, by Page 23.
Tzetzes on Lycophron called Acteus. But Orat. 6.
Dion Chrysostom brings a more natural reason then this, why it was Actaea.
Acta signifies a shore, both in the Greek and Virg. Aen. 5. p. 214.
Latin speech. Now because all of it, within a little, was washed with the
sea, and Strabo l. 9. p. 391.
(...), it might challenge unto it self Actaea. Dion (...). Hence (...) by the
Aenegmeticall Poet in his Page 22.
Cassandra is put for this country. Tzetzes. Because it is (Acta) a cliffe,
that is cast forth and lying in the sea. And Athens her self by Plautus is
said Athenae in acta, pro Athenis Atticis, as In Spicilegiis.
Palmerius has noted. But this grew old after a season, and Cecrops, having
married the daughter of Actaeus, glories in his Cecropia, and Athens was called
Cecropiae, and Cecropis civitas; and after that Cranaae, from Cranaus the king
that succeeded him. This Cranaus among other of his daughters had one Strabo
and Paus. locis praed.
Atthis, from whom also was derived Atthis and Attica; next Posidonia and
Minervia, from Neptune and Pallas. In this region stood Athens, Queen of
Greece, so called, from that victory which Minerva got over Neptune, when
Cecrops, moved with a prodigy of a sudden shooting up of an Olive, Varro apud
August. l. 18. c. 9. de civit. Dei.
and bubling forth of a salt spring in the Acropolis, consulted the Oracle of
Apollo, who taught them that the one did signify Neptune, the other Minerva,
taking therefore the men into suffrages for Neptune, and the women for Minerva,
who had most voices should carry it. The females being more, the Goddess bore
away the bell. Lo here a witty Devil to bring in (...), Gods of his own
making, to infold the superstitious in an ignorant zeal. However let us leave
the shadow of poetical fictions, and take the true draught out of Mythology.
Plutarch is of opinion; that the ancient kings striving to draw away their
subjects from seafaring negotiations, and a desire to live by sailing, unto
tillage and manuring of ground, gave occasion of the speech that Neptune and
Minerva did altercate about the city. In them. p. 87. l. 23.
(...), etc. Neptune is put for the Sea and businesses thereof. Minerva for
Arts and ingenuous kinds of life: nay says Ovid in his Calendar, Mill Dea est
operum, she is a Goddess of a thousand trades. Others say that the City was
consecrated to her by Amphictyon, and nomen civitati Athenas dedit. Lib. 2.
Iustine. Others in the time of Erectheus, among which is Herodotus, will have
this name given. Which Author (...).
Marcianus Heracleota does follow, (...). This was that Erectheus, who in a
time of drought over all the world, except Egypt, brought corn to Athens, and
taught the Eleusinian mysteries. Beholding this City has been to Egypt for
other kings; to wit, Aristoph. sch. page 79. Tzetz. in Lycoph. p. 23.
Cecrops and Menestheus, for his father Petes was an Egyptian. In the time of
Diodorus Siculus, and before him, it was a received opinion, that Athens was
peopled by the Egyptians, Sais in that tongue answering to Athene in Greek,
as Tzetzes out of Carax. Nay that they should be of the inhabitants of Sais,
they argue from this. Because that the Saitae and Athenians have diverse
customs alike. Witness Diodorus Siculus. But it pleases not me. I conjecture
that first it was called Athens, when the people began more seriously to addict
themselves to civil government, and study of good literature; knowledge and
art being ascribed to Minerva. (...), says Polit. l. 8. c. 9.
Aristotle. Nay her name being derived from thence, (...) thena in the Chaldy
tongue signifying to study or learn: from which come thenaa, and with an
article Hatthenaa, as In Aristar. Sac. Synt. 1. c. 1. p. 27.
Heinsius the most learned. As for the conceit of Goropius Becan, from ana the
number of three, which notes eternity; and so from hat-het-ana. Athena. But
because wisdom does contain eternity, let ut send it back into Germany. Lo
now Athens named from learning, which was once the Isidor.
shop of letters and the Muses, whereof it is now deplorably destitute, having
lost the glory of former Athens, nay the name it self. For if we believe some
they tell us, that now it is Salenos or Selines. To whom I accord not. Because
that I have read Selines for Megara called Nisaea, which is not many miles from
Athens. Furthermore in discourse with a native of Peloponnesus, who lived many
years in that City, I had no other appellation from him then Ateene, which others
write Satina, corrupted, as Portus and Meursius truly think, for (...). Nay In
Hodoep. Byz. l. 3.
Hugo Favolius who was there himself even to the same purpose names it Sethina.

Vndique sic miserae nobis spectantur Athenae,
Dedala quas Pallas sese coluisse negaret,
Quas, Neptune pater, nunquam tua maenia dicas,
Indigenae Sethina vocant. --
We wretched Athens round do view, which now,
Though once ingenious Pallas love, 's her shame,
And to have been thine, Neptune, would disavow,
To which the Homebred give Sethina name.
CAP. II. Athenarum situs. (...). Herbae lucentes, Murus, Pelasgicus and
Cimonius, Propylaea. Circuitus veteris urbis, and novae. (...). Piraeei
brachia. Murus Phalericus. Portae. Aer. Laus passim apud scriptores. Cephissus
Fl^^ius.
GReece, says In Panath. p. 171, 172.
Aristides, is placed in the midst of the whole earth, and in the midst of it
stands Attica; the navell whereof is Athens, by which all Greece, closeted in
the womb of time, received nourishment, before an happy birth had brought her
forth into the light. She is seated upon a very high rock, which habitations
do encompasse, as Lib. 9. page 396.
Strabo: on the top of which stands that renowned fabric even to this day,
which Cecrops from himself names Plin. Not. hist. l. 7. c. 56.
Cecropia; of old (...), the City, by a kind of excellence, in a bravado of
their antiquity, concerning which they were in perpetual contention with the
Argivi. Witness In At. page 13. l. 16.
Pausanias. Eunuch. act. 5. sc. 6.
Terent, An in astu venit? Donat. Sic Athenienses urbem suam vocabant, unde
ipsi incolae (...) vocantur. So, says he, the Athenians called their City,
whence the Citizens themselves are called astoi. After that they called it
(...) Attic. p. 24. l. 43.
Pausanias. Which in his time was called (...) or the high City, although it be
often interpreted Arx a Castle; which ever were sacred to Minerva, as Orat. in
Minerv. Tom. 1. p. 21.
Aristides. Who therefore is by Catullus in his Argonauticks named Diva
retinens in summis urbibus arces. The Goddess that keeps the Turrets of
Cities. This only now remains, the succor and shelter of the barbarous
Athenians, being strongly furnished with men and arms, in which alone dwell
Janissaries, to the number of seven hundred thousand, as Christophero Angelo
told me, and avouched it, I fearing least he had mistaken the number. As for
the forces thereof Hodoep. Byz. l. 3.
Hugo Favolius shall thus instruct you, A^x tantum celebris hoc tempore montis
eodem
Quaeque imposta jugo est, vastas prospectat in undas
Aequoris, and circum dispersa mapalia, and omnes
Externo indigenas nocuo^ tutatur ab host,
Nobilis arx, toto qua non est altera Graio
Nota magis regno, validisque instructior armis,
Ignivomoque magis tormentorum impere tuta.
A Castle only famous at this day,
Set on an hill, below which viewes the sea.
The scattered thatcht sheds, that stand it about,
The fort defends, and keeps invasion out,
And natives safe. A fort; none noted more
In Greece, which has a better warlike store,
Or it for fiery Canons goes before.
Upon the top of this Turret stand the fashions of Half Moons most rarely
gilded, after the manner of the Ishmaelites, who have the Moon in no small
honor, as my much honored Mr De Diis Syris, Syn. 2. cap. 2. p. 288.
Seldom has observed. Of which Lunulets thus speaks Favolius, Cujus inauratis
long rutilantia Lunis
Ardua coelivagas feriunt fastigia nubes.
Whose tops with gilded Moons aspiring high,
Do knock the Clouds the pilgrims of the sky.
Neither may it pass obscurely which I have taken up, being let fall from the
mouth of an eye witness; namely, on the side of this hill, on which the
Acropolis is built, grows a certain kind of herb, that far off, in the night
season, gives a most shining and glittering light, to which when a man shall
approach, he shall discern nothing but the herb it self. Of which matter I
seriously wish that I could testify the truth. It was delivered to me, bona
fide, with good credit. The walls that environ this, are none now, says
Favolius, but in former time it has been well fenced; some part thereof
erected by those two Tuscan brothers, who leaving their country, lived here
under the Acropolis, called (...), Pelargi, Storkes, (...), for their wandering:
Lib. 9. page 397.
Strabo: Not. hist. l. 7. c. 56.
Pliny says their names were Euryalus and Hyperbius: the two that first built
houses of brick at Athens, when formerly they had Caves for dwelling places.
But by the authority of Pausanias, though the Printers and Scribes have done
both that Author, and the persons wrong, in putting a false name upon one of
them, I will do them none. Read then Laterarias domus constituerunt primi
Agrolas and Hyperbius fratres Athenis, etc. In Attic. p. 36. l. 34.
Pausanias. (...). From these was that part which they edified called
Pelargicum. Aristophanes in Avibus. (...);
The other part of the Acropolis which was left naked, Cimon the son of
Miltiades clothed. Pausanias in the fore quoted place. These walls admitted no
gate but one, so rarely beautified with that costly Propylaeum or porch, on
which Pericles is discommended by Tull. Off. l. 2.
Demetrius Phalareus for disbursing so great a sum of money. Val. Max. lib.
3. ^. 1.
For which he was not smally troubled how he might give up his accounts to the
people; His Nephew Alcibiades therefore seeing him somewhat sad, and demanding
the cause, to whom when his uncle replied, that it was about giving his
accounts, seek rather, quoth he, how you may not give them. By which counsel
the Athenians were entangled with that neighbor war against the Lacedaemonians,
in which they found not vacancy for an audit. By the way it shall be fit to
acquaint you with thus much, that it was not permitted to a dog to enter into
the Acropolis, as (...). p. 175.
Plutarch (...) it may be, for his heat in Venery and ill savor. Goats
likewise, says De re Rust.
Varro, came not thither, unless for a necessary sacrifice once, least they
should hurt the Olive which is said first to have sprung up there. The circuit
of this Acropolis is said to be threescore stadia. Now a Stadium is about some
Fine feet make a pace, and a thousand paces a mile. I^idor. Orig. lib. 15. c.
16.
six hundred and twenty five feet, eight of which make a mile, it being the
custom of the ancient Greeks, so to measure the length or distance of grounds,
or Cities, by the (...). The first City then is contained in seven miles and
an half. But at this were added more houses able to make a City of themselves.
And so indeed were they distinguished by (...). The upper and lower City. In
Phoc. p. 549. l. 47.
Plutarch, (...). Note here moreover, in the reading of your Greek Authors,
that when you meet with (...) in the description of a Country, you presently
must conceive the higher part, if it be (...), Lib. 1. p. 6. a
Thucidides. (...). And they preyed upon each other, and among the rest who
were not addicted to the sea, yet lived below, understand near the sea, Schol.
(...). The (...) then, and (...) knit together made but one joint corporation;
both as it were uniting Piraeum unto themselves, took up, as Orat. 6.
Dion Chrysostom writes, two hundred Stadia, which is about five and twenty
miles. Upon which place, Morellus produces a Scholiast testifying that the
walls were (...) fifteen miles save one furlong. Where I wonder that the
learned man had not eftsoon perceived the number to have been corrupt, and
written (...) for (...), twenty five for fifteen. For so it ought to be.
Neither is it strange that it had so large bounds. For consider that from
Piraeum to Athens were reckoned five miles, as you may see in Not. hist. l. 2
c. 85.
Pliny, from Athens to Phalerum, and so to the other side of Piraeum four
miles and a quarter: The utmost wall of which Thucydides speaks in his second
book consisted of five miles a quarter and half. The girdle of Piraeum and
Munychia had seven miles and an half more. All which being put together make
up but twenty two miles one quarter and one furlong. But Dion Chrysostom must
be here understood; and it behooves us to conceive that he spoke not barely of
the naked walls, for then it cannot hold; but I suppose some houses to have been
without Loco citato
(...), as he says, (...). In which I appeal to more judicious heads. Neither
can I silently pass by the opinion of John Meursius, who reading in In Archad.
p. 244. l. 37.
Pausanias, these words, At. Lect. l. 3. c. 4.
(...), should presently obtrude to us, that Pausanias teaches, that the At.
Lect. l. 3. c. 4.
wall called Phalericus is but twenty stadia or two mile and an half. When
indeed he meant nothing less. For speaking of salt Springs, which he calls
(...), he seems to involve a reason drawn from the neerenesse of the sea. For
when he writes of this brackish well. Among the Athenians, the Sea which comes
up near Phalerus, is distant from the City but twenty Stadia at the most,
quoth he. Where Amasaeus had thus strangely doted. Athenae a Phalero ab^unt
stadia haud amplius XX. And that ^his was the meaning of the Author, proves
that which follows. He might have likewise considered that (...) with a Dative
case signifies not only juxta and prope as I have translated it; but supra
sometimes, which will now serve better. And Meursius indeed blames the number;
but sees not into the words. Now it is not needless that the two walls, which
joins Pyreum and Athens at so long a distance, be somewhat spoken of, seeing
they are reckoned by Lib. 31.
Livie among the multa visenda, Many things worthy of sight at Athens. These
are the (...), in Lib. 3. Eleg. 19. p. 192.
Propertius,

-- Theseae brachia longa viae. In bello Mith. p. 125. l. 9.
Appian of Alexandria, (...), and Page 355. l. 10.
Plutarch in Cimone. One lying toward the North, of which In Pe^icle. p. 115.
l. 20.
Plutarch. The other toward the South, in height about forty Cubits, as In
Mith. p. 124. l. ult.
Appian testifies. These are called (...) by Orat. 6.
Dion Chrysostom, because Athens being at one end, and Piraeum at the other,
these were drawn forth between. And when writers speak of (...), it may be
conjectured that it is for distinction of that (...) in the Acropolis which
Cimon built, In Attic. p. 19. l. 8.
witness Pausanias Aristophanes seems to bring authority for an opinion that
Themistocles built these. In P. 337.
Equitibus. (...).
Which his P. 338. A. co. 2.
Scholiast affirms. (...) For Themistocles added Piraeum to the City. we read
in In Them. p. 27.
Probus that he was the only agent in walling the City, and that he so hastened
the accomplishing, that they were feign to be as it were sacrilegious, and make
use of materials formerly consecrated to the edifying of Temples, and
Monuments of the dead. But In Them* p. 87. l. 25.
Plutarch gaine-saies this, and that he did only (...), conjoyne the City and
Piraeum, and put the land to take acquaintance with the Sea. It seems somewhat
forward before. However, so fenny was the ground it was founded upon, that the
work soon came to great reparation, which Plut. in Cim. p. 355. l. 14.
Cimon the son of Miltiades undertook. For which stones of an huge weight and
lime, he made the earth so firm that it could not give. Nay he was so liberal,
that he did out of his own expenses so great favors, to a people that some
years after gratified him with exile. Neither did he only mend the breaches;
but in after time Plut. p. 355. l. 12. unless (...) may have respect to Conon
who after the victory at Cnidus erected these walls as Pausan. in Atticis p. 2.
l. 14. I would neither deceive my self or the Reader.
finished the whole work, so that he may truly be said to be the founder of
them. Let us now come to the Gates of the City. Attic. Lect. initio.
Meursius has observed ten, but I fear they will scarce suffice to such a
vast City. Take then these. Dipylon or Thriasia the fairest of all, velut in
ore urbis posi^a, placed as it were in the front of the City, says Livie,
major aliquanto patentiorque quam caeterae est, greater somewhat and wider then
the rest. Dec. 4. l. 1. p. 11. A.
Hence I suppose named Dipylon as if it were as big as two Gates. (...).
Piraicae. Near the Temple of Chalcodoon. Here were buried some of those that
died in fight with the Amazons in the time of Theseus. In Theseo. p. 9. l. 20.
Plutarch. (...). Hippades. Where the bones of Hyperides the famous Orator rest
with his progenitors, who being racked under Antipater, chose rather to bite
off his tongue, (...) p. 456.
then to divulge the secrets of his Country. (...), Sacrae. The sacred gate. We
read of this in (...). p. 45.
Theophrastus Characters but to my great admiration, that the Eagle-sighted
Casaubon had not espied a fault For though it be true that there were such
gates at Athens as (...), yet is there any that ever read (...), the dead to
have bin carried out to burial through the sacred gate? It makes not any thing
that it was spoken to a stupid fellow, for they spak not as our vulgar do,
such as, When Christmas comes out of Wales. Write then (...) are the gates at
which they went forth with their corpse at the solemnizations of their
obsequies, the reason of which shall be spoken hereafter. Page 715. number. 95.
Demosthenes, (...) The gate of Aegeus. It seems to have been in Delphinium
where he dwelt; whence the Hermes or Image toward the East end of the Temple
was called Plut. These. p. 4. l. 21.
(...). The statue at the gates of Aegeus (...) Melitides. Where lies
Thucydides the son of Olorus that wrote the Peloponnesian War, who after
his return into his Country from banishment, was treacherously murdered, his
Sepulcher stands near these gates. Atticis p. 21. l. 41.
Pausanias. (...) Ceramicae. These are called by Xenophon (...). The Gates in
Ceramicus, where many of the Lacedaemonians were buried, which died in the
seditious war that Thrasybulus made against the Thirty Tyrants. (...) p. 279.
l. 43.
Xenophon. (...). The Gates of Diochares. Of whom I have naught to speak.
(...). The Acharnan Gates. I suppose they were called so from that Town or
Village near, named Acharnia, to which it is probable it looked. For so did
the ancients dame their Gates from the Town to which they were near. The
Romans their Porta Collatina from Collatia, Meursius has added two l. toneae,
and Scaae. in Atticis which I never s^w until I had written this place as God
and man is my witness I speak least any should think that I have stolen out of
him because we meet,
a Burge not far off. And happily it is so here, as also in (...) Diomaea;
for Dionus is a people of Athens not any great matter distant from the City.
(...) Thracia These are all that I ever met with named: others there are
obscurely pointed at by Atticis p. 14. l. 1.
Pausanias, as that near the Gallery which from its various draughts they call
Paecile, where is the effigies of Mercury Ago^aeus in brass. And others about
the beginning of his Attica, of which I had better hold my peace then speak as
good as nothing. Thus have we found twelve Gates; which being opened enter;
suck that sweet air, whose excellent purity brought forth such acute wits,
Cassiod. Var. l. 12.
and prepared with a most happy bounty understanding judgments for
contemplation. Whence Med^a p. 460.461.
Euripides may well strain to this note, that Venus sitting near, and
adorning her self, sends forth continually Cupids of Learning (...). Well may
he bless that clime stiling it (...), which has been the Mother of the Muses
(by the leave of Mnemosyne) or at least the Nurse to them, for there are they
said to have traveled with Harmonia; as if there were no such melodious
consent, Med. p. 459
as in the Sciences. Let not In Praf. ad Charact.
Theophrastus assert all Greece to lie under the same temperature and
disposition of the heavens, when at this day it may be spoken, as once
Aristides did of it. Tom. 1. p. 173.
No coast so truly void of all earthly dreggs, and participating more of the
celestial and defecated air. Not unworthily has Sophocles been lavish in
expressions. Aia. p. 57.
Famous, Oed. Col p. 258.
The most Renowned, Oed. Col. p. 264.
Happy* Aia p. 71.
Sacred Athens. Pindarus. p. 361.
Wonderful, p. 361.
Much spoken of. p. 361.
Nea^, etc. To the making up of her delight comes to all the river Cephissus,
which is able to bear vessels of a good burden, as I have been informed, but
the Turks fearing least it might be adva^tagious to any enemy that might invade
the^, have cut it into many and sundry little streams, damming up with an
innumerable quantity of stones the mouth of the river for a mile in length.
Thinking they have sufficiently prevented, which they did but suppose could
happen.

CAP. III. (...), Mores, and Ingenia. (...). Quantum hod^erni differunt a
veteribus; and qualem vitae rationem modumque habent.
THE Athenians by (...) p. 196
Dicaearchus are divided into two sorts, (...), Atticos, and (...). Of which
though there were no difference in latter times, yet certainly of old there
was. Insomuch as one of the punishments, which the Athenians are said to
inflict upon their women (for the appeasing of Neptune, bringing in an
inundation upon their fields to their great damage, in anger conceived for
loss of the Title of the City) was this, Varro apud Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 18. c.
9,
That none should after call them (...), Athenians, but (...) Atticas. A
revenge I suppose opprobrious enough. For thus writes my Author. (...). Curious
Babblers, Deceitful, Calumniators, Observers of the lives of strangers. (...).
A sufficient witness of this is Act. 17.
St Luke, that says, they did regard nothing more then to hear and speak
novelty. To which end they often met in Barbers shops, where all the news, that
was going in those days, was current. Hence say we verba in Tonstrinis
proculcata: and in Greek (...), In Pluto p. 38.
Aristophanes. (...)
(...)
(...).
They that sat in the Barbers shops did talk much that he was suddenly grown
rich The Scholiast seems to take the meaning as if the Comaedia^ had quipped
them for resorting to Barbers and neglecting Barber Chirurgions of better
credit^ But I see no reason. They met in both to prattle. Var. hist. l. 3. c. 7.
Aelian (...). Sitting in a Chirurgions shop, scandalous, and thirsty to speak
ill by all means. (...) men Italianated, who can smile, Cap. (...).
even when they cut your throat. Such as Theophrastus has in his Characters
drawn out, who can be affable to their enemies, and disguise their hatred in
commendation, while they privily lay their snares; that salute with mortal
embracements, and clasp you in those arms, which they mean to embrew in your
dearest blood. In sum, fair without, but rotten within, like a wound which
is healed above and seems sound, but putrifies under the skin. And so much the
word does import. (...). Given to false accusations. The In Plut. p. 5.
Scholiast of Aristophanes writes, that it being forbidden to carry Figgs out
of Athens, and some nevertheless the decree being absolute against it,
presuming so to do, they set rogues in the gates that did appeach them, (as In
Solone p. 65.
Plutarch likewise) Hence came this word to be used for any crafty knave that
gets his living by promooting, Xenophon. (...). p. 271. l. 20.
(...). One that meddles in every man's affairs, and therefore Pluto p. 90. c.
p. 91. b.
Aristophanes has fitly brought one upon the scene terming himself an
Overseer both of private and public matters. If then such a person had espied
any tripping, and gotten him on the hip, he would as sure have fetched him over
for his coin, as any Summoner does a person delinquent toward the flesh, or
any Lawyer a credulous client, and having well plumed him, afterward gives him
a dimissory* (...) ( Sycophants) (...). Xenophon. Such were many in Athens,
insomuch that Aristotle being asked what Athens was, (...). p. 272. l. 19.
answered, (...), All beautiful, (...)* in a verse of (...).
Homer in the description of Alcinous garden, but pears grew ripe after
pears, and figs after figs, meaning a continual succession of Sycophants.
This made Isocrates the Orator to compare the City to a Curtezan, with whom few
there were but would have to do, yet none dare take to wife; affirming it to
be the best place to sojourne in, but the worst to inhabit: By reason of their
Sycophants and treacheries of nimble tongued Orators* (...). I was once half
in an opinion that these words were to have been, put to the former thus,
(...), And I think the sense will run well, Malicious observers of the lives
of strangers. The Athenians were (...) and held hospitality sacred, and I doubt
not but they had that Law. That Forrainers should receive no wrong, (...). p.
428.
(...). Socrates in Xenophon. Now he discommends the (...) as ready to trouble
and vex strangers in Law, duly marking and bearing an eye unto them to take
them at an advantage: As for the Athenienses they were (...), Brave spirited,
single dealing, and faithful friends. But as the words were at length
confounded, so did their manners degenerate, growing into (...), an
Irregularity of nature. As Lib. 6.
Polybius. No (...) afterwa^ds, but haughtiness of spirit, magnanimity now
fallen. And when Dec. 4. p. 7. l. 1.
Livy says ex vetere fortuna nihil praeter animos servare, he means, they had
nothing left but those proud spirits; which their ancient flourishing fortune
had puffed up. No (...), or simplicity, no Aristoph. p. 694.
Lamb like innocence, or mildness, but as (...). p. 387.
Plutarch speaks, People rashly angry, soon pitiful, rather inclined
sharply to take opinion, then quietly to be informed. And as they are ready to
help base and abject Peasants, so friendly do they entertain childish and
ridiculous ^oyes, rejoy^ing in their own praises, and nothing moved with
scurrility, Fearful and terrible even to their Governors, humane toward
their enemies. Not unfitly then Lib. 5. c. 3. p. 207.
Valerius Maximus, Quantam ergo reprehensionem merentur, etc. How deserve they
to be blamed, who though they had just Laws, yet had they most wicked
disposition, and chose rather to take their own courses, then put in practice
their statues? As for their impudence, so great was it, that to express a
countenance void of shame, the Comoedian has put (...), an Athenian look* in
Page 189. g.
Nubibus (...), so accounted in the time of Lib. 2. p. 47.
Paterculus, that what was done in sincerity culus, that what was done in
sincerity and faithful trust, the Romans would say, it was performed fide
Attica, with an Athenian loyalty. Fear and power might make them trusty, but
how they brake their leagues, took part with other Ilanders against
confederates, and violated the laws of arms, Historians are not dumb. As for
their wrath, it was (...), ever mindful, as Aeneid. 1.
Virgil. memor ira. And the hatred they prosecuted the Barbarians withal was
so unquenchable, that it burned against Isocrat. in Pa^. p. 109.
all Barbarians for the Persians sake; and they forbad them their sacrifices,
as they used to do murderers among them. Where you must note, that all that
were not Grecians were called of them Barbarians. But lo! How are they now
become all Barbarous! whether or no people of Africa, or some of the Catelani,
I cannot justly tell; Mahumedans all, poor and miserable, living by rapine, or
fishing, or tilling the earth: Hod^ep. Byz. l. 3.
Favolius, Duraque coacti
Pauperie assuerunt vitam tolerare rapina.
Aut passim infestant furto, raptoque propinqua
Aequora piratae, sed quae pars aequior, hamis
Fallit inescatos ^ereti sub arundine pisces.
Aut desolatas exercet vomere terras,
Semper inops, misera, infelix, rerum omnium egena.
Oppressed with need they do their life sustain
By rapine, and annoy the neighbor maine
By pillaging. Who are most just and good
With angling do the silly fish delude;
Or plough the grounds made desolate before,
Unhappy, wretched, mis'rable, still poor.


CAP. IV. De populi divisione, (...). Quid Atheniensibus cum Aegyptiis commune.
THere were at first but two kinds of people in Athens, So does Dionysius
Halicarnasseus divide them into (...) and (...) lib. 2. n. 2.
two orders quibus inter gradus dignitatis fortunaeque aliquid interlucebat, in
which there was a difference of dignity and fortune: such as at this day are in
France, either Peers or Peasants; or as in Venice, Patricians and Plebeians.
And although Pollux call them (...), three sorts, yet I make but two, because
the (...) were not any way more gentile for blood, surpassing for riches, or
happy for life. But because he has so set them, take them thus, as he speaks.
Pollux l. 8. c. 9. p. 404.
(...), Eupatridae, were such as were descended from the loins of those Heroes
famous in the Greek history, whose families were ever renowned, and posterity
propagated to many generations; such as Praxiergidae, Eteobutadae,
Al^moeonidae, Cynidae, Ceryces, etc. whom we may term Nobles, or men of good
birth. (...), Geomori, may not seem unlike our Yeomen, who had lands of their
own, and sustained themselves with the fruit and commodities of these their
possessions. (...), Demiurgi, were men of some handi-craft, Tradesmen, such as
Tentmakers, Shoemakers, Carpenters, Masons, and the like. But Solon made
another division. For when the Diacrii, which were those that lived in the
upper part of the City, (...), says In Solone.
Diogenes Laertius; and the Pediaei, which likewise are (...), such as lived in
the middle of the City, or the plain; and the Paralii who lived near the sea,
were at contention about government: The Diacrii leaning to a Democracy, as
Page 61. in Solonem.
Plutarch writes; the Pediaei to an Oligarchy, and the Paralii between both,
and had chosen Solon to arbitrate and determine the matter; he made these four
ranks. (...). Pentacosiomedimnos, Equites, Zeugitas, Thetas. Plut. p. 65.
Pentacosiomedimni were those who (...), could make five hundred measures in
wet and dry commodities alike* What Possardus then brings out of Varro
concerning modium, has no place here; for he supposes that Pentacosiomedimnus
was he that had as much ground as fifty Medimni could suffice to sow: but here
I will confute him with a wet finger. (...). For he seems to sow upon the
waters. This is he whom the Elzevirii printed at Leyden Anno 1635, under the
name of Postellus, who was sometime a Professor of Tongues in France, and
Author of the Treatise De Magistratibus Atheniensium* Equites were such as were
of ability to keep an horse, or had the quantity of three hundred measures in
dry, and as many in wet: called likewise (...). Zeugitae were such as could of
wet and dry in all make but three hundred. Any of these three could bear
office in the Commonwealth. A fourth rank which he called Plutarch. loco
praedicto.
(...), Thetas, a name from servility, which had no power in the rule of the
weal public. But it had not been amiss if I had shown how the Egyptians had
divided their people into three classes, as the Athenians did, as I have spoken
above. For the first degree, or Eupatridae, addicted to learning and study, who
were had in greater honor, answer to the Egyptian Priests. Plut. These. p. 8.
l. 18.
Nay those great houses in Athens had Priesthood by succession, as Eumolpidae,
Ceryces, Cynidae: for out of the stock were chosen Priests; hence (...) in Page
741. number. 164.
Demosthenes. The Geomori who had lands assigned to them for the maintenance of
the war, are not dislike them in Egypt, who hold possessions on these
terms, namely, to provide soldiers when need shall require to fight. The
Demiurgi resemble those Plebeians, who skillful in some art, did set out their
labor to daily hire: as Diodorus Siculus can testify.

CAP. V. Tribus quatuor sub Cecrope. Mutata earum nomina. Augentur a Clisthene:
duae additae. (...). Tribulum. (...).
IN Athens there were but four tribes under the rule of Cecrops. Cecropis,
Autocthon, Actaea, Paralia; which had other names put to them, Cranais, Atthis,
Mesogaea, Diacris. I suppose from the parts of Attica, it lying partly near the
sea, thence Actaea; partly hilly, thence Diacris; partly Mediterrane, thence
Mesogaea; the other name from the King that was then: Whether the King would
honor the Tribe so much, or the Tribe glory in the name of the King, I know
not: it is probable that it was an honor to their governor; for as Cecrops
gave the first names, Cranaus the second, each assuming a title to himself,
Ericthonius called them after the name of Jupiter, Pallas, Neptune, Vulcan.
(...). But when Ion came to rule, they were named after his four sons,
Geleontes, Aegicorcis* Argades* Hopletes, as In Terpsic. p. 137.
Herodotus and In Ione versus finem.
Euripides; though Plutarch says that they were so called In Solon. p. 65.
(...), from the courses of life which they first took. But Clisthenes, a man
factious and wealthy, is said by the Council of Aristides T. 1. p. 336. A. T.
3. p. 352.
Apollo, Al^maeon being Archon, to make ten of them, changing the ancient
titles, and taking new from some Demigods or Heroes born in that land, all
except Ajax, whom, though a stranger, he puts to the rest, as a neighbor and
companion In Terpsic. p. 137.
Herodotus. These then were called (...); as you would say, giving names; the
word so signifies sometimes; as Minerva is said by Dion Chrysostom (...), who
gave the name to Athens. To these were erected Statues near the Council place
of the Senate. Their names are these as In At. p. 4.5
Pausanias has them, Hippothoon, Antiochus, Ajax Telamonius, Leo, Erectheus
that slew Immaradus the son of Eumolpus in the Eleusinian war, Aegeus,
Oeneus, Acamas, Cecrops, Pandion. From these (...). To which they put two more,
one called after Antigonus, the other after Demetrius his name, in gratuity to
them for the favors received; which in process of time they changed into
Attalis, and Ptolemais, as Stephanus writes, (...), having been courteously
entreated by the These are reckoned among the Eponymos in Paus. p. 5. who had
Statues likewise.
Kings bearing that name. Which being so, let us take heed that Livie deceive
us not, who at the time when Attalus did succor the Athenians against Philip,
says they first thought of adding that Tribe to the ten, in thanksgiving that
the Rhodii rescued four fighting ships of the Athenians taken by the
Macedonians, and sent them home, Decad. 4. l. 1. p. 6.
Tum primum mentio illata de tribu quam Attalida appellarent, ad december veteres
tribus addenda. Thus have we seen that there were twelve Tribes in all: Let us
look back to the first institution. I suppose they were first ordained for the
better administration of civil government. In Il. b. page 181.
Eustathius writes, that they were divided in imitation of the year; the four
Tribes according to the four quarters; each Tribe into three Fraternities,
which they call (...), or (...), answerable to the twelve Months; each (...),
or (...), into thirty (...), or kindreds, equalizing the days. For so many
only had the year of old. Witness the Riddle of Laertius p. 63. l. 1.
Cleobulus concerning the year, (...)
(...).
One Father had twelve Sons, and each son thirty daughters, and every daughter
black and white, meaning days and nights. Over these were governors, (...),
Kings of the Tribes, who sat upon controversies between party and party of
their own Tribes. Each Tertian also had his overseer, called (...), the Ruler
of the Trittys or Phratria. The word may seem to signify a Society,
Fellowship, or company. It skils not whether you derive it from (...), as
Eustath, or (...), as Suidas, or (...), as others, which is a Well, because
they drew water from the same well. For the place being scanty of springs where
Athens was founded, there being but one wellspring in Athens, they were
constrained to use (...), dug wells, as In Solone p. 65. l. 33.
Plutarch. (...) are the men of that society, called by Tully, Curiales, of the
same Ward, speaking of Cimon, who gave command that his servants should afford
what they had if any Laciades should come into his Farm. In description of
which thing Plutarch uses (...), which then we are not to interpret Curialis,
(For this is as much as (...) and (...)) but popularis. These at festival
days in Athens met in a place called Phratrion, as Iliad. (...). p. 181. and
Il. ^. page 629.
Eustathius observes, and Lib. 3. c. 4.
Pollux (where they brought their children to be engrossed in their books, as
shall be hereafter spoken with the reasons thereof) from hence comes (...),
Phratrizein, which is (...), to meet, for so Eustathius in another place,
(...). As for the (...), or kindreds, we must not think that they were of one
blood, but from that near conjunction which they had each with other, being
admitted into this society. (...) (every (...) or kindred consisting of thirty,
whence they were named (...)) (...) Not of affinity so called, but for their
Synod; which the Grammarians call, (...), a Communicative familiarity, (...)
being a participating in one thing, or having an equal share in the same
privileges. Great was their care of each other; great was their mutual love;
which that it might continue, Solon their Lawgiver ordained certain feasts to
be provided, wherein they should kindly entertain each other. (...), and (...).
Dipnosoph. l. 5. p. 185. d.
Athenaeus. (...), etc. Of feasts celebrated at this day the Lawmakers have
appointed Phyletica for Tribes, Demotica for the people or popular. Moreover,
Thiasos for Colleges (as Philosophers for the death of their Grand Masters)
and Phratrica for the same Ward. Hence (...), and (...). Of which in due time.
The reason of this the Dipnosophist gives, saying, that wine has (...), an
attractive and persuading force to procure love, and friendship.

CAP. VI. Graecia vicatim habitata. (...), quid? Atheniensibus proprium habere
(...). Quot? Templa and sacra pagatim.
ALL Greece was inhabited (...), as Lib. 1.
Thucydides speaks, by Villages, before there were any Towns; from whence
comes the word Comoedie. Donat. in Praef. in Ter.
At vero nondum coactis in urbem Atheniensibus, cum Apollini Nomio, id est,
Pastorum vicinorumque praesidi Deo, constructis aris in honorem divinae r^i
circum Atticae vicos, villas, and compita festum carmen solenniter cantarent:
orta est Comoedia (...), quod est, commessatum ire cantantes. The Athenians
being as yet not gathered into Corporations, when they sung sacred hymns to
Apollo Nomius, that is, the President of the sheepheards and neighbors, about
the villages, houses and cross ways of Attica, altars being built in honor
of the celebrity, sprung up a Comoedy, (...), from revelling and singing.
Others will have it derived from an ancient custom they had, when any were
injured, among them, for the party wronged to come to the street where the
offender lived, and in the night time to cry aloud, Thomas Magister.
(...). Such a one does wrong, and commits such and such outrages, although
there be Gods and Laws, by which these abuses were reformed. But the Anonymus
in a preface to Aristophanes says, (...), that they were not called (...) or
villages by the Athenians, but (...), which they slate Populos, better in my
mind oppida or Towns. Cicero ad Lib. 7. Ep. 3.
Atticum. Venio ad Piraeea in quo magis reprehendus sum, quod homo Romanus
Piraeea scripserim, non Piraeeum (sic enim omnes nostri locuti sunt) quam quod
M addiderim. Non enim hoc ut oppido praeposui, sed ut loco: and tamen Dionysius
noster, qui est nobiscum, and Nicias Cous, non rebatur oppidum esse Piraeea,
sed de eo videro. Nostrum quidem si est peccatum, in eo est, quod non ut de
oppido locutus sum, sed ut de loco* secutusque sum non dico Caecilium, Mane ut
ex portu in Piraeeum (malus enim auctor Latinitatis est) sed Terentium cujus
fabellae propter elegantiam sermonis putabantur a Caio Laelio scribi. Heri
aliquot adolescentuli coimus in Piraeeum, and idem, Mercator hoc add^bat captam
de Sunio. Quod si (...) oppida volumus esse, tam est oppidum Sunium quam
Piraeeus. If so be we will have (...) to be Towns, Sunium as well as Piraeeus
is a Town. These were formerly Kingdoms as Atticis. p. 33. l. 42.
Pausanias testifies. (...). Moreover, I have written, that some of the towns
were governed by a King before the reign of Cecrops: And no marvel, for some
of them far surpassed other Cities, as In Panath. T. 1. p. 326.
Aristides affirms. These were most peculiar to the Athenians, anciently
called (...), as Nub. page 225. e.
Aristoph. Schol. or (...), as L. 8. p. 430.
Pollux, twelve belonging to every Tribe. But Clisthenes changed them into
(...), as out of Aristotle the Schol. of Aristoph. The number of them is, as In
Il. b. page 215.
Eustathius out of Strabo, and In Athenaeum l. 6. ^. 9.
Casaubon, an hundred seventy four. Some whereof having the same name, are
distinguished according to their situations, (...) and (...), as we may say the
upper and the lower Wakefield, etc. All of them divided into Greater and
Lesser. The Pausan. At. page 30.
(...), or less, are these, Alimusii, Zoster, Prospaltii, Anagyrasii, Cephale,
Prasieis, Lampreis, Phlyeis, Myrrinusii, Athmoneis, Acharnae, Marathon,
Brauron, Rhamnus. The rest were greater. Take them promiscuous according to
their Tribes.

KEKOPIS.
(...). Aexone. Dadalidae, Epiecidae, Xypete, Pithus, Sypalettus, Trinemei,
Athmonon or Athmonia. Alae Aexonides. Phlya.

EPETHIS.
(...). Agraule or Agryle. Euonymia or Euonymus. Themaci or Themacus. Cephisia.
The upper Lampra. The lower Lampra, in which Sigonius erres calling one the
Maritimate, the other the inferior, which to be one and the same I have shown
above. Pamb^tadae. Pergase. Sybridae, Phegus^ Anagyrus.

(...).
(...). Angele, Cydathenaeum. Cytharum. Oa or Oeis. The upper Paeania, the
under Paeania. Probalinthus, Stiria. Phegaea. Myrrhinus.

(...).
(...). Alae Araphenides. Araphen. Bate. Gargettus. Dionea. Erecthia. Ericria.
Echria. Icaria or Icarius. Ion^^ae. Colyttus. Cydantidae. Plothea. Tithras.
Phegaea. Philaede. Chollidae.

(...).
(...). Agnus. Erisidae. Hermus or Hermi. Hephestiadae. Thoricus. I^ea.
Cicyana, Sphettus. Cholargus Cholargi Cholargia. Cophale. Prospalta.

(...).
(...). (...). Aethalidae Aethalia. Aphid^a. Dir^des. Hecale. Sypyradae. Cetti.
Cropia. Leuconium. Oeum* Ceramicum. Paeonidae. Peleces. Potamus. Scambonidae.
Sunium. Hyba Hybadae. Phrearri. Marathon. Alimus.

(...).
(...). Azenia. Amaxantea. Anacaea* Acherdus. Decelia. Eleaeus. Eleusis.
Eraeadae. Thymaetadae. Ceriadae. Corydallus. Oeum Deceli^um. Oeum ad
Eleutheras. Sphendale.

(...).
(...). Aegilia or Aegilus. Alopece or Alopecae. Amphitrope. Anaphlystus. A^ene
or Atenia. Bessa. Thorae. Crioa. Leucopyra. Melaeneis or Melaenae. Pallene.
Pentele. Semachidae^ Phalerum.

(...).
(...). Oenoe at Macathon. Titacedae. Tricorythus. Rhamnus. Of this Tribe were
some towns taken away and put to other, Aphyna, Persidae, etc.

(...).
(...). Butea, Butadae. Epicephisia. Thria or Thrio. Hippotomadae. Lacia,
Laciadae. Lusia^ Melit^. Oe or Aea. Perithaedae. Ptelea. Phyle. Acharna.
Tyrmidae.

(...).
(...). Berenicidae. Thyrgonidae. (...)* Conthyle.

(...).
(...). Apollonienses. These are all which Authors make mention of according to
their Tribes, others there are, which I know not how to distribute, none of the
ancients either directing or furnishing me. But these are they. Agra.
Anchesmus. Amphiade. Archilia, Astipalaea. Atalanta. A^^r^dus. Belbina. Bra^^on
Brilessus. Enna. Echelidae. Zoster. Thrion. Cale. Cedae. Cothocidae. Coele.
Cynosarges. Ceramicus without the City the same with Academia. Laurium.
Lenaeum. Limnae. Munychia. Parnes. Pnyx. Pa^ocl^s his ditch or trench. Scirum.
Sporgilus. Hydrusa Hymettus. Hysiae. Phaura. Phormisii. Phritij. Phoron.
Chitone. O^opus. To which are put the Islands, called Pharmacusae, two in
number, and Psytallia. The Scholast of In Ranis p. 235.
Aristophanes speaks as if Io were a Demus, but I say not with him. The
greatest use we have of these among authors, is in their form of Law, matters
of contracts, and the like, that there might be no fraud or deceit; that none
either unjustly be taxed for any thing, or tax an other. Hence read we such
punctual clauses in their writs. N. the son of N. dwelling at Alopeca, (...),
of Caele. of Melite of Cerameis. In these villages were Temples of the Gods*
Dec. 4. l. 1. p. 12.13.
Live. Templa pagatim sacrata. And again Delubra fibi ^uisse, quae quondam
pagatim habitantes in parvis illis castellis viisque consecrata, ne in unam
quidem urbem contributi majores sui deserta relinquerint. So much witnesses In
Atticis p. 77. l. 40.
Pausanias; who tells us that they worshipped some peculiar Deity, and yet
nevertheless did (...), honor* Minerva. Some of them had peculiar festivalls,
as Brauron the sollemnities Brauronia, to Diana Diomea to Jupiter Diomeus.
Chitonia etc.

CAP. VIII. (...). Atheniensium status mutatio^ (...).
THe ancients had but three sorts of government* Tyrannis, Democratia,
Oligarchia, as In C^esiphontem p. 4
Aeschines, which Polybius calls (...). where although the one names it a
Tyrannis or Tyrany, the other (...) the rule of a King, yet must we understand
the same. For in old time all Kings were called Tyrants, as Servius on Virgil
has observed. A word taken up by the Grecians about the time of Archilocus,
which neither Homer nor Hesiod knew; and therefore are the Poets noted, as
(...), for calling the Kings, or (...) before the Trojan wars, Tyrants or
Tyrannos. (...) or a Kingdom, is where obeisance is free, yielded rather out
of a good advice, then for fear or might. (...) an Aristocratie, when most
wise and just men are fitly chosen to sit at the Helm of the Weal public.
(...) a Democratie, when the Laws and customs of the Country, in matters
belonging both to Gods and men, are truly observed; and that rules the roast,
which shall be approved of by the greater part, (...) says, Polibius; as that
may be said at a banquet to please all, which does relish well with the most.
But the grave Historian has odserved changes in such government, as they use to
be inclining to the worst Mornachies being turned into Tyrannyes; as when the
people are led away by the persuasions of some pleasing Aristot^ l. Pol. l. 5.
c. 4.
popular man, and are as it were, willingly constrained to take the yoke that
his usurping authority shall lay on them; Probus in Militide.
a Tyrant indeed said, Viconsecutus, who gets it by violence, Probus ibid. p.
17.
Omnis autem and habentur and dicuntur Tiranni, qui potestate sunt perpetua in
ea civitate, quae liberate usa est. But all are accounted and called Tyrants,
who have perpetual authority in that City, which formerly has enjoyed
liberty. The deprivation of which causing murmuring and rebellion, brings forth
an Aristocratie, or government of the best men, such as are well brought up, and
exercised in virtue* The end of an Aristocratie being, as Pol. l. 4. c. 9.
Aristotle has it, Virtue, which of no long continuance does soon degenerate,
Polyb^ l. 6.
(...), naturally enclining to an Oligarchie, or rule of few. These few being
chosen according to their riches. And because that many in a state cannot be
wealthy, therefore the number of them cannot be great. These are great Lords
and little Kings, whose power swaies all, and not the Laws; who unjustly
favor those that are pertially theirs, and oppress them that would defend
their liberty against them. All things being administered Aeschines in ^^s.
(...), by their presidents. Such dominion is taken away by the people set on a
rage, and not bearing (...), the injuries of their rulers. Hence comes in a
Democratie, which Sophocles calls (...), the power of a multitude; whose end is
freedom; when all can epually partake of the same privileges and immunities,
who are true citizens: whence Terence styles it aequam libertatem; for which
the Greek Orators have properly used the word (...), as In Demosth. p. 59.
Vlpian observes. But the vulgar for the most part strangely insolent, prone
to wrong, and ready to trespass against the Laws bring in by a miserable
proceeding, the worst kind of government an Ochlocratie, the rule of Rascality.
All these in their times did Athens feel, for they were governed by Kings four
hundred eighty seven years: the last of which was Codrus, who in a fight
between the Dorienses and Athenians offered himself willingly to be slain, it
being foretold by the Oracle of Apollo that the Dorienses should be conquerours
unless the Athenian King were killed; he therefore clothing himself familiari
vest ne posset agnos^i, says Tusc. Q. l. 11
Cicero, with a servants habit least he should be known, put himself among
the enemies, by one of which in a brawle he was murdered. After whom none
enjoyed the name of King, Justin. l. 2.
quod memoriae nominis ejus tribulum est, which was done in memory to his name.
For after that, Archontes or Judges ruled; in the Title, (...) Archontes, but
in power Kings, whese authority was for term of life. These continued three
hundred and fifteen years. These being ended, it pleased the State to choose
a man, whose office should continue but ten years; seven succeeded eath
other, and made up the number of seventie years; who, because they abused
their power, were made but for one year, called therefore Justin. l. 2.
annui Magistratus, yearly Magistrates. These continued until Pisistratus,
for a fained fear of the seditious, begged a guard of the people for his
safty, For when the faction sprung up. Of which I have spoken in the fouth
Chapter, he cutting himself with lashes, and the Mules which drew his Charot,
went into the place of meeting, (...), and beseeching the people to afford him
some defense against their violence, who did (but did not) assault him,
procured a company of chosen Citizens who armed with clubs, not weapons,
possessed the Castle, and so Tyrany came in, which Pisistratus enjoyed
Heraclides in Pol.
thirty years, and deceased leaving behind him two sonns, Hipparchus, and
Hippias, whom Heracledus calls Thessalus. Hipparchus was slain by Aristogiton,
after whose death the Athenians lived under a tyrany Herodotus l. 5. p. 135.
four years, from which they were delivered by the help of the
Lacedaemonians, the offspring of Al^maeon corrupting the Oracle, to the end that
whenever they came for council he should wish them to free the Athenians of
that servitude. The Democratie came in eight hundred sixty eight years after
Cecrops, established by Solon, who excluded the fifth rank of plebeitie from
office or honor by a law, afterward abrogated by Aristides. After this
Pericles brought in an Ochlocratie by weaking the power of the Areopagites.
Then after the overthrow in Sicily the (...) or four hundred took upon them
state, deceaving the people, as Ptol. l. c. 57.
Aristotle and Lib. 8.
Thucydides affirm. For persuading them that they should reconcile
Tissaphernes and Alcibiades unto themselves by that means, and that the
Persian Monarch would afford supply for the war, they most willingly
condescended to this motion in the one and twenty year of the Peloponensian
war. These Princes were called Plat. in Alcyb. p. 148.
(...), Five thousand, though not exceedeng four hundred. The reason is,
because they boasted that none should be rewarded, but who bear arms; nor any
admitted to public power but five thousand, such as with person and estate
could be beneficial to the Republique. Their authority was granted by an Xen.
(...) 274. l. 38.
Act of the people, to which Theramenes was very forward, but after they were
inducted, none more ready to drive out; whereupon they termed him (...)
Cothurnum, from a kind of start-up which did fit both feet. Xen. p. 275.
(...). The word may suit with a Jack of both sides. These (...) were
constrained for fear of Justin. l. 5.
Alcibiades to resign the right unto the people, and to go into wilful
banishment. But when Lysander had overcome Athens (the Arist. Pol. l. 5. c. 7.
Lacedaemonians ever affecting an Oligarchie, as the Athenians a Democracie) he
ordained these thirty to be chief. Xen. (...) p. 270.
Polyarches, Critias, Melobius, Hippolochus, Euclides, Hiero, Mnesilochus,
Chremo, Theramenes, Aresias, Diocles, Phaedrias, Chaerileos, Anaetius; Piso,
Sophocles, Eratosthenes, Charicles, Onomocles, Theognis, Aeschines, Theogenes,
Clomedes, Erasistratus, Phido, Dracontides, Eumathes, Aristoteles, Hippomachus,
Mnesithides. These began at first to put to death the worst and most abhorred,
says In Catil. Consp.
Salust, without trial of law; but afterward the good and bad alike; Xen. p.
272.
some for envy, others for riches. These to make their party firm chose about
three thousand to whom alone they permitted to have weapons, disarming all the
rest, to the end they might easily command their lives. But by their Laws (for
they made some, styled Xen. p. 275.
(...), which were nullified by a decree, as we shall speak hereafter) none
was to suffer (...), who was registered in the list of three thousand. So cruel
were they, that the people fled into Them. p. 467
Phyle a castle in the Athenean borders; and making an head under the conduct
of Thrasybulus, at last shook off this yoke, and remained free until the
death of Alexander even fourscore years, whom Antipater succeeded; who in
battle at the City Lamia gave the Athenians an overthrow; and gave them
quarters on these terms that they should submit to a few Peers, whose
revenewes amounted to two thousand Drachm'es at least, the chief of whom was
Demetrius Phalerius; that they should likewise receave a garrison into Munichia
for the asswaging of riots and uproares. But four years after, Antipater
dying, the City fell into the power of Cassander, of whom they often strove to
acquit themselves; but in vain. For he brought them to such an exigency, that
they were glad to come to composition. And indeed he dealt fairly with them,
giving them their City, Territories, Tributes, and all other things, so that
they would be confederates to him, that none whose revenewes come not to ten
minae or pounds, should undergo any function in the Commonweal; and he
should be their overseer whom he would be pleased to nominate. The man
appointed was Demetrius Phalarius, Vide Laert. in vita, and Strabonem.
who made the City to shine in her full luster, insomuch that they erected in
honor of him three hundred Statues. He wrott a Treatise of the Athenian
Republique, which, had not time devoured, would have given no small light to my
poor endeavors. After he in trouble and vexation had spent fourteeene years
he was put out by Demetrius the son of Antigonus surnamed Polioreetes, who
restored the ancient customs to them again. To them they ascribed such
worship, as also to his father, that they changed the name of their Judge from
Archon into Plu. in Demerito.
(...) The Priest of the Gods that saved them, calling the year after his name,
and adding Pollux. l. 8.
two Tribes to the Ten, whence the Senate consisted of six hundred, but five
before, as In Berenice,
Stephanus, But when Cassander had overthrown the son and father, such was
the ingratitude and levity of the Athenians, that they forbad Demetrius to
approach nere their City. After this Lacharis played the Tyrant, and was
expelled by Demetreus; whom they utterly cast off, assuming again the title of
Archon. Demetrius dying Antigonus Gonatas succeeded, who in the ninteenth year
of his reign put in presidiarie soldiers to the City, which ten years
after he took out. The Macedonians still kept some of the Athenians forces in
this space. Demetrius Antigoni Gone. F. and Antigonus Doson, out of whose hands
Plut. in vita
Aratus the Sicyonian rescued the City, and made it stand by it self until
Phillip, the last king of the Macedonian Monarchy except one, did somewhat
shake it, as you may read in Decad. 4. l. 1
Livie But he was expelled by the Romans, who took the Athenians into league
with a maintaining their ancient right. So they remained until the war
between the Mithridates and the Romans. For by fear they were driven to
receive Vide Appianum Alex. in Methridatio, circa page 122 123. etc.
Archestratus, Mithridates his General, within their walls; against which
Sylla laid siege, and captivated the City, whence proceeded (...), a mercylesse
slaughter, says Appian, that the Plut. in vita p. 335.
streets did run with blood. But the Laws were not much altered by this
Conqueror; and therefore they lived in a nere resemblance of their former
state; in favor with the Roman Emperors, Julius Caesar, Adrian, Antonius;
Gallienus, in whose successors time, Claudius, the ^econd of the name, this
City was ransacked by the Goths, who when they had heaped up ^nnumerable
companies of books to burn, were dehorted by this reason, Cedrenus Baptis^a
^gnatius. ^om. Prin. 1.
that the Greeks, spencing their time in reading of them, might be made more
un^it for war. Constantine the Great likewise had this City in high esteem,
taking to himself the Title (...), as In Orati^ne Constantium
Julian says, which in the word, of Nicephorus Gregoras is Hist. ^om. l. 7. p.
166.
(...) ((...)) the Grand Duke, whom simply afterward they called the Hist.
Romans l. 7. p. 16^.
Duke of Athens, in that Historians time. Emperors have taken them Wives
Citizens of this place; and the Nic. Greg. lib. cita.
daughters of their Dukes have been desired by that eminent rank. And indeed
no marvel. For they were potent. Rainerius Acciajolus is said to have taken
the City from the Spaniards that inhabit Arragon, Calcochon. (...)
(...); who having no Issue male of his wife Eubois but an illegitimate named
Antonius, by an other woman, bequeathed by will Boeotia and Thebes to him, but
Athens to the In the time of Pietro Zani came Ambassadors from Athens to d^e
hamage to the Venetian Senate. M* Leukenor in history and lives of the Venetian
Princes.
Venetians, from whom his son recovered it agane. Nerius succeeded him in the
Dukedom who thrust out Chalcocondilas his father. After him came in Antonius
Nerius brother to the former Nereus. Now about this time we must know that
Mahomet the son of Amurat the second got Athens, Chalcocon. l. 9. p. 299.
whose beauty and building he held in admiration; which when he had made his
own, he continued the Title. For an other Nerius from those above named dying,
leaving one son an Infant, his mother in the Child's Title exercised Tyranny.
This woman loved a Venetian Noble man (son to Petrus Palmerius, to whose
Government the City Nauplium was committed, he is called by Chalcocondilas
Priamus) who came thither for merchandise. Him by discourse and flattery she
intised into her love, promising that she would take him to her husband, and
give up the Princedome of Athens unto him. But upon condition, that he would
devorce his own wife. Whereupon the young man going to Venice slew his wife,
swelling with ambition and thirsty of honor. Which being done, he returns to
Athens, marries this woman, enjoyes the government of the City; who being hated
of the Athenians, and complained of at the Court, to avoid envy termed himself
the Childs Tutor And not long after taking the boy with him, went to the
Court; where Francus Accia^olus, waited, expecting to be promoted to the
Dukedom. When the Emperor therefore understood the folly of the woman, he
gave the title to him. Who being enstalled, imprisoned the woman at Megara, and
afterward (by means not known to the Chalcocon p. 300.
Author slew her. This Francus in time was taken away from men by Zogan
governor rf Peleponnesus, Mahomet having intelligence that the Athenians would
have delivered the City to the Prince of Boeocia. He was the last Duke.

LIBER SECVNDVS.
CAP. I. Duodecem Dii Aih^niensium Idololatria septifariam commissa. Dii
Adscriptitii. (...).
HErodotus in Page 48.
Terpsichore is of opinion that the Greeks derived their religion from the
Egyptians. But In Tractu (...). p. 669.
Plutarch does stoutly deny it. And not without good testimony may I affirm
that it seems to be a falsitie. For Orpheus is thought to have brought the
mysteries of piety into Greece; who was himself a Thracian, from whom the word
Sch. Eurip. in Alcest. page 661.
(...) is supposed to be drawn, which signifies devotion. (...), says (...).
in Stel. 1.
Nonnus. They called (...), to worship God, etc. Appositely to which Page 260.
Aristophanes (...).

(...). Orpheus showed us sacrificies and to abstain from slaughter. Neither
is Page 281.
Euripides disagreeing in Rheso.

(...)
(...) -- O^pheus revealed the hidden mysteries. Herodotus names not the Gods,
the worship of whom the Gseekes might borrow from the Egyptians; Twelve in
number they were, quoth he, but these only are reckoned. Jupiter, Bacchus,
Hercules, Apollo, Mars, Pan, Diana, Isis or Ceres, Sais or Minerva, Latona, as
I have gathered, which all at once to have been made known to the Greeks, and
that by the Egyptians is too hard a task for me to prove. The Athenians I am
sure had twelve Gods in especial honor, whose Paus. Attic. p. 3. l 18.
pictures they had drawn out in Gallery in C^ramicus; and had an Altar
erected, called Plut. in Nicia. page 387. l. 26.
(...), on which a little before the Sicilian war, a man dismembered himself
with a stone; which was accounted prodigious. By these twelve would they swear
in common discourse. Aristop. Equ. p. 300. A
(...). The heathens thinking that they did honor those Gods, by whom they
swear; as I have elsewhere spoken. But they were not confined to so small a
number as twelve. For how could it be, when they ran through the seven sorts
of Idolatry? First worshipping the Son, and punishing with death the neglect
thereof; as you may read in Vide Bodnum in Demonologia.
Plutarch in the life of Pericles. Secondly defying the effects of God as Bread
etc. For Clemens Alexandrinus interprets (...), Ceres, (...), corn or food.
Thirdly the poetical Gods. Furies and revengers of wickedness, as Alastores,
Palamnaei. Fourthly, the Passions, as Love, Pity, Injury likewise, and
Impudence, to whom Epimenides built an Altar at Athens. Fifthly the accidents of
grouth and nourishment, hence Auxo, and Thallo two deityes, (...), to increase,
and (...) to flourish; to which may be put Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos, the
three fatal sisters, and (...) Necessity, taken sometime for death it self.
6ly, the Theogonie or pedigree of their Gods, able to make up the sum of
which Homer speaks. (...), etc. Three thousand. Seaventhly an ignorance of the
providence and bounty of God towartd them, ^ained Hercules the rep^ller of
evil, and Aesculapius the God of Physic. And if this serve not, I can add an
eighth way, namely hospitality and good entertainment of strange Gods. (...)
(...). says Page 471.
Strabo. as the Athenians love forrainers, so foreign Gods. (...), etc. In
Panath. T. 1. p. 188.
Aristides. For they serve not only the most ancient Deities in a peculiar
manner above all their followers, but have assumed adventitious ones; such as
Strab. p. 587
Orthane, Conissalus, and Tychon. So prone were they to conceive superstition,
that when Act. Apost. c. 17. v. 18.
Paul preached Jesus and the Resurrection of the Dead; they forthwith deemed
Anastasin, or resurrection to be a God And least they should omit any, they
erected Altars unto the unknown Gods, of which In Att^. p. 1 l. 35.
Pausanius. Neither may we doubt of it the Scripture bearing witness. The
cause of this they say to be a fearful vision appearing to Philippides, sent
Ambassador to the Lacedaemonians concerning aid against the Persians, and
complaining that he ( Vide Eurip. Sch. in Med. p. 482.
Pan from whom (...) a spectrum) was neglected and other Gods worshipped;
promising likewise his help, they therefore being victorious, and fearing the
like event, built a Temple, and Altar TO THE UNKNOWEN GOD. Another opinion is,
that a plague being at Athens hot, and the people finding no help from the Gods
they implored, surmising some other power to have sent the desease, whereupon
they set up this Altar, on which was written THEOIS] (...). TO THE GODS OF
ASIA, EUROPE, AND AFRICA, TO THE UNKNOWN AND STRANGE GOD. As Justin Page 137.
Martyr and Oecumenius. much may be said of their Tutelar Gods, both for their
Cities and houses, much of their Heroes or Demigods. We will view them in order.

CAP. II. Jupiter (...). Modii salis edendi, Tessera hospitalis seu Symbolum.
Apollo (...). Poean, and ejusdem verbi origo. Mercurius (...).
ABove other of their Gods Jupiter was had in high esteem. And that commanded
by the Oracle. For when the Athenians were bidden to dissolve their kingdoms,
they were charged to make choice of Jupiter, Sch. Aristop p. 122.
(...). And so by In Nubibus
Aristophanes he is called (...). Him they worshipded as President of Law and
Justice, under the name of Jupiter Them. in Mid. p. 251.
Nemius (different from that of Corin^h named (...)) Him as God of supplicants,
hence Ulpian in Them. p. 273. Paus. p. 18. l. 40. Who thinks Sylla to be eaten
with lice by a judgment, that slew Aristion suppliantly flying to the Temple of
Minerva.
(...), Him as Protector of Cities, hence (...). Him as Governor and director
of their Counsels, hence (...). Him as chief of their Societies, hence (...),
and of their frendshipe too, hence (...); and of kindred likewise, hence (...).
To him they ascribed Thunder, hence Aristoph. Avib. p. 626,
(...), as much as coming down in thuder. To him they thankfully acknowledged
their delivery from the Persians, wrought by Themistocles, hence Plut. and Paus.
(...). Him they confessed the greatest of all, hence Pausan.
(...). Him the overseer of their buying and selling, hence Aristoph. p. 917.
(...). To him stood an Altar sacred in the courts of their houses, hence
Jupiter Her^eus, from (...) a wall, as if he were the watch and defender of
the house. Phavorius. (...). There was also an Altar to him before the gates,
of which Metamorph
Ovid. -- Ante aedis stabat Iovis Hospitis ara, hence Jupiter Xenius, as if he
were the God of strangers and hospitality So solemn were they in their
entertainements, that they would not receive a stranger without great
ceremonies such as giving the right hand each to other Eustath. in Il. (...).
(...), a most certain sign of fidelity, and security; as also washing and
clensing with salt, or salt water, as page 27. But Eustath says that they did
set salt before any other meat to strangers.
Tzetzes on Lycophron; whence it is caled (...). Salt they highly esteemed of,
ever upbrading violated hospitalty with Demosth. p. 241.
(...), etc. where is the salt? And yet it may be thought to be said of the
community of the table Tzetzes in Lycoph. p. 28
(...), customs showing that fellow-commoners, and as feed of the same table
must not injure one an other, to which the old saying may well agree Cic. de
Amicitia. Eustath says that it betokens love permanent. For salt preserves And
as it is made of many lettings in of water, so they who come from diverse places
by hospitality are made one. In (...) p100
multos modios salis simul edendos esse, ut Amicitiae munus expletum sit, Men
must eat many bushells of salt together, before they can be perfect friends;
meaning that friendship is not so soon established. But I take salt, of the
lustration, to which also they added fire, as you may see in In Acharn. p. 414.
vide Sch.
Aristophanes. Neither was this all, for they sacrificed moreover, calling
Jupiter to witness, and using these words in the time of sacrifice* Eustath.
in (...),
(...). Let my trespass be against Jupiter Xenius, if I offend, contemn, or
neglect strangers. And for the continuation of this even to their posterity
they were wont to cut an hucle bone in two, the one party keeping one piece,
the other party the other half, that when occasion or necessity should make
either of them stand in need of other, Eurip. Sch. page 446.
(...), bringing with them their half huckle bone they might renew their
hospitallity. This they call (...) Symbolum a token, which sometimes they would
send to their acquaintance in others behalf, as Jason in Euripides offers to
Medea to do. (...). And to send a Symbolum or token to strangers that shall
courteously entertain you. But of this enough, as also of Iupite^, whom
celebrated in As (...) Aristophan. (...). Pausan. etc.
other Epithits I know by the Athenians. Apollo was next in request to Jupiter,
invocated in danger or sudden events, hence Aristophan. (...). p. 86.
(...), from (...), to turn away, as if he should deliver them from eminent
evil, for which reason he is called Alexicacus. Macrob. Sat. 1. p. 253.
Apollinem aspellentem mala intelligas, quem Athenienses (...) appellant. He
was one of the first Gods they had, hence he is termed Aristoph. Nub. p. 203.
(...), but Aristop. Sch. p. 611. g.
others think because he was the father of Ion. Satur. 1. p. 257.
Macrobius is of opinion, because the Sun the same with Apollo is the Author of
progenerating all things quod sol humoribus exsiccatis progenerandis omnibus
prebuit causam. To him stood Altars in their streets hence is he (...), as if
he were set over their ways Macrob. Sat. 1. c. 9.
Illi enim vias, quae intra pomaeria sunt, (...). This Agyeus was a sharp
pillar. Schol. Eurip Phae. p. 322.
(...). Although the Greeks, Sat. 1. c. 9.
as Macrobius says, did worship him as (...), exitus and introitus potentem,
one that kept the doors of their houses, yet I find no monument of that Title
in Pausanias. famous he was for the name of Paean, of which though I have taken
occasion to speak elsewhere, yet this is a most proper place. I will not
trouble you with the trivial derivations of the Greeks, which you read in In
fin. lib. 14. Dip.
Athenaeus When the Athenians asked help of the Oracle at Delphos against the
Amazons, in the days of Theseus, The God bid them implore his succor in these
words (...). Macrob. Sat. l. 1. c. 17. page 253.
Hanc vocem, id est (...), confirmasse sertur Oraculum Delphicum Atheniensibus,
petentibus opem Dei adversus Amazonas, Theseo regnante. Namque inituros bellum
jussit his ipsis verbis semetipsum auxilliatorem invocari, hortarique. I doubt
not but the words are changed somewhat, especially if we consider the ancient
Io Paean. Paean, says the In Plut. p. 68.
Scholiast of Aristophanes is a song or hymn praying for the ceasing of a
plage, or war nay for the preventing of apparent hurt. The original of Io
Graec. Trag.
Scaliger has already found, Iao, and Io being contracted by the Greeks for
Jehovah; Paean then comes from (...) to look, so that Io Paena is in force
Jehovah Penoh, LORD LOOK. UPON US, it being a craft of the Devil to come as
near as possible he may to God, so to bereave him of his dear honor, if he
could. The remnants of these words the Vide Sir Fr. Drake.
Symerons a people of the West Indies use, who in their fighting, dance, and
leap and sing (...) Peho, at this day. Mercury is hallowed by the name of
Aristophan. (...). p. 120. Ach. p. 410.
(...) or (...), demed to be the God whose favor could enrich Merchants and
Tradesmen. He is the God of craft, so by consequence he that is cunning to
cheat may soon grow rich, wherefore this God is termed Aristophan. (...). p. 266
(...), Very profitable, from (...), an augmenting word, and (...) to profit.
He had a statue erected to him in the Market place caled Aristop. 304
(...). The entry of their houses was sacred to him; from which he is named
Paus. p. 20. l. 59.
(...), as likewise (...) from (...), to turn, because he was set up behind
the door to keep away thieves, that were wont to lurk thereabout, and then
afterward commit their villainy. More of his names you may read in Page 110.
Aristoph. Schol.

CAP. III. De Sa^^rno, Vulcano, Neptuno, Mart, Hercule. (...).
Saturn was worshipped by the Athenians, witness the feasts kept in honor to
him called (...): witness a Paus. p. 16. l. 32.
Temple which he had in Athens. Of his antiquity I cannot much affirm any
thing, He seems to have been of old, as I conjecture out of Aristophan.
(...). p. 61
(...), Saturninae animae, put for dotag proverbially. Vulcan likewise had his
honor there, and a Temple, of which P. 536. n 26
Demosthenes; where was one of the Athenian prisons some controversies in law
in it decided, as I gather out of (...).
Demosthenes. Neptune was an ancient Patron of this City, which he loved even
to strife. He was feared for security in navigation, hence Aristop. p. 403.
(...). Mars also had his worship, Paus. p. 7. l. 27.
and Temple, and Hercules too, who in a dream appeared to Sophocles revealing
unto him the sacrilege of one who had stolen a golden cup out of his Temple:
caled therefore (...) as Index Hercules, as De divinatione l. 1.
Tully. Neither were they contented with such a quantity, but canonized more
daily, as the sons of Tyndarus, Castor and Pollux, naming them (...). Plut.
The* p. 11. l. 25.
(...). For they who have a care and watch of any thing do diligently observe
it (...). For which Kings perhaps are called (...), as keepers of their people.
In Hipp ol. p. 507.
The Scholast of Euripides teaches us that (...) properly signifies a Savior.
So Pan is said to be (...), the Tutelar God of Cylene. And Apollo in Illiad. a.
Homer. (...). The word is simply put for God in In Avib. page 578.
Aristophanes, Eurip. Sch. p. 507.
(...). To these may be put Harm^dius and Aristogiton. Lycus, Theseus, Alon,
Hesychus, Aristomachus the Physician. Celeus and Metanira. And many more (of
whom see In Athen. At. l. 3. c. 1. and 7.
Meursius) made of Men, as Selanion and Paerrhasius that made the statue of
Plut. in The p. l. 14.
Theseus.

CAP. IV. De Minerva, ^erere and Proserpina, Baccho* Venere, Eumenidibus,
Hecate Iunone, Prometheo, etc.
MInerva the especial deity of the Athenians, had the Festivals called
Panathenaea, of which you may fully read in In Panath.
Meursius. Next to her Ceres and Proserpina, whose rites long maximis and
occultissimis ceremon^is continentur, In Verum. 5
says Cicero, were greatest and most hidden: therefore called mysteria from
Nonnus ad Naz. (...)
(...), to hide Vide Plut. in Alcib.
death and curse lying on him who should disclose those abominable secrets. See
Meursius in his Cap. 7.
Eleusinia, of the initiation into these stews. They were of two sorts.
Aristop. Sch. p. 85.
Greater to Ceres, less to Proserpina. Bacchus also the son of Ceres had his
Temple allotted and a double tide holy to him. Dionysia Arist. p. 222.
parva and Idem. p. 123
Magna Venus had her honor, and sacrifice in which they offered to her Clem.
Alex. p. 19.
money the price of an whore Vide Aesch. in Eumen. and Sch. Soph. in Oed. Col.
Eumenides were first adored by Orestes after he escaped the Judgment at
Athens in Areopagus for killing his mother Clytemnestra. These by In Theogonia.
Hesiod are called Erinnyes, by the Athenians (...), the venerable Goddesses.
Paus. p. 27. l. 3.
To these they offered drink offerings, without wine though at midnight, a
custom peculiar to them alone, as In Eumen. p. 275.
Aeschylus witnesses, though I am Ignorant that Aristoph. p. 228.
Bacchus his feasts were kept in the night, whence he is called Nictelius. But
the Tragoedian^ Loco citato.
(...)
(...).
Scholiast: (...). By In Oedipo. Col. p. 271.
Sophocles the manner of oblation is set down. First having clean hands and
pure, the worshipper ought to draw out of a running fountain water, and having
filled three cups with water and honey (hence termed Aeschylus loco praed.
(...)) the mouths and ears of which are to be covered with the wool of a
young sheep, turning himself toward the East, he powered out some of two of
them, but the third wholly; then with both hands setting thrice nine branches of
Olive on the place where he casts his (...), he uttered his conceaved
supplications. Other sacrifices they had as shall be shortly spoken. Vide
Interp. Hor. in illud Diva triformis.
Hecate was worshipped by them in triviis, where three wayesmet, supposed to be
the Moon in Heaven, Diana on earth, and Hecate below. Aristop. Sch. p. 63.
To her the richer sort every new Moon made a feast in the cross ways
setting bread and other provision, which the poor greedily fed on, and were so
ravinous after, that Page 64.
Penia in Aristophanes complains, that they snacht it, before it could be laid
down. Reference to this has (...), to eat the cates of Hecate, in In Orat.
(...). p. 693. n. 59.
Demosthenes, which he seems to object, as a sordid or wicked thing, Indeed
(...), which signifies on that privily takes away any of the sacrifices from
the altar, imports sometimes impious, (...). Schol. In Nubes p. 176.
Aristoph. And yet the same Scholiast tells us that the needy sustained
themselves by the sacrifices. In Plut. 63.
(...). Iunoes rites were performed in great pomp with hair over their
shoulders and down the back, in a vesture that swept the ground, their arms
bedecked with glorious bracelets, their paces so minced, that Vide Schottum in
Proverb. Isaa^um Casaub. in Athen. l. 12. c. 5. p. 388. p.
(...), Iunonem incedere is to go stately. Prometheus was worshipped in a kind
of Torch-dance, or running with likes or lamps, it may be in memorial of the
fire, which superstitiosly they believed him to have stolen out of Heaven. To
say more of their Gods were needless either for you to read or me to write.
More they had, among whom Pan was of latter making, introducted by Cl. Alex. 22.
Philippides, and Plut. Arist. p. 240. l. 30.
(...). Sphragitides Nymphae after the Persian overthrow.

CAP, V. (...). Phacasiani Dii.
THE Athenians before their doors erected statues which they called Vide
Hesychium, and Dionysium Petavium in Themislium.
(...), because they were exposed to the Sun. Neither had they these alone,
but certain others sacred to Mercury, named from Hermes Hermae Mercurialls.
The fashion of them was diverse. For first they were not (...), porrecto
veretro, but made after to that form by the Athenians, who received it from
the Palasgi, as In Euterpe p. 48.
Herodotus* Neither did they want legs, until the Athenians made them (...),
according to In Atticis p. 22. l. 14.
Pausanias. The manner was this, A face of Mercury set upon a pilar of four
corners the head only and neck were shapen, and therefore it was called
truncus Hermes, Sat. v. 852.
Iuvenal, Nil nisi Cecropides, truncoque simillimus Hermae.
Nullo quippe alio vincis discrimine, quam quod
Illi marmoreum caput est, tua vivit imago.
For which reason likewise the Greeks name them Vide Ulpian in Them: p. 332.
and G. Lang^aine in Notis ad Longinum. (...).
(...), without limbs. On the lower pars of them were certain verses engraven,
containing the praises of some well deserving men; but the Hermae on which they
wrote the exploits of those that had merited, seem to me to have been set up
in that gallery, which from the number of these images was commonly known by
(...) the gallery of Mercurials. At the consecration of these they used some
ceremonies, and sacrificed a kind of gruell which was of no great preparation;
Because they would not stand long about it. Hence (...) may be said to
sacrifice with that which costs but little. Page 693.
Aristophanes. (...); Schol. (...). in Pace. Now to the erecting of their
Images it will not be unseasonable to add something of the form of their Gods;
whom they made standing with their hands upward as if they were more willing to
receave then bestow any thing. To which Concion. p. 747.
Aristophanes alludes saying, (...). Even the Gods you shall know by their
hands and statues. For when we pray them to give us some great thing they stand
with their hands upward, as if they would send down nothing but rather take
oblation. To tell you likewise that these Idols were clothed, is no news
doubtless to on meanly versed in the Greek antiquities. To say that they
werae shoes to is probable, whence they are named Dii Phaecasiani, from (...),
a kind of low shoes which the Athenians called (...), from (...), dust, and
(...), the foot because they were nere the ground. (...), says Paed. l. 2. c.
11. p. 152.
Clemens Alexandrinus. But more sure I am rhat the were pictured with them on
their feet. Sat. 3. v. 217
Iuvenal.

Hic aliquid praeclarum Euphranoris and Polyclesi
Phaecasianorum vetera ornamenta Deorum.
CAP. VI^ De Superstioione Atheniensium, and vaticinis.
LOng since were the Athenians taxed by the Apostle for superstition, which
though it properly signifies Donat. in Ter. p. 67.
a worshipping of the Gods too much, yet under it these follies are
comprehended. Purification after fearful dreams, in Ranis p. 274 vide and
Aesch. in Per^^s.
Aristophanes (...). In which sense some understand Persius. Noctem flumine
purgare. Wearing of rings against witchcraft as a spell, called Aristop. Pl. p.
88. f.
(...). Thoph. Chapter p. 49.
Spitting into their bosoms thrice at the sight of a mad man, or one troubled
with an Epilepsie. Of which also Theocritus* (...). I know not whether the
custom of our silly people have reference to this foppery, who use to spit at
the naming of the Devil. Certain it is that anciently they did spit in
defiance, hence (...) is put for (...) and (...) to contemn or set little by,
as the Antigonen.
Scholiast of Sophocles on these words, (...). Washing with water the head as
often as he shall go into the streets (...); Charact.
Theophrastus. Anointing of stones, diverse it seems from those heaps sacred to
Mercury, termed (...). This has been of old. Done indeed as a token of
thankfulness by Genesis 28.18.
Jacob in Bethell, where he took the stone that he put for his pillowes, and
set it up, and powered oil on the top of it, in his journey to Padan Aram.
Hens crowing, the bold entrance of a black dog into their houses, Serpents
seen (...), says Theophratus, of which In Phor. Ac. 4. Sc. 4.
Terence Introit in aedes ater alienus canis. Anguis per impluvium decidit de
tegulis. Gallina cecenit. Put to these a (...). Theop.
Cat or Weesel (the word signefieth both) crossing his way, the Mouse eating
his salt bag. Not unlike them now adays, whose clothes the Rats or Mice shall
chance to eat, deemed not long after like to live by our ignorant, or that he
shall have great ill betide him. Add the avoiding of obsequies for fear of
pollution. Antiquity was of opinion that sacred persons were de^iled with the
sight of the dead, as Chemnitius has observed, and In Hip. p. 603. vide etia^
Eu^tath. in (...).
Euripides brings in Diana speaking that it is not lawful for her to behold
dying Hippolytus. Nay the standing upon a grave was a great religion* (...).
Furthermore observing of days good and bad, of which (...).
Hesiod (...), that one is a stepdame* another a mother. Pl^t. Nici 2. p. 123.
l. 35.
Amazement at the Eclipse of the Sun, as also the Plut. Nicia. p. 392. l. 21.
Moon; not knowing the reason why she did loose her light, at that time, when
she was in her full luster. Buying of Medicines or enchanted stones for the
quicker delivery in childbirth, in Aristophanes. (...). Of the virtue I speak
naught. Lib. 4. c. 11.
Boemus relates that in Darien in America the women eat an herb when they are
great with child which makes them to bring forth without pain. Join to this
the sneezing over the right shoulder, or the right side, Plu^. Them p. 85. l.
23.
(...). observation of (...), or sudden storms, as the In Ach. p. 379. and p.
424
Sch. of Aristophanes interprets it, snow, hail, or the like. Paus* At. p.
35. l. 31. vide Eust. in Il. B.
Cutting off their hair, and sacrificing it to rivers, as Cephissus. Marking
the flight of the owl, whence came the proverb, Aristop. Vespis. p. 508.
(...), The Owl has fled. And (...) for good luck* The Owl being a token of
victory to the Athenians. Zenobius.
(...). They ever accounting it so since the war at Salamis, where the
Greeks seeing an Owl took courage and beat the Barbarians. Appendix
Vaticana. (...). Other madness of theirs was sleeping in the Aristop. pp. 44,
66. T. 438
Temple of Aesculapius, who were ill at ease, supposing the deity to give, or
show them a remedy, Petronius.
for which in gratulation they were wont to offer him a cock. If I mistake not.
Aelian. (...). l. 5. c. 17.
What shall I say of putting him to death who should cut down an Oak or an
Holme (so Ilex which in Greek is (...) may be taken, I think it an Holme) in
the Heroum; And punishing Atarbes capitally who being distracted had slain a
sparrow sacred to Aesculapius? thus far have we gone. Let us proceed to their
vaticinations or prophesyings. Aeschylus brings Prometheus on the stage,
vaunting how first he taught men Vide Sch. page 32.
(...). All which were practiced among the Athenians, as you may read in (...).
initio.
Xenophon. (...), the interpretation of dreams, is a resolution of those
doubts, which we conceive of things offered to our fancy in sleep, as that of
Hecuba dreaming that she should bring forth a firebrand; and that of Atossa
before the fall of her son Xerxes, whom she saw striving to yoke the
Barbarian and Greek Woman, one of which overthrew him. This the ancients
termed (...), Aeschylus, ascribing much to the truth of them, supposing them to
be sent from a Deity -- (...). Iliad. 1.
Homer. The skill in them is (...) to truly tell the event. Aeschy. Pro. p. 33.
Which was no small art, certain Books written of that subject. Eust. in Il. a.
p. 36.
(...) as Artemidorus his Onirocritica. (...), Soothsaying by birds when such
or such fly either before or behind him, at the right or left hand, to show
what it does prognosticate. Page 33.
Aeschylus. (...). It was formerly styled Aristides T. 3. p. 25.
(...), which the mind does suggest to the opinion. It is put for any
divination in Greek writers, but most properly (...), which Nonus (...). l. 5.
(...).
Telegonus is related to have found according to Nonnus, but according to Not.
hist. l. 7 c. 56.
Pliny, Car; whence it is called Caria: (...), looking into the Liver or
entrals, like the Latins extispicium, observing the color of them. A^sch.
loco citato.
(...); as likewise the soundness, hence taken as a prodigy (...), in Page
357. l. 31.
Plutarch, the extremity of the liver (like the outmost parts of the vine
leaf, says Isidor) not to be seen, or rather that which they call the head,
Ovid, caesumque caput reperitur in extis. (...), in marking the flame of the
sacrifice burnt, Aesch. loco. citato.
(...), the Tragoedian calls them, by which they could fortell events. More
doubtless had they ways of witchcraft, as the other Greeks. (...), as when
one shall meet you carrying such or such things, then this shall befall you.
Aeschylus terms them (...) Sch. (...). See Scaliger in Tibullum, on these
words Puer e triviis. The Scholiast of In An. p. 574
Aristophanes on (...), They made, quoth he, whom they met first as it were
tokens of good hap. Whence it may be came up the salutation which In Oed. Tyr.
initio.
Sophocles calls (...), wishing luck, as (...) among the Greeks, and the
Latins Ovid. Fast.
Esto bonis avibus visus etc. (...) is put likewise for sneesing, or the
conjecturing at them. Sterm tamentum being accounted a Deity by the Romans, but
sacred to Sch. Aristop loco citato.
Ceres, as the Greeks, whence proceeded that (...), which we intimate in our
God help you, as often as we see any man so purging his head. which not to
have proceeded from any deadly disease, is sufficiently evinced by Casaubon on
Athenaeus. (...), at the sight of a Mouse. Serpent, Cat or the like in the
house, or when the oil cruse is dry, honey, wine, water is spent, to guess at
future things. On this Nonnus in Naz.
Xenocrates wrote. (...), Palmistry, when by the length of the hand, or lines
of the table, they can judge of freenes in housekeeping, of marriage and
posterity, of which Nonnus.
Helenus once left a monument. (...), gathered out of the shaking of the parts
of the body as the shoulder, thigh, or right eye, in which kind Posidonius was
an author exposed to the world. (...), as that wherein the Witch of Endor was
experienced, out of the lower parts of whose belly the Devil spoke. The first
that practiced this among the Athenians was Eurycles: hence they who are
possessed with this spirit of prophesying, are called (...) Euriclitae, as the
In Vesp. page 503.
Schol. of Aristoph. who calls this art Ib. p. 502.
(...), the divining of Eurycles (...), where after solemn sacrifices they
were wont to call up the souls of the deceased, demanding of them what
afterward should befall. As De Magis Inf. l. 2. c. 11.
Wierus. And no wonder, for they held the spirits of their parents and kindred
for Gods, quibus sacrificabant (says Bodin) and ad quorum sepulchra
comedebant, Daemonomaniae l. 2. c. 3.
in quos scriptura invebens ac detestans, inquit, and comederunt sacrificia
mortuorum, to which they sacrificed, and at whose sepulehers they fed; against
whom the Scripture inveighing and detesting speaks, And they a^e the
Oblations of the dead. Of this In Avib. p. 613. a.
Aristophanes makes mention, and Homer in his Odysses. This is that which most
properly is called (...) from (...) lamentation, Lib. (...).
by Wierus termed dirae execrationes, Nonnus in Naz.
for with great mourning they invocated (...), wicked Gods for the
accomplishment of their devilish designs. It may most fitly have the name of
Nigra Magia Vide Bodin
for so the Wizards divide them into the black and white Magic. (...), from
whence the word Magic is derived, seems to have been found by the Medes and
Persians, whose Priests were called Magi great Philosophers, Vide No^.
as In Pro^em. Nonnus.
Laertius is witness. This is supposed to be the good Magic. e (...), is a
giving of philtrum, a medicine for the procurement of love, or rather enraging
of lust, by bewitching something and giving it to be eaten; which to have power
over swine is credibly reported. (...) Tricks with a pair of sheeres and sive,
of which Theocritus. Vide Odys.
(...),. to take council of an hachet, taking it and laying it on a piece of
timber flatwaies, which did the feat by turning round. Like to which is that
naughty use of a key ^^ible. (...), by the casting of the dice to ask the
number of wives, children, farms, etc. which answer to the quantity of a
chance. Vide Theocrit. in Phar.
(...) and (...), done by corn. Delrio Disqui. Mag. l. 4. c. 2. q. 5. sec. 7.
(...), by taking the letters of the name, as when two were to fight and by the
value of them to judge the conquest: As they said of Hectors being overcome by
Achiles. (...), making a circle they divided it into four and twenty parts,
and on each part made a letter, and putting wheat upon the letters they brought
in a Cock, and observing from what letters he took up the grain, they at last
joined them together, and so knew their successors, husbands, etc. (...),
opening a book of Homer and by the first verse that they lighted upon, to
divine, as that of the death of Socrates, who so foretold it, meeting with that
verse of Homer, which speaks of the arrival of Achilles within three days at
Thessaly* Wie^. de Magis Inf. l. 2. c. 13.
Et quoniam poemata pro vaticiniis, etc and because poems were accounted
Prophesies, as Poets Prophets, they were most busy in them. Hence in public
causes had the Romans recourse to the Sibylline Oracles, and the private
Grecians to the verses of Homer. And that Sors was put for the writing of
Oracles, is manifest out of the words Sorts Delphicae, for foretelling or
divination. Vide Sch. Arist. in Plut.
I know the she Priest of Apollo being inspired with a kind of holy fury spoke
to those who asked counsel. Whence the word Aristid. T. 3 page 25.
(...) at this time read for Soothsaying, was anciently called (...) madness.
And yet that their cunning men had a kind of lottery, is as clear as day, the
In Hippol. p. 580.
Scholiast of Euripides testifying* done it seems in matters of question, so
(...) may intimate as much as to undergo trial. Predictions there were, In
Il. a. p. 36
says Eustath, out of signs and wonders, as also of the noise that leaves
make when they are burned. To which some add (...) or divination by the air,
quoting for it Aristophanes in Nubibus, which I now remember not.

CAP. VII. De Templis and Asylis.
THeir Churches were of two sorts; sacred to their Gods in Greek (...), or
(...). And sacred to their Demigods most properly (...). But the word is
promiscuously used by the Tragoedians* Clemens Alexandrinus is of opinion that
the first original of their Temples was the erecting of an edifice to the
honor of the deceased. Vide p. 22.
(...). Cecr^ps buried in the Acropolis, Ericthonius in the Temple of Minerva
Polias, the daughters of Celeus in El^usiis, etc. They were divided into two
parts, the sacred and profane, this called (...), the other (...)* In Theop.
Charact.
Casaubon tells us that (...) was that holy water set at the door of the Temple,
with which every one that entered into the Temple besp^inkled himself, or was
besprinkled by those that sacrificed; of which in the next Chapter. But others
have written that it stood at the entrance of the Adytum, into which i^ was not
lawful for any but the Priests to come. The In Oed. Tyrannum.
Schol. of Sophocles thus describes the Church. (...), quoth he, is the place
where the Altar sta^ds. (...), the Altar on which they offered their oblations,
(...), where they placed the Idol which they worshipped; in ancient time a rude
table or stock, Protreptic. p. 23.
(...) Clemens Alexandrinus calls it, as that of Juno Samia, afterward made in
the magistracy of Procles to be a statue. At first named Idem.
(...), from the shaving of it; but when art began to be so expert, as to make
it resemble a man, they termed it (...), from (...) mortolis, whose shape it
bare. At the setting up thereof they used these ceremonies: That a Woman neatly
trimmed and decked in a purple vesture, should bring on her head a pot of sodden
pulse, as beans, pease, and the like, which they sacrificed in thankfulness
for their first food, Schol. Arist. p. 115.
(...). For as much as I conceive out of Pollux, they prayed not where this was
consecrated, or did divine honors, but in the (...) or (...), the body of the
Church, framing, as may be gathered, their gesture toward it. Lib. 1, c. 1.
(...).
(...), etc. Farthermore belonging to their Temples there was a kind of Vestry,
in Greek (...) by some translated summum templum, as if it were at the upper
end. This seems to have been a Treasure both for the Church, and any soever,
who fearing the security of his wealth would commit it to the custody of the
Priest, as Laertius in vita. p. 122. vide ad eum locum Cas.
Xenophon is reported to have done at the Temple of Diana in Ephesus. Martial
points at this when he says, Templa vel arcano demens spoliaverat auro.
So reverently did they esteem of these houses of their Gods, that to do those
offices of nature, I mean venting of excrements, too shamlesly seen among us
in the Churchyards, as I may call them, was an abomination; punished severely
by Pisistratus. For when he had taken tribute of all that the Attick ground had
brought forth, they so hated him for that taxation, as they made the (...) of
the Temple of Apollo Pythius a Jakes; which although for bidden never was
redressed. And yet so secretly was it done, that he could apprehend none, save
at last one stranger whom he caused to be whipped, with this proclamation, THAT
BECAUSE HE CONTEMNED THE EDICT HE SHOULD DIE. Hence to a man that soundly
smarted for his wickedness, they were wount proverbially to say, He had better
have eased himself in the Pytheum, or if there were more, in the plural
number. (...). Nay so honorable held they these Churches, that to them they
granted privilege of Sanctuary, to which who should fly, might not from thence
be drawn out under a trespass upon religion. Of this kind was the Temple of
Minerva, and Theseus, the altars of the Eumenides, and Mercy, Vid. Rosin.
whose image they would not have erected any where in their City, although in
the midst thereof she had a Grove. Polyd. Virg. in Eurip. they are presented
sitting near the Altar. T. ^. p. 472.
The first Asylum among the Heathens is held to have been in Athens, built by
the Heraclidae.

CAP. VIII, De Sacerdotiis.
OF holy orders among them I conceive to have been diverse sorts, (...),
Parasiti, a word had in later times in great derision, exagitated almost in
every Comoedy, put for a shark or smel-feast, Terent.
Edax Parasi^us. But held once in good esteem. For when they had set aside
such a parcel of land as they thought the revenews thereof would suffice for
the sacrifices of such and such Gods, they chose certain men who should
receive or gather the harvest. Secun. At. Dialecti. apud Athen. p. 235
Crates, (...). With the incoms of this were the charges of those public
sacrifices defraied. Hence (...) Introitus magni, great yearly substance, is
used for great sacrifice in Avib. p. 581.
Aristophanes. Scholiast. (...). 'Ceryces, the same signifies a crier, but in
sacred functions a Minister, who slew and offered the victim. Apud Ath* l. 14.
p. 661.
Anthenio the Comoedian ascribes much honor to them, as if they had first
taught men to sees victuals, the flesh of sheep and oxen, while before they
devoured each other raw. They take their name from Vide Salm. in Inscripti.
Pollucem. l. 8
Ceryx the son of Mercury and Pandorus. But In Athen. lib. 15. c. 23.
Casaubon. (...). Apraestantiore part muneris quod ^bi^ant, sic dicti. Idem
namque and hostias mactabant, adolebantque etc. They in the time of divine
rites craved the silence of the people in these words, (...). Be whist all ye
people. Good words, for so Casaub. in Theophrast. p. 321.
(...) signifies, as well as to say naught, which Horace fitly interprets, when
he says Male ominatis Parcite verbis. When sacrifice was ended they dismissed
the congregation with these words (...). To which custom ^e unfitly looked,
who derived the Mass from Missa est, ite, better fetched in my mind by In lib.
quem scripsit de Sacrament.
Wechelius from Masath the Hebrew, which availes as much as to praise. (...),
the same with Meursius Eleusin. in c. 13
(...), who initiated them who desired to be admitted into the society of the
superstitiously zealous (who after they were entered, were not under a year
complete, permitted to see their Babble) In Stel. 1. p. 63.
Schol. Naz. (...). Hierophantae so called from (...), opening the holy things.
(...). L. Mountac. of Chichest.
The learned Bishop upon that place of Nazianzen, notes that Moses among the
Israelites was an Hierophanta, showing unto them what they were to do in those
sacred businesses. (...), they who lighted the fire at the Altar, whose office
made them safe in war and danger. Hence of bloody fight we say (...), Ne
ignifer quidem, there escaped not he that served at the Altar. (...). The
Priests in the Great Mysteries, ten in number, (...) whom In Alexiph. p. 144.
Nicander calls (...) from Arist. etc. p. 125.
(...), to be decent, because they kept the Temples clean, and swept them, as
Ion in T. 2. p. 621.
Euripides speaks. These were the (...), whose charge it was to preserve that
which was found in the Church, and to see that repaired which went to ruin,
says In Politic.
Aristotle. And yet we read that the Parasiti did sometime look to the mending
of it. There being a Law enacted, that what they laid out should be restored
again. (...) in In Plut. p. 71
Aristophanes likewise termed (...). These are the Priests ever waiting on the
Gods, Casaub. in Theoph.
whose prayers the ancient required at their sacrifices; out of which they had
a fee, Arist. p. 481.
the trotters and skins, as the Arist. p. 101
Ceryces the tongues. And indeed there was no necessity, For there being tables
in their Temples, as Casaubon teaches us, whereon they might lay their
oblations, (and perhaps sometimes depart) of which the Priest according to his
stomach did share. Well known to In Plut. p. 71
Aristop. who relates the like of the Priest of Aesculapius. It was requisite
to this function, that they who undertook it, should be sound both wind and
limb, they being asked (...) before their Creation, whether they were whole in
every member: which ceremony to have been used among holy orders of latter
days is well known, their neighbors wives bearing record, says In Aristop.
Christianus, that they have not taken into their societies quid mutilum. There
were moreover she Priests as the (...), in Demosthenes, and the (...) whom in
all things Antiq. l. 2. n. 3.
Dionysius Halicarnasseus compared to the vestall Nuns.

CAP, IX. De Sacrificiis.
THE father of Philosophy is of opinion that Sacrifices first began after the
ancients had ended their harvest. For then being free from care, they found
time for mirth and jollity. In which they offered their first fruits called
(...), from whence (...) is read generally to do any sacrifice. Neither does
(...) import less. For Vide Schol. Eur. in Phaen. p. 291.
(...) signifies the bend, or great chest of the garnet, wherein they laid up
the harvest thresht and winnowed; (...), the first or beginning, as if when
they began to treasure up their store, they first of all liberally paid some
devotion to their Gods. The Attick oblations, even to Draco, were nothing else
but the earths beneficence, but before Solons age, burnt offering, who willed
in his laws, Plut. p. 65. l. 26. they called their lean sacrifices (...),
horns and hair, as if naught else, Arist. p. 584.
that they should be (...), chosen and selected sacrifices. The rites performed
in them were not different from those in the days of Homer, but somewhat
reformed. It behoved them that would take in hand these holy things to purify
themselves some certain days before, Demosth. pp. 400.476.
(...), the number of them is not set down. I take (...) here to abstain from
carnal delights. Tibuli-Discedite ab aris Quos tulit hesterna gaudia nocte
Venus) To which purpose Theano being asked when it might be lawful for a
woman, from the company of a man to go to sacrifice; answered, from her own at
any time, but a stranger never. Being thus prepared they came and stood round
the Altar, having with them a basket in which was the knife hid (covered with
flower and salt, in In pace. p. 695.
Aristophanes (...) in (...). with these (...) the Greeks ever began sacrifice,
the Romans Far. Dionys. Hal. l. 2. n. 4.
Homer (...)) with which they cut the throat of the victime. Then they purified
the Altar going about it with the right hand toward it. Loco laud.
Aristophanes* (...). This lustration was made with meal and holy water
sprinkled thereon. This water is called Athen. l. 9. p. 409.
(...) in which they quenched a firebrand taken from the Altar; with which they
bedewed the standers by, accounting it a kind of clensing* (Hence Sophocles
Oed. Tyr.
(...) was forbidden him who^ they took for a polluted and forlorn rogue) Then
they cast some of the flower on them. And having thus expiated, they cried out
Aristoph. p.
(...); Who is here? to which they made reply, (...). Many and good. Then they
prayed. (...).
Homer (...). Among the latter they spoke with a loud voice (...), before they
began. Let us pray. Supplications ended they drew the victime so as (if it were
to the Gods above) the head might look upwards, which (...).
Homer (...). Eust. (...). If it were to the Heroes or Demigods, with his
throat downwards. Then they slew him and skinned him, and cutting out the (...).
huck shinbones and hanch, they covered them with fat, which is called (...)
(hence the Gods of the heathen are deciphered by In Stel.
Nazianzen, (...), rejoicing in the fat) to the end that they might burn all
out in a great flame. Eustath. p. 101. (...).
(...) For the Grecians accounted it unlucky if it did not so consume, and
thought that it was not (...): upon the (...) they cast small pieces of flesh
cut from every part of the beast, beginning with the shoulder (which is in
Greek (...)) hence this is called (...). The reason Eustathius gives, Loco
laud.
(...). that they might seem to consume all, which the Athenians did not,
being commanded by law to carry some of the sacrifice home. By reason of which
injunction, they did so strain curtesy of their Gods, that the illiberall or
nigardly sort of people would sell that which was left, and so make gain of
their devotion. Th. Charac. (...).
(...) says Theophrastus, Where Page 336.
Casaubon notes. Coxam fere offerebant, aut intestina, aut aliud non magnae rei
persaepe. They offered the hanch bone or the entrals, or somewhat of no great
worth. Where by entrals, you are to understand the spleen, the liver, and the
heart, which Homer calls (...), for though the word be taken for the bowels,
yet it signifies the heart too, in which sense we say (...), a pusillanimous
man, and (...) a courageous, as the In Aiacem Lorarium.
Scholiast of Sophocles teaches us, and so (...) the bowels of compassion These
the ancients did divide among them at sacrifice to feed on, and afterward cut
out the rest to roast* For when they had finished their devotions, they let the
reyns loose to all manner of voluptuousnes, gluttony, and drunkenness. For often
times they left nothing of their sacrifice, especially when they offered to
Vesta, whence the proverb, (...), is to eat up all, like the Roman Lari
sacrificare. To say that publicly they begun to Vesta were more then I could
well prove; but that they did so is plain. In their houses they had Altars,
and so I supposed once (...) to be taken, but this was done in Libaminibus, in
their drink offerings, as he on Vide p. 582
Aristophanes. As for their meat offerings it was required that they should be
Vide Pollucem. l. 1.
sound and without blemish, whether it were an ox, sheep, goat, swine, calfe:
to sacrifice they simply termed (...) which our Latins have interpreted fitly,
Facere. In Bucolicis
Virgil, cum faciam vitula. Whose poverty was so great that he could not afford
a sheep, or the like, they thought the Gods would be well pleased if he offered
Molas, which the Greeks call Casaub. in Theop. p. 237.
(...) meal, which by the richer was mingled with oil and wine, as the Page
701. D.
Scholiast of Aristoph. The more wealthy instead of this, did cast frank
incense on the Altars. For the sacrifices of Pallas the tithes were set a part,
as Page 378.
Demosthenes. In their oblations the (...) or cooks gave the Schol. Arist. p.
204.
10 part to the Prytanes. So (...), put for (...) where the Gods cannot have
their allowance. Scho. Aristop. on (...), etc.

CAP. X. De Anno Attico.
THE ancient Greek year consisted of three hundred and sixty days, each
month consisting of thirty* Rude antiquity ignorant of celestial
contemplations, deeming the Moon to finish her course in that space. Which
according to De Doct. Te^p. l. 1. c. 1.
Petavius seems false. Lunaris enim non fuit, sed ejus menses tricenis diebus
constabant singuli. By which reckoning, had they not used intercalations, they
had soon found a maine difference in the times, when they ought to have
celebrated their festivals. They made therefore a Tetraeteris, in which when
they found seven days deficient, they supplied them by adding Negat Petitus
Miscel. l. 8 p. 192. Petav. assirmat.
two to every end of the year, called (...), M. Seldeu. in Apparat. ad Graeco
Epoc. Chro.
eo quod per illud biduum Athenae Magistratibus carebant, Because for those two
days Athens was without Magistrates. But the last of these four had but 359
days, besides the two (...), in respect to the Olympic games, ever kept in
the Olympic games, ever kept in the id est, The fifteenth day.
full moon, which could not have happened, had they not began the Tetraeteris
with a new Moon. Nevertheless the Sun and Moon appearing 14 days odds in
a Tetraeteris, they made every eighth year an interjection of one Month, De D.
Tem. T. 1. p. 4.
that this time being ended, the course might still return the same. This all
Greece observed, says Petavius, by the Athenians termed (...), by the people
of Etis an Olypiad. What kind of Lunary year was in use among the Grandfires
of Greece, is not truly known; by Eclog. Chr. p. 225. Petav. goes not so home.
Lib. de doct. Temp. 1. c. 6.
Petitus delivered to be of D. 347. every Month 29 D: except one, which like
our February had but 28 D. Every two years one month was inserted, once of 29
D. another time of 28 D: But because in two years this each of these two years
severally taken was called ver^tens, joined annus magnus.
magnus annus surpassed the Moon 15 D. itaque Tetra^teridae fecerunt. This
consisted of 1445 D: 723. and 722. make 1445. So many days 354. four times
doubled has, Loco laud.
if you please to adjoyne 29. Of this sort of calculation does he understand
El^m. Astro. c. 8. p. 36.
Geminus (...). That must be fitly understood, quoth he, for they did number
the Months as if they were 30 D. when notwithstanding they had but 29. In
Auctario
Petavius is otherwise conceited, who takes the Scholiast of Arist^phanes in
that sense, as meaning 29 D: full ones, when indeed exactly taken according to
Loco citato
Gemiuus you may account 29., 1/33. and In Arg. Orat. contra. And p. 380.
Vlpian, (...) 29 ^ And yet are we not destitute of authority, that a Month was
supputed 29 D: In A^ati Diosem. p. 74.
Th^on. (...). But that the fragments were left out, the words are plain,
(...). He means a day the space of a night and a day, for according to such
Months did they administer iheir civil affairs. And now it is in request among
many of the Greeks. But of this enough. Soon was the Tetraeteris found
faulty; therefore was made a Kalander of eight years, in which doubling eight
times the difference of the Sun, to wit, 11 D:. made up three Months,
inserted every third, fifth, and eight year. But the scruples coming short in
sixteen years 3 D: they intercalated three. And seeing still they could not
make it even. Geminus p. 38. Wh^m I follow. Not igno^ant that Meton was the
first that made the Cicle of 19. years. Hence (...). Metans year is put for a
long time proverbially.
Euctemon and Philippus made an Almanac for nineteen years, which by
Callippus was produced to 76 Months 940. of them 28. (...), says Geminus. This
was the progress of their reformation. But we must look back again and
consider that they counted their year two ways. First of Then were al^ the
m^nths of 30 D. as you may see in Schol. Aristop. Ach. p. 412. c.
CCCLX, as has been already spoken, next CCCLIIII, when they made the Months
interchangeably (...), full and deficient, that is, one 29. the other 30 days,
yet both Lunary. For that is proved even by the names of their days. The
first, wherein the Moon appeared new, called by a Synalaepha or contraction of
the words (...). The second (...). The eight (...), or half full: the full
(...). The last (...), Gem. p. 32.
(...), because that in the days of Thales Milesius, Laertius in vita.
who was the author of that term, the Month had 30, and no more, but ended,
whence I suppose Pollux l. 1.
(...), signify the dead, the period of whose life has Been come to. Though
Diogenian gives other reasons. And by the way we must not think, that they had
no regard to the course of the Sun; Petit. E^cl. Chro. p. 215.
sed tamen ut annus fieret Solaris, etc. But nevertheless that the year might
be correspondent to the Sun, they put five days, called (...) epacted, to
the last Month Scirrophorion, for the supplying of the defect. And so the year
had 365 D. which was the true and just measure. But he might have added,
sometimes 366, by reason of that which Geminus acknowledges the Greeks to have
reckoned, although they accounted their Months but 30 D. This is that annus
implicitus, which In (...). p. 78.
Aratus styles (...). To this point the Greek Authors, telling the years by
seed time. In Antigon. p. 213.
Sophocles -- (...)* For the ancients, says In Aratum p 78.
Theon took the year three ways, either by the Sun; or seasons; as spring,
summer, autumn, winter, In Oedipo Tyran. p. 183
( Sophocles. (...) --) or thirdly by the Moon: whose irregularity Solon is
reported by In vita page 66. l. 15.
Plutarch first to have marked. Observing therefore that she on the same day
overtook and surpassed the Sun, Plutarch.
(...), he caused that to be called Laert. in vit
(...) the old and new, because that remnant, which was before the conjunction,
he thought belonging to the precedent Month; and that remnant which was after
the conjunction, appertaining to the subsequent. (These pieces In Diosem. p.
125.
Aratus calls (...)) in which matter he is thought to have had Homer in sight,
who in his (...). page 164.
Odysses terms the thirtieth day, as Didymus expounds it, (...). Where we may
note that then they had no (...), but counted from one to twelve in the
ordinall numbers, used by Contra Timocratem. p. 446. n. 39.
Demosthenes in one Orati^n, (...). Then putting the lesser to the greater they
said (...), the third above ten, the fourth upon ten, and so to twenty, Vide
Plutarch. loco nuper laud.
But when at the one and twentieth day they perceived the wan^ of the Moon to
be great, and the light almost lost, they changed the order and used (...),
etc. the tenth of the decrease, the ninth of the decrease, and so to the twenty
nine, (...), the second of the decrease, or from the end, going lower in number
still, as the splendour of the Moon was diminished, but the thirtieth they called
(...) for the cause above. Here likewise they take the reason by the Month
ending was (...) Ulpian in Them. p. 210.
(...). Because the days and Moons do as it were dye, according to that of
Horace. Novaeque pergunt interire Lunae. Macrobius Sat. l. 1. c. 16.
Macrobius, quid aliud nisi illum (...) dicit ^ujus pa^la^im deficien^is
supputatio in nomen desinit secuturi: and (...) illum, qui praecedit numerum
successurus priori in defectum meanti. (...) standing to supply the place of
the departing Month; fixed and still waiting until the Moon shall have
journied to the completing and ending of the precedent time. Thus the last day
of our lives is said to stand Virgil, Aeneid. 10, p. 330.
Stat sua cuique dies, as unto which we must pass through all the rest, and
once approach. Thus squared they their times and state matters to the Moon.
Hence read we (...), to count the Month as they do, who manage politic
businesses, or belonging to government. In which course they made their year of
CCCLIIII days, which divided into ten parts make ten times 35, which space
each Argum. Or. Them. contra Androt. page 380.
(...) ruled in its turn, the four that abounded were called (...), in which
they chose Magistrates, being for that time destitute of them. The year thus
dsposed, the Months must of necessity be (...) cavi and pleni, as Elemen.
Astrono. p. 31.
Geminus. (...). If a month have 29 D:, two have 59. Because therefore the two
halfes might be made one whole, they so ordered it that now it should be 29 D.
then 30 D. The Athenians counted their day from the setting of the sun on this
day, Macrob. l. 1. Sat. c. 3. Plin. not. hist. l. 2. c. 77.
until the going down of the next. In respect to which In. Theriac.
Nicander may be thought to say of noone sleep, -- (...) To take rest at the
beginning of the even. I know that the ancients wrought but six hours in the
day. Lib. 4. Ep. 8.
Martial, sexta quies lassis septima finis erit. Which In Il: ad (...).
Eustath affirms in his Commentary on Homer. And therefore Z. H. TH. I. were
the notes of the 7.8.9.10. hours, which joined make (...), as if they should
have said to the Laborers, Rest. The beginning of the year was Casaub. in
Athen. p. 921
Hecatombaeon, July, the eight, says Chronol.
Petitus. They ever accounting that to be the first Month. In which order I
have found them set down in a In 40 number. 24. p. 264.
Manuscript in our public Library, only Maemacterion is to be put above
Pyanepsion.

Roman. Macedon. Hebrew. Egypt. Hellen. Athenian. (...). (...). (...). (...).
(...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...).
(...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...).
(...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...).
(...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...).
(...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...).
(...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...).
(...). (...). In which table although Hecatombaeon be compared to the Julian
Month January, yet it appears not that Hecatombaeon was ever so removed out of
his place, as Eclog. Chr. p. 214.
Petitus will have it, Epiphanius contradicting of which by and by. Indeed when
the Christians in honor of their Easter, began the year in April, they called
April Hecatombaeon, as Loco laud.
he himself testifies. But that Hecatombaeon was always the first Month, is
not probable. For when the Athenians under the dominion of Alexander the
Great's successors changed the head of the year from July to the seventh of
October it is like that they began at Maemacterion according to this Ex MS.
Biblioth. Bodleianae in 80 n. 8.
rule.

(...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...).
(...).
Vide Petav. in Epiphan. p. 138.
Certain it is that the same Attick Months are sometimes Lunary, and sometimes
not, but of 30 D: or Julian; When they are Lunary they have no sure seat, but
are now at this time, then at another. And this has bin the reason why the
same Months have not been suited to the Julian, by writers. Vlpian on
Demosthenes parallels Hecatombaeon to Page 21.
January, and in the Oration for Ctesiphon, to March, and again to Page 163.
April. In Olymt. 3
March he calls Boedromion, which also he interprets Page 148.
June* Elaphebolon Page 140.
November, Page 167.
Sep^ember (in the margin February) and Page 120.
December. Page 167.
Thragelion^, April. Munychion January. Scirrophorion, March. Which errors are
cursorily noted by Eclog. chr. l. 1. c. 6. p. 213.
Petit in part, to no great satisfaction. But when by the decree of Augustus
Caesar they were charged to conform their year to the Julian, they Vide Petav.
in Epiphan. page 139.
thus numbered.

Menses Attici. Menses Iuliani. (...) March. (...) April. (...). May. (...).
June. (...). July. (...). August. (...). September. (...), October. (...).
November. (...). December^ (...). January. (...). February.

But of this, so much only. We must handle their Lunary year because according
to them were their feasts kept. From whence sometimes they would count, as
Aristoph. p. 806. c.
(...)* So much and as long since the Bac hanals; speaking of the age of a
girl. For a more compendious way of comprehending their holy days view this
Almanac.

Hecatombaeon. July.
1 (...). 2 (...). 3 (...). 4 (...). 5 (...). 6 (...). 7 (...). Kept in memory
of the return of Theseus out of Cree^, after he had slain the Minotaure. In
vita p. 12
Plutarch. The solemnity Metamorp. l. 7. Fab. 23. Vide illum diligenter. Nam
erit operae pretiu^.
Ovid seems to describe: Nullus Erecthidis fertur celebratior illo Illuxisse
dies etc. the eight day of every Month was sacred to him. He had also a
festival called Theseia, in ^honour of gathering together the dispersed people
of Attica*
(...). 8 (...). 9 (...). 10 (...). 11 (...). 12 (...). Of these as also of the
day, speaks Page 446. contra Timocratem.
Demosthenes. Then did the Masters wait on their servants, as in the Roman
Saturnals. In Annalib. vide Macrob. Satur. l. 1. c. 7 versus finem.
L. Accius. Maxima pars Graium Saturno, and maxim Athenae Conficiunt sacra,
quae Cronia esse iterantur ab illis, cumque diem celebrant, per agros, urbesque
fere omnes Exercent epulis laeti, famulosque procurant Quisque suos.
13 (...). 14 (...). 15 Then were kept the (...) in memorial of their
transmigration. Plut. p. 8. l. 9. By some it is termed (...) Aristop: page: 700.
Plut. initio Them. l. 12.
(...). 16 (...). 17 (...). 18 (...). 19 (...). 20 (...). Hence was this this
Month called by the ancient Athenian^, (...); afterward Hecatombaeon, from
(...), sacrifices to Jupiter or Apollo, as some think with the blood of an
hundred beasts: For so were they profuse in their sacrifices. Metamorp.
Ovid. Taurorum sanguine centum.
21 (...). 22 (...). 23 (...). 24 (...). 25 (...). 26 (...). 27 To Minerva the
Protectresse of their City, as has been before said, instituted by Theseus, as
In vita p. 8. l. 8.
Plutarch. (...). At first they had the name (...), by Ericthonius, or Orpheus.
In the time of solemnization there were rare shows exhibited to the people,
such as horse races, wrestling, dancing in armor, called (...), from Pyrrhus
that invented it; Then carrying in procession the Peplus, or robe, in which was
wrought the fight of the Giants. All which you may read in In Panathenaeis.
Meursius at large, and Page 140.197.180.181 467.580.650 746.
Aristophanes his Scholiast.

The second of this Month is called (...), because it has but 29 days, and so
always in cavis.


(...). In Il. (...). page 6.
The Scholiast of Homer says that Hecatombe may be used for five and twenty
beasts, whose feet make up the number of an hundred, (...).
28 (...). 29 (...).
Metagitnion. August.
From the sacrifices of Apollo, called (...).

1 (...). 2 3 4 (...). 5 6 7 (...). 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 (...). 18 19 20
21 22 23 24 25 26 (...). 27 28 29 30
From this month came the feasts Boedromia, from Theseus everthrowing the
Amazons. Plut. p. 9. or Ion helping the Athenians against Eumolpus. (...) to
aid because in necespty they made a cry. Aristophan. (...) Lucian. (...).
Latini Quiritare. hence help came in.
Boedromion September.
1 2 (...). When Pausanias and Aristides overthrew Mardonius, Xerxes his
General near Plataeae, a City of Baeotia, Tom. 1 p. 257. see Plut. in
Aristid. p. 241.
Herodotus, Sch. Arist. page 247.
Justin.
3 4 5 (...). Miltiades leader of the Attick forces got the upper hand of the
Persians. In which battle when Cynaegirus pursued the flying enemies to their
ships, he caught hold of one with his right hand, which lost, he made use of
his left; that cut off, he intoken of his prowess spared not his teeth, to the
eternizing of his name for valor against his enemies.
6 (...). 7 8 9 (...). 10 11 In thankfulness for the delivery of Greece; at
what time Darius and his Fleet went homeward. Calliop. p. 234. b. lib. 3.
Tom. 1 p. 257. see Plut. in Aristid. p. 241.
Aristides describes the joy at full, and the erecting of an Altar to Jupiter
that freed them,
(...). 12 13 14 The greater in which they were made Sch. Arist. page 247.
(...), or admitted to the sight of that they worshipped. The first day was
called (...), perhaps from the conflux of the people. The second (...) because
the Crier then warned them to go to sea. Here I look on Meursius for brevities
sake but if you please to read severally, see Aristop. Sch. p. 85.98.131
138.455.529.647.142 218.227.228 231.233.217 262.264.516 Aristid. T. 1. p. 323.
Clem: Alex. in Protrep. p. 10.
The third day they Sacrificed a Barble, because it devoures a sea hare, an
enemy to man. The fourth, two Oxen drew a basket representing Proserpine
gathering flowers, which women following cried (...), Hail Ceres. The fifth
they ran with torches: Hence (...), and (...).

The sixth Bacchus was carried in pomp: Hence is it termed (...). The seventh
day they exercised in feats of activity and he that overcame had wheat given
him. The 8th was Epidauria from Aesculapius his coming from Epidaurus to Athens
to be initiated. In the ninth they filled two measures of corn, and setting
one at East and the other at West, they powered them out, one looking to heaven
and crying (...), the other to the ground, saying, (...): Thus Meursius: That
day was (...).

The second of this Month was left out ever, says Sympos. Q. l. 9. q. and in
l. (...). p. 331
Plutarch, instead of which some are persuaded, the name only was omitted, as
(...) for (...), which was recompensed by (...), or (...), as in a defective
Month (...), for the twenty: Of this judgment is the Lib. de doct Temp. 1. c.
5. p. 11. D.
worthy Petavius.


(...). 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
Maemacterion. is to be inserted here.
Pyanepsion. October.
This Month took denomination from the feasts Pyanepsia: For mingling the
remainder of their food after their ariving, they put it into one pot, and
seething it, were joviall altogether at the same.

1 2 (...). 3 4 5 6 7 (...). After that Theseus had buried his Father, he paid
the vow made at Del^s, to wit, if he returned safe from the death of the
Mino^aure, he would sacrifice unto him a pot of sodden beans. Hence (...), as
it were, (...). For the antiques called beans (...).
8 9 10 11 (...). 12 (...). 13 14 (...). In Aulularia.
Plautus calls the festival vigilias Cereris, which the Attick Dames kept most
sober and chaste, strowing their beds with conyza for that purpose, it being an
enemy to lust. They prepared themselves with fasting, but after that took their
liquor freely. The number of days were three allotted, as some, or four, as
others. When Castellanus says that Ovid makes them nine, is false; for that
was the Mysteria, as we above have shown: They were done in honor to Ceres,
that gave laws first, as she is termed (...). Of these you may read Page
611.7^0.782.783.819.820.829.
Aristophanes and his Scholiast.
15 16 17 18 (...). 19 20 21 22 (...) Kept this Month. When the Parents brought
their children to their Tribes, to be enrolled, I suppose for fear of deceit
in patrimonies* Then they made merry^ for four days.
23 24 25 26 27 28 (...). The first was (...). The second (...). The third
(...). The fourth, (...). In honor to Minerva. Graecia Feria. l. 1.
Meursius teaches us that they were celebrated the 17 of this Month, but
Petitus has thus placed them.
29 30 (...).
Maemacterion. November.
This Month is to be placed before Pyanepsion, as I have above given notice,
but in this Almanac I follow Petitus, who so has set it, though much against
the opinion of other learned: as M. Seldom, Petavius and others, whom I would
have you Reader to accept as for most approved.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 (...). 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 (...). Plutarch in the Life
of Aristides, says that the Baeotians, nay and Greeks send yearly some to
sacrifice to to the memory of those that died at Plataeae, and every five year
they have great pastimes, which Page 241.
he sets down the manner of.
18 19 20 21 22 23 (...). The Month is derived from Jupiter Maemactes: for I
suppose they first found Gods, afterward festivals to them. Not the Months
first, and then named the Gods from them.
24 25 26 27 28 29
Posideon. December.
Fron Neptune, who is Posidon. For the first day of this month was sacred to
him, as In Theoph. Char. ult.
Casaubon. Hence he thinks it to be called (...).

1 2 3 4 (...). 5 (...). Dionysia (...)* Without the City, It seems when they
had gathered in vintage and pressed their grapes. (...) Torcular. Then were
they most jocund, as may appear out of that. Like the voice of them that tread
the Wine Press, and in (...). v. 127.
Oppian. (...). On which words Page 18.
Conradus Rittarspusius takes (...) to be January.
6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 (...). 14 15 16 (...). A feast to Ceres. The day
doubtful. Page 743.
Demosth.
17 18 19 20 21 22 23 (...). 24 25 26 (...). 27 28 29 (...). 30
Gamelion. January.
1 From the marriages first made by Cecrops, of whom before we have spoken, and
more you may read in Tzetzes on Lycophron. That month wherein this people
coupled, hence is called Gamelion, from (...), nuptiae. It is sacred to Juno,
who by the Poets is called Pronuba and conjugalis, Pre^ident of weddings and
the marriage bed.
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 (...). 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 (...). 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
26 27 28 (...). 29
Anthesterion. February.
1 2 (...). 3 4 5 (...). 6 7 8 9 10 11 (...). Kept in great mirth for three
days in the honor of Bacchus. Of this you may see Aristoph. p.
293.417.419.422.222.
The first (...) from (...) the tubs, and (...), to open, for at the broaching
of their vessels they drunk stiffely. The second (...) from Chus, a good
capacious vessel. In this he that could drink down the rest of his companions
had a golden crown. The day was called (...) likewise, but not in the sense
spoken.
The third (...), I suppose different from (...). From this Festival the month
is named. The twelfth of which Dionysia in Lemnis were kept, called (...) and
(...). The 13th were acted Comoedies, begun the 3d year of the 93 Olympiad,
when Callias was Archon. But after they were taught as In Terent. p. 289.
Donat and In Demost. p. 184.
Vlpian witness, and Page 143.
Aristophanes, (...), says one. (...).
12 13 14 15 (...). 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
Elaphobolion. March.
1 2 3 4 (...). 5 6 7 (...). 8 9 10 (...). 11 12 13 14 15 16 (...). Of these
Contra C^esiphont.
Aeschines makes mention, and you shall have them obvious every where in the
Greek Authors.
17 18 19 20 (...). 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 (...).
Munychion. April.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 (...). 11 12 13 (...). 14 15 16 (...). Munychia were
observed to Diana, who was so called, and had a Temple in Munychia, by Athens:
The Month bears the name: In this Month were the causes of strangers judged.
Avib. p. 60.
Arist: Sc:
17 18 19 (...). To Jupiter Meilichius. The greatest day that the Attick route
was kept in: See of this Page 150.174.
Aristophanes and Eustathius. Ismen. and Ism. l. 1.

20 21 22 23 24 25 26 (...). 27 28 29 30
Thargelion. May.
1 2 3 4 5 (...). 6 (...). To Apollo and Diana; holding it to be their
nativity^ On this day did they expiate for the sins of the people. For they
were wont to nourish some base men, and of no account, at the public charge
whom in time of pestilence, or the like they sacrificed for the sins of the
City, Two in number, says the In Equites page 353.
Scholiast of Aristophanes, whence they were called (...): but more properly
(...) and (...), In Ranis.
Aristophanes.
7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 (...). 16 17 18 (...). 19 20 (...). To Diana, who by
the Thracians is named (...)*
21 (...). Not much different from the greater. See Meursius.
22 (...). 23 24 (...). Petitus places it on the 24 day, others will have it
the 25. To Minerva, on which they take off the ornaments of her statue, and
wash it I suppose, Page 152.
Plutarch, (...). p. 257.
Xenophon.
25 26 27 28 29
Scirrophorion. June.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 (...). To Minerva from (...), a Canopy, under which
her Priests did walk in pomp at that time: or from the statue of Minerva found
in Scirus. Page 497.725.
Scol. Aristoph.
13 14 15 (...). It was not lawful anciently to kill an Ox: wherefore when
one had slain that beast eating the meal provided for the sacrifice, he slew
him and fled, in memory of which this day was kept. Afterward they did mitigate
the Law, and gave license to butcher an Ox, so that he was not for the plough.
To which Satyr. 10. v. 268.
Iuvenal may allude. Vt vetulus ^os Qui domini cultris tenue and miserabile
collum Praebet, ab invito jam fastiditus aratro.
16 17 18 19 20 21 (...). 22 23 24 (...). 25 26 27 (...), etc. 28 Where Petitus
makes the four first Tribes to govern each his day, on those four that
abounded above the year, Athen Rep. l. 2. c. 3.
Sigonius seems to agree, and In notis ad Harpo^ra.
Mausacus approoves it. Neither is it misliked by D. Doct. Temp. l. 2. c. 1.
Petavius De emend. Tem. lib. 1.
Scaliger has falsely taught us otherwise, who makes each Prytaniea to rule 36
days, which none ever are to have done, except the first four.
29 30
CAP. XI. De Tragoeda, Satyrica, and Comoedia.
IT is taken for grant among the Ancients, that Homer who lived Vid. Can. Chro.
ad Gr. Epoch. Mar. Arund. p. 97.
907 years before Christ, was the first that taught Hermog. de Eloq. Meth. p.
561. c. 33. Eustath. in Praef. ad Iliad
(...), to speak in Tragoedie; comprehending great and weighty matters in few
words and very concisely, being more large and using circumlocution in matters
of less consequence, which Hermogenes acknowledges to be the property of a
Tragoedian. This foundation being laid, following ages still built (though
rudely) a structure to small perfection. Nam post illius tale tantumque
documentum, etc. says Tract. de Trag. and Comoed. praef. Terentio.
Donat. For after that Homer by the Iliads had represented a Tragoedy, by the
Odysses a Comoedy, most ingenious imitators took those Poems and set them in
order, and divided them, which at that time were inconsiderately, and without
judgment written, impolisht, and in the first rudiments not so neat and trim,
as in process of time they were made. For Poesy was a great while in her
minority, and very rude, after the first publishing of plays. For we see
little or nothing of Marmo. Arundel. and ad ea Seld. CL. Praefixa etia^
Aristophan. (...)
Susarion, the first Comoedian, worth our time: some few verses only, and so
few, as may but witness such an Author. The original of the word Comoedy is
supposed to be taken from diverse reasons: First, because in their revelling,
kept in honor to Bacchus, they sung them, and so it may be derived from (...),
commessatio; Sch. in Naz. ^te^. b. p. 106.
(...), signifying (...), to sing basely at the cup. Secondly from (...),
sleep; because when any of the Attick husbandmen had been injured, it was the
custom (as before has been spoken) for the party abused, to come in the night
season into the streets, and with a loud voice cry, such and such rejoice in
wrong, and commit such outrages, though there be Gods and Laws. And after
that, proclaimed the parties name, who on the morrow was sought out by the
husbandmen and much shamed; by which these wrongs were redressed. Thirdly from
(...), a street, because when the old Athenians would note a wicked man's life
out to the world, meeting merrily in the streets and high ways, they laid open
every man's life, and concealed not his name, Donatus de Tra. and Com.
In vicos and compita ex omnibus locis laeti, alacrefque veniebant: ibique cum
nominibus singulorum vitam publicaban^. These verses were first sung Idem ibid.
in the green Meddowes, In Synopsi vitae Aristop. Th. Magister.
about the beginning of the spring, When the husbandmen kept the festivals of
Bacchus the God of Wine, to whom they sacrificed a Goat, because his biting is
an enemy to the vine, the skin of which they took and sowed up close, filled
with wine, and anointed it with oil to make it slippery, and so hopped with
one leg upon it, making themselves laughter at the falls they often took. This
sport they call (...) from (...) a skin, and (...), to leap, Plut. p. 108.
Aristophanes. (...). Geor. 2. p. 71.
Virgil has fitly set it out. Non aliam ob culpam Baccho caper omnibus aris
Caeditur, and veteres ineunt proscennia ludi:
Praemiaque Isa. Tzetzes in Proleg. ad Poetas interprets (...)
ingentes Pagos and compita circum
Theseidae posuere: atque inter pocula laeti
Mollibus in pratis unctos saliere per utres.
After Susarion, sprang up Thespis, the first that made Tragoedies, which by
Horace are termed Lachrymosa poemata, sad poems; because they represent humane
miseries, the misfortunes of Kings and great men especially, there being no
place for a poor man, but only to dance, as In Epictes p. 95.
Arrian has observed. Which thing gave an occasion to Aelian Var. l. 2. c. 11.
Socrates, when he saw the most worthy and rich put to death under the thirty
Tirants to say to Antisthenes, does it not repent thee that we in our lives
never did some famous exploit? So in Tragoedies we mark that such as Atreus,
Thyestes, and Agamemnon are slain; but what Poet was yet so impudent as to
bring a base fellow on the stage sacrificed? Not supernumerary is that of
Euripides for K: Archelaus, desiring that he would write a Tragoedy of him, who
prayed that nothing proper to a Tragoedy might happen to him; meaning sorrow
and lamentation. For so is (...) used, as Athen. l. 3. p. 90.
(...) for joy and mirth, and glee conceits. The first Tragoedy that Thespis
taught was that of Alcestis repriving her husband from death by her own, as Ad
Marm. Arund.
Mr Seldom has conjectured: It Is Thespis was forbidden by Solon to act his
Tragoedies, as Laert. in Solone. p. 40.
(...), a fruitless lying: Horace of him thus speaks: Ignotum Tragicae genus
invenisse camaenae
Dicitur, and plaustris vexisse poemata Thespis.
Quae canerent agerentque peruncti foecibus ora.
Upon which words some have written that his Poems were so voluminous, that he
was constrained to bring them upon waines: But alas a poor conceit! In Horatii
Poeticen.
Franciscus Lusinius Vticensis is of opinion that Thespis carried his Scene
upon carres: and Acron; That the Chorus carried about in waines acted
Tragoedies: Chori plaustris circumducti Tragoedias agebant* Schol. Arist. p.
142.
I avouch that at the first the Poets acted alone their own Fables; And to me
it seems a ground for to stand on, the Greek Authors by the word (...),
intimating a Poet. (...), etc. The ancients, says In Demost. p. 40.
Vlpian, called the Poets Hypocritas actors, which we now term Tragoedi, such
as Euripides, Aristophanes, etc: The place in which they sung their Poems, was
a Scene upon a waine drawn in procession to the honor of their God Bacchus, as
among the Greeks the custom was, Stel. (...). p. 107.
says the Scholiast of Nazianzen: Of the manner in those ancient times, (...).
p. 343.
Plutarch shall thus inform you: (...), etc: A pot of wine and a vine twigge,
then one drawing a Goat, next another with a basket of figs, and last of all
the Phallus: In which solemnity the Poets in waines following the pomp, might
without control laugh, scorn, and deride any they met, says Antiq. Rom: l* 7.
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus; or were wont, as the Loco la^d.
Schol: of Nazianz: to rail upon each other, whence (...), is as much as to
convitiate impudently, (though in a good sense sometimes Hermog. Meth. de
Eloquentta, c* 2. p. 519.
to celebrate the pomp, or go in procession in honor to the festival) and
Them. pro Coron. p. 134
(...), a scandal or reproach, (...). Whence likewise came the Greek proverb,
Schol. Arist: p. 142.
(...), tanquam ex plaustro loqui, and Vlpian. in loc. cit: Them.
(...), tanquam ex plaustro convitiari* to give reins to the tongue, to be
free in abuse: Which that they might do the better without shame, or blushing,
sometimes would they anoint their faces amurca, olei faece, with the dregs of
oil, says Donat, or of wine (for so I interpret (...)) from which Poets by
Nubibus p* 141.
Aristophanes are called (...). Horace -- P^runcti foecibus ora. Sometimes
would they put on vizards, Vlpian: in Them: p* 254,
which least they should hurt the head, were defended from the skin with a
woollen cap, named (...): A word elegantly used by De falsa Legatione.
Demosthenes, in a Metaphor drawn from the liberty and impunity of the persons
that wrote it: (...). Think not to escape scot-free for such villainy, though
you get a pileum on your head. We may apply it in threatening to any slanderer,
of who^ we surely intend to be revenged. But I seem to forget the Poet, while I
speak of the stage, I will therefore return to him. Thespis, as I said, was
the first that invented Tragoedies; so called, as Donat tells, because (least
there should be rewards wanting, by which good wits might be stired up to
write, and men encouraged to get them tunable voices ad dulcedinem
commendationis) they gave the Actors a Goat. Caper namque pro dono his dabatur.
(...) is a Goat, and (...) a song. Horace, Carmine qui Tragico vilem certavit
ob hir^um. Before that time some say that Epigenes the Sicyonian made
Tragoedies, but the most received opinion is this which Horace has set down
of Thespis. Before him there was no art of poesy Tragical, but at their
festivalls, when they ascribed all their mirth and delight to their Gods, they
did it especially to Bacchus (and so afterward, when Actors are called (...),
and (...) simply by Orat. (...). p. 242.
Demosthenes, by Donat Artifices. The word is used for Juglers, and such as
Hokus Pokus in Charact. vi. Casaub.
Theophrastus) they would feast, and afterward scoff and deride each other,
which grew afterward a part of their solemnity. They would moreover dance at
rude Music, and from thence suppose they the Chorus to have sprung up. They
would likewise cast forth (...), as they term them, Georg. 2.
in Virgils language, versus incomptos, Casub. de Sat. Poesi. l. 1
Numeros innumeros eo tempore fundi solitos and sine art. For they had of old
but two sorts of verses, Heroicks, in which they sung the praise of Gods and
Noble men, and from this in a short time, with small care grew a Tragoedy; the
other sort was Iambicks as toying and lascivious as the Phallica, but biting
too, and from hence came a Comoedy. At first small was the difference between a
Tragedy and Comedy, Casaub. ib.
constat sane, primis temporibus ignoratum fuisse discrimen inter Tragoediam
and Comoediam, and the reason is, because even Tragoedies had their wantonness
and petulancy. At first they sung in honor to Bacchus Dithyrambicks, and
afterward neglecting him they praised their Demigods, which when the people
saw they cried down, with (...), whence our proverbial adverb is fitly used
(...), for nothing to the purpose. But to give content to the people, the
Satyrs did praeludere. But after that, when a Tragoedy took state they excluded
the Satyrs, and were only for sad and serious persons; by which mournful Poems
the people were wont to be cast down, sympathizing with the persons
represented, therefore to cheer them a Chorus of wanton Satyrs were brought in
by Thespis as De art Poet.
Horace. Moxetiam agrestes Satyros nudavit, and asper
Incolumi gravitate, jocum tentavit, eo quod
Illecebris erat and grata novitate morandus
Spectator, functusque sacris, and potus and exlex,
In a Satyrick play, Satyrs have a Chorus place, or else the persons are
Satyrick and ridiculous, and for the easing of the minds of the spectators,
they would bring in Satyrs for sports sake; and many of their Tragoedies had
some mixture of Satyrick sport, says P. 129. de Sat. Poesi.
Casaubon. Fuisse aliquando pluribus Tragicis Dramatis interjectas Satyricas
Fabulas. Of this I say Thespis was the first inventer, who likewise eo ease the
Chorus ( Laert. p. 220
for that acted only) brought one actor upon the stage, to whom Aeschylus added
one, and Sophocles another, so the number was three, Aeschylus's is (...)
Sophocles his (...), a word put for an obscure and base fellow in 184.
Demosthenes, Vlpiau, (...), speaking of Aeschines, if I remember, Tully calls
them Actors secundarum and tertiarum partium. In divina^.
Vt in actoribus G^aecis fieri videmus, saepe illum qui secundarum and
tertiarum partiam, cum possit al^q^anto clarius dicere, quam ipse primarum,
multum summitt^re, ut ille princeps quam maxim excellat. But let me speak
what I have to say of a Tragoedy. Plutarch in vita X Rhet. p. 452. B.
None was permitted once to act Aeschylus, Euripides, or Sophocles his
Tragoedies, but they were to be recited by the Scribe, that the Actors might
(as I conceive) repeat them. (...). And to this purpose by a law of Lycurgus
the Orator were they commanded to be transcribed, and kept under custody (...).
Yet the Iuxta fine^.
Author of the life of Aeschylus writes that the People made a decree, that he
should receive such a sum of gold, that would (...), the places of Aeschylus
after his death. I put the word (...), docere. Because Tragoedians as well as
the Comoedians were said (...), to labor in teaching the people. And for this
end did the Ancients say out so much money upon their Theaters. Heinsius Poleg.
ad Aristarchum Sacrum.
Sed immane quos quantosque sumptus, in Theatra, in Comoediarum ac Tragoediarum
repraesentationem fecerit antiquitas. Cum non mores tantum ab utrisque
emendari, ac prudentiam conferri, sed and scripta antiquissim^, and formas
Reipublicae, ac vitam Magistratuum, cum summo spectatorum fructu, in Comoedia
examinari, factiones componi, ac gravissima subinde publico suppeditari
crederent consilia. Not unfitly therefore did the Poet reply to the people that
carped at him in the Theater. I came hither to teach you, not to be taught by
you. Hence of a Tragoedy or Comoedy the Greek writers say, Athenaeus Dip. l:
6. page: 268. vide Casaub.
(...), docetur fabula, and (...), docere, as sometime (...), as you may see in
Page 270.
Atheneus. The following Poets did not always represent their own Fables, but
oft-times their predecessors; so says Lib: 10.
Quintilian, the people permitted the works of Aeschylus to be dealt with,
because in many places his verses were not set in order. He brought great grace
to the stage, and first taught (...), the painting of the Scenes; which some
think Horace to aim at, when he says, Modicis instravit pulpita cignis: Which
because it was perfected by Sophocles, is thought (nay spoken affirmatively by
some) to have been invented by him: Sophocles indeed did (...), bring in many
new things: such as leaving out the actio^ of the Poet (for before the Poet
himself acted) by reason of the badnesse of his own voice; he found out white
shoos, which the Actors and Dancers wore; he made the number of Dancers
fifteen, before but twelve; he fitted likewise his Tragoedies to the natures of
the Actors, etc: but that he invented (...) I cannot find: Somewhat likewise
was added by Euripides: T: Magister:
as to set out the Argument of the Fable in the beginning of the Tragoedy, as
you may observe, leading the Auditor, as it were, by the hand to the last and
principal point of that one action which he would represent, which by the
glory of our Nation, In the defense of Poesy.
Sr Philip Sidney, is not past by, as frivolous, without noting: These three
were the Princes of Tragic style, who exhibited to the People every year at
some certain solemnities their Poems, striving who should get the victory by
the approbation of Judges, chosen for that purpose, called Heinsius in Proleg:
ad Aristarchum sacrum.
(...), and Aeschines cont: C^esip:
(...); Ten in number, think some, at first, gathering out of Plutarch, in
the life of Cimon, authority for it. Because when he had brought the Relics
of Theseus out of Scyrus, Aphepsion the Archon, in gratulation to him, chose
not the Judges as soon as the Theater was filled, and spectators placed; but
presently after Cimon entered the Theater with nine more of his fellow
Captains, of each Tribe one, after accustomed Sacrifice he swore them Judges,
who gave the victory to Sophocles, but then young; for which Aeschylus grieving
went into Sicily, where he died, and was buried near Plut: Cimone p. 352. l.
39.
Gelas. But out of this place we cannot prove that the number of these Critic
Judges was always Ten. This we acknowledge done in testimony of high
acceptance of Cimons service. And yet in judgment upon Tragoedia^s, the number
might be so great. For there seems to be a difference between the Judges of
Tragoedies and Comoedies. The number of Tragic Judges, grant we happily to be
such as we speak; the power incontrolable, as from whom there was no appeal to
others. Heinsius loco laudato.
Cum neque provocatio ab iis esset, neque de quibus illi judicarent,
magistra^us caeteri sententiam pronunciarent. The Comic Judges were in number
but five, from whence came the Greek proverb, Zenobius.
(...). sub quinque Iudicibus lis est. The Ad Aves p. 562.
Scholiast of Aristophanes speaks somewhat uncertain. Judges, quoth he, pass
censures upon the Comoedians, and they who had five voices were happy. Those
were all. For if there had been ten of them too, it would have made nothing
to the Poets felicity to have had equal voices: For the odd gave a great
stroke. Hence wishes the Chorus in the behalf of the Poet -- (...), to be
Victor by one voice only. Another difference is that, whereas the Tragic
Judges had free liberty of suffrages beyond the power of the people, the Comic
had not: For when Aristophanes taught his (...), they so much took the people,
that they applauded the Poet, cried him up Conqueror, (...), says Var. H: l: 2.
Aelian, and commanded the Judges to write Aristophanes uppermost (as the
fashion was, which Avib: p: 762
Aristophanes calls (...), the most excellent first, the next to him second, and
next to him third (which was no small praise, according to that of Quintilian,
as I remember, Honestum est in secundis tertiisve consistere) and no other. For
which cause I suppose the Poets before reciting, were wont to sacrifice, and
pray for the favor of the Judges and spectators. Loco laud.
Aristophan.

(...)
(...) -- Where the Scholiast interprets (...) truly as it is to be understood,
(...), to supplicate. And good reason. For if they pleased not the people in
reciting, they were overwhelmed with stones. To which use ^anis p. 248
Aristophanes points, saying -- (...); nay sometime would they hiss them,
which they term (...) and (...), sometime stamp them out of the Theater, which
they call (...), by Lib. 6. c. 19. p. 203.
Pollux interpreted (...). Another difference is that Aeschines contra C^esiph.
p. 98.
the Comic Judges were punished if they judged not right, the Tragic not so
And for these reasons have some conjectured, nay positively written, that their
Judges were of two sorts, old and new, in which matter, if there be place for a
conjecture, mine is, that they confounded both, making no odds between the
Critic Judges of Tragoedies and Comoedies But of this, Reader, you may
determine as your Authors shall afford authority. Before Judges, as I said, the
Poets in emulation presented their labors, and they who in their opinion lost
the day, were said Heintsius Prolegom^
(...), by Sat. Poesi.
Casaubon interpreted non stare. The time of exhibiting their Tragoedies, were
the holy days of Bacchus called Dionysia in agris, or Lenaea, in the month
Posideon, on the Anthesteria, or Dionysia in Lymnis, in the month Anthesterion,
on Dionysia in urbe in the month Elaphebolion, to which I find added the
Panathenaea by Thrasylus in Platone p. 220.
Laertius, which some deny, yet the same write that when Sophocles exhibited
but one, it was at this festival. I say but one, because it was a custom
among the Poets of ancient days to entertain their people with more plays
then one. Mos autem Tragicorum Graecorum fuit Athenis, ut modo singulas
committerent fabulas, modo plures, says De Satyrica Poesi p. 131.
Casaubon: Sometime in the same year three, and then was it called (...):
sometime four, and then they styled it (...), Laertius loco citato.
(...) TETPALOGIA. Whereof, says mine Author, the fourth was a Satyricall
play, the three other now treating of the fortunes of one and the same man, as
those of Aeschylus, named therefore Orestia, to wit, (...). Which are all
extant; the fourth was Proteus Satyricus. At other times they were not of the
same subject, as that of Euripides. Medea. Philoctetes. Dictys. The fourth was
(...), says the Author of the argument to Medea. Where the interpreter seems
to me not to reach to the expression of the Greek word (...); Messores,
Satyros; he ought to have rendered it thus, Messores, Dramma Satyricum. For that
the word bears this sense is sufficiently delucidated by Lib. laudat.
Casaubon. That the greatest task of action lay on the Chorus, is as apparent
as the Sun at noone. The number of them in Comoedies were twenty four, and six
juga (each jugum consisting of four; but (...) four, each (...) six men) in
Tragoedies fifty, until the time of Aeschylus his Eumenides, the number of
which so terrified the People, Author vitae Aeschyli.
that the children and younger sort fainted, and the women suffered abortion;
for which reason, says Pollux, the number was lessened (which some deny) by
law. They were by the Act brought to fifteen, five juga: I say juga, because
they were divided into (...), and (...) was when the Chorus entered by three,
and then it was called (...), by file (...), when they came on the stage in
rank five at a time; and this they term (...). Sometime one of them entered
alone, which they say (...). Of interlocutors the ancients for the most part
never had above three; but if a fourth spoke, that they named (...); and if the
Chorus supplied the part of a fourth actor, it was styled (...). To speak of
the several verses of Tragoedies, is actum agere; and I had rather speak of
the action, then the art in co^posing and yet not much, only this of their
motions, termed (...) and (...), says the Scholiast of Pindar, is a turning
from the right hand to the left, in analogy to the motion of the universe
(...), from the East to the West; because Homer calls the East the right hand,
the West the left: Contrary to the Hebrews, who term the South Iamin, which
signifies the right hand, and the North they counted the left. (...) was a
turning from the West to the East, that is from the left hand to the right, as
the Planets move* Another posture they had in their Epodes, for (if it be so in
Tragoedies, as in Lyrick Music, which I believe) to express the immobility of
the earth they stood still. They used Epodes for the most part at the end of
the Acts, when the Players avoided the stage. Thus much of Tragoedies; the
authors of which were highly of old esteemed of; insomuch as after the dismal
discomfeit of the Plut. in fine vitae Niciae.
Athenians in Sicily, they were relieved, who could repeat somewhat of
Euripides. Nay, by a Law made by Plut. in vit. x. Resp. Paus. Atticis. p. 18.
Lycurgus, and established in Athens, Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides had
statues erected in brass for the continuation of their memory. After
Tragoed^es had proceeded to perfection, Comoedies were with great applause
taught, as De art Poetica.
Horace, Successit vetus his Comoedia, non sine multa
Laud --
He says, vetus Comoedia, because a Comoedy was divided into three, or if you
please so to speak, two sorts, the Old and New. I said three sorts, because
Grammat. (...).
the old was different from it self. The meaning is, that the old Comoedy, of
which Susarion (by some named Sannyrion,) was author, tended only to laughter,
being without order and decency. For the Chorus now walking, now dancing about
the smoking Altars, sung simplex carmen, some naked verse, says Donat. Which
by Cratinus was redressed; for he ordained three Actors, and mingled with his
sport, profit, I mean for instruction. For under the Democracy it was lawful
to exagitate and propose for a laughing stock Captains and corrupt Judges,
Citizens given to bribery, and such as lead a dissolute life, naming the men
upon the stage, and fitting the Actors with vizards, bearing the shape of those
whom they intended to deride. But as the state grew to an Oligarchie, that
license was taken away, Eupolis being cast into the sea by those, against whom
he wrote his Comoedy Baptae, and so drowned* Nay, there was a law enacted not
Hermog. Partiti. p. 76.
(...), to name any whom they wrote the Comoedy of* Of which Horace, -- Sed in
vitium libertas excidit, and vim
Dignam lege regi. Lex est accepta, Ch^rusque
Turpiter obticuit sublato jure nocendi.
But when Alexander of Ma^edon grew potent and a terror to Greece, the Poets
fearing least any of the abusive wit might displease the great Macedonian, they
changed the Argument of their plays, and instead of abusing states and people,
they fell upon ancient Poets, or some part of History not truly written,
personating the Actors so as to be most ridiculous: Donat. Generaliter ad omnes
homines qui mediocrib. fortunis agunt, etc.
sometimes scoffing on the stage at mean men, and this they termed (...), the
new Comoedy. But afterward it was a piece of the Athenian policy to forbid that
the people should be tossed on the stage, unless they would themselves, says
Athen. Rep.
Xenophon; knowing that none were wont to be brought thither but the wealthier
sort, (...). Some are of opinion that no Player came on the stage until thirty
or forty; I dispute not the matter; sure I am that Sophocles taught his first
Tragoedy at twenty eight* in which doubtless himself came on the stage. It
being among the Athenians no disgrace, as the Romans accounted it, to appear
there. Praesatione ad vitas p. 2.
Aemilius Probus. In scenam vero prodire, and populo esse spectaculo nemini in
eisdem gentibus (Graecis) fuisse turpitudini: quae omnia apud nos partim
infamia, partim humilia, a^que ab honestate remota ponuntur. The place where
the people beheld these plays and pastimes was in the market place, Meurs.
A^t. Lect. l. 4 c. ult
where they nailed scaffolds to a black poplar tree. For in ancient time they
had no Theater of stone, only of wood, which they call (...). Thesmoph. p. 787.
Aristophan. -- (...)
(...) --
These were built by some, who upon some consideration of money admitted any to
a seat, named therefore Casaub. in Theoph. p. 245.
(...). Once it seems places were not hired. But there grew great enormities
and abuses. For striving to get places, there rose wrangling and brawles, and
fights; wherefore the Attick Senate ordained that each place should be hired
for two oboli: (in the Consulship of Diophantus, a Dra^hme, say some, whence
rose the Proverb, Zenobius.
(...); because at the establishing of it, there fell hail) This money they
called (...), from (...): because with it they did (...), buy a seat to behold
the show exhibited. Now because the poor people had not to give, and so were
deprived of the spectacle, Pericles desiring to be popular, made a law that
they should receive out of the Cities revenues two oboli each man. Cont.
Leocha. p. 617. n. 50.51.
For the right of exacting which money, they were to produce the authority of
the Lexiarchicall Rolls, as appears out of Demosthenes. For the distribution
of this were certain officers appointed, named (...). But afterward
Apollodorus strove that in war and public necessity, these sums might be
employed in military affairs, but he endeavored in vain; Eubulus in flattery
to the people, enacting it capital for any that should attempt that which
Apollodorus did; Which makes Olymth. 1. p. 7.
Demosthenes desist, willing, yet not daring to persuade to convert the money to
the use of the Army. But see the folly of them! Lacon. apud Plut. Mor. p. 421.
For they spent as much on these sports as in obtaining the Mastery and liberty
of Greece. And the end was miserable for they became effoeminate, and so put
their necks under the Macedonian yoke. Lib: 6* fine.
Justin of the death of Epaminondas. Siquidem amisso, quem aemulari
consueverant, in segnitiem torporemque resoluti, non ut olim in classem
exercitusque, sed in dies festos apparatusque ludorum, reditus publicos
effundunt: and cum auctoribus nobilissimis, poetisque theatra celebrant,
freqentius scenam, quam castra visentes. Versificatores Oratoresque meliores,
quam duces laudantes. Tunc vectigal publicum, quo ante millites and remiges
^lebantur, cum urbano populo dividi coep^um est. Quibus rebus effectum est, ut
inter otia Graecorum, sordidum and obscurum antea Macedonum nomen emergeret,
etc. Of the Theater I will say little, as also of the stage: Only that the
places in the Theater were not promiscuous. For there was a distinction
between Senators and younger sort. The Senators was named Aristoph. p. 578.
(...), among which it is probable the Judges had the first place, as Lib. 4.
c. 19. p. 202.
Pollux The seats of the youth were called (...). One part of the stage was
Orchestra, in which was (...) either a Tribunal or an Altar. That upon all
their stages there was an Altar sacred to Bacchus, is apparent out of Donat: he
says it stood on one side of the stage, before the doors, Pollux: who names it
(...). There was more over a Table called (...), on which before the time of
Thespis some body ascending in the Poets place, did answer the Chorus. D^
Musica p. 441.
Plutarch thinks (...) to be derived from (...), because that before the
building of Theaters the ancients embracing Music only for institution of
youth and praiese of their Gods, sung the commendation of good men and honor
of their Deities in Temples.

LIBER TERTIVS.
CAP. I. De Legum latoribus Atticis. (...). De sanciendis Legibus.
AS Lib. 2. p: 27.
Justin has been too forward in relating the mutation of the Athenian
government, passing by the perpetual and decennal Consuls, and naming only the
yearly: so has he erred in the original of their Laws, making Solon the
Father of them, but it seems otherwise. For, as Arist. Plut. pap. 67.
Gerardus has observed, Theseus gave Laws to the Athenians. And In Theseo p.
8. l. 2.
Plutarch witnesses, that when he congregated the Attick people, and
constituted a Democracy, he reserved only to himself the government of war
and custody of Laws. (...). Add to this, that before the knowledge of letters
and writing, it was a custom among the ancients to sing their laws, least they
might forget them, used in the days of Problem. (...). fol. 189. b.
Aristotle by the Agathyrsi, a people near to the Scythians. Whence afterward
the rules of Music, for the true keeping of time, singing, and playing, are
supposed to be called (...). Neither may it be thought otherwise, because all
the notes of the Vide Alypium in Isagoge Musica.
Lydian, Hypolydian, etc. Dorick, Hypodorick, etc. Phrygian, Hypophrygian,
Ionick, etc. songs were distinguished by the Alphabet. Yet In libro de Musica.
Plutarch is of opinion, that they derived the word from those bounds, which
the Musicians of old prescribed, for the tuning of voices or instruments, least
they might be confounded, and therefore he calls it (...). Loco citato page: 437.
Idem. (...). The Greeks, says De leg. lib. 1. fol. 16. b.
Cicero, think the cause of this word, jus suum cuique tribuendo, intimating
(...)* which signifies to distribute, because the Law gives every man his due.
Thus see we, that there were Laws of yor^; let Loco laud.
Justin say, Nullae civit^ti leges tunc erant, quia libido regum pro legibus
habebatur; That the City was without Law, because the wills of Kings were
Laws. In succeeding ages, and before Solon too, Draco gave Laws, living about
the three Clem. Alex. p. 226.
hundred and ninth Olympiad. His Acts, says Variae hist. l. 8. c. 10.
Aelian, were called (...). Now (...), by Arg. orat. con. Lepti.
Vlpian is interpreted (...). A Law giving in precept how to make a Law. And
yet Poli. 2. c: 10
Aristotle calls them (...), giving them this commendation, that they are not
worth remembrance, but for their great severity. Which gave occasion to Arist.
Rhet. l. 2. c. 44.
Herodicus to say, that they were not the Laws of man, (...), in a double
sense of the word, which is also put for a Dragon. And Plut. in Solon. p. 63.
l. 2.
Demades, that they were not written with black, but blood For he punished
every peccadyllo almost with death, those that were convicted of idleness, or
stealing of pothearbs, alike the sacrilegious and man^slayers. Wherefore were
they made of none effect by Solon. For he abrogated all, except those which
concerned murder, entitled Demosth. p. 70.
PHONIKOI NOMOI. Him succeeded His laws ^ontinued 100 years says Plutarch in
strength. In Solone. p. 66. and afterward by little and little decayed. Aelian.
Var. hist. l. 2. c. 22. If any speak against them, he had corporal punishment.
Solon, a man so well tempered, and equal betwixt the Commons and the Peers,
that he was beloved of both, having still a care, least while he should side
with one, he might displease the other. Whom, for his uprightness, Sat. 10.
verse: 274.
Iuvenal styles Iustum, and for the care of the Republique, which (...). page
390.
Demosthenes averres he had in all his Laws, Page 190.
Aristophanes terms, (...), a lover of the people. In Timaeo.
Plato brings him learning his Laws from a Barbarian: And In Solone p. 66. l.
31.
Plutarch tells us that he traveled afterward into Egypt. But it seems by
Lib. 22.
Ammianus Marcellinus, that in the making of his Laws he had the approbation
and judgment of the Egyptian Priests. Et Solon adju^us sententiis Aegypti
Sacerdotum, latis justo moderamine legibus, Romano qu^que Iuri maximum addidit
firmamentum. Bibliothec.
Diodorus Siculus relates two things brought from thence to the Athenians by
him. First, that all the Egyptians were compelled to bring to the governors
of the countries their names written, and by what means they sustained
themselves; wherein if any were found false, or that lived by unjust gain, he
fell into danger of life. Secondly, it was a custom among the^, that payment
should be made only with the goods of the debtor, and that the body should not
suffer. For they thought the estate alone to be subject to the creditor, the
body addicted to the Cities in which they lived. Neither was it fit that
Soldiers, who were to undergo hazard for their country, should for usury be
committed to prison, or the country be in jeopardy for the avarice of some one
man. Which induced Solon to make the first decree, as Initio vitae Solonis.
Laertius and In Solone p. 62. l. 8.
Plutarch say, of freeing the bodies; which, if there were not wherewithal to
satisfy the craving loaner, were compelled to serve. He therefore out off all
use, Plutarch. p. 62.
as some write, or else Androtio.
lessened the burden of it making it more moderate by his Law (...): so called
from (...), to shake off, and (...), an heavy weight: Forgiving himself first,
Loco laud.
as Laertius, seven talents; or, as Page 62. fifteen says Polyzerus Rhodius.
Plutarch, five. But this seems to have been done for the avoiding of the
aspersion cast upon him as accessory to the injuries of some, who having an
inkling of his intent, borrowed much money with hope of never making
restitution. Laert. p. 14.
Casaubon conceited that this was not his first exploit, but long after he had
sat at the stern of the Weale-publique. Yet it seems probable. There being
no more compendious way to make a man popular, then to give liberty to the
common people. which he to bring in an innovation of Laws did willingly
invent, and they afterward lovingly accepted. For in testimony of their
approbation, they kept a Festival named Plutarch. p. 62. l. 43.
(...). Here likewise you may observe the ancient flattery of the Athenians
toward their own vices, putting gilded names on those things, which
themselves were ashamed of, calling Plutarch. loco laudato.
(...) etc. as our blades name drunkenness, good fellowship; whores, she
sinners; and niggardise, thriftinesse; springing from this root of Solons, who
called (...). Them. p. 477.
To these Laws two ends were proposed, mutual commerce. and direction of
behavior toward the state. Idem p. 484.
To curb wickedness, and injustice* and to punish offenders that they might be
bettered. And although they were the ordinances of Draco and Solon, yet may we
fitly call them the Athenian Civil Law. Each City, as Institut. l. Tit. 2. Sed
jus quidem civil ex unaquaqu^ civitate appellatur. veluti Atheniensium.
Justinian teaches, giving a denomination unto her Statutes. Nam si quis velit
Solonis vel Draconis leges appellare jus civil Atheniensium, non erraverit.
They were engraven in tables of wood called Sch. Apollo. Rho. Argo. 4.
(...), triangular, if we may believe the In Avibus page 604.
Scholiast of Aristophanes, who quotes Aristotle and Apollodorus, witnessing
that they were called (...) also (...) from the elevation. Vi^e* Plut. p. 66.
Some are of opinion that the Rites pertaining to the Gods and their worship
were written in the Cyrbes, and Laws belonging to men in the Axones.
Apollodorus says that all decrees are called Cyrbes, because they were written
in stone, and so set up, (...).
which from their standing were termed (...). I know that decrees, merits,
praise and dispraise too, were written in stone. whence Vide Nonnum in Naz.
(...).
(...) may be put for a Treatise tending to a man's disgrace. But this by the
way. These Tables were kept in the Acropolis, translated afterward to the
Pry^an^um by Ephialtes, where to the days of In Solone p. 66.
Plutarch, some relics of them were to be seen. The Antegraphon or copy
written with his own hand was not removed, but those that were transcribed by
them. Because in matters of doubt and controversy they might have recourse
unto them. Pollux lib. 8. p. 408.
For the distinction of which, some think that (...) is used in Demosthenes for
that in the Prytaneum. Others for the Law in the l^wer part of the table; but
to me it seems improbable for then the number of the table ought to be cited;
and indeed, one Table sometimes could not contain a Law. For we read in Solone
page 63. l. 37.
Plutarch, that the eighth Law was cut in the thirteenth. I am not averse from
the guess of Petitus, who supposes the Orator to mean the Law which afterward
he quotes* nor ignorant of the opinion of some, who think that it is to be
understood of the under line. For the Laws being written (...), converso sive
retrogrado literarum ordine, says In Pausaniam. p. 426.
Silburgius; which In Eliacis p. 174.
Pausanias explaines, (...), from the right hand to the left, Eodem lib. page
165.
more significantly, (...). When the second verse begins at the end of the
former, as in the race which they call Didulus, or if I shall speak nearest to
the word, as husbandmen turn their Oxen when they plough, as for example: EK
DIOS AP ONESTHA See those that have written of diverse ways of writing. They
therefore take the lower, that is turned, (...), After this manner were the
Laws written, and doubtless there were some customs as strong as Laws. For
although the Lacedaemonians governed by tradition of custom, and the Athenians
by written statutes, as Contra Appionem. Vide Justinianum. Inst. l. 1. tit. 2.
Josephus, yet surely had their customs great force, insomuch as In Avibus
page 576.
Aristophanes uses (...) for (...). Page 577.
Scholiastes (...), Vide Justinianum.
So did the Greeks divide their Laws into (...), wri^ten and unwritten. The
unwritten, sine scripto jus venit, quod usus approbavit, use. The In Ajacem
Locarium.
Interpreter of Sophocles thus (...). A Law is a written custom, and a custom
an unwritten Law. Besides these there were decrees which they termed (...),
Psephismata, a word used by In O^at. pro Flacco.
Cicero, nothing different, (...). Cont. Lept. p. 296.
Demosthenes. who means in virtue and power. For they differ much. A Law
maintains justice once found, Aristides. Tom. 2. p. 30.
common for ever. A Psephisma follows the necessity of the time, as it differs
in events: it directs not warlike affairs, but is applied unto the occasion of
arms, and as Laws can be abrogated, so decrees chanced. And here ought we to
note, Demosthen. (...). p. 417.
that no decree is greater then a Law. Of decrees there were two sorts; h
(...), such as the Senate by it self established, which were but of twelve
months continuance; to the confirming of which, the people were not convocated,
or their consent required, termed Ulp. in Them. p. 418.
(...), which Demosthenes proves to be (...), Vlpian. (...). Like to the edict
of the Roman Praetors which lasted but a year In Vetr. 1.
Cicero. Qui plurimum tribuunt edicto* Praeteris edictum legem annuam esse
dicunt. In other decrees the opinion and good liking of the people was asked,
for the giving of the authority unto them, which endured in force a longer
time. Ulpian. loco laudato.
(...). And therefore we may easily know a problema from a decree of the
peoples confirming, by this observation, (...) only, gives us to wit, that it
is a problema. (...), in the beginning of a decree, shows it to be (...). The
Senate always sat in consultation about that which was to be enacted, whether
any damage might accrue to the State by it or no, the Law commanding that no
decree should go forth without deliberation. Ulp. in Arg. Orat. And. p. 181.
Vide Them. p. 182.
(...). Which done the Pritaneis took certain Tables and wrote on them Such
or such a day, about such a time there should be an assembly to consult of
these and those affairs: and this they called Sch. in Naz. (...), page 55.
vid. Ulp. in Them. p. 240.
(...). When then they were assembled, and the people purified, the decree was
read; which if the people allowed of, stood; if not* decayed. It was forbidden
that any should raze out a Decree of any table. And he was brought in question
of life, who should presume in making a decree to pretend a fallacy. Now
because future time might happily perceive some inconveniences to arise by
oversight in their Lawg^ver, and that as abuses should happen, which in his
days were not discerned, so there would be a necessity of making new statutes:
It was ordained therefore that every year there should be (...), which
Demosth. p. 445.
Vlpian expounds (...). A consideration of what ought to be done concerning the
Laws. Vid. Them. loco cit.
The manner was this. Every eleventh day of July in the assembly after the
Crier had made his prayers, as his fashion was, and shall anon be spoken of,
the Laws were read over in order. First those which concerned their Senate,
next the we^le public, and thirdly the 9. Archons, and afterward the other
Magistrates. Then was it demanded if there were Laws enough for the Senate,
and so for the Commonwealth, etc. If any of the Laws in force were to be
abrogated, it was adjourned until the last of the three days of the three
Co^vocations; on which the Prytanes, appointed for the revising and reciting of
the Laws, were to take the matter in hand. The Preedri chief of the Assembly,
were to (...) Demosthen. Ulp. expounds (...), to report.
acquaint them with it. Five men at the first meeting, were chosen out of all
the Athenians, who should patronize the Law to be abolished; and according to
the judgment of the Nomothetae, chosen out of the Council of five hundred, was
the business carried, that the Laws should be of none effect, or full
strength. Whosoever should bring in a new Law, was to write in a Table, Cont.
Timocr. p. 446.
(...), Demosthenes, the form thereof, and set it up at the Statues of the
Heroes before spoken of, Demost. p. 297.
(...), which standing in a place conspicuous, that some certain days before
the Sessions, any Citizen might read what was to be handled; and if any so
pleased, he might at the proposal of the Law declare his mind either for, or
against it, as at the preferring of Ulp. in Them. p. ^97.
Bill in our High Court of Parliament, where it is not denied any Burges or
Knight of a shire, to speak his opinion pro or con, either with any whole Bill
or some part thereof, or in opposition to it, or some one clause. Provided
likewise, that he, who attempted to enact a new Statute, should take care for
the disanulling of the old, that might contradict it, otherwise he came within
the compass of (...), a writ of Transgression of the Laws: which was of two
sorts. First, when time is not observed in writing them, Ulp. in Them. p. 297.
(...). Next when one is made that is adverse to a former. And if it so happened,
that any persuaded the people to make a Law that was not commodious to the
weale-publike, he might be questioned within Them. Orat. Arg. cont. Leptinem.
a years space; Them. p. 419.
but if the time was expired, he could not. Idem p. 468.
Nay, they slew Eudemus, a Cydiathenian, for bringing in a Law they liked not;
scarce different in that one example from the Locri; among whom, he that would
propose a Law, should do it, his neck adorned with a halter, that if his
request pleased not, he straight way powered out his soul under the hands of
the hangman. Their Orators, which are called Gellius l. 3. c. 13. Is.
Callistratus Athenis Orator fuit, quos illi (...) appellant. L^vie Dec. 4. of
Athens, ubi Oration plurimum pollet, favore multitudinis alitur. Ulpian. (...).
(...), because they lead the people with their Rhetoric and flattery, wrote
Laws and decrees, as we learn out of Page 468. n. 225.
Demosthenes; and therefore are they deciphered by Dipnos. l. 12
Athenaeus, (...).

CAP. II. De Comitiis. (...) and (...). etc.
THe Assemblies were called by the Prytaneis four times in five and thirty
days. Pollux l. 8. c. 9. Sect. 7. p. 398.
In the first they confirmed the Magistrates in their offices, if all things
were managed well by them, otherwise they put them o^t* They heard public
causes, looked into confiscate goods* and possessions left by inheritance. In
the second, any one with leave might freely speak of private and public
affairs. In the third they gave audience to Ambassadour^, who before ought to
deliver their letters to the P^ytaneis. In the fourth they treated of holy
things, such as belong to their gods and worship of them. The first meeting was
the eleventh day of the Prytanea; the second the twentieth; the third the
thirtieth; the fourth the three and thirtieth. I find a difference between the
In Achar. p. 371.
Scholiast of Aristophanes and Vlpi^^ in the days on which they came together,
one making the first day of the month to be the day on which the first
assembly was, In Them. p. 445.
the other the eleventh of the Prytanea, which seems truest* And whereas they
both write that every month there were three lawful assemblies, to wit, on
the first, tenth, thirtieth; or tenth, twentieth, thirtieth, we are not so to
reckon them, but according to the Prytanea, it being the Prytanes charge to
congregate the people. They seem to have been called (...), because in them
they did (...), establish decrees, as the In Achar.
Scholiast of Aristophanes. Other assemblies there were which are termed Ulp.
and Sch. Arist. loc. laud.
(...), when war, or any sudden accident troubled the State, then the people
were called together over and above those four times in a Pritanea. They are
styled (...) because the people of their own accord met on the other days; but
when they would have a Convocation some went about the City and called them.
There is likewise (...), Poll. p. 405.
when they were summoned out of the fields to go to the assembly. It seems to
me that the Crier in the streets on their lawful assemblies gave some token
when they should hasten; and so much In concionantib. p. 725.
Aristophanes witnesses, bringing in the woman speaking, that it is high time
to be stirring because the Crier -- (...), had cried the second time. And
indeed need was there of some warning, and compulsion too; for so slow were
they in coming to assemblies, that the L^gista were feign to tho^g them to the
meetings, as the Schol. of Aristoph: on these words, In Achar. p. 406,
(...), Sometimes they took a ^ope, and dying it with red earth, they sent two
slaves into the market place, who should one of the one side of the way, and
the other of the opposite, pursue the people, and to whose chance it fell to be
marked with the paint, paid a certain piece of money. Hence in the Aristoph.
Achar. p. 371.
Com^edian -- (...). Up and dow^ they shun the cord slained with Ve^^^^lion.
And again -- (...). Jupiter, the red earth which flew about made laughter.
Schol. Arist loco laudato.
Sometimes would they take hurdles, and barracado all the streets except those
that led the Ecclesia: Sometimes take away all their ^aleable wares which they
brought into the market, least people, intent on their traffic, should absent
themselves from the Assemblies. When they had met often times the company would
be dismissed at some prodigious sign, as thunder, lightning, tempest, and the
like, which they called Vide Arist. p. 379.
(...): Plut. p. 386. l 7. and 384. l. 34.
and earthquakes, or o^ther occasions, deferring the Assemblies meeting until
the next day. When they were come together, and the Senate ready to sit, one
man sacrificed which rites were called Demost. (...) p. 241.
(...), because they were done at the entry of the Council. Vide and Ulp. p.
351.
Vlpian, (...). I will not justly say that it was the purification made with a
young pig, before the bench was sat; and yet I may presume to aver it, the
Grammarian that interprets In Concion. p. 728. A.
Aristophanes witnesses that immediately preceding the Sessions this custom
was observed by one, whom they named (...), from (...), which signifies
cleansing, because by that he purged the Assembly, Theater, and congresse of
the people. After they were sat, Demosth. (...). 213.
the Cries did pray for the good of the people, Id. p. 418.
and cursed those who should offer to deceive the Senate or people. After this,
he spoke with a loud voice, Alcidamus Aristoph. p. 372. Diod. Sic. l. 15.
(...); who will make a speech* whereupon one of the Demosth. p. 29. Aeschines
contr. C^es. initio.
Elders arose that gave his verdict, it being not permitted to any to utter his
opinion, before the reverend hoary head had spent his judgment. Whence by
Philippic. 1.
Demosthenes they are styled (...), those that were wont to orate. After they
had finished their sayings, others had leave to declare themselves. Neither
must we omit the fashion they had to exclude all private men from their
assemblies sometimes, when the Senate alone sat, or the Areopageticall
Council; sometimes to debar all servants, strangers, and men deprived of
their liberties from their convents, which at other times they admitted, and
then was it called Plut. p. 552. L. 11.17.
(...), an open Theater to all comers. The place of meeting was called (...),
Pnyx, (...), from the frequent concourse of people there. It stood on a rock,
and therefore by Aristophanes is called (...)* 345. Sch (...). There was a
stipend for them that came to assemblies, as you may see in Demost. contra
Timoc. And (...). Because they might be at leisure without damage. Aristot.
Pol. 1. c. 13. They assembled also in Pir^eus. Vlp. in Them.

CAP. III.
SECT. I. De Tribunalibus Atticis, and primum de Senatu (...).
When the mutiny between the fac^ion of Megacles and Cyle disturbed the Attick
Commonwealth, Solon persuaded the people that those, who^ for their audacity
in drawing away the suppliants from the Altars they named (...) should undergo
judgment, there were chosen Plut. Solone, P. 60. l. 31.
three hundred men, (...), according, to their worth, to sit upon the case* But
these were not a perpetual judicatory* For when the people murmured at the
cutting off of the usury money, then was the Grand Council orda^ned; out of
every Tribe, which was then but four, an hundred chosen, who by their advice
should direct the people in those things which were to be handled, lest any
thing should be inducted, or proposed to the Assembly, without due
consideration. Who from their office in a Democracie, Polit* l 6. c. 8.
Aristotle says are more properly called (...), but where the Root rules,
(...). But when Clisthenes, who by Plutarch is termed (...), had augmented the
number of the Tribes from the four to ten, eighty six year after Solon's
Laws were received, he made the number five hundred, taking fifty of every
Tribe, which double ten times make up the sum. This Counsel by Aristotle
is described (...), The Mistress of all the rest: and I am not of opinion that
(...) in in Solon. p. 63.
Plutarch, is to be understood of the Areopagus, as if that were above the
Senate, but as instituted first by Solon, and so related by the Author. And yet
I, know Possardus. false, for Pausanias calls it (...) in At: p. 27. l. 15.
one writes, Tam dignitate, fama, quam officio, secundum post Areopagitas locum
obtinere. To this Counsel none was chosen under thirty years of age, which
time is styled (...) by In Arg. otar. con. Androt.
Libanius. And doubtless Vita december Rhet. p. 378.
Plutarch justifies it speaking that Demosthenes wrote his Orations against
Androtion, Timocrates, Aristocrates, (...), when he had not attained to to the
managing of state business, because we wanted two or three of thirty years.
Agreeing to this is Stobaeus sermon. 112.
Iunius, who says that Solon admitted none very young, though very wise no
Magistracy or Council. Nay the In Nub. p. 157.
Scholiast of Aristophanes tells us the green heads were not permitted to speak
publicly. The law prohibiting any to attempt it under forty, or as some say
(which is truest) thirty, one these words. (...).
Which to be otherwise understood by some, is not hidden from me. They were
called likewise (...), as well as (...), and their Tribunal (...), from the
word Ulp. Them: p. 445.
(...), which signifies to throng together, because the people were frequent
there. But the more probable reason is Ulp. loc. laudato. vide and Aristoph.
Sc. p. 436.
(...), because the place was open and exposed to the Sun. And in respect of
this Page 486*
Aristophanes makes that cold conceit branded by Didymus, (...), In the morning
thou shall (...) in the sunshine. At their admission they had this oath given
them. Them. Orat. cont. Tim.
(...), etc. I will give sentence according to the Laws, and decrees of the
people of Athens, and Council of five hundred: I will not consent to be a
Tyrant, or bring in Oligarchie: Neither shall any approbation be to any that
will dissolve the Democracie of Athens by speech; or decree, I will not cut off
private use, or suffer a division of the Athenian lands or houses. I will not
bring back exiled men, or those that are condemned. I will not thrust out of
the City any innocent against the Laws and Statutes of the Athenians, and
Senate of five hundred: neither by my self or suffer any other. I will not
create a Magistrate, who has not given an account of his former office,
whether of the nine Archons, or agents for the holy things, or they, who at the
same day are chosen with the nine Archons by lot, Ambassadors and assistants.
Neither shall the same man bear the same office twice, or two in one year. I
will not take gifts for judgment neither my self or other for me, or others
with my privacy, by fraud or deceit. I am not younger then thirty. I will hear
both parties, the accuser and defendant, alike. I will pass judgment aright in
the thing prosecuted. I swear by Jupiter, Neptune, Ceres. If I transgress any
of these, let me and my house perish: but if I faithfully keep them according
to my oath, let us be happy and prosperous. Them. p. 470.
There is also another oath which they took; some clauses whereof, we have left
in record. To ratify the Laws of Solon. Plutarch in Solone. p. 62. To give
counsel for the best of the people. To advise according to the Laws. I will
not bind any Athenian, who shall give three suerties of the same revennues,
unless for treason, or he conspire the subversion of state popular, or buy
custom, or be engaged, or gather public money and not pay it. I will sit in
the order which lot shall direct me to. I will not permit any unless banished
to be accused or imprisoned for what is past. This last was made after the
driving out of the 30 Tyrants, when Vide Zen^ in (...). Cic. init. Phil. 1.
Vellerium. Paterculum l. 2 p. 84. Arist. Sch. in (...). Aeschin. contr. Ctesiph.
Thrasybulus gave them to oath (...), not to remember ancient wrongs, which
they call (...). The authority of this Counsel was great, for it handled causes
of war, tributes, making of Laws, civil businesses and events, affairs of
confederates, collections of money, performance of sacred rites, accounts of
offices discharged, appointing keepers for prisoners, and (...) of Orphans, as
Athen. Rep. page 407*
Xenophon. See Sir Tho. Smith in his Commmon-wealth of England.
Resembling our Court of Parliament in England, by whose consent all Laws are
abrogated, new made, right and possessions of private men changed, forms of
religion established, Subsidies, Talies, Taxes, and Impositions appointed,
waights and measures altered, etc. As not unlike also the Venetian Gran
Consiglio, or Senate, of which the Contarene, As Eranchirio Andirimi has
translated it. lib. 3. fol..34 B
Tutta la cura del governo della Republica apparti^^^al Senato, etc. The whole
manner of the Comon-wealths government belongs to the Senate That which the
Senate determines is held for ratified and inviolable. By their authority and
rule is peace confirmed and war denounced. The whole rents and receipts of the
Commonwealth at their appointment collected and gathered in, and likewise laid
out again and defrayed, etc. In a word, I may say of these five hundred, as In
Pandect. Prio. p. 298.
Budaeus of the Parliament of France; Amplissimam eam curiam causarumque omne
genus diceptatricem justam ac legitimam esse, that that Court is most ample,
and justly and equally decided all sorts of controversies whatsoever. Them. 385.
To their charge was committed the making of new ships, for which at the years
end they were to be rewarded by the people. To this alludes Avib. p. 546.
Aristophanes. (...) -- Sch. Arist. p. 93.
Without their consent could the people do naught, as indeed they made not any
thing sanctum against the peoples wills. Hence in Page, 234,
Demosthenes, (...). In testimony of their pre-eminence are they termed
Demosthen. (...).
(...), and Idem (...).
(...). The Lords of sentence. In time of war they would send Commissions to
their Captains, as they thought requisite. Plut. in Cimone p. 356 l. 50.
Such as in the battle between the Lacedaemonians and their countrymen in
Tanagra, where fearing least Cimon banished by Ostracisme should betray them to
the Laconians, they sen^ to the commanders not to entertain him in the Army.
The honor was not during term of life, but every year changed. Apostolius,
(...). Which Anonymus in Arg. Orat. contr. Androt. expresses by (...). The
manner of choosing them is this. Verbo Emmius in Descrip. Reip. Athen.
The chief of every tribe, on an appointed day before the beginning of the
month Hecatombaeon, brought the names of all their Tribe that were capable of
this dignity, and cast them written into a vessel, and into another they put
an hundred white beans, and all the rest black; Then drawing out a name and
then a bean, to who^^ chance the white bean fell to be extracted with his
name, was designed Senator. This they did when they had but four Tribe, and so
four hundred Senators. But when they had ten Tribes, there could be but
fifty white beans, to the making up of the tenth part of five hundred. This
differs not from the election observed by the Contaren* l. 1. fol, 11, b.
Venetians upon the fourth day of december, when the names of all the young men
that have not by lot obtained the right of Citizens, nor passed twenty five
years old, are put into a pot, and carried unto the Prince, and there the same
set before the Counselors* with which there is another pot, wherein are round
balls equal with the number of the names written in the first, every one
having his mark, the fifth part of these bals is gilded with gold, the rest
with silver. The Prince takes out of the first pot the ball, which if it be of
the golden sort, the young man whose name is drawn, is presently admitted to
public authority, they to whom the silver chance, loose it for that time,
expecting it the ensuing year, unles in the mean space they accomplish twenty
five, at which age all the young Noble men partake of the Cities liberties. So
every year the fifth part of the yonkers is chosen to give voice with the other
Citizens. The use in choosing I deem the same, and shall until I find
authentike writters contradict it. But the number, as augmented by Clistenes
according to the Tribes, so by his successors* For when they added two the
number was increased 100, by reason of the Tribes Antigonis and Demetrias after
named Attalis and Ptolomais in honor to the Kings of that name which were
benefactours to the State Stephanus (...).
(...). Arist. Schol. p. 37.
Out of these were their Judges chosen; but such as were above thereescore
yares old. For although juniors were admitted into this company, yet none
judged under that age. (...). To these was any business referred, of which the
Senate and people were in suspense what to determine. In vesp p. 471.
Aristoph. (...). When the Council and people are in doubt how to judge a
great matter, they decree to deliver the guilty over to the Judges. And no
marvel. For the office of a Judge is (...), prerogative in sentence, says
Pol. l. 3. c 13. (...).
Aristotle; that is, to state those Questions which the Law has not decided.
The order of their giving sentence before the third year of the ninty second
Olympiad I know not. Afterward they sat by turn in their own Tribes, every
one as his lot fell. For there being formerly ten Tribes in Athens, they chose
out of each five men, and to which one of them the chance happened, and sat
judge. I cannot say that the manner of election was like that of the Cic. in
Verrem. Act. 3.
Syracusians concerning the Priest of Jupiter, who taking the names of so many
as were nominated, and casting them into a pot* created him, whose name should
first be drawn, of that sacred function. But of our own must I speak
Aristophan. (...). p. 30.
When then they were appointed, they met, every of them bringing with him a
table and a wand on which was written a letter that did betoken some
Judicatory, (For there being ten Tribunals every one of them was noted with a
red letter, A,, G, D, E, etc. to K. over the door) time calling them to sit,
they drew lots, and he to whom A. was taken out, sat in the Court noted with
A. and. with and so to K. This done, they showed their lots to the Praeco of
the Judicatory, who gave them their wand and table. This they did, lest any
should rashly attempt to sit and pervert Justice. I know not whether I may
better call the rod of authority a wand or staff: because that Suidas proverb.
(...), was a proverb used in derision of the Judges. Sch Aristop. (...). 30.
This staff at the days end they brought to the Prytanes, who gave them their
wages; But the In Equites page 301.
Scholiast teaches us other ways, saying, that the Demagogi paid them, it
being manifest out of Cleon's words the Orator, (...) -- Judges which I feed.
Their pay was not always the same, (...), In nubes page 174.
says the inrerpreter of Aristophanes. First they had obolum, which
Calistratus surnamed Parnytes was author of. Hence the proverb Appendix.
Vaticana.
(...). Afterward it was augmented by Calicrates, Zenobius.
and from him grew the word (...) it may be, for a pretty sum of money. Nay it
changed, for now I read of (...) one, and anon (...) three a Sch Aristop. p.
487.
Drachme or two. And therefore may we conclude that it was sometime more
sometime less. Thus having spoken a little of their Judges, I proceed to their
causes of Law, in which I shall add,

When any one had received wrong in Athens, it was their custom to make their
cases known to a Magistrate, whose office it was to report to the Judicatory.
And this they did by a Table in which was written, Ulp. in Them. p. 343.
(...). I accuse H.B. and cite him to the Court by W. N. not unlike the Romans
proceedings, who brought the name of the delinquent to the Magistrate, before
the accusation; to which Asinaria Act. 1 p. 54.
Plautus alludes, Ibo ego ad tres viros vestraque ibi nomina Faxo erunt -- when
this note was given up, the Magistrate asked the Plantiffe, whether he had
witnesses and would prosecute the matter, who answering that he intended it,
had thereupon authority to summon the defendant to his appearance, and this he
did either by himself or other, called therefore (...), Sch. Arist. 190.
for (...) is (...), a bringing into suit: (...). The word signifies a witness
also. For when they warned any to the Tribunal, they bad any that stood by to
testify that they had admonished them. Sch. Arist. p. 442.
(...). You may use (...) for an Apparitor, Sergeant, Baliffe or the like.
Sometimes they would run straight to the Court, as it were headlong, in (...)
p, 596. n. 17.
Demosthenes his phrase, sometimes the Suitor would forthwith draw the
Defendant, if he were loath to come, as you may see out of In Vespis p. 487.
Aristophanes. (...) -- But if the party could put in two (...), sufficient
bail, he was dismissed. Hence in Arist. Concio. p. 755.
the Comoedian. (...)* I will procure the a couple of able suerties. Sometimes
they would appoint a day of appearance, that might be a week or more after the
vocationem in jus, at which time if the Defendant were not personally at the
Judgment seat, he came within compass of (...) a Writ of Eremodicium, refusal
to come in and answer. Which was avoided by suing for a (...) in ten days
afser. For when the party to defend was absent, he was condemned indicta causa,
so In prioribus and Post. No* ad Pand.
Budaeus expounds (...), by this therefore the case was renewed, and stood as
at first, the sentence that before past, being made of no force; and for this
was it termed (...), Vlp. in Them. p. 343.
(...), because in the beginning it seeemed to carry some power but at last was
nothing. The business then made a new the party that was cast by an (...),
after that he had obtained a (...), Pollux. l. 8. p 390
was within two Months to set the Law on foot, which they term (...), or else
the sentence given before was ratified. Whosoever should offer to call call any
man to Court, unless upon good grounds, was liable to (...), a writ of
molestation for a false cause Having thus far proceeded, the Impleader gave in
a Libell, which held contents of his action, and the sum of the Defendant's
answer. This the Greeks call You have a form of this in Demosth. p. 628.
(...), Antigraphen. Though I know also that all cases in law were termed
Arist. Nub. p. 154. v Sch.
(...). They took this course because the Defendant might know what to answer.
And because it was ordinary in Athens for knaves to accuse out of envy, which
is (...), they made a Demost. page 716. n 7.
Law, that whosoever accused and had not the fifth part of the voices, should
be fined a thousand Drachmes. And he that could not prove his objections was
also punished in the purse a certain sum; Arist. Schol. p. 1* 0.
which if he paid not at the constituted time was fourefold; and if his ability
reached not so far, he suffered inprisonment. At the presenting of the
Antigraphe, testimonies were also delivered, (forms of which you shall often
meet with in Unum contta Stephan. (...). p. 622. aliud p. 624.629.
Demosthenes) and a copy of an oath, which the Suitor gave, in these words
Schol. A^ist. Vesp. 505.
(...), that he would justly accuse. (...), that he would according to truth
make his Apology: and this they name In Vesp. p. 504
(...). These writings were cast into a certain coffer, forth coming as
occasion should require; all which l Aristophanes in one verse comprehends.
(...), They joined or put together oaths, citatons and testimonies. I so
interpret it against the Scholiast's mind, who will have (...) to be
exortations given to the Plantiffe and Defendant to come to composition. But I
know that Scho^. Arist. 239.
(...) is (...), to accuse, in jus rapere, idem p. 195.
and (...). The chest or coffer was called (...), and of this are the words of
the Greek Orators to be understood Demosthen. 622. n. 33.629. n 80.640. n.
22.655. n. 65.665. n. 66.
(...). Charact. (...). p. 21.
Theophrastus of a mad man that would entangle himself in any thing, (...).
Having an Echinus in his lap, and abundle of libels in his hands. Pollux makes
a different exposition of this oath from that that which other Gramarians do,
confounding, as is most probable, the (...) and (...), with (...). For (...) is
that first oath, which the Plantif gave to the prosequute, the party prosecuted
to answer, which on the defendants side was called (...), and generally on
both* (...) Schol. Aristoph. Vesp. 505.
(...), follow the delinquent in law: the defendant (...), to stand stiffly to
it that he did not trespass. In Demost. p. 287.
And yet Vlpian makes both these one. After this were they that sued one
another admitted to the judicatory, it being first demanded of the Suitor Vide.
Ulpian in Them. pp. 347.341.
whether he would persequi, follow the suit, and had sufficient witnesses for
evide^ce; in causes capital it was asked if there were need of any, who could
not then be present. This interrogation was termed Bud. in Annot. Rel. ad Pan
p. 341.
(...). If then any thing was deficient, the judgment was prorogued by an
Ulpian in Them. p. 226. the Scho. of Aristoph. makes it the same with (...). p.
75.
(...), or an oath, which the Plantif took, that for the present he could not
perform it, but certainly would. Ulpian in. Demost. 341.
Perhaps for that time pretending sickness, death of friends, or some urgent
necessity, on which their fortunes might depend. When then all things were
ready, and at hand, they proceeded toward the Tribunal, the Judges first
swearing Pollux l: 8. page 406.
that they would give sentence according to the Laws, and in those things
concerning which there were no Laws according to conscience and equity (which
the Greeks call (...)) Them. page 628.
and of those things only concerning which they did debate. This oath seems to
have been taken at the Altar, from whence they brought their little stones (of
these by and by) with which they gave sentence. 1 Page 122.
Plutarch. (...). The oath is called (...). Then went the Judges to their
seats Aristoph. Sch. p. 239.
neatly spread with matts, in Greek (...) and (...), and all others being
warned by the Praeco, to go without the bars, in this form Demost.
(...), they sat down. For we must know that the Athenian Judicatories were
environed in as the Romans, with lettice I suppose, by them called Poll. lib.
8. p. 407.
(...) Cancellatae, by the Greeks (...), Pollux loco citato.
though (...), more properly signify the door of the (...) before which was
This is (...). Pollux.
a rope of fifty foot length drawn, and public servants set, that none might
enter, but who had business. The partition I think was but weak, and therefore
by Demosthenes called (...). Within which none was permitted to come but the
Judges. Page 485.
And therefore when Plutarch. in Vita.
Demosthenes did long to hear Callistratus plead concerning Oropus, he over
entreated his Paedagogue that he would bring him, where he might have the
happiness to be an auditour. The Paedagogue therefore acquainted with the
public officers that opened the doors, (...), procured him a place where he
might hear and not be seen, (...). When then the Judges had gone within the
bars, lest any should be wanting the Praeco cried Aristoph. p. 494.
(...), if any Judge be without the door of the place of judgment, let him
anter. Aristoph. Sch. Ibid.
Because if any came after the case began to be pleaded, he could not have
admission. Being then seated the Crier read the Indictment, (...) (a copy of
some part of which you have in (...) p. 567.
Demosthenes ELAPPSgr;E NIKOOYLOS EPIOYL^YSAS EOI, etc.) in which according to
the custom of the old Egyptians, Boemus De Custum delle Genti. lib* 1. cap. 5.
were given up to the court in writing all the reasons of accusation, the wrong
received and the manner of it, with an estimation of the damage; The several
heads of which the Judges wrote down, least the Impleader and Defendant should
swerve from that they had in hand. Then stood up the Suitor in a pulpit on the
left hand of the Tribunal, and spoke an accusatory oration, made for the most
Part by some of the Attick Orators: which use brought in by Arist. Rhet. l 1.
c. 33.
Antiphon the Rhamnusian, Stromat. 1^ page 226.
Clemens of Alexandria calls (...) In Bruto*
Cicero scribere aliis causas, quibus in judiciis uterentur, such as Lysias is
reported to have done for Socrates: Which least it should exceed in length, was
limited to a certain time, by a vessel, in the bottom of which was a small
hole for water to run, as sand does in houre-glasses, thence called (...), into
which was poured an equal measure of water; and least there should be deceit,
there was an officer made for that purpose named Pollux* l, 8* page 404.
(...), filling alike for the Impleader and answerer. Ulpian in Them. p. 356.
When therefore the glass was run, it was not lawful for them to speak
farther, Demost. (...). p 586.
nay for scantinesse of time they were compelled to pass by many things, and
for that reason were they chary of their water, bidding that it should be
stopped at the reciting of Laws, or the like, which Demosthenes intimates in
(...), as (...) is to stop the nose in in Pluto.
Aristophenes. Apologia.
Apuleius. At tu interea dum legit, aquam sustine. Pancirollus. Ne si aqua
interim e^fluxisset, amplius sibi dicendi praebita foret facultas, least he
might not have leave to speak any more, if the water were spent. If any would
give way to another to speak while his glass was running he might; which
Demost. testifies; (...). But if he would not permit it, he bad the Praeco cast
it forth Demost. (...).
(...). Vlpian. (...), From which kind of pleading it grew into a proverb
Aristoph. 617.
(...), Tus^. Qu. l. 2 in fine.
Cicero, ad clepsydram, to speak by the hour or an allotted time. His speech
being ended, he sat down. Ulpian. in Them. 226.
The defendant the^ sitting all that while over against him, until he had
finished after addressed himself to his answer, which he made from the right
hand of the Judicatory; where he had a pulpit, and station. For this reason
(says Problem. (...).
Aristotle,) because they would make both parties equal, For the Suitor having
the better part, they gave the upper hand to the defendant. Or because (...) or
defendants, were for the most part in custody; If therefore the guard stood on
the right hand, the defendant stood there also. Thence then he pleaded for
himself; in which plea, he was only to wipe out those accusations which
adversary laid against him, Ulpian in Demosth p. 252.
(...), And in that had the plantif a pre^rogative. For he might object what he
would; nay and as Loco laudato.
Aristotle, forecast all before he commenced his suit, and feign to himself
what he pleased; The defendant perhaps innocent, was at that instant to clear
himself, Demost. p. 219.
either by witness, or probabilities, of all doubts, whatsoever the plantif
could cast in. Sometimes the Plantif and defendant would desire Advocates of
the Judges, (...), hence Clemens Alex. Th^se had certain pe^^forgers ^nde^
them that a^mi^istre^ the Laws and forms ^f action. Cicero. apud G^aecos
infimi ho^i^nes mercedula adducti ministros se praebent in judiciis Oratoribus
iis, qui apud illos. (...) vocantur.
(...), to plead for a fee. In the time of their pleading, witnesses were
called, who came in, and gave their testimonies, and after they had uttered
what they had to say, they went to the Altar (as it seems to me, either in, or
very nigh the Judicatory) and swore Corneliana. Vide ad Attic^m. l. 1. c. 13.
Cicero. Athenis aiunt cum quidam apud eos sancte graviterque vixiss^t, and
testimonium dixisset public, and, ut mos Graecorum est jurandi causa ad aras
accederet, una voce omnes Iudices, ne is juraret, reclamasse. They report that
in Athens, when a certain man ( Vide Laertium in vita ejus.
Xenocrates) who had lived godly and gravely among them, had given witness,
and as the fashion of the Greeks is, approached to the Altar to take oath, all
the Judges with one voice cried, that he should not (They would not, it seems,
have belief rather be bound with religion then truth) Fit to this is the answer
of Pericles to a friend of his desiring him (...) to testify a lie, which he
was to avouch with an oath, I am your friend, quoth he, to the Altar, that is,
as far as conscience, religion, and honesty shall permit; hence (...) usque ad
aras grew, I suppose to be a proverb. Plut. Apoph. p. 112. Whether in this
ceremony they touched the Altar, I cannot justly say; in delivering their
testimonies they were wont to touch the tips of the ear (for reason to me
unknown) called (...) from (...), Etymologicon; (But I rather may suppose it to
be a Roman fashion, where the Plantif was wont to pluck his witness by the
ear, for remembrance sake. Horace lib. 1. Sat. 9. Licet antestari? ego vero
Oppono auriculam -- To which Virgil looked, saying Cynthius aurem vellit and
admonuit. Eclog. 6.) and at the end thereof wish all destruction to themselves
and house if they dealt falsely. Which if they did, they were ^ubject to a writ
(...), of false witness, and he that subor^ed them (...). Sometimes the
witness was not present at the doing of the wrong, but took it from others by
hearsay, which the Greek Lawyers term (...), as Demost. pp 619 634.
(...), when they they take from those that are dead, which went for current,
and was allowable. But to bring a testimony from the Mouth of one that was
alive, and within the teritories of Athens, it would not pass. As neither
theirs who were discarded the liberties of the City, (...) or servants, or any
man in his own cause. Ulpian in Demosth. 238.
The manner of witness was twofold, either by personal appearance and
testifying (...), and then he was called (...), in no case liable to the Law,
(...): or else by writing, by which he offered himself to his questions or
attachments in Law, against whom he witnessed; if he were not true; and this is
(...). Both parties being heard and the altercation ceased, the Praeco cried,
To whom E N. has seemed to violate right, (so they interperet (...), jus
violare) let him cast in the black stone, or hollow, to whom he seems not,
the whole or white. For we must know that anciently the Greeks gave their
sentences with black and white pebles, called Aristoph. 438.
(...) (which the French semblably term Procellaines, (...) porcus) Metamorph.
15. F. 1.
Ovid. Mos erat antiquis, niveis atrisque Lapillis,
His damnare reos, illis absolvere culpa.
The antique fashion was with white stones to absolve, with black to condemn
the accused* Pertinent to which is the saying of Alcibiades, when he was called
out of Sicile to go home and answer for his life, counting it foolish to go
thither, whence he was never like to escape; when one asked ked Aelian. Var.
lib. 13. c. 38. Piut. Mor. p. 140.
(...); Will thou not trust thy country which begat thee to be thy judge? (...),
quoth he, (...). No not her, that brought me forth. For I fear least she being
ignorant and not conceiving the truth, mistake the black for the white stone.
The black made trist^m sententiam, and was so named, the sad sentence; the
white candidam or acquitting. They used likewise black and white beans; in
respect of which Pythagoras is thought to have spoken as a riddle (...), not to
eat beans, by In Naz Stellit. (...).
Nonnus interpreted (...), not to undermine justice with bribes; or that men
should get by the perverting of equity. I see no reason but that I may think he
means men ought not to be forward in getting places of judgment. For Pagina
290.
(...) in Aristophanes is by the Scholiast expounded (...) and Lysistrata. p.
870.
(...) is used for a Judge, which properly signifies an eater of beans. But
afterward they had little pellets of brass; The bloody ones of them were
peirced through, therefore termed, Pollux l 8. page 407. U^pian in Them. 407.
(...): the saving were whole, (...). Of these every one took, of each one,
from the Altar, as I, have said, Ulpian in Them: p. 162.
where laying their hands upon the (...), or bals they intimated by a
transposition of them (as from the black to the white, and from the white to
the black again) that they would not for envy or by respects, but
indifferently and truly judge. When then they were ready to pass sentence
Aristoph. 485
the Praeco carried about the (...), or (...), a certain pitcher (for so ^ag.
263.
Xenophon calls it (...)) having on the mouth of it a conveyance like a Tunnel,
named (...), but the top thereof was covered close, except a little hole for
one pellet at a time to be put in, made for the avoiding of deceit, I suppose,
least one man might cast in more; and therefore were they to touch the (...),
only with the forefinger, middle, and thumb. Page 437. vide Scholiast.
Aristoph, (...). But we must know that the black and white pellets were not
promiscuously cast into one pot, but two; Aristoph. Ve^pis 5^0.
The one which freed was made of brass called (...), whether because they
first threw into it their voices, or because it may signify the better, I know
not; The other that condemned, being wooden (...). After the Crier had gone
round with both* because some would keep their balls, and for favor no^ give
their voice against a friend or a great person, therefore he cried Aristoph.
Vespis.
(...), who has not cast in his ball? let him rise. So he rose and threw it
in. Then they took them out and numbered them; and in matter of lands, money or
the like, whose vessel (for there was as many set as the number of the
litigants came to) had most; got the upper hand. At the counting of them a
Magistrate stood by with a rod, and laid it over those that were told, lest
they should mistake the one for the other or wittingly do it. For so were they
wont to do; thence named Schol. Naz. in (...).
(...). Which Sophocles Ajace. p. 68.
Teucer objects to Menelaus about Ajax, when by his deceit the armor was given
to Ulysses; and therefore he calls him (...). Sch. (...): not amiss (...).
Schol. Arist. 438.
When the number was known, if the white or solid bals were more, they took
their tables, which they had in their hands, and drew a short line, as a token
of absolution; if the black or hollow were more they drew a longer line, as
condemning. Hence Aristoph. Vesp. loco. cit.
(...), may be used, for to condeme every body. The thing it self they termed
Page 491.
(...), as Aristophanes. By this the one party being overthrown ( Aristoph. p.
472.
as none never was without the sentence of the Judges) his adversary wrote down
what damages he should pay, which they term (...). (...). p. 454.
Plutarch. (...). Schol. Arist. in (...). page 50.
For it was a use of old for those that went to Law to make agreements (I know
not whether by oath, for they did swear by three gods (...)) and put it into
the Echinus, that they would stand to such and such conditions, before
sentence, that he that was cast should undergo somewhat; and afterward (...),
that is set down what loss of limbs or life, or means etc. For although they
did Schol. Arist. 40.
(...) give their estates as pledges to answer and meet at the Court; yet it
may be that might be less or more then the fine. There was in cause capital
another proceeding, like to that in the city of C^^arren. de Rep Ven. l^b 3.
Venice, where they gave two sentences. In the first they determined whether
they should condemn or free; If in the first he was condemned, the manner of
punishment was ordained in the second But if in the first they found no cause
of death, they bid the accused to fine himself, which Apolog. Socr. p. 265.
Xenophon intimates by (...), and if it were too little, the Judges doubtless
made it more, as the Scholiast of Aristophanes, if I forget not: The custom is
set down by De Orat. 1. fol 61. b.
Cicero, speaking of Socrates. Ergo ille quoque damnatus est etc. And he too
was condemned; not only by the first suffrages, but also by those, which, by
the appointment of the Laws, they were to give the second time. For in Athens
the accused being found guilty, if the offense were not capital, they weighed
and considered the penalty. When the sentence was to be given by the Judges,
they asked the defendant, what he thought himself to have deserved to forfeit,
etc. (In the Venetian Common wealth this is not observed.) In trial if there
be more for the prisoners liberty, the^ against him, he is straight acquitted,
but if more then half be in the pot of condemnation he suffers. Laertius in
Socrat. p 115.
Socrates at the first had two hundred eighty and one more against him, then on
his side; and at the next eighty more were added to the former, so in all he
had three hundred threescore and one condemnatory suffrages. But fewer might
have done as much. For we read in Pag^ 436.
Demosthenes of Cimon like to be punished with death (...), if three had not
been wanting. And again Page 430.
(...). Nay one was sufficient, Page 338.
Demosthenes. (...). But Vlpian on the place (...), says, that he was lightly
punished. Aristoph. p. 244.
If the voices were equal, then was the prisoner loosed; because sometimes he
might be accused upon suspicion; or of those things which he did not willingly
commit, or perhaps was sued out of envy, and many other reasons given by Probl.
(...).
Aristotle: therefore did the Lawgiver leave some place for pity and
compassion. To which the Judges were often moved. And therefore would they
plead the Them. p. 492.
deserts of their ancestors* their own lives formerly well led. Aristid. T. 3.
p. 292.
Sometimes showed they their wounds; Aristid. loco cit. (...).
and brought the venerable gray hairs of their parents, but Them. p. 493.
mothers chiefly, to intercede in silence: Sometimes embracing their children
in their arms, they held them up in the Judges view; or caused them to
Aristop. pp. 469.499.
come up into the (...), or pulpit, and supplicate with tears, which wrought
so much upon the Judges, that Vesp. p. 499.
Aristophanes in a scoff presents one (...), drowning his sentence in weeping.
Then in compunction would the Judges speak to the prisoner, Sch. Ar. 500.
(...), wishing him to go down from the (...), a token often of mercy; though
now and then it proved otherwise. Nay it was a word of displeasure too, as when
Laert. Socr. p. 115.
Plato would have been Advocate for Socrates. (...), they thundered out, (...).
Neither may I forget Aelian. Var. hist. l. 5. c. 19.
Amynias the brother of Aeschylus the Tragoedian, who, when the people would
have stoned his brother for some impiety brought on the stage, held up his
elbow and arm without a hand, lost in the fight at Salamis: by which spectacle
the Judges calling to mind the merits of Amynias, dismissed the Poet. Neither
may I omit what Athen. Rep. (...). p. 404.
Xenophon objects to them, that they cared not so much for justice, as regarded
what might conduce most to their own profit, and be convenient: Apol. Socr.
initio.
And that they condemned innocents, and spared offenders that could speak well.
Furthermore another fault of theirs was the prolonging of cases a whole year,
says Athen. Rep. 406.
Xenophon, and (...). 752.753. They are translated foolishly into latin. (...)
is what the Proctours in the Civil Law usually mean by in proximum in
proximum.
Aristophanes. (...). Now we do not handle suits of above threescore years,
but we are put off until the next day. (...). For we come to trial within
twenty years. This Xenophon imputes to the multitude of their employments. As
long as the case hung in suspense, the name of the accused was (as among the
Romans, whence Budaeus in Pand. No. Relig. p. 31.
Rei periurii) exposed in a public table to the view of all men, which they
term (...): Demost. in Mid. 347.
Demosthenes (...). Vlpian. (...). You see here the place too, viz. at the
Statues of the Eponymi* Before a man was convicted, all that they objected to
him was but (...), by Cont. Andro. 388.
Demosthenes termed (...)* a bare report: but after proof (...). After
judgment past, Them. p. 406.
(...). An indictment of sacrilege, theft, murder, treason, is but (...): the
evidence and conviction makes it (...), the sentence (...).

CAP. III.
SECT. II. De Areopago* and ejus appellatione. Areopagitae.
ON the hill, on which the Acropolis was built, stood the Areopagus, in the old
translation of the Acts of the Apostles rendered Vi^us Martius, by our
Engl^shmen, Mars his street, falsely. For When Tullu^ had divided the Roman
field, he made on high hills and places fortified by nature, refuges for the
husbandmen and called them (...), Dion Hal. 4. Not as if it signified a
village, but as it was situated. For Pagus villa rustica comes from (...)
Because built near a well. Perot.
(...) bears not that signification, but what In Acta. p. 136.
Justin Martyr interprets, (...), an eminent place. (...) For that Judicatory
was on a high rock Therefore named by Eumenid. p 296.
Aeschylus, and Elect. p. 836.
Euripides, (...), by Metamorph. l. 6. fab. 2.
Ovid, Scopulus Mavertis, and Vide Scalig. in conject.
Ennius, Areopagitica petra: so called, as fond Antiquity would have, Demost.
p. 413. Paul. 26. Simeon Met^e^ Pachym. in vit. Dionys. Areopag.
from the judgment of the twelve Gods upon Mars, for killing Halirrhothius the
son of Neptune: But Loco citato. Paul. Attic. p. 31.
Justin Martyr, because he was there arraigned of adultery, (...). But alike
true. It pleases me to consider the superstition of the ancients, that
consecrated high places to their deities, and erected the statues of their Gods
upon hills. As i Parnes, Hymettus, Anchesmus whence Jupiter Parnethius,
Hymettius, Anchesmius. And as in Athens, Neptune had a hill (...), Saturn
another (...). Pan another (...), Mercury another (...), so Mars h^s Areopagus
Eumenid. p. 296.
Aeschylus gives it ^ nomination from the Amazons, sacrificing to Mars there,
when they came and fought against Theseus. Or if you will receive the opinion
of others, it takes name from the cases in it handled, of blood wilfully shed:
so Hesychius, (...), that when Satyr. 9. v. 100.
Iuvenal calls it Curiam Martis, you may interpret it, The Court of murder, but
willingly committed. This is termed by the Aeschylus page 297.
Tragoedian, the most incorrupt, sharp, reverend council, then which nothing
is more constant (says Ad. Atticum l. 1 ep. 11.
Tully, comparing to it the Roman Senate) nothing more severe, as by De bello
T^o l 6. p. 14.
Pseudo-Dictys Cretensis it is styled Iudicium severissimum per omnem Graeciam.
Then which none judged better, more just, or honest, says (...). P. 448.
Xenophon, In Solone. page 63.
Plutarch writes that this Court was ordained by Solon, and Offic. l 1.
Cicero received the like opinion, but that seems to contradict it, which
Plutarch presently brings, quoted in the thirteenth table, that they, who had
lost their liberties, should be restored again, unless they were condemned by
the Areopagites, Ephetae, Prytanes, Basileis, of murder, slaughter, tyranny,
when that law was enacted. And by and by, Loco laud.
(...), etc. Who were condemned in Areopagus before Solons time (if he first
instituted the Areopagites.) Pollux. l. 8. p. 407.
Others are of opinion, that Solon added the Areopagites to the Ephetae (Judges
so called, because when formerly the Basileis made inquisition after murder
unwillingly committed* Draco made it (...), that is, translated it to the
Ephetae, their num^er was but fifty one. And though they judged in five Courts
once, yet by little and little they became ridiculous.) De Athen. mag. p 446.
Possardus says he abolished their severity, and substituted the Areopagites.
But De Repub Athen. p. 20.
Vrbo emmius more probably, that Solon was not the Author of this Senate but
brought it into a better form, made it more strong and firm, and augmented
the power of it. For Draco it seems lessened the authority of it, deriving it
to the Ephetae; Solon restored that authority and made it greater. Vide Maximum
in Prolog. ad S. Dionys. ope^a and Niceph. l. 2. in vita Dion.
To this company none were admitted, but wise, wealthy, and noble men; Pachymer.
famous for good life, and innocence, (...), whom no man could justly charge of
misdemeanour. Nay men, whose behavior was intolerable, Isoc. in Areopag p. 133.
(...), after they were chosen into the College of the Areopagites, abhorring
and blushing at their former dispositions. (...), changed their natures, and
embraced virtue. The number of them is uncertain. Loco supra laudato.
Nicephorus makes them but nine; as Maximus too out of Atthid. l. 2.
Philochorus; Pachymerius fifty and one. But what Maximus produces after, is
somewhat, that they consisted of fifty and one, besides the Nobility most wise
and rich. (...). They were of those Magistrates that were ch^sen by Lot, as the
Archon, Thesmothetae. Basileus, Polemarchus, for which cause Pericles was not
of that number because he never attained to these offices. Plut. in Peric. p.
113.
By which words he seems to aim at the nine Achontes, Anonym. in Argu. Oration
Androcia.
who when they had governed one year, and given an account of their offices,
and had administered all things justly, were chosen ^early into this society.
For which election an^uall, the number was doubtful. For some might dye in that
space; or all live, and in the next year be increased. Volatteran out of an
old inscription in Acropolis; that they were three hundred; TO LAPPOTATO, etc.
To the most famous Rufius Festus, Preconsul of Greece and Areopagite, the
Council of Areopagus consisting of three hundred; and the people of Athens set
up this monument for a testimonial of his good will and benevolence. But that
might only happen when this was erected. Anonymus loco laudat.
They continued all their life time in this dignity, and were never put out,
(...), unless for some grand offense. De statu Italiae adversus Machiavel.
Bozius tells us (how true I wot not) that they were all Priests. Athenienses
olim, etc. The Athenians, quoth he, did strive to challenge to themselves the
prerogative of wisdom, and to them it is bent what the Apostle says, The
Greeks seek after Wisdom. Nevertheless their Areopagus, who had the power of
all things consisted of Judges that were Priests, and the High Priest of all
that asked every of their sentences, took the suffrages. Their authority was
unlimited. For Plutarc. Solon p 63.
they were overseers of all, Aelian. Var. l. 15 c 15 Them p. 406.
Judges of wilful murders, wounds given out of pretended malice: which would
make some, having a desire to drive a man out of Athens, Demost. in Orat. (...).
go to a Chyrurgeon and make an incision in their heads, that they might sue
him who they hated upon an action of battery, as Mantitheus against Baeotus.
They sat upon incendiaries, and impoisoners, if the party died they took
their doses. Them p. 445.
They saw that the Laws should be put in execution, Pachymer.
such as Contaren would have in Venice to be Guardians to their Statues. In
Sympos. unless I am extremely forgetful. It is quoted likewise by Athenaus
Dipnos l. 4. p. 167.
In a word all great delinquencies came under their censures. They enquired
into the behaviors of men; and we read in d Xenophon that they sharply
reproved a young man for his loose living. (...), etc. says the Dipnosophist,
Lib. 2. c 6.
Valerius Maximus. Est and ejusdem urbis Aristides T. 1 p 331. (...)
sanctissimum conciliu^ Areopagus etc. There is likewise in that City the most
sacred Council Areopagus, where they were wont most diligently to enquire,
what every of the Athenians did, by what gain he maintained himself, and what
his trade and actions were. That men, knowing and remembering that once they
must give an account of their lives, might embrace honesty. Anon. Atg. Orat.
Andror.
The Greek authot tells us that except in great cases of necessity they meddled
not with state affairs, but it seems otherwise. For if any one say, quoth De
natura Deorum. 2.
Tully, that the Attick Republique can be well governed, without the council
of the Areopagites; he may as well say that the world may be governed without
the providence of the Gods. When the Medes and Persians invaded Greece, Est
enim bellum g^stum consilio Senatus ejus. Cic. Off. 1.
by the advice of them was the war waged, wherein Themistocles purchased an
everlasting memory of a victory Plutarch. in Themistocl. p. 84. l. 3.
And when their public treasury was bare, they furnished each man with eight
Drachmes, and stored the ships with Mariners. Which advise, when they had won
the day, was a cause, says Polit. l. 5. c.
Aristotle, (...) to give strength and sinews to the Common wealth. Isocrates
A^eop. p. 132.
Under their sight were all the youth of Athens. For this reason especially,
because that when they were reckoned among men, and were come to age, they
needed more care to be had of them, then when they were children; not observed
by our Countrymen in sending their sons ^oung to the Innes of Court: youth
and heat of blood, unstaidnesse in judgment, rashness in adventures, and
pronenesse to vice, leading, or rather carrying headlong tender years to their
own destruction. To them appertain^d blasphemies against their Gods, violating
of religion, and divulging mysteries, as when Laert. lib. 2. in Aristippo. p
154.
Euryclides the Hierophanta in answer to the question of Theodoru^, (...); who
offended against the mysteries? (...), replied; such as open t^em to those who
are not initiated. Therefore, quoth the Philosopher, art thou impious: For
which crime had not Demetrius Phalereus befriended him, the Hierophanta was in
danger, (...), to have been brought before the Council of Areopagus. By virtue
of which authority S. Paul was here judged for teaching strange Gods (as they
supposed.) Simeon metaphrast*
For although that the Athenians were under the Romans, yet their Lords made
them (...), sui juris, and permitted them to keep their ancient customs The
manner of proceedi^g in this Court, was thus. After the felony committed, the
appellant brought his indictment to the Basileus, who giving the prisoner and
his accuser audience once a month, at three several times to debate the
business, in the fourth month, brings in the accusation to the Areopagites,
Pollux, l 8
and putting off the crown, which he wa^ wont to wear, sat down as judge
with the Areopagites in the dark: for they judged by night, says Hermotim. p.
505.
Lucian, that they might not regard the speaker, but what was spoken. It being
there forbidden Pollux page 405
(...), to move to compassion, and use Proems, as in other Courts, wherein they
craved the Judges favor and attention, which by Demosthenes are termed Vide
Ulp. in Dem^st. page 39^^
(...). This f Aristotle calls (...) to speak beside the matter. Before the
trial both parties swear (which they style Pollux loco laudato Them. cont.
Aristocr. p. 413.
(...)) The appealer standing upon the testes of a Goat, a Ram and a Bull
(usual to the Greeks, as Tyndarus swore he Suitors of Helena, that they should
revenge any wrong done to her and her predestined husband, Pau^anias Lacon p.
103.
(...), and Hercules the children of Heleus (...)) to^k oath, therefore named
(...); in which he maint^ined that he dealt justly and rightly, and that he was
joy^ed in affinity to the slain man; Demosth. p. 6^8 and 416. Th^se agreed
says Po^^a^d. about the punishment, according to the damage received. De
Ather* Mag. p. 449.
which if he were not, he could not prosecute, the Law forbidding The reason
why he stood (...), I suppose is, because they are the instruments of
generation, and in that oath, if he were not true, he wished an extirpation of
his house, h^mselfe and his posterity. In which if he were perjured, he was
liable to no punishment, as among the Romans Idem Messa* n^acis p. 126.
Iuris jurandi contempta religio satis Deum ultorem habet. For swearing is
punished by a revenging God, Lib. 2. ^ de re^^ ^red.
but if any swore false by the life of the Prince* he fell under the Julian
Law, Laesae Majestatis. After this the prisoner swore; which among us will not
be allowed Then setting each of them upon Paul. Attic p. 27.
two silver stones, one of which was named (...), the stone of iniquity; the
other (...), by Adrian Iunius thought (...) of innocen^e, not impudence. Then
the appealer asked the prisoner three question^, which Eumenid. p. 202.
Aeschylus calls (...). First, whether he were guilty or no, Ibidem.
(...) to which he answered, (...) or (...) yea or nay: secondly, (...) for
what reason he did the murder: thirdly, (...), who were the Abettors. Then
arose there certain Lawyers, (...), who showed whether the murder was
committed Aeschylus p. 293.
(...) in justice ( Demost vid. p. 647.
For in Athens there were such Counselors, to whom in matters of difficulty
they had res^rt) By (...), you must understand those causes, in which D^most*
p* 312
Draco thought it lawful to kill a man* As taking him committing uncleanes
with wife, mother, sister, daughter, or concubine, or any who^ he accounts
among his children: Vid. Demost. cont. Aristocr.
the party so offending might be slain in the manner by him, against whom he
had trespassed Likewise in the defense of a man's goods, if the thief were
killed, impunity was granted. After this inquisition, they passed to sentence,
which was given very privily, as Iuvenal intimates, Ergo occulta teges, ut
Curia Martis Athenis; without speaking (as the Tabellares sententiae of the
Romans in which they wrote C if they condemned. Vide Sylvium in Orat. pro Flacco.
A if absolved. N L. if the case were not manifest) hence (...), for one that
is close and silent; and (...), for one that is grave, and who can hold his
peace, and in whose countenance is Terentius.
tristis severitas. (...). Whatsoever they concluded of, stood irrecoverable,
(...). Pachymerius.
neither could there be any appeal to another Tribunal. And no marvail. For so
upright was their sentence, Demost. cont. Aristocrat. p. 413.
that none either Appellant or Prisoner, could ever say, that he was unjustly
condemned. Nay both parties, as well those that are cast, as they that cast,
are like contented. Aristides Tom. 1. p. 185.
(...). After doom the prisoner was to suffer death. In which execution also
the Areopagites had a care least the innocent should be punished with the
guilty. Aelian. Va^. h^st. l. 5. c. 13.
When therefore they had condemned a woman for poisoning another, they deferred
the execution, because she was great with child, and straight way after her
delivery put the mother to death. Which custom is by us also observed at our
Assizes. Valor. Max. p. 322.
It will not be amiss to relate one memorable thing done in the time of
Dolabella Proconsul of Asia, who, when a dame of Smyrna was brought before him,
for killing her husband and son* who had deprived her of a hopeful youth,
begot of her by a former husband, referred the audience of the matter to the
Areopagites; who commanded the woman and her accuser to appear some hundred
years after; that by such a bottom of time, scarce able to be unwinded, they
might show, that neither would condemn nor acquit the woman. One thing more,
Lib. quinto.
Quintilian tells us, that they condemned a boy for putting out the eyes of
Quails. Because it was a sign of a mind, likely to prove most pernicious.
Their power was shaken and somewhat plucked down by Plutarch. Vit. p. 355. and
Mor. 391.
Ephialtes, a sore enemy of Oligarchichall government, and more enclining to
the people, who was secretly slain by Plut: in Pericle p. 113.
Aristodicus of Tanagra. They sat three days every Month, (...).

CAP. III.
SECT. III. De Iudicio (...).
AFter the siege of Troy some of the Grecians came with Diomedes, Dictis
Cretensis de bello Trojano. l: 5. p. 14 P.
who kept the Palladium, to the coast of Attica, and arriving by night at
Phalerum, supposing it to be an enemy country, went to make a prey. Where
Demopho ignorant that they were Grecians came to aid and defend his own* and
slew many of the Argivi; which they cast out unburied; whose bodies when no
beast had touched ( Libro octacto page 406.
(...) says Pollux, the interpreter, nullus vivus, I better think it no
creature, either foul or beast) Acamas showed that they were Argivi having the
Palladium; Being warned then by the Oracle (who named them (...), that is,
Schol. Soph. in Oed. Tyr.
neither knowing nor known) they buried them; and in that Place consecrated
the Palladium; where they made also a judicatory, for murders unwillingly
committed, and called it It is simply so called Palladium Aelian Var. l. 5. c.
15. (...).
(...), juxta Palladium, as some. Here was Demopho first tried* who returning
from this battle, killed with his horse, somewhat diverting, an Athenian;
Pausan. Attic. page 27.
For whose kindred some think he satisfied the Law, or generally for the
Argivi. Demosth: contra Neaeram: page: 727. Vide 647.
If any had stricken a man or woman, and the party chanced to dye, he was judged
in this Court. Demosthe: page 329.
In such cases the Law was very favorable; for the party, offending was not
punished with perpetual exile, (...), as in wilful felony; (kept by us in
England once, called Abjuration (where the guilty had his life upon oath, that
he would never return) but he did Demosthenes, Midiana. Aeust, in Iliad
(...), in a gentler term. (...). etc.
For it was a custom of old, to give a ce^tane sum of money (the Attick Law
(...), in wilful, all was confiscate) to the kindred of the slain that they
might not depart their country: but if they could not purchase an abode they
went some where else. De Ponto lib. 1. Eleg. 4.
Ovid, Caede puer facta Patroclus Opunta reliquit. Their discountenance was but
for one year (...). Eustath. But Demosth. (...) Until he obtained remission
from some of the kindred of the slain.
The money disbursed on such occasions was properly called (...) quasi (...),
from (...) murder, as if it were the price of blood. And the Scholast of
Sophocles tells us that (...) is spoken only (...) of payment of money, but
abusively of any punishment* Demosthe.
If the party wounded had forgiven the offender before his death, or the allies
of the man desperately hurt, none could afterward compel him to flee;
otherwise he fled. And in that flight he betook himself to some aquaintance;
by whom he was cleansed from the guilt with certain ceremonies of washing,
which the Romans call Februa. So was Patroclus, Peleus, Medea, Al^maeon
purified: Fastorum 2. initio.
Ovid. Graecia principium moris fuit: illa nocentes
Impia lustratos ponere facta putat.
Actoridem Peleus, ipsum quoque Pelea Phoei
Caede per Aeinonias solvit Acastus aquas.
Vectam fraenatis per inane draconibus Aegeus
Credulus immerita Phasida fovit open;
Amphiaraiades Naupacteo Acheloo
Solve nefas dixit, solvit and ille nefas.
Ah nimium faciles, qui tristia crimina caedis
Eluminea tolli posse putatis aqua.
In this ceremony they did (...), sacrifice, says (...) p. 414.
Demosthenes, (which custom likewise was observed by the Pausan. Corinth. p.
74. (...) etc.
Traezenians in the lustration of Orestes from the blood of his mother; which I
gather by the feast which they presently celebrated there, and yearly observed
afterward. This manner was done with water, as you may read, taken out of the
well Hippocrene, made by the foot of Pegasus; the sprinkling was with a little
bough of Laurel, as I suppose (by the words following persuaded to it, which
tell us, that when the (...) were buried, there sprouted out of them a
Bay Tree) and after that (...). This as I said was in his flight. (...). The
proceeding in this Court, was first, (...), such as before I mentioned, an oath
of each party, accuser and defendant: secondly (...), their speeches of both
sides: thirdly (...), Judgment. If the prisoner were found guilty, that is,
unwillingly to have murdered, then had he a time appointed him* how long he
should flee, as above said, until he had made peace and gotten pardon from the
Cousins of the deceased.

CAP. III.
SECT. IV. De Iudiciis (...).
AT Athens there was a Temple erected by Plutarch. page 4. l. 19.
Aegeus (who lived in Delphinium) to the honor of Apollo Delphinius and Diana
Delphinia, Schol. Arist. page 333.
where was the Tribunal named (...), or (...). Aelian. Var. l. 5. c. 15.
In this Judicatory were heard cases of murder, when the party confessed the
fact, but pleaded that it was legitimate. Demosth. contra Arist. page 410.411
For the Law required no punishment of any man that should kill another taking
him committing adultery with his Wife, or uncleanness with his Mother, Sister,
Daughter, Concubine, or free Children. Likewise if in preservation of his goods
or own defense he spilt blood it was not capital. The first that was arraigned
here was Theseus, maintaining the right he had to slay the Thieves, says Lib.
8. page 406.
Pollux, (I know not whether he mean Sciron and Procrustes etc.) and Pallas
with his children, Pausan. Art. p. 27.
who were rebels. Before this trial of Theseus, whosoever had slain any body
was compelled to flee the Country, or staying dye, were the cause never so
just. (...). Here they sat on things inanimate. As if a stone, timber iron, or
such like, fall on a man, and kill him, if the party that flung this be not
known, sentence was past on that thing which slew him; and the Pollux loco
citato.
(...), that were the Masters of this Court, were to see this thing cast out of
the Territories of Athens, to which Contra Ctesiph^ p. 103
Aeschines alludes. (...). The first thing that here was judged was an axe,
wherewith the Priest, whom they call (...), had slain an Ox on the Altar of
Jupiter Polieus in the time of Erectheus. (...). In that part of Pireaeum which
is next the Sea, is a place which they name (...), from Phreutus an Heroes, some
think; not because it stood in a pit, whence Lib. octav. 406.
Pollux names it (...). Hear they were judged who having fled out of an other
country for unwilfull murder Demosth. contra Aristocr. 415.
(...), they that drove him out not acquitting him, if in the space of his
exile it happened that he wittingly slew another he answered here. The
proceeding was in this sort. The Judges assembled in (...), in a place seaten
on the Sea, Demost. ib.
(...); where the guilty drawing near in a boat or bark was to make his
apology, (...), not coming to land or touching it, neither casting anchor
Rodolphus Galterur* out of Pollux interprets it Scalam terrae injicentem;
putting down a lader; the Greek (...).
or moaring his bark; and if he were found guilty he underwent deserved
punishment: if he were not found guilty they cleared him of that fact, not
discharging him of the former Demosthenes.
(...). I know not whether I may be of that opinion that others are in this,
that if he were cast in this trial, he was exposed to the cruel mercy of the
wind and waves. These last quoted words seem contradict it. The first that
ever answered here was Teucer, proving himself to be innocent of the death of
Ajax; Dictis cretensis de bel^^ Trojano. l. 6. p. 145.
whom trecherously circumvented because he defended not, his father Telamon
drove out of Salamis, unto which that he might be restored he made appeal to
this Court. Which gives light to Politico^ 4. c. 17.
Aristotle (...). Judicatories concerning men flying for murder, that care for
their bringing back again, such as in Athens, (...). When the party
prosequuting will not admit of reconciliation.

CAP. III.
SECT. V. De Tribunalibus reliquis. (...).
BEsides these Courts of blood and causes criminal, there were for civil
matters these, Heliaea, of which before for the excellency of it I treated.
(...). Of this name there are two, (...), the greater and the middle. In this
Court were handled matters says Petit that exceeded not one drachme, to which
Polit. lib. 4. c. 17.
Aristotle might be thought to look speaking of Judicatories, (...) etc. And
this was the meaning of Att^els. pa: 27. l: 13.
Pausanias, (...). Suing here for the least occasions. The Vndecimviri were
Judges of the Court, which made Petit to suppose that it was not to be reckoned
among the (...). It stood Pausania^ ibidem.
(...), in an obscure place of the city; whence (...), in Page 450.
Demosthenes, is by Vlpian expounded, privily, by a Metaphor taken from the
situation of the Judicatory, or, (...), from goods secretly hidden. (...), from
the form of it, which seems to have been triangular. (...), and (...), from
the colors that were painted Aristoteles Athen. Rep. apud Arist. Sch. page 31.
(...) upon the post of the entry, answerable to which there was a staff given
to the Judges, that they might know in what Court to ^it. For they presently
went to that Court which had the same color with their staff. (...). From the
statue of Lycus on Heroes, which was there set up, having the face of a wolf;
where likewise the statue of Juno stood visaged in the same manner. But we must
not omit that the image of Lycus was erected in every court; hence Zenobius.
(...), Lyci december, for sycophants and such as corrupt judgment, because that
such persons were very frequent and busy there; And so think I Pollux is to be
read, Lib. octavo p. 406. The place is extremely corrupted, as you may perceive
by the false Greek.
(...) (understand (...) or the like) at which they who bribed the Judicatories
met. Zenobius helps my conjecture (...). The Vesp. p. 457
Scholiast of Aristophanes writes that this noble Lycus had a Temple near the
Judicatory, where the Judges divided their money for pay, three oboli to each, a
day. Pollux lib. 8.
(...). This was a great Judicatory; so named from Metichus an artificer which
built it. Here, who had passed thirty years of his age, and was well and Nobly
descended and owed nothing to the public treasury, might be chosen Judge. For
of such they all consisted. (...). Some have fal^ely supposed that there was a
Tribunal so called: neither did Athen. At. l. 2. c. 12. p. 124.
Meursius think otherwise, when he translated these words of Lib. 8. page 406.
Pollux, (...), apud tribunal Ardettum. The fault crept in by the negligence of
the transcriber; for the place is thus to be read, (...). The Judicatories were
wont to take Oath or be sworn in Ardettus. Ardettus is a place near the river
Ilissus, so named from Ardettus a Peer, who swore the people, being in
sedition and mutiny, to love and amity. Where afterward, as is most probable
the Judges took oath (I cannot justly say presently after their election) to
give sentence according to the Laws, and concerning things to which no Laws
were enacted, in equity and justice, (...).
by Apollo Patrius, Ceres, and Jupiter Rex. And this the Etymologist affirms,
speaking of Ardettus, Etym. mag. p. 147.
(...). The Judges in this place took their bath touching the discharge of
their office. From whence among the Ancients such as would presently swear,
were called Casaub. Theoph. Char. p. 178.
Ardetti, proverbially; as also those who wear perjurious and forsworn.
(...). Thus have we viewed the Athenian Judicatories, in number ten. Etym.
Mag. loco laudato.
For Murder, Areopag^s, Palladium, Delphinium, Prytanum, and Phrea^tys. For
other matters Heliaea, Trigonum, Parabystum (not the Medium but Majus) Metichi
forum, and ad Lycum, where the (...) were wont to sit, says De Mag. Athen. p^
540
Possardus; of whom, because Discrip. Reip. Ath. p. 41.
Emmius numbers them among Iudicia qua^uor praecipua, the four chief Courts, I
will now speak. But of every Tribe were chosen Ulpian in Them. p. 342.
forty four men, Pollux l. 8. p. 407.
above threscore years old, who judged in several Tribes, as it fell to them
by lot. And if any refused to sit according to his lot he was deprived of the
privileges of an Athenian Citizen. Pollux ib.
In former time there came no controversy into the Courts, which had not first
past through their hands; (if it succeeded ten dracmes; Although Demosthenem
loco citato.
Vlpian tells us that they determined of petty businesses) but that seems to
be, (...), holy matters, if Pollux be so to be read. For some things there were
which came not under their Jurisdiction. What ever the (...) judged, if the
plaintiff and defendant, or either of them liked not the award, they might
refer it to the Senate (as appears out of the Page 678.
Argument of Demosth. Orat. contra Callippum; and Lib. 8. p. 407.
Pollux) at which removing of the suit they were to cast their suffrages into a
pot as they gave the^, on what side soever, for the piaintif by themselves, and
for the defendant by themselves. Vide Them. Midian. etc. Ulpian in illum. p. 344.
When they were appointed for the hearing of a case they were to meet at the
place for them ordained, there to expect both parties until the even, at which
time if neither or but one was present, it was in their power to fine them
according to the Law. At the time they entered the suit, and wrote the
accusation, with the fine which was required for damages; they received as a
fe^ from the plaintiff one drachme, which they called Pollux. 8. c. 10. p. 408.
(...), as also another from the defendant, when they gave him his oath. Their
office was but annual; And because would pervert justice, (as Orat. in Baeotum
pro dote.
Demosthenes is witness, Idem page 682 n. 41.
although they were not to judge before they had sworn) give sentence
according to favor, envy, or for gain, therefore Ulpian loco laudeto. 342.
at the years end they made an account of their function upon the last day of
Petit Miscel. l. 8. p. 211
Thargilion, on which ie was lawful for any to speak what he could object
against them; and if any were faulty, they were (...). Thus much of the (...).
There were other (...) likewise, such as our Civilians call Arbitri
compromissarii: and we in english Arbitrators: whom two parties choose with
resolution to stand to their determination; whether in matter of debt,
covenant, or other co^troversy whatsoever such by the Attick Law any might
request, but with necessity of abiding at their judgment. Vide legem apud Them.
p. 344.
For they could not appeal from them to any other court. To refer matters to
their arbitremet the Greeks term (...). and it will not be superfluous here
to relate the story of Bunas an Athenian, whom when the Elei and Calydonii had
chosen arbitrator in a difference, after he had heard both parties, he
prolonged the sentence until at last he died. Whence grew to a proverb,
Zenobius.
(...), Bunas judica^, Bunas judges, of those that defer to pass sentence,
and hold a case long in suspense.

CAP. IV. De Nominibus Iudicialibus.
HAving thus treated of the Attick Courts, it follows that I speak of the
Terms of law, Writts, Accusations. These were of two sorts, private and
public. The public were properly termed (...), says Descrip. Reip. Arh. p.
41.
Emmius. Of (...), there were diverse sorts. (...) says In Demost. pro Corona.
p. 159.
Vlpian, is (...), of any trespass against the Law, by which the Statutes of
the Commonwealth are violated; and most properly, Orat. contra Lept. p. 296.
quoth he, else where, it signifies an accusation made according to the Law; or
to come nearer, it is the same which in English we call a Sir T. Smith Com.
Wealth of Engl. l: 2. c. 10.
Writ or Right, in Latin Actio or Formula, as in In Vitelio.
Sueton, Injuriarum formulam intendere, to serve a man with a writ. Pollux l.
8. p. 387.
(...) is a kind of an Information made against any for abuses in the Mines,
or, Custom houses, for converting Tribute money to a man's own use, or the
like. Which offenses were brought to the Archon in witing, with the names of
the accuser and accused, and the fine which the parties convinced should
undergo, to be paid to him to whom the wrong was offered. But if the informer
had not the fifth part of the suffrages, he was to lay down the sixth part of
the fine; which the Demosten. cont. Caricl. p. 699. n. 6. cont. Everg. and
Mnesib. p. 646. n. 90. cont: Steph. (...). A. p. 622. n. 9. con^tra Onetora.
(...). p. 528. n: 19. cont: Aphob. (...). p. 508, n. 97.
Orators call (...), from (...), because it signifies the sixth part of a
Drachme. At the end of the accusation, the informer was to subscribe the names
of the witnesses that were present. In general, all discoveries of private
injuries are called (...), which in Latin you may name delationes. For which
the Romans allotted the fourth part of the forfeit, whence they are styled
Quadruplatores but among the Athenians not so, if Onomast. l: 8. c: 6. p* 387.
Pollux say right. (...). The amercement fell to the person injured, although
another accused for him. If the fine were written down a thousand Drachmes, and
the Accuser had not the fifth part of the voices: he paid two hundred and one
Drachme; if it exceded; a thousand, four hundred and one. (...) is a Writ
against those that owe to the City Treasury, and yet go about to bear office,
says In Demost. p. 391,
Vlpian, which by the Attick Law was utterly fo bidden. The Scholiast of
Aristophanes, takes it for the accusing of any that did amiss in public
affairs; In Equit. p. 303.
and the Page 469.
Interpreter of Demosthenes in another place, (...) for men disfranchised. But
Onom. lib. 8. p. 388.
Pollux teaches us that it is a declaration made to the Archon against one
taken in the manner; which the Greeks term (...) In Stelit. 1.
Schol. Nazianz, (...), Pollux expresses by (...), when the offense is
confessed. Because men so apprehended were forced to condemn themselves; no
further evidence required then from their own mouths. By which
acknowledgement of their giltinesse, without greater trial, they received
their doom Sir T. Smith Commonw: of Engl. l. 2. c. 26. p. 281.
as among us when a prisoner arraigned, confesses his indictment to be true,
noe twelve men go upon him: there rests but the Judges sentence of the pain
of death. Whence grew our proverb, Confess and be Hanged Loco laud.
Pollux (...). He that thus made his declaration, was to subscribe his name, yt
if he were false, he might be liable to the writ, (...) The declaration was
against men who were not present. (...), is a carrying of a man before the
Magistrate, being taken in the fact, who^ otherwise he was to accuse by
declaration in his absence. By which a thousand Drachmes were endangered. In
this (...); they brought not all offenders to the same Magistrates, but
according as they were made Judges of such and such offenses; Vlp. in Them* p.
389.
sometimes to the eleven, sometimes to the Idem p. 407
Thesmothetae, sometimes to the Archon. Now if a man had found out any indebted
to the public treasury, or bound for those places or countries where it was
not permitted for him to go, or one who had committed murder, if by reason of
weakness he durst not venture to apprehend the person, and (...), he would
perhaps fetch the Archon to the house where such a party lay hid, which the
Attick Lawyers term (...), is when a fellon has committed murder, and flies
for succor to any; ( Them. p. 416
as the Law suffered any to receive him) if the kindred of the slain or others
had required the malefactor to be delivered to the^ and the protector would
not, it was lawful to enter into his house and carry a way any three persons,
as some translate it, or all save three (...), as others, Idem con^* Arist. p.
415.
who were to answer for the outrage done. But who so entered unjustly was not to
escape unpunished. (...), says In Them. p. 58.
Vlpian, is accusation concerning great and public matters, such as Eund. p.
453.
elsewhere he speaks of, to wit, the disolution of the Democracie; or if an
Orator had spoken what was not for the benefit of the weal public; if any
went to wars before they were sent, or betrayed a Garrison, A^my or fleet. In
other accusations, if the accuser had not the fifth part of the suffrages he was
fined a thousand drachmes, and lost the privileges of a Citizen, in this he
was uncontrolable. But in after time, because men would accuse presently for
none, or small offenses; therefore was there a law enacted, that whosoever
accused by (...), and had not the fifth part of voices on his side, was fined a
thousand drachmes, although he lost not the privileges of a Citizen. This
(...) contained no written crimes but was only by bare word of mouth; and as
the accusation was given, so was the defense made according to the Law called
(...). The Senate was Judge, ( Pollux says that Solon made a thousand to sit
on this, and Phalereus 1500. Where the interpreter erres. For (...) is 500 to
them, as (...), in Demosthenes, and somewhat more) and whom they found
delinquent, if in small faults, they fined; but if the offense were heinous,
they committed him to prison. Thus much for public actions; private were
these that follow, more properly calid (...).

(...) is an action against a man, who when two shall scuffle, Them. p. 410.
vide Vlp. ibid and Arg. Orat. cont. Everg. p. 637.
gives the first blow, which they Greeks call (...). Sch. Arist. Conc. p. 745.
The matter was heard before the Judges; and though the Law ordained not any
set some of money for damages, yet it was permitted for the party smitten to
to write down what he thought fitting. Them. cont. Con. p. 690*
The reason why these actions were so strictly looked into, was least any not
able to defend himself with his hands, should seek to revenge himself with
stones or any other hurt full weapon.

Idem ibid.
(...). Some what near our proviso of giving the lie, least by taunting and
reproachful words, men be provoked to blows. (...)* Is when any man receives
damage and hurt in estate by another man. Arg. Orat. Them. contra Calliclem.
As to turn water into his ground, by which it is anoyed; Them: cont: Callip:
p: 680. n: 20.
to refuse to pay money where it is required, or to give it to an other. Them.
cont. Tim. p. 659. n. 25.
to promise to bear witness in a suit, and then not be present, by which the
case falls, and the like. (...). About pawnes, I supose, which men that needed
money mere wont to leave with the userers, Sch: Aristo: 137. E.
as clothes household stuff, etc. Or about money put to the banck, which
exchangers did employ to the advantage of the owners, as I gather out of Cont:
Phor: p: 555. n. 7.8.
Demosthenes* The word importes both. (...). Of divorce. Vide Cujacium. Observe:
l: 6: c: 15.
for they were wont to put a way their wives, in former time, upon discontent
or hope of greater portions; which divorse they called (...), and as Lysias
(...) on the husbands side, and on the wives (...); for he did as it were turn
her away, she was said to forsake him. (...). Of ill usage of parents, as not
relieving them if they were poor. Of wives against husbands, of Pupils against
Tutors. (...) of theft, after what manner soever. Which if it were by day, was
not capital, but by night was deadly. (...). Such as our Act of Parliament has
allotted for extortion, it being by This is reckoned among the Laws* which
were made for private men. Vlp in Them: p: 481.
Law provided in Athens that none should take too much use, although once
allowed by Solon, that any might make the best of his money: which he terms Vi
Casub: in Theoph. p: 191. Char: (...)
(...). Of usury I shall speak more in Chap. of money. (...). When men had
bargained and would not stand to it, Polit: l: 2: c: 3
Aristotle. (...). When men broke the Articles which they made to each other,
about deviding of inheritance between man and man; or between City and
City, concerning free trading, as that of the Carthaginians with the Romans.
Arist. Pol. 3. c. 6. or the like. Them: p: 651 n: 13.
These (...) were usually confirmed by oath to each other. (...). Ulp: in Them
p: 62. and 310.
A contention about bearing office, in which they seek to have a time
appointed, when a man shall enter into it. For the discharge whereof they are
to prove him fit. (...). When parents died and left their daughters
inheritrices, the kindred was wont to sue each other to make it appear who was
nearest joining in blood, that he might mary her. Hence a Virgin to whom an
inheritance falls, Pollux l: 3. c: 3. p: 136.
is called (...), that is Controversa. (...). About letting of houses. (For
Herodotus terms that (...), which other Greek writers (...), it is as well to
set to hire, as to take to rent, (...) and (...), to let out. Which they ofete^
did for want of money which that they might obtain the quicker, they wrote over
their door as we use do, This House is to be let* which custom Menedemus in
Heut: Act: 1. Sc: 1:
Terence expresses -- Inscrpsi ilico, AEDES MERCEDE.) This Writ was properly
against Guardians of Orphans (not concerning men of years, such as immediately
is before spoken) who having taken the charge upon the^ of Tuition, were to
employ for the benefit of their Pupils what was left them: they therefore made
known to the Archon that such a house was to be let, he then put it out upon
some pledge for security. But if the house were let under the yearly rent it
could bring in, or was suffered to remain void of a Tenant, to he loss of the
Pupil, then was it lawful for any man to sue the Guardian in the Archon's
court Upon a writ of (...). I have observed it to have been a custom among
the Anciens, when they perceived themselves to draw near to death, to call for
some one to whose care they would commit their children, and delivering them
into their hands, beseech them to have a tender ey over the^ and to provide for
them what should be most convenient: such as Odipus in Odip: Col: p: 314.
Sophocles entreats of Theseus in the behalf of his daughters - (...). Not
unlike is that of the Ter: Andr: Act: 1. Sc: 5*
Comoedian under the person of Chrysis, committing Glycerium to the Tuition of
Pamphylus. Accessi: vos semotae: nos soli: incipit.
Mi Pamphile, hujus formam atque aetatem vides:
Nec clam te est, quam illi nunc utraeque inutiles
Et ad pudicitiam, and ad tutandam rem sient.
Quod ego te hanc per dextram oro, and ingenium tuum,
Per tuam fidem, perque hujus solitudinem
Te obtestor, ne abs te hanc segreges, non deseras.
Si te in Germani fratris dilexi loco;
Sive haec te solum semper fecit maxumi,
Seu tibi morigera fuit in rebus omnibus.
Te isti virum do, amicum, tutorem, patrem:
Bona nostra haec tibi committo, and tuae mando fidei.
Hanc mihi IN MANUM DAT, mors continuo ipsam occupat.
But among the Atheneans the use was to nominate in their Testaments and last
wills, whom they would have to be Guardians. Which office after they had
undertaken, if they should defraud the Orphans of their patrimony, or any part
thereof, they were sued with a Writ (...), as Plut. in vita eius.
Demosthenes did sue his as soon as he came to age. But if the matter were not
questioned within five years after the pupil was admitted among the number of
men, by the Demosth. p. 724. n. 22.
Law the Guardian could not be taxed. (...), Of a Master against a servant
ungrateful for his manumission, not doing his duty to his Master. Because, as
Page 465.
Demosthenes witnesses, it was the nature of servants once made free, not only
to be ungrateful but also to hate their Masters most of all men, as those who
had been conscious to their servitude. It was enacted therefore that whosoever
was convicted of ingratitude should again be made a bondslave. Lib^ 2. c. 1.
p. 670.
Valerius Maximus. Age, quid illud Institutum Athenarum, quam memorabile? Quod
canvictus a patrono libertus ingratus, jure libertatis exuitur. The Romans did
not only acquit them of the liberty of the City, (which the Athenians gave
not) but made them also slaves, which punishment they term Justin. Ins^^. l.
1. T. 16.
Maximam capitis diminutionem. (...). If any man put away his Wife he was to
restore her portion again; if he refused he was (...), that is, every month
for one pound to pay nine oboli, which the Atticks term Demost. p. 733.
(...), the revenew of her Dowry. The Writ whereby he was sued was (...) for
the repayment. Them. page 655. n. 58.
(...), If any went to Law, as clayming title to an house, he was first to serve
him that dwelled in it with a Writ (...), by which he dema^ds his rent for the
time the defendant had the house: if it were for any parcel of land, there was
a Writ (...) given out, for the provent and fruit thereof; afterward (in both
cases alike) they proceeded to an (...), in which they claimed right and title
to the house or land. Although in all these trials the defendant were cast, yet
could he keep justly either house or land: but if in a 3d trial, which they
call (...), he were overthrown, he was compelled to relinquish his possession.
This (...) also is a Writ against those that would cast an inhabitant out of
his house, it being termed from (...), to throw forth. Vlp. in them* p. 340.
It is also a Writ of Execution against any overthrown in the Court, and fined
a thousand drachmes, which at such a day he was to pay; and if he laid it not
down upon the nail, there went forth a Writ (...), to make enter upon the
lands and possessions of him so cast. It is also a Right against any who will
not suffer him, who has bought any thing of the public to reap the fruit
thereof. Who either withholds any thing from the owner, or violently takes from
any, etc. (...), when two had bin partners in estates, and one of them would
have a dividence made, if the other refused, he might be restrained to it by
the Writ. (...). Because the Market place among the Greeks was the fittest to
cheat and cosen in, as Apud Laer. p. 74.
Anacharsis was wont to say, therefore the Athenians enacted that none should
buy in the market place; (to which the Scythian wise man poynted likewise,
saying, that they forbad to speak false, and yet did (...)) if any man had
bargained for any thing, and another sued and doubted of the right of it,
Pollux l. 8. c. 6. p. 385.
he might require the seller to confirm the lawfulness of the thing sold, and
maintain it against all controversy, otherwise the seller was liable to (...).
For although in Athens they bought for the most part Graeca fide with ready
money; as In Auson. Lect. l. 2. c. 6.
Scaaliger and In Theoph. Char. p. 312.
Casaubon truly interpret it, Adversariorum l. 4. c. 13.
Turnebus, Repraesentata pecunia: yet sometime gave they Earnest only to make
the thing sure, which the Greeks and Latins call Don. Quod prius datur, ut
reliquum reddatur. in Ter. Heaut. Act. 3. Sc. 3.
(...), from the Vide Dasq. in Basil. Sell.
Hebrew (...). This seems to me to have been the hundredth part of money which
was to be paid for the thing bought, as Sermon 42
Stobaeus out of Theophrastus. Where you may read likewise that it was the
custom, when any thing was to be sold, to bring a note thereof to the
Magistrate some threescore days before. (...), For the laying open of any
thing, concerning which was a suit in law, by Onomast l. 8. c: 6: p. 384.
Pollux his words I may conjecture, goods or money privily taken away (...).
When any should offer to take another man's servant and make him free against
the will of the Master, which the Greeks term Demost. p. 718. n. 29.
(...) is a suit about neerenesse of blood, in matter of inheritance, when a
man dies without issue of his own body. (...), When a man went to prove that
he was to challenge the inheritance of right, as near of blood; or upon some
other conditions: from (...); because he laid down the tenth part of the
inheritance, which if he were cast in Law, he was to pay, if the cause were
private, says Pand. Prio. p. 100.
Budaeus: but if public, the fifth. Them. p. 620 n: 78.

Here follows the terms promiscuous, private and public, which are
public and lawful for any to prosecute: see Polux, page 386.


(...). When any shall protest that an inheritance does hang in controversy,
and is (...), as a true heir being still alive, of which thing chiefly treats
the Oration of Demosthenes against Leochares. (...) When any shall try to
falsify the (...). When men went to Law about kindred, as to prove themselves
of such and such houses.

(...), All strangers in Athens were compelled by the Law to get them Patrons
(as my most worthy Schoolmaster the glory of his time in Epist. Dedic. suo
Euchaitensi praesixa ad Richar. Cantuariensem Archiepiscopum.
Mr Matthew Bust has observed, whom for honors sake I name) or else they might
be questioned, and if they were convicted their goods were sold and put into
the City Treasury. (...) of ingratitude against those who showed not
themselves thankful to those who had well deserved of them. (...) the same
with (...), when any will reckon himself among the number of Citizens who had
never been made free, by which he purchased imprisonment until such times as
there was a Court kept, and then he was sold. (...) when a man is eye witness
of a matter. (...), When another witnesses from the report of him that saw it.
(...) falsewitnesse, which to prosecute in Law they term (...), when one was
eyewitness and promised to testify, yet would not appear at the appointed
time; which they were wont to compel them to do, which they call (...), after
which citation the party was to be at court, or forswear that he saw not the
matter, or was not present; otherwise he was to pay a thousand Drachmes, in
which sum to be fined the Atticke Lawyers give the appellation (...), When
the Judges were corrupted with bribes. (...) against those that did corrupt
them. (...) of a man convinced of idleness, which once taken Draco punished
the elinquent with loss of the City privileges, Solon not unless he were
thrice delinquent. (...), When any of the mariners ran away from their ships.
(...), When the Mariners that stayed in the ships would not fight, if occasion
required. (...) when any would falsely accuse, there was likewise against them
a writ (...) Against those that unjustly cite to the Court. (...) when any is
accused of encroaching into the number of Citizens, and gives gifts to escape
free. (...) when any was accused of making a decree or Law contrary to former
statutes. This accusation was called (...); because the accuser swore that it
was against the Laws, or unjust, or inconvenient for the Common wealth (...),
was an examination of the Magistrates whether they were fit to govern, or no.
Whether the Orators were not given to Lust, and incontinency, whether they had
not spent their patrimonies, or dealt unkindly with their parents, or lead a
life any other ways blameable, whereupon they were discarded the privileges
of the City, and not suffered to plead, or speak publicly. (...), An account
of public offices borne, laying out of money, and dispaching Ambassages, made
to the Ten Logistae (for the breach of which went out a Writ (...), Rationem
reddere) if concerning injuries given to the judges. (...), an accusation
against those who are ill affected toward the Commonwealth, made by the decree
of the people, and such as are wellwillers to the state. (...) likewise are
accusations against men injurious, (...), Lib. Arg. in Midianam.
and such as are delinque^t against their festivalls, as the oration of
Demosthenes against Midias. (...), An oath which the accuser took that he
would justly accuse. Vlpian in Them. 226.
(...), The defendants oath that he had done no wrong. (...), an oath of
Ambassadors, or men chosen for state service, that by reason of sickness they
cannot give atte^dance. They may do it by a proxy, if they please. It is
likewise the oath of one called to witness, wherein he swears that he knows
nothing of the business. (...), When others shall swear that pretended
weakness was only a shift to put of the burden of public office which the
state laid on them. (...), an accusation of a Law or decree unprofitable,
against the motioner, as above said. (...), and (...), when a man shall object
a case not to be entered rightly that the writ ought to be such, and such, and
not as it is. ex. gr for a man that runs away from the Army, which is (...),
and I accuse him of leaving his rank, to wit (...), or objection of the time
past within which space the suit was to be commenced, or that it should be
handled in such a Court, and not in such; as wilful murder in Areopagus, not
Palladium: by which evasion if the case fell, it was termed (...), when he that
is sued puts in a bill against the plaintiff in like manner. But if the
defendant (I call (...) so) were cast, he paid (...). Vlpian in Them. 334.
(...), when a man is summoned to answer before the Arbitri a controversy, if
he swear that he is sick, or pretends a journey from home, and appears not at
the day appointed, he was cast in (...), Eremodicio, as if he scorned to come,
or were obstinate, he ought within ten days to sue out (...), wherein he
reproved the sentence, and made it of no effect, so as it came to its first
state again. But if he could not obtain a (...), having before sworn that he
would stand to the award of the Judges, their determination stood in full
strenth and power, and he was constrained to pay a thousand drachmes (as In
Them. p. 340.
Vlpian) which was the mulct appointed by the law: for the discharge whereof he
put in good security. (...), When any was absent from the Court, or heard not
his name called by the Crier to answer thereunto, he was fined, as conscious of
Eremodicium, and if within the space of two Months he did not renew the suit
(which is (...)) he was sure to pay the fine. (...), when any man will
challenge out of goods forfeited, and publicly sold, somewhat as debt to him,
or say that part belongs to him, the state would narrowly search into it, which
thing they term (...), is a citing of one before the Archon in controversy
about inheritance, or a Virgin left inheretrix. Now if the plaintiff did not
warn the defendant (...), the suit died, and such actions are called (...).
Them p. 623
(...), is as letting a case fall, or dissolving it upon some witness, oath,
confession extorted by torments, and the like. (...), is an appeal from one
court to the other, as from the Senate to the people, and from the people to
the Senate again, or from their Judicatories at home to some forrainers in
another country* (...) when there is no more fine laid upon a man then what his
adversary did (...), write down at the lower end of his indictment: of which
custom somewhat has before been spoken. (...), Against such as stole Ox dung
out of their neighbors lands; whence of those that are put in the court for
trivial matters the proverb Aristoph: Sch. p. 3.28. Laertius in vita.
(...) of impiety against their gods, as Aristotle for his hymn on Hermias,
Tyrant of the Acharnenses, which he engraved on a statue at Delphos. For
revealing mysteries, or imitating them as Alcibiades. Of which if a man were
convicted he was put to death; as on the contrary the accuser if he got not the
better* (...), of being false to the state, the punishment was death, and after
that, that they should be cast out of the Territories of Athens unburied. Them.
cont. Theocr. page 7.13. n. 76.77.
(...), If any owed to the City Treasury, and his name were registered, and
before the discharge of the money his name were blotted out, they sued him
before the Thesmotheta (...), but if his name were never entered, he was
prosecuted by an (...) proper only to such as dealt in the Mines, like to the
Stanneries in the County of Cornwall my Country, and Devon-shire her sister.
Them. con. Pantae. p. 567. n. 51.52*
Liable to this Court were they who should thrust any man from his work, who
should dig within another ma^s liberties, who should bring weapons thither,
I suppose to take away Mineralls by violence, who should kindle any fire in
the Mines etc. Who should offer to take away the props that upheld the weight
of the incumbent earth, which to do was death, as In vitis December. Rhet. p.
453.
Plutarch tells us. There was likewise (...) against the laborers in the
Mines, who if they intended to begin a new work were to acquaint the overseers
appointed for that end by the people, that the four and twentieth part of the
new coin might come to the public Treasury. Now if any presumed to work who
had not made it known to the officers it was lawful for any to accuse him
(...) About money put out to the money changers. Argum. Phorm. Orat. p. 554.
For (...) among the Atticks is the same that (...) in the Lawyers of latter
time, in Iure Graeco, Romans Sometimes indeed they used (...) for means, and
sustenance Sch. Eurip.
(...) and (...) have this difference, Med. p 368.
that Vlpian in Med. p. 368.
(...) is the Judge that gives sentence, (...) is he that put in the
controversy, to be the means that the sentence past against the defendant.
Idem in Them. p. 450.
(...) is when a man deeply indebted pretends that he is not able to discharge
all and therefore desires the people that a part thereof might be remitted.

LIBER QUARTUS. De Ritibus Nuptialibus, and Amatoriis.
CAP. I. De Venere, and Cupidine.
THE People of Athens, had their habitation too near the Sea, to keep their
affections far from her that rose of the Foame. For that they were devoted to
the service of Venus, the two Temples wherein she was courted, and the over
favorable name of (...) will sufficiently testify. One of those Temples was
for Venus' (...) ( Pausanias.
si diis placet) a name better becomeing one of the Muses, (...), a play so
called.
or the play with the ball, then her: and the other, for Venus (...). Which two
names put me in mind of an excellent saying in Achilles Tatius concerning
(...), and (...). A saying good enough for a Christian, and a Bishop, such as
Suidas reports him to have been. But, a diverticulo. The Sacrifices of the
first Temple, were (...), with a little more state, and chastity then became
her; but those of the last, (...), as easy, and as wicked as her self: For
every farthing-strumpet, might by Solon's own appointment prostitute her body
in the very Temple, as well as in the (...), Pausanias.
or the (...), (those (...)) or any other or the places abused to lust. Nay
those sinkes Clo^cae.
besides places for the purpose, they had garments also for the purpose, and
flowers on the Garments too, (...), storidas vestes, apparel fit for such
flora's as wore them. The Rites of her service the Athenians are said to have
received from the Phaenicians, the Phaenicians from the Cyprians, the Cyprians
from the Assyrians. Fides penes Authorem Coel. Rh^d.
sit. The fashion of her Picture they had from the Cyprians. (viz.) with a
head, and all like a man as far down as the girdle, and all the rest like a
woman* (to show she had a place in the Ditches Inter Socraticos notissima fossa
cinaedos Juven. Sat. 2.
too as well as in the Sinkes, and patronized lust to either of the Sexes,)
Insomuch, that many have been scrupulous whether they should call her Deum, or
Deam: for there is one that says -- Pollentemque Deum venerem.
Which Macrobius himself commends for the best, and therefore in Virgill. Aen.
2. v, 632. reads Discedo, and ducente Deo flammam inter and hosts


Expedior -- and not Dea, and so Aristophanes calls her (...), in the masculine
gender. But, now this makesmore work, and therefore (to plaster two walls
with one pot full of plaistring) they made it a custom, ei sacrificiu^
Philochorus, cited by Macrobius^
facere viros cu^ vest muliebri, Mulieres cu^ virili* Quod eade and Mas, and
Foemina aestimaretur, for the men to Sacrifice to her in women's apparel and
women in men's. If it be so* you may say Aphroditus for Hermaphroditus, if you
please. I read of no such thing concerning Minerva: only the Aristophanes Act.
5. s^. 2.
Poet (because she was such a Virago) honors the Manhood of the Goddess,
with a (...); as Theocritus in (...). 5.
does Hecate* with (...); an appellative of the masculine gender: Nor is it
enough, that the Mother is thus religiously wood, and adored: but the blind
paultry Boy will be crying for a Temple too And if Her due be a Cow, certainly
His cannot be less then a Calfe, neither was it. (...).
says Theocritus: and Amori Litari to sacrifice to Amor or Cupid is common in
Apuleius. Me thinks he might have been content to sit still in his Mothers
Temple (where he was lovely Pourtraicted by Zeuxes and crowned with flowers)
and have soard Alatus.
with his wings no higher. But the Temples of (...) and (...) in the way to the
Academy, and the famous title of (...), do more then whisper what cause he had
to be so proud, and how amorous this People has been.

CAP. II. De Paederastia.
TO omit the (...), and the Abomination of the Women one with another changing
(...) Ep^ad Romans c. 1. v. 26.
(...), the natural use into that which is against nature; give me leave to
speak a little of their (...), or (...), and the (...), Ibid. v. 27.
practiced by the Men upon their own Sex. The first that ever taught -- Amorem
In teneros transfer mares. --
(if we may believe Ovid) was Orpheus, How good a Scholar of his the Roman
was, Lippis and Tonsoribus notum. And for the Greeks, it is reported by
Herodot^^, that the Persians derived the infection from them; which I am apt
enough to believe, when I read those words of Cornelius Initio lib^ de
Excel. Imp.
Nepos, Laudi in Graecia ducitur adolescentulis* quam plurimos habere Amat^res,
in one place, and those concerning Alcibiades in another Ineunte adolescentia
amatus est a multis more Graecorum, not to tell you how he himself afterward
was more then Pathieus in that double-Cappa-rougery as well as Aemil. Prob.
Pausanias or Socratici (...).
Socrates, or any of his Wag-tail Plato in Symp.
Sectaries. The Cretians (whatever Strabo commends of that government) if
Aristot. say true, made a law for a toleration of it. The Athenaeus.
Megarenses had their Kissing-matches, when he that could kiss sweetest was
led away in pomp Corollis onustus. only thus much is said in commendation of
the Lacedaemonians, and the Athenians, that they confined the Lust to the person
of a slave. Nay L. 3. Var. Hist. c. 12.
Aelian (who makes bold to vary from other authors in several relations) goes
farther, and says, (...). but how true that is, I know not, I am sure their
(...) and (...) tell in plain song what they loved: though I confess, I have
found no such feats among them, as that of Lycoph.
Achilles in Murdering Troilus for refusing to submit to his lust. One word
more and I have done. He that was inspired with such a love as this, (as if
they had used the trick of Pyramus Inque vices fuerat captatus an^elitus oris.
and Thisbe) among the Lacedaemonians had the name of (...), or (...), or rather
(...) as Callimachus has it. (...).
By which word (says the Etymologicall Dictionary) is denoted, (...), (or
rather (...)) (...). one inspired, shall I say, or beloved, for so signifies
the word at Sparta (viz.) to love a boy so perdite as to blow in his lower end,
(as we say) or spit in his mouth, or give him Mansum ex ^re, take the Authors
own words for it in the place above quoted. (...), and so Hesychius says of
(...) too. (...). This was all (as he says) or (as I say) it should have been
all: for a man may love his house well enough, though he do not ride upon the
ridge. However, I must confess they had so much care still of the
Commonwealth, notwithstanding their private pleasures, as not to give a voice
to one whom they knew to be guilty of so Much Mollities, as to scratch his head
with one finger. Insomuch that if a man had sued for an Office, to give a
testimony of his virtue, and Manlike disposition, he was feign to lift up his
Arms, and show his hair in his Arme-pits. -- (...).
(...).
says Aristophanes. And good reason for this practice, for, Dura per brachia
set^
Promittunt atrocem animum --
says Persius. And therefore the Woman Apud Aristoph.
that desired to be taken for a Man, thought this the best Argument she could
use -- (...)
(...).
Whereas on the contrary, those that had the forehead to seem, as they were,
effeminate, used the same tricks, which the Romans are said to have used (for
which service they had their (...), or alipilarios) to pull away their hair,
and be as smooth as they could.

But I have said too much of so odious a Love, as should not indeed be named
among us. I will now proceed to speak of a chaster Venus (notwithstanding that
Menelaus in Achill Tat. lib. 2.
Achilles preferred the former) Quae primis rerum exordiis sexuum diversitatem
generato amore sociavit, as Metam. l. 11.
Apuleius said in his Prayer.

CAP. III. De Amore Mulierum.
WHen they first listed themselves into the service (for, Militat omnis amans,
and Cupid is painted like a Soldier) some of them made it such a solemn
business, as to be formerly initiated, like so many Priests.

Achill. lib. 2.
(...)* says Clitophon to Leucippe (...), says Ismenias, Eustath. l. 5.
to his mistress, alluding (it may be) to such Books as the old fellow brought
forth to Apuleius, Loco ante laudato.
Litteris ignorabilibus, Hieroglyphicis.
pranotatos.

Well it seems Venus had her (...) too, as well as Ceres. for her Priests,
though they were not under an enjoined silence, as the others were: yet the
greatest part of their tattling was under the Rose.

Conscius omnis abest Nutu signisque loquuntur. Ovid Met* lib. 4 fab. 4.
And therefore Cupid had not the name of a Whisperer (...) for nothing, seeing
speaking through the teeth, and whispering through the walls (like Pyramus Ovid
Met: lil 4 f^b. 4.
and Thisbe) was so commonly used by his followers. Such as that (...) in
Euripides, succrotilla vocula. Fae^^inina fabulare Titinnius.
succrotilla vocula, says one. (...), Eustath.
says another, of Ismene. And not only their words, but every thing they did,
was by stealth, for what are all their pleasures but fur^a? What is Cupid
Theo^ritas says he stole honicombs. Id. 20.
but a Thief. No wonder then if lovers used to worship the Moon: and the Night
be the blind boys holy day. Eurip.
(...), says one (like that of the Scholiast upon Theocritus (...)) for the
greatest part of their employments were not able to look upon the Sun. Yet
Pindar (as I take it) says the custom was, for the man to worship the Sun,
and the Woman the Moon. It may be the Man's aim Venerem tu^ Mart depre.
hendit. Ovid Met. lib 4 fab. 6.
was to have the Sun's help in bringing Adulteries, and the Woman's the Moons,
in bringing her Luna par. turientibus adest.
children to light.

Besides these, (...) Longus in Pastoral. l. 2.
Pan had his worship too. But for any thing I can perceive (though some of them
it may be, were of Theocritus his mind, -- (...))
whatsoever they pretended to the Band of Religion, they took the liberty and
loosnesse in such businesses to swear and forswear, as fast as they listed,
whiles Jupiter stood by and laughed -- Perjuria ridet amantum. insomuch that
(...), a Love oath, became but a proverb at last, as being accounted (...), not
deserving punishment, if it were taken: nay if Plato (in Ephebo) say truth,
(...), the Gods gave them leave: as having done haec eadem Iuvenes, the same
themselves once: and none can play the French proverb.
knave better then an Abbot that has been a Monk.

CAP. IV. De Amoris I^diciis.
NOw to know whether such an one were in Love or not, (though they say? Love
and the Cough can never be hid) at the keeping of a feast, they took special
notice of the untying of his Garland (as we use to do of the Garter) making it
a forerunner of that of the Zona. But I take to much upon me to determine so
soon of the reason, for Lib. ^5. Deipnos.
Athenaeus says it had been a riddle a thousand years before his time, and
propounded at their merry meetings, (...), and he himself has served up no
less then eight other reasons: but I know never a one better then another to
give you a ^ast. Another sign that they were in Love, was the tinkling of the
Ear, whence that of Sappho (...), and Catullus, -- Sonitu suopte
Tintinant aures. --
To know whether the party loved did love again, they took a leaf* (whether
of Poppie, or what it was I know not) they called it (...) quasi (...)) and
putting it on the forefinger, and the thumb of the left hand (as our Children
use to do with us) struck it with the right. If it gave a crack they rejoiced,
if not they gave a sigh: ou^ alas! * (...).
says Theocritus Idyll. 3. So Aristoph. Schol in Pace.
at their Feasts they had a ^rick, to fasten a long stick in the ground, with
another upon it (in the fashion of the cross beam of a Balance) with a pair
of Scales hanging to it. Under the scales stood a couple of Bowls filled with
water, and under the water a statue of Brass, gilded and called by the name of
(...) ( Id, in Avi^^^*
once the name of a Servant.) Now the manner was for such as were in Love (with
the same Woman as I think) and would willingly know their fortune who should
carry it, to take each his phiale of brass ((...)) to stand a pretty way off,
and having drunk as much as he listed, with a sudden turn of the hand ((...)
they call it, and thence (...)) to throw the remainder into the Scales; the
remainder thus thrown they called (...) from (...), the klat or the sound that
it gave in the fall: Now he that could do this so well, as to make his scale
sink, and strike the image hardest on the head ((...), so that some of the
Wine leap out upon him says the Scholiast) presumed presently upon the love of
his Mistress, and had his (...) or his Cake (the usual reward of victory in
most of their plays) for his labor. sometimes they flung the liquor on the
bare ground, and if it gave a good flash it was counted as luckie for a Lover,
as the crack of the Leaf. Thus to drink and play, they called (...) (as (...)
was the name of the cup and the play too) and seldom a drinking match without
it, (...)
(...)
(...).
Says the Poet. The invention of this barbarous gamboll they are ashamed to
own themselves, and therefore turn it off upon the people of Sicily. I might
speak more of (...), were it either fitter for the present discourse, or not
spoken of so largely, and by so many, as Athenaeus, Rhodiginus and others
already. Let it suffice only to have minded you of the folly so usual among
Lovers in those times according to that of Callima^^u^ (...)
(...).


CAP. V. De Philtris and incantamentis amatoriis.
BUT what if she could not be woone over by fair means? was there then never
an arrow left in the Quiver to wound her with? or a juggling trick to bewich
her? Yes, but first they must get something or other of here is into their
possession, and work upon that, according to the nurses advise to Phaedra in
wooing of Hippolitus, Euripides Hipp. v. 512.
(...)
(...)
(...).
And if they could come to the sight of her, your illices couli (in Apuleius)
there is nothing like is for a fascination. (...), he threw a sheep eye at her
(says Lib. 4.
Heliodorus) The proverb, that Love comes in at the Window and goes out at the
Door, may not absurdly be understood of the eyes, which Maximus Tyrius calls
(...), the Doors of the Soul which seem to be the way and the passage by which
the two loves go in and out. (...), says Musaeus: or if you will, the eyes of
either party are a Torch lighted by the others, to kindle the fire in the
heart. (...), says Lib. 3.
Eustathius, and so in (...).
Lucian make the sight the first step Oculi sunt in amore duces.
in Cupid's ladder of love* To try therefore what this Card could do, they
would go to the house where she lived, and the fashion being for the Daughter
(...) to fill drink to the stranger: (as Sosthenes commanded his Daughter to do
to Ismenias) after the old folk had drunk, when it came to their Mistresses
to drink to them, they observed at what part of the cup she drank, to be sure
to drink at the same, according to that of the Ovid de Art Am. lib. 1.
Poet Fac primus rapias illius tacta labellis
Pocula; quaque bibit part Puella, bibe.
forsooth they thought thus to have a kiss mediate at the second hand wa^ted
over in the cup (...), Aristaenetus calls it, not to kiss the cup, but to cup
the kiss. Nam transmissa tuis ad me fert suavia labris
Ille Calix.
Says Scaliger translating that verse (...).
Such a kiss they used to call (...), ( missivum osculum, or a Kiss conveyed
in a cup, like words in a Letter) as both Achilles and Eustathius do. And by
this time they have seen whether they can do any thing or nothing by the eye.
Next they will try what they can do with the Tongue, by enchanting songs and
tales: or by the Hand with gifts and Philtres. (...), says Xenophon. (...)
more especially is the name of a Bird, (whether it be torquilla or regulus, or
passerculus: the last is most likely because of its salacity) whose tongue they
made use of to such purposes, putting it under the knap of her ring with the
paring of her nails.

And we can thank no body but Juno for such a naughty Bird, for having been
formerly a Woman, and the Daughter of Pan and Pitho (of Echo says
Callimachus) because she bewitched Jupiter to the loving of Io, Juno turned her
into a Bird of the same name, and of a making very suitable to her former
condition, and the uses for which she serves, For (according to the Scholiast
upon Lycrophon) it is a Bird with a long neck and tongue, continually wagging
both the head and the tail and punished she is enough for her roguery, for
(besides that way I told you of before) some times they tied her (...) to a
wheel (as I think) and chanted a charm as they whirled it round, sometimes
(at least the entralls) to a (...) of wax, causing both together to consume in
the fire. But what will you say, if all this while it be nothing but an
instrument pleasantly tuned and played? as some say it is, and that it is
therefore commonly used for any pleasant thing, or inticement (...) says Nem.
Od. 4. vid. Theoc. Pharmacentr. and Aristophan. Lusistrate prope finem.
Pindar, or any other Magical Love toy, such as Vngues muscles, wreathed
fillets, hair, and bands of twisted wool, and diverse other gambolls of the
same branne according to that which I have seen of Laelius an ancient Poet.
Trochiscili, Vngues, taeniae
Aureae, Ilices bitortilae,
With no stronger chains then those of twisted wool ( not (...)
(...) (...).
Plutarch calls it) is Saturn reported to have been bound by Jupiter when he
^lung him down. I can rather believe that all the Gods had laneos pedes
woollen feet, as the proverb says they had, then that any of them should have
Laneas pedicas, woolen fetters. And yet that dull and lazy old dotard, could
be content to lie fast in those bands all the year long, 'till the Month
December, when he had his liberty, because of the Saturnalia which Papinius
therefore calls Saturni compedem exolutum: I refer you for the reason to
Macrobius Saturn. lib. 1. c. 8. Though I believe they intended no other then a
Magical tie, upon the affection of the party, Yet they seem to have made use
of wool, rather then any other thing, because it was so much in fashion in
such kind of matters; for first, the girdle the woman used to wear, was made of
woll, twisted and tied with an Hercules or a True-lovers knot, not to be untyed
but in the Geniallbed. Then the doors of the Bride-house, and the posts of the
doors, were bound about with woollen fillettings, and the Wife was to sit upon
a fleece for a Cushion. Yet how they used this (...) I cannot tell, whether
they put it about the cup wherein the potion was given, according to that.
Theocrit. Pharmaceu
(...).
Or about the Bay which they burnt, or in some other way* but thus much I have
observed of their ordinary practices in such Rogueries (too common with the
woman in these times) that what ever was done to the things which they used
they imprecated the same, or the like, to the parties whom they imagined the
things to represent. Thus Ovid. Met* lib. 8 fab. 4.
Althaea burnt Meleager out in the brand. Thus Juno tied up Ovid. Met. lib. 9.
fab. 5.
Alemaena's womb Digitis inter se pectine junctis. I know not how. Thus
Theocrit. Pharmac.
Simetha (to come nearer home) angry with Delphis for want of his Love would
have scattered his bones in the meal, burnt his flesh in the Bay, melted him
away in the wax, or have had him tumble to her door in the Brazen Bowl, and
have killed him with kindness. Every one o^ which practices was attended with
prayers to Hecate and the Moon for success: as things that were fit to be
done neither by day, nor above ground* Infinite more were the tricks they used
to make a man to love them, such as Lib. 8. E. 68
Philostratus speaks of in his Epistles, (...). The (...) may be thought to be
Cerussa. (...), otherwise (...), or (...), Multicia or Bombycia, a kind of
Pollux.
(...), or a garment that hid the body so that it might be seen, lucet sic per
Bombycina corpus, says Lib. 8. Ep. 6.
Martial, such Women used it Iuvenal. Sat. 6.
Quae tenui sudant in cyclade quaerum
Delicias, and Panniculus bombycinus urit.
It had the name (...), says Lib. 7. c. 17. Petulans, madidumque Tarentum.
Pollux, (...), are like to be (...) Lacertae, such as she in Theocritus would
have used in a potion, but I had rather take them for the (...) worn about the
wrists (...): and the golden fetters I suppose to be stronger then woollen* But
besides all these there was (...), feats to be done by the throwing of an
Apple. Cydonium malum I mean, reported to grow in the Garden of Venus, and
used at weddings (as shall be shown hereafter.) Thus when Cydippe was sitting
in the Temple of Aristan. lib. 1* Ep. 10.
Diana, Acontius threw in his Apple with this Inscription (...), or if you had
rather have the Latin Iuro tibi sane per mystica sacra Dianae,
Me tibi venturam comitem sponsamque futuram.
And so made her think she took, when she did but read the oath. And thus Ovid
Met: l. 10 fab. 11.
Hippomanes threw Back Atalanta, by throwing of his Apples. Nay, if they bit
off a piece, and threw it; it was enough which made Aristaen lib: 1 op. 25
Philenis, being jealous of her sister Thelxinoe complain of Pamphilus his
throwing a piece of Apple in her lap. The Achil. Tat. l. 5. Thessala vendit
Philtra. Iuvenal.
Women of Thessalie are especially noted for cunning Women at this work,
being able (as he says) (...), etc. And so are the Women of Egypt (I think the
sex has still had the Monopoly of Magic (however the Egyptian Corgias apud
Tat: l* 4
Soldier cam^ to mistake in the Dosis, when he gave Lucippe the Potion. For
instead of putting her into a fit of love, Suetonius.
he put her clean out of her wits as Caesonia did her Husband Galigula with
an Hippomanes. Those (...), or Love-potions, were commonly made of the juice of
such herbs, as disposed the body to Venerie, such as the (...) (rendered
Pastinaca) called by way of excellency (...), says Eustathius. Plutarch (if I
mistake not) in his (...), expresses his dislike of these courses. But what?
was there never a way to unwitch the party again? (for I have heard of some
that can do this, who cannot do the the other) yes, either by taking
counter-physick, (as Leucippe did:) or by washing it away in the River
Selemnis, as ( Pausaenias says) they used to do in Achaia: or else by
Sacrifices or charms, according as they imagined the cause. Whence those words
of the Ovid. Met. l: 10. fab. 9.
Nurse to Myrrha incited by the Furies, and not by Cupid, to the wanton love of
her own Father.

Seu Furor est, habeo quod Carmine sanet, and herbis:
Sive aliquis nocuit, Magico lustrabere ritu:
Ira Deum sive est, sacris placabimus iram.
CAP. VI. De Vsitato more significandi amorem.
IF the Love came of its own accord, and were kindled with a natural heat (as
indeed the soul is naturally inclined Plut. in Solon.
(...) to the love of another) you will not think what a tender care those
Grecian Women had of their Sweethearts. In so much, that if you call to mind
some of their choysest expressions thereof (especially that of Ariadne to
Theseus) you cannot but be of In vita These.
Plutarchs mind, in approving the definition given by some of the old
Philosophers, who said that it is, (...). Not to tell you that sometimes they
sent a wooing to the men, pray take but a taste of their customs in this
particular of expressing their love. To trim up their bodies as they did
their own Eusta^b. Ism.
with flowers (like a May-maid) or hang up Garlands at their doors (or (...)
the parts of the house exposed to sight when the doors were open, (...) says
Hesychius) was an ordinary caresse, though indeed (as L. 15.
Athenaeus says) they intend it chiefly to the honor of (...), as making the
body of a sweetheart the Image, and his house, the Temple of Love. The tokens
they usually sent were Garlands and Roses, (...) (says Petala to Simaleon in
Alciphron) and (it may be) sometimes bitten pieces of Apples (...) (as Lucian
calls them) tokens very well agreeing with those expressions in fashion among
the Romans when they sat at table, viz: leaving drink in the cup, and giving
morsells of meat, such as L. 6. Ep. 7.
Martial would have Pontia send him, rather then a whole leg, or the like,
or such as Amor. l. 1. El. 4.
Ovid speaks of, Si tibi forte dabit, quos praegustaverit ipse,
Rejice libatos illius ore cibos.
But I must tell you S. Hi^roms De vita Cleric. ad Nepotian.
censure, degustatos cibos, blandosque ac dulces literulas sanctus amor non
habet, it ought not to be so amongst you. Symmachus upon those words of the
birds in Aristophanes, -- (...), says they were wont to gratify one another
with Birds, such as doves, and the (...), and the like. But these expressions I
weigh but little, when I observe that scarce a Wall or a Tree, where ever it
were ((...) says the Scholiast) was passed by without writing Diog La^r. in
Diadero.
thereon the name of the party, in this form (...), or (...), for the word
(...) among the Gretians signified am asium* a Woman's word, like (...) in
Theocritus, (...).
Instead Whereof (say some) you shall read (...) in the Comedian in Vespis. but
I see no such need of a correction, for he speaks of the Lawyer that was so
much in love with the employments of the Court, that the (...) Vid. p. 118.
(the cover of the pot for the calculi) or one such thing or other ran still
in his mind, and therefore (says he) -- (...)
(...),
(...).
In like manner the men dealt with the names of their Mistresses. which they
wrote sometimes upon the very leaves of the trees, according to that of
Callimachus, (...)
(...).
Let on the leaves so many letters lie,
As my Cydippe Fair may signify.
Which puts me in mind of what Lucian in his (...) says of one that was ready
to dye with the love of C^idia Venus. (...), not a wall now but what was
engraven with* nor a bark of a tree but what proclaimed VENUS FAIR. How glad
would they have been, if they could have written them upon paper, and have
worn them in their hats as we do. but no wonder they did as they did, having
a copy written to them by Nature, (for -- Inscripti nomina rerum
Nascuntur flores --)
and an example given them by Apollo himself, who when he turned Hyacin* thus
into a flower of the same name to keep his memory alive when he was dead; not
contented with that Ipse suos gemitus foliis inscribit, Lib. Ovid. Met. 10.
Fab. 5.
and Ai, Ai,
Flos habet inscriptum --
Thus was the memory of Ajax preserved, and one half of his name, as the same
Author has it. Littera communis mediis pueroque viroque
Inscripta est foliis: L. 13. F. 1.
haec nominis, illa querelae.
But the vehement love of Moschus to Bion his deceased friend thought those
lamenting interjections too little, unless there were written a (...) besides
upon the same Flower. (...)
(...).
(...) for him, and (...) for Her was sure to be written, for never seemed
Mistress foul, nor Prison fair. But for her part if she were (...), or had
black eyebrows, she was counted fair indeed, Theocr.
according to that of Gregori Nyssen, (...), insomuch that Iul. Pollux says,
they had a trick (...) to black them: or if she were somewhat big of stature;
and therefore Aristotle in his Rhetoric, puts (...), as part of the (...), as
he does (...), for the most commendable virtues of her mind. What the Women of
other times esteemed to be the (...) of a man I know not. It seems in
Aristotle's time, it was counted most commendable (...)* But I have talked too
long of Love, or of Robin-hood, that never shot in his bow. I fear the Reader
will blame me, for casting away so much oil and labor upon such a subject,
and (it may be) give his censure that Oration est vultus animi. Seneca Ep. 115.
But those that know me will mistrust his Physiognomy, for defining the temper
of my mind by my look in a paper. However now I am in, I will not stick but
propere sequi quae piget inchoare, Tacit.
and proceed to the Nuptials themselves.

CAP. VII* De Nuptiis.
THE parties being both agreed, unless the Wench were as yet Acerba (as Varro
calls her) or (...), but a sower grape (as Eustathius) and not yet ripe (
Matura viro in the words of Virgil.) they were thus betrothed and yoaked
together. The man did in the the presence of witnesses, promise himself after
the manner of the Latin form, se sponsam post concubitum invitam non
deserturum, and so gave her one (...) or other in earnest: but the Woman she
was desponsata, promised or bestowed upon him by the Parent or the Guardian; as
if the promises of a woman were false enough to make the saying among the
French to be true. Qui femme croit and asne mesne,
Son corpse ne sera ia sans peine.
And yet (it seems) though they feared she might break a promise, they
thought an oath to be strong enough to hold her. For sometimes at the
consummation of the business, Achil. Tat. l. 5.
they went both into the Temple, and there engaged themselves mutually by oath,
as it is probable by the practice of Clitophon and Leucippe, in the Temple of
Isis, where the man swore (...), and the Woman, (...). I do not remember that
the Athenians had that good-fellows-trick of the Galatians, to make a poculum
conjugii as well as Charitatis, and to pledge their troth in a cup, a trick by
which Alex. ab Alex. l. 2. c. 5.
Camma is reported to have poisoned Synorix, (whom she pretended to marry) for
kissing her Husband. Or that they used the custom of the Macedonians of
cutting a Loaf in two between them with a sword, related by L. 8.
Q. Curtius. Surely it had been a true Roman confarreation, if they had. The
rites usually observed at a wedding are said Cael. Rhod. l. 7: c: 4.
to have been invented by Erato. They were partly these. The Daughter being
betrothed, was led by her Parents into the Temple of Minerva, as who would say
to take her leave of the (...) Minerva so called.
Virgin. Besides this, before she can cease to be of the herd of the (...)
Eurip.
(...), take heed, Great Diana will be clean out of patience, if she have not a
draught of the blood of a Heifer calfe never yet married in the yoke, (and so
the fitter for the maid that gives, and the maid that takes (and a crop of her
hair besides, according to that of Euripides. Eurip. in Iphigen. Aul. versu
11.12.
(...)
(...).
And therefore Clytemnestra (speaking of her daughter, whom they pretended to
marry to Achilles) demands of her Husband. ibid. v* 711.
(...);
Whether he had seen the sacrifice performed? But alas poor Iphigenia, she was
not so much to do as to be a Sacrifice to Diana the Goddess of Aulis, and be
made a calfe her self: When as our Woman, it will serve her turn to (...) to
Diana the goddess of Virginity; that is, give her in a basket for a present to
stop her mouth, some curious needle-worke or other, with a prayer besides to
this purpose Theocr. Id 27.
(...) -- that she would not take it amiss if she married. But now I must tell
you, that besides those rites of the (...), there were others as solemn as
they to be observed too, if ever they thought to obtain the good will of the
goddess. The manner of them, and the occasion, you have related by Suidas
thus. It happened upon a time that a certain Bear growing tame, came and
lived in the (...) of the Phlavides: insomuch that at length a little girl
durst go so far, and so near, as to play with it, but the Bear quickly
grew to be in earnest, and drew her blood for the stake: whereupon one of her
brothers shot the Bear and killed it. Presently after this there happened a
very great Pestilence in the City* and the Oracle being sought unto, answer
was returned, that if they meant to remove it, they must make a decree, that
every girl in the City of Athens, some time or other between the years of
Five and Ten of her age, clad in a (...) or a Saffron color garment, do
offer and devote her self to Diana, to make amends for the Bear, and
therefore a girl thus consecrated, was her self called (...) Harpocr^
the Bear, and the action (...) and (...) to play the Bear, (which me thinks
was very unfitting for a Maid) and sometimes (...), because commonly they
deferred it till the last year, as she did in Aristoph.
Leusistrate. (...)
(...)
(...).
(...), she says, because it was to be done in the feast of Brauronia kept in
the Month of Munichion to the honor of the same Diana, who Athen l. 6.
is reported to have been delighted very much with Brauron a Village of Attica,
where Pausanias (in Atticis) says, that Image of hers, which Iphigenia brought
from the Tauri, was continually kept, till Xerxes took it away, insomuch that
she came to be called by the name of Diana Pausan in Arcad.
Brauronia. And yet after all this, for ought that I can see, she need not have
been so Scrupulous of displeasing I know not whom, if she had C^crops his own
Law for a warrant, who first instituted the contract of Matrimony, and was
therefore called by the name of (...), says Ad Odiss. S.
Eustathius: or else, (according to the Scholiast upon In Plut. Act. 3. Sc. 3.
Aristophanes In Plut. Act. 3. Sc. 3.
) quasi (...), because he had in a manner invented the two natures of a Father
and Mother (as to knowledge, and in the way of a certain couple) or rather (if
you will) the natures of a Father and a Son; for before, neither the Father
could be known by the Son, nor the Son by the Father. But some again say,
he had this name, because of his having the bodies of two distinct natures: in
the upper part of a man and in the lower, of a Dragon, as he says (in Vespis)
(...).
And others, because of the many excellent Laws, which he made. Whereby he is
reported so to have tamed and civilliz'd the brutish conditions of the ancient
People of Athens, that he seemed to have new-moulded them, and made them of
another nature: in the sense, that the stones have been said to be turned into
men, and the Trees into Lovers of Music: of all the reasons that are given, I
like that best, which likes Lib. c. 25.
Rhodiginus: who says he was called by this name, because the children did now
appear to be (...), come of two; whereas before (for ought any one could
prove) they might be but (...), the Sons of a Mother only: nay hardly that, at
such time as the fashion was to be exposed, or put out to nursing to Bears and
Wolves and the like. But enough of this, for I have more work for the Woman
yet. She must Sacrifice to Venus and the Graces for the past, and in special
manner to Juno (...), either as a Pronuba for the present, or as a Lucina, or a
Mater-familias (as he in In Amphitr. Act. 2. Sc: 2*
Plautus calls her) for the future. An ordinary thing it was among the Heathen
to change their Gods, when they changed their condition; and I should be glad
if we Christians could answer, not guilty, in this particular, being every one
of us too too ready (...) etc. (as Aristotle says in his L. 1, c. 4.
Ethics) to have a new Summum bonum every day at the least. The Sacrifices
performed to Juno went under the several names of (...), and (...), and (...),
indeed the two first are sometimes the same that (...), the gifts sent before
the wedding and the word (...), is used also sometimes in relation to others,
as well as to Juno, as it is to Diana in that verse of Euripides already cited.
And therefore in another V. 433.
place of the same Tragedy, you have the Greek Soldiers at Aulis, when they
saw Iphigenia brought thither in a Nuptial pomp, thus speaking. (...)
(...);
And so sometimes to the Jul Pol. l. 3. c. 3.
Parcae, whom they had reason to remember, if they meant to be spared, or to
spinne out their lives to the longest. But yet Juno (I think) was in a great
deal more request among lovers then any of the rest, because they had her name
so often in their mouths. For among the Latins, when they would express
themselves in the most affectionate manner that might be, they used to call one
another by the name of Jupiter and Juno, as the old dota^d does his Casina in
the Poet Plaut. in Casina Act. 1. Sc. 3.
by the name of Juno: Eia mea Juno, non decet te esse tam tristem tuo Iovi.
Add hereunto the title of (...) (as there is also (...)) under which she was
worshipped, which (together with the word (...)) must be so said either from
(...) anciently put for (...) (as (...) was for (...)) from whence comes (...)
both the Sacrifice and the day or from (...) to initiate; or from (...)
adultus, as if only such as were of age, (and (...)) Aristotle.
might be suffered to have the happiness to marry. Now Juno adulta and Jupiter
adultus, were the more religiously worshipped at such a time (...) (says
Suidas) as being esteemed in a manner the Prytanes, and overseers of the
wedding. Her'es a great deal of cry about Sacrifices, but you^ll say the Wool
is to come: only some (...) there must be, least any Roman should grudge the
Woman the name of a Sponsa. Now because (it may be) I set you a longing upon
the mention of Gifts, I will speak a word or two more of them. The gift called
by Demosthenes (...), was that which they sent to the (...) for the making of a
feast, when they were to be admitted into the Tribe of their Husbands. The gift
of either party to the other at the time of the Nuptials, they called (...),
(as they did also those which they gave when they went a wooing) But the (...)
was a garment bestowed upon the husband by the Wife, (giving of apparel was
very usual once, both with the Jew Genes^ c. 24. v. 51.
and the Gentile.) And you may not wonder at her for liberality, if she gave a
cake to him that had a Pasty in the Oven, for if she brought her (...), she had
her (...) to carry away. Nor can you blame her for immodestly in giving, who
was to be given her self: for else (it may be) before it was come thus far,
she might bear the blame of the proverb, femme qui donne's abandoune, she
that gives is soon gotten. The petty gifts then given by the Parents they
called (...) as were those which were giving after the Wedding. The Dowry
bestowed upon her by her father at the first, (...). that which was afterward
added to improve it, (...). (thus some have thought good to distinguish, and
look their gifts in the mouth, but they may be too free of their distinctions)
At her first bringing to her Husband, she had bestowed upon her by him and her
friends (...) (which was also the name of the day it self) otherwise called
(...) and (...), and all for the same reason, viz. because those gifts were
given at illa pateretur se videri, says Var. Lect. l. 25. c. 3.
Victorius, to make her take off her veil, and be seen. In such a way Jupiter
is reported to have bestowed upon Proserpina the City of Thebes: according to
those verses of Euphorion, as they are cited by the Scholiast upon Euripides in
Phaenissis. (...)
(...)
(...).
(...) says he, or (...) according to I. Pollux: for although she might now
show her face and be modest nevertheless, yet before, she stood behind a red
veil or hood, with which she hid her self* and so deserved the name of (...)
if it were for nothing else See another reason in Prove. c 3. v. 19*
but for that. This Luteous veil is otherwise called (...), in Latin
Flammeum, Iuven. Sat. 2.
in Hebrew (...), such a thing as Rebeccah had when she met with her Husband,
Genesis 24.65. or Tamar when she met with a worse thing c. 38.19. The reason why
they were not unvailed till they came to be covert Baron (I mean at Athens,
for at Sparta they say, it was the clean contrary) is by Charilaus (cited by
L. 13.36.
Cael. Rhodiginus) delivered veiled under these words (...). the scope of the
man, or the true reason of the custom though I cannot easily hit, yet I may
give a very great aim when I say, Aucta fuga forma est --
(as Ovid says of Peneis when Apollo pursued her (or when I express my self
in the words of Nonnus. (...).
Men long to see a face that is hid, the more.
Indeed the case was otherwise with the Sophister Hermocrates* who having a
Wife, that was none of the handsomest, put upon him by the Emperor Severus,
and being demanded his (...), very handsomely answered to put it off, (...), I
had more need give her somewhat to let her veil alone, unless she were better
then she is. Whether these Flammea were of the same making that their ordinary
(...) were, I cannot well tell; but if they were, (as I have some cause so to
think, by those words of In Aul. v. 372.
Iphigenia as she was going to be Married (...) --) then I must tell you, they
were so thin, that their faces might well have been discovered, and the
covering been let alone, for Helen, it seems, could see the flowers through
them. Eurip. He^. v. 150.
(...)
(...)
(...) --
But this may be easily answered: for as (you know) a mountain that is a far
off, may be hid by putting but the little finger between: so again, one man is
able to see another plainly through that which is sufficient to hide himself.
And so much for the gifts at present, perchance you may have more anon. Now the
custom was for the Bride to be carried from her (...) Chamber, to her Husband,
in a Coach (or some such kind of thing) which the poor Girl in the Poet Id.
in Tauris v. 370 etc.
(complaining to Agamemnon of her abuse) could term little better then being
ferried in Charon's boat. (...)
(...)
(...).
To Pluto, not to Peleus' son
You would me then have married,
When me to bloody Nuptials
In Coach and fraud you carried.
The fellow that was the Coachman, carried a Torch in his hand, if we may
gather so much by the Nuncius in another Tragedy, for he says, he had done
this office for Helen himself. (...) Id. in Hell. v 728.

(...)
(...).
(I make bold to trouble you with so much Greek, because it explaines the
custom so fully.) The song which they sung as they went along, they called
(...), from (...) the Coach, the Axletree whereof they burnt as soon as they
came to the Bride grooms door, ut signarent illam ibi perpetuo mansuram,
neque inde ulla tempestate Alex. ab Alex.
recessuram: to show that she was never to return from thence again: just as
William the Conqueror burnt his ships at Pevensey, that so his Soldiers
seeing their return to be desperate, might Fight the more desperately (as we
use to say,) or with the better courage. The (...), or (...) that was sent to
fetch her, either sat by her side in the same Coach, or else went a long by
her Coaches side in another, and was therefore called (...), from (...);
unless that she were e^ther willing, or constran'd to foot it, ^or then he
could be but (...) a Pedee. This custom for the Husband to lead his Wife home
by the hand of a proxy (yet in fashion among Kings and Princes) was sure to be
observed at his second marriage, for then (says In Homeri Il. (...).
Eustathius) (...) ((...) says L. 3. c. 5.
Pollux) (...), he might not do it him self, perhaps out of shame, because
they accounted it a disparagement for a man to Marry the second time, yea
though his former Wife were dead, as (it may be) I shall have occasion to show
you hereafter. Besides the (...), or the Bride-man, and some of her own
friends, there went along with her a (...), or a Bride-woman to take of her
veil, and dress, and undresse, and do other such offices as should be
required. Her Wedding ornaments were precious stones and jewels, especially
about her head, such as Eurip. Androm. v. 147.
Hermione had in the Tragedy. (...).
Her Wedding Garment all of purple, save in one place, (where her other
garments were to be of that color, and no where else) (...); and there it was
gold: which agrees very well with that of Hesiod concerning a Virgin. (...).
Who never yet the Works of Golden Venus knew.
I think I might venture upon this custom to interpret (...) (in Isra l. 10.
Eustathius) in another sense then others have done. When she came to the
house, she found the Doors all hung with Garlands already, Domus tota laureis
obsita, says L* 3 Met.
Apuleius: it seems they tarried not till Sat. 9.
Iuvenals time -- Foribus suspende Coronas
Iam pater es --
Neither was it any whit strange to her to see those ornaments upon the House,
for she her self had the same according to those words of Clytemnestra to
Achilles. Eurip. Iphig. in Aul. v 705.
(...).
And (I think) her Husband too, (...), says Declam. 39*
Libanius, speaking to the Father, whose work it was to trim the Husband: as
it was the Mothers to adorn the wife. That custom of adorning the House with
Garlands, was very much in use among the Romans too, and as much detested by
the Christians, Christianus nec Laureis januam infamabit, says De Co^on. milit
c. 13.
Tertullian. Those Garlands have been made either of Verbena, consecrated to
Venus, and so they made them in Italy; or of Asparagus, and so they made them
in Boe^tia, or else of the leaves of the herbs (...), and (...), and so they
made them at Athens: (...), says the Upon Aristoph. in Pa.
Scholiast: the leaves had the name of the herb in the plural number. The
Garland made of Sesamum-leaves had the name of (...), or (...), but the Cake
which they made of the grain was called (...). For Cakes they usually bestowed
upon them at their day of Marriage, as well as Garlands, as He says in the
Aristoph. Pac.
Comoedy (telling how all things were now ready for the Wedding) (...).
And made they were of Sesamum rather then any other thing (...) (says the
Scholiast) as if it were the bearb Polyganum a name very well ominous to the
new Married people. Whether the custom of kembing her hair with a Spear
(such as had been kept by a Fencer with the loss of his life) were in use
among the Grecian Women too (as Alex. ab Alex. l. 2. c. 5.
some say it was) I cannot determine. But among the Romans it was, and they
called such a Spear hastam celibarem. The reason why the woman made use of
such a comb, or made this use of a spear, is thought to be, either quasi
fortes ea de causa viros se genitura^ ominetur, because she ominated that by
this means she should have strong men to her children, or quod sponsi
disciplinae se subditam fateatur. Because she acknowledged her self subject to
her husbands discipline. As the woman went forth of her fathers house she was
to be lifted out over the threshold, just as the Emperors were wont to be
lifted by the Soldiers at the time of Election, to pretend a constraint. You
see, it is ducere (Vxorem) almost every where, and yet they say, that Love will
creep where it cannot go. As she entered into her Husband's house, the
Aristoph. in Pluto.
Boys, and ^aides fell a throwing of Figs, and junkets upon the head of the
Bride, not to upbraid him of sycophancy, but as an omen of fruitfulness,
(...), (says Rhodiginus out of Theopompus) which puts me in mind of a foolish
custom once in fashion with some of Us, viz: upon Twelfe Eve (as they called
it) to put a part of their tosted Bean-cake upon one of their Trees, and so to
cry Whatsayle, and sing a Carmen for a fruitful year. The trumpery thus
thrown or powered out, they called (...), as the word is used by the Poet in his
Comoedy of Pluto where he brings in the Woman ready to do the like upon him,
and so to give him the Joy for his new-bought eyes: says She -- (...)
(...).
Upon which words the Scholiast notes it to have been the custom also for a
new servant, at his first coming into the house, to have him to the fire side
and there to sow upon his head (...), Junkets, and Figgs, and Palmebranches,
and a hundred other such trinkets. But this I think was done, not only as he
says, (...), to make it an Omen of fruitfulness (as they had done to his
Master before) but also for the benefit of the old Servants, who when the
Scamble was made, gathered up all that was thrown, and demanded it for their
due, as Seniors (in Oxford) do the Fresh-mens-gawdies. All this while the Gods
were not forgotten neither, but some beast or other was bestowed upon them for
a victime. In the cutting of it up (to show that in Wedlock all bitterness and
choler must be cast aside) they took the Cael. Rhod. l 28. c. 21.
Gall, and flung it with a most eager loathing behind the Altar during the time
of Sacrifice. if there happened any thing obscene or unlucky, the Nuptials were
dissolved, and thus it happned to Ach Tat. l* 2.
Clitophon, and Calligone: for an Eagle came and snacht away a piece of the
Sacrifice as it lay upon the Alter. Now this Sacrifice was usually performed by
the Fathers (and none so fit to be the Priests of their own family) as may be
gathered from the practice of Eurip. Iph. in A* v. 721.
Agamemnon: who, when his Wife called upon him to make ready the Wedding
cheer, very religiously made answer yes, (...).
When I have done my Wedding Sacrifice.
As also by that which you may read of the like practice in Achilles Tatius,
where he speaks of the Marriages of Lycippe, and Calligone. In this Sacrifice
they directed their Prayers in a more special manner to Jupiter (...),
Libanius Declam. 35.
and Juno (...), if it may appear by that of Libanius. (...). By reason of
this and other solemnities of their Weddings, you will not imagine what a
profanation they made it to disturb the business never so little, or to offer
any incivility to either of the parties, especially to the Wife: as for
instance. One Callicles (of whom you may read the story in Phocius Codice
(...).) being accused of bribery to the Areopagus, they summoned him to make
his appearance at the Court to answer the crime; but the Sergeants that were
sent (says my Author) (...), as soon as they saw but the signs of a Wedding
(the Garlands which hung at the door) and were informed of a Nuptial
Sacrifice: because they would not rush uncivilly in upon the new-Married-Wife,
they made no more enquiry after the Man, but returned presently back again,
and the court was contented with the news. So likewise in the Wars with King
Philip, having intercepted several Letters of his to his friends, and among
the rest one that was directed to his Wife Olympia: when they came to reading
of the Letters in the Court, they no sooner cast their eye upon that to his
W^fe, but presently every one cried out (...), that it might not be read, nor
so much as broken up: Phocius ib.
(...), because they thought it a thing no way beseeming them to divulge that
most secret converse by letters betwixt a man and his Wife. From the service of
their gods, they made have to the service of their Genius: but amidst a great
deal of good cheer, the Man and the Wife were always noted Athenaeus. l. 9
for a great deal of temperance too. The Bread which they had was carried
about in a basket by a Boy with his Garland of Thorns, and boughs of Acornes,
singing as he went Zenobius.
(...), I (or they) have avoided a worse evil, and met with a better. If he
spoke in the person of the Man, he meant that he had met with optimum malorum,
the best of the three evils at the least; and so it is not so bad as Out in
the frying pan into the fire; (unless you will prize the finding of a Wife,
after the rate of the leesing of her, for so (they say) he that has lost his
Wife and sixpence, has some loss by the money. The Music which they had was
singing (...), by turns; and calling upon Hymenaeus (as the Romans did upon
Talassius Aristoph. in Avib.
(...), imitated by him in Plautus. Io Hymen, Hymenaee, Io Hymen.
And this they did either in a thankful commemoration of one of that name, who
had sometime saved the Maids of Athens from a general ravishment; (such as
there was once of the Sabines) or else in a sorrowful commiseration of
another, that happend to be killed by the fall of a house the very day that he
Married. What ever the Man was, they seem to have given him the honor of a
God, and therefore to have been very loath to give him distaste, in omitting
any part of the Nuptial ceremonies, Quid si etiam offendam Hymenaeum?
Says he in In Casina Act. 4. Sc. 3.
Plautus. And this it was that made them keep such a noise in the Streets, as
they did with their Io Hymen Hymenaee, as soon as ever she was out of her
Fathers house. (...).
says Clytemnestra: Eurip. Iphig in A. v. 693.
which agrees with that of the other Poet in the same place. Age tibicen dum
illam educunt huc novam nuptam for as,
Suavi cantu concelebra omnem hanc plateam, Hymenaee.
Whether 'twere the fashion in Greece to set the Woman first in the lapp of
Priapus, I cannot tell: But (if I mistake not) Lactantius has somewhat of such
a thing, and I might speak more of Priapus too, if it were fitting. As the
Woman was led into the Chamber, ((...) or (...)) to show whereto she must,
there was a ^ive carried along with her, and a pestle hung up at the door,
(...) (as I. Pollux says) or to signify that hereafter she must learn to put
her hand to any kind of labor. When the Man and the Woman were both in (for
the Woman was in first, as the fashion is with Us) according to Solons own
order, they were to take a Quince-apple and eat it between them, (...), says
Plutarch in the life of Solon, to signify the pleasantness, and harmony which
should be in their talk at first. And yet notwithstanding, now they are in the
very Bedchamber, if a Chough would but come and scold ( grave cornicaretur
forsooth) 'twas enough to make them part for that time (at least) and leave the
building imperfect; and this they called (...), or (...), because by this means
-- Valor. Flacc.
Conjux miseranda Cayco
Linquitur, and primo Domus Imperfecta cubili.
(...) I said (or if you will (...) speak a little finer,) (...): for this
word is many times used by it self for (...), as it seems to be by Plato in
his third book de Republ. speaking of Jupiter thus, (...). And yet I think,
(...) l. 2.
Hesiod without any wrong done him) may be understood of any other business
left Roughhewn, unpolished, or not done over again, when he ^aies (...)
(...).
Apud. Eusta^h. l 5.
Ismenias applies it indeed to our purpose: but now to prevent such an omen as
this, they set the boys to cry (...), in manner of a Scare-cry, as if they had
been set to keep off the Rooks from the corn: (...) (I say) and not (...), in
the Plural number* for herein the Scholiast upon Pindar is supposed to have
mistaken; because neither that bird, nor the Turtle at the making of their
Augury (which was commonly the day before the Wedding) was ever wont to be
looked upon as unlucky; unless it came in the singular number; and then the
birds being singled and divided one from the other, could not possibly be a
good sign, to those that were to be coupl'd, and joined together. But some
notwithstanding like the Choughs for very good lucky birds (as we use to say)
let them come how they will: either because they are (...) (as Homer calls them
longliv'd or because ea cornicum societas est (says Alex. ab Alex. l. 2. c. 5.
one) ut ex duabus Sociis, altera extincta, vidua altera perpetuo maneat. Now
in the Chamber where they were to lie, they had two beds, viz. (...), and
(...), or a side-bed for a change or (...), says Hesychius. If the parties
that were married were very young, their Poets would term the bed (...), as
Aristophanes does (in Pace.) and so (...) Homer.
(...) for the house, and (...) for the Wife. Before the Woman could lie which
the Man, she was to have her bath of water heated of purpose to wash her body
in, (...) they called it, according to that of the Comedian in Lusistrate. (...)
(...).
And in Pace, you have Trygaeus when he intended to marry Opora, giving order
to his servant, as soon as he had brought her to his house, first to provide
him a pot of Water, and afterward to make the bed. (...)
(...),
(...).
This water at first was fetched as far as from Callirhoe-well; (...). But
afterward says L. 3. c 3.
Pollux) from Enneacrunos, which was so called because it had nine several
(...) or fistulas, or salientes, where the water sprung up: and so you might
allow one for every Muse in the City. But what if Callirhoe and Enneacrunus
were but two distinct names of the same Well. The one expressing what fair
Water it was, or how well and clear it ran: and the other in how many
places: for it may very well be thought so by that verse of Theb. 12.
Statius. Et quos Callirhoe nonis errantibus undis
Implicat --
Nay, Thucidides says positively, they were the same. Only that when the Well
was repaired by the Tyrants (as it was usual when they new-made a thing, to
give it a new name) it received the name of Enneacrunos. Which if it be so, I
think it may be no offense to Pollux, when I come to that place of his formerly
cited, to read it thus (...). From Callirhoe afterward named Enneacrunus. The
Woman whom they employed to fetch this Warer, was commonly called the (...).
When the Wife was ready to undresse, her Mother took her hair lace, and
winding it about one of the torches (for they had (...) too) burnt it out, and
made up her hair with a new. The Mother I said. For she commonly would (...),
carry the torches or hold the Candle to it, or any other work which the
Pronuba's used to do. -- Non te duxit in thalamos parens
Comitata primos, nec sua festa manu
Ornavit aedes, nec sua laetas faces.
Vitta revinxit --
says Senec. Theb.
Iocasta. For the matter of these Torches, or of what kind of wood they were
made, I am not yet assur^d: whether it were Corylus commonly used for such
purposes, according to Pliny: or Larex, or Spina alba, which they used among
the Romans. and so likewise for their number, whether the custom were to have
just five according to the number of the Gods which they prayed to, viz.
Jupiter Adultus, Juno Adulta, Venus, Suadela, and Lucina: they have not given
me light enough to discover, a little glimmering I have, and some cause to
conjecture, that there was a certain number required. Otherwise, why should the
covetous Father in D^clam. 37.
Libanius complain so heavily (among other charges he was put to in marrying
his daughter) that he could not (...), light the Bride to bed with one and no
more. But for the bearer that it was usually the Mother, will appear by the
discourse that passed between Clytemnestra and her Husband in the Eurip. Iph.
in Aul v. 7.34.
Poet; for when her Husband bid her go back again to Argos, and leave her
Daughter with him; she asked him -- (...),
but who shall carry the Torches then? and being answered (...)* that he meant
to do it himself: nay, quoth she (...), that was never the custom, neither do
you your self think it to be handsome and fitting And indeed, I think,
Clytemnestra was wronged: for it seems to have been reckoned not so much the
office and the charge, as the Privilege and the honor of the Grecian Woman.
And therefore Medea made it one of he sad consequents of her banishment from
the company of her Children, to be debarred the bearing of the Torches at the
Wedding. O my dear children, quoth she, what a Wretch am I, who must thus
leave you before, I carry the Torches. Eurip Med. 1025.
(...)
(...).
It Is true, if Agamemnon had desired only to have lighted the Torches, she
might very well have been blamed for her passion, because then he had done no
more then other fathers used to do. (...): I lighted the Torches, says he in
Decl. 35.
Libanius. But this office neither of them could challenge from the other, but
they shared it between them, for the Mothers might do it too, if we may believe
the Author in those words which he puts in Niobe's mouth (but took them out of
Medea's) upon the death of her children, (...) (not only (...)) (...): I made
account to have lighted a Torch at the Wedding etc* At Sparta there was none of
these doings, only the Pronuba shaved the Woman (whether because she had vowed
to be henceforth her Husband) and so delivered her up to the man (if she had
gone among the Deutr c. 21. v. 12.
Israelites when she was thus used, certainly the People there would have taken
her for a captive Wife.) The Zona which the Woman wore was untyed by her
Husband in the bed, (...), says the Scholiast upon Euripides in Helena:
certainly the name of (...) might be given to Diana as seasonably then as at
the time of Childbearing: and worshipped she was then, as well as at any other
time. But at which of the times it was that they gave her the Zona: or whether
there were another yet to be untied besides this: or whether it were tied and
untyed again: or whether one knot were untyed at first time, and another at
the second; there is the knot of question (if we may question for knots in
bulrushes) Indeed that there was a Zona untyed the Wedding night, I th^nk it
may be proved by those words of Alcestes. (...)
(...) --
And that there was another left to be untyed at the time of Childbearing* I
have reason to conjecture from the Herculaneus nodus formerly mentioned:
because (I suppose) they called it by that name in allusion not so much to
Hercules his strength, as if they would have it the faster, that is the
stronger tied; as to his happiness in making of Children, as if they would
have it the faster untied, as fast as ever it was by Hercules, who had seventy
Children just. After they were both in bed, the Boys and Maids (whom we may
call the Children of the Bridegroom) stood at the Chamber door, and sung
their (...), or (...), with as great noise as possibly they could, (...), says
the Scholiast upon Theocritus, so that if the Wife should Cry out (as we say)
before her time, she might not be heard. Pollux l. 3 c. 3.
Which they had no such need to do, if that be true which they say, that one of
the Brides friends, whom they called the (...), usually did him that good
office to stand Sentinel at the door, and keep the Women off from coming to
help her. All this while the man was not so much wedded to his pleasure, as to
be clean divorced from his friends; for besides the feast which he made
altogether for the Women, (called (...), by Isaeus in his oration for Pyrrhus)
he made another for the (...), as his Father in Law had done before him. This
making of Feasts at Weddings, was properly called (...), as it is in the
Tragedy. Iphig. in Auliv. 707. and 720.
(...) --
And a little before. (...).
Neither was the Woman and her Mother behind hand at this kind of work: for
they also kept a feast of purpose for the Women besides. And therefore says
Clytemnestra in the place but now cited. (...).
The saying aujourd huy marie, and demain marri, to day Wedded, and to morrow
sadded, would scarce hold true among them. For the day after the Wedding, the
mirth ran as f^esh as ever it did before, and the gifts were carried to the
house in pomp, a Boy in a white coat walking before with a Torch in his hand,
and the bearers in the reere, with suits of Clothes and all sorts of Household
stuff, as Spoones, and Cups, and the like: a custom observed by the
Lacedaemonians with so much pride and excess, that Solon was feign to make a
Law to restrain the Suits to the number of three, and the rest of the things
to a lower price. The gifts then bestowed they called (...), (as those which I
presented you before, were called (...)) and sometimes (...), as being that
which (to speak in Iuvenal's words) Prima pro nocte datur --
and such gifts Medea once sent by her children to Glauca. But so with the
vengeance, as she made them (...), killing her with the Spit, from which she
gave her the roast. (...) Eurip. Med. v. 784.
(...)
(...) etc.
And this puts me in mind of some that reckon three days for a Wedding, I.
Pollux. l. 3 c. 3.
allowing (...) for the first (...) (when the garment called (...) was given by
the Woman to the man) for the second, and (...) for the third.

CAP. VIII. Quo tempore optime ducatur Vxor.
THE time of the year which they deemed most lucky to Marry in (for almost
every Nation has had their nefastous time and days) was the first Month of
the Winter. (Clean contrary to the custom of the Persians, who thought it
fitter to follow natures example, and set upon the work of Generation in the
Spring.) But though they chalked but one part of the year, I hope they did not
mark all the rest with a coal, neither can I think they had the same opinion
of all the other Months, which the Romans had only of the Month of May, Ovid.
l. 5. Fast.
Mense malas Maii nubere-it may be malum by Quaest. Romans 8.6.
Plutarches consent. The best day of the Month, they reckoned to be the middle
or the Full of the Moon; that they might be brought to bed (as we say) the
sooner, and grow the fuller themselves. But the best part of the day was the
last, or the next to the night, and so they might go to bed the sooner. Just
at these seasons Themis in Isthm. H.
Pindar would have T^etis to be Married to Peleus, as appears in those words of
hers (and the Poets) -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
But I make no question, (as exact as they were in Marrying) many of them had
the fortune to be borne (...) Quarta Luna, as Hercules had. Besides, (...). l.
3*
Hesiod is of opinion that the forth day (and I believe he means (...) of the
first third part of the Month) was a very good day to be Married in, so that no
Oscinous bird did obcaevare or occinere, sing another song to the contrary.
(...)
(...).
Whereas the (...) (as he calls the eighteenth day, if you reckon thirty days
to the Month) was in his judgment all as bad again, especially for the Woman.
But I must confess, I rather incline to the judgment of the Goddess:
especially having Eurip: Iphig. in A v. 717.
Agamemnon too (a man) on my side, who when the question was asked -- (...);
made answer. (...).
When that blessed season of Full-Moon shall come. I do not find the Romans to
have been so scrupulous, as to think Marriage to be imperfect, unless it were
at the full or never to be as good as it should be, except it were in Medio,
like the virtues. It Is true, the Kalends and the Nones, and the Ides, were
days of another color, black and unsuitable with the mirth of a Wedding: and
so were all Holy Days whatsoever, and the reason you have given by L* 1. Sat.
c. 15
Macrobius in these words, Feriis autem vim cuiquam fieri piaculare est: ideo
tunc vitantur nuptiae, in quibus vis fieri virginibus videtur. To whom if you
object that the Nones were no Holy Days, he will reply, that neither were the
Nones Holy Days to any, neither Religious days (as they called them) to such
as intended to Marry, but only thus: all your postri^uani dies, that is the
first days after the Ides, or the Nones, or the Calends, being accounted atri
were not to admit of any Sacrifice. Now every new married Wife, the day after
the Wedding was to offer a Sacrifice, which she could not do, if she married
upon the Nones. It Is true a Widow might be suffered to Marry upon a Holy Day;
(and Varr^ will tell you the reason) but in the Parentalia in February, and the
feast of the Salii in March none at all. Besides having of non-licet days,
they had a custom to Marry only upon such a day as by the judgment of the
Astrologer (to whom they sought) copulas nuptiales affirmet. But so much may
suffice concerning the time of Marrying. I proceed to speak of the
qualifications of the persons to to be Married.

CAP. IX. Quae requirantur in Marito
THE Conditions required in a Husband were these. First, he must be no
stranger; for if it could be proved that he was; both his goods and he too were
sold, and the third part of the price went to the informer. Secondly he must
be no less then five and thirty years old, according to the Law; and
according to Polit, 7.
Aristotle two years elder. But according to Polit, 7.
Hesiod a little younger, or a little elder is seasonable enough.

(...)
(...)*
Thirdly if the Woman with whom she was to Marry, were (...), sole daughter and
Heir (such a one as Aristophanes in Vespis calls (...) or (...)) he must be
one of the same house, and the next of the blood. But then there always were,
and (it may be) there ought to be (as I have known the like in other matters)
some others of the kindred (if they were to be gotten) to controvert the
business with him* and plead to the same; and then such Women were called
(...), I. Poll. l. 3. c. 3.
and the whole suit (...), the question was wont to be decided by the Praetor.
Lastly he must not be one that had another Wife yet living with him, at least
he might not be so, upon pain of being accounted a fellow of no account, or
repute among the Citizens, for Charondas having made this Law, (...), whosoever
shall super-inducere novercam, let him be (...), etc. Besides the hurt done to
the Children (it being as good to have the Devil to their Dame, as a
Step-dame) gave one pretty reason more against being the Husband of two Wives
in this sense, by way of dilemma: you shall have his words, as I found them in
Monmebasiae Archiepis.
Arsenius his (...) etc. says he, (...), If thou had good luck in thy first
Wife, thou should have kept thee well while thou wast well: if thou had
not, thou art a little better then a Fool or a Madman, to stumble again at
the same stone.

CAP. X. Quae requiruntur in Vxore.
THE Qualifications required in a Wife, were these. First she must be free,
before she put her neck in the yoke. For otherwise the Marriage was counted
(...) rather then (...), and you might call the Woman (in the words of Hesiod)
(...) -- If she were a stranger, she must pay soundly for it, no less then a
thousand (...) to the City. This Law though it were for a time let down by
Pericles his ill example, yet it was brought up again by Aristophon. Secondly,
she must be six and twenty years of age, and yet Aristotle even in L. 7. c.
16.
Pilicy can be very well contented to let the Woman Marry at eighteen. Out of
indulgence to the Sex surely: for else he thinks it very unfitting they should
Marry so young: both because (...) etc. they travel with a great deal more
labor, and labor for their travel with a great deal more intemperance; and
also because he had observed that in those places where they used to make so
much have, (...), the Puppies for the most part were blind, not so perfect, or
not so big of stature as else they would be. But then there is Hesiod. Oper.
another who would be willing to let them Marry a year or two sooner then he,
(...).
And Eurip. in Hell. v. 12.
another sooner yet (if I do not mistake) (...).
Cum ad pubertatem venit, tempestivis nuptiis.
Thirdly she must be but one, and no more according to L. 13.
Athenaeus; and yet about Socrates his time, by reason of the scarcity of men,
to make the more have for a recruit, they made an Act for toleration of keeping
a Concubine; (whom they made use of only ad concumbendum for the present
occasion) and that Children begotten upon such a Woman were accounted for
(...), as good as the best. And what will you say, if Socrates himself made
use of this liberty? For I have read he did, and that besides Xanthippe the
shrew, he had another named Myrto, the daughter of Aristides, of which two it
is said, that upon a time they fell out, and were presently reconciled again
by their Husband, who told them, it was a shame for two handsome Women as they
were, thus to fall out for one unhandsome man. But Rhod. Panaeth^us
others there be again that deny the whole. During that liberty, I cannot see
how the Etymology could hold water (...) Unless you will have the man to stand
out. Hermione her self, though she were super inducta over Andromache's head
did altogether dislike the increase of the number. -- (...)
(...).
Which words of hers were presently seconded by those of the Chorus. Eurip.
Androm. v. 177.
(...),
(...)*
Such envious things the Women are,
That fellow-wives they cannot bear.
And verified they have been, not only by her own example in conspiring the
death of Andromache: but by the ordinary practice of other such Wives among the
Greeks, especially in the Country of Epyrus, Eurip. ih.
when one to bring the Husband out of love with the other, made use of Magical
devices, especially such as might hinder her bearing Children to him, and so
consequently his bearing affection to her, there being no better way then
Iuven. Sat. 2.
partu retinere maritos. Thus Neoptolemus was made to hate his Wife Hermion^,
as she supposed, and so she told the other. -- (...)
(...)*
When such courses as these are taken

Iuven. ib.
Turgida non prodest condita pyxide Lyde, Neither the keeping of a Spider in a
box, nor the lash of a naked Lupercus will do any good. Fourthly, she might
be half a sister to the Husband, so it be meant not (...), or (...), or
uterina; but only (...), by the Fathers side, or germana, as the word is used
by Aemilius Probus; (whether in its germane sense I know not) where he speaks
of Cimon's marrying his Sister Elpinice, Habuit autem in Matrimonio s^r^rem
germanam suam, nomine Elpinicen, non magis amore, quam patrio more ductus: na^
Atheniensibus licet eode^ patre natas Vxores ducere. L. 13.
This act of Cimons, Athenaeus thinks to have been done (...), contrary to the
Laws, and so in a clancular way. But Plutarch says he did it in a public
manner, not only by making her his Concubine to lie with him (...), (as he
terms it) which agrees with that which I told you before concerning (...), but
(...), * taking her into his house to live with him, and that for a lawful
cause, (as he thought) viz. because she was to seek of a Husband fit for her
condition. But for all this, I do not see how he could by a Grecian well be
excused, for Hermione (in the place above commended) made it alike barbarous.
-- (...)
(...) --
When Son is joined with Mother,
Or Sister with the Brother.
Unless you will maintain the goodness of the practice then, by the
greatness of the Persons that used it before, I mean Jupiter and Juno, who
had but one Womb, one birth, and one bed, (when they pleased.) Fifthly, she must
be no Bastard, unless she were intended for a Bastard-maker, and in a
Proletarious manner, only for breed, I mean for a Concubine: for such I take to
be little better then what Talthibius once said poor Cassandra was like to be
made by Agamemnon, viz. Eurip. in Troad. v. 251.
(...), and the Children little better then (...), if the Father were more in
the dark. As for the Portion or Estate, she was either (...), one that had no
Brother, and was Heir to the whole Estate: or (...) that had a Brother, and no
more then her part, or a portion. The greatest distinction between a Wife and a
Concubine, was the having a (...), or a portion. Insomuch that if any married
with a Woman that had none, but was (...); yet he would have the (...), the
Writings, formally drawn up however, to make the World believe the best. Those
writings were signed and sealed in the presence of witnesses, and the man did
(...), make over to the Woman some House of Land in exchange, and this they
called Harpocr.
(...).

CAP. XI. De Divortiis.
ANd now that they are Married, the Husband was to lie with the Wife thrice in
a Month (once for every part; for they divided their Month unto three parts.)
or else, if she were an (...) she might go to another, unless he were able to
excuse himself by a lawful impediment. Such as coming from Funerals is
accounted by L. 2.
Hesiod in those words of his. (...)
(...).
Or by any other unseasonablenesse of time: for that they thought some times
more seasonable then other, and some fitter to beget Men-children then Women,
may appear by the words of the same Poet, speaking of the sixth day of the
middle part of the Month. (...).
And a little after of two other days. (...).
But if they were about any solemn Sacrifice to the gods be the time what it
would, it could never be lucky for either, and therefore at such times they
used (as well as the Israelites) to obstaine altogether, or (...), pure habere,
as the Poet called it, in Asinario. Si forte pure velle habere dixerit.
If a Wife that was an (...) were overlay'd, or any way abused by her Husband,
she might have a Writ (...), otherwise called (...), and be suffered to leave
him; and this they called Schol in Aristoph. in Equit*
(...): where as if the Husband would part with her, it was called (...),
because he might tarry in his own house, and be rid of her company never the
less. But one thing I must tell you too, that for either party to leave, or to
put away the the other, was a thing always very much detested among the Grecians.
Insomuch that at Sparta, even then when the custom was for so many Men and
Women to meet in the dark, and every on to buy his pigge in the poke, the
Ephori imposed a mulct upon Lysander himself for putting away one, that he did
not like, for a better. But (...), for the Woman to separate from the Man,
'twas a thousand times worse then (...), even flat Rebellion, or delinquency at
the best. Hear but what Eurip. Med* v. 236.
Medea says of it -- (...)
(...).
Where she puts it for one of the privileges which the Man enjoyes before the
Women, to leave where he cannot like; whereas the poor Wi^e if she be well
used, it is true, (...) -- no life like hers -- (...) -- but if ill -- (...)
there is no remedy but death, or she had better be out of the life. On the
other side, what an honor they counted it to live content with one Wife, or
one Husband in all: and what a disparagement it was to Marry a Second, not only
after the Divorce, but even after the death of the former, In Alcest. ^. 464.
Euripides will tell you in the words of the Chorus to Alcestis, thus
threatening her Husband, if he married again, though she were dead. (...)
(...).
But was it so indeed as Medea complained, and was the Woman to be miserable
still without any hopes of redress? no, for at length it was provided by the
Law, that if she found the Conjugall yoke too strait, and had a mind to slip
the Collar, she was to make her complaint to the Archon: who deputed other
judges to consider if the cause were lawful, and so to give her a Bill of
Divorce with this condition, that she engage her self by Band, never to
return to her Husbands house again: and when this was done, she might either
have her portion back again from her Husband, or else serve him with a Writ
(...), or allow her maintenance, and so much a Month for use, as long as he
detained the money.

CAP. XII. De Mulierum scleragogia, and servilibus minister^s*
BUT now whether the Woman reckond it sufficient cause to complain, to be put
to servile employments, I know not, such abuses as this were many times
offered. I do not stand so much upon keeping of the Keys, or making of the
Bread; (whatever Apud Evrip Tpoad. v. 293.
Heouba has complaind of that employment) but the baser sort of services, such
as fetching of Water upon their heads: which the poor old Maid in the Id. in
Elect. v. 55.
Poet, might justly make one of the saddest parts of her slavish condition, --
(...)
(...).
It seems the Grecian Women their fashion of carrying Water, was the same that
ours is now; nay and the Roman too* for L. 3. Fast.
Ovid says of the Vestall Virgin her self ( Sylvia I mean when she went to
fetch Water, and slept away her Maidenhead, a good caveat for all sleepy
Servants) Ponitur e summa fictilis urna Coma.
And so likewise I did once conjecture that the Men amongst them used to carry
Water and other things too, much in the same manner as they do with us, I mean
with things put about their necks, because of that which the Poet says of
Ulysses his Mariners, when they took in fresh Water in Sicily. -- (...)
(...)
(...) --
Now whereas I mentiond only fetching of Water, I might indeed have added, any
other work without doors, which belonged to the Men; for to them on the other
side, it was reckoned neither a duty, nor a thing beseeming to meddle with any
thing within doors, or so much as to know what was done there, (...). It is
Aristotle's own Oeconomicks, at least (...), though not (...) (to use the words
of Tusanus sometime professor at Paris, who translated into Greek again, that
part of the Book which concerns Man and Wife, the Original being lost, and
only a Latin translation of one Arrhetinus left) And very good reason you will
say there is, for her to be excused from labor abroad, that must keep so close
at home, and yet travel too: which close confinement made Medea thus bemoane
the Wives condition. If any thing grieve her (says he) she has no more company
to make known her grief unto, then (...), her own poor soul: And whereas
they object that the Husband goes to War, and does this and that, I for my
part says she -- E^rip. in Med v. 244. to 251.
(...)
(...).
-- Three times to bear a shield


Thrice better do it think, then once to bear a child. And yet at home too,
the liberty of the Wife was wont to be more or less, according to her Fathers
liberality in her Portion; and therefore Hermione told Andromache that in this
she came behind her, though she were otherwise the first Wife; my Father, says
she, sent me hither in a liberal manner. Eurip. Androm. v. 153.
(...).
With many a good thing. That having been free of my hand, I might be free of
my tongue too. Only you that brought nothing with you, must go to doors. And
she that cannot pay, must be sure to pray. This argument of hers, her
Waiting-maide afterward bandy'd back to her again, to put her out of her fear
that her Husband would put her away. For, says she, he did not take you as a
Captive, or so, but Ib. v. 872.
(...) he had something with you.

CAP. XIII. De Mulierum honestioribus opificiis
THE emp^oyments most usual and least dishonorable, were seeing things
handsome and neat in the house, and providing for the Workmen abroad: take it
in Electra's own words -- Eurip. Elect. v. 75.
(...)
(...) etc.
Or else woking at any kind of Lanifice, either at I. Poll. l. 7. c. 10.
(...) the tazing, (shall I say) or the carding of the Wool? or (...), when
they went to spinne out the (...) or stamen, and (...) (as they called it) to
divide it, and part it from the rest of the Wool; or last of all at (...), the
Weaving and joining the (...) together, with the help of the (...), (the pecten
or the sley like a comb) and the (...), or the (...), smooth stones (like our
smooth lace-sticks, that they might not wear) which hung at the end of the
threads. The posture in Weaving was more anciently Servi ad Aen. 8.
standing, but at length (when they were weary) it came to sitting (with the
Romans at least) excepting when they made plain work recta as the Latins
called it, down right with one thread a cross and no more; for there was (...)
too, and a great deal of variety in some works, as well as several sorts of
works in the trade; which was the cause why V. 141 g.
John in Euripides when Crusa told him of a Bearing-cloth of her own Weaving,
asked her of what sort of making it was. (...).
Unless you will confine this (...) to the Virgins, (as you may seem to have
cause from the words but now produced*) and the Wives and Mothers (or their
servants for them) to the planer work. As it is said, they were wont to be
among the Romans, for rectas parents boni ominis causa liberis confici
curabant, says Festus, the Parents among them would make their Children none
but plane Clothes, to show they must use themselves to plain dealing. And
seeing Weaving was a work so well beseeming the better sort (as appears in
Creusa the daughter of no worse man then Erectheus a King of Athens, and that
noble Lady Penelope) I cannot but wonder at Electra, if she have put it among
her complaints in that verse, (...).
That she was kept to Weaving. For (it may be) her complaint was, rather that
she could not be her own Woman, and Weave for her self, but must be still
winning and never wearing, and starve in the Cooks shop. I must tell her thus
much from Polit. l. 6. c. 143.
Aristotle, if she lived in a hate of levelling Democracy, though she were a
married Woman (as she was but (...)) that or any work else would have been
thought too much to little purpose. For says he in such a case, (...), she
must be forced to do things her self for want of Servants, and so there could
be no such thing at all as Gynaeconomy, which might give the Wife any
privilidge at all.

CAP. XIV. De Vxorum and Filiarum Oecuria.
NOW the Wives besides their (...), (their Bedchamber shall I call it, or their
Attiring room, or their Dining-roome, just as the men had their (...)) had
their I. Poll. l. 1. c. 8.
(...) too, to work in, as the Virgins had their (...)* to play in, for I fear
me, vnides chambres font dames folles, and Agamemnon is of my mind. Eurip.
Iphig. in Aul v. 737.
(...).
That Maids at home should not be left a lone.
It Is true they were helped ^o gadding abroad. Insomuch that a man would think
they had Sentinels set at their Chamberdoores, by the words immediately
following the former, (...).
And if their Daughters not yet shut fast in Wedlock, were kept so in safe
custody, and as it were, in Prison (for which their (...), things which their
Parents gave them to keep them quiet, was a small amends) what strong guards
think you would they put upon their Wives; when they tied them up? as good as
ever any King in Epirus had to keep his daughter, if we may believe the
complaint of one of their Women, in one of their Aristoph. in* Thesmop.
Poets: -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
-- besides the seals
Upon the Women's Chambers, bars they lay
To make us sure; nay more, their Mastive curs
They keep to fright adulterers away.
No wonder then if the Housekeepers of Athens, were (...) House-dogs (as we
call them) or Keep-houses, when it was so hard a matter to get abroad* if it
were for nothing but the trouble and the charges. In which sense you may well
take that of the same Poet in Lusistrate: (...). For if at any time they got
forth (as a great many of them were (...), of a gadding Gossipping humor) they
must be sure to have the attendance of Maids, and their (...), all the
ornaments that belonged to the Women about them: and if they were found
defective herein, there were (...) (as they called them) officers of purpose,
who had power to impose a mulct upon them for it, and the mulct was I* Poll. l.
8. c. 10.
posted up upon a certain plane-tree, which they had in the Ceramicus for
every one to read. But what do I talk of going, when as Fathers and Husbands,
were so hard or so jealous, as not to suffer their Wives and Daughters so much
as to look abroad: or if they were suffered by them, they should be sure to
suffer themselves from others in their good name, as if they were wanton and
the like. Hence it was that Hermione's waiting maid took up her Mistress so
short, when she went forth at doors in a pass^on. Eurip. in Androm. v. 876.
(...)
(...)
(...)
But, pray, get in, and show not thus your self
Before the house, etc.
Where, I dare not say, the translator was Fantastic to render (...),
imagineris* but what ever he says, I cannot but imagine it fit for my purpose.
Nay looking out at a window, was almost as bad as looking out at door; (...)
as the Women complain in Thesmophroris azusae Aristoph.
where you may read more of their grievances) if they did but peep out, they
would be thought to do it, as other Women used to do: and to draw in their
head again, the better to draw out the affection of the beholder. Nay farther
yet, I fear me, some of the Daughters had scarce the liberty to go out of one
room into another: for so it was with Antigone, when she went up to the top of
the house to view the Army, as well may be conjectured by the words of her
Paedagogue (a Tutor, such as to whom they committed the bringing up of their
Children Maids or B^yes) Eurip. Phanis. v. 88.
(...)
(...).
Whether the Wives could change their Cham^ers without leave, I know not, I
believe they could hardly do it without company, and the attendance of their
Maids: as if they were going abroad, for so I remember Penelope went up to her
Chamber, as Homer says; (...).
The Woman's own private chamber, ( Gynaeconitis, Gyneconites, or Gynaecon,
call it what you will) was (says Didymus) (...) two stories high, like a nest,
to make it the harder to climb up to them: for (to tell you in his Words)
(...). the People of ancient times, built their (...) their upper Chamber for
the nonce. (...) and (...) they called them then, insomuch that Helena having
been always closebred up in such a chamber, is thought by some to be said to
be hatched of an Egg, either from the ovall fashion of the Room, or the like
signification of the name in the Greek. Whether they went up by the Ladder,
or a pair of stares, it is not so easy to determine, as it was to get up, for
when I call to mind what ado the Paedagogue (whom I lastly mentiond) had to
help up his Pupil by the hand, I am apt to think that (...) from the
Parthenon, and the the other to the Gynaecon, to have been a ladder, and not a
stare-case: hear how she cries for help: (...)
(...)
(...).
Such a (...) had Penelope in Homer, but no such need of help; for, (...).
Now a Woman if she went about any work that required expedition, her fashion
was (...), as Id. 14.
Theocritus says, to be nuda genu, to pin up her coat to her knees, but no
farther, for fear of being taken for a doxie. Such a one as in Hesiod is
called (...), me thinks not so well rendered nates ornata, as (...).
ad nates succincta, from the stola, too short to become the modesty of a
Woman, or the use of the word among the Latins. I might here take occasion to
speak a great deal of their apparel, and the over many ornaments which they
used about their heads, their necks, their ears, their arms, and their
fingers, and twenty other sorts of this kind, but because there has been
promised a draught thereof from a pen able to do it, I think it better to hold
my hands. Besides, I am of I. Pollux L. 5. c. 2.
his mind in this, that for a good many of those names which we find in
Authors, where they speak of this kind of things, (...), it is hard to know
what fashion the things wereof; because it is hard to tell whether the Author
be in jest or in earnest in the names.

CAP. XV. De Adulterio.
IF a Man had plowd in another Man's ground, though not as a Moechus
manifestarius, Plant. in Bacchid.
but by enticements, and in a clancular way, and were taken (...) (as they
called it) in the fact it was counted so much the worse, and he that found him,
might abuse him as much as he pleased: yea and kill him too, if the Cuckold did
desire it, (and no doubt, but sometimes he had hay in his Horns. If the fellon
had no mind to meddle with him himself, he might have him before the
Thesmotheta, and cause him to be punished at the pleasure of the Poll. l. 8. c.
9.
Judges* The ordinary manner of punishing an adulterer, had as little modesty
a^ ^he crime it self, it was called either (...), or (...) synecdochically the
part for the whole. for having plucked off the hair of his privities, they
threw hot ashes in the place, and thrust up a Raddish or a Mullet into his
fundiment, according to that of Iuvenall, Quosdam maechos and mugilis intrat:
Insomuch that ever after he was disgracefully called (...). A punishment little
enough for so great a vice, so great I say, that Solon is thought to have
tolerated the public use of Harlots (as I formerly told you) of purpose to
prevent it. And for the Woman having thus violated the Laws of the gods (or
the men rather, for they were better) she was not only forbid to go to the
Temples, but if she went any where else with the ornaments and attire which
other Women wore, it was lawful for any that met her to take them, and tear
them, and if her husband lay with her after, he was branded for (...), a base
companion. On the other side, if the Women were forced, and openly abused, the
Adulterets punishment then was no more then a fine. and you will not so much
wonder at this manner of dealing with him, if you consider how the other
commits Adultery with the mind too, as well as with the body of the Woman; and
is so much more the dangerous of the two, as he that works by a Mine, or can
get in at a private way, then he that must break the door. For proof
whereof, if the Adultery of Aegysthus and Clytemnestra which proceeded to the
death of Agamemnon be not sufficient, I refer you to that practice of
Sejanus: who having on a time received an affront from Drusus, had no other way
to be revenged* Cuncta tentanti (says L. 4. Anral.
Tacitus) promptissimum visum ad uxorem ejus Livia^ convertere: hanc ut amore
incensus adulteris pellexit ad co^jugii spem, consortium Regni, and necem
mariti impulit.. In like manner, if a Man had ravished a young Woman, (so she
were free borne,) his Isaeus pre Pyrrh.
punishment was a fine, viz. a thousan Drachmae, but then besides that, he was
to marry her too, (unless it could be made appear she had taken something of
him in consideration) which puts me in mind of a story of the Messenian in
Pausanias: who to compel Aristodemus to give him his Daughter to Wife, pleaded
that he had brought her with child: whereupon he to evidence the contrary,
killed her with his own hand, and cut up her belly worse then Virginius. There
was a time when a ravisher of a Virgin was to be stoned shall I say, or pre^s'd
to death, for they called such a punishment (...), as Homer speaks.

(...).
LIBER QVINTUS.
CAP. I. De Puerperarum Religione, etc.
THE Athenians (says Plutarch in his Marriage exhortations) had three sacred
plowings. One in the Sciron, another in the Raria, and another called Buzugion:
but yet, says he, (...), the plowing for Children is the best Husbandry. In
that he calls it plowing (a word very suitable to a Conjugall condition) he
agrees with the expressions commonly used by the Greeks of (...), and (...),
and (...), concerning the Women. For as L. 7. t. 67.
Aristotle says in his Politics, (...): as also with the use of the word
(...) for to beget, as you have in Sophocles his Oedipus Tyrannus (...), and in
his Antigone (...) in the same sense. So Aristaenetus L. 1. Ep. 18.
in one of his Epistles (speaking of a Woman to be Married) says (...). And
Moschus has an Epigramme of purpose upon (...). The Latin word Sator answers
very well to it, and so would Insitor to the word (...) a bud, and (...), so
commonly used in Sophocles and other Authors in the same sense. Now for a Woman
with child, it was sometime the custom for about forty days before her time,
to abstain from going to the Temples, and pray at home. But then Aristotle's
Loco predict.
advice could not be followed, who would have a Law made to compel Women with
child, to go every day in Pilgrimage a certain journey, to do service to one
or other of the Gods of Generation, (...), and his reason was, that they might
not (...) grow unlusty by sitting still, but by this kind of traveling prepare
their bodies for a worse: as Plutarch says, Lycurgus caused the Maids of
Sparta to use the exercises of wrestling, and coyting, and shooting and the
like, that by this means having confirmed their own health and strength, they
might make the stronger Children, and might the better (...), wrestle with the
throws. The principal god whom they prayed unto, especially in the time of
travel was Diana, cal^ed by them (...), from her readiness to come to the
woman at a call, or a crying out: -- Aperire partus Horat. Carm. Saec.

Lenis Ilithiia --
So that from the office of a Hand-woman, and her handynesse or dexterity, and
willingness to perform it, she was worshipped by the Romans under the name o
'Egeria, quod eam putarent facile Conceptam alvum egerere, says Festus, an
sometime, under the name of Facilina. -- Facilinae templa Dianae. Sil Ital.

Either a face, because she was painted with a Torch in her hand; (as if she
did but hold the Candle to it) and so was Ilithiia by the Greeks, (...), (says
Pausanias in Arcadicis) because the pains of a Travel are so hott: or else
from facilis, easy and without difficulty to be woone. -- Gravidis facilis
Lucina puellis. Ovid. Fast l 2.

likewise for the same reason called by the Greeks (...): as by Orpheus, by
whom she is also termed (...), and (...), and (...), because she stood still
ready as it were at the door, and was always at hand to do the work of a
hand-woman -- tu voto parturientis ades. Or lastly from facilis easy, Id.
and without pain, because she gave the Woman facilem partum, as he says Vt
solvat partus molliter illa suos.
For the same cause they gave her also the title of (...) as the Latins did
that of Genitalis, Sive tu Lucina probas vocari,
Seu Genitalis.
To this purpose I remember a jest related by Cicero of one Timaeus, made upon
the burning of her Temple at Ephesus near about the time that Alexander was
borne: Non esse mirandum, quod Diana occupata in adjuva^da Olympia Alexandro
gravida domo abesset, that it was no wonder; because Diana, was then taken up
in helping Olimpia and yet this jest (as dry as it is) Plutarch is so far from
liking, that he says it was cold enough to have extinguished the flames. Last
of all she was also called (...), quasi (...), says the Aristoph. in Lusist.
Scholiast, as much as to say Lucifera or Lucina. For by this name she was most
of all adored by the Romans too, according to that of Ovid. Dicite, tu nobis
lucem Lucina, dedisti:
Dicite, tu voto parturientis ades.
Now this Lucina (says L. 2 de Not. D^or.
Cicero) was nothing but the Moon: Luna a lucendo nominata est, eadem est enim
Lucina. And the Moon being (as L. 4. de Ling. L^^.
Varro says) nascentiu^ dux, was therefore worshipped by the women in travel,
quod partus maturescant septe^ aut nonnunquam novem Lunae cursibus. Or because
the Moon by the filling and opening moisture of her influence, graviditates and
partus afferat, maturitatesque gignendi, as the Orator said in the same place.
If you chance to meet with a Plural number, as you have in Homer -- (...), and
in Aristotle (...), etc. you may take it to be in reference only to several
names of one and the same Diana and in especial manner to those three viz.
Lucina in Heaven, Diana above ground and Proserpina beneath in regard to which
the Women among the Latins, used to call her Diva triformis, in their prayers
at the time of Childbearing, Quae laborantes utero puellas
Ter vocata audis, adimisque letho
Diva triformis.
Diana should be a Gentle-VVomen by the number of her names. Diana, I said; for
that was the ground, or the principal name: all the other names seem to be
but the descant, or so many Epithetes, and Sur-names upon it. So in Euripides
his Hippolytus you have. (...)
(...)
(...).
In another tragedy (...) and -- (...) or Diana stands still the substantive,
and all the rest hang like so many Adjectives. Besides these to the Moon, they
talk of other Sacrifices to they know not whom themselves, whom they
worshipped by the name of (...). Cottus, Gyges, and Briareus say some. So many
winds, says one Etymol. Diction.
(that which is thought to be meant by the Giants in the Fables.) But what have
the women to do With the VVind? it can blow them no good, but a Tympany, and
so puff them up with the conceit of a Child. Orphaus calls them by the name of
Amalcides, Protoclias, and Protocreon and Philochorus says, they were the
three first men that were begotten. And here I must tell you of somewhat to be
done by the Husband too; for he was to Sacrifice to the Nymphs, and pray to
them then for the bringing forth of the child, as he was afterward to give
them thanks for the bringing it up. And thus much I conjecture by those words
of Orestes, when one told him that he saw Aegystus Sacrificing to the Nymphs.

Eurip Elect. v 616.
(...);
For breeding was it, or for bringing forth?
CAP. II. De Puerperio, and foetu Masculo.
FOR the place where they lay in, whether it were a Chamber kept of purpose for
that use I cannot tell; neither durst I conclude as much by the (...) in^
Euripides where speaking of Jupiter and Bacchus, he says, In Baceh. v. 96.
(...)
(...).
At the time of travel, they were wont to take Palm branches and hold them in
their hands, as thinking they had a virtue either to conquor the pain, (for a
palm brench was a token of Conquest) or to make them bear up under the
burden the better, (for no weight will make a palme-brance go downward)
according to that of Theognis. -- (...)
(...).
I do not read that ever before travel they stood in fear of such things as
Incubi, De Civ. Dei l 15 c. 22.
and Fauni, and Sylvani, as the Romans did, who (as St Austin says) supposed
those Hobgoblings improbos saepe extisse mulieribus, and earum appetisse, ac
peregisse concubitum. Or that after the delevery, they kept three men of
purpose to sit up all night, one with an Axe, and another with a Pestle, and
another with a Broom, cutting and beating, and sweeping at the thresholds to
keep* Ibid. l 6. c. 9.
Sylvanus off from coming to hurt the Woman for having child without him. I
hope they had more wit. When the Woman was delivered, if it hapened to be a
Male, then what joy and confidence of the building of their house (as the
Hebrew phrase is) for partuviri fundavit familiam, says ^. 10. Met.
Apuleius, such a one they accounted as a Pillar thereof, (...), says
Lycophron of Hector, and (...), says Pinder of the same. Iphigenia her self,
when she dreamt of the fall of a house, could interpret the Pillars for so many
Sons. For says she, (...)
The Males are pillars of a family.
And very good reason the men should bear the name of the Pillars of the
house, if the Pillars of the House can bear the names, and the figures of the
men. As they do many of them to this day. Names they made choice of the best,
such as (...) among the Greeks, and Telamones among the Latins: but indeed the
figure was commonly of the worst, with a hunch back, bowing under the weight,
and therefore they were called Gibbosi, according to that in Martial. --
Ridetur Atlas cum Compare Gibbo.
Besides in ancient time, 'twas an ordinary thing to erect a Pillar instead of
a Statue, or the Image of a man.

CAP. III. De infantibus lavandis and ungendis.
THE Child as soon as it was borne, was washed in Water (or else in Wine, Plut*
in Lycurg*
if they followed the Lacedaemonian fashion, and desired to prove, shall I say,
or to improve the strength of the Infant) of this washing mention is made in
Plautus his Amphitryon thus, Postquam peperit pueros, lavare jussit; nos
occapimus.
Sed puer ille quem ego lavi, ut magnus est and multum valet!
and so likewise in Lycophron (for I thing it may be meant of the child, as
well as the Mother) where he speaks of Priamus his putting to death the Infant
Munippus (as he did his Mother Cilla, rather then Hecuba her sister, and her
son Alexander) though the Oracle named no body, but only bid him kill (...),
the Mother and the Child, he did it says he. (...)
from which verse (after I have started the question how he came to be called
Munippus, if he liv^d not long enough to be named) I have occasion given to
tell you more of this matter. For the Scoliast notes upon the word (...), that
after they had washed the body with Water (heated I suppose it was, and used
only for the cleansing of the body) they anointed it with oil, kept in a
(...), or a vessel so called, which they had for that purpose. The reason I
believe to be the same, for which they did it at other times upon the elder
sort. viz. (...), (as the In Aristoph. Plut.
Scholiast has it) to close up the pores again after they had been opened by
the hot water, and to keep out the cold. This thing of anointing, was so
constantly used just after the washing, that you shall have the word (...),
sometimes used to signify the same, as it is in Callimachus his Hymn upon
Jupiter. -- (...)
(...)
(...).
In allusion to this (...) L. 9. Di^nys.
Nonnus calls the birth of Bacchus (...). For coming from so clean a place as
Jupiters thigh, he had no great need of a washing.

CAP. IV. De Cunabulis, etc.
THE Child being washed, it was wrapped in a cloth Woven for the purpose by the
Mother in the time of her Virginity; as may be conjectured by that which Creusa
made for Ion. In this cloth the Erecthidae wrought the Image of the Gorgon, and
the Snakes of her head, as it was in Minerva's Aegis, by help whereof Perseus
had cut it off. Besides the likeness of two Dragons drawn in gold, by
Minerva's own command, and in memory of Ericthonius: who being borne of nothing
but Vulcan's seed spilt on the ground in forcing of the goddess, and having
feet like a Dragon was exposed and committed by her, to the custody of two
vigilant Dragons. -- (...) Eurip. in Ion. v. 25. and 1427.

(...)
(...).
Says the Poet* and from thence came the custom I speak of. And yet perhaps
neither those Dragons, nor the others in imitation of them, were any thing else
but emblems, used by the authors to express the narrow and watchful care that
was or ought to be had in the breeding of the child; for so they are like to
have been assigned for keepers of other things too, as of the apples of the
Hesperides etc. and that because of their quicknes of sight, according to
Festus: Dracones dicti (...), quod est videre: clarissima^ enim habebant
oculorum aciem qua ex causa incubantes eos thesauris custodiae causa finxerunt.
Being wrap*d in the cloth instead of being put in a cradle, it was either laid
upon a Clypeus, as an omen of fortitude in a time of War* (and thus was
Hercules himself, and the Lacedaemonians generally used; thus also the Strabo
l. 7.
Celtae used the children when they threw them into the Rhene:) or else upon a
Vannus or Ventilalabrum quod alimentorum copiae and bonitatis Symbolum
conjectabant says Rhodiginus, as an omen of peace and plenty.

CAP. V. De Infantis gestatione circa focum, and de nominis impositione.
WHen the child was five days old, they took it and carried it about the
hearth running: perchance to initiate him to the Lares, and make him one of the
house. At the same time the custom was for the Midwives to wash their hands.
Now in token of joy for having a child the Parents bedecked their house with
Garlands, and in congratulation the kindred that intended to be at the
naming-feast, sent their (...) (as Aeschylus calls them in Eumenides) before,
as they have used to do with us at a Christning* the things which they sent,
were commonly Polypodes, and Sepiae, whether as rarities, or for what reason I
am yet to seek. The verses of Eub^lus cited by Atheneus c. 2. speak as if
those things were not kept till the feast, but used the same day, as likewise
Doves, and Thrushes, and Coleworts with oil, and tosted pieces of
Chersonesus-cheese, and I know not what: the whole solemnity of the day is
called (...), and so is the Genius, or (...), from the running about the hearth
(which it seems was placed in the midst of the room) or as we may call it
Dancing about our cole fire, for we read of no more but the hearth: but surely
there must be a fire, for Hesychius says, those that carried the child must be
naked The naming-feast which I mentioned, was kept upon the seventh day after
the Birth, says L. 7. de Hist. An^
Aristotle: and his reason is, because that day was observed to be very
critical to most things, (...), and therefore, says he* when that day came,
if they perceived the child to be well, then they presently gave it a name,
(...), as presuming it would continue so. But (with reverence be it spoken) I
rather believe it to have been upon the tenth day (or the tenth night rather)
because the feast which they kept was called (...) and those which then
sacrificed (for that was to be done first) were said to (...): and at the same
feast (says Suidas) were the Kindred wont to meet all together, to be witnesses
(as we call it) to the naming of the child, after the manner of the Romans at
the Nominalia. Again, besides the authority of a Scholiast upon the word (...)
(in Avibus Aristophanis) I have the plain testimony of the Poet himself in
the same Comedy in another place, where he brings in Pistheteros thus speaking
of Athens, in an allusion to the custom, (...)
(...).
Now a Eustath* in Il. 5.
Father might give what name he pleased to any of his children: but usually the
eldest son was called by the name of the Grandfather. I cannot say that they
kept this name, and had no more: for many times they changed their name, as
they changed their condition. Thus the daughter of Proteus, Eur. Hell v. 13.
when she came to be elder and wiser, assumed the name of Theonoe; thu^ A^chil.
Ta^. l 5. Eustat. l. 9.
Leucippe when she was bought, was new-nam'd Lacaena; and Ismenias, Atraces,
when he became enslaved. And indeed for the Servants, it was an ordinary thing
to give up their names, and all to their Masters: who presently gave them new,
such as they thought sit. Either from the Country, (...), or the color and
complexion, as (...) or (...): Phoc. Biblioth. Cod. 279.
or some good quality in him, as (...), and (...), or else from the day or the
time whereon they bought him, as (...). At Rome the Master gave them a name of
their own: but 'twas when they set them free, and so a new name was a token of
liberty too: or of something better, See Rev. 2.17.
as of an adoption, (when the adopters name was the better of the two) or some
other good fortune: which made him in Lucian, when an Estate fell to him, to
change his name from Simon to Simonides* and thus they took new names when
they came to be made Kings, as among the Persians etc. or gods, as every where
besides, which appears in those names of Palaemon and Quirinus, and a great
many more.

CAP. VI. De Puerperarum Lustrationibus.
THE Mother after her delivery (though some say it was done after the first
nights lying with her Husband) hung up her Zona to Diana (...), ( Cinxia you
may call her in Latin) and her clothes too (says Callimachus) to Diana (...)*
until she were purified, she was as carefully shunned, as any Woman of the
Jews, insomuch that reckoning her among the (...), they loathed to go into
the house where she lay, as much as if she had layn for dead: or if they
happened to go in unwittingly or by constraint; when they came forth again,
they would be sure to wash. whence that of Diog: Laertius in the life of
Pythagoras, (...). which puts me in mind of Iphigenia in Euripides: when
bemoaning the condition of Orestes, whom the Scythians designed for a Sacrifice
to Diana, she spoke her mind so plainly in relation to her curiousness, to
have no body come near her, that came from a Woman in Childbed, or a
slaughter, or a funeral, etc. I defy (says she) the hypocrisy of that
Goddess whatever she be, that shall take delight in the murdering of men, and
yet notwithstanding out of purity, forsooth, shall forbid such and such to come
near her Altars. -- Iphig in Taur. v. 380.
(...)
(...)
(...).
A saying so cutting to the folly of the best of the heathen Theology, that it
would have sounded very well from the mouth of a Christian. For Thucydides
says, that the Athenians, for fear the holy Isle of Delos, should by this
means be polluted, made a law, that no Woman should lie in for child there,
but she must be removed to Rhenia, an Island near adjoining. What day she was
purified in, I cannot yet determine, and I remember the question put in
Euripides: (...).
Whether it were at the time of the (...), the feast that was kept at the forty
days end (for so many days she was to keep in after her delivery, as well as
before) or whether it were (...), when the child was a tenne-night old, (as we
say a seven night, counting nothing but the nights: for I do not think it is
the tenth Month) I do not well know: but Electra says it was so, (...).
Whenever the time was: the Woman, after she had washed away her (...) in the
river (as Rhea did hers in the river Lymax so called from Pausan in Ach.
thence) she her self was to Sacrifice to Diana, for helping her to a child:
and her Husband to the Nymphs, for helping him to such a Wife: or both (if you
will) to return their thanks, that the child came in its due time. And this
one calls (...). It may be in case of weakness, or if she were ignorant of
rites (as she might be at the first) another did it for her, as Clytemnestra
did for Electra upon her request. But indeed it should be the Midwife by right,
as Clytemnestra her self confessed, (...). Eurip. Electr. v. 1128.

During her lying in; the greatest part of her food was colewort.

CAP. VII. De Nutricibus.
THE Nurses during the time of sucking, were called (...) (from (...) the same
that (...) the pappes) but after they came to be Weaned ((...)) (...) dry
Nurses. Now the custom was for the Nurses (the better to harden the Children
usu liberioris Rhodig. ex Plat.
aurae, and to make the Nurses the more neat and cleanly) to be often carrying
the children abroad in the ways and the streets: and in case they should be
unquiet, the Scholiast upon those words of Aristophanes, (...).
Says they were wont to have their sponge full of honey, in a little pot
always ready for the purpose. Of all Women they counted a Lacedemonian the
fittest for a Nurse, (and such a one Alcibiades had himself.) Or rather indeed
the Athenian Women were so proud, that they counted it a disparagement to them,
to be nurses themselves. And therefore the Woman in Demosthenes, when it was
objected to her, that she had sometimes used this base employment, was feign to
excuse it, by the necessity of the Famine, which was in the City at that time.
And so likewise you shall find Hecuba in Euripides complaining of her
unhappines, that she must be forced to such an office as this was. When they
would lull as we call it) or lalle a child a sleep, they used lallare to cry
(...), or (...), to sing songs to it. Their songs they called (...), and
sometimes (...): (for so is naenia used in the Latin too, as in Arnobius lib.
7. Somno occupari ut possint leves audiendae sunt naeniae,) such a kind of song
is that in Theocritus. (...)
(...)
(...).
Sleep my little souls, etc.
For thus they were wont to (...) to the child, calling it also sometimes
(...), or (...), or (...) and the like.

CAP. VIII. De expositione Infantum.
BUT we shall have no need to trouble our selves to get Nurses, if the child
either dye of it self, or be exposed to dye by the Parent. If it dye in the
time of it is infancy (before it had teeth says Pliny) it was to have but a
cold burial without any fire, or any funeral sacrifice or solemnity in
Mourning or otherwise As being (in the words of Sat. 8.
Iuvenal) minor igne rogi. Which practice is by Plutarch in his Consolation to
his Wife, produced for an argument, to persuade her not to grieve for the death
of her child; Says he (...). The custom of exposing childring, which the
Graecians call (...), with the people of ancient times was very usual; it was
exercised upon such children as were lame, or deformed, or defective in any of
their Members. We Exodus 7. v. 2.
read indeed that Moses was used thus because he was (...) or a godly child:
but he was rather hidden from Pharaoh, then exposed to the river. This practice
was in most places at the pleasure of the parent: but at Sparta I read that
they took better advice^ for there they had a Commitee of purpose called by
them (...) appointed to examine every child, whether it were (...), sound or
not. The places where they exposed them, were sometimes Rivers and Lakes, such
as Moses was put in by his Mother, and Romulus and Remus by their Uncle
Aemilius; sometimes a sink or a gutter, according to that in Iuvenal. --
votaque saepe
Ad spurcos decepta lacus.
Sometimes a deep pit, such as the Lacedaemonians had at Taygetus in common for
all, sometimes Woods and desert places, such as Oedipus had, as Seneca says:
and in alta nemora pabulum misit feris Avidis -- and sometimes the wide Sea, as
Justin says of one Habides, (if that be his name,) Gargoris Habidem nepotem
suum in mare projici jussit. If a child were exposed any where upon the Land,
after they had swathed it (...) fasciis, they put it in an earthen pot. Such a
pot some would have to be meant by the Cantharus in Terence his Andria.

-- verum vidi Cantharum
Suffarcinatum* As if it were Suffasciatum. Whereas others would have you read
it Cantharam, for an old Woman of that name, and suffarcinatam, for as much as
succinctam. It is sometimes called (...), as by Aristophanes in Ranis, where he
speaks of Oedipus thus -- (...)
(...) --
And sometimes (...), says the Scholiast upon the same place, whence comes
(...) exponere. What kind of thing that (...) was, wherein Creusa exposed her
Bastard in a rock in the Acropolis; or whereof it was made, I cannot so well
determine. Euripides says it was (...) a vessel, and that Ion the child was
wrapped up in a skin, or a leather, and put into it, according to that -- (...)
(...).
Me thinks it might be rendered area, and more properly so then Moses (...) can
be: for first he says there was (...) skin or leather, rolled or folded up,
such as some of our Chests have. 2. It was fastend or locked of one side: (...)
ab (...) and (...), as our trunks are. 3. It was round also, and fit to be
tumbled as he says, (...)
(...)


And for (...), that will serve well enough for any such thing, as well as vas,
or a vessel. If the child were exposed on the Water, it was usually put in a
thing made like a basket made of oziers, or bulrush^s, daubed and closed with
slime and pitch, such as that we read of in C. 2. v. 3.
Exodus. But though they thus set him out to the mercy of fortune, they would
be sure to set him forth too, in the best manner they could, with rings, and
jewels, and garlands, and many precious ornaments, either in a way of mourning,
to do as they did to the dead, according to that -- Eurip. Ion: v. 26.
(...)
(...).
Or in a way of care and providence, that if it lived, and any one happened to
find it so lying, and would Tolleret.
take it up (as they call it) he might have his (...), or (...), his charges to
breed him advanced to his hand: and if it dyed, there might be enough for him,
that would bestow the pains, to bestow the cost too in the burying, according
to that in Heautont* Act. 3. Sc. 1.
Terence. -- cum exponendam do illi, degito annulum
Detraho, and eum ut una cum puella exponeret
Si moreretur, ne expers partis esset de nostris bonis.
These (...), or crepundia, most commonly were fastened about their necks, and
were therefore called (...), as they were likewise called (...); for they were
many times, bottles and bells, and such like toys (and so you must distinguish
betwixt ornaments and marks) because they were for another end yet besides the
former, viz. (...) (says Dio Chrysostom.
one) not to adorn him, but to mark him so as to know him again, and to set
the parents name therein, as we use to fasten collars and such like things,
about the necks of our dogs: and it may be the rattle-bels were fastened to find
him by the noise, as we do our Hawks. For you must know, every child that was
exposed, was not exposed with this intent to be killed (as some would have
exponere and necare to be little different) for many times they did it to hide
it only, out of fear it would be killed, if it were not exposed (as it was
with Moses:) and sometimes (if it were a Bastard) they put it out of purpose to
have some body nurse it, for if she bread it up her self, every body would
know it. Besides, when they were exposed with that intent, the parents for the
most, part had not their ends, for none have proved more famous men then such
as were exposed, as might be made appear by sundry examples. At the best,
exposing in my mind was very hard dealing, and therefore the Thebans (whom
Aelian commends for their humanity) made a Law to forbid it: and so did the
Romans too afterward: among whom, no exposed child could be free of the City.
And yet Aristotle could afford to prescribe it, (...). But he was then in
Politics, and that made him forget his Physics, or his natural affection.
Our putting out children to Nurse, many times proves little better then
exposing. Another way there was of carrying a child into another Country, where
it might live in secret, and secure from an enemy: as Orestes did in Phocis,
from the rage of Aegystus. And therefore Sophocles speaking of his manner of
life in his youth, calls it (...); and so you might have called him (...), in
the words of Lycophron: but enough of exposing. I will proceed to speak of the
customs they used in education: only, because their practice was different
according to the birth of the child, it will be necessary to speak a word first
of the several sorts of children, in regard of their Birth or Parentage.

CAP. IX. De Liberorum diversitate.
ACcording to the Scholiast upon Homer, there were four sorts of Sons. 1.
(...), or (...), in Latin Legitimus, (...), the son of a married free Woman.
2. (...), qui Latin reddi non potest, says L. 3. c. 6.
Quintilian, the son either of a foreign Woman, or a Concubine; such a
son, if his Father were but a private man, might have nothing to do with the
name, or the kindred of his Fether, (...) says Aristophanes: In Avib. Eurip.
v. 591.
and if the case were thus when the Mother was a stranger, how just a cause had
Ion in the Poet, to complain as he did? (...)
(...).
But if the father were a Prince, or some great Potentate (if we may believe
Eustathius upon Il. 8.
Homer concerning Teucer who was a nothus himself) being well born he must
needs be lawfully borne, and so he was held in as great esteem as any other,
and enjoyed his inheritance: consuetudinis Regiae fuit ut legitimam Vxorem non
habentes aliquam licet captivam tamen pro legitima haberent, ut liberi ex ipsa
nati succederent, says Servius. Whereas the other must be pop'd along with a
portion only of a thousand drachmae at the most: Harpoc.
this portion they called (...), which they had in the nature of gifts, like
(...) which Genesis 25 c. 6.
Abraham gave to the sons of his concubines: it was the value of (...) of
five minae says the Scholiast upon Aristophanes in Avibus* where I remember
how Hercules ( Jupiters bastard by Alemaena the Wife of Amphitryon) when
Pistheteros had told him, that being (...), by the Law he could not lay claim
to the least part of his fathers estate, makes answer thus; (...)
(...);
But what if he give me a portion, I hope there is no law against that. But the
other replied again and conf^ted his answer, by urging Solon's Law, which
ordered indeed that, the nothi should (...), have the estate shared among them
in portions, but it must be only for default of legitimate children and not
otherwise. This Law is mentioned by Demosthenes in his speech (...). Thirdly,
(...) an obscure son, whose Father we know not: in Latin Spurius or
Favonius. As if he were nothing but terrae filius, rising out of the ground
like the wind; or as if he were begotten of the wind, (which we know not from
what part of the earth it comes) without the help of a Father; like the eggs
which they call (...), made by the hens without the help of the cook. In
allusion to which Lucian calls Vulcan (...), because they fained him to be
borne of Juno, but begot of the Wind, or they knew not whom. 4ly, (...), says
Pollux; A Son borne in Wedlock, of a woman with child when she married, whom
the Husband took for a Maid. To these may be added, first (...), or (...), a
son not begotten, but made, or adopted: of whom (it may be) I shall speak
more anon. Secondly, (...) liber, whose father was (...) libertus, made free:
and thirdly, (...) ingennus, the son of (...). Any son begotten by a Father
in his old age, or the only child, or the only beloved, they usually called 1
Poll.
(...).

CAP. X. De Liberorum educatione.
IT is said of Greece, that it took the best course in breeding up of
Children, of any Country in the world. In so much that Euripides is therefore
thought to have given it the Epithete of (...), by way of excellence above the
rest. But how is it then that Homer gives the same to Ithaca: as Cicero does
that of a Nidulus. In Aristophanes his Thesmophoriazusae, the Pr^co, calling
upon the Women, to provide to sacrifice to such and such Gods, among the rest
brings in (...)
But whether this (...) here be Tellus in general, the Mother and the Nurse of
the Creatures; or whether it be only* Tellus Attica, Athens (...), the best
Nurse of the best, I know not, but thus much is delivered by Suidas, viz. that
Ericthonius the poor exposed child of Vulcan, in a thankful acknowledgement
of his education in that land, first sacrificed ^o this (...), and having built
an Alter of purpose to her, made a Law that whosoever would sacrifice to any
other god should (...), do it to her first. Well let us see a little what
their manner of education was. They say the Children were usually taught (...),
first to swim and dive and then to read; Very good method. If the Father was
poor, he was brought up to a trade; if able and rich, to Philosophy, Music,
Gymnicall exercises, hunting and the like. If he were brought up to no calling
at all, in case his Father should come to poverty, he was not bound to
maintain Plut. in Solon.
him, as otherwise he was. Many times the boys were taken up, and maintained
by the greater sort, in a lustful manner (as they have been by the Romans) and
were called their (...) Pages: all such Catamites or Ganymedes were usually
called Hesych.
(...), though, I know, (...) and (...) too, are frequently used by Sophocles
and others, in no ill meaning at all.

CAP. XI. De Puerorum Castigatione, etc.
IF a boy at any time were refractory, and stubborn in committing a fault, the
best means the Mother could use to persuade him to leave it, was to show him
her breasts, (...), says the Scholiast upon Euripides, as the most powerfulll
motive she had. But the Fathers and the Masters took another course with them.
If a boy had deserved to be whipped, he should be sure enough of his wages from
them, for they tied him fast, (...), to a block, to make him kiss the post, or
(...), to a stake, or a pin, and so whipped him. And thus to be punished they
called it (...), says he in In Equit.
Aristophanes, which is rendered by Frischlin, Diste^tus affigere humi, as if
they stretched him out every way as much as they could, and tied his neck, and
arms, and legs, too pinnes fastened in the ground for that purpose, to keep
him from striving. I know not whether this were the same as they called E^. ad
Hebr. c. ^1 v. 3.5.
(...), or (...). But I think that to have been rather the stretching, or
pulling of the skin, only fidiculis with little cords, to make it as tight as
that in a drum. Of which perhaps the Poet speaks when he says, (...), from
the (...), or the stool, whereon they stretched him or beat him, as they would
a skin or a hide. That torture of one of the seven brethren in the L. 2. c.
7 v. 7.
Maccabes, pulling his skin off his head, may be very well reduced hither.
And indeed I do ^ather think the true apo^ympanismum, to have been a torture
or a rack exercised upon any by Tyrants rather then a punishment of boys and
children by their Masters. For so Aristotle in the second book of his L. 2 c 8
^. 38
Rhetoricks, says that Antiphon the Poet, was used by Dionysius the Tyrant.
And in the sixth T. 24.
Chapter of the same book, speaking of the want of all fear, in such as had
already suffered the extermity of evils, he instances in those that are thus
used; (...). And so Plutarch in his book de Adulatione, cries out upon those
flatterers or Ptolomee, that even (...), when he was thus racking and torturing
of men, durst not open their mouths to dissuade him. But yet I believe also,
that there was an easier kind of (...), when they would but beat a fellow with
clubbs, which they called (...) (if that be not rather the word for the block
upon which they suffered, for the Scholiasts on these words of Aristophanes in
Pluto (...) -- says both (...), on which, and (...) with which they beat him.)
And that boys were punished with such a thing, I have cause to think, from
these words of Plutarch (...) etc. But to return to the punishment with the
Passalus. I know the word (...) in that Poet, is more often used to express
another manner of handling a man, by any body else as well as a Master. For
instance, in Thesmophoriazusae, when one kept a great deal of noise and would
not be silent, another threatens him to put a (...) in his mouth. -- (...)
(...).
Where the Scholiast says he alluded to the trick (used with us also) of
thrusting a stick in a Hoggs mouth, when they would see whether it had (...),
the Hail, or the Meazles or no; nay in the Poet himself in Equites, you have
one threatening to use another in this very manner. That fashion of tying the
boys to a stake to whip them, I remember mentioned by Themistius, under the
name of (...), in his first Oration, where speaking of a Plagosus Orbilius,
that used to pay the poor and Fatherless children to the purpose, because
they could pay him no better; says he, (...), etc. And so Prometheus, whom the
gods tied to Caucasus-hill for stealing fire is said by Mena^der, to have been
(...), or tied like a boy to the Rocks; (...)
(...).
Where he prettily pleads his cause, as if he had been too hardly dealt with
for so small a matter. Nay the power of a Father over a child went farther yet:
For first, (before that Solon made a Law not to do it unless it were found in
the act of adultery) any one might sell his child when he Plut. in Sol.
pleased. 2. The Father, if the Son had been faulty, might (...), Lucian.
abdicere filium suum, turn him out of doors. But not till the Judges had the
hearing of the cause, says (...)
Demosthenes: and then the (...), or the Crier went about, and cried that
(...), such a one did deny (...), such a one to be his Son any longer. He
that was thus used was said (...), to be ejected out of the Family, and nas
called (...). If he were received into favor again, he was said (...), to be
taken into the family again: and then he could never be abdicated any more.

CAP. XII. De ascriptione in (...).
THE Sons when they came to be three years old at the soonest, and seven at
the latest, were carried by their Fathers to the (...), and registered, in the
Tribe. But before they could be registered, the Fathers were to take their
Oaths that the children were theirs: and yet notwithstanding the Oaths, those
heads of the Tribe if they listed, might question the matter, and put them to a
suit in Demost. (...).
Law. The time on which this was usually done, was the third day of the Feast
(...). Which was so called, either according to the Etymologicall dictionary,
because the sons which before might be thought (...), to have no Father, did
now make it appear, who the Father was. Or according to to the opinion of
Xenophon, L. 1. (...):
because at that feast, (...), the Fathers met altogether: and so it must be
called (...), in that manner as a wife is called, (...), for (...); or (...),
for (...): where A is (...), and not a privative, as in (...), and many other
such words. The third day of the feast was called by the name of (...), as who
would say, a Shearing-feast: because at that time they used to cut their hair.
The hair which they cut they called (...), or (...), or (...), in opposition
to (...), that which they cut at a funeral. This lock (as I think it was) they
had nourished of purpose till that time, and consecrated to the honor of one
of their gods: as may appear by the practice of Bacchus himself: for when
Pentheus threatened to cut of his dainty lock, he had nothing else to dissuade
him, but to tell him it was sacred, (like the lock of the Numb. c. 6. v. 5.
Nazarites) Eurip. in Bach. 494.
(...).
And thus Theseus is said to have consecrated his hair to Apollo at Delos. The
hair thus cut because it was the first time that ever they cut it, and because
it was done by way of an offering, they called (...), the first fruits of the
hair, (for the word both English, Greek, and Hebrew, is appliable to any
thing that is first.) Such first fruits of his Beard Sueton. c. 12. ejus vitae.
Nero put it into a golden box, which he adorned with precious jewels, and
laid it up in the Capitol.

If the children were of an noble blood, the would go as far as Delphos to
give it Apollo. But if others, some to one god and some to another (I think
they had their choice, for there were gods enough of conscience) at Rome,
besides Apollo, whom still one or other was careful to supply (notwithstanding
his own Intonsum caput, and his long hairy beams) Hos tibi, Martial.
Phaebe, vovet totos a vertice crines.
Aesculapius was remembered too. For Statius speaks of one Earinus, that sent
his hair to him to Pergamus, in a curious box beset with jewels, and a
looking-glass besides, Mart. Ep. 9.
-- dulcesque capillos.
Pergameo posuit dona sacrata deo.
How was it then that the Vestall Virgins hung up theirs upon a Tree: which
Festus says they kept for the purpose, by the name of Capillaris? The Nuns the
Vestall Virgins of these times have no such need, they have gods and Saints
enough and to one of them they bestow a love-lock for entrance, as I have heard
it reported. But let me not run on with my empty cart, and take no notice of
that which is asserted by some, contrary to what I have delivered. Car.
Sigonius and diverse others say, that this regestring in the Tribe-Book, and
that which they called the Searching too, was not done till the boys were
fifteen years old, and the enroling of them into the (...) at eighteen:
according to that of Pausanias in Eliacis, where he says, that after they were
eighteen years old, they were not to play at any kind of plays with boys any
longer. But as yet, I dare be so bold as to be of a contrary mind. For first,
Proclus upon Plato's Timaeus, says that when they went to be registered, they
were (...), three or four years old, and there is my authority. 2ly, Cnemon
in Helidorus says, he was registered as soon as he went to School, which is
like to have been sooner then at fifteen year old: and there is my example.
3ly. It is agreed upon by all, that at the time Registring they offered up the
first fruits of their hair: and it is not likely they should let it alone till
fifteen years of age, and there is my reason. But, Si quid novisti rectius
etc. It is all one to me.

CAP. XIII. De ascriptione in Epheborum censum, and in album Lexiarchicu^.
WHen they came to be eighteen years old, (...), they were listed among the
number of those that were (...) puberes. And to this purpose they had certain
Officers appointed to search them, to see whether they were so or no, and to
prove them whether they were able (as they called it) (...), to keep Guard, or
do service in the City* (of which hereafter.) This search or examination was
called (...). If they were found to be puberes, sound wind and Limb, and like
to prove a Soldiers; they were led into the Temple of Argulus, where they took
a solemn oath conceptis verbis, to be true to the gods and the Country. The
time when this was done, was upon (...) too, and that may be the occasion of
the difference I lately spoke of. Neither were these later rites performed
without cutting of hair too. But commonly the fashion was, either then, or at
any other time but the first, to consecrate their hair, Sch^l. in Hom. Il. ^.
not to this or that God, but to the rivers, especially such as belonged to the
Country they lived in (...). Thus much may be gathred from Pausan in At.
Peleus his vow to consecrate his hair to the River Sperchius, if Achilles
returned in safety: and Philostr.
Memnon's performance of the like to the river of Nilus: so (as Acts 18.18.
Paul shaved his hair at Cenchrea, upon the like occasion,) the Nazarites,
when they cut their hair of Number. c. 3.
consecration, were to make use of the contrary Element, and to throw it in the
fire. But amongst the Greeks the custom of paying tribute of their hair, when
they cut it, to the Water (as to a principal cause of life and growth) was
very usual both in men and women, especially in times of mourning, when they
cut it most. I remember Helena in Euripides, where she bemoans the condition of
the poor Trojans, and the sad fruits of the War, speaks of such a thing done
by the Virgins at the river Scamandar. Eurip. Helen. v. 372.
(...)
(...)
(...).
Unless you had rather think it was done (according to the custom) to the
dead bodies of their friends, that lay therein. I should have told you that
before they cut their hair, (I mean when they went out Ephebi) they first
took a vessel of Wine ((...), says Hesychius) and having consecrated it to
the honor of Hercules, they began a health in it to the company there present.
This ceremony, they called (...) from the Wine. And here it may not be amiss,
to mention the distinction, which you shall find in the Poets of two several
ways of cuttting of their hair, in use among the Greeks. The one was (...),
when they did but pare their hair, as they would do the borders in a garden:
the other called (...), when they shaved it so closse to the skin, that they
made the head look like a (...), a Skiffe, or a boat. When they came to be two
years puberes, (...), (as Demosthenes calls it) or twenty year old (...) they
wrote men, or they became sui juris, and their names were registered by the
Demarchus in his (...), in Albo Lexiarchico, a book wherein he kept the names
of all those that belonged to his Demus. It had this name (...), (or (...))
(...), because as soon as any ones name was written therein, he might be
master of an estate himself if he had it. Besides this book, there was (...), a
table of box-wood, wherein every one was to set down of what Demus he was,
together with the name of his Father. Now as for the women, they were not wont
to be entered into any tribe, till the time when they came to be Married, and
that in the month of Gamelion, whereas the men were entered into the Month of
Pyanepsion.

CAP. XIV. Alimenta parentibus and alumnis praebenda.
WHen the Father came to age, or necessity, if the Son refused to support him
(unless he were a nothus, or had not been bred up to a calling) he might be
served with a Write (...); and if he were convicted, his punishment was to be
excommunicated all Society, both Sacred and civil, and to be fined a mulct
besides. This maintenance and succor, he was bound by a Law of Solons making,
to afford not only to his Parents, but to any friend else, to whom he owed his
education: and thence it was caled (...), and (...), or (...), in Latin
Alimenta. This debt they reckond themselves so strongly engaged to pay, that
they abominated, deprec^ated, and grieved for nothing so much, as to dye before
it was paid, according to that in the Poet, Iliad (...). -- (...)
(...)
(...) -- rendered by Val. L. 6.
Flaccus thus.
-- nec reddita charo
Nutrimenta patri: brevibus praereptus in annis.
Insomuch that the Parent might very well say to his children Quinul. deel 6.
Non est beneficium, quod pascitis; sed facinus, quod negatis. And indeed I
must needs say thus much for them, I have found them for the most part, very
careful to keep out of debt in this kind, and very tender hearted to their
Parents, as may be gathered by this one practice of theirs in use among them,
In Aristoph. Vesp.
viz. If a Father had been any time abroad: when he came home again, the
Daughter themselves, presently fell to washing his feet, and anointed them with
oil, (...) says the Scholiast, insomuch that Euphron* (says he) thought that
Homer had used the Epithete (...) for the feet, in allusion to this anointing,
(it may be) they used to kiss them too (as she did the feet of our Savior)
for so says he of his Daughter in Aristophanes. -- (...)
(...).
For the Children thus to maintain their Parents out of an Antipelargy, and to
feed the old ones like the birds, it was commonly termed in one word (...), and
so Medea uses the word to her children at parting. -- (...)
Eurip. Med. v. 133.
(...).
Next to the charges of maintaining the parent when he is old, are those of
burying him, when he is dead; and those to be borne by the Son too. And
therefore Admetus running out upon his father, for nor offering to lay down
that life in his room, which being then very old, he must shortly leave in his
own; Well (says he) I am to be reckoned but a dead man, and you for your
part, are not like to have any more sons now. Idem in Alcest. v. 664.
(...)
(...).
That will you feed, and shroud your head,
And Lay you forth when you are dead.
And now that we have brought the man so near his end: we will show him what
course he is to take for the disposing of his estate, only because if he should
have no children at all, or none such as they should be, there might be a doubt
what to do; I will speak a word of that first.

CAP. XV. De adoptione, testamento, and haereditate.
IF a man had either no child at all, or none that was (...), free borne: he
had power Isa. de Aristarch,
to adopt him a nothus or any one else. And this was to be done after the
manner of a Will, signed and sealed in the presence of the Magistrate, as their
Wills were wont to be. Whosoever was thus adopted, must be first made free of
the City, and then be ascribed into the Tribe (or fraternity) of him that
adopted him. But this last was to be done upon the feast of (...) in the month
of Thargelion, and not at the ordinary time. Having thus left his old Tribe
(which they were not bound to do among the Romans) he was not to return to it
again, 'till he had begotten a child in the new. As for the man's estate it
passed to another either (...) by descent, or (...), by virtue of a will. Now
by Solons laws (for before, their estate could not be conveyed but to those of
the kindred) a man might make any body his heir, Demost.
of any estate that he had which was not in controversy: but with these six
qualifications. First he himself must be no Fool nor Madman, 2 No prisoner,
so as to make his will against his will: for then it could be no will. 3 No
stranger, for then his estate went to the common treasure. 4 No adopted man,
for such a ones estate (if he wanted a child, was to pass to the Demost. ad
Leochar.
next of the Adopters kindred) 5 Not persuaded thereunto by his Wife: for such
a one (says my Id* cont. Olympiodorum.
author) (...), is little better then a madman. 6 Not having a male child of
his own; for then the inheritance should go to him. And if there were more
Males then one, they were to be (...), coparteners, or joynetenants. But in
case he had no male child at all, and dyed without a Will, the estate fell to
the next Male of the Kindred. If he had but one Daughter in all, or if the Sons
that he had, were not (...), free borne and legitimate: the Daughter was to be
(...), or (...), sole heir. And therefore he in Aristophanis Avibus, told
Hercules, minerva could not possibly be (...) to Jupiter, if Mars and Vulcan
were his legitimate sons: -- (...)
(...)
(...).
I say this Daughter was the heir, and the next of the kin was to marry her;
or the next of kin who was to marry her, became the heir by the marriage. A
Woman or a Boy, if they made a Will, could not go beyond (...), six bushells,
Isaus de Aristarch.
(they say it is) or the value of such a measure of Barley. He to whom the
estate did pass, by what way soever it were, was forthwith to make his claim
to it before the Praetor: which thing they called (...), or (...). And if any
one would (...), lay in any thing to defeat the claim, he was to prosicute his
title. Demst. contr. Stephan*
And now the man has made his will, the next care he has is how to be buried
when he dies: I shall therefore endeavor to show him how to have that done too
in the amplest manner, onl^ first, I will satisfy him of the necessity of
having a burial.

CAP. XVI. De necessitate s^pulturae.
I Remember Cicero in his Topics, divides justice into three kinds, unam ad
superos, alteram ad manes, tertiam ad homines pertinentem of the second kind of
justice viz to the dead, I do find every where among the ancients so religious
a care; and such a sacred esteem of a burial; that Sepulchers were called
templa, and the rite- of a funeral acknowledged and called to be (...) by the
Greeks, as well as justa by the latins. Insomuch that the Athenians had a Law,
that if any one happened but by chance, upon the carcass of another, whosoever
it were: he should be boun^ to cast earth upon it, three times together,
Aclian. Var. Hist. l. 5, c. 14.
and give it a mouthfull of Tur^e, -- Horace l. 1. Od. 28.
Capiti inhumato
Particulam dare --
The Romans (it seems by Quintilian Declam. 5.) observed this custom exceeding
well, for (says he) Ignotis Cadaveribus humum congerimus and insepultum
quodlibet corpus nulla festinatio tam rapida transcurrit, ut non quantulocunque
veneretur aggestu. And if any one omitted the duty he must make satisfaction by
sacrificing a Sow pig* porcam Festus c. 14.
praecidaneam (as they called it) to Ceres. But the Scholiast upon Sophocles in
Antigone goes fa^ther: (...). Whosoever saw a dead body* and did not turn up
the dust upon it, was not only a breaker of the Law* but (...), a scelus, an
accursed devoted fellow, anathema, acer (for what should the body do any
longer in the air, which it is not able to draw?) and therefore they accounted
(...), says the Scholiast upon In Helen.
Euripides, and (...), very much feared that the gods under ground, would be
angry, if any belonging to them were a bove ground. No greater imprecation to
an enemy amongst them, then (...), that he might not be covered with the earth.
Me thinks I see Homer. Sophoc.
Hector upon his knees to Achilles, as he was ready to stabbe him; and Homer.
Sophoc.
Ajax in his prayers to Jupiter (before he fell upon his sword) earnestly
beseeching them not to suffer their bodies, when their souls were removed, to
be left behind in the lurch to be meat for the dogs and the birds. Hence
surely it was; that the ancients stood so much in fear of a death upon the
Sea: or a shipwreck; because of death: for there they could never be interred.
Demite naufragium. and mors mihi munus erit
Says Ovid. Insomuch that when they went to Sea, or at least when they feared
to be cast away (as we call it, for there if the Soul be gone, we have lost
the body too) their custom was to fasten to one part or other of their bodies,
a reward for him that should find it, and bury it, if it were cast a shore.
(...); says Synesius in one one of his Epistles* Mor^over not only if a corpse
were not buried at all: but if it were not buried as soon as possibly it
could, it was counted (...), as if they had offended the manes; whereas on the
contrary, if it were done without delay, they thought it (...), that they had
done them a pleasure. You have those two words used by the Scholiast, upon the
saying of Homer. Iliad 7. -- (...).
Petroclus is said to have been angry with Achilles for such a delay; Alex. ab
Alex l. 3 c. 7.
and how true it is which one says, that the bodies were kept fourteen days,
and fourteen nights, before they were buried, I do not yet find.

CAP. XVII. De ter vocanda anima, and de Cenotaphiis.
BUT next to the happiness of being buried, was that of being buried in their
own Country. Insomuch that if a Man died so far from home, that they could
not come to the body; they were wont with solemn and frequent invocations,
naming him thrice at every time, (...). -- manes ter voce vocare (as I may say)
to give a hollow for the Soul: which they thought was still quick enough to
come to them. In Pyth. Od. 4.
Pindar says: that Phrixus, when he was a dying at Cholchis, desired Pelias to
see this office performed for him -- (...)
(...) --
And so Ulysses, after he had lost threescore and twelve of his company among
the Cicones, presently made it his business (says Homer) -- (...): to give a
hoop for every one three times. Id. 13. Eclog. 6.
As Theocritus says of Hylas, (...). in Virgil he is named but twice. -- Hylam
nautae quo font relictum.
Clamessent^ut littus Hyla, Hyla, omne Sonaret.
Doubtless they would have been glad, to believe their bodies also might be
rolled under ground, into their native Country, as some of the Jews do think
theirs shall into the land of Canaan. And yet a great many of them knew, that
if they cried their hearts out to the Souls themselves, it could be to little
purpose. For as I remember, one in Aristophanis Ranis says concerning the
dead, (...).


They are gone so far ((...) to go isused also for to dye, we say a man is
dead, and gone) that you cannot reach them at thrice calling.

But must this be all? can there be no way else to honor the man, unless you
can finger the carcass? yes, he shall be kept safe in Grave and a Monument,
though he never be buried. Such a monument they called (...): and to bury a man
thus in effigy (as I may say) (...), as in Helen v. 1^62.
Euripides. (...)
The Scholiast upon the Same Poet in Hecuba, gives a full testimony of the
custom, saying that, (...), though the body were buried in another Country,
to keep his memory above ground, they would bury his grave. Nonnus calls this
Cenotaphium (...), from (...) a Sepulcher. Such a thing as this Aeneas made for
his Father. -- Virg Aen. 6.
Tumulum Rhaeteo in littore inanem
Constitui -- Ovid. l. 6. fab. 8.
Progne for Philomela.
-- and inane Sepulchrum
Constituit --
The Pythagoreans for those qui a Philosophia sua descivissent, (accounting
them as bad as departed out of the life, that had departed from the principles)
The Athenians for all those that dyed upon the Sea. (...)
(...) --
says the Poet concerning Helena's husband. it is worth your labor to read the
story, what a pudder the Woman, kept about putting a suit of clothes in a
beer; as if his body were there; and bedecking it with flowers, and carrying
it out into the Sea to drown it. If it may not be grievous* I will produce the
words which passed betwixt Theoclymenus and Helen concerning the custom.
Theoc. (...);
Hell. (...)
Teoc. (...)
Hell. (...)..
If a man died fighting in the field, and his body could not be found; he was
honored with the carriage of an empty beer in pomp, and a burial, in the
Ceramicus, with Pillars and Epitaphs in the stateliest manner that might be.
For with this provision for his burial, he in In Avibus.
Aristophanes comforted himself and his friend (...); what need I say more of
this? It was a common thing every where as L. 11 fab. 10.
Ovid says. Et saep^ in tumulis sine corpore momina legi.


CAP. XVIII. De mortui mutilatione, and iis quae in homicidiis fieri solebant.
THE customs used in Athens upon the dead body, were different* according to
the different ways by which he came to his end. viz. Violent, and Natural.
And first of the customs used in a violent death. If the man had killed himself
((...)) they cut off the hand with which he did it and buried it in a place
apart from the rest of the body. So says Cel. Rhodiginus, but I know not who
told him so. In dying (or falling down) Men and Women. but especially the
Women, were exceeding careful, that they might not discover any thing that was
not to be seen, but (...) as Euripides says of Polyxena. If another killed a
man: he that killed him, if he thought that he had done it justly and in a good
cause, though he washed his hands after it (as they would do after killing any
other Creature) yet he used to take the sword that he did it with, and hold it
up toward the Sun with the blood on it, (...), (says the scoliast upon
Euripides in Orestes) to show that he feared not if heaven were witness, and
all the World knew of the fact. If he had done it unjustly: instead of sh^wing
the blood he wiped it off in the hair of the party slain. (...) (says the
Scoliast upon Sophocles in Electra) averruncare, to abominate, and wipe away
the abomination of the fact. But if it were (...), and (...) (as he says) i.
e. If the party were one of his own Tribe or kindred: he could never wipe it
so clean, but some would stick. And therefore fearing it would draw the Furies
to revenge it, they provided. Amulets and spells to keep them off: And what
better thing then a part of the body it self? for having that in their power
as a hostage, to do what they would with it, the Ghost of the party would not
offer to meddle with them, or else would spare the bearer, for love of the
carriage. And therefore as soon as they had slain him they cut off all the
extreme or outmost parts of the outmost members: Soph. in Electra.
and sewing them, or tying them together, wore them under their arme-pits. The
extremities thus used they called (...), and so to use the body (...) so as
they called it likewise, if they did but cut the topps of the ears, when a man
had committed a fault, says the Etymologicall Dictionary: which may more
properly be called (...), from (...) the lap of the ear. Though that word, and
(...), be also used for as bad usage as (...): unles you will say this was
properly said to be done, when they killed the party quite. Those (...), are
sometimes called (...) or (...), as in L. 4.
Apollonius, where he speaks of Absyrtus his being thus used by his sister
Medea. (...).
(...).
And sometimes (...), from (...), the same that (...): because oftimes they
hung those pieces of the body (...) to their armeholes* of which Sophocles
speaks thus (...)
(...).
But if he had killd the man by treachery, he hung those pieces about his neck,
and taking some of the blood, spit three times in his mouth. This fashion of
mutilating, or Laceration as they called it, and cutting of pieces from the
Noses, and the ears, and the hands, and the feet, was in use likewise among
the Romans: not only upon men slain, (as Quintilian says, truncas partibus
suis umbras) but when they did not kill them outright: according to that in
Virgil Aen, 6. Atque hic Priamidem laniatum corpore toto.
Deiphobum vidi lacerum crudeliter ora,
Ora, manusque ambas, populataque tempora raptis
Auribus, and truncas inhonesto vulnere nares.
That practice of Adonibezeks which we read of in the book of Judges, C. 1. v.
7.
in cutting the fingers and toes of the Kings, may well be called
ocroteriasmus, as this was.

The usual punishments to be suffered by him that had killed another were
these. If he had done it unwillingly, he must fly his own Country, and get into
another, (as the Israelites were to fly to the Cities of refuge) Being there he
must betake himself (says the On Homer Il. O.
Scholiast) (...), Joshua c. 20.
into some great man's house that was able to protect him (for reject him he
might not coming as an (...), or Petitioner,) and there set him covered by the
hearth (a place which they counted holy) (...), to expiate the fact, and purge
himself of the pollution. If the party were one of his own Tribe or Kindred,
he must tarry out of his Country a whole year at the Schol in Eurip Hippol.
least. lib. 18.
Eustathius says anciently they suffered them sometimes, to redeem their
liberty with a fine of two Talents of gold. But afterward, it seems to have
been otherwise: Insomuch that a Murderer was not only forbid (...), or (...),
to perticipate in their Sacrifices himself. But every body else (of his own
Country) was forbid to receive him into his house. Nay they might not be
allowed to speak to him: as thinking him (...), so unholy a thing, as that he
might not have the name of a Man, as Euripides says (...). The Scholiast upon
Il. X.
Homer, out of Callimachus, says, that among the Thessali, they used to drag
him about the grave, where the party was buried whom he had slain; as
Eurydamus did Simon for killing his brother Thrasynus.

CAP. XIX. De claudendis oculis, pulsandis aeneis vasis, and amiciendo corpone.
IT was the custom among the Greeks, as well as among the Jews and the
Romans, when a man was a dying, or his Sun was a setting as they used to say
-- (...)) to have his eyes closed by the Parents, Theoc.
or the next of the kindred: and they called it (...). The performing of this
ceremony by the Kindred, was so much valued, that it was bewaild as a very
great unhappiness, to dye in such a place where a man's friends could not be
present to do it: Il. O.
as Ulysses says -- (...)
(...) --
If a man died suddenly; (...) (says the Il.
Scholiast upon Homer) it was attributed to Apollo: if a Woman to Diana. I know
not whether I may here venture to tell you, from an old Scholiast upon
Theocritus, that just at the time of death, they had a custom likewise to make
a great ringing with vessels of brass ( Bells, some render it) to fright away
the Hobgoblings, and Furies from the Soul. For such a kind of sound (he says)
is (...) of a special virtue for such effects. But else I should rather
imagine it to have been done for the same end, that a Roman Conclamation was,
viz. to t^y whether the party were but dead a sleep (not dead and gone) and so
to awake him with the noyce: as they were wont to do to the Moon in an
Eclipse, when they thought her a sleep. The eyes being covered with the lids;
the face was next covered with a cloth: and that by the next of the Kin too:
for Hyppolytus as he lay a dying, thus calls to his Father to do it. Eur.
H^pport. b. 148.
(...)
And indeed the whole business of stretching out and shrowding the body,
belonged especially to the next of the Kin. And therefore Cassandra, in
Euripides, endeavoring to prove the condition of the Trojans to be better then
that of the Greeks that besieged them, says, that they, having the happiness
to dye at home among their friends and kindred were (...)
Shrouded by whom ^hey ought their Kin. If a Father or a Mother dyed a Widow:
the Children did it. And so Medea tells her children, she had once hopes it
should have been done by them to herself. Eur Med. v. 1035.
(...).
If a Husband dyed: the Wife did it. Which happiness the Greek Soldiers could
not attain, if they died at Troy. -- (...)
Troam v. 277.
(...).
If a brother; the Sister. Which made Orestes when he was to fuffer death among
the Scythians, a great way of from his home, cry out so pitifully, (...).
Alack! how shall my Sister shrowed me now!


Id Iphig. in Taur.
CAP. XX. De offa Cerberi, and Naulo Charontis
THE body being dead, began from thence to be Sacrum Sacred those that are dead
are called (...) by In vita numae.
Plutarch, and the graves themselves (...) by Lycophon, as soon as the body
was in. Sacred I say, that is not to be injured, far enough from holy,
insomuch that if a mam had but touched it, (...), (as you have read it already)
he could not meddle with any holy thing after, till he had washed, as (...) as
a Jew. Touched did I say; when Hippolitus lay a dying Diana would not so much as
stay to see him dead, for fear of pollution. (...), Eur. Hipp. v. 1437.

(...).
The same may be said of the graves. (...), says Hesiod; for (...) they were
not, but only in this sense, that they were (...), not to be meddled with as
some would have it to be meant by that of the same Poet (...) --
Insomuch that Plutarch in his Romans Quest. says, that those men, that out of
Pride would make their burying place, and provide the funeral pomp, before
they dy*d, were not fit to bear the name of (...) themselves. The whole
performance of the ceremonies used to prepare the body for the burial, was
called (says the Scholiast upon Aeschylus) (...): as the elation or carrying
forth, was called (...). The ceremonies were these. First they took a piece of
money above a halfe-peny ('it was dearer there then at Rome) and put it into his
mouth to speak his fare to the (...), or Ferriman Charon* the piece of money
was called by the name of (...), because it was given (...): which signifies
the dead, from (...) dry, because of their dry bones. I remember the Scholiast
upon Aristophanes in Ranis, (where Charon bid the man to wait.

-- (...) (says that there was a stone which the Poets feigned to be (...), in
the place of the dead, called by the name of Auaenus (...), because the bodies
of the dead must needs be as dry as dust.

Together with the money, they threw in a morsel of pudding or past, or Cheese,
to give to Cerberus to stop his wide mouth, when he had bit him to death
already. It was usually made of flower tempered with honey (too good for a dog)
and therefore called more peculiarly (...) and (...), says Suidas* such a kind
of thing Aeneas is said to have given him; when he visited the dead. Melle
Saporatam, and medicatis frugibus offam
Aen. 6. Metam. l. 6,
Objicit.
Apuleius speaks of more pieces then one: offas polentae mulso cencretas, and
says, they were to carry a piece in each hand. The Poet in Aristophan.
Lusistrate used it but in the singular number -- (...)
(...).
It may be the same Poet alluded to this custom in those words of his in pace.
(...).


CAP. XXI. De Ablutione mortuorum, Pollinctura, and amiculo ferali.
IF the party deceased were free of the City, the (...) (you may render it
Pollinctores) took out his bowels, and with heated water, which they put in a
Labrum kept in a Temple for the purpose, washed the body: as those Acts c. 9.
v. 57. Eurip. v. 157. Electra.
did the body of Tabitha before they laid her in the upper room. This (...)
(as Electra called it in the Poet) was a thing accounted so necessary, that
Socrates (as it is in In Phaedone.
Plato) when he intended to drink his own death in a health, thought it best
to set about it himself before hand, and save the Women a labor: (...). Which
puts me in mind of the like practice of Alcestis, when she intended to dye for
her Husband. Says the Poet. Eurip. Alc. v. 116.
(...) (...)
(...)
When she perceived the day appointed near,
She washed her self in river water clear,
In allusion to this custom apud Eurip.
Iphigenia in her dream, fell a w^shing one of the pillars of the ruined
house, which she fancied to see. (...).
Interpreting the Pillar for a Son, and concluding the death of that Soon by
the washing of the pillar. To this washing, (it may be,) alludes that
expression of Strepsiades to his son in Aristophanis nubibus (...).
He casts aspersions upon my life, and washes me as if I were dead. This
work was indeed proper to the Women; but in case of necessity others might
serve. And therefore in De Method. Medendi. l. 1 c 15.
Galen you shall find the Cynicks themselves a washing poor Theagenes, because
he had neither Wife, nor Child, nor chick of his own to do it. Having washed
the body, they anointed it with ointments, and poured Ambrosia upon his head
and his face, as Homer says, Jupiter bid them do to Sarpedon, (...) -- Il. 11.

Having done this, they wrapped the body in a fine garment, woven (it may be)
long before by his Wife, Homer. Odyss. 1.
or some other friend for the purpose: having also (...), bands or lists of
cloth, to tie the hands and the feet withal, such as John. c. 11. v. 44.
Lazarus had. Feralibus amiculis obstrictus, says Metam. l. 10.
Apuleius. The color of the shroud (if my memory fail not) was white among
the Grecians, but black with the Latins.

CAP. XXII. De ablutione a Mortuis. De coronis, quibus corpora ornabantur. de
l^cto, and de coll^catione.
HAving thus clothed him with his Winding Sheet, and his (...): next they
trimmed him with Garlands, (...), says Suidas as they would do to one that had
run out his race, or fought it out: and with the like signification, I have
thought they put the cake in his mouth, for the same reason: for cakes were
given for rewards, as well as Garlands. In allusion to these Garlands,
Eustathius, when the Father was lamenting the death of his Son, makes him
say, (...), how shall I crown thee with my tears? L. 10. Ism.
an example of this practice, you may see in Euripides: where Talthybius speaks
to Hecuba to do it to Astyanax, in the absence of his Mother, thus. -- (...)
Eur. Troam. v 1143. Artem l. 1. c. 14.
(...).
After they had done this they set him on the ground, with his feet outward
toward the gate: as being never to put his foot in the house again. Then they
took him and put him into a couch or a bed ((...)) to be in a readiness to be
carried to his bed, for so Lycophron calls the grave (...), as it is likewise
termed (...), and so the dead are called (...), and (...), for death is a long
sleep, as sleep is a short death. The couch was also adorned with Garlands
made of all sorts of Herbs and flowers, (as In Hell.
Euripides says) (...), but especially of Olive, which they used in victories:
having thus adorned it, they placed it, or set it forth at the doors as
Potroclus in Homer was, -- (...).
This placing of him they called (...), collocare, Laying forth (as we call it)
as it is in Alcestis. -- (...). Eurip.

During the (...), and all the time till the (...) (as they called it) till the
body was carried forth, efforebatur, (...), as St Luke says, C. 7. v 11.
(whether out of the house or the City) there stood at the door, a great
earthen vessel filled with water, which they fetched from another house, for
the people to wash in, that came in and out. This vessel is called by
Hesychius (...), by Pellux (...), and by Aristophanes (...), in that In Eccles.
place where he speaks of the (...) too, that is the Pots for ointments
wherewith they anointed the body, as likewise of strewing of Origanum (they
say it is for good hearts origanum tueri) and of Vine-branches, for what use I
know not, unless it were to lay the Corpse upon in the time of anointing, or
else to make the Torches of them* for of such stuff Torches were commonly
made: as Eustathius says (...) was (...). And so our Poet in Lusistrate calls
it (...): pray take his own words, for the great pot of Water, the lesser pots
of ointment, and the Vine-branches together. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Thus I remember in Euripides his Tragedy of Alcestis ( verse 99) one makes a
doubt whether the woman were indeed buried, as they said she was, because he
could not see any Spring Water (...) (as he calls it, for such it should be)
standing at the door as the custom was.

The Washing it self was called (...), like the Israelites (...), which we
read of in Ecclesiasticus cap. 34. v. 25. and in Numbers c. 19. v. 11. The
Romans used Suffitionem, a perfuming of the house: for they thought the whole
house polluted, where there lay but a dead body by the wall. And so did the
Greeks too, as may appear by those words of Helena, and the Poet, Eurip. Hell.
v. 1446.
(...)
(...) --
Our house is clean, for Menelaus here.
Lost not his life. --


CAP. XXIII De ritu efferendi and portandi corporis.
THE best time of burying, they reckoned to be in the day and not in the night.
And this I gathered by those words in the Poet, wherein Cassandra the
Fortune Tellers, threatening Talthybius, told him his fortune to be buried in the
night (clean contrary to the judgment of many now a days, who make it an
honor for the better sort.) says she Id. in Troad v. 446. Il 11.
(...),
Therefore the next day after the Collocation, before Sun rising, -- (...).
(says Homer in the funeral of Hector) at break of day, up the corpse is
mounted, and carried along most bravely (...) (says De Luctu.
Lucian) in pomp, as if it were intended for a show. Now it was carried (says
the Scholiast upon Homer) (...), not in any Litter or Coach, etc. But upon men's
shoulders up aloof (...), as Euripides calls it, speaking of Alcestis, where
he speaks also of (...) Servants (I should have thought the bearers had been
some of the kindred rather) that thus carried the Corpse. -- Eurip. Alc. u. 607.
(...)
(...).
In the like sense he uses the word (...) in another Tragedy; where speaking of
Rhesus his being trudged away to be buried by his mother Terpsichore, when
Ulysses had slain him, ^ (...)
(...)
(...) --
If the party died of a violent death, especial in a fight, they used to carry
forth Spears, and other arms and armor along with the corpse, as the
Arcadians did at the funeral of Pallas -- Hostam alii, galeamque ferunt --
And it is likely they held those Spears at the wrong end too, as the custom
is with us at the burial of a Soldier, and as they did then -- and versis
Arcades armis.
As the corpse was a carrying forth from the Porch, it seems that they used some
speech or other, as to the party deceased either to commend him for his
virtues, or to commend him to the protection of the infernal gods to whom he
went, or to bemoane his departure; for it may well be conjectured by the words
of Admetus to the people of Pherae concerning his Wife, Eurip. Alc. 608.
(...),
(...)
Those that accompanied the coarse, and were invited to the funeral, sometimes
went on foot, (if it were one whom they honored very much) and sometimes in a
Coach. If it were a public Diog. Laert. L. l. 10..
person, or one of great note, they were all clad in white, and adorned with
Garlands. In going to the grave the manner was for the Men to walk stately
before the corpse, and the Demost. ad. Macart.
Women (but not unless they were threescore years of age, or of Kin to the
party) to come whining behind, every one with a (...) about her; whatsoever
that was.

CAP. XXIV. De Ministerio Funerarum and Siticinum.
TO set forth the mourning with a better grace, as the Jews had See Jerem. c
9. v. 17.
(...), and the Romans Praeficas: so they also had their singing Women of
purpose to lead the dance, (...), or (...), as Il. O.
Homer calls them; or (...), as Nonnus. And since vocal Music might be
allowed, I marvel very much why Admetus upon the death of his Wife should be
so strict against any Isntrumental, either with the Harp or the pipe. Eurip
Alc. v. 430.
(...)
(...) --
Especially considering the virtue supposed to be in it, of mounting up the
Soul into the Heavens, the original of all harmony according to that of*
Macrobius, Mortuos quoque ad sepulturam prosequi oportere cum cantu plurimarum
gentiu^ vel regionu^ instituta saenxerunt persuasione hac, quia post corpus
animae ad originem dulcedinis musicae, id est ad coelum redire credatur. Indeed
for the Harp, I have read, that they might not sing (...), in such times of
mourning, because it was an instrument consecrated to the service of Apollo,
for Paan's, and such merry songs (as the reason is given upon the Scholiast
upon those words of the Poet in his Phaenissae, (...).) But for the Pipe, I
never knew but that they might sing (...). for else why were there (...) Pipers
among them? as there were Siticines among the Romans.

As many as came to the Funeral, brought along with them (...), one fine thing
or other, to carry in their hands, or to put upon the coarse; such as Admetus
in (...) Alc. v. 630.
Euripides denied his Father the liberty to give to his Wife, when all the
company besides had given before. (...).
I have some cause to think that some of those (...) which they carried, were
the Images and the Arms of the family of the party deceased; (for such they
were wont to have among the Romans) the more to honor the funeral. And if so,
then those (...) Ib. de v. 612.
(near the place above quoted) said to be carried by those which followed the
corpse, may be translated imagines, as well as grata munera. Or if it must needs
be grata munera, it must be meant to the gods of the dead, and not the dead
themselves.

But yet after all this, you may do well to take notice, of a great deal of
difference in the Pomp, according to the age of the party deceased for such as
had more age, had more honor then others. And therefore when Death told Apollo
(as he was interceding for the life of Alcestis) of a great deal more glory to
be gotten by the death of the younger sort, he replied, by no means; for (...).
If old she die she wall be richly buried.
And here, because I have such an occasion given me before I go any farther
with the Corpse, I will make bold to tattle a little more then I thought to have
done, concerning the customs used in mourning at Funerals, or any other time,
and first of the cutting of the hair.

CAP. XXV. De Capillis tondendis in Luctu.
THE Grecians upon any extraordinary occasion of sorrow and boldness (as the
Hebrews say) used to cut their hair (...) (as they called it) or to shave it
close to the skin. For so much may be gathered by those words of Lysias (cited
by Aristotle in his L 3. c. 10.
Rhetoricks) which he had in his speech for the Corinthians that dyed in the
fight with the Persians at Salamis* says he (...). It had been no less then
desert, if all Greece had been shaved at the burial of those gallant
soldiers that dyed at the fight of Salamis. If this suffice not, you may take
the testimony of Euripides, who would have the whole Country of the Cyclopians
to do the like. -- (...)
(...).
And he himself when he dyed (as Solinus reports) was mourned for after this
manner, by no worse man then Archelaus the King of the Macedons* In reference
to this custo^e, Strabo speaks of a Town in Cappadocia called Comona, from
the mourning-haire, cut in that place by Orestes and Iphigenia. So you shall
meet with the like practice of Tellus in the behalf of Phaeton: and of Bacchus
the god (as intonsus as he was) for the loss of his wife. Nay you shall find
Job himself at this very work upon the news of his Childrens death* and in
the Prophecy of C. 7. v. 29.
Jeremy you may read Cut off thy hair, and cast it away, and take up a
lamentation. It Is true, they were to be blamed for these follies, and in Tusc.
Q. l. 3.
Cicero you shall meet with a saying of Bion himself, deriding the use of this
custom in Agamemnon, Perinde stultissimu^ Rege^ in luctu capillu^ sibi
evellere, quasi calvitio maeror levaretu^, as if he aggravated the former
l^sse, of his friends, with another of his haire^, what if it be objected to
all this, (which we confess to be true too) that it was a custom to cut the
hair in token of joy? For first among the Jews, if you look into the Bible,
you shall find Joseph cutting his hair, when he came out of Prison; and
Ionathans Son, when he met with David for joy doing the like* nay that action
of Job it self, is by Origin (the Allegorical interpreter) thought to have
been an expression not of Sorrow, but of a kind of joy* or a cheerful
patience under his affliction. 2ly Among the Romans, you know their squallid
prisoners let their hair hang down long, that they might look the more
dejected, and so move the Judges to pity when they came to be tried. Ovid. In.
Epist.
Aspice demissos lugentis more capillos.
Whereas after their absolution or releasement, they presently cut it* and
therefore Pliny in one of his epistles interprets his dream of the cutting off
his hair, to be a token of his deliverance from some eminent danger. And last
of all for your Greeks themselves, that they let their hair grow long in times
of sadness, may appear by that of Lychophron. (...)
(...).
And that they cut it in times of joy; will be out of question if we believe
Artemidorus, who says that (...), the word for rejoicing comes from the word
which they use for cutting the hair. To reconsile these things, perhaps it may
suffice to say, That cutting their hair shorter by way of a (...), or a
trimming (as we call it) was a token of joy; but shaving it close, even to
baldness, of sorrow and dejection as among the Jews, Isaic 22. viz.
weeping, and mourning, and baldness were joined together. I know there are
some, that think to reconcile all, by saying as Plutarch says (in Romaicis)
(...), that That women expressed their sorrow by cutting their hair, and the
Me^ by letting it grow* which may be likely enough, because in sorrow, people
out of a dejected carelessness, love to appear as unhandsome as may be and
contrary to the usual fashion: now it was accounted a handsome thing, (and so
it was the custom too) among the Greeks, for Women to wear their hair long,
and the men to wear it short* but how is it then that in In Heaut. Act, 2.51.3.
Terence there is mention made of a Woman in mourning with long hair?

Capillus passus, prolixus, circum caput
Rejectus negligenter.
CAP. XXVI De ritu Lugendi in funere.
WHen any disaster befell such as were near of kin unto them, (...), etc. it
being a time for sadness, they forbear to drink any Wine, (which has a property
to make men glad) and confined themselves to that which the Scholiast calls
(...), a Barly-mash, (Ale, it is like.) But sorrow must be more then negative:
(negatives make an affirmative) and therefore, First, they used to tear their
cloths and their hair, Eurip.
after the manner of the Hebrews, and some times to fling their vailes in the
fire, (not in healths, but in sobs and sighs) as it is in Rhesus.

(...).
2 To throw their faces in the dust, or the dust in their faces, as the Romans
did after them. Ovid. Met. l. 8. fab. 9.
Pulvere canitiem genitor, vultusque seniles.
Faedat humi fusos --
Or sometimes ashes, as Achilles did, when he mourned for the death of
Patroclus, and the Argive Women for the death of their Sons at the Leaguer of
Thebes. Eurip. Suppl. v. 826.


-- (...)
(...): --
3 (...) (which is used for (...)) to beat their breasts and their thighs, and
cut and tear their flesh like a Jew: as one says Smyrnaeus. (...),
(...).
Making streakes and furrows with their nails in their face. (as In Hell.
Euripides uses the word (...).

-- (...))
4 To draine, and draw out at length, and repeat the interjection (...), and
from hence (if we may believe the Scholiast upon In Avib.
Aristophanes) comes the word (...) to be used for a song of lamentation
scilicet (...).

But at a funeral, so immoderate were they (especially the Women) in these and
the like expressions of sorrow, that Solon was feign to make this Law of
purpose to restrain them, Mulieres genas ne radunto, ne ve lessu^ funeris ergo
habento, Let no Women etc. Cicero De Legib.
Their customs they used at such times were these. First, when they came forth
of the house (and not only at the grave) every one lop'd off a lock of his
hair and it is noted by the Eurip. Alc. v 100.
Tragedian for a very ordinary practice, where he shows how it could hardly be
believed, that Alcestis was indeed buried, as they said she was, because
neither the pot of Holy Water, nor so much as a lock of hair could be seen at
the door, as they were wont to be.

(...).
-- (...).
2 As they went along with the corpse they kept their heads close covered, See
Esth^r. c 6. v. 12. and J^rem c. 14 v. 3.
and their faces: as other people do. And therefore Orestes, when he bid
Electra leave mourning, says he -- (...)
(...) --
Be uncovered etc.
In like manner Theseus (as it is in another In Suppl. v. 110.
Tragedy of the same Poet) when Adrastus came to petition his help (...), all
bemufled and covered in the habit of a Mourner, said to him (...).
They used likewise to lay their hands on their head, (as we do our heads upon
our hands.) So Id. v. 376.
Helen says of the Trojans (...).


3 Their manner of going, was to tread as softly as they could with their feet,
and make no noyce with their tongues (I mean the rest of the company, and not
those which they got for the purpose to Weep) (...)
(...).
Says the Chorus. In the book of l. 1. c. 21. v. 27
Kings it is said that Ahab lay in Sackcloth (...) and went softly* and so c. 38.
v. 15.
Isaiah says I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my soul
(...) though I know some translations render it otherwise.

4 When they come to the place of burial (for I mean to end the Mourning
first, and then to come to the rest) they would cut off all the best locks of
their hair ((...) or (...)) and lay them on the grave, or cast them into the
fire. And this they called (...), and (...) (as it is in Aristophanes) or (...)
(as in Aeschylus) or (...) (as in Sophocles) or (...) (as it is every where.)
All their best Locks I said; for I remember how Electra in Sophocles, was very
angry with Helen for dealing (...) deceitfully, and hiding the best of her
hair to save it, at the burial of Clytemnestra* for indeed (...), they should
with it all, says the Scholiast upon that Poet: who in another place has given
a reason or too for the action, viz. First to make them seem squallid, and
careless, and contemptible; whereas locks (...), are used for ornament, and
sprucenesse, as being (...) (as I may say) the Luxury of the hair. Then, it is
known that the Greeks were (...), and used to wear the hair long (...),
says the Il. (...).
Scholiast, both to please their friends and to fright their enemies. Nay they
took such a pride in having it so, (calling themselves (...), and such as cut
it to short (...)) that (...), signifying to wear hair long, has been used to
signify to be Il. (...).
proud.

2 (...). To get the good will of the deceased party, and the Manes. Some
again say it was done by none but a Parent, or a Foster-father, or Mother, by
way of thanks for their education, and so they called it (...), or (...). But
why then should Pausan.
Hercules do it to Sostratus he who was but his Ganymede Last of all, during
the whole time of Mourning for the dead (which Lycurgus confined to the space
of eleaven days) the Women were not to wear any Lycophr.
Jewels, neither was there to be fire or Candle light (which two at first were
but one thing, viz. Vid Suid. in (...) and Hesych in (...), Iuven. Sat. 3.
Wood for heat and light too.) (...), says an old Gloss, and to this custom
some do refer that in the Satyrist. Pullati proceres, etc.
-- tunc odimus ignem.
If the mourning were for a public calamity, all the palaestrae, and gymnasia,
must be shut up: together with the Baths and the Shops, and the temples
themselves. But it is time to return to the Corpse, and see it buried as soon
as I can for fear of giving offense (as I told you before)

CAP. XXVII. De via per quam efferebatur corpus, and de loco sepulturae.
THE ordinary way by which the corpse was carried was the gate called (...), so
called because they led to the (...), the Graves, or the Common place of
burial. This gate is sometimes called (...), Theoph. (...).
Sacrae portae, whether in opposition to the (...) (in Plutarch) or the (...)
(you may render it the Gates of Hell, I. Pollux.
in the Scripture phrase, or Scelerata porta as the Romans do) by which they
dragged the Malefactors; I am yet to seek: for Malefactors were to suffer death
without the Gates, as no others were to be buried within. It seems they
thought the dead by Law, and the dead by nature alike unclean, and so took the
like care to avoid the contagion of either.

The place of burial in ancient times for a King or a Prince, was wont to be
the foot of a hill, (to show that he might not be a Mountain Kings and Princes
are so called in Script. as Isaiah. 41, 15* etc.
for ever) according to that in Lycophron. (...)
Or that of Aen. 11.
Virgil. -- fuit ingens Monte sub alto
Regis Derceni terreno ex aggere bustum.
Lib de Orig. Gent. Romans
Aurelius says of King Aventinus Sylvius, that he was Sepultus circa radices
Montis cui ex se nomen dedit. unless you will say that those Montes were
nothing but that in a larger size, which tumuli were in the diminutive: and so
the hills must be made by the buryer as L 8.
Lucian says. Et Regum cineres extructo monte quiescant.
But for men of a lower rank, 'till the days of King Cecrops, it went to
higher then a Pit or a Cave, according to that of Theognis -- (...)
(...)
It Is true that in after times there were two common Churchyards (as I may
say) appointed for the purpose, called by the name of (...), Potters fields,
(...), one within the Walls, and the other without Aristophanes in his Ranae,
calls them (...), the Burialls or the Berryes. That burial place within
(otherwise called (...) by Thycidides) was for those that made an honorable end
in the Field for the good of the Commonwealth: the manner whereof I shall
mention perhaps in another place. The outer Ceramicus was distinguished into
several fields, and enclosures. And therefore we shall read. That sometimes
close to the Gates, sometimes by the way sides, according to that of Hector in
In R^es. v. 880.
Euripides, -- (...)
(...).


CAP. XXVIII. De Corporis crematione.
NOw for the usage of the bodies: when they came to the place of burial, says
the Scholiast upon Homer, (...), the custom was at first to burn them;
according to that of Quintilian. Declam. 10. Animam, quoties exonerata membris
mortalibus levi se igni lustraverit petere seeds inter astra. And the reason
was, says that Scholiast, because by this means the body might presently
consume all away to nothing. But that custo^e (I know not for what reason) was
not so well liked by other people. Insomuch that the Magi among the Diog. Lert.
l* 10.
Persians, thought it (...) a thing most profane (I fear me more for the Fire
then any thing else.) and therefore at length it came to be less used, so as
sometimes they would bourne them, and sometimes only cover them with earth.
Which is enough to prove, that there is no necessity that (...) a Grave, should
come from (...), to burn, as the Scholiast upon Aristophanes would have it.
but for ought I can find even in after times, among the Greeks, burial by
burning, was still esteemed the more honorable and stately way of the two: as
may appear by their unwillingnesse to have it common. For they denied the use
of it, First to Infants. 2 To such as killed themselves. 3 To suce as were killed
with Lightning or Fulguritis, struck with the Planet (as we say) who were to be
buried there where they dyed, or at least in some peculiar place apart, as we
do those that Hang themselves, or the like. And thus Capaneus, whom the
Athenians stoned to death, as he was scaling the walls (a thing invented by him
as some report) because they imagined him to have been shot to death by
Jupiter, must needs be buried (...) seorsum, so Adrastus says in Euripides*
(...)
And lastly to Traitors: on whom they were loath to bestow any burial at all.
Insomuch that Themistocles having been dead long before in Magnesia, the
Athenians in time of a Pestilence, though they had express command from the
Oracle, to fetch his bones and bring them to Athens, could by no means be
permitted by the Magistrates to do it, in regard he had dealt with Artaxerxes
to betray their Country* and therefore having obtained fifty days time to
celebrate his Funeral, as the fashion was (as I may say) in his picture,
having erected a Tent, closely conveyed thither his bones, and hid them in the
ground. The Original of this Law the Scholiast upon Homer fetches from Hector,
who in the time of the siege of Troy, threatened whomsoever he found leaving his
place treacherously in the fight, to kill him himself, adding withal, -- (...)
(...).
Upon which words you have this Scholy. (...). Hence came the Law etc. But I
must tell you after all this, that however burning and burying are so near in
their sound, they have been far enough distant in their being; at least in
some Countries. For at Rome it was not used in Macrobius his time. Among the
Greeks indeed it may be rather thought to have been discontinued only upon
dislike, then not to have been begun when it was not used. For one of them (I
know not his name) thinking the fire (which they esteemed pure and holy) to be
polluted by the dead body, which it was to purify, is reported by a Scholiast
upon Homer, to have cried aloud to Prometheus with these words, (...), O, pray
carry the fire back again where you had it. The first that ever gave example in
this kind, is reported to be Hercules. Who desiring of Licymnius to send his
son Argius to help him in the war with Laomedon for the horses, engaged
himself by an oath, to see him home safe to his Father again; but the son
being killed in the War he took him and burnt him, and carried his bones to
his father, (...) putting a fallacy upon him, as if he had had his son indeed,
when there was nothing left but the bare bones. And yet he used him better then
Cyniras K. of Cyprus, did Menelaus, who having promised him fifty ships with
men, sent him but one true ship, and pop'd him along with ships and men made
of clay for the rest. The story is likely enough, (...). Hom. Il. A.
but he that told me said he did not believe it, and therefore leaving the
argument of an example, gives a reason or two of the use of the custom, either
because (...), every dead thing is impure, and so it had need to be purified:
and the rather by fire, because it was commonly used to such a purpose, as
being (...), able to make that pure and chaste which before was adulterated with
Heterogeneous abasements and alloys: whence Euripides says of Clytemnestra's
body (...). Or else to show, how the divine and purer part of the man is
carried in the fire, as in a coach to be joined in society with the gods above,
(...) (how near this goes to express the fiery Chariot of Elias) (...). Which
Princes had no need of, if they could be carried upon Eagles wings: as I shall
tell you anon. Thus Scylla in Lycophron is said (...), to be made again by the
fire, and so to become (...), Ib. (...).
as he calls it. Thus the naked Sophisters of India ((...)) used to burn
themselves into that immortality, Cic Tusc. Q L. 5.
which they desired of Alexander, when he put them to ask what they would.

CAP. XXIX. De ritu Cremandi, sive comburendi corporis. De loculis and
reliquiis.
THE manner of burning, was to make a pyle of wood; and having laid the corpse
on the top, to set it one fire. according to that of Homer, where he speaks of
Hector, Il. O.
(...).
The wood was not all ways of one sort. But sometimes Oak: as in Herc. Fur.
v, 241.
Euripides, where you shall read of (...) Oaken billets, at the funeral of
Hercules his children. Sometimes Olive, as in In Trach.
Sophocles. And sometimes Pine, as in Atheneus: unless shall I say, L. 15.
that he confined the use of it to the burial of Virgins. If the party had
lost his life in a shipwreck, I have read that they made the fire of the planks
of the ship, -- ut corpus sepeliret naufragus ignis
Manlius l. 4.
Et collecta rogum facerent fragmenta carinae.
Thus to burn the bodies, they called it (...), and the Bone-fire it self
(...).

All the while it was burning, the mourners stood round about the Bone-fire,
and prayed to the Winds to blow, (for so Achilles in Homer is said to have done
at the burning of Patroclus) to make it burn the better. Not to put the
carcass (surely) but themselves out of the pain. If there happened to be a
very strong wind just at that time, they embraced it as an excellent good omen*
Still there was a (...), a Bell-man there ready to keep off any that should
offer to meddle with the bones. Ossa ne legito, says the Roman. When all was
burnt to the Bones, the next of the kin quenched the fire with red Wine. And
after that (...), Il (...).
they swept up the ashes together in a heap. The bones they took and washed
them in water brought in (...) pots for the Purpose, by the (...), (Women
appointed for that work, E^ym. Mag.
and for bringing Milk, and such other things as they used in the (...)) and
having anointed them with ointments, and the fat of a Sow; they wrapped them in
fine linen, and put them into a coffin which they called (...), or (...), or
(...). Il. (...).
(...).
The vessel, whatsoever it was, is in Lycrophon called (...), as if it were a
Pot: Idy l. 4.
and in Moschus (...), as if it were wont to be gilded. And in In Numa.
Plutarch (...), as if it were wont to be of stone. Methinks it may be called a
coffin, for I read it was usually made of Wood, viz. of Cedar, which is longest
a rotting, and is therefore called (...), the life of the dead. Indeed whether
it were ordinary to have such coffins, or only for those that had Sepulchra,
and vaults of purpose under ground to set them in, I cannot well tell. But that
there was such a thing, and that it was made of Cedar, the word (...), used
sometimes for the chest it self does seem to declare in those words of
Admetus desiring to lie with his Wife in the Grave-bed too. Eurip. Alc. v 365.
(...)
(...) --
A wish not unreasonable; seeing the thing desired was so usual both among the
Greeks and the Romans too, St Austins own Mother was of the same mind: for why?
Quos certus amor quos hora navissima juxit Ovid. Met. l. 4. fab. 2.

Componi tumulo non invideatis eodem.
The Athenians indeed seldom put above one man's bones in the same coffin: but
the Megarenses many times four, says Pausanias. The bones which they kept,
because they were that which the fire left, were called (...) or Relics. And
they were thus kept says the Scholiast upon Euripides in Orestes, (...) etc.
least they should be exposed to the rage of too deadly Enemies. If the party
were burnt in a foreign Country, his bones or his ashes were carried home in
the coffin, and pompously showed and adorned with Garlands in every place they
came to, according to that of Ovid. Ossa tamen faci^o parva referantur in Vrna
Sic ego non etiam mortuus Exul ero.
When they came where there were cross ways, those that were of kin to the
party, kept Compitalia-feasts, (...) Vetus Gloss.
(...), After they had laid it up among the Monuments, they cited the party
three times ('it was a number very superstitiously used by all nations) to make
his appearance. -- Magna manes ter vo^e vocavi.
(but of this already) Now the place where the coffin was put, Virgil.
was a Sepulcher common to all the rest of the family, only such as proved
Diog. La.
unthrifts, were excommunicated by Law, and branded with the name of (...).
Harpocr.


CAP. XXX. De Tumulis.
THE customs used in a cold burial were these* (and some of them used at a
burning too: as the Sacrifice, the speeches, and the plays) The peculiar place
of burial was usually chosen before they died, and marked with a black stone.
And when they came to be buried, a heap of earth thrown upon the body, (...),
etc. says Ulysses (in Hecuba Euripidis) agreeable whereto, is that phrase of
the same Poet in another place. (...) and the Latin word Tumulus a heap or a
grave. But (I think) for the better sort, they made it higher, and a little
handsomer, with stones, somewhat after the fashion of our Tombs. For so Theseus
told Hercules, the Athenians should honor his Corpse -- (...). Whether earth or
stones: it seems they desired to have it polished, as neat as might be, fast
and smooth. Ib. v. 836.
(...),
says the same Poet in Alcestis, and in Helena -- Ib. v. 992.
(...) The peosture which the body usually had in the grave, was with the face
toward the East says Diogenes Laert. in Democrito; toward the West, says
Plutarch and Aelian. On the stone which I mentioned, was written the name and
the condition of the party deceased, which they described commonly in verse.
Plato was for just four Heroic verses and no more. Such Epitaphes they called
(...), because they made known the party: as the Romans did Monumenta and
Memorias, because they made them remembered. And therefore the Lacedemonian
Soldiers, (says Justin) used to tie a ticket, or a note, about their wrests,
to certify of what condition they were; that in case they should dye in the
Fields, they might have a burial and a Monument, according to their quality.
Having thrown the earth upon him, the next work was to Sacrifice, and pray
that it might not lie too heavy. Sit tibi terra levis. Such a prayer as the
Chorus in Euripides used for Alcestis. -- (...)
(...).
Which benefit as they thought too great to be granted to a wicked U. 462.
fellow, or a (...).
Coward, so they thought it too little to be denied to another: and this made
Menelaus to fear so little to dye, for says he.

Eurip. Hell. v. 857.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
CAP. XXXI. De Infernis.
THe manner of Sacrificing to the Infernal gods, or the gods of the dead (for
infernum or (...) or (...), was a place for all alike) was to dig a ditch for
the Altar ((...)) (perchance to get the nearer to them) according to that
practice in Ovid. Haud procul egesta scrobibus tellure duabus
Met. l. 7.
Sacra facit.
The Victime then slain, Odyss 11.
was either a barren Cow, as Aen. 6.
Homer says -- (...), and Virgil.
-- Sterilemque, tibi Proserpina, vaccam.
Or else a black sheep, such as the old fellow saw slain at the grave of
Agamemnon Eurip. Electr. v. 513.
(...)
(...) --
And such as Seneca speaks of In Oedip. v. 556.
Nigro bidentes vellere, etc. the reason why they made choice of this color,
was either because it suited best with mourning: or because it was to the black
gods of the dark. For as L. 7.
Arnobius says, Diis laevi^ seeds habitantibus inferas color furvus est
gratior. Afterward it rose to an Ox; Plut. in Sol.
till it was forbidden by Solon. Whether it were Sheep or Bullock, or Hog: as
it was best, if it were a spayd or a barren female: so it might not be Ram
nor Bull, nor Boar. etc. (...), or (...), says the Scholiast; Hom. Il. (...).
and that for the same reason (as he says) for which at the same time they
offered down both their hair, and the Bristle-haire of the beast, which grew
upon his forehead, (...) viz. (...), that they might not give the dead, either
that which had life in it self, or that which could beget it in another thing.
Those setae, or bristle-haires, are in a peculiar manner termed (...), and the
offering thereof, (...), as in these words, -- (...)
Il. (...).
(...)
Thus rendered in the words of Virgil. Et summas carpens media inter cornua Setas
Ignibus imposuit --
Yea not only the beast which they slew; but all the rest which they suffered
to live, in the time of a public funeral, came under the hands of the Barber,
as well as the men: As appears by the practice of Mardonius and his Army,
reported by Herodotus, to have trimmed their Horses and Bullocks, and all, at
the funeral of Masistius. In the like manner Alexander at the funeral of
Hephaestion dealt with the Horses and the Mules, and the Walls themselves of
the Town of Echatanae (...) (as Aelian has it) shaving them (...) close to the
ground. And, I remember, in In Alcest. v. 429.
Euripides, Admetus desiring to celebrate his Wifes funeral in the best manner
that might be, gives order for the Coach-horses manes to be all cut. -- (...)
(...).
Then besides the victime they had (...) Libationes, which was usually (...),
honey and milk and wine; to which they added Cakes, if the Translator render
aright -- (...).
In Hell. v. 554.
Euripides. the manner of using these liquors, was first to go round about the
grave, and power out some as they went out of the bottle (as he Id. in Elect.
v. 530.
says (...)) and then to stand on the top, and do it there too, as Sophocles
says (...) etc. As they offered, they used certain speeches to the party
deceased, such as that was (...).
Together with prayers to the gods, and the ghosts of the dead, to be
propitious to them. And therefore those (...), were usually termed (...), and
(...), and (...): (...): and they made choice of the most proper liquors, for
to sweeten and supple them. Such a prayer is that in Euripides to the ghost of
Achilles, (...) etc.

Those Sacrificing offices were especially to be performed by the Kindred too
(as most of the rest were) and therefore Cassandra setting forth the sad
condition of the Leagurers at Troy, and their friends at home, says she, Their
Parents being thus bereft of their children in the Siege.

-- (...)
(...).
-- no body have
To let a victime blood upon their grave.
CAP XXXII. De Coronandis tumulis, and de Phyllebolia.
BEsides all this, there must be Garlands laid upon the grave too, as there
were before upon the the hearse and the corpse. And this action they called
(...), and the Garlands themselves (...) and that more properly then any of the
former, as being not only (...), made of a Collation, or a collection of all
sorts of flowers gathered together, but also made to be thrown (...), upon the
Earth. Sometimes indeed they made those Garlands of nothing but the flower
(...), (says L. 14. and 5.
Athenaeus:) and then the Garlands were called (...) too. And it may be
sometimes of (...) or Apium as I have occasion to think from that story of
Timoleon, who when he was to fight with the Carthaginians; there met him by
chance Mules laden with this Apium. The Soldiers being affrighted therewith,
because of the use which they knew to be made of that herb in funerals
(whence the proverb of on that is desperately sick (...), that he needs Apium)
refused to fight: but he told them, Nay, rather take courage, my Soldiers, and
make it an omen of victory, for there is use of the herb, when a man has won
the best at a fight, as well as when death has given him the worst. The first
beginning of this custom, is by Pilostratis ( in Heroicis) attributed to the
Thessali, when they did it to the grave of Achilles. The reason of it, says
Pedag. l. 11. c. 8.
Clemens, was to express the quiet condition of the dead, and their freedom
from care and trouble, (...). But I rather think with the Scholiast upon
Euripides, as I have formerly told you, that they intended it (...), to honor
the dead as they use to do the living, when they won the Game. For the same
reason, doubtless, was it that they did (...) (as they called it) fall a
throwing of boughs and leaves upon the grave: as Euripides says, they did to
Polyxna, when she dyed (for in latter times, if a man had won a race or the
like, they had a custom to bedeck his valiant corpse with boughs and leaves)
you have it done by an old fellow in Electr. v. 512.
Euripides with Myrt^e. -- (...)
Whether was there any allusion therein to the golden-bough or no? I think not:
but if you will, you may read more of that bough in Virgil, and in Servius his
notes upon him. It seems that in Italy they had the same customs. For says
Aen. 6.
Varo, ad Sepulchrum ferunt frondes, they carried leaves to cast upon the dead
trees. And that they took the pains to make Garlands too will appear by those
words of Min. Felix to Octavius, Coronas etiam sepulchris denegatis etc. nay,
Addunt nunc etiam lanam, says my L. 6. de L. L
Author, they came to wool at last, when they had more to spare.

CAP. XXXIII. De Columnis. de Oratione. and Ludis funeribus. and de Aquilis.
EIther upon, or close by the grave, they were wont to erect a Pillar, the
height whereof was not to be above three cubits by the Law. To the Pillar
sometimes they added, either the Image of the party, or of somewhat else to
resemble him. Thus Diogenes was honored with the Image of a dog, for being a
Cynick: and Isocrates with the Image of a Siren, for being an Orator. And it
puts me in mind of Admetus his over constant love to his wife; when he would
get the Image curiously made, and have it lie in the bed with him in her place,
for so he tells her. (...)
(...).
The honor which they gave the dead in commending him, was either by private
discourse at home at the feast, or by a public speech in the Ceramicus. Which
speech, if the party dyed in a battle, was to be made by one appointed by the
Magistrate, (ordinarily the Father or one of the Kin) and that not only at the
time of burial, but every year after: as Cicero says, Lib. de Or^^.
in Populari oratione mos est Athenis laudari in concione eos qui in praelio
sint interfecti: quae sic probata est, ut eam quotannis, ut scis, illa die
recitari necesse sit.

The first that began this custom of making speeches, some say, was Pericles,
who made one upon the death of those that were slain in the Peloponesian
war; and some. Solon. but besides funerall-speeches, they had funeral-
plays too, (...). both the Play and the Feast, commonly go under the name of
(...).

After I have thus vexed you, with a tedious company of fopperies, practiced by
the unhappy people of those times, even in burialls, when they should have more
wit: what will you say, if I have that yet left, which will please you all as
much, viz. that even they themselves for the most part, esteemed those
practices, both unprofitable to the dead, and vain and foolish in the living,
as may appear in the words of Hecuba her self, or the Eurip Tro. ad v. 1247.
Poet for her. (...),
(...)
(...).
I think it boots the dead the least of all,
How rich or poor they have the funeral,
It Is the livings vanity for this to call.
Having thus disposed of the body, they returned home. For the Soul they take
no care, unless it were a King or a Prince, whose souls they imagined (...)
to be carried into heaven upon Eagles Wings: and therefore was it, that they
were Artemid. l. 2. c. 20.
wont to honor them with the pictures of Eagles. So at Rome, when they buried
an Emperor, they used to let fly an Eagle over the grave. In allusion to this
Lycophron calls Achilles (...) an Eagle, because he carried about Hectors body
in a Coach.

CAP. XXXIV. De Lustratione Domus funestae, and de Parentalibus. etc.
BEing come home, they fell a purging and Lustrating the house with brimsto^e;
and themselves, by going through the fire; or some other lustration, for there
were several sorts thereof, and if I have leisure, I may chance to speak more
of it.) thus I remember in the Poet, it is said they did to the Kings house, who
was slain by Hercules: rounding the Alter with a Basket, and dipping the (...)
in the holy water, and I know not what more. Eurip. Herc. F. v. 923.
(...)
(...).
After this they kept a feast, (...) Silicernium, or circum potationem, as the
manner is with some of us. Those that were at it wore Garlands: Odyss. 17.
as Cicero says, quas inibant parents coronati. The color of their apparel
was white: and quis unquam caenavit atratus, says In vatinium Il. 24.
Cicero. But how is it then that Homer makes Thetis to go all in black to
Jupiter about the death of her Son? So I remember Admetus in Alc. v 427.
Euripides bids them mourn for Alcestis, (...), in black: and Venus in
Theocritus celebrated the funeral of Adonis (...) in a sky colored gown.
Perchance they wore black no longer, then till it came to the feast. This feast
they renewed again, not only nine days after, Po^lux l. 3.6.19.
when they called it (...), and thirty days after, when they called it (...)
(when they sacrificed to Mercury, that he might carry their souls to the
fields) but also upon the day of his death ever after; calling it (...) and
upon the day of his birth calling it (...). The common name for all these
feasts, or the common festival for all the infernal rites, and for all
persons, was (...), usually kept in the Month of Anthesterion: as the
Parentalia were by the Romans in the Month of February, in quibus parentabantur
manibus mortuorum when the Kindred especially ( les parens) did sacrifice both
to the earth, and the Gods under it and the ghosts of their Parents, or their
Ancestors above it.

Of all these Funeral rites that I have named, none that had been an enemy to
the person deceased, might be suffered to bear any part: as appears by the
words of Electra to Chrysothemis forbidding her to sacrifice, (...)
(...) --
Nor so much as come near the grave, as Ulysses in Sophocles is forbid to do
to the grave of Ajax. Nay such was Sepulchralis sanctitas, (says Tully,) that
no stranger might be suffered to do it, for fear he might be an enemy.
Moreover a law was made to forbid any one to take away from, or add any thing
more to the monuments, then what was already made.

And now it is high time to leave the body in the Mouth of death,) for so Il.
(...). Psalm 49 14.
Homer calls the grave) to be gnawne like a sheep, by the never satisfied teeth
of a hungry (...) For (...), he that is buried, and laid in a Sarco-phagus in
the belly of the earth, is as properly said to be devoured, as what is devoured
and enclosed in the stomach of a Whale or a Vulture, or any ravenous creature,
is commonly said to be buried (...). For so the Vultures are called H* mog.
(...), living graves: nay the Metaphore is commonly made reach to men
themselves, some of whom, even their mouths are open sepulchers, as well as
the bellyes have been of others. As that of Tereus when he eat his Son. --
Seque vocat bustum miserabile nati.
And of Saturn when he did the like. Nay being buried, and being devoured,
have been counted so synonymous, that (as Lactantius says) Saturn was thought
to have been said, to have eaten his Sons, L. 1. c. 13.
because he buried them where they might not be seen. Well, it cannot be helped:
these great eaters Death and the Grave are all mouth, and no ears, like the
belly. There Is no stopping nor filling their mouth. (...), says Aeschylus,
Pluto has no Altars. He is inexorable, and therefore called (...) in Euripides.
Neither (says a On. Hom. Il. 1.
Scholiast) was Death ever known to have an Altar but at Gadira, I know not
wherefore. Let us see therefore that his Wife be the more made of, now he is
gone.

His Wife if she seemed to be with child, was taken into the care and
protection of the Archon, least she might be cunningly persuaded to marry with
whom she should not; and if any man offered to wrong her, the punishment was
arbitrary. The children were committed (...) to a Tutor. He that was to (...),
to be overseer or Guardian, was either not to be of Kin at all; or else so
far off, that if the child should happen to die in his nonnage, the
inheritance could not fall to him. A Tutor was either by will or by appointment
of the Archon. Which way soever it were, he was (...) (says Aeschines) and had
the mannaging of all the affairs, till they came to be twenty year old: and
then either they themselves, or any else that would, might sue out (...), a
writ Male administratae Tutelae, and have him before the Archon. But this must
be done within five years after the Pupil came to be of age, or not at all.

LIB. VI.
SECTIO. I. De Supplicationibus and juramentis
CAP. I. De Supplicibus sacris. De asylis and aris.
HAving taken this care to see the Marriage of himself, the Education of his
children, and the honorable Burial of his Body, it will be expected that now
I say somewhat in commendation of his conditions, and concerning his manner of
Life, either toward the gods, or toward Men. Of his carriage toward the
gods, because there has been something already done in that kind, I shall not
speak so largely; only a word or two, or more of the customs used in
Supplication to, and in Swearing by the gods: and then I shall proceed to his
actions toward Men, whether his friends in making merry with his equals, and
giving to the Poor; or his Enemies in waging of War. This Treatise, because
of the diversity of subjects, you have divided into three several Sections,
the first of Supplication called by them (...).

The person of a distressed Petitioner (as an abused slave or the like) whether
he addressed himself to men or to the gods, but especially if to the gods, was
to be looked upon as Sacred and inviolable, as appears by the Oracle, sent
from Dodona's Vocal Forest to the Athenians, related by Pausanias. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
For if he came flying to such or such Altars as were appointed to be (...)
none might touch him upon pain of exilement. And therefore is it that
Polydorus in Euripides makes it such a ground for his confidence: says he --
(...).
The Altars are not far off. So in another Tragedy, when Helena kept hanging
upon the Bed for her refuge, Menelaus wondering thereat, Eurip. Hell. v. 805.
what (says he) do Altars want, or is it the Barbarian mode? And no wonder
that they thus fled to Altars, or that others feared to meddle with, or to slay
any body near them: viz: because they thought the blood would be upon them that
should do it, yey though the Supplicants were already dead in the Law. For so
the Chorus in Ion tells Creusa, the Law forbids any Petitioner to be put to
death, True (says she) but I must be killed by the same Law. No matter
(replies the Chorus) sit fast, and if any one kill thee there Ib. v 125^.
(...).
Thy blood shall be upon him.
Insomuch that a great many even among them, seeing malefactors thus protected
from the Law, and consequently encouraged to the transgression, were bold to
complain of the injustice of it, as you have Ion in the Tragoedy, thus (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
I said before, such or such: because it is thought that not any of the Altars
or Temples had this privilege, but only six viz. Misericordiae, Minervae,
Eumenidum, Munichiae, and two of Theseus Temples, one within and another
without the Walls. The first of these some say was the first Alylus that ever
was made, erected by Hercules his Grandchildren, to preserve them from their
enemies, according to that of Servius ad Aen. 8. Postquam Hercules migravit e
terris, nepotes ejus timentes insidias eorum quos avus afflixerat Athenis sibi
primi Asylum, hoc est, templum misericordiae conlocarunt, unde nullus posset
abduci. An example imitated by other People, almost in every country. For they
thought that otherwise a beast had a safer condition then a man. (...). But is
he now safe for ever? yes, unless they made a fire, and burnt him out of the
hole, as we use to do eeles, etc. And thus he in Plautus threatened to do. In
Rud. Act 3. Sc. 4.
Ibo Hercle aliquo quaeritatum ignem
Ignem magnum hic faciam --
and Hermione in Euripides to Andromache sheltring herself by the Altar of
Thetis. (...) -- on which the Scholiast thus (...), etc. And yet all (...) or
Petitioners, were not so afraid of a fire. As appears by the name of (...),
which they have from flying to hearths, the place for the fire, for refuge: as
Themistocles did, when being Ostracis'd and banished, he fled to Admetus King
of the Molossi for shelter. Otherwise none that fled thither, could be so
wicked, but they counted him worse that should meddle with him. Insomuch that
those who killed the followers of Cylon (though they plundered the Temple of
Minerva) because they killed them hanging on the Altars, were ever after
themselves, and all other such profane companions after them called (...), as
who should say, hinderers (...) supplication. Profane, I said, for it was no
better then profanation, according to the Poet, (...), the Garlands are
Polluted* Eurip in Heracl.


CAP. II. De tangendis genis, manibus, genibus.
PEtitioners both to the gods and Men, used to go with (...) Garlands about
their necks, or green boughs in their hands In O^d.
(...) (says the Scholiast on Sophocles) to beget respect, and amuse the
beholders. Those green boughs are called by the several names of (...), and
sometimes (...) for In Aul v. 1216.
Iphigenia wanting them, told her Father she would make her own body supply the
room thus (...)
(...) --
In those boughs they put wool, (as we do silk in posies) and so called them
(...), Aeschyl in eum.
vittatas laureas. (...)
(...).
The wool was not tied, and so fastened to the bows, but only wreathed and
wrapped up in them: and (it may be) therefore it was that Aethra in the Tragedy
of the Theban Women petitioners (v. 31.) called it (...) the Tie without a
knot. The Italians used such boughs too, as it seems, for Virgil says Iamque
oratores aderant ex Vrbe Latina
Velati ramis oleae veniamque rogantes.
And Livy speaks of the like pactise of the people of Rhodes. The boughs were
either of Laurel or Olive. Stat. Theb. l. 12.
Vittatae laurus and supplicis arbor Olivae.
First because both those kinds are (...) not subject to withering, and
therefore In Ion. v. 1436.
Euripides gives the latter the epithete of (...). 2ly, Because the Laurall was
sign of prevailing, and the Olive of Peace and good will, as Lactantius sais,
per quam pax petitur supplicando. Now the custom was with those boughs, if
they were doubtful of prevailing, to touch but the knees of the man whom they
Petitioned, or of the statue of the god, just as Dion. Halic.
Lucretia did (...). But if hopeful; the hands. Soph Oed. T.
(...). And if confident; the chinne, l 4.
and the cheeks, (...) Eurip. in Heracl.
(...). It is said by a Comment upon Pindar in his (...). (where the Poet
desires to touch Aeacus his knees, when he prays for a Gale of success for
the Aeginetae) that when they desired the parties consent, they touched the
head to have at annuere: when his help, his helping hand; when success, the
knee. The Last I know no great reason for, but history enough, even from the
Natural Historian himself. Hominis genibus quaedam religio inest observatione
gentium; haec supplices attingunt ad haec manus tendunt, haec ut aras adorant.
All his reason is, because of the abundance of spirits in the hollow of the
knee, fortasse quia inest iis vitalitas, quippe quorum inanitate fossa, ceu
jugulo, spiritus fugiat. And therefore Homer makes the Litae, the Petitioners
gods to be lame. As good as that of Zenobius (...), because Judges had that
upon their knees then, which now they write in their books.

If the Petitioners were very fearful, and the persons of very great quality,
they would bow so low as to kiss his feet: Xenoph. l. 7.
as those did to Cyrus, (...). It was either this kiss, or a kiss of their
own hand, which they anciently termed labratum. The old gloss calls it (...).
I have read of a kiss of the hand when they did the reverence to the Gods,
with putting the forefinger over the thumb (perhaps upon the middle joint,
which they used in counting for the number of ten) and then giving a turn on
the right hand, as it is in In Gurculi
Plautus, Quo me vortam, nescio. Si deos salutas, dextro vorsum, censeo.

The safest place for a Petitioner to men too, as well as to the gods (as I
have already told you) was the hearth or the fire whither they presently ran,
when they came to any strange place in travel, or exilement, as to the only
Altar of the house, and the gods thereof. For according to that of Cicero in
his oration for his house, Nihil Sanctius, nihil omni religione munitius, quam
demus unicujusque civium. Hic arae sunt, hic foci, hic dii penates, hic sacrae
religonis ceremoniae continentur: hoc perfugium est ita sanctum omnibus, ut
inde arripi neminem fas sit. When they had once seated themselves there in the
ashes, in as mournful posture as might be: they need not open their mouths for
pity; neither was it the custom so to do. For those actions speak loud
enough; and an eye would serve for hearing.

(...).
(...) etc.
This was the Odyss 7.
practice of Ulysses at the house Alcinous. L 4. Argon.
and of Themistocles at the house of Admetus; but so as first, by the
instruction of the Queen, he took the Kings little son along with him for his
guard, Thyciddid.
(...), the only way in use among the people to obtain a request.

If they fled to the gods for refuge or for help, their fashion was first to
crown the Altars with Garlands, and then to pray, that their desires might be
crowned with success. Eurip in Aclest.
(...)
(...)
(...).
Their usual gesture in praying, was to hold up their arms right toward
heaven, as Eurip. He^len v. 1 100.
Helen says -- (...)
(...) --


But to wrest their hands as far as they could upon their wrests. According
to that of Aelchylus, where he says of Prometheus, that though the gods had
tied him fast to the hill, his stomach was so great, that he said he scorned to
submit or pray manibus supinis, with bended hands like Women and children.
(...).
Now sometimes, if they obtained their request and it were a matter of
consequence, you should have them relate it to the Priest of the Temple to be
registered; or write it down in a Table, and leave it behind them, to show for
a testimony.

CAP. III. De generibus and locis sacrificiorum.
AND now we are in, let us even out with a little more of that which we have
observed in reading, concerning their manner of serving their Gods. Their
divine services in respect of the cause or occasion, were 1. (...), or (...),
vota, free will offerings. Services promised and paid for a victory or the
like. -- Ovid. Met. l. 9.
Cenaeo sacra parabat
Vota Iovi --
2ly (...), such as were imposed, and commanded by an Oracle.

-- Sophoc on Trach.
(...).
In respect of the object (that is to which of the gods they were formed) they
were done either 1o (...) to the gods under ground, and that (...) in a ditch
dig'd* or plowed up for that purpose. The Latins called it Ara, such as they
used when they sacrificed to the Heroes, (for whom they had also (...) Temples
and Plays, and what not) together with the Schol. in Arist. in Avib.
Image of Vulcan made of clay, to set it forth. 2ly (...), to the gods upon
ground, much in the same manner* and 3ly (...), to the gods above ground,
(...), upon an Altar raised up high from the ground, which the Latins
therefore called Altar, and the Greeks Soph. in Trach.
(...), and Eurip. in Heracl.
(...), as if it were a work, vallum, or Agger, made of earth cast up
together. The distinction betwixt (...) and (...), is set down by the
Scholiast on In Pheniss.
Euripides thus (...) is an Altar built up high with an ascent of several
steps (...) is as it were one step it self, after the fashion of some hearths
in the figure of a quadrangle* (just as they made their (...) Schol in
Aristoph. Eccles.
wherein they powered oil and wine, and tempered it with the dust, to make
cakes for the devil) The occasion given him to make this distinction, was the
words (...) in the Author: whereupon he notes that (...) was there used in a
large sense, for the hole, (...), or the concavitie in the top of the (...) for
the fire. At the making of a (...) (and so at the making of a Statue to be
worshipped) they had a custom (...), for women in garments of several
colors, to carry about pots of several sorts of boiled pulse, and to offer
thereof to the Schol in Aristoph. in Pluto.
gods.

-- (...)
(...).
They made it commonly of earth heaped together, and so it may be called (...)
or tumulus, as it uses to be sometimes of ashes; sometimes of earth and blood
tempered together; sometimes of stone, and sometimes of wood. For the figure,
it was sometimes long, and sometimes square; but most often Odyss. (...).
(...), round: as the Theater, the marketplaces, and their Tables used to be.
The places where they made their Altars, were usually Mountains and
high places (so often objected to the heathenish Israelites) for according to
the Scholiast upon those words of In Trach.
Sophocles, (...) etc. (...), every Mountain was called by Jupiters name, or
consecrated to Jupiter, because the god being in a high place, it was fit to
sacrifice to him in a high place, to be heard the better; as it was to the
terrestrial gods in a low, to come nearer to them. Besides, the Altar in such
a place, was the less in danger to be got up upon, and profaned, as being kept
(as the same Scholiast says) (...), holy and untroden.

3ly In respect of time, some do say that they sacrificed to the Hero's,
Pindar. Isth. D.
(...); in the evening; and to others in the morning.

Lastly in respect of the matter or the thing sacrificed, it was either (...)
of living creatures, Schol. in Eurip.
properly called (...) or else of things without life; and those either (...)
dry, as corn and flower, or (...) wet, as Wine, or Milk, or Honey, usually
called by the name of (...). The first Pythagoras could not endure, as thinking
it unnatural to kill any thing; and so was all for his (...), wherein there
was no blood, or (...), (as Thucidides calls them) where there was no smoke,
or Suidas.
(...), where there was no Wine. But every one else almost like't it too well,
and no such glorious a business as an (...), a whole burnt sacrifice.
Sometimes greater then a Suovetauralia, and consisting of a Sow, a Bull, a
Ram, and a Goat: and sometimes but a (...), of a Sow, a Ram, and a Goat. I
hardly believe they ever went so high as an hundred, notwithstanding -- (...).
Out of every Sacrifice one part went for a fee to the Prytanes, or Comissaries,
unless they were robbed of their due: as it seems they were sometimes, by him
in the Poet, threatening to complain of one that did so, Aristo^, in Equit.
(...)
(...)
(...)


CAP. IV. De generibus and formulis jurandi.
O (...) an Oath, (the Son He^iod.
of Eris, and yet the end Ep. ad Heb. 6.16.
of all contention) was of two sorts, viz. (...), and (...), the greater, Idem.
in Theogon,
and the less. The greater oath was either of men by the gods: or of the gods
themselves, by the Stygian Lake. (...).
Which is the cause why some fetch the word (...) an oath, from Orcus Hell.
This Oath was then invented by Jupiter, and prescribed by him to the rest of
the gods, when he had the assistance of Styx, and his Sons against the Titans;
or when he drank of the water, to quench his thirst in the fight. Servius
says (out of Orpheus) that if any god had sworn false, or broken his oath when
he swore by Styx, he was to be punished for it in hell nine thousand years.
Which order, even Jupiter himself submitted to, and therefore took the more
care how he swear, as Minutius says, Destinatam enim sibi cum suis cultoribus
poenam praescius perhorrescit. He that swore either of these ways, was
properly said to (...), and to yield himself up to the mercy of those that
were able to punish him, if he called them to witness that which was contrary
to his knowledge, or his meaning. So that sometimes it was the custom to add
an imprecation of some evil, wherewith he knew them able to punish him, if the
swore false. As Telemachus does in Homer.

(...)
By Jove, and the sorrows of my Father.
The Women's oath was commonly by Juno; and by my Lady Diana, as In Elect.
Clytemnestra uses in Euripides, (...), much like the superstitious oath of By
my Lady, among some of us. The gods, by whom the m^n were to swear by the
appointment of Solon, were three (or if you will, one Jupiter (...) with three
names) viz. (...), and (...). For that Jupiter was the proper Custos
juramentorum, (as I may call him) if it do not appear, (as some say it does
in the word jusjurandum, quasi Iovis jurandum, it will sufficiently be proved
by the plain testimony of the Poet, that says -- (...) Eurip. Med. v. 170.

(...).


But so far were they from being contented to swear by none but Jupiter,
that not only, any other of the gods, but any of their own men lately dead, and
thought to be deified, did serve the turn: as when Demosthenes swore by (...),
those that valiantly dyed in the battle of Marathon. Sometimes for over much
have or confidence, or some such reason, they left it to the party, to whom
they swore, to choose any of the gods, whomsoever him pleased to be tried by: in
this manner, (...), as we say, I Will lay you what you will. This form you may
find used by Plato in Phaedro, and by Aristenetus in his Epistle of L. 2. Ep. 2
Euxith^us to Pythias. Sometimes they swore by many gods together in the
plural number, without specifying whom they meant. And sometimes by all their
twelve gods, (as the Lacedaemonians did by their two (...) Castor and Pollux)
Aristoph. in Equest.
(...)

(...) -- by the whole jury of the gods, (neither honest nor true; only they
thought them to be Majorum gentium, of the higher house, and Deos consentes,
and so they put them together.) Other times again, they swore by this or that
god in particular, to whom either the affairs they handled, or the place where
in they were, especicially belonged: expressing his name. For so in the Market
in buying and selling, or the like business, they commonly swore this Oath
(...), by Mercury. But then you should have some that out of mere
deisidaemony, would say no more then (...). By etc. (...), with a Aristoph. in
Ran.
rel^gious aposiopesis, forbearing to name the God. Hitherto you may reduce the
oath by an oath it self, Pind. Nem.
(...) or (...) with (...) before it, in the Poets, was for an affirmative
oath: and (...) for a negative.

CAP. V. De riitbus in Iuramento Magno.
THE customs in taking a Great oath, if it were in a public manner, and by
way of vindication of the truth, were these. The gods used to lift up their
hands, as Apollo in the Poet bids Lachesis (...). Little thought he how the
Scripture makes the like action of the true God in several places. Men when
they swore a great oath, laid down their hands upon the Altar, as we do upon
the New Testament: whereas in a less, or in a private oath, made to such or
such a Man, by way of a bargain or a promise, according to the Roman fashion,
they laid their hand, upon the hand of the party to whom they swore. This
ceremony, I remember, Menelaus in Helen v. 834.
Euripides demanded of Helen v. 834.
Helena besides the words of her oath.

(...).
2ly To honor the gods by whom they swore, they sacrificed the life of one of
these three beasts, Arist in Lusist.
(...), and (...). a Boar, a Ram and a Goat: or all three, and of every
sort one or three of one of the sorts, as Adrastus was made to do of the three
sheep, in behalf of the Argivi.

-- Eurip. Supl. v. 1200.
(...) which they called (...). Sometimes when they killed a Boar, they cut
out the stones ((...) and (...) are pretty near kin) and stood upon them as
they swore. A Ram or a Boar thus used is properly called (...). Perhaps they
used to sacrifice Pigges chiefly (as the Romans did) at the confirmation of
Leagues and Truces. And good reason choice should be made of that beast, rather
then any other in swearing too, since there was so great account made of it in
other businesses, as solemn as that. For 1. Jupiter was nursed by a Sow, (say
some) and concealed by the noise of the grunting: and therefore with the
Cretians his Country men, there might be no initiation without it. 2ly Varro De
Re Rust.
says, pecoris immolandi initium sumptum a suillo: that it was the first beast
that was Sacrificed. which made some think that (...) was so called, quasi
(...), and Sus quasi Thus. Nay it was a creature so greatly sacred, (or
employed to a sacred use,) that Sacres by it self, is used for little pigges
consecrated for a Sacrifice. Clem. Alex. in Strom.
The flesh that was wont to be eaten in other Sacrifices, in these was not to
be Arestoph. in Lusist.
eaten at all, except it were by the worms and the fish. For either they
buried it in the Eustath. in Il. (...).
ground, or else threw it into the Sea: as Talthybius did the Sow, which was
sacrificed at an oath of Agamemnons.

CAP. VI. De juramento Parvo and ejus ritibus.
(...), or the little oath, was when they swore by a creature (and their gods
were hardly so much) such as per Cramben, or by a Goose or a Dog, (...) or
(...) as the Socraticks did, having that practice commended to them by their
own Master: who as it is in the Scholies upon In Avib.
Aristophanes) in his twelfth Book (...), had told them that Rhadamanthus the
justest man that ever lived, had expressly forbid them to swear by the gods;
but instead thereof had allowed them the use of a Dog or a Goose, or a Ram,
or such like creatures. Sometimes they swore by the ground they stood upon, as
V. 1025.
Hippolitus does, in Euripides.

-- (...).
Sometimes by their Nets, or by any other thing which they made use of. If the
matter were serious, you might hear them swearing by their right hand, or by
their head, as he does in Virgil.

Per Caput hoc jur^, per quod Pater ante solebat.
Which was the reason (says Atheneus) first, why they accounted the head
(...), L. 2*
holy and Sacred. 2ly Why they did (...), bow the knee at a Sneeze. 3ly Why the
old Philosophers made such a scruple to eat of the head of any kind of
creature. And 4ly Why they used this oath but seldom, accounting it (...), as
Helena called it when she swore to Menelaus, Eurip. in Hell. v. 841.
though it were by his head, and not her own, (...). The Customs used both in
the Little and Great oaths too, in abjuring and purging of crimes, were
sometimes, creeping upon their hands through the fire, or holding in their hands
a red hot Iron, ((...) they called it, such a thing as Anaxagoras, and his
Scholar Euripdes Schol Eurip. in Hell.
took the Sun to be) supposing (as the Scholiast says upon Sophocles) (...),
that if they were not guilty of the crime, they should not be sensible of the
pain. Thus the fellow in Antigone would have taken his oath to Creon, that he
buried not Polynices. The like custom, we read to have been in use among the
Saxon ancestors, and for the same purpose, under the name of Fire-Ordeal. For
Emma the Mother of King Edward the Confessor, passing blindfolded in the spaces
between a great many red-hot Plow-shares laid on the ground: and Kunigund the
Wife of the Emperor Henry the second holding a red-hot Iron in her hand,
receiving no hurt thereby, cleared themselves of the crime of Adultery laid to
their charge. Sometimes they took the Iron and threw it into the Sea, solemly
vowing to keep the oath without breaking, as long as the Sea should the Iron
without swimming. -- Callimach.
(...).
Sometimes (as I have known Boys do among us) they wrote the oath in a Paper,
and threw it into the water: if it swamme, and the water could endure it, he
swore true; but if it sunk, and the water would not suffer it to be seen, he
was to be punished immediately without more ado. And this puts me in mind of
that oath of Adrastus, and the Argivi, for amity and League with the Athenians,
which the Poet says they would have written in the hollow of a tripus, and the
tripus to be sent to Delphos to Apollo, to be there kept for a testimony, and a
memorial. (...)
to be produced when occasion should require. So Achilles Tatius (in his 8th
book de Clitophontis, and Leucippes ammoribus) speaks of a custom, if a Wench
were accused of Whoredom, to have her make a formal oath of denial, and
having written the oath in a table, to stand in water up to the shinnes, with
the table about her neck. If she were chaste, and had sworn true, the water
remained as it was: but if not, (...) (says he) the very water grows angry at
it, and never leaves swelling, till it get up as high as her neck and cover the
table; least so horrid a sight as a false oath, should look the Sun and the
World in the face.

CAP. VII. De perjurii religione.
IF a man made a conscience of swearing aright, he was counted religious
indeed. Insomuch that (...), was commonly used for (...), (...).
in Hesiod. and -- (...). In Plut.
in Aristophanes. Whereas on the other side, when they expressed a very wicked
man, they made use of the word (...) perjurious. And therefore Aristophanes (in
nubibus) speaking of Jupiters lightnings and thunderbolts, which some said,
that they did more hurt to the wicked then to others, says he (...), if
perjured men are only liable to be struck, how comes it to pass that Cleonymus
and Theodorus escape so well? or that the poor Oak tree is so often hurted
(...) since it can never be perjured Such as were common and customary
swearers, for ill making, as well as for ill keeping of oaths, were branded
with the name of (...) from (...) (says Hesychius) the place where the oaths
used to be administered. Now for the punishment of such vile persons, they
supposed the furies every fifth day to have a visitation, and to walk the
round, for no other purpose: according to that of In Dich.
Hesiod. (...)
(...) --
and therefore Agamemnon when he swore that he never had to do with Briseis,
called the Furies to witness too, as well as the Earth and the Sun.

-- (...)
(...)
Nay in some places, the insensible creatures seemed to be sensible of the
sin and save the furies a labor. For I have read that in a Temple at Palice
a City in Cicily, there were certain crateres or fonts, out of which there
rose sometimes flames, and sometimes hot boiling water: and that thither people
used to resort from other places, for deciding of Controversies by taking an
oath. For if any one swore false near these fonts, he was presently stricken
blind, or lame, or dead in the place. Besides these there were other means of
their own appointing to affright men from perjury. Such as that of the image of
Jupiter (...), Pausan. in Eliac.
(...), which they made in the most dreadful manner of any viz. with
Thunderbolts in his hands, and a plate of brass at his feet, on which were
engraven certain Elegiacall verses, composed of purpose to terrify such as
durst to invocate that god in falsehood. All this moved the Lacedaemonians little
or nothing, if that be true which the Poet said of them.

(...).
Which you will say is very likely, if you remember the saying of Lysander, one
of their own generallls, (...), fallere oportere pueros astragalis, hosts
autem juramentis.

SECT. II. De Ritu Convivandi.
CAP. I. De Leschis, and de tempore victus caepiendi.
WHat ever they talk of Atticus moriens porrigit manum, (as if an Athenian
were charitable, and so he died) for my part, I have found him to be of a very
good nature, both to the Stranger, and the Poor, and among his companions as
merry as a Greek. Of the goodness of the Athenian natures, I can give you two
or three very pregnant testimonies, whereby I shall make it appear, how tender
hearted they were, not only to men in philanthropy, but even to Brute Beasts.
For the first you may hear it from Demosthenes his own mouth, whom, as he was
going into Exile (a time not so safe for such expressions) they brought going
on the way, and carried every one something under his arm, to furnish him for
his journey, insomuch that at parting he cried out (...). How shall I endure to
leave such a City, wherein the very enemies are as good as a man can find
friends any where else. For the last you shall have two pretty instances, as I
had them from the same Author. The first is of an Areopagite, whom they
expelled the house for killing a Sparrow which being pursued by anothir bird
fled into his bosom for shelter. Phoc. cod. 1591.
(...). (says he) as if he had not done righteous things. (...), not so much
out of love to the Sparrow, as hatred to his conditions. The last is of one
Praxitiles, whom for skinning a Ram alive, they punished much after the same
manner, as the Ram was (...). The goodness of his nature among his
companions, appeared either in eating and drinking, or merry talking, and
discourse. For there is (...), says Theophrastus, good cheer in words, as
well as in meat and drink. Aristophanes calls it (...) eating of words, Plautus
comedere sermones. And it may be they might be made sometimes to eat their
words indeed, if they prated so much as by all men's report they did. Theophr.
For they were so (...) (as the character terms them) so employed (...), in
disseminandis and spargendis rumoribus; and were so much given to spend their
time in nothing else, but either to hear or to tell some new thing, Act. 17^21.
that I wonder with what face, they could call St. Paul (...). Though I know
some do rather choose to fetch the word from (...) to gather, as the Scholiast
on Aristoph. interprets (...) to be (...), such as watch for loose things that
drop out of cariages, and gather them up. The places where they met and
discoursed were either the Baths, or the Vaults, and the Porches for the better
sort: or Trades^mens shops for the meaner, like the Roman Tabernae; Nulla
Taberna meos habeat, nec pila libellos. Their meetings in this kind, but
especially those in the shops and the places themselves, and the coufabulations
therein, they called (...) says Euripides. And yet Sophocles in Antigone durst
call the convention indicted by the King, by the name of (...) too. Now those
shops were commonly Perfumers or Barbers, whence the proverb (...) used by
Polybius, i. e. Barbers talk, (as we say) Lie like a tooth drawer.) But
especially Smiths, and such as made use of a Fire; being free for any that
would warm themselves, and without any doors, as the Scholiast upon those
words in Hesiod l. 2. Concerning (...) etc. (...) (says he) (...). And to this
belongs that of Homer.

Il. TH.
(...)
(...).
The discourse was for the most part de Lana Caprina (as they called it) or de
Gerris Siculis, childish and Idle, well befitting such Geruli figuli, as most
of them were. But the Philosophers that met in the (...) which Hierocles speaks
of, had better discourse. These places were consecrated to the honor of
Apollo, who is therefore said to have the name of (...) (so says Suidas; but
it should be rather (...), says Meursius.) the reason was, because such
meetings were, or should be in the day time: and sometimes in the Sun.

Their merriment in eating and drinking, at a set meal amongst themselves, was
anciently, but once a day at supper (as it was with the Romans.) but afterward
more often, and how often (for ought I can find by the Scholiast upon Homer in
several places) it is not easy to determine. Some say, there were four meals
a day, viz. 1. (...) or (...), the Breake-fast. 2. (...), the Dinner 3. (...),
the Beaver. 4. (...), the Supper. Just so many Atheneus has, but in this order,
viz 1. (...). 2. (...). 3. (...), or ( Vesperna) 4. (...). Others make but
these three. 1. (...). 2. (...). 3. (...). You see that (...), is the last
meal still, and so it is in Aristophanes, In Vesp.
who after (...) supper time, makes it to be presently Bedtime. To any of
these meals if they came to late, they called it (...). or (...). Which they
need not fear, if they had a bell to call them, as Plutarch says they had in
the Fish-market, and therefore terms those, Sympos c. 4.
whose bellies had no ears, but for the Bell, (...).

CAP. II. De ritibus and variis modis convivandi.
THeir merriment with others, was when they kept a feast. And thus to spend
their money, was especially called (...), and (...): and the merriment it self,
by the name of Schol in Arist. Vesp.
(...). Which made Homer bring in Hebe ministering to the gods at a feast; and
from whence (...) came to be used for a little cup to drink healthes out of.
Now a feast was of three Eusta^hius in Hom.
kinds, 1. (...) 2. (...), 3. (...), otherwise called Aristoph. and Schol.
(...), was when they joined or club'd for it, and every one brought his
Symbolam his part, or else lay in his Symbolum, his pawn, or his earnest with
the master of the feast. The earnest was commonly a ring, as Terence says,
dati annuli, locus, tempus constitutum. And sometimes any other thing: which he
that laid out the money for the feast, if he were not paid, or the party did not
come, had power to sell, or do what he would with it. The reason why it was
not so costly, and those that were at it, did eat so sparingly, (...) (...).
ibid.
(...), was because every one brought his own provender with him, and from
thence they were called (...) Festus.
Sodales. Sometimes they call such a feasting (...), from joining as we say, or
clubbing, or casting every one his lot into one purse. (...), says Tzetzes
upon L. 2.
Hesiod. And so likewise sometimes (...), from (...), because the charges came
scattered, or sown by several hands, which is resembled very well by the
Sportula instituted by Nero. Lastly (...) (they say) has been used for the
same, Athen. l. 8.
(...) for the company.

Of this way of Feasting, you have a brief and large commendation in Hesiod.
(...)
(...).
Be not averse from common feasts; for there
The charge the least is, and the most the chere.
Sometimes you should have a Covetous fellow make his (...), his very wedding
dinner, in the manner of an (...): and every one that comes must bring his part
with him, and be (...), In Crass.
(as Plutarch calls the Soldier that goes a Warfare at his own cost.) This
kind of feasting (I think) may very well be named (...), for Schol in
Aristoph. Pace.
that is either when there is meat of all sorts, or when is it brought to
every man, or when they sit higly pigly, and every one takes where he likes.
(...) (for of (...) we have spoken already) used to be a little more costly
(...). It was thus called either, 1. From (...) the lapping and tippling in it,
or, 2. From their gathering together, or sitting in companies; (...), or 5.
From (...), the vertigines or rounds used in dances, Pindar.
(...). The company at such a feast were called (...). Contrary to the manner
of the Romans, the poor Women were left by themselves alone in the (...),
unless it were to accompany some of their very near friends: according to
that of Cornelius Nepos, in the beginning of his book: Nam neque in convivium
adhibetur nisi propinquorum, neque sedet nisi in interiore part aediu^, quae
gynaeconitis appellatur, quo nemo accedit, nisi propinqua cognatione
conjunctus. The usual customs in feasting were these. 1. The number of the
company was not above thirty, and if there were more, there were certain
officers, appointed for the purpose to discommon them: and to them the Cooks
were to repair, to be examined concerning the same. Besides those Officers,
there was an (...) too, to see how often, and how much every one drank. And if
it appeared that a man was any way (...) or intemperate; he was to be punished
by the Areopagus. Which perhaps gave occasion to the Drunken unthrifts of those
times, to call the Greeks (...), and (...), as if they were niggardly in their
diet. But if they were indeed such bite-figues, and cummin-cutters as they make
them, how came it to pass that Cookery was so much in request among them;
((...), it is an honorable profession says Athenaeus) or that the skill in
Physic, L. 4.
Astronomy, and Geometry, was thought so requisite to that art: or that in
ancient time, the Cook should be one of the chief officers at a Sacrifice, as
they say he was? the Last indeed very convenient, since a Sacrifice and a feast
so well agreed that commonly either the latter followed the former, or instead
of invitations they sent their friends a piece of the victime.

-- (...)
(...).
-- as soon as you
To the Nymphs have offered, give to Morson too.
CAP. III. De more salutandi, Symposiarcho, Coronis, unguentis, modo
accumb^ndi, and de mensis.
WHen the guests were come, the manner of salutation for little boys (if any
came) was to take them by the ears, as one would take a pot, and kiss them;
and such a kiss as this they called (...) a pot. Pollux. l. 9. c. 24.
The fashion of kissing the lips was but of latter days, and osculum may be
osculum upon any thing so it be from the mouth. Anciently they used to lay
their mouth upon the eyes, and sometimes upon the head, or the shoulder, or the
neck, like the Jews. Sometimes they went no higher then the hand, with an
embracing of the body: as Xuthus desired to do to Ion. (...). Eurip. Ion. v.
518.

Embracing was the most usual salutation. Insomuch that (if you will believe
the On Aristoph. Plut.
Scholy) the word (...) used to signify to Salute, does properly signify to
embrace, as being derived (says he) (...). The compellation to such as they
respected was usually (...), vir honest, worthy Sir, rather then (...),
Domine, or Master.

Eurip. in Supl.
-- (...).
Till the meat came up, the Guests spent their time, in observing and
commending the conveniences of the house, and the household stuff, and the
like, according to his instructions in Vesp.
Aristophanes.

(...)
(...) --
The (...), the Master of the house, shall I say, or the Master of the Feast?
or rather the founder of the feast; (for (...) the Master, was many times no
more then a Master-Steward, or Pollux. l. 2. c. 1.
(...) the Caterer chosen by a company at a Collation) presently had his (...)*
brought him in by the Cook i. e. a note containing the several sorts of
dishes which they were to expect. Now in some feasts, to carouse it (according
to the manner of the Roman Modiperator, and the fashion yet in use in Italy,
and among us upon Twelfth-day) they threw lots who should be (...) King: and he
to whose lot it fell, was to have the whole command of all, for matter of
drinking, or ceremonies, without any restraint. Which sometimes proved too
tyrannical: as it did in him in Diog. Laertius, who commanded a fellow (...)
to take the drink in his mouth, C. 8.
or have it flung in his face.

All the while that the feast lasted, they kept burning of Frankincence and
Myrre upon the hearth. Either that the sense of smelling too, might have a taste
of the mirth, ((...) for Atheneus (...)
smell-feast) or else to stop the mouths, and the angry noses of the gods: to
whom, before they eat any thing themselves, they used to offer a taste of the
best of every dish. But how they did it I know not, unless they threw it in
the fire as Patroclus did. Il. 10.
-- (...).
The Guests before they sat down, used to crown their heads with Garlands,
made for the most part of Myrtle* for so I remember the bold ghuest in
Euripides, calling and commanding for his drink. -- (...). bound his head with
Myrtle-boughs to secure it from aching. and the Romans it seems agree with them
herein, for says Horace, when he went to be too merry, Nunc decet aut viridi
caput impedire myrto.
The use of these Garlands, (...). Says the Scholiast upon Aristoph. in Avib.
was to cool the head, and so to restaine the heat of the Wine* neither did
they crown their heads only, but anoint them too, as if they had been going to
wrestle with the strength of the liquor: for so says he in Vespis. -- (...)
(...).
Ovid and the Romans knew of this too it seems. -- habent unctae mollia serta
comae.
Using it as they did, either to keep the fumes and vapors from coming
altogether; or to open the pores, and let them out as soon as they came. for
the same end was it, that the herb crambe was so much used in their feasts, as
it was also among the Egyptians. and very likely it is to have a virtue that
way, in regard of the antipathy said to be in the nature of it, to the nature
of the Vine, so great, that it will not endure to grow near it. which
antipathy (they say) has been in it, ever since (...). On Aristoph. in Equit.
Act. 1. Sc. 3,
Lycurgus (a King of Thrace) for cutting down all the Vines in his Kingdom to
prevent drunkenness, being bound by Bacchus with Vine-twiggs, to be thrown
into the Sea, in crying, let drop a tear upon the ground, out of which tear
presently sprung the crambe. so called quasi (...), from (...), or Pupillae the
Apples, or the Babies (as we say) in the eyes, to which it is thought to be
hurtful.

Besides anointing, there was washing too, both before and after meat. that
before, had a peculiar name of (...): the other they call (...). Their posture
at eating was lying upon (...) beds (imitated by the Roman lecti) with a (...)
a matt Poll l. 6 c. 2.
close by, which had bed clothes and all to sleep upon. Those (...), were
usually covered with skins: according to that in the Aristoph. in Eq.
Poet of one that lay snorting upon a full belly. (...).
And sometimes with Tapistry, for the better sort: for with such Achilles his
Ambassadors are entertained in Il. 10,
Homer, -- (...)
The manner of lying was on their sides, and leaning upon their elbowes. And
therefore Silenus, in Euripides, bids Cyclops (when they sat at meat upon the
ground) (...), to place his elbow handsomely. They rested their feet upon a
(...), or a footstool: such a one as Juno would bestow upon Somnus for the
same use. (...).


And yet I remember one in the Poets Vespae, asking how he should sit, was bid
(...), to stretch out his knees. The table was ordinarily Tripus. Unless the
man were of a higher stomach then he that said, Sit mihi mensa tripes: for then
it might be of another fashion. But usually it was made with three legs, and
an (...) upon it, called (...) (in imitation of the Tripus at Delphos) to be
taken off, and set on, as they had occasion. Of what fashion soever it was,
they used to reverence it with a great deal of religion: so as not to have any
uncivil or profane or immodest discourse, as long as they sat at it. For why
(says Synesius) it is holy and consecrated to Jupiter (...), Ep. 57.
and (...). Which gave occasion to that expression of Demosthenes (...) (...).
Sat. 2.
(...). And to Juvenals, reverentia mensae. The Paus. in Phoch.
first that ever dared to profane the table, were the Women that killed Tereus
his son, and served him up in the dish.

CAP. IV. De Cibo and Potu.
THE Greeks (they say) in ancient times, as well as other people, were
contented with Masts and Acornes: for their bread at least, if not for their
Meat. And there were (...), Viig. Ae^.
people employed of purpose to gather them. There was no cereale solum, in
those days, no fear of mensas consumimus. 'Twas enough for the luxury of
later days, to make paniceas mensas, tables or trenchers of bread. In allusion
to the use of this food L. 5 c. 6.
A. Gellius says that the Romans made their civica corona of Oaken boughs,
quoniam cibus victusque antiquissimus quernus capi solitus sit. In remembrance
of their oaken diet. After mast, they looked lower and found better food in
barley. For that kind of corn was the Artemid^r. l. 1. c. 71.
first in use. Afterward, when fine Wheat, and teeth came up, it was made a
punishment to use it, as In Aug. c. 24.
Swetonius says, decimatas hordeo pavit. Their way of using corn at first,
before that mills came up ((...), said to be first invented by Mylas) was to
roast it in hot embers, or to parch it upon the hearth: and then pinsere to beat
it, Serve. ad Aen.
and knead it into hard lumps or loaves. Those that did this the Romans called
pinsores, which afterward came to pistores, bakers. 2. Sam. c. 17, v. 28.
We read of (...) parched stuff among the Israelites too, even there where we
read of flower, and so it was not for need that they used it. In time it came
to varieties: and I also might say a great deal concerning them; as likewise
of their usual dishes at feasts, both of fish and flesh. But you may have
enough in Athenaeus with little pain, and less profit. Only I desire to
observe one thing, that of all the parts of a beast, the brain might by no
means be seen upon a table. For they loathed to eat it, as much as
Pythagorean could to eat a bean: and thought that none but he that had lost
his fences, would offer to devour that, from which all the senses had their
life. Nay (...) the brain, might not be in their mouths to speak it, as well
as to eat it. In Trachin.
And therefore Sophocles, when he speaks of Lichas his throwing from the rock
into the sea, and dashing out his brains, how gingerly does he relate it,
calling the brain white marrow of his head.

(...)
(...) --
Hecuba in Euripides speaking of Astyanax his throwing down from the tower by
the Greeks, relates it after the same manner, calling it (...), adding withal
(...) with reverence be it spoken.

But as for the Entralls, (...), no dish so common as that: insomuch that you
should have some covetous fellows make a feast of nothing else. Such a feast
they called more peculiarly (...), or (...). The meat was served up in dishes
of wood: or of brass (for the better sort) and every ones portion at his place.

The drink, which they had at feasts during meal time, was usually wine
mingled with water to allay the strength of it. And this mixture they say was
the invention of Amphictyon (him whom they report to have first instituted the
meeting of the seven Cities called Concilium Amphyctyonicum) but I have another
story for you from L. 15.
Athenaeus, who had it from one Philonides a Physician, and it is this. When
Bacchus first brought his Vines from the Read-sea into Greece; the people came
presently flocking to the Sea side, and fell so immoderately to the liquor,
that some became dead-drunk, and some raving mad. Others that came later, being
driven away by a sudden tempestuous shower, when they returned again, found
some of the rain mingled with the Wine, which they had left in the cupps, and
drinking freely of it, (...), not withstanding found no such effects as the
former did, but continued sober. This (they say) is the reason that at the
first bringing in of the (...), or mixed wine, to the table, they used to
remember (...), Jupiter the founder of the rain, and the mixture. To which
they added the health called (...), if the feast were a victors feast; and
(...), if it were at a Wedding: altering the name of the health, according to
the occasion of the feast. And yet Sophocles seems to make the third round to
be to Jupiter Servator -- (...)
(...).
Presently after meal came in (...) the Wine in puris naturalibus whereof (it
may be) (...), promulsis, or gustatio, the first taste before they went to
eating used to be. The great Crater being filled, the Symposiarch began a
health, either to the good Genius (to whom they meant to indulge) or to the
goodly god that invented the liqour. This health is called Poculum not
Charitatis, but (...): and so to drink it (...), making it a religious
business, as if it were a Libation or a drink offering: Aristoph in Eq.
as he says (...). And many times they prayed too, crying out (...). Some say,
this health was at the beginning of the feast. But they did but sip at it, and
therefore Hesychius interprets (...) for (...), little drinkers. In Vesp.
The last health of all, which they drunk just as they went to bed, was to
Mercury, as to the god of sleeping and dreams -- (...)
(...).
for that was the reason (says Athenaeus) (...). Yet some say it was (...),
the bottle or vessel out of which they filled the Wine, was usually made of
the skin of a Boar. And therefore in Lysistrate (Aristophanis) it is called
by the name of (...), and the Wine (...) blood, and the pouring it out (...)
slaughter, as if the Goat were a killing but then.

When one friend drank to another, they called it (...), or (...) a cup of good
friendship: and such kind of expressions (...), takings or pledgings: according
to that -- (...)
(...) --
And thus if a great man kept the feast, when he drank to his favorites, he
gave him the cup to keep. But if he drank a health to one whom he loved ((...)
or (...), his friend or his Catamite) he drank part himself, and bestowed the
rest upon the ground. Sometimes after Supper, they would sit up drinking for a
wager all the night, and he that could keep himself waking 'till morning, had
a (...), a cake made of flower and honey for his labor. Just as the women used
to have in the Thesmophoria. In such mad fits as these, they were wont to have
(...), riddles proposed: which he that could not interpret, was to drink off
his cup. And if any one were weary, he might not depart unless he had leave,
(perhaps it was unless he took his leave) of the Master of the feast. and
hear I might easily speak enough of their (...), but I think a little is
sufficient, and that I have done already.

Now the cupps wherein they drank in ancient time were nothing but Bulls horns,
(...), says the Scholiast upon Nicander, (...). Insomuch that the word (...),
to fill drink, seemed to be derived from (...) these horns. Scilicet. Hence it
was that they used to picture Bacchus with Bull-hornes. Nay the Argivi made his
picture all Bull. which occasioned some to call him downright by the name of
Taurus a Bull. And the reason of those phancies was (says the Scholiast) (...)
for the strange (says he) or rather the Bull-wood carriage of those that use
his liquor. But the best is, dat Deus immiti cornua curta bovi. Afterward they
grew weary of horns, and came to their cannes, which they seem to have made of
Ivy (for Bacchus his sake too no question, to whom the wood belongs) Eurlp.
Alc. v. 756.
(...).


CAP. V. De iis quae a discumbentibus fieri solebant.
FOR their behavior at table, spitting and coughing, and speaking loud, was
counted uncivil in any but a Gentleman (as we say in the University, that
nothing is fresh in a Senior) and to him it was a glory (...), says Stobaeus,
to spit stoutly, or as Quintilian calls it; clare excreare as it is among us
for great men to sit and eat carelessly. But paring of nails was such a sordid
thing, that no gentility could bear it out. Hesiod (as it is thought) long
since abominated the incivility, or what shall I call it to hit his meaning.

(...)
(...)
Nor from the five-branch'd green do with a knife
At feasting cut the witberd for thy life.
Their attendance was, every one his (...), or his Pedee, to whom they used to
deliver (...), choice bits, or such dainties as they liked best, to keep, or to
carry whom with them: but I must confess it was counted somewhat base: and
therefore clancularly done, except it were a very high feast indeed, and open
house. Those boys or servants were commonly Black moors; after the fashion of
the Romans, -- tibi pocula cursor
Getulu^ dabit, aut nigri manus ossea Mauri.


Your (...), portions, which we read of, were another thing: as a piece of the
Victime at a Sacrifice, or a part of the choycest dishes at a feast, sent by
all the company in a public manner to friends that were absent. For such
Plutarch reports to have been sent to Aratus by King Antigonus, when he
Sacrificed at Corinth: and Aristophanes (in his Archarnanes) by the Bride at a
Wedding (...)
(...).
And indeed not only the Greeks, but the Romans and the Jews too, are to be
commended for remembering their friends in this kind: for the Jews both at
Sacrifices (as 1. Sam. 1.4
Elkanah did to his Wife,) and also at feasts (as those were bid to do by
Nehem. c. 8.10.
Nehemiah) used to send (...) portions to them, for whom nothing was prepared.
When they had greased their fingers, they would take a piece of soft bread, and
rub them with it, and throw it to the dogs, and from thence came the proverb
tanquam canis vivens e magdalia, or rather (if you will) apomagdalia, for so
they called such a piece of bread from (...) to wipe; such a thing as their
Cooks (...) or (...), a piece of course bread, which they had for the same use.

The desert consisted of nuts and fruit, and all sorts of junkets* they called
this service, by the several names of or (...)
(...), Epidorpiae mensae. And now to crown all with dancing and music,
which Homer calls Coronas Convivii.
(...), (usually accompanied with (...), merry songs, and tales) because they
themselves spent most time in practicing it, I shall be bold to spend a little
the more in relating it.

CAP. VI. De cantu Convivali and Scoliis.
ALthough Socrates in Plato's Protagoras, speak against the use of Music at a
Feast: and Euripides say, it were better used at a Funeral, to make the
Mourners merry: yet you shall find Xenophon himself (in himself) commending,
and Phemius (in Homer) practicing the same. Odyss. I.
Now the custom was when they came to the dancing and the Music, (whereas at
Meale-time less cupps would serve) then to have greater, and a fresh bowl
((...)) to begin with, for such a one they had at every change, if they
observed that fashion we read of in Euripides.

(...)
(...) In Ion. v: 1177.

(...).
The song most common among them was Harmodius: so called (just as Hymenaeus is
from a man of the same name, and as we call our songs Chloris and the like)
because it was sung to the honor of Harmodius and Aristogeiton, the two famous
Tyrannicidae, that put an end to the tyranny of the Pisistratidae, by putting
Hipparchus to death: and of whom it is reported that the strumpet Leaena (as
beastly a name as Lupa) so faithfully loved their bodies, that when she was
rackt by the Tyrant, to discover their conspiracies, she bit off a piece of her
tongue with her teeth, and spit in his face. The beginning of Harmodius was
thus, (...), etc. You have mention of it in Aristophanes his Acharnenses, and
his Vespae. Sometimes they would have up Admetus, or a song to the praise of
Admetus, (for most of their songs, as well as those of the Romans, tended to
the praise of one famous worthy or other.) It began thus, (...). etc. where you
may observe the oppsing (...) to (...). For so you shall find (...), commonly
for a Coward in Heathen writers, who reckoned virtutem (as they called it)
valor and fortitude, the only virtue worthy the name. Besides these two which
I have named, you shall find a great many more such in Authors, under the name
of (...). I will only give you one whole one, made by Tim^creon, a Poet of
Rhodes, against riches. (...) Vid. (...). in Aristoph. Ran.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).


Those kind of songs which they called (...), were first invented by one
Plutarch. de mus.
Terpander. They were so called either first (...) (says the Scholiast upon
Ranae,) from the crooked placing of the beds, and the lying of the guests upon
them. Or else 2. (as the Scholy says upon the same Poet in Vespis) from the
flexuous disorderly manner in the singing. For there were in use among the
Greeks (says Schol. in Ra^.
Dicaearchus (...)) three ways of singing ^ongs at such meetings, the first
(...), by all together. the 2. (...), by one after another in order as they
sat. the 3. one after another, but (...), not in order, and (...), either by
such as had best skill, or by such as he that sung last, should please to
choose, I say to choose; for in singing a Scolium, as it is properly used, this was
the custom. He that Scolid first, took him a Mirtyle rod, called (...) from
(...) and (...) and holding it in his hand like a thyrsus, (for all the
devotion now was to Bacchus and to Venus,) b^gun in any place of Simonides, or
Stesichorus, or Aeschylus, where he had a mind, and continued as long as he
pleased. The verses which they sung, they called by the name of (...), or
(...), or (...), from the (...), or the rods, as being apta virgae, in the
words of Apuleius. When he had done, he delivered his bough to whom he thought
fit* and he to whom the bough was delivered, was to go on where the the other
left off: and thus it went round 'till all had done. And then he that was
judged by the company to come off best, and have capt the rest, Eustath. Il 1.
had his (...) (as they called it) i. e. a cup, or some such thing for his
reward. Unless they sung some of Homers verses, for then both the bough was
Laurel, and the prize a Lamb, (...). Aristoph. in Nub.
from whence they were called (...), as well as Homeristae. Others say it was
the custom presently after taking away, to have a harp to go from one to
another, and every one as he was best able, or as his mind gave him, to sing to
the Harp, with a bough in his hand besides. A third reason of the name is given
by Oru^ (a Grammarian:) viz. because the eye, and the understanding of those
that sung, were by over strong drink become (...), or (...), distorted, as
they are in Madmen ((...), and (...) right eyes, and a right mind, are put
Soph. in Oed. Tyr.
together in the Poet.) 4. The song was called (...), (says the In Ranis.
Scoliast) by the Figure Antiphrasis, because it was least difficult of any,
and (...), consisting but of a few staves. But this etymology in another place
of the same book is utterly disliked, (...), because that Figure Antiphrasis,
is always by way of Euphemy, to give a bad thing a good name, but never to
give a good thing a bad name. Origin (they say) wrote a Poem, wherein he
briefly comprised all such things, as seemed to be intricate and perplexe, and
gave it the title of Scolia. (...). Arist. in Ran.
Pericles is said to have made his Laws, in the manner of Scolies, I think
not for any obscurity in the meaning, but Poetry in the making.

(...), is not opposed (what ever it may seem to be) to that which they call
(...) (which might be sung by one alone, whereas the Scolys could not) so
called, not because it was sung right along and in order: but either because
the persons sung (...), that is, (as Suidas expounds it) alta and erecta voce,
with a long blast, (like the trumpet in Judges c. 7.5.) or because it was sung
(...), which I know not what way it was, but that Herodotus says Arion played
after that way upon the ship, and Eustathius and Suidas, say that Timotheus
playing after that manner to Alexander (...) etc. So moved his spirit, that he
lept immediately to his arms and took them up to fight. Instead of Scolies,
sometimes you should have hole Comedies acted, and then none so soon as
Menanders.

But amidst all this jollity, to put them in mind of the changeableness and
uncertainty of their conditions, (for this they say was the use as they made of
them) they had their (...), oscilla, or ossicula, like those which they use at
Rome at the feast Sigillaria, or such as Suet. c. 83.
Augustus is said to have played with ( talis aut ossiculis ludebat cum pueris)
things so artificially made with joints and pins, that in so many throws they
would yield you a thousand shapes, or mouths, or faces. Petronius having at a
certain feast, thrown those things on the table, presently cried out upon
mortality, but with an ill intent, viz. to be merry therefore while he might.
Heu, heu nos miseros, quam totus homuncio nilest!
Sic erimus cuncti, postquam nos auferet ^r^u^.
Ergo vivamus dum licet esse been.
And just so the Egyptians used at feasts, to bring in the picture of a dead
man in a Coffin: for he that brought him in, bid every one (...), to eat and
drink, Herod. l. 2.
for to morrow he should dye.

CAP. VII. De Peregrinis excipiendis.
A Stranger, whether you take it for a Guest or for an Alien, so it were not a
god, was always had in so religious esteem at Athens, (...), that (as the
Scholie says upon In Helen.
Euripides) if any one wronged a stranger, he was looked upon as a profane cursed
fellow: according to the Poet himself in another In Taur. v. 468.
place. -- Let go the strangers hands,
Which being sacred may not be in bands.
And good reason; for -- (...)

(...) -- all strangers have Jupiters own Letters of protection: and therefore
no dolus so malus, as (...). Now this esteem they had, First in obedience to
the Laws of (...), or (...). you may call him Jupiter hospes: for L. 10. Fab.
6.
Ovid in his Metamorphosis speaks of l^vis hospitis Ara an Altar of his in
Cyprus, where the unhospital people, for their brutish inhumanity, are said to
have been turned into Cerastas bullocks. Jupiter Xenius as much as he was for
the strangers, was notwithstanding better known and honored then any of the
Jupiters besides, according to that of Plutarch, (...), as if he had ca^'d more
for them then other people.

Jupiter hospitibus nam te dare jura loquuntur. Virg. Aen. 1

I remember indeed once to show how well he was pleased with that virtue of
hospitality, being in his travells in Phrygia with Mercury lovingly entertained
by Baucis and Philemon, when no body else would receive him, in requital
thereof, he preserved the house from the Earth^quake, and made it a Temple.

2ly In obedience to the Laws of the City, Xenoph. l. 3. (...).
which expressly commanded them (...), not to wrong a stranger. And this made
Aristippus, upon Socrates his information, presently to remove to Athens and
dwell there. L. de Offc.
Nay says Tully Execrationibus publicis sancitum est etc. (speaking of
refusal to show a stranger the way) that command was enforced with the penalty
of public execrations.

If a stranger had received any wrong (because they might not be so familiar as
to do it themselves) there were (...), allowed of purpose to plead for them,
as well as (...) to entertain them. Unless you will say that these last
officers were not for (...), that is hospites, such as tarried a while and
away: but for (...), that is (...), inquilini, such as set up their habitation
in the place where they came. For those were made to pay their (...), an early
rent to the City, the men twelve, and the Isaeus contr. Elpagor^
Women six Drachmes: which if they did not pay, they sold them, and put them
into the ships for gally-slaves, as not reckoning them clean corn, and true
Citizens, any more then L 3. Polit*
Aristotle; but only (in the words of Aristophanes) (...), the out casts and
chafe, and no more. Even the Cretians themselves (as evil beasts as they
were) seem to have had humanity enough in this respect. Athenaeus
Otherwise what meant their (...), two distinct Tables, and a Chamber kept a
purpose for strangers? The very Soldiers at the taking of Troy, so much valued
the hospitality showed by Antenor to Menelaus, as to spare his house alone.

I must confess indeed the Lacedemonia^s hear but ill for their (...), and
Lycurgus his Law against admittance of strangers, but upon certain days, and
their dealing deceitfully with them then too. Which made the Poet (even in
Pace) brand them with the name of (...). Nay it is said how that they never
made any (...), (as they called it) free of their City, but only two, viz.
Tisamenus the Poet, and his brother Hegias. But still I hope, their (...)
strangers, were all one with (...) Barbarians, for whom the word is often used,
says Herodotus, and the Scholiast upon Homer. For else certainly Plato would
never have given such commendations of their Policy, though it be as proper to
the nature of (as we usually take it) policy, as it is inconsistent with the
name of (...), to care most for ones private good.

CAP. VIII. De Hospitibus excipiendis.
IF the Athenians were so kind (...), to every stranger, properly so called:
what were they (think you) (...), to their own strangers (as we use to call it)
or to their sworn guests? Those had their (...), or (...), or tesseram
hospitii, something or other like a ticket, to show for their quarter when they
came: such as Jason in curtesy offered Medea to help her in the time of
exilement.

(...).
So far were the (...), those that entertained guests (you may call them
(...) too, for it is a name for both, like hospes, perhaps to show their near
relation) from so much as suspecting a return of hatred for kindness, that it
cost Dio no less then his life. Who though he were forwarned of an intention
of Callipus his guest to murder him, took no care to avoid him, (...), being
ashamed (says Plutarch in his chapter de Vitioso pudore (...), to beware of
one that was his friend and ghuest too (as if that were more.)

The manner of entertaining a stranger was this. As soon as ever they saw him,
Pindar.
(...), the first care they had, was to have somewhat for him to eat.
Egredientem illico e navi adduxit ad caenam, says In Heaut.
Terence. When he came to the door (as some say) they both joined feet one the
threshold, and there mutually engaged themselves to be true and trusty. Qui
recipiebant, and qui recipiebantur veniebant ad hostium, Vetus Diction.
and ponebant pede^ in eo, and confirmabant quod unus non deciperet alium And
therefore hospes is said to be derived from hostium, or ostium a door, and pes
a foot. When he came in, they called for the Strangers bottle (as he says in
Eurip v. 511.
Electra, (...)) and drank to him in a cup of Wine, before ever they asked his
name (says Athenaeus,) (...), as giving him honor, because he was a stranger,
not because he was this or that particular man. Now they used Wine, rather then
any other liquor (says the same Author) because they took it to be, Idem. Ibid.
(...) etc. Powerful to warm the affection too, as well as the stomach.

The next thing they presented him with, was Salt: intimating their friendship
must be so seasoned with good carriage, as it might keep long and sweet. All
the time of his being the house, this respect he had. They made their own
daughters to attend upon him, to fill drink and the like: nay and to bring him
Water in a Basin, and wash his feet with their own hands. As may be proved by
several places in Homer both observed and approved by Athenaeus, L. 1.
who makes it to he an ancient custom (...) (says he) 2. They allotted (...),
Chambers a part from the rest, of purpose for strangers. Which puts me in mind
of Admetus in the V. 545.
Poets Alcestis, who when Hercules coming to his house in a time of Mourning
(a thing accounted (...), so unsit to be seen by the sacred eyes of a stranger
(as he there says) was therefore about to be gone again, replied; no such
need, good Hercules, notwithstanding the mourning in the house. (...)
For we have Chambers on the other side of the house which we keep only for
strangers, and you shall be there.

3ly When they sat at Meals they had a table also to themselves: as may be
conjectured by that which Orestes had at his being at Athens.

Eurip. El^ctr v 849.
-- (...)
(...). --
Lastly they had (...) places allowed them at the shows, instituted by
Sphyromachus. Therefore to return respect again to the people of the house:
as at his coming into the Country, he ought to do reverence and Sacrifice to
the Genius of the place, saluting the ground with a kiss Ovid. Met. l. 3.
Cadmus agit grates, peregrinaeque oscula terrae
Fecit, and ignotos montes, agrosque salutat.
So during all the time of his being with them, he was to do Divine service,
(...) unto their gods especially, or the gods of the place: as Alexander did at
his being at Troy: and as they themselves, Id* Herc. v* 609.
if they had been from home at their return, were to do (...) (as Hercules
calls them) to the Penates, the gods of the house. In like manner, at his going
out of the Country, when he came to the borders he kissed the ground, and so
took his leave of the Genius: as Ovid says, Met. l. 13.
-- dant oscula terrae Troades --


Whenever the party had a mind to be gone, it was counted an uncivility to
detain him. Menelaus accordingly practiced, and left it for a rule. (...).
And parting they usually gave (...), or (...), some thing or other for a
remembrance: or to bear their charges by the way. Besides every man's private
benevolence, there was (...), a common Hospital maintained by the City. Where
if any strangers, to whom it belonged, were denied entertainment, they might
complain to the Magistrate and be righted. Indeed a murderer or such like
person, they might not by any means (...) (as he * calls it) entertain him,
and give him meat and drink, as being aquae and igni interdictum.

CAP. IX. De Pauperibus sublevandis.
AND now in the last place, I have a word to say also, of the good will, which
the Athenians bare to the poor. And certainly if they intended no more then
the Honor of their City, they would be loath to suffer any to become a beggar;
That there may be no poor among you. etc Deuteron. 15.4. So some render (...)
of whom Isocrates says in his Arcopag. (...), that he is a disparagement to
the city wherein he lives. To prevent the disgrace, every (...) or Society,
kept a poore-man's box, or a common Treasury, for the relief of such as came
to poverty, and the ransom of the Captives. Into that box once every month,
they used (...), confer eranum (as Plautus says eranum amici contulerunt) to
put every man's contribution; and from thence were the contributers called by
the name of (...) or (...). He that thus came to a gathering (as we call it)
was said (...) or (...), as in Aristotle ( Acroas l. 2. e. 5.) where he makes
this instance of a thing (...), that happened by chance; if a creditor, (...),
with his Bond in his hand should come to his debtor for money, when he with his
roll in his hand, was come to the parish (as we say) for a collection. Such
another contribution was that which they called (...), appointed by Aristides
for those that assisted him in the War against the Medes, of which
Aristophanes in his Lysistrate. If there happened any controversy in this
business, there were (...), Laws and Writs made for the purpose.

Plato speaks very well of this L. 9. de Leg.
custom, and Trajanus the Emperor in his answer to Pliny approves of it,
permitting the use thereof to the Amiseni (for other Cities had it as well as
Athens) eo facilius, si tali Collationi etc.

Other provision there was besides this eranus, for their relief. For the
richer sort were wont every new moon, to make a great feast of Bread, and
other course fare for this purpose. Which feast being chiefly intended to the
honor of Hecate, gave occasion to them to call every course beggarly feast, by
the name of Hecates caena. But as bad as the fare was, the person in Pluto
Aristophanis, took his argument even from thence, to commend the condition of
the poor, above that of the rich. Says he -- (...) (...) etc.


Ask Hecate and she will tell which is best. To conclude, I have read that
they had a Lucar, money allowed them out of the Treasury, to pay for pla^es at
the Plays and shows.

SECT. III. De Ritibus Bellicis.
CAP. I. De Militibus.
HAving spoken of the customs used by the Athenians amongst themselves, it
will be fitting in the next place to say something of those which they used
toward their enemies; and after that of those toward either, or both, in
Divinations.

The Warlike provision which they made for the defense of the City, was partly
this. The young men being Listed inter Ephebos (which was as I told you, at the
age of eighteen) were from that time 'till twenty, Harpocr.
(...) (as they ^^lled it) that is, they must be circitores or fraxatores. Or
they must (...) stand sentinel and keep Guards in the Forts, and be employed
in the making of Works and the like: according to that of In Ennucho.
Terence, Video herilem filium minorem huc advenire: Miror, quid ex Piraeo
abierit, nam ibi custos public est nunc. The first of the two years they kept
within the City, but the second they proceeded to the Suburbs, and in token of
the degree they had taken, they received of the people a Shield, and a Spear,
and a (...), or Coat for a Livery. During these two years, they could not be
compelled to fight (...), without the Liberties. But ever after 'till forty
they might. Vlpian. ad Olymph.
And both the first, and every year after, till the end of forty two years,
(as I take it) they had their own names, together with the name of the (...),
registered in this manner, (...). Such a one in pay ever since such a one was
Archon Eponymus: to show how long every man had been in service. Of these
(...), there were twenty two, according to the number of the years from
eighteen to forty. They are called (...), from the (...), in which they listed
their names after they were twenty years old; and sometimes (...), because
they thus kept a note of every man's age: in opposition to (...), who were but
to keep a note of their Tribes. Aristot de Rep. Ath.
Now some there were that were exempted, and some that were excluded from that
service* the former were such as Custom-holders (...), who therefore had the
privilege (...): or the (...). i. e. (...): Bachus his Salii, or dancing
Priests. The latter were, (...) slaves and all such proletarious People who
were not to be employed but in case of necessity, nor had the honor (...),
which the others had. For they, as soon as they had taken the oath in the
Temple of Agraulus, (...), were listed by the (...), or General (as many as he
(...) made choice of, after the manner of the Roman Delectus) in the (...), or
Muster-role, which he kept for the same purpose, having besides that another
(...) or Table Book, for such as were Emeriti out of service, and discharged.
After they had been listed by the general, they were to be listed again by
the under Officer, the (...), or the foot by the (...), and the Horsemen by
the (...). The (...) were of three sorts. First those more especially so
called, such as used much armor, (...), and were gravis armaturae milites,
with their wide Shields and long Spears. 2ly (...), Levis armaturae milites,
such as had little or no Armor, but carried Arrows, and Darts, and Stones for
the sling. And 3ly (...), a middle sort between both, with their (...) or
(...), narrow Shields, and short Spears. Such as they made choice of for
Horsemen, were to be (...) (says Xenophon) able both in body and purse, and
therefore were to be examined first by the Senate of 500, before they could be
listed; and so were likewise the Horses themselves, to try whether they were
(...) skittish, or (...) (as the Scholiast calls it) Noyse-proofe. And this
they did (...), with a Bell, or a Kettle-drum, or a Pipe, I know not which I
shall render it. And now I am put in mind of the (...), which they used to make
a noise withal, when they did (...) Walk the round to try whether the Guards
were asleep or no, which they called (...) or (...). -- (...)
(...)
Insomuch that (...), is used for the same with (...), to try, or prove (as in
Aristophanis Batrachis, (...)) and (...) for (...) intentatum. (as in
Lysistrate, (...).) If a Horse had been (...) worn and beaten out with long
service, they marked him in the Jaw with the sign of a (...) (a wheel I
think) and gave him his (...); Hesych.
for so they called both the mark and the discharge it self: whence came the
proverb used by Eupolis (...), to give a man his (...), that is his discharge.
All their Horses the Greeks reckoned to be consecrated to the Sun, and Beda
upon the Kings, gives this reason, Audientes Graeci ab Isra^liticis, (quos
divinas habere literas fama prodebat) quod Helias curru igneo, and equis igneis
sit ad caelestes translatus (vel certe hoc ipsu^ inter alia depictu^ in
pariete^videntes) crediderunt vicinia decepti nominis Solis hic transitu^ per
coelos esse designatum, and miraculu^ divinitas factum comutarunt in argumentum
erroris, etc. because Helias once was carried up to heaven with Horses,
therefore Helius or the Sun, must be thought to have horses consecrated to
his service for ever after.

The Horsemen, first, some were (...), that had two ways to fight, I. Poll.
l. 8. c. 10.
with Armor for the purpose, and a boy to hold their horse while they fought a
foot (a fashion of Alexanders own inventing. 2. Some were (...), that had two
Horses, one to ride upon, and the other to lead: from (...). Their manner of
life was very high and stately, for many times they would (...), that is, have
a transvection, or ride into the City in Pomp and triumph, with a Coach, and a
garment of Scarlet or Purple, usually called by the name of a (...), as it is
these verses. (...)
(...)
For in ancient time it was counted not below a King, for to ride the
Coach^horse, or sit in the chair. aurigae then were called (...), and were
better then (...), who looked to the Coach only.

The number of the Horsemen was greater or less, according to the number of
the people. Otherwise (as Pollux says) every (...) (which was the twelth part
of a Tribe) was to find two.

Most of the Athenian Soldiers were assidui, and went to War upon their own
charges, insomuch that they reckond it a very disgraceful thing to be aerarii,
or me^^lli, and to take pay. Concerning a mercenary Soldiers pay, what it was,
because it was so often changed, I think I had better be silent. And concerning
the habit, and diet of others only this, that a Law made by Cineas and Phryxus,
forbad them to be (...), dainty and to wear long hair, as some say: but (it
may be) the latter is to be meant only of their fore-locks, which they were to
cut, (...), that the enemy might have no holdfast, says Plutarch in his
Theseus, where he says also that the fashion being first used by Theseus, was
therefore called (...).

CAP. II. De Armis quibus vim propulsabant.
THE first makers of Armor are said to be the Lemnians, of whom Vulcan was the
chief workman. The Metal whereof it was made, at the first was Brass, says
In Lacon.
Pausanias: but for want of Iron, says Hesiod. (...).
The most noted Armor was the Helmet, the Shield, and the coat of Maile. The
most noted thing in the Helmet, was the Crest, invented by the Cares, and
therefore called by Alcaeus, (...). The thing* or the part wherein, or whereto
it was fastend they called (...), and to fasten it (...). (...). Homer.

The Crest was double or treble, according to the quality of the person. For if
he were an heroes, it might be treble, says In Orest.
Euripides, and quadruple, says L. 2.
Apollonius. (...)
The stuff whereof it was made, was usually feathers, and the hair of a
Horse-taile; and thence it is that it is called (...), and (...), in Id 23.
Theocritus; and that it is said Aristophan. Puce.
(...), when the hair fell off. The other parts of the Helmet bare the name of
that part of the head to which they belong, as (...) the eyebrows, and the
rest, except the Penthouse (...). Of the shield, both the matter, and the
form, was of several kinds, for sometimes it was made of Oziers woven
together, Aen. 7.
according to that of Virgil. -- flectuntque Salignas
Vmbonum crates --
(but then they called it (...)) and sometimes of wood: Mesych.
but most commonly of raw Ox hides, or of pieces of Leather, doubled or laid
one upon the other. Ovid says Ajax had Septemplicem clypeum, a Buckler that
had seven pieces of or foldings in it; and Achilles another that had ten.
Neither was this all, for it was done over with Brass besides, as that of
Achilles was, -- and aes and proxima rupit
Terga novena boum, decimo tamen orb moratum est.


And therefore in Troad. v. 1336.
Euripides it is called (...). For the form of it, it was sometimes long,
sometimes round, and some times square. The names of the several parts of it
you may have in I. Pollux L. 1. c. 10. Only thus much I may tell you, first for
the making of them, that it was wont to be done with a great deal of
curiosity, both for show and for use, as having (...) ornaments to be seen, and
(...) little holes to see others by, set in the (...), or the border. And 2ly*
For the invention of them; the handle by which they held it, called (...), or
(...), or (...), was invented by the Cares, and thence it was that Anacreon
called it, (...): and so were likewise the umbilicus, Strabo l. 14.
and the arms, and most of the rest. In memory of this invention, when they
buried any man, they used to put a Shield and a Crest into the grave along with
him. The Arms ((...), or (...)) were different, according to the quality of
the bearer. Ulysses had his (...); Idomeneus Grandchild to Sol a Roust-cock
the avaunt coureur to the Sun. But the Heroes anciently, and for the most
part, Aristop. in Ran.
used to bear Eagles, (...). To the Arms, they added verses in commendation
of the prowess of the Person, by which he deserved those Arms, and the name
of the maker; such as Pausanias relates upon that of Idomeneus. The case or
Theca wherein the shield was put, In Eliatr.
they called (...), a name (it may be) for any other the like cases, according
to that in Eut. v 617.
Andromache.

(...)
Rhodiginus says, L. 21. c. 14.
that in the use of the shield, there were some things which they observed to
be ominous* for if it happend to strike their knees, they counted it lucky: but
if they struck it with their Spear, 'twas an ill sign. The most famous shield
that ever I read of in heathen writers, was that of Jupiter Aegiochus, named
(...) because he covered it with the skin of his nurse the goat called
Amalthaea* this shield he bestowed upon Minerva, who ingraved upon it the
Stone-making or astonishing head of Medusa. Whether that Scutum sacru^ which
Alexander is said to have stolen, and to have carried always before him, were
the same with this or no, I know not. Their shields when they laid them up in
the Temples (as the fashion was also for the other sorts of arms) they
suffered not to have their (...) handles, (or some such necessary appurtenance)
that so in case there should be any insurrection, they might be the less ready
for use; which was the cause why he in the Poet cried out so as he did, when he
saw it otherwise. (...).
For says another a little before. (...)
(...).
The Coats of Maile were of three sorts, the first (...), which reached from
the navell to the knees: the second (...), which covered half the breast, such
as Polyaenus reports to have bin much used by the Soldiers of Alexander the
Great. The third (...), which reached from the shoulders to the navell, Etymol.
so called (...), from preserving the heart, and the breast* from which peculiar
office of it, Aristophanes in Acharnensibus, borrowes the word (...), for to
signify to be well nigh drunk, (as we say when we have well eaten or drunken,
that we are well armed against the cold) and (...), to signify (...) drunk to
the top. now a Thorax was either (...), all of one piece plain like (...)
recta tunica: or else (...), with chains or plaites of iron put between the
leather (as it is in our Coats of Maile.) The leather I say, because it was
usually made of a hide ((...)) as the S^uta were, -- (...).


Aristoph. in Pace.
So they say that the Latin word Lorica comes from Lorum, the dried and tanned
hide, whereof it was made. According to that of Virgil.

Cui pellis latos humeros exempta juvenco
Pugnatori operit.
The holes where they put out their arms Aristophanes calls (...), by a
Metaphor from the holes of a boat, where they put out the Oars.

The Color most in use upon their Arms, Clothes, or Crests, etc. was crimson
red, either to make themselves the less afraid, if they saw their blood, being
used to the color; or else that the enemy might be the less able to perceive
it, if they should chance to be wounded. From the Phaenicean color, the
Lacedaemonians called their Coat (or Crest, Aristoph. in Pace.
or what is it?) (...). In allusion to whose red bloody color, the P^et in
Acharnenses speaking of having a fellow beaten* till the blood came, thus
expresses it. (...).
Let Us card him, and work him, and belabour him, 'till we make his skin like
a (...).

Idem. Ibid.
To carry their Provision in, every man had his (...), or (...) a kind of basket
( fiscinam,) made of Oziers ((...)) with a long narrow neck. And therefore the
Poet having used the word (...), to signify such a thing, in the same Comedy
uses the word (...), to signify men that had a neck as long as that thing.
Their ordinary provision was Cheese, and Olives, and Onions. The quantity
commonly so much as would serve for three days, according to that of the same
Poet still, and in the same Comedy, where speaking against the troublesome life
of a Soldier* among other troubles he reckons in viz.

(...).
Those too often repeated orders for three days provision.

CAP. III. De armis quibus vim inferebant.
THE Arms, or the Weapons they used to fight with, were in ancient time clubs
(used also for the putting of Malefactors, to death) called by Il. 4.
Homer (...), according to that of Horace, Vnguibus and pugnis, dein fustibus;
atque ita porro
Pugnabant armis quae post jabricaverat usus.


But afterward they came to Spears, a weapon so highly esteemed, that some
would not stick to adore it; as may be gathered by the words of Eustathius.
(...). Where (...), some say signifies to worship (and so they say of the word
numerare, used by Cicero in his book De Not. Deorum. Novi ego Epicureos omnia
sigilla numerantes.) Thus it is reported of one Pheraeus Alexander a tyrant,
that having killed his uncle Polyphron with his Spear, he took it and crowned
it with Garlands, and caused it to be adored by the name of (...). One would
have thought it sufficiently honored, to be used by Kings instead of Scepters,
as Justin says it was: or at most to have a place in the Temple: or else to
have been dedicated to a god, as Plutarch says it was to Pallas, (because of
(...), the proper word for (...)) and to be joined to the statue of the god:
for so it commonly was among the Latins especially; whence it came that hastae
motae shaking of the Spears, so often spoken of by Livy and others, was
accounted such a grand prodigium. If there were none of this, yet the respect
they gave to them will sufficiently appear, in the care they took of the
keeping them. For when they slept in the field they fastened it (...), which
Pollux interprets, the but-end of the Spear, made (it may be) with a cross
for the better hold-fast, quasi (...) from (...). But Eustathius says it was
an iron with a sharp tail like a snake, to be set in the ground, and hollow
head, to set the Spear in, from (...) Lacerta a Lizard, which it resembled.
When they came home, they set it in a long woden case, made of purpose by a
pillar of the house. Odyss. 1.
(...)
(...) --
says Homer, and Virgil has the like.

Aen. 12.
Exin quae mediis ingenti adnixa columnae
Aedibus astabat, validam vi corripit hastam.
The custom first (...) to vibrate the Spear before they used it, to try the
strength of it, was so constantly kept, that (...), a shake-speare, came at
length to be an ordinary word both in Homer and other Poets to signify a
Soldier. When the Greeks began the use of Bows, I know not: but it seems
they had such things, and Hesychius in the word (...), says they made the
strings of Horses hair. Swords likewise they had, which they used to hang by
their sides, (...) by belts, (...).
or strings of leather, as they did the shields: and the strings came over the
shoulders as ours do.

(...). Hesiod.

What other offensive arms they had I know not. But the Scholiast upon
Euripides, in one place reports, that about the time of the Theban War, they
excelled most in the defensive: and that the Barbarians were better at the
offensive.

CAP. IV. De ritu excipiendi legatos, indicendi Bellum, consulendi deos,
observandi dies, and trajiciendi fluvios.
AS careful and as cunning as they were in Warlike affairs, I cannot find but
that they did propere sequi quae piget in choare, bear a greater affection to
Peace: as may apeare in their honorable receiving of Ambassadors, to whom they
gave hearing in no worse place then a Temple, Demosth. (...).
and their entertainment in the Prytaneum. The usual Ensign carried by Greek
Ambassadors, was (...) caduceus a right staff of wood with snakes twisted
about it, and looking one another in the face. Whither this was to affright
them from discord, and to put them in mind of the Serpents teeth (a seed of
dissension sometime sown by Cadmus among Draco's friends) it is but (...) my
conjecture, and a bolt perhaps too soon shot to hit the mark. An Ambassadors
allowance, was two (...) a day, Etym.
which they usually called (...). If the Peace could not be kept, but they must
needs have war: ye^ they yould be sure to give warning, and fair pla^, and
make Proclamations of their intentions, before they marched. the manner in
proclaiming War, (...). Homer in Batra chrm.
was to send a fellow of purpose, either to cast a Spear, or to let loose a
Lamb into the borders of the Country, or into the City it self, whether they
were Marching (which Hesychius rather thinks to have been the signal before a
battle) thereby showing them (...), that what was then a habitation for men,
Diogenian.
should be shortly a pasture for sheep, and what was then pasture for their own
sheep, should be shortly turned to the use of their enemies. Before they set
forward upon a March, you will not think how exact they were in preparation
considering, and examining whether it were convenient or not, the Gods must be
Sacrificed to, the Prophets and Diviners sought to, and all the old Oracles and
Prophecies concerning the City search into: for this course the (...).
Tragoedian makes to have been taken by Demophon of Athens, upon the coming of
Euristheus. Then besides this, after the manner of other Nations, Jewish,
La^ine, and Persian, they used to vow one thing or other, to be devoted and
consecrated to the gods, in case they prevailed: such as was that of the Tithe
of the men to Apollo, and many other vows of the like price. Nay the Athenians
were so over-lavish in this kind, that once there came an Oracle from Jupiter
Hammon, test^fying the gods dislike of such courses, and commending the
frugality of the Lacedaemonians.

In like manner were they superstitious in the observation of days. For as the
Lacedaemonians thought it not good to march (...), till the full of the Moon:
so neither did they think it lucky either to march (...), till the seventh day
of the Month, (...). Aristoph. in Eq. Herodot.
or to make any Commanders till the new of the Moon. In Marching the General
used always (...), to keep himself one the right horn, or wing. The
Soldiers but newly entered ((...)) kept themselves (...), Suidas.
in those parts, or those Corpora (as the Romans called them) which were less
in danger, such kind of service was from thence called (...), and sometimes
(...). When they came to a River, before they went over, they would be sure to
Sacrifice by it, which they called (...). No passing without a prayer Hesiod.
l. 2.
-- (...).
The Romans always observed the like custom when they came to Petronia, (a
River that runs into Tiber) commonly calling the action Peremne auspicari.
Festus.


CAP. V. De ritu Committendi praelium, and de usu tubarum.
(...). In Eurip. Phaen.
WHen they fought a Battle, after they had killed a victime and looked upon the
gall, then away to the Torches* for (...), instead of sounding a Trumpet, they
had fellows whom they called (...), that went before with Torches, and
throwing them down in the midst between the two Armies, gave the sign.

Prima manu rutilam de vertice Larissaeo. Statius Th. 4.

Obtrudit Bellona facem.
Lycophron in his (...), and Pindar in (...), seem to allude to this incentive
or incendiary. Now this business they might do safely, and without any
danger, (...). For the Torch bearers were peculiarly protected by Mars, and
accounted sacred, (...). In Eurip. Phaen. (...).
(...): insomuch that it became a proverb, when an Army was totally defeated,
(...). In Eurip. Phaen. (...).
(...). Those Torches Euripides in Rhesus calls (...), where he says that the
Achivi avoided them, that is, refused to fight. -- (...)
(...).
Qui elatus es, audiens faces
Fugere Achivos.
(better in my mind then Qui audiens ignis faces accensas adductus est, ut
credat fugere etc.) Nay, not only when they would signify their intentions to
fight with the enemy, (...). In Homer Il. (...).
to the enemy himself: but also when they would signify his approach to
others, to have their assistance, they made use of Torches too, which they
called (...). The word rendered faces, and you may render it Brands, or Beacons
if you will, for they were made of dry wood, or sticks, that would quickly take
fire, as our Beacons are. And they had men still who did (...) keep (...)
Watches, in the (...). Aristoph. in Avib.
Towers or Forts, as we do at the Beacons. If the enemy came in the night,
they fired the Brands, if he came by day, they raised a smoke. But I must tell
you, there were (...) Torches or Brands, to be lighted upon the approach of
their friends too; as well as (...). But with this distinction, that (...) were
held, or let lie still: but the (...) were tossed and shaken to and fro.

But those Torches lasted not always. In Persis.
For afterward they came to make use of Trumpets, according to that of
Aeschylus (...).
In or accendit still, perhaps in a metaphore from the fire of the Torches once
in use. The first invention of the Trumpet is attributed by the Scholiast upon
Euripides to the Tyrrheni, In Phaen.
from whom it is conceived to have been first brought into Greece by own
Archidas an assistant to the Heraclidae, as the same Scholiast reports in the
same place. (...). And therefore he calls the Trumpet, (...), viz. from the
inventers; as the Poet himself had done before, both in his Phaenissae, and
his Heraclidae: where he says it was used when they joined Battle, and that
then it sounded (...). v 830.
(...) a long blast, like that in the book of Judges (but of this word I have
bespoken before.) There was a time when Shields did serve for Trumpets
conchaeque sonantes: C. 6.5.
and then you might easily construe that riddle of Theognis.

(...)
(...).
CAP. VI. De Scytale, de Militum paenis and praemiis and Sepultura,
IF it went well with the Army in the fight, the messenger that was sent with
the news was adorned with (...) etc. Soph. Trach. (...). In Aristoph. Eq.
Garlands. In the mean time those that were at home, and continually looked for
news, used to sacrifice to the gods in the ways, (...), if it were good to
bring it along the way to them, if not to be there in the way and stop it For
close conveying of the intelligence I suppose they had several ways. Whether
they made use of the Lacedemonian (...), I know not. If you please, you may
read the description thereof in A. Gellius at full: L. 17. c. 9.
or in the Scholiast upon Aristophanes in his Aves. Where he says, that the
made them two stave^ or rods (...) of a length, one to be kept at home, and the
other to be carried by the General along with him. When they meant to send him
any private message, they took a piece of a (...) a skin, or parchment, and
wrote upon it, so as it could not be understood, unless it were rolled upon
those staves, and the Parchment and the staff one applied to the other. This
Lacedemonian trick (as it seems by the Poet, whether he spoke in jest or in
eargest, I cannot tell) was imitated by the Athenians, among a great many other
things, out of a Laconomany, as he terms it, or a humor like that of the
English toward the French.

(...)
(...).
If any one turned (...) transfuga, or betrayed the place committed to him, he
suffered death. If he had been (...), and would not, or (...) and could not
fight for fear, or if (...), or (...), he had left his rank or thrown down
his Arms, he was registered, and delivered to the Heliastae to be punished as
they pleased, Vid supr.
and not to come to the Temples, Aeschines contra Ctcsiph. Eurip. Heracl. v.
966.
till he had satisfied justice. If they had taken any man alive, they were not
to kill him afterward.

(...).
Such as were maimed, were to be allowed two (...), says Hesychius: (but one,
says Harpocration) every day out of the public Treasury: but first they
were to be examined by the Parliament of five Hundred, Vid. Supr.
whether they were (...). now (...) were (...), says Harpocration, those whose
estates came not to so much as three minae. Such as were slain, their Children
were maintained out of the public Treasure, till they came to be twenty
years old: and then they had a (...), a Suit of Arms bestowed upon them,
(...), to put them in mind of their fathers exploits, and to keep them from
degenerating. They had the honor also (...), of having the foremost seat at
shows. If they buried the party slain in the same place (as they did all at
Plato.
Marathon^fight) the fashion was then to make a shield his Beer, as 'twas
before to make it his cradle, according to those words of the Lacedaemonian
virago to her Son, as she was helping on his shield, (...), either do thou
bring the shield home again, or let the shield bring Arma superveheris quid,
Thrasibule, tua Auson Epig. 24.
thee; nay and to make it his Coffin too sometimes, as it seems by the saying
of Talthybius in Euripides concerning Astyanax.

(...)
(...).
At the burial, the rest of his company Marched in equipage thrice about the
Pyra, shaking their Arms, and throwing their swords, bridles, belts, or one
thing or other, into the fire or the grave after him. But for the most part,
they were allowed a public burial upon the common charge, at home in the
Ceramicus all together. And then three days before the burial, Thucid* l. 3.
the bones being laid up in Tents, upon the burial day, every Tribe brought a
Coffin of Cypress wood and carrying away each one their bones, put them in the
ground with several pillars and inscriptio^s, and one solemn speech for all.
Such as came off with life and honor, were allowed to have their Arms in
their Shields, or else placed in the (...) and honored with the name of
Cecropidae, Citizens of the true old blood: according to that Eurip. in Ph^n.
(...).


Sometimes such as had the first fruits (or the prime) of the spoils, were
adorned with a golden (...), Ibid.
(...)
(...).


CAP. VIII. De Trophaeis.
FOR memorialls of the victory, (...), they erected Trophies: (you may right
(...), if you had rather follow the most (...). In Aristoph. Plut.
ancient, then that which is newest in fashion.) Trophies were usually pillars
of brass, or stone, or wood. And the wood sometimes olive ((...), says
Dionysius) and sometimes the trunk of an Oak.

-- Quercusque trophaeis Curva tremens --
Those Pillars among them answered to the arcus triumphalis among the Latins.
Only that might be overthrown; but these might neither be taken away, nor
restored again, if consumed with age or the like, (...), Plut. in Roman.
least they should thereby rub up the old sore and revive the grudge with their
enemies. And therefore, says the same Author, (...), those that made them
Trophies of brass, were looked upon as contentious men, and haters of Amnesty.
Now upon the Trophee, they engraved an (...), declaring the cause of the War,
Stobaeus de Fortuna.
and the manner of the Victory: such a one as Othryades wrote with the blood of
the Argivi. The like inscriptions many times were written upon other things.
For Pausanias having conquered Mardonius at Platae^, did not only at Byzantium
write it upon the Cup, which he consecrated to the gods of the place; (as
Athenaeus reports to his dispraise for his arrogance) but also upon a tripus
besides, which he caused to be made of Gold and sent to Delphos, with this
inscription, (...) Thucid. l. 1.

(...).


Wherewith the Lacedaemonians being displeased blotted it clean out and instead
thereof, engraved the names only of those Cities, by whose help they obtained
the victory, And so when they overthrew the Medes at Marathon, they caused an
inscription to be set up in the vault called (...)
(...).

In Cicero's Pison.
time (it seems) the custom of erecting Trophies was left off. And therefore
he says, that the Thebans were accused for erecting a Trophee over the
Lacedaemonians. But instead of them, they erected sometimes Altars, (as
Alexander did upon the hill Amanus:) and sometimes Images to Jupiter (...) (so
called from causing the enemy (...) to turn their backs: as the Romans did to
Jupiter Stator, for causing their own Soldiers to stand to their ground) such
a one as Hyllus and (...) (as I told you before of (...)) good or valiant
Iolaus erected. Eurip. in Heracl. v. 937.


-- (...).
The Spoils which they took ((...) from the dead, and (...) from the living)
they usually dedicated to the gods, and sometimes sent them to Delphos. The
common name for such things was (...), In Odyss. 4.
qusi (...), says Eustathius as if it were (...): the same name which they
gave to those goods, which Merchants consecrated for delivery from shipwreck
(only that then there is a new Etymology, viz. (...) a littore (...), because
the things were saved from being cast on shore.) But I rather incline to the
Scholiast upon Sophocles Trachiniae, who says those (...), or the first fruits
of the spoils which they Sacrificed to the gods were called (...), because
they used to lay the spoils, which they had taken, together on a heap, and
then (...), they skim'd away the Cream as I may say, or the Crop, or the
Choice to be given back for the gods that gave them. In allusion where to
Megara in Euripides, speaking what choice of Wives she had made for her Sons
out of Athens, Thebes, and Sparta, expresses it thus.

(...).
The Arms which they took, (...) they hung up for the most part in their
Temples, and some times in their own house) as they did their own, when they
left the service, as Horace says -- Veianius, armis
Herculis ad postem fixis, latet abditus agro.


Some of the spoils they hung upon the Trophies, but wrote them (...) --
Eurip. Heracl. v. 786.
all. For that was the custom, (...) says the In Phaenis. Eur.
Scholiast.

LIBER SEPTIMVS.
SECT. I. De ritu Divinandi per motum furentem, and s^mniantem.
THERE were not many things in use among the Jews the people of God, which the
Gentiles imitatorum pecus, do not seem to have imitated; and so vice versa.
Such as the Prophets were among them, such were the Magi among the Persians,
the Chaldaei among the Assyrians, Gymnosophists among the Indians, the
Galleotae among the Sicilians, and the Hetrusci among the Italians. Neither was
the honor or credit of Divination less then the use. For if we may believe L.
16.
Strabo, (...), many of their old Prophets have been thought worthy to be
Kings. To a Persian King it was necessary, to any other convenient.
Amphilochus, and Mopsus Kings of Argivi were Augurs too. Helenus and Cassandra
Children of a King; one was an Augur, and the other a Sybill. But to a
Physician, it was reckoned so necessary, that Aeschylus has used (...) a
Physician, and (...) a Prophet, one for the other, which made Achilles in time
of the Pestilence, to seek to (...) for a cure. The Scholiast upon Homer speaks
of two men, Melampus and Polyidus, that were excellent in both Professions.
Credit it had among the best Philosophers (especially that of Dreams, and
Enthysiasmes) maintained by Plato and the Socraticks, Zeno and the Stoics,
Aristotle and the Peripateticks* Pythagoras indeed was against extispicina,
Divination by entralls; and only Epicurus against that and all the rest.

Prediction of things to come, was either from men, cal^ (...): or from the
Gods, properly called (...) an Oracle. According to that of the In Oed. Tyr.
Scholiast upon Sophocles, (...). Indeed (...) seems to be the genus, and
(...) the species. The same Prophesy which when it was spoken by a god, was a
(...): when it was delivered by Ennius.
men, was (...). In the Oracles the word was Fari (neque me Apollo fatis fandis
dementem invitam ciet:) whereas in the other it could be but praesagire at the
wisest. The faculty in the first (...) (as we now called it, Plato
(...)) or (...) as Plato called it (for, as Tiresias said, (...)) is divided
by Plutarch, and Cicero, into first (...) artificiosam, that which is acquired
by observation and experience, Eurip. in Bac. 199.
observatis longo tempore significationibus etc. And 2ly (...) or (...)
naturalem, for which we take little or no pains. These two species are said to
be (...), the twins, or the double legacy, which Apollo bequeathed to Iamus his
son, and to his Family after him. The natural or infused faculty of
Divination, most properly called (...), proceeded first a motu furente, from a
Frantic motion. Which though they took it for a help to prophecy, yet it
seems rather to have been a punishment sent from God, who in the Prophesy of
Isaiah c. 44. v. 25. Said he would make their Diviners mad. And Cicero himself
says it is very strange, ut qui humanos sensus amiserit, divinos assecutus sit,
that he that has lost his own sense, should be able to know the sense of the
gods. Hitherto you may reduce the Prophetic speeches of dying men: such as
that of Rhodius in Cicero, who foretold the death of six men that were of the
same age, which should be first, and which next and so along. Or else it
proceeded a motu somnianti, from a doting dreaming motion. And then they called
it (...), which because it helps nature forward when it is going alre^dy, he
that had it is by Plutarch compared to a stone tumbling down the hill.

The first kind coming by Enthusiasme or Inspiration, was either of less
authority; such as Cassandra had: or Polybius Prophesying his Sons death, as
he went to Troy; or Solon foretelling the tyrany. Or else of greater, so as to
command a belief: such as the Sybill women had, or the Pythia wench, who
delivered the Oracles; which was nothing but a cunning trick, a vafris
quibusdam and quaestuariis inchoatum, invented for gain. The difference
between those two Prophets consisted in this, that Cic. l. 1. de Divin.
Terrae vis Pythiam Delphis incitabat, naturae Sibyllam. Pythia had it
inspired, or blown into her out of the ground, and the Sibylles had it by
nature. Now, because the number of Oracles, and the superstition was greater in
Greece and in Athens, then in any other part of the world, It may not be amiss
to speak somewhat of the most noted of them, viz. Pythium, Dodonaeum, and
Jupiter Hammon's.

CAP. I. De Oraculo Pythio.
THE most noted of the three Oracles was the first. It was called Pythium, for
the same reason that the Woman was called Pythia, i. e. Either from Python the
serpent, that lay in the pit, out of which the Oracle came, afterward killed by
Apollo, who possessed the place by conquest Or from Pytho, another name of
Delphos the place of this oracle, which came from Pythis the son of Delphus*
the son of Apollo. Delphos was as fit a place to distribute Oracles to all
the body of Greece, as the navill is to distribute nourishment to the body of a
child. And therefore Sophocles calls it (...), because it was (...) the Navill,
or Vmbilicus the midst of Greece, (says Strabo) and not of the World as Ovid
would have it Orb in medio positi. And this they came to know forsooth, by the
two Eagles (says Pindar: Crows says some, and others Swans) which being let
fly by Jupiter, met both in that place. Nay in allusion to the name of (...)
(by which it was commonly called) Pausanias sa^es there was to be seen in the
Temple a Navill made of white stone, with a Ribband hanging to it for the
Navill-string. But Lactantius had rather derive it from (...) the Oracle. And
Varro would by no means yield to have it derived from the Navill, quoniam
neque locus is sit terrarum medius, neque umbilicus sit in homine medius. But
the latter reason is defeated by Vitruvius, or by any one else. The first
beginner of the Oracle (some say) was Tellus, (...): and some Themis. (...).


The first beginning of the Oracle, was after this manner. When the place was a
Common, Diodor. l. 6.
the Goats that fed there, coming to a den very large below; with a little
mouth at the Top, and looking in, on a sudden fell a leaping and making a
strange noise. He that kept them ( Plutarch calls him Coretas) seeing this, ran
to the place to know what the matter was, and fell into the same frolic; but
prophesied tool And thus it fared with diverse others, that came thither to the
same purpose. Nay a great many, with the breath ((...), or anhelitus terra, as
Cicero calls it) that came out of the earth, expired. Insomuch that afterward
they set a Three-footed-stoole upon the hole, and a Maid upon it consecrated
for a Priestesse, whose common name was Pythia, and her office to put the
Oracle into verse and deliver it out. For (says Plutarch) the words are hers,
only Apollo, (...), sat in under blowing with the bellows to set her a
peeping, or a whispering like those (...) in Isaiah c. 8. v. 19. Where he
speaks of such (...), or belly. Prophets that peep and mutter; such as the
Pythia was, As I have heard he lately did in a possessed Christian in the Town
of Barwick
out of whose belly the Devil spoke his Prophesyes with a small peeping voice
like a child's. But that Prophet in another place comes nearer to us, saying,
thou shall not speak out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the
dust, and thy voice shall be as one that has a familiar spirit out of the
ground, C. 29. v. 4.
and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust. Now some say the Tripus whereof
I spoke, was a pot filled with dust, through which the afflatus the wicked
inspiration, was to pass into the belly of the Wench, and so to go forth at
her mouth for an Oracle. And therefore it is that those Prophets which in those
tims had a familiar spirit within them, were commoly called by the name of
(...), Plutarch. de Or^c^ defec.
and (...), as well as (...), and And Euriclidae from Eurycles a Prophet of
that name.
(...), the manner of her sitting etc* when she took the spirit in, because it
may not so fitly be expressed in English, I desire to give you it in the words
of the Aristoph. in Avib.
Sch^liast, (...). She was no sooner inspired, but she fell a tearing her
hair, and running round, foaming at the mouth, and cutting her flesh as bad as
ever the Prophets of Baal did. Lactantius thus speaks of their gestures, Sectis
namque humeris and utraque mann districtos gladios exerentes current,
efferantur, insaniunt. But this peeping may not make me preposterous; and
therefore I will tell you more of the Wench and the Tripus. The first Maids
name that Prophesied in that place, was Phaenomene. All the rest were young
Virgins, as she was, till Echecrates a Thessalian deflowred Phaebas; and then
they made choice of Women of fifty years of age, but made them go in the
habit of a Virgin. The (...). on Eurip. Phaen.
custom of those Virgins was, before they went to stool, to wash their
bodies, and especially their hair in the fountain Castalius (where the Poets
a people of the like inspiration, and Vates too, were used to wash) -- (...) --
when they sat first on the stool, they used to shake (...). on Aristoph.
the Laurell-tree that grew close by the Tripus, and sometimes to take the
leaves and chew in their mouths, as Lucian says (...): for so other such
Women used to do, and therefore Lycophron calls Cassandra (...).

The first that came to receive an Oracle from them, was Parnassus, from whence
(some say) the place took it is name, whereas before it was Larnassus from (...)
Deucalion's Arc that rested there fides penes autorem. As for Tripus (called
by the Latins Cortina, whence Cortinipotens for Apollo, thouhg Prudentius made
it but the cover -- tripodes Cortina tegit)

It is thought by the Scholiast upon Aristophanes in Lysistrate to have been
(...) a Pot (as I told you before) with a wide mouth, and made of Brass, but
filled with (...), or calculi, cuts, or Lottery-pellets (usually put in such
pots) whereof those that leapt out of the Pot, ((...)) or leapt and dan^ed in
it, when any one came to ask, according to the signification they bare, made
up the answer. But it is rather thought to have been a thing with three legs
(after the fashion of the common sort of Tables) with a round cover like a
table-bord called (...),) as the table-bords were) whence Apollo is by
Sophocles called (...), and his Wench (...).

I wonder that ever people could so much loose themselves, as to go to her
that would be sure to put the business in a greater question by the answer,
and make them more to seek then they were before. But that they were resolved
to be fooled, because forsooth Apollo is (...) crooked there too, as well as in
the Zodiac, and he must (...), be crabbed in in his delivery, as well as in
his gate. It Is his use.

Senec. Oed. Act 2. Sc 1.
Ambage nexa Delphico mos est deo
Arcana tegere.
And indeed if we may believe the Scholiast upon Aeschylus, (...), in ancient
time they made their verses in riddles. Now the Oracles, were delivered
commonly in verse, as he says. -- dictae per carmina Sorts.
For Sorts they usually called them, and the Verse for the most part was
Hexameter, insomuch that this Oracle, (...)
(...).


Was thought, to be none of Pythia's, because it was not heroic enough to
become the author. De Pythiae Oracul
Plutarch says some were of opinion, that there were Poets kept of purpose in
the Oracle place. (...), to catch the Oracles as they fell, and wrap them up in
verse. But one reason why they delivered their Oracles in verse, or in brief,
and so commonly in obscurity, was because the god (...), not willing to
conceal the truth altogether, nor yet desirous to make it known, was feign to
have delivered in such manner, as no body might take advantage to hurt the
speaker, if that answer were not according to his mind. It Is true in later
times it fell to prose (when it began to fall in the price) and the reason
thereof has been sufficiently disputed already by Plutarch in a treatise of
purpose.

The esteem, which they had of those Oracles, was such; that in times of War,
when no other Divination could prevail, Polyanus l. 2.27.
it was an ordinary thing to feign an Oracle, to persuade the Soldiers to
fight. For they might very well be of Tiresias his mind, who though he were an
Entral gazer himself, yet in Euripides you shall have him confessing to Creon,
that men were so apt to speak contrary to what they knew, either out of ill
will, or for fear, or for favor, that there was little, or no credit to be
given to any other Prophecy, besides Apollo's own.

-- (...)
(...).
And yet it is clear, that the Woman or some body else was naught, and
corrupted very often. Tully when he had thus commended her for a tell-troth,
nunquam illud oraculum Delphis tam celebre and tam clarum fuisset, neque tantis
donis refertum omnium populorum atque regum, nisi omnis aetas oraculorum
illorum veritatem esset expert^, afterward comes in with a Iamdiu idem non
facit. But indeed, she has not been thus a long time. Nay for three hundred
years (I think) before his time, Demosthenes could complain she did (...),
Plutarch. de Herodot.
flatter and speak, as Philip would have her. Thus one time she was bribed by
Clysthenes, to persuade the Lacedaemonians to free the Athenians from the
Tyranny; and another time by Cleomenes, to persuade them to deprive his
Colleague Demaratus of his place. Neither would Lycophron call Apollo (...) for
nothing.

But you will say some other body might play the knave, and put it upon her. L.
2. de Divin.
And likely enough. For so Cicero thinks they did in that answer reported to be
given by Apollo to Pyrhus, Aio te Aeacida Romanos vincere posse. And that,
First because Apollo did not speak in Latin. 2ly Because none of the Greek
writers mention any such thing. And 3ly Because the Oracles were not given in
verse in Pyrrhus his time.

CAP. II. De Templo Delpico, de Theoris, and Oraculi cessatione.
ALL this while I have said nothing of the Temple, for fear of saying too
little. So famous and so rich as it was with the gifts or (...), of most of
the Princes or People in the world (insomuch that Aphetoriae opes, so said from
(...) the name of Apollo, who was emissor Oracul^rum, has been used as a
proverb for abundance of wealth^ I have red of five Temples erected in the
same place at several times. The first was of Laurell-boughes fetched from
Tempe fields. The second, of Wax and Feathers: or else feigned to be made (...)
of wings, because the man's name was Pteras that built it. The third, of Brass
(as the Temple was at Sparta Minervae (...).) This some say was molten to
ground, others that it was swallowed up by the Earthquake. The forth, Pausan
in Pho^.
of stone, destroyed by fire the first year of the fifth Olympiad. The fifth,
built by the Amphyctions out of the ho^y treasure in a very s^eep place, with
but one narrow way for the entrance More might be said concerning the temple,
and the E. I. in the fronti^pice, the reason whereof is disputed by (...) E. I.
78 (...).
Pluturch; but I doubt there is too much already. I will proceed to the
Customs, which the Athenians (the devoutest servants of Apollo) used in
sending to him: either to Delphos, or to Delos, to do him honor, or to ask
his advice. The occasion of sending to the Oracle, was either for help in
performing some arduous affairs; or for delivery from sickness, or the like.
When they went thither, they were said (...)* when they returned again (...).
The ceremonies used in sending Embasses extraordinary to Delphos, were near the
same with those that were ordinarily used in the Delia-feast once a year, and
they were these. Those that were sent were called sometimes (...), from the
feast, sometimes (...) (like Hebrew seers) a name suitable to that of Apollo
(...) in Pindar ( Pyth. (...).) which some notwithstanding interpret to be his
Index, or his angel the Crow. He that had the ordering of the business was
called (...). There were also sent along with them (...), two that were to be
(...), or Eupulones at Delos for that year. The ship in which they went, was
first to be adorned with Garlands by the Priest of Apollo, and so were the
messengers too on the (...). Apollonius l. 2. Argon.
head, the brow, and the neck, (...), head in allusion to the three parts of
the soul. The ship was likewise called (...), and sometimes (...). It was wont
to be Theseus his, in which the Boys were brought, that were to be paid to the
Minotaur, at such time as returning from Crete to Athens he instituted the
Plays, and the solemnity celebrated by the aforesaid Deliastae, when they came
to Delos. This very ship the Athenians kept for his sake, till the time of
Demetrius Phalereus, (...), Insomuch (says Plutarch) that Philosophers use to
illustrate that opinion, that the body remains still the same notwithstanding
continual decay, by this similitude. Thucyd. l. 5.
Besides this, there were four more naves sacrae, viz. the Paralos, Antigonis,
Ptolemais, and Ammonis. The things that were sent for the keeping of the feast
and the Sacrifice, were called (...). For when they came thither, first they
(...). apud Pind. Olymp. H.
Sacrificed; and then the Maid sent thither from several places, fell a
Dancing a strange kind of dance about the Altar, which the called (...),
Gruem the Crane: wherein, their motions being crooked like the cranes-neck when
he holds it in, they imitated the turnings and windings of the Minotaurs
Labyrinth; beating the Altar, and biting at a bush of Olives with their hands
behind them (as our boys do at Snap apple) if so much be imported in the
words of Callimachus.

(...). Hymn. in Del.

(...)
(...) etc.
The Altar was (...), and therefore called (...) because it was made by Apollo
at four years old, of the horns of the Goats, which his sister Diana killed
a hunting upon Cynthus hill. The horns were all of the left side, says Plut
in Thes^o. And yet in his book de Solertia Animalium, it is (...). Whether it
should be rendered of the right side, or right, that is, fit or handsome, I
know not. But so strangely were these horns joined together without any
Cement, glue, or tie, that it was reckoned for one of the seven strange sights
(...) as Ovid says, Miror and innumeris structam de cornibus aram.


During all these holy days no malefactor was to suffer punishment. By which
means Socrates had the hap to be reprieved for thirty days, (...), says
Xenophon. When the Theori returned, they came with their Garlands abought them,
and the People ran all forth to meet them, o^ening their doors, and making
obeisance as they passed by, which made him complain so in Euripides. In
Hippol.
(...)
(...).
How the Oracle at Delphos came to cease is uncertain. Some say, Alexander put
it down. But it appears to have flourished after his time^ Plutarch thinks,
it ceased as soon as men had wit enough to advise themselves, without seeking
to him that made it his business to cousen them. Dion says, it was Nero
murdered the men at the hole. When it left Delphos it went to the Pulcher
Apollo Lustrat Hyperboreas Delphis cessantibus aras. Claudian.
Hyperborean Scythians: for Abaris a Scythian one of Apollo's Priests, wrote a
book of his Oracles, and his coming thither. The Athenians when all Greece was
infected with the Plague, had an Oracle from thence, to make vows and prayers
in the name of the rest. And it was their fashion to send gifts and offerings
thither, as they had done to Delphos. But what need we doubt of the time or the
cause, since we doubt not of that which Prudentius asserts -- Ex quo hominis
Deus induit ar^u^,
Delphica damnatis tacuerunt sortibus antra.
Non Tripodes Cortina tegit, non spumat anhelus
Fata Sibyllinis fanaticus edita libris.
Perdidit insanos mendax Dodona vapores
Neo responsa refert Lybicis in Syrtibus Ammon.


The Oracle place, ((...)) of Jupiter Hammon, is thought to have been at first
a kind of School for the family of Cham, or Ham, but afterward abused by the
Devil to this delusion of Oracles. It was in Africa among the Garamantes in a
place almost inaccessible for heat, as that place at Delphos was for hight.
Dodonas Grove is thought to have been such another School, viz. For the
offspring of Dodonaim Nephew to Iaphet. But for this there is a Fable of a pair
of Doves, that should come from Egypt, one of which picht upon a Beech-tree in
Epirus, and there using the voice of a man among other good instructions gave
order for the building of a Temple in that place; which was done by Deucalion
after his ship came thither (while I speak of these things I cannot but think
upon Noah and his Arc, and his Dove) besides the building of the City Dodona,
near unto which this Oracle was. These two Oracles are reckoned the most
ancient of all, and of these two, the last. (...). Herodot.
And therefore a word or two more of it then I thought. It is conceived by
most, that those Doves were certain Women-priests or Prophets, fetched from
Egypt (the Mart of superstition) by the Phaenicians first, and from them
conveyed into Thessaly. Now in the Thessalian language, the same word which
signifies a Dove, is used also to signiy a Prophetess, In Il. (...).
(...). Eustathius says, that in the Thessalian tongue old Women were called
(...), and old men (...) and that those Prophetesses being three old women,
whose names were Promenia, Timarate, and Nican^^e, either by mistake of the
word, or the fiction of Poets were commoly supposed to be doves. The same
author also says, that perhaps those women being Barbarians (whom the Greeks
would scarce allow to be men and women) for the rude brutish language might
have been counted as so many birds. But it seems to have been no such strange
thing in ancient times, for Prophetesses to have the nanes of doves. And
therefore Lycophron calls Cassandra by the name (...) Palumbes: though in
another place she have the name of a more rattling Bird, viz. (...) the Swallow.
The Scholiast upon Sophocles (in his Trachiniae) has another conjecture more
besides that which I named last, viz That these Prophetesses had the name of
(...): or rather if you will, the old women therefore had the name of (...),
because they were (...) gray haired and aged.

Strabo speaks of four Priests called (...), from the fennes near the Temple,
viz. of Jupiter surnamed Tomurus, which was a name common also to the Priests.
Homer calls them (...), saying -- (...)
(...).


They used not to wash their feet; and lay upon the ground when they slept.
When they gave answer, they got them amid'st the boughs, and so the Oracle was
thought to come from the Oaks, when it came but from between them. They are
called (...), and (...), and the Argo reported to be made of the timber
Lycophron called Coeco Tomuri jovis augure luco Arbore praesaga tabulas
animasse Loquacis. Claudian*
(...). Round about the Temple stood Basins of Brass, one just against the
other (...), says Eustathius, of which if you struck but one all the rest
would cry, and make such a noise, that at length Aes Dodonaeum became a
Proverb. Be^ike they used to strike these Basins as they used to do other
Basins and Pots, with a ring held by a thread in the hand, and striking the
sides of the vessel so many times, to make a Divination by the sounds.

CAP. III. De Divinatione persomnium, super Melotas in Templis, cum
observatione diaetae.
Prophesying by a Dream, was either (...), Somniatoris, of a Dreamer of
Dreams, or (...) Conjectoris, of an Interpreter of dreams, such as Hecuba
spoke of when she said (...). The latter of these surely belongs to the
technicall part of divination, and may be reckoned for an Art, as well as any
other sort of Ario^ation. For he that shall object that speaking but sometimes
true, does not argue skill, because si saepe jactav^ris, quandoque venerem
jacies, in Cicero's opinion may be answered with this question, Lib. 1. Divin.
Quae tandem id ars non habet? Besides if it were no Art, what talk we of
Xenophon's dreams in his service with Cyrus; or how came it, that there were
so many books written of this subject? For, to say nothing of Hadr. Iun animad.
eleven more that wrote of purpose of it, nor of the Treatise (...) reported by
In Pompeio.
Plutarch to be found among Mithridates his books, Artemon Milesius wrote two
and twenty books of it himself; and there is a very pretty copy of about
fourscore Senarii verses in Greek, touching the signification of such or such a
sight in a dream* But the dream (you must understand) was not every (...), or
vain dream (for so does the Elymology import. (...), says Eustathius) but
(...), or (...), a Morning dream, fresh and fasting, such as (...) is, says
(...). Hom. Odyss. T.
Homer, which they derive (...), which comes about waking time, or (...), which
they derive (...), and of such is that of Orph^us in the Hymm: (...). I believe
few that read me are such as Plutarch^ Thrasymede, or Plinies Atlant^s, that
never dream^ of a dream* and therefore I will make ^old to detain them the
longer. It is variously conjectured who was the first conjectour in this kind.
Lib. 7. cap 5^
Pliny says, Amphic^y^n, Deucalion's son; Philo Iudaeus, Abraham; Trogus
Pompeius, Joseph; Pausanias would have it to be Amphiaraus, whom he reports to
have been Deified for his skill; and that they used to sacrifice to him, when
they looked for a dream. They talk that the People that lived near
Borysthenes, and the Gades, were excellent at this work; and so were those
that lived at the Pausan Eliac. Propertius lib. 2. El. 4.
Hiblae, two Cities so named in Sicily. But among'st all, the old doting Women
were best at it, Quae mihi non decies somnia versat anus.


When they desired to dream a Prophetical dream, sometimes they would
sacrifice a Ram to Amphiaraus, and sleep upon the fleece. For thus the Daunii
used to do in the Temple of (...). Strabo l. 6.
Calchas. So likewise the Calabri used their m^lotae sheepskins, or fleeces,
to sleep upon at the Sepulcher of Podalirius And it seems, it was a common
practice both for dreaming; for Virgil also says, -- Caesarum ovium sub noctae
silenti
Pellibus incubuit stratis, s^mnosque petivit.
And also for purifying a polluted person in the Ele^sinian and other
sacrifices: for they took the skins of beasts that had been sacrificed to
Jupiter (which they called by the name of (...)) and laid them under their
feet. Nay there was no small use of fleeces and skins in several other
businesses: as in Mourning, and at Weddings, when the Wife (as I told you) sat
upon a fleece for a cushion, to show her purpose Lanificie intendere of spining
and carding. The Scythians played mad tricks with skins. For among them, if a
man had been wronged, and had need of help to revenge himself, he would
sacrifice an Ox, Call. Rodig.
and cut the flesh into pieces and boil it, and sit upon the skin with his
hands behind him, and so beg for help. Then come his friends, and every one
taking a piece of the flesh, and setting his right foot on the skin, promised
either men of Arms, or what he best could* Such ceremonies as these, they
accounted a fast engagement, and much conducing to the success. Sometimes they
would go and sleep in a Temple with Laurel, or some such fatidicall stuff
tied about their heads, and sacrifice to (...). Athenaeus l. 8.
Brizo, the goddess of the dreamers, so called from (...) to sleep. The
Lacedaemonians kept men of purpose to sleep in the Temple of Pasithea, to watch
for dreams. So if any were sick, they would go and sleep in the Temple of
Aesculapius, to dream of a remedy, (as they have used to do with us, to go
watch at the Church door, to know who shall dye next) Pluto in Aristophanes did
so,

(...)
And the like was wont to be done in Egypt in the Temple of Serapis. But
Iuvenal has sufficiently declared the vanity of all this doings in saying, Sat.
6.
Non delubra deum, nec ab aethere ^^mina mitt^nt
Sed sibi quisque facit.


Besides all this they took a special care of their diet, so as to fast for
one day before, and abstain from Wine for three. as likewise to forbear eating
Beans or raw fruit. Aristotle says there is no credit to be given (...), to
dreams in the Autumn. Sympos l. 9.
But Plutarch questions that again, and says if we eat good and ripe fruit,
(...), our dreams will be the truer. Fish either they counted very good, or
very bad* For when they sacrificed to Brizo, they offered boats full of all
manner of things but Fish; whether it were to please the goddess with the
sparing of the best thing, or the rejection of the worst I cannot tell. Cael.
Rhod. l* 27 c. 10.
Plutarch observes that the head of a Polypus is as sower in the dream, as
it is sweet in the taste: and therefore compares Poetry to it, when it is not
moderately used. Some choice there was also of the color of their Clothes. For
the whitest and cleerest was best, (...), says Suidas: as if Dreams and the
Visions must needs be the cleerer. The truest dreams ((...)) or the clearest
visions, were either a little after it was day, or toward the morning (the
forms time Homer calls (...), the milking time in the Morning, in opposition
^o (...) the milking time in the evening) -- (...)
(...).
says Theocritus: and Ovid was of the same mind (...). Odyss (...).
Pliny says a dream is never true presently after eating and dinking. Namque
sub aurora ^am dormitante lucerna Tempore quo cerni somnia vera sole^t.
But Artemidorus says it is all one for that, (...), for if you eat too much,
the dream will never be the truer i^ it tar^y' till morning.

CAP. IV. De duahus portis.
SO great a difference there was in Dreams, that they were feign to make two
distinct doors for them to come in by, one of Horn, and another of Ivory.
Odyss. (...).
For thus much Penelope her self could tell Ulysses (when she desired him to
interpret her dreams) (...)
(...).


Ausonius says as much; telling you which are the true, and which the false,
In Ephemer.
Et gemi^^^ numera porta^ qua fornice eburn^
Semper fallaces glomerant super era somnos
Altera qu^ veros ^mittit corn a visu^.


And I have heard of some Christians that have believed the same. Philostratus
says, that in allusion to these doors, they used to picture a dream with a
white garment upon a black, and a horn in his hand* The door for the true
dreams was of Horn. (...).
(Surely this was made of the horns of the Ram when they s^ep^ upon the
fleece. Nonnus dion. (...).
Of which before) the door for the false and deceitful dreams, was of Ivory,
such as that wherewith Morrheus was cozend with in the Poet. (...)
(...). Nonn.



Lucian therefore jeeres the covetous Micyllus for wishing his dreame-doore
were of Gold, whereas there were but those two in all, as may be gathered by
these words in In Charmide
Pluto. (...). The reasons of those names, I find very prettily guessed at by
the Scholiast upon Homer at the place above commended; and I shall desire your
patience to tell them. First, the true (says he) comes by the Horne-doore or
(...): because (...), or (...), that is effectum reddunt, they say no more then
comes to pass whereas those that come in by the Ivory-doore, or (...) or
(...), delude the dreamer with a fruitless hope of truth. 2ly (...), the
coming in by the Horn is as much as coming clearly, for one may see throw
horn, if it be made ^hinne* (...), the ^o^her confusedly, for one cannot see
throw Ivory, nor any other such white things, as milk or the like, if they be
never so little, and so Macrobius does Interpret Speaking of sleep says he.
Hoc velamen cum in quiet ad verum usque aciem animae introspicientis admittit,
decornu creditur cujus ista natura est, ut, ut ^enuatum vis^i pervium sit, cum
autem a vero h^be^at ac repellit, obtuum, ebur putatur cujus etc l c. 3. in
Somnium Scip.
it too. 3ly By the (...) is meant the eye, by the figure Synecdoche, or (...),
cornea t^nica, the first coat of the eye. And by the (...), the mouth, or the
Ivory-coloured tee^h (...): and so the meaning must be, that which is to be
seen with the eye is likelier, then that which is but said to be so from the
teeth. And this was also the opinion of Servius concerning the same fiction,
upon those words of Virgil Sunt Geminae somni portae etc.


4ly By the Horne-doore, may be meant the passage for the more heavenly and
Diviner sort of dreams, (...), or (...): by the other, the entrance for the
(...) the more earthly, gross, and confused. Because the Elephants Proboscis
turns downward toward the earth, whereas the Horns of other beasts look
upward toward heaven. 5ly (...), is the door for the false dreams; because
there can be no other but false dreams expected, when the Teeth have eaten too
much.

The Ghuests which are to come in by these doors, were thought to be Ghosts
and Spirits from hell. Vmbrae, shadows they might well be: and such as ascend
in a fume too, like Furies from the neither part of the body. Again as Ghosts
are -- (...), Homer. Odyss (...).
said to fly in and out like dreams, and death is a sleep: so dreams are said
to fly in and out like Ghosts, and sleep is a death. Lycophron calls them
(...), night-walking^ Bug-beares. Fly they did with black wings, like battes of
the night; and therefore Euripides calls a dream (...), Orpheus (...), Lucian
(...). If this be so, the reason, why before they went to bed, when they meant
to dream, they used to sacrifice a Victime to Mercury, was it may be not so
much because of his rod, with which he brought people a sleep, and awakened
them again, as because he was Gentleman Usher of the Ghosts: for what reason
so ever it was, it seems Mercury was most in their minds when they were ready
to sleep: and therefore as at feasts, so at other times, the last of their
prayers was to him, and the last health that went round was his. For so we find
Calasiris in Heliodorus, (...) etc. After he had prayed to all the rest of the
gods, calling upon Mercury for (...), L. 3. Suidas.
a night of good dreams. Hence was it that they us^d to fasten (...), Images
of Mercury to their beds feet, which from thence had the name of (...). When
they sacrificed that victime, they used to take the tongue and (...). on Odys.
12.
burn it in the fire, as in honor to him to whom they thought all tongues and
speech to be consecrated. (...), says the Scholiast upon Aristophanes. With
whom agrees Athenaeus, Plut.
(...), other who did not think dreams to be Ghosts, yet would have them to be
put into the head by Spirits, as Plato who thought the air to be full of such
things. And so Democritus (as the Scholiast reports, In Odyss. (...).
who says that he had it from Homer himself) thought that men dreamt this or
that dream (...), or (as De Placit. Philos.
Plutarch has it from the same man) (...), according to this composition, or
separation of Images, or Ghosts, or phancies, or somewhat. But indeed I think
those (...), should not be so much Images as Imaginations, nor so much umbrae
Ghosts, as adumbrationes, Images and Species in the Fancy proceeding from the
spirits within, and not from those without.

CAP. V. De Somniorum variis generibus, and de eorum lustratione.
FOR their descent, they thought all dreams to have one common mother the
Earth. (...), says Euripides. And the Scholiast upon him gives the reason,
(...), because from the earth comes meat from meat sleep, and from sleep
dreams. Some indeed thought, they were from Hecate, (and so they may come from
the earth still.) And some from the Moon, which was all one, and suited very
well to the time of their coming, the night. For the Kinds of dreams,
Macrobius makes five, viz 1. (...), 2. (...), 3. (...), 4. (...), 5. (...).
Others divided them into (...), and (...), were (...), when things appeared in
their own likeness. (...) were when they appeared in the likeness of other
things; when one thing was dreamt and another meant. Such as Cesar's was, when
he dreamt he lay with his Mother, and so was informed Imperium orbis terrae
portendi, quae cunctorum viventium sit matter, that the whole earth the mother
of every living thing was to be under him. Nay the distinction of dreams was
so accurate, that in the making of them, Somnus was fained to have no less
then three servants to wait upon him. For if he would have a dream that should
concern men, he made use of Morpheus: if beasts, of Phobetor (as men called
him) or Icolos (as the gods called him) Fit fera, Ovid. Met. l. 12. f 10.
sit volucris -- if nanimate creatures ( Quaeque vacant anima -- of him that
had the name of Phantasos (I wonder how he could remember all the shapes and
the river of Lethe spring in his house, and his house be as dark as a den as
any among the Cimmerii, for so it is fained to be.)

But after all this doting about a Dream, is there any remedy, if I meet with
any of the best? Yes by all means as soon as I arise, be sure to tell it to
Vesta, or some other household stuff, Propert l. 2. Eleg. 29,
diis penatibus. Vadit and hinc castae narratum somnia Vestae
Quae sibi, quaeque mihi non nocitura forent.
Or if you think this to little, tell it to the Sun, or Apollo averruncus,
called by them (...), or (...), because his Image used to stand in the Porches.
Some had rather to do it to Hercules, and some to Jupiter, as he does in
Plautus. But there is better reason why they should do it to the Sun, viz.
(...), etc. In Electr.
Because the Sun being contrary to the night, might have power to avert, or
expel all evils brought by the same. They are the words of the Scholiast,
upon that of Sophocles -- (...)* etc. They called this action (...), and (...)
Eurip. in Hec.
(...), but most properly (...). It was practiced by Iphigenia in the Poet,
when she had dreamt of the fall of the house: although she (or the Poet) had so
much wit as to think it to be to little purpose.

Idem in Taur. v. 43.
(...)
(...).
If you think that this will not do neither, try a third remedy, go make a
prayer and wash your self lustily in the cold River till you sweat. -- sub
lucem ut visa secundent.
Oro caelicolas, Sil. Ital l. 8.
and vivo purgor in amne.
Or if the River water be not good enough go to the fountain, as he did in In
Persis.
Aeschylus.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
If you think no cold water will do it, call for hot, as he does in
Aristophanes.

-- (...) In Ranis:

(...)
(...).
But perhaps no kind of fresh water is strong enough; you may do well
therefore to try in the Sea, for there they used to wash away not only the
evil of a dream, but of a crime, or disease, or any thing else: for it is
reported that Euripides when he went with Plato into Egypt, being troubled
with the falling sickness, was bid by the Priest, to bath himself in the Sea,
and being by that means cured, he presently gave this commendation of it,
(...).


So I remember Plutus in the Poet is led to the Sea, for recovery of his sight.
After murder (for other sins they scarce thought great enough, to cost hot
water) it was a common practice; and then no fear of the displeasure of a god
for the future. (...)
(...).


SECT. II. De Divinatione artificiosa, and primo de Ornithomantia.
THE Technicall part of Divining, artificiosum genus divinandi, as Cicero calls
it, consisted especially in the observing of birds, and the Entralls of Beasts.
Besides which were (...) or (...) ominous words, or things, (...) lots, (...)
sights, and indeed (...) (as the Scholiast says upon Homer) infinite many
more: but the two first were every where most in use. Il. A.
Quae est autem gens aut quae civitas, Cicer. l. 1. Divin.
quae non aut extis pecudum, aut Augurum, aut sortium praedictione moveatur. In
the first the Phrygians, Cicilians, Arabians, Pisideans, and the Vmbrians
excelled: the Lacedaemonians had so great esteem of it, that every King had his
Augur to advise him, as well as the Senate* It was first invented, L. 7. c. 55.
(says Pliny) by one Car. Auguria ex avibus invenit Car, a quo Caria nomen
habet: adjecit ex caeteris animalibus Orpheus. Improved it was very much by
Calchas: so that he proved exceeding useful to the Greeks in the Trojan
expedition, not only showing them how they should pacify Diana detaining the
ships at Aulis, Il. ^.
and Apollo afflicting the people with a Pestilence, but telling the number of
years that the war should last, by the number of Sparrowes destroyed by the
Serpent in the nest as Cicero renders the verses. Nam quot aves tetro mactatas
dente videtis
Tot nos ad Trojam belli exant labimus annos
Quae decimo cadet, and poena satiabit Achivos.
And yet as cunning as he was, he died for grief, because he could not tell
how many Piggs were in the belly of a Sow (say some) or how many Figs upon
the fig tree (says Hesiod) which Mopsus, with whom he contested, was able to
tell. The name they called it by was* (...), or (...). It was (...) at first
with an omicron, according to Plato, as being (...): but now (says Aristides)
they write it with omega (...), to give the better grace to the word: and it is
still used as the old word was, for any kind of divination; as (...), and (...)
a bird, are for any other ominous thing. Now among the Greeks it was the
Augur's fashion to were a white garment (whereas it was purple, or Scarlet
among the Latins) and to have his (...) his place and his seat appointed for
the purpose, (...), or (...). (...). In Antigon.

Says he in Sophocles. And the Scholiast upon the word (...) in Euripides
says, it was a place made in Thebes, where Tiresias used to sit and divine.
When they went to it, (...) (says the same Scholiast) doubting their memory
might not suffice, they carried their Table-books with them, and wrote down
the name, and the flight of the Bird, and every thing belonging thereto. This
and the seeing too Tiresias being blind, and only able to foresee, and judge
of things as they were told him, was fain to have his daughter to do for him:
by which means she her self at length, after the death of her father, became
very famous at Thebes for her skill in the art. Yea not only the habit of the
Greek Augures, but their manner of observing was different from other peoples.
Quid, quod aliis avibus utuntur, aliis signis? Aliter observant, L 2.
aliter respondent, says Cicero. The Greeks accounted the right side the
luckiest, Graiis and Barbaris dextra meliora: the Romans the left. Although (to
speak the truth, the side was the same, only the posture of the Augures was
different. For the Grecians looked toward the north, and the Romans toward the
south; and the word sinistra for lucky or good signs, came not so much a
sinistra manu from the hands being left; as a sinendo, from the man's being
left to his pleasure to set upon his enterprise if he would* So says Festus
and Cicero thus, Quanquam haud ignoro quae bona sunt sinistra nos dicere
etiamsi dextra sint. But yet this was the manner of speech, viz* For the
Greeks, to call the lucky tokens always (...) Says Ajax Hom Il. 10.
(...) right (and therefore Statius may seem to have mistaken, when he spoke
af Grecian Augury, Theb.
Signae feras laevusque tones --)
The Romans sometimes dextra, and sometimes laeva; but the one more suo, and
the other more Graeco. Unlucky birds (word used among us for an unhappy wagge)
they called (...), or (...), when they fled not, or picht not in their usual
height or place This last word puts me in mind of that saying of Hippolitus
perhaps in allusion to it. Eurip Hippol. v. 934.
-- (...)
(...)
Sometimes they are called (...), or (...) inhibae, (...) arculae, and (...)
(as in (...). says Aeschylus
Apollonius) ab (...) cedo, as who would say non sinistra, or non sinentia, as
I told you before. And such they commonly counted those that had long talons or
(...). says Aeschylus
scracht their heads as they fled, such (as they say) were seen upon Cassius
his Tent before his defeat: the Latins call them Volsgras. But what? is there
no amuletum, nor remedy against a few paltry birds? yes, I have read in Apulius
of a trick to kill one or two of the worser sort, and hang them up at the
door: as we use to do dead Crows upon a stick in the field, to scare the
living away: * Says he, ^stas nocturnas aves cum penetraverint Larem quempiam,
solicit prehensas foribus videmus aff^^gi, ut quod infaustis volatibus
familiae minantur, exitium suis luant cruciatibus. Birds that were lucky either
in their nature, Metam. lib 3.
or the place they appeared in, were called (...), or (...), that is, such as
were not (...) ( unseatly, or unsightly as we use to say) but appeared (...),
(as (...). Eurip in Hec.
Aeschylus has it,) in their proper sphere or seat. such they counted Doves,
and the (...) in matters of Love: as they did the Cocks, if they kept a
continual crowing, in matters of War. For hereupon the Augurs once foretold
the Thebans a victory. Propterea quod avis illa victa silere soleret; can^re,
si vicisset. Cock- fightings indeed were usually (...) says Lib. 3. c. 5.
Artemiderus, signs of sedition and discord. But then you must except the
Cock- matches kept once a ^eare in the Theater and instituted by Aelian. Var.
Hist. l 2. c 28.
Themistocles after the victory gotten over the Persians from whom Athen l. 14.
the Cock first^ me into Athens. This bird being always very much looked upon
in matters of War, was the occasion that Mars was pictured with a Cock: Rosin.
insomuch that it was their ordinary sacrifice to Mars, and therefore
Aristophanes in Avibus calls it (...), (...) In Aristoph Aves
Mars his own bird* All birds (says one) were either (...), or (...) or (...).
The (...) (I believe) were not many besides Crows, and Eagles and Doves, and
Owls the most noted of all. Some of them are thought to have had a kind of
language; which the Augurs came to understand by being lickt by Snakes, or some
such venomous and veneneficall means Qui credit ista (says Pliny,) and
Melampodi profecto aures lambendo dedisse Intellectum avium sermonis dracones
non abnuet, vel quae Democritus tradit, nominando aves quarum confuso sanguine
serpens gignatur quem si quisquam ederit, intellecturus sit avium colloquia.
Eustathius says that Helenus and Cassandra were thus licked clean into Augurs.
(...). I am glad I am saved the labor to reprove those fellows my self. For
it seems that the wiser sort even amongst them, did give but little heed to
the wagging of a feather, or of a bird's tail, when they had a mind to be
serious. Look in Homer, and you shall find Hector thus chiding with Polydamas
the Theban Augur (who had dissuaded from fighting, by reason of some thing or
other which he had observed in the Birds) says he, you may if you think good,
sit and gaze upon a few foolish birds till your eyes be out, for my part this
is my opinion, (...).


In Aristophanes you find the birds themselves oscinentes, chirping and gibing
their spectatators for their superstition.

(...)
(...).
CAP. I. De extispicina, and quibusdam aliis.
DIvination by the Entrals of beasts, or Extispicina (for so Aruspicina,
Divination in Sacrifices, is denominated a ^otiori from the best part of it)
was more common then that former in all places ( Extis omnes fere utuntur says
Cicero:) and especially at Elis where it was, by the two families of the
Iamidae, and the Pindar.
Clytidae, and Thelmessas in Caria much improved. Tiresius had so great skill
in this art (I cannot say insight, because Jupiter gave him the skill to
recompense his blindness) that even after his death, among the Ghosts there
were none but* (...). Hom. Odyss. K.
his. Ulysses himselefe, was feign to trouble his soul to come back again to
give him advise. The whole business of Divining at the offering of a Victime
(for there was something else to do besides poring in the guts) was called
(...). And a very solemn business it was, being usually attended with a
feast, according to that.

-- (...). Eurip. Elect. v. 835.

(...), or that part of it in killing, and cutting it up, is called by
Sophocles (...), and the act of cutting (...). The signs observed were most
properly called (...), and the observers (...). If the beast were drawn by
force to the slaughter, if it escaped by the way, avoided the blow, fel^ not
down quietly, bled but little, were long a dying, kept beating the ground,
they were all ill signs. For the two latter of them you have sadly expressed
in the sacrifice of Aegysthus.

-- (...) Ibid.

(...).
Ill signs, I say those were; and so was any thing else that either was
contrary to nature or use, or put themselves to any trouble. Whereas on the
contrary all was well, when every thing was done with ease, the beast not
striving, and the blood presently darting out, as it is said it did in the
Sac^ifice of Menelaus. -- (...)
(...).
Somewhat there was too, which they observed in the very (...) or wagging of
his Idem. v. 1603.
Tail, whence that in the Poet.

-- (...);
The beasts that were thus used were anciently sheep, and Goats, and Calves.
The Cyprians (they say) made use of Sowes, and the Iamidae of dogs; which was
the reason why Paus. in Eliac.
Thrasybulus one of the pedigree was pictured at Olympia with a a dog lying by
him dissected, and a Weezle (an ominous creature) creeping over his shoulder.

In Fissiculation or cutting it abroad, they took most notice of the Liver,
which (...).
Philostratus says they accounted the Tripus (as it were) or the chair, and
the key of the work. For they thought if the Liver was naught, both the blood
and all the rest of the body must needs be so too; insomuch that the work about
all the bowels was called (...), a looking into the liver. The Concavous part
of the Liver was called (...) familiaris, because the signs which they
observed there, Hesych.
concerned themselves and their friends: the Gibbons side, (...) or (...)
hostilis, because the tokens in it concerned their enemies (as it was with the
Romans). The place or seat in which all the parts of the liver lay, was called
(...) or (...): the place between the parts in the middle (...), and (...).
(...). ad orat. Demost. Coron.
Hesychius calls it (...), or (...), Euripides (...).

-- (...)
(...).
If there were (...) (as they called it) too much dryth, or (...) a tie between
the parts, or especially if it were (...), or without a lobus, it was a very
ill sign: according to that of Appian (...). L. 2.
This and other such signs because they were so bad, that they feared to go
any farther in it; they called (...). When they came to handle the heart, they
called it (...), or (...). If it were little, or palpitated much, it was an ill
sign. Fat in any part of the bowels was good ((...)) says Aeschylus; and so
were (...), plaites and foldings, says Euripides.

When they came to burning, then they were said more properly (...). Hesych.
At Delphos they had (...), officers of purpose for the work. The fire which
they made use of for this occasion, was in most places made of some peculiar
fuel, kindled by the beams of the Sun, and kept in a peculiar place. Thus
in Egypt they had the seraphim, and among the Persians, the fire which they
worshipped under the name of Orimasda. Xenoph.
At Athens they had a torch still burning in the temple of Minerva Polias, and
Virgins constantly there to see it renewed; just as it was at Delphos, and at
Rome in the temple of Vesta.

In burning they observed especially the flames, whatever he in V. 751.
Helena say to the contrary, where he speaks against all other divination too.

(...).
Good signs in the flame were these, if it went upright without a noise, if it
continued till all were consumed; or if it suddenly began to have the latter
sign, instead of (...) ^left wood, which they used at other times, they would
get small dry sticks that would soonest take fire, (...), according to that,
Aristoph. in Pace.
(...).
Now indeed many times (...), (...). in Eurip.
(...), that is, the Priests being divinarumque sagaces Sil. Ital.
Flammarum, divined by the burning when there was nothing seen in the cutting:
and therefore they took the bladder, and binding the neck of it with wool (for
which reason Sophocles calls the bladders (...)) put it into the fire, to
observe in what place it brake, and which way it darted the Urine, Id.
(...). Sometimes they took pitch off the Torches, and threw it into the fire,
and if there rose but one entire flame, it was taken for a good sign. In
matters of hostility, they took most notice of the gall, and the (...) in the
flame: and very good reason, (...), for enemies are as bitter as the Gall they
burnt. Of the Ashes too they took some notice (...), says Eurip. in Phaen.

(...).


Sophocles. In the smoke they observed if it went upright and smelt of the
flesh. And so at other times they used to throw frankincense and Poppey, and
other several things in the fire, for nothing else but to observe such things,
and to sell the smoke* Besides these there were infinite more Divelish sorts
of Divinations: In Oedip. Tyr.
have the patience to take notice of two or three of the more notorious. (...).
(...) or (...), was sometimes by the magical use of a bone, or a vein of a
dead body, after the fashion of the Thessalians, or else by pouring hot blood
into the carcass, to make it answer a question, as Ericto does in Lucian, --
Dum vocem defuncto in corpore quaerit
Protinus astrictus caluit cruor, atraque f^vit
Vulnera etc. --
Now because the Ghost or the Soul was thus recalled to the body ( -- animas
responsa daturas) it was therefore sometimes termed (...), Horace.
or (...), Divining by the Soul* or the Ghost. But such as expected any answer
thus from the soul then, must be sure to be kind to the body before: for
Melissa the Wife of Periander refused to answer him, because he had not buried
her body as he should. Herod. l. 6.
But surely there was somewat worse then a Soul; else what need of lustration
of the party? Such as Tiresias used to the St^ l. 4.
Theban King, to keep him from receiving harm. Hydromanteia was sometimes by
Seawater, but most commonly by that of a fountain, and so was called (...).
It was done several ways. 1. By drinking of the Water (enough to make many a
Poet too) (...), says Aristides in his Orat. de Puteo. 2ly By throwing things
into it to try whither they would sink or swim, as they did cakes in the Well
of Ino. Pausan. in Lacon.
3ly By seeing the Images of such things as they sought for, especially in the
well of Apollo Thyrxeus in Achaia. 4ly By dipping a glass in the water, to
know what would become of a sick-man. For as he looked well or ill in the
glass, accordingly they presumed of his future condition. 5ly By throwing in
three stones, and observing the rounds they made in the sinking. Sometimes they
made use of oil, or of Wine instead of Water: and so it was termed (...), as
when it was done in a Basin, (...), was by a Syderitis a kind of lodestone,
which if they washed in spring water, would speak like a child. With such a one
Helenus is reported to have divined the destruction of Troy. (...), was by a
Sive held up by a Thread, or a pair of Sheeres, and turning round at the naming
of the party that stole the thing or the like Of this Theoc. Idyl. 3. And I
have seen it used by some women, impia fraud, or anili superstitione, I cannot
tell which. I have not leisure (neither indeed is it tanti) to tell much of
other ways of divining, of (...), with Gyg^s his ring: or of (...) with Eggs,
which Suidas says Orpheus wrote a book of. Or of (...) with barley, or of
(...), by the burning of a candle, L. 30. c. 11.
mentioned by Pliny in his Natural History, and by Aratus in his Prognostics.
To which you may add their common old-wives. Sawes concerning weather or the
like, such as this Clara dies Pauli bona tempora denotat anni, not to disparage
those more Astrologicall and Rational, such as that of Virgil.

Luna revertentem, etc. with the rest.
CAP. II. De ritu Divinandi ex vocibus, and rebus ominatis.
ALL this which I have spoken is to conjecture by things. but there is a way by
words also; by which according as the words were good or bad, they presaged
such and such events. Such words were called (...) or (...), from (...)
(suitable to the name of Propheta:) as omen comes from oremen quia fit ore
(quoth Festus.) You may render it voices (for so we use to call those
prophetic speeches, which we hear we know not from whence, as the Scripture
also does) and Tully called them by the name of voces; Pythagorei non solum
voces de^rum observarunt, L. 1. Divin.
sed etiam hominum. Any words that either boded ill, or signified that which
they disliked, they called (...): and he that used them to another, either to
hurt him, or to vex him, was said to (...) to blaspheame him. (...) Euripides
calls it, where he speak of certain ominous speeches let fall at a feast by a
servant, just as one of the company was going to drink (...). Io^. v. 1188.

The Latins call it obscaenare, and the words themselves male ominata verba
(as it is in Horace.) we may english it halzening speeches. Such words as these
they had always a superstitious care to avoid: insomuch that they would say
instead of (...) a prison, (...) a house. And so for (...), and (...): for
(...): for (...), and the like. For there is a kind of words, which (as Tully
says of Nulla spes Reipublicae) non licet, In Epist. ad Cassium.
or (to speak in the phrase of Terence,) Religio est dicere, they made a
scruple to speak and therefore in time of Sacrifice, or any other business with
the gods, nothing was more strictly commanded and observed, then (...) (as it
was among the Romans in the Proclamations for keeping of holy days) to avoid
all ominous expressions, or (...) (as they called them.) Which if they were
spoken by a brother, Plato l. 7. de Leg.
or one very near of kin to that party whose business was then in hand, they
took the greater notice of them, and thought them so much the worse. What words
were especially counted for ominous, you might give me an account, if you could
give me Suetonius his book, of which we have but the title, viz: De vocibus
male ominatis. Only thus much I may tell you, that when they first set about
any business of concernement, they had a special care to begin with a Preface
(...), or (...), or (...), like to Persius his hoc been sit, and that old
threadbare word of the Latins, Quod bonum felix fortunatumque sit. Some words
there were, and Proper names of such a signification, as it was counted a
happiness but to hear them spoken. For so when Iulus had said

Mensas etiam consumimus -- presently (says Virgil) his Father laid hold on
the word and embraced the omen -- ea vox audita laborum
Prima tulit finem, primumque loquentis ob ore
Eripuit pater --
So Leotychides, when he desired ^f a Samian his assistance against the
Persians, asked what his name was, and being answered Hegesistratus, replied, I
embrace the omen in the nomen, or (...): for (...), is the same with them, that
accipere omen is with the Latins, that is, to make an ominous speech an omen
indeed, and take it to my self. For indeed they counted it much in the power
of the hearer, to make it an omen or not an omen; ostentorum vires in eorum
erant potestate, quibus ostendebantur, says Pliny.

Now the way to ab^eminate an omen, was either to fling a stone at the thing,
if it were an ominous creature, as a Cat, or the like; or else if it were an
unlucky speech, to retort it back again with (...), tibi in caput redeat, let
it return upon thine own head. Which perhaps is an expression borrowed from a
custom of the (...), Herodot.
not only among them, but among the Egyptians also* who when they spied any
thing in the victims, that seemed to portend ill to their country, used to
pray, (...), that it might return upon the head of the beast. The like perhaps
is used in the Hebrew, Obadiaev. 15 and 1 Kings 2. v. 44. etc.
viz: (...) in several places of the Scripture: and it puts me in mind of that
saying in Seneca, Quis non, si admoneatur ut de suis cogitet, tanquem dirum
omen respuat, and in capita inimicorum, aut ipsius intempestivi monitoris abire
illa jubeat. Instead of this sometimes they would say, Mosch Idyl.
(...), dii monuerint meliora. Sometimes upon such an unlucky speech heard
while they did such a thing, they would do it another way: or do it again;
as one in Euripides, upon somebodies speaking an unhappy word as he was a
drinking, threw the drink on the ground, and called for another cup.

Things ominous, some of them were in the parties own body, and those were
^^ther 1. Marks, such as (...) spots like oil. 2. (...). 3. (...), were such
as the palpitations of the heart, or the eye, or any of the muscles, called in
Latin Salissationes, and (...), or tinnitus aurium; which if it were the
tingling of the right ear, it was as good as the palpitation of the (...).
Theocr. Id 3.
right eye. Of these things Melampus the great Fortune Tellers wrote one book to
Ptolomaeus Philadelphus; and Posidonius another (says Suidas which he called
(...).

(...) Sneezing, was so superstitiously esteemed of, that it came at length to
be counted for a god. (...), says Aristotle in his Problems. Which was the
reason, says L. 2.
Athenaeus, that they abstained from eating the brain, out of which the
sneezing came; as also the cause of that usual prayer of salutation (...), at
a sneezing: according to that jeere of Ammian upon a fellow with a long nose,
as if it had stood so far out, that he could not hear himself when he
sneezed.

(...)
(...).
Insomuch that if a man sneezed at such a time, or on such a side, they were
either persuaded to, or discouraged from the business undertaken. Socrates (as
emunctae naris as he was) had so little sense himself, Plutarch de demon.
Socrat.
as to fetch advice from another man's nose, and to make a Sneeze serve instead
of a genius or a daemonium, to tell him the good and the bad; for it did both,
according to circumstances. If a man Sneez'd in the afternoon it was a good
omen: but ill in the morning and the reason is disputed by Aristotle in the
Problem. If a: man Sneezed at table while they were taking away: or if another
happened to sneeze on the left hand of a man; then beware all is not right. But
if it happened one the other hand all was well. If I may take Euphrantides his
judgment, encouraging Themistocles his Soldiers to fight, upon no other ground
then such a sneeze, (...). Such a sneeze while Xenophon was making his speech,
was enough to make him a General. But another, while he persuaded the
Soldiers to fight, was to them such an omen of ill luck, that they were feign
to nuncupate a public vote for the expiation of it. However (I think)
ordinarily it was reckoned for good; as in Homer that of Telemachus was,
presently after a speech made of Ulysses his return, and revenging himself of
his enemies.

(...) -- and so Penelope took it; (for says she, laughing and rejoicing)
(...). And the reason may be because esneezing is commonly healthy and wholesome,
(...): which perchance was understood by the aforesaid Euphrantides, when he
added (...). But now at last I must tell you of this way of divining too (as I
did often he former) that it was long ago slighted even among the Grecians by
the wiser sort. For example, Timotheus, when one of the Soldiers happened to
sneeze, as he was going on shipbord; being therefore dissuaded from going by
the Master of the ship, burst out a laughing and said, (...); What great omen
can it be for one man to sneeze, when there be so many together. But among the
Romans a great deal more: for Cicero put it among the other fooleries, L. 2.
de Divin.
Quae si suscipiamus, and pedis offensio nobis, and corrigiae abruptio, and
sternutamenta erunt observanda.

Ominous actions, or accidents were such as these following. First at a
Sacrifice, it was an action much used, to take a piece of the cake or any other
thing, and carry it home bonae scaevae gratia, as we say, for the lucks sake.
This piece of cake, or pudding, or what shall I call it, they called by the
name of (...). says Hesychius.
(...) sanitas. If in Sacrificing the Priest did let any thing fall out of his
hand, it was looked upon as an unlucky accident. This observation the Romans
called, caducum auspicium. 2ly At a Feast this action was lucky, to crown the
Cup with a Garland -- pateramque Corona induit. The reason (says Eustathius
out of Athenaeus) was this, because a Garland represents a circle, (...), which
is the most complete figure of all, and holds most. Unlucky accidents were
such as these, viz. The coming in of a strange black dog, the creaking of the
table, the spilling of wine (of which Xenocrates had no more wit then to write
a book) taking away while one was a drinking, or a sudden silence. In putting
on of the clothes the right side must be served first; and therefore if a
servant had but given his Master the left shoe first, he was sure to have
(...). Chrysostom.
it. And thus much at Home. Abroad they had for their omens (...), or (...).
That is (says the In Aristoph Av. Suidas.
Scholiast) (...) occursacula, any thing that met them first. Of such as these
one named Hippocrates (not the Physician) and another named Pollos wrote their
books If a Snake lay so in the way, as to part the company: or if they met with
a Hare, or a Bitch with Whelps, or a Fixen with Cubbs; Lucian.
O! these things were (...), abominanda and averruncanda, abominable sights. So
if a man hapened to meet with a Black-more, or an Ape, or an Eunuch, (...),
says Lucian, he must stand forty foot off. Nay if we met with but a Weezle or
such a creature in the cross way, Aristoph. in Eccles.*
we will have no Comitia sit for all this day. And L. 3.
Artemidorus will give you a reason, why a (...) should be so much taken notice
of, in his Plutarch. de Philadel.
(...), or running by* because (forsooth) it is (...), that is (as I think) the
letters in each word will signify the same number, viz* 42. But if it be so,
how came she to be such an enemy to (...), as to interrupt the course of
justice? perhaps, it was only then, when they omitted that usual ceremony, of
leading her about the house for a lustration, Aristoph. in Eccles.
to purge it of unlucky things. Infinite many more sorts of divination might I
mention of this kind, but it will sufficiently testify what regard the Grecians
had of such bables, if I tell you how that at Thebes Apollo Spondius himself
had his Altars, and his prophesying by Omens (...). So likewise at Smyrna he
had his (...) his Temple for omens too, In Eliacis.
(says Pausanias:) where the fashion was for him that came for an omen, first
to whisper his question in the Idol's ears, and then presently stopping his
own, to go forth of the temple, and the first voice he heard after he came
out must go for the Oracle. And so much of divining by a conjecture by art.
One word or two of lots, and 'Ile have done.

CAP. III. De Sortibus, etc.
THis way of Divination is clean different from the former, because in it (as
Cicero says) termeritas and casus, non ratio and consilium valet. For though
there might be casus of the things in the former, yet there was skill with all
in the person to give the signification. It was invented by Minerva: only
Jupiter took away her credit, to make the better trading for Apollo. Casting,
or Drawing lots, was either with (...), or tali cast into a box: or with
tesserae ((...) In Fabio.
Plutarch calls them) little wooden tables with letters upon them drawn out of
a pot, or calculi little balls of earth, with marks upon them for the names,
sometimes taken out of a pot, and sometimes thrown into a well, (whether to see
which came up first, or how it was I cannot tell.) Pausanias speaks of the
wooden tables, that they were used in the temple of Hercules (...) in Achaia.
And the like (they say) were used by the Parliament of five hundred, De iis
supra.
with the characters of the ten first letters upon them, to show to which of
the ten Courts every judge was to go (together with the Image of a rod the
ensign of Mercury, the God of Lots) he that had the Alpha, went to that Court
which had the sign of Alpha, and they had the rest, to the Courts that bare
the names of the letters. One of these ways or all (which I know not) was so
much used by the Thriae, (the three Nymphs reported to have been the nurses of
Apollo) that at length the word thriae came to be used for sorts, lots,
according to that (...)


Calculi were very much used in ancient times in Judging of causes, L. 2. devin.
and in wrestling matches, and the like: though (it seems) in Cicero's time not
so much, Quis enim magistratus, aut quis vir illustrior utitur sortibus,
caeteris vero in locis plane refrixerunt. In their Wrestling-matches I have
read that they had a silver pot called the (...), into which they put little
pellets about the bigness of a bean, according to the number of the men, two
with one mark; and those that happened to draw the same mark were to Wrestle
together: or if there were an odd man, he that had the luck to meet with the
odd pellet (whom they named (...)) was to come in at Kings (as we say) or to
wrestle at last with him that had the mastery. How they used them in Judging of
Causes, has been showed by another Page 118.
already. But that they were used also by persons condemned to dye, may be
gathred out of Aristophanes in Pace For by reason that one only was to be put
to death in one day, and sometimes the judgment was reversed: the Prisoners did
cast lots who was to dye first; and he that drew first, was commonly called by
the name of (...) the Mercury. Thus in the ships in a storm, they used to cast
lots who should be thrown over board for a (...). Thus Eustathius says, the lot
fell to L. 7.
Ismene, just as it did to the Prophet Jonah. And so in most of the Temples,
that were resorted unto for Oracles, there were (...) Lotts and a table of
purpose to throw for it; after the receiving of the answer; for (...) (says
the (...) upon Pindar) if I throw such a cast, Pyth. Od. 4.
the Prophecy will be fulfilled, If I do not, it will not. Nay in the Lanes,
and the Streets, and cross ways they had their sorts viales ((...) Aeschylus
calls them and (...) is a Title of Mercury) as well as the Romans. For the
party that would know his fortune, carried so many cuts about him, with
several inscriptions; and the next boy he met with in the way as he went, he
bid him draw: and if that which came forth, agreed with that which he had in
his mind; it went for as good a Prophesy as the best, according to that of
Tibullus Eleg. 1. ^lle sacras pueri sorts ter sustulit, illi
Retulit e triviis omnia certae over.
Artemidorus in his Pr^oemium, speaks of (...), Diviners in the Market. The
original of this divination Plutarch in his book de Iside and Osiride, fetches
from the Egyptians. For when Typho had put Osiris in a chest, and thrown him
into the Sea: Isis as he was wandering too and fro to seek him, happened upon a
company of boys at play; and asking of them, they showed him the place. (...).
Besides these ways already mentioned, they had another, by opening such a Poet
in one or more places, and taking the first verses they met with for a
prediction: which way of prediction they called (...), or (...). And of this
are meant the Sorts Homericae we read of. And Virgilianae; which they say
Severus Alexander made use of, when he met with this verse of Virgil Tu regere
imperio populos, Roman, m^mento.


Nay the Christians themselves have not stickt to practice the like upon the
Bible, according to that of Nicephorus Gregor. (...). And thus Hercules is
reported by Cedrenus, to have asked counsel out of the New Testament, (...),
and to have been thereby persuaded to Winter in Albania. Sometimes they would
make choice of diverse fatidicall verses, and have written them upon little
Tables, put them into a pot and draw for it. Aug. l. 4. Confess. cap. 3. Makes
mention of these lotteries. Si enim de Paganis poetae cujuspiam long aliud
canentis atque intendentis, cum sortem quis consulit mirabiliter consonus
negotio saepe versus exiret. And this way they say that Socrates foretold the
day of his death. But thus much may suffice of (...) sorts, for by (...) in
the singular number, is many times meant the hint, or occasion given to
Diviners to speak what they did. (...). (...) In Eurip. Hippol.
For the Diviners themselves, Vates* or (...), as they did but little better
then feign like Poets; so they did imitate them too in many other things, as in
eating of hearts and livers, and tying of Laurel about their heads, as the
Poet Eurip. Ipbig. in A. v. 757.
says of Cassandra In Androm.
(...). For why? -- venturi praescia laurus. The Laurel the^ took to be a thing
of special and sovereign virtue, both to set a man a Prophesying, (and
therefore Eurip. calls it (...)) and to preserve him from any evil; and
therefore very much used in Lustrations, insomuch that they would commonly have
the staves they carried in their hands, to be made of Laurel wood. They had
their diet in the Prytaneum like public persons. (...), says the Scholiast on
Aristophanes. There was one more noted Fraternity of them, called the (...),
says Hesych. Three Prophets there were of very great fame, every one called by
the name of Bacis. The eldest was of Eleon in Baeotia; the next of Athens (he
that cured the Lacedaemonian women of their madness:) and the youngest of
Caphua in Arcadia (of Locris some say) otherwise called (...), and (...).
Answering to these three men, the Scholiast upon Aristophanes (in Irene) says
there were three Women Prophets, every one of whom was called by the name of
Sybilla, viz. Delphica, Erythraea, and Sardiaca. But the first (I believe) had
most of the Spirit of Py^hon, Acts c. 16, v 16.
and brought her Master most gain by Southsaying.

And now, Courteous Reader, though I have done so much so ill already, I must
be forced to do more yet; and excuse one fault with another. For my desire is
to leav thee fully satisfied with my reasons why I did it at all, and why I did
it not better. The cords that drew me to do it (and drawn I was) were three,
such as twisted together I could by no means break viz. First the importunity
of my friend. 2. The necessity of the knowledge of Ancient Rites and Customs,
for the understanding of Authors and 3. The hopes which I had, by Employment
(as by an Issue) to divert my humor of Melancholy another way. The causes why I
did it no better, are as many. viz. First, want of years and judgment, having
done the most part of it in my Tyrocinium (when I took more delight in these
studies) as appears by the number of the Authors which I have cited. 2ly. Want
of health. And 3ly, Want of time and leisure being called away by occasions,
that might not be neglected, and by friends that could not be disobeyed. If yet
I have given thee but a little light, and my labor and oil be not all lost, I
have as much as I desired my self, and thou have no more then I owed thee.

Z. BOGAN.

(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
R. WAR. e C.C.C.
FINIS.
INDEX VOCABULORUM.
A
ACerba: i. e. non matura viro, 166 (...), after sentence, 122 (...)* 129
(...), properly before enditement 122 (...) 306 (...) 104 Alcibiadis dictum 177
(...), unde 276 (...), upon hearesay 117 (...), Ga^ymeds 223 (...) 239 (...).
5.6. circuitus ejus 9 (...) 57 (...) 29^ (...), quomodo differt ab (...) 148
Amoris indicia 156 Amatoria philtra 158 (...) 212 (...) Jusjurandum (...) 107
(...) 144 Amyniae Aeschyli fratris Philadelphia 128 (...) 236 (...) 171 (...),
^p^cted 60, 62 (...) 38 (...) 43 (...). (...) quid 138. (...) ibid. 'Annus
Atticus 60 (...) 144 (...) 147 (...) Delphica 342 (...) 112 (...) 113 (...) 227
(...) 226 (...), carrying one before the Magistrate 140 (...) quomodo differunt
140.193 (...) 140 (...) 192 (...) 159 Apollo 39 (...) 87 (...) 238 (...), vel
(...) 145 (...) 149 (...), seu (...) ibid. (...) 146 (...), numerare, to
worship, 223 Areopagus, Areopagitae 122 (...) 128 (...), 133. (...) 288 (...)
Homeristae 306 (...) 173 (...) 145 (...) 168 Arma defensiva, 319. Arms
offensive 323 (...) triplex 204 Ascriptio in (...), album lexiarchicum etc. 226
(...), unde 296 (...) pro Athenis (...), quid 81 Asyla Atheniensium 5^ (...) ab
(...). 4. (...) diff. 14 (...). Impudence, 16. Attica sides 17 (...). 5
Circuitus earundem. 9. portae 11.12. Laus 13 (...) 243 (...) 238 Aucho dea 37
(...) 97 (...) 145 (...) 116 (...) 132
B
(...) 133 (...) 143 (...) Prove. 133 (...) prove. in case of deferring sentence
139 (...) 98 (...) 140 (...), prius (...) dictum, primo (...) 53 Brickbuilding
first invented by whom 8 (...) and (...). diff. 380
C
CEphisus amnis 13. Classes tres Populi Atheniensis and Aegyptii 19 Casaubonus
reprehensus and Theophrasti Characteres emendati 12 De Capills tondendis. c.
25. l. 5 Caena Hecates a beggarly feast 315 Cibus and potus Graecorum 299 Cedar
called (...) 263 Comaedia unde dicta 23.80 Comitia Attica 101 Convivium
triplex, (...) 293 Convivantium gestus 303 Crambe, quasi (...) 297 Cupido
151.152 Cunabula 211 Crematio corporum and ritus cremandi 259.26^
D
(...) 292 (...) 213 Demetreus Phalareus. 300. Statius ornatus 32 Demosthenis
dictum 290 (...) qui 18 (...), prius dicti (...). number. 174.24 (...) and (...).
ibid. nomina eorum vide. page 25.26
(...) 28.30. Diacrii 18 (...) 141 (...). 135. Arbitrators unde (...) (...) 136
(...) 144 (...) dicuntur Poetae 85.86 (...) 117 (...) 315 (...) december 135. viz.
(...) etc. 105 Divinationes variae per (...), persomnum etc. 347 Divinatio
artificiosa per ornitho manteiam etc. 356 Divortia Graecorum 162 (...) 102
(...) Cecrops cur sic dictus 168- (...), an oath of both parties: pleader
(...), defendant, (...) 113 Draconis cur incubantes Thesauris finguntur. 211.
(...) videre 211 (...) 145 (...). 1. (...) 179 (...) 145
E
(...) 171 (...), the indictment 144 (...) ab (...) 105 (...). Junonium
incedere. 45. (...) 257 (...), not to be eaten, or named 303 (...) 139 (...)
142 (...) 144 (...). 205. Sic Egeria ab egerendo partus. Facilina a facilis.
(...) and Lucina a lucem ferendo ibid.
(...), Seniores quare sic dicti 140 (...), July the first month afterward in
the year (...) October 65 (...) 102 (...), to be fined for not appearing to
witness after citatitation 145 (...). vid. and alias rations 351 (...) 122
(...), pro (...) ibid. (...), 255 (...), after proof 122 (...) festa 271 (...)
against taken 137 (...) to give bail 119 (...) 147 (...) (...) (...), ab (...)
143 (...) 349 (...) 134 (...) to fine for damages 119 (...) 141 (...) 115
(...). l. 5. (...) 144 Epihtalamiu^, why sung with a great noise 184 (...).
Tutor, (...) 173 (...) 270 (...) 14 (...) 100 (...) quid 137 Equites (...) 19
(...) facere, Sacrificare 59 Estates, passed either (...), or (...) 233
Eumendes 44 (...) pro (...) 288 (...) 18 Eupolis his Baptae, ominous to
himself 91 (...), unde deriv: 153 (...) (...) 58 (...) 12^ (...) 144
Extispicina 36 Ephetae, (...) 123 (...) 110 (...) 112
F
FIggs thrown at the head of the Bride (...) de Ferali amiculo 244 Fire ordeal,
parallel to the Greek (...) 287
G
(...) unde 190 (...) 212 (...) 18 (...) 200 Going sof^ly. i. e. Mourning 256
(...) a (...) luctus cur 51 Governments, several kinds of it among the
Ancients 28 (...), Actio, formula, a writ 137 Graeca fide i, e. with ready money
144 (...) 278 (...) 322 (...), eodem sensu quo (...) 199
H
HElena, why said to be hatched of an egg 200 Herba quaedam mirabilis Atheni^
in Acropoli 8 Hospites (...) excipiendi 310 Hospes ab hostium, vel ostium quare
311 Hypocritae* Actors properly 82
I
(...), olim pro eodem habebantur 336 (...), 275. (...) 276 Idololatria
Atheniensium 36 Infantium Lotio and unctio 190. expositio 216 Io poean, unde
41.42 Judicialia nomina 159 Judicium (...), 121. (...) etc. 131 (...),
passerculus 159 Jurandi Genera and formulae 282 Juramenti Magni ritus 284 Parv^
286 (...) a J^van
K
(...) (...). 118* (...). ibid. (...) 167 (...) 140 (...) quare. (...) in
bonam, and malam parpartem 121 (...), pollinctores 244 (...), of diverse sorts
137 (...) 140 (...). Assembly summond out of the feilds 102 (...) Amasium ut
(...) 164 (...) 237 (...) 258 (...) 57 (...) 302 (...) 343 (...) 370 (...) 140
(...) 115 (...), to hiss 89 (...) dictus Theramenes, cur 31 (...) etc. id
genus 364 (...) ominous, not (...) 180 (...) 157 (...) 256 (...) 22^ (...)
Epitheton Graeciae ibid. (...), vel (...), the Tragic Judges 87 (...) 118
(...). Alleg. 118 (...) Gut^ings 222 (...) idem. Item ten^tare. (...) 117
L
(...) quid sign. 203 Lallare, (...) 216 (...) 183 (...), unde Missa 55 (...)
145 (...) 290 Liberi quadruplices. (...) 221.222 Liberorum Educatio, 223.
Castigatio 224 Leges and legislatores Attici 94 (...) or rather (...) 127
Livius emendatus (...), tips of the ears, why from (...) 116 (...) 380 (...)
244 (...), unde Lymax flu. 215 (...) Diana cur 183 Lustratio Domus funestae 271
M
(...), partic. used in negative oaths 284 (...) secundum Platonem quasi
(...). 335 Mars 42 (...). i. e (...) 239 (...) quomodo differt ab (...) 145
Mercurius 39 Menses (...) 64 Mensium nomenclatura, comparatio, schema 46.66
(...) 103 (...). 148, (...) 149 (...) 63 (...) 161 (...) (...) l. 5. (...) 147
(...) 134 Melotae 348 Meursius reprehen^us 10.134 Militum poenae, praemia,
sepultura, 328 (...) 141 Mos amorem significandi. 163 Mulierum amor. 154. (...)
194 honestioria opificia, 196. (...) 199 (...) uude 299
N
(...) and (...) used in affirmative oaths 284 (...) 363 (...). 146. (...).
147. (...). 147 (...) 52 (...) unde 95 (...), ibid. (...), ibid. (...) 98
(...)* 1. (...), ibid. (...), vel (...) 99 (...), eodem sensu quo lat. justa
234 (...) 248 Nuptiae Graecorum 166 Nutrices duplices. (...) 116
O
Offa Cerberi. 243. (...) 244 (...) 230 (...) solitae filiae. (...) quis 294
(...) 301 (...) 29 (...) pro (...) 282 (...) 48 (...). 1. (...) 347 (...)
prohibited 99 (...) triplices 316 Oraculum Pythium etc. 316. Templum Delphicum
ibid. Oracula (...) solita 341 Oracula, cur, quomodo, and quando cessaverint
345 Orationes funebres 270 (...) ab Orcus 283 (...) 282 (...) 155 (...) 127
(...) Venus. Item lusus pilae 150 (...) 30
P
PAgus quid, unde 122 (...) 152 (...). 133. Situated (...). hence (...) i. e.
(...) ibid. (...) and (...). 146 (...) 146 (...) 269 (...) 83 Pauperes
sublevandi 313 (...) 140 (...) 144 (...) proprie (...). Parentalia 272 (...)
224 (...), old Prophetesses, quasi (...) 346. (...). 140. (...). 108 fiunt
(...) 109 De Peregrinis excipiendis 308 Pelargi, pelargicum 8 Pediaei, paralii
19 (...) 53 Perjurii religio 288 (...) 316 (...) 103 Perenne auspicari. 326.
(...) ibid. Perjuries not punished among the Greeks, or Romans, why 127 (...) 83
(...) 364 (...), the place of meeting (...). alias petra. Petitus reprehensus.
(...) quasi (...). 133. proprie (...) dicitur ibid. (...) cur dicta 174 Pollux
emendatus 134.181 (...) convitiari. (...) 85 Possardus reprehensus 150 (...)
227 (...) 100 (...) 168 (...) 148 (...) 260 (...) 147 (...) 147 (...), and some
what more 139 (...) 309 (...), Ilex, an Holme 48 de Prytanaeis 102 (...) flos
quidam, (...) coronae quib. (...) 268 (...) 74 (...), 48. (...) 367. (...) 368
(...), ad nates usque succincta 201 Puerpurarum religio. 266. Lustratio 214
Puerperium 280 (...), prove. 54 (...), Prove. not a mothers son escaped 56
Q
QUadruplatores cur ita dicti ^37 Quince-Apple to be eaten between the new
married Bride, and Bridegroom 179
R
(...) poena adulterii 202 Recta quid 197 Reges, cur ad radices montium sepulti
258 Requisites in a husband. 87. (...) 187 Requisites in a Wife 189 Ritus
Convivandi varii Ritus Bellici. 316. indicendi bellum 326 praelia committendi
326 Ritus legatos excipiendi 327 Ritus lugendi in funere 254 Ritus divinandi.
vid. divinatio.
S
SAcerdotia Graecorum 55 Sacrificiorum genera and loca 280 Saturnus 42 Saturni
compedes exoluti 160 Satyrica 85 (...) quasi (...) Scaliger reprehensus 323
(...) 96 (...) apium. (...), prove. Of one desperately sick 268 Sepultura. 233.
Necessitas ejus. 234. locus 237 (...) 179 (...) 175 (...) 143 (...) 363 (...),
not o^posed to (...) 307 Somnia. 348 eo^um genera, Allegorica and Thorematica
353 de Sortibus. 371. Sorts Homericae, Vi^gilianae etc. ibid. (...) 291 (...),
the entrails, also the heart. Hence (...) and (...) 59 Spolia twofold* (...),
from the dead. (...) from the living 332 (...) dictus Constantin. M. post (...)
33 (...) 97 (...) 1^2 (...) 243 (...) 40 (...) occursacula 369 (...) 140 (...)
241 (...) 206 (...) 116 (...) 140 (...) differt a (...) 190 Superstitio
Atheniensium 47 De Supplicibus Sacris 274 (...) dictus Antigonus 72
T
(...) 161 Tempus sumendi cibos 291 (...) dicti (...) quare 31 (...) 60.61
Templa (...) 151 (...) pro (...) pro (...), hinc (...) 170 (...) quasi (...)
156 (...) quis secundu^ Pollucem 122 Thallo dea unde 37 (...). 37. (...) 45
(...). 38 (...) cur 46 (...) 158 (...), Thetes unde 19 (...), a Co^f^^ 263
(...) a (...) quia in Theatris deos celebrabant 93 (...) 92 (...) a (...) 36
(...) 250 (...) 231 (...) poculum, (...) inebriari 321 (...) 66 (...) 34
Tragaedia, 80. vocavit eam Solon (...), 12. unde der: a (...) vel (...) 83
(...) 133 (...) 127 Tribunalia varia 133 Tribus quatuor sub Cecrope, sub
Clisthene december, postea duodecem 21 (...) 21 Trophaea, 330. (...) Jupiter, from
cauthe enemies (...), ibid. (...) 89 (...) dicuntur qui a lupis etc. de
vorautur I^^n. vocantur (...) 272 (...) a (...). 1. (...) 259 Tumuli 264 (...)
28 (...) 224
V
VEnus duplex (...) and (...) 150. deus dicitur ibid. (...) to fine ones self
120 (...) 113 (...) quasi (...) quare 285 Vulcanus 42 Uxor, quando ducenda 185.
quae in ea requirantur 189
W
WEdding days three, 1. (...) 2. (...). 3. (...)
X
XEnocrates, quantae fidei vir 116 (...). 312. (...) primum fundavit Hircanus
313 (...), 110. (...) 112
PH
(...), an information, delatio (...) 366 Phaenomoe Pythia prima 338 (...) 302
(...) unde 22 (...) ibid. (...) 327 (...) 269 (...) 162
X
(...) cur 252 (...) 153 (...) 267 (...) 210 (...), pro (...) 218 (...),
Porcellaines, pebles 117
PS
(...). 145. (...) 99 (...) 118 (...) Cupido 152.155

(...) 19 (...) etc. 39..TH.I. 64 (...) duplex 183
O. o.
(...) and (...) ab ovali figura 200
FINIS.

