THE BIRTH OF MERLIN: OR, The Child has found his Father. As it has been
several times Acted with great Applause. Written by William Shakespeare, and
William Rowley.

Placere cupio.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Johnson for Francis Kirkman, and Henry Marsh, and are
to be sold at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane. 1662.

Drammatis Personae.
The Scene BRITAIN. AVrelius, King of Britain. Vortiger, King of Britain.
Vter Pendragon the Prince, Brother to Aurelius. Donobert a Nobleman, and Father
to Constantia and Modes^ia. The Earl of Gloucester, and Father to Edwyn. Edoll
Earl of Chester, and General to King Aurelius Cador Earl of Cornwall, and Suitor
to Constantia Edwyn, Son to the Earl of Gloucester, and Suitor to Modestia Tocli^
and Oswald, two Noblemen Merlin the Prophet Anselme the Hermit, after Bishop of
Winchester. Clown, brother to Ione, mother of Merlin Sir Nichodemus Nothing, a
Courtier The Devil, father of Merlin Ostorius, the Saxon General Octa, a Saxon
Nobleman Proximu^, a Saxon Magician Two Bishops Two Saxon Lords Two of Edols
Captains Two Gentlemen A little Antic Spirit Artesia, Sister to Ostorius the
Saxon General Constantia and Modestia Daughters to Donobert Ione Goe-too't,
Mother of Merlin A Waiting Woman to Artesia Lucina, Queen of the Shades.
The BIRTH of MERLIN: OR, The Child has found his Father.
ACTUS. I.
Enter Donobert, Gloucester, Cador, Edwin, Constantia, and Modestia. Cador YOu
teach me language, sir, as one that knows the Debt of Love I owe unto their
Virtues, wherein like a true Courtier I have fed my self with hope of fair
Success, and now attend your wished consent to my long Suit.


Dono. Believe me, youthful Lord, time could not give an opportunity more
fitting your desires, always provided my Daughters love be suited with my Grant.


Cador. It Is the condition sir, her Promise sealed.


Dono. Is It so, Constantia?


Constan. I was content to give him words for oaths, he swore so often he loved
me.


Dono. That thou believe him?


Constable. He is a man I hope.


Dono. That Is in the trial Girl.


Constable. However I am a woman, sir.


Dono. The Law's on thy side then, shall have a Husband, I, and a worthy one:
Take her brave Cornwall, and make our happiness great as our wishes.


Cador. Sir, I thank you.


Glost. Double the fortunes of the day, my Lord, and crown my wishes too: I
have a son here, who in my absence would protest no less unto your other
Daughter.


Dono. Ha Gloucester, is it so? what says Lord Edwin? will she protest as much to
thee?


Edwin. Else must she want some of her Sisters faith, Sir.


Modesta. Of her credulity much rather, Sir: My Lord, you are a Soldier, and
methinks the height of that Profession should diminish all heat of Loves
desires, being so late employed in blood and ruin.


Edwin. The more my Conscience ties me to repair the worlds losses in a new
succession.


Modest. Necessity it seems ties your affections then, and at that rate I would
unwillingly be thrust upon you, a wife is a dish soon cloys, sir.


Edwin. Weak and diseased appetites it may.


Modest. Most of your making have dull stomachs sir.


Dono. If that be all Girl, thou shall quicken him, be kind to him


Modesta: Noble Edwin, let it suffice what is mine in her, speaks yours;

For her consent, let your fair suit go on,
She is a woman sir, and will be won.

Enter Toclio. Edwin. You give me comfort sir.


Dono. Now Toclio.


Toclio. The King, my honored Lords, requires your presence, and calls a
Council for return of answer unto the parling enemy, whose Ambassadors are on
the way to Court.


Dono. So suddenly, Chester it seems has plied them hard at war, they sue so
fast for peace, which by my advice they never shall have, unless they leave the
Realm. Come noble Gloucester, let us attend the King, it lies sir in your Son to do
me pleasure, and save the charges of a Wedding Dinner,

If you will make haste to end your Love affairs,
One cost may give discharge to both my cares.

Exit Dono. Glost. Edwin. I Will do my best.


Cador. Now Toclio, what stirring news at Court?


Toclio. Oh my Lord, the Court's all filled with rumor, the City with news, and
the Country with wonder, and all the bells in the Kingdom must proclaim it, we
have a new Holyday a coming.


Consta. A holy day! for whom? for thee?


Toclio. Me, Madam! 'sfoot I Would be loath that any man should make a holy day
for me yet: In brief it is thus, there is here arrived at Court, sent by the Earl
of Chester to the King, a man of rare esteem for holiness, a reverent Hermit,
that by miracle not only saved our army, but without aid of man o'rethrew the
pagan Host, and with such wonder sir, as might confirm a Kingdom to his faith.


Edwin. This is strange news indeed, where is he?


Toclio. In conference with the King that much respects him.


Modest. Trust me, I long to see him.


Toclio. Faith you will find no great pleasure in him, for ought that I can
see Lady, they say he is half a Prophet too, would he could tell me any news of
the lost Prince, there is twenty Talents offered to him that finds him.


Cador. Such news was breeding in the morning.


Toclio. And now it has birth and life sir, if fortune bless me I Will once more
search those woods where then we lost him, I know not yet what fate may follow
me.


Exit. Cador. Fortune go with you sir, come fair Mistress, your Sister and Lord
Edwin are in game, and all their wits at stake to win the Set.


Consta. My sister has the hand yet, we had best leave them,

She will be out anon as well as I,
He wants but cunning to put in a Dye.

Exit Cador. Constan. Edwin. You are a cunning Gamester, Madam.


Modest. It is a desperate Game indeed this Marriage, where there is no winning
without loss to either.


Edwin. Why, what but your perfection noble Lady, can bar the worthiness of
this my suit? if so you please I count my happiness, from difficult obtaining,
you shall see my duty and observance.


Modest. There shall be place to neither, noble sir, I do beseech you let this
mild Reply give answer to your suit, for here I vow if e're I change my Virgin
name by you, it gains or looses.


Edwin. My wishes have their crown.


Modest. Let them confine you then, as to my promise, you give faith and
credence?


Edwin. In your command my willing absence speaks it.


Exit. Modest. Noble and virtuous: could I dream of Marriage, I should affect
thee Edwin: oh my soul, here is something tells me that these best of creatures,
these models of the world, weak man and woman, should have their souls, their
making, life, and being, to some more excellent use: if what the sense calls
pleasure were our ends, we might justly blame great natures wisdom, who reared
a building of so much art and beauty to entertain a guest so far uncertain, so
imperfect: if only speech distinguish us from beasts, who know no inequality
of birth or place, but still to ^ly from goodness: oh, how base were life at
such a rate! no, no, that power that gave to man his being, speech, and wisdom,
gave it for thankfulness: To him alone that

Made me thus, may I whence truly know,
I Will pay to him, not man, the love I owe.

Exit. Flourish Cornets. Enter Aurelius King of Britain, Donobert, Gloucester,
Cador, Edwin, Toclio, Oswold, and Attendants. Aurelius. No tiding of our
brother yet? It Is strange, so never the Court, and in our own Land too, and yet
no news of him: oh this loss tempers the sweetness of our happy conquests, with
much untimely sorrow.


Dono. Royal sir, his safety being unquestioned, should to time leave the
redress of sorrow, were he dead, or taken by the foe, our fatal loss had wanted
no quick Herald to disclose it.


Aurelius. That hope alone sustains me, nor will we be so ungrateful unto
heaven to question what we fear, with what we enjoy. Is answer of our message
yet returned from that religious man, the holy Hermit, sent by the Earl of
Chester to confirm us in that miraculous act? For 'twas no less, our Army being
in rout, nay, quite overthrown, as Chester writes; even then this holy man
armed with his cross and staff, went smiling on, and boldly fronts the foe; at
sight of whom the Saxons stood amazed: for to their seeming, above the Hermit
head appeared such brightness, such clear and glorious beams as if our men
marched all in fire, wherewith the Pagans fled, and by our troops were all to
death pursued.


Glost. It Is full of wonder sir.

Aurel. Oh Gloucester, he is a jewelworth a Kingdom: where is Oswold with his answer?


Oswold. It Is here my Royal Lord.


Aurel. In writing, will he not sit with us?


Oswo. His Orizons performed, he bad me say he would attend with all submission.


Aurel. Proceed to council then, and let some give order, the Ambassadors being
come, to take our answer, they have admittance. Oswold, Toclio, be it your
charge: and now my Lords, observe the holy council of this reveren'd Hermit:
[reads] As you respect your safety, limit not that only power that has
protected you, trust not an open enemy too far,

He Is yet a looser; and knows you have won,
Mischie^s not ended, are but then begun.

Anselme the Hermit. Dono. Powerful and pithie, which my advice confirms, no
man leaves physic when his sickness slakes, but doubles the ^eceipts: the word
of Peace seems fair to blood-shot eyes; but being applied with such a medicine
as blinds all the sight, argues desire of Cure, but not of Art.


Aurel. You argue from defects, if both the name, and the condition of the
Peace be one, it is to be preferred, and in the offer made by the Saxon, I see
naught repugnant.


Glost. The time of Truce required for thirty days, carries suspicion in it,
since half that space will serve to strength their weakened Regiment.


Cador. Who in less time will undertake to free our Country from them.


Edwin. Leave that unto our fortune.


Dono. Is not our bold, and hopeful General still Master of the field, their
Legious fallen, the rest intrencht for fear, half starved, and wounded, and shall
we now give over our fair advantage? force heaven, my Lord, the danger is far
more, in trusting to their words, then to their weapons.


Enter Oswold. Oswold. The Ambassadors are come sir.


Aurel. Conduct them in, we are resolved my Lords, since policy failed in the
beginning, it shall have no hand in the conclusion, that heavenly power that
has so well begun their fatal overthrow I know can end it, from which fair
hope, my self will give them answer.


Flourish Cornets. Enter Artesia with the Saxon Lords. Dono. What Is here, a
woman Orator?


Aurel. Peace Donobert, speak, what are you Lady?


Arts. The sister of the Saxon General, warlike Ostorius the East Anglese
King, my name Artesia, who in terms of love brings peace and health to great
Aurelius, wishing she may return as fair a present as she makes tender of.


Aurel. The fairest present e're mine eyes were blessed with, command a chair
there for this Saxon Beauty: sit Lady, we will confer: your warlike brother sues
for a peace, you say?


Arts. With endless love unto your State and Person.


Aurel. Has sent a moving Orator believe me, what think thou Donobert?


Dono. Believe me sir, were I but young again this gilded pill might take my
stomach quickly.


Aurel. True, thou art old, how soon we do forget our own defects. Fair damsel,
oh my tongue turns Traitor, and will betray my heart, sister to our enemy: 's
death her beauty mazes me, I cannot speak if I but lock on her, what is that we
did conclude?


Dono. This Royal Lord.


Aurel. Pish, thou can not utter it: fairest of creatures* tell the King your
Brother that we in love, ha! and honor to our Country, command his Armies to
depart our Realm, but if you please fair soul-Lord Donobert, deliver you our
pleasure.


Dono. I shall sir, Lady return, and certify your brother.


Aurel. Thou art t^o blunt, and rude, return so soon, fie, let her stay, and
send some messenger to certify our pleasure.


Dono. What means your Grace?


Aurel. To give her time of rest to her long Journey, we would not willingly be
thought* uncivil.


Arts. Great King of Bri^^ain, let (...) not seem strange to embrace the
Princely Offers of a friend,

Whose virtues with thine own, in fairest merit
Both States in Peace and Love may now inherit.

Aurel. She speaks of Love again, sure it is my fear, she knows I do not hate
her.


Arts. Be then thy self most great Aureliu^, and let not envy, nor a deeper
sin in these thy Counselors, deprive thy goodness of that fair honor, we in
seeking peace, give first to thee, who never use to sue but force our wishes*
yet if this seem light, oh let my sex, though worthless your respect, take the
report of thy humanity,

Whose mild and ver^uous life loud fame displayes,
As being overcome by one so worthy praise.

Aurel. She has an Angels tongue, speak still.

Dono. This flattery is gross sir, hear no more on it, Lady, these childish
complements are needless, you have your answer, and believe it, Madam, his
Grace, though young, does wear within his breast too grave a Councellor to be
seduc't by smoothing flattery, or oily words.


Arts. I come not sir, to woo him.


Dono. 'Twere folly if you should, you must not wed him, shame take thy tongue,
being old and weak thy self, thou doat'st, and looking on thine own defects,
speak what thoud'st wish in me, do I command the deeds of others, mine own
act not free?

Be pleased to smile or frown, we respect neither,
My will and rule shall stand and fall together.
Most fair Artesia, see the King descends to give thee welcome with these
warlike Saxons, and now on equal terms both sues and grants, in stead of Truce,
let a perpetual League seal our united bloods in holy marriage, send the East
Angles King this happy news, that thou with me have made a League for ever, and
added to his state a friend and brother: speak dearest Love, dare you confirm
this Title?


Arts. I were no woman to deny a good so high and noble to my fame and Country.


Aurel. Live then a Queen in Britain.


Glost. He means to marry her.


Dono. Death! he shall marry the devil first, marry a Pagan, an Idolater.


Cador. He has won her quickly.


Edwin. She was wooed before she came sure, or came of purpose to conclude the
Match.


Aurel. Who dares oppose our will? my Lord of Gloucester, be you Ambassador unto
our Brother, the Brother of our Queen (...), tell him for such our
entertainment looks him, our marriage adding to the happiness,

Of our intended joys, man's good or ill,
In this like waves agree, come double still,
Enter Hermit. Who Is this, the Hermit? Welcome my happiness, our Countries
hope, most reverent holy man, I wanted but thy blessing to make perfect the
infinite sum of my felicity.


Hermit. Alack sweet Prince, that happiness is yonder,
Felicity and thou art far asunder,
this world can never give it.

Aurel. Thou art deceived, see here what I have found, Beauty, Alliance, Peace,
and strength of Friends, all in this all exceeding excellence, the League's
confirmed.


Hermit. With whom, dear Lord?

Aurel. With the great Brother of this Beauteous woman, the Royal Saxon King.


Hermit. Oh then I see, and fear thou art too near thy misery, what magic
could so linck thee to this mischief by all the good that thou have reapt by
me, stand further from destruction.


Aurel. Speak as a man, and I shall hope to obey thee.

Hermit. Idolaters get hence, fond King, let go,
Thou hug'st thy ruin, and thy Countries woe.

Dono. Well spoke old Father, too him, bait him soundly, now by heavens blessed
Lady, I can scarce keep patience.


1 Saxon Lord. What devil is this?


2 Saxon Lord. That cursed Christian, by whose hellish charms our army was
overthrown.


Hermit. Why do you dally sir? oh tempt not heaven, warm not a serpent in your
naked bosom, discharge them from your Court.


Aurel. Thou speak like madness, command the frozen shepherd to the shade,
when he sits warm in the Sun, the fever sick to add more heat unto his burning
pain, these may obey, it is less extremity then thou enjoynst to me: cast but
thine eye upon this beauty, do it, I Will forgive thee, though jealousy in
others finds no pardon, then say thou do not love me, I shall then swear
thou art immortal, and no earthly man, oh blame then my morta^lity; no^ me.


Hermit. It is thy weakness brings thy (...) Prince.


Aurel. Be milder in thy doom.


Hermit. It Is you that must endure heavens doom, which fallen, remember's just.


Arts. Thou shall not live to see it: how fares my Lord? (...) my poor
presence breed dislike, great Prince, I am no such neglected soul, will seek to
tie you to your word.


Aurel. My word dear Love, may my Religion, Crown, State, and Kingdom fail,
when I fail thee, command Earl Chester to break up the camp, without
disturbance to our Saxon friends, send every hour swift posts to hasten on the
King her Brother, to conclude this League, this endless happy Peace of Love and
Marriage, till when provide for Revels, and give charge that naught be wanting,
which make our Triumphs

Sportful and free to all, if such fair blood
Exit all but Hermit. Engender ill, man must not look for good.

Flourish. Enter Modestia reading in a book. Modesta. How much the often report of
this blessed Hermit, has won on my desires; I must behold him, and sure this
should be he, oh the worlds folly, proud earth and dust, how low a price bears
goodness, all that should make man absolute, shines in him: much reverent Sir,
may I without offense give interruption to your holy thoughts?


Hermit. What would you Lady?

Modest. That which^till now never found a language in me, I am in love.


Her. In Love, with what?

Modest. With virtue?

Her. There Is no blame in that.

Modest. Nay sir, with you?
With your Religious Life? Your Virtue, Goodness, if there be a name to express
affection greater, that, that would I learn and utter: Reverent Sir, if there
be any thing to bar my suit, be charitable and expose it, your prayers are the
same Orizons, which I will number. Holy Sir, keep not instruction back from
willingness, possess me of that knowledge leads you on to this humility, for
well I know were greatness good, you would not live so low.


Her. Are you a Virgin?

Modest. Yes Sir?

Her. Your name?

Modest. Modesta?

Her. Your name and virtues meet, a Modest Virgin, live ever in the
sanctimonious way to Heaven and Happiness, there is goodness in you, I must
instruct you further; come look up, behold yon firmament, there sits a power,
whose footstool is this earth, oh learn this lesson,

And practice it, he that will climb so high,
Must leave no joy beneath, to move his eye.

Exit. Modest. I apprehend you sir, on Heaven I fix my love,
Earth gives us grief, our joys are all above,
For this was man in innocence naked born,
To show us wealth hinders our sweet return.

Exit. ACTUS II.
Enter Clown, and his Sister great with child. Clown. AWay, follow me no
further, I am none of thy brother, what with Child, great with Child, and
knows not whose the Father on it, I am ashamed to call thee Sister.


Joan. Believe me Brother, he was a Gentleman.

Clown. Nay, I believe that, he gives arms, and legs too, and has made you the
Herald to blaze 'em, but Joan, Joan, sister Joan, can you tell me his name that
did it: how shall we call my Cousin, your bastard, when we have it?


Joan. Alas, I know not the Gentleman's name Brother, I met him in these woods,
the last great hunting, he was so kind and proffered me so much, as I had not
the heart to ask him more.


Clown. Not his name, why this shows your Country breeding now, had you been
brought up i'th^ City, you would have got a Father first, and the child
afterward: have thou no marks to know him by.


Joan. He had most rich Attire, a fair Hat and Feather, a gilt Sword, and most
excellent Hangers.


Clown. Pox on his Hangers, would he had bin gelt for his labor.


Joan. Had you but heard him swear you would have thought.


Clown. I as you did, swearing and lying goes together still, did his Oaths
get you with Child, we shall have a roaring Boy then in faith, well sister, I
must leave you.


Joan. Dear Brother stay, help me to find him out, I Will ask no further.


Clown. 'Sfoot who should I find? who should I ask for?


Joan. Alas I know not, he uses in these woods, and these are witness of his
oaths and promise.


Clown. We are like to have a hot suit on it, when our best witness's but a
Knight 'ath Post.


Joan. Do but enquire this Forest, I Will go with you, some happy fate may guide
us till we meet him.


Clown. Meet him, and what name shall we have for him, when we weet him? 'Sfoot
thou neither know him, nor can tell what to call him, was ever man tired
with such a business, to have a sister got with child, and know not who did
it; well, you shall see him, I Will do my best for you, I Will make Proclamation, if
these Woods and Trees, as you say, will bear any witness, let them answer; Oh
yes: If there be any man that wants a name, will come in for conscience sake,
and acknowledge himself to be a Whore-Master, he shall have that laid to his
charge in an hour, he shall not be rid on in an age; if he have Lands, he shall
have an heir, if he have patience, he shall have a wife, if he have neither
Lands nor patience, ^e shall have a whore, so ho boy, so ho, so, so.

Within Prince Vter. So, ho, by, so, ho, illo ho, illo ho.


Clown. Hark, hark sister, there is one hollows to us, what a wicked world's
this, a man cannot so soon name a whore but a knave comes presently, and see
where he is, stand close a while, sister.


Enter Prince Vter. Prince. How like a voice that Echo spoke, but oh my
thoughts are lost for ever in amazement, could I but meet a man to tell her
beauties, these trees would bend their tops to kiss the air, that from my lips
should give her praises up.


Clown. He talk's of a woman, sister.


Joan. This may be he, brother.

Clown. View him well, you see he has a fair Sword, but his Hanger's are fallen.


Prince. Here did I see her first, here view her beauty, oh had I known her
name, I had been happy.


Clown. Sister this is he sure, he knows not thy name neither, a couple of wise
fools in faith, to get children and know not one another.


Prince. You weeping leaves, upon whose tender cheeks does stand a flood of
tears at my complaint, and heard my vows and oaths.


Clown. Law, Law, he has been a great swearer too, it is he sister.


Prince. For having overtook her, as I have seen a forward blood-hound, strip
the swifter of the cry ready to seize his wished hopes, upon the sudden view
struck with astonishment at his arrived prey, instead of seizure stands at
fearful bay,

Or like to Marius soldiers, who o'retook
The eye sight killing Gorgon at one look,
Made everlasting stand: so feared my power
Whose cloud aspired the Sun, dissolved a shower:
Pigmalion, then I tasted thy sad fate, whose Ivory picture, and my fair were
one, our dotage past imagination, I saw and felt desire.


Clown. Pox a your fingering, did he feel sister?


Prince. But enjoyed now, oh fate, thou had thy days and nights to feed,

Or calm affection, one poor sight was all,
Converts my pleasure to perpetual thrall,
Embracing thine, thou lostest breath and desire,
So I relating mine, will here expire,
For here I vow to you mournful plants
Who were the first made happy by her fame,
Never to part hence, till I know her name.

Clown. Give me thy hand sister, The Child has found his Father, this is he
sure, as I am a man, had I been a woman these kind words would have won me, I
should have had a great belly too that is certain; well, I Will speak to him: most
honest and fleshly minded Gentleman, give me your hand sir.


Prince. Ha, what art thou, that thus rude and boldly, dare take notice of a
wretch so much allied to misery as I am?


Clown. Nay, Sir, for our aliance, I shall be found to be a poor brother in Law
of your worships, the Gentlewoman you spoke on, is my sister, you see what a
clew she spreads, her name is Joan Go-too't, I am her elder, but she has been
at it before me: it is a woman's fault, pox a this bashfulness, come forward Iug,
prithee speak to him.


Prince. Have you e're seen me Lady?


Clown. Seen ye, ha, ha, It seems she has felt you too, here is a young Go-too't
a coming sir, she is my sister, we all love to Go-too't, as well as your
worship, she is a Maid yet, but you may make her a wife, when you please sir.


Prince. I am amazed with wonder: Tell me woman, what sin have you committed
worthy this?


Joan. Do you not know me sir?


Prince. Know thee! as I do thunder, hell, and mischief, witch, stallion, hag.


Clown. I see he will marry her, he speaks so like a husband.


Prince. Death, I will cut their tongues out for this blasphemy, strumpet,
villain, where have you ever seen me?


Clown. Speak for your self with a pox to ye.


Prince. Slaves, I Will make you curse your selves for this temptation.


Joan. Oh sir, if ever you did speak to me, it was in smoother phrase, in
fairer language.


Prince. Lightning consume me, if I ever saw thee, my rage o'reflowes my blood,
all patience flies me.


Beats her. Clown. Hold I beseech you sir, I have nothing to ^ay to you.


Joan. Help, help, murder, murder.


Enter Toclio, and Oswold. Toclio. Make haste Sir, this way the sound came, it
was a wood.


Oswold. See where she is, and the Prince, the price of all our wishes.


Clown. The Prince say ye, has made a poor Subject of me I am sure.


Toclio. Sweet Prince, noble Vter, speak, how fare you sir?


Oswold. Dear sir, recall your self, your fearful absence has won too much
already on the grief of our sad King, from whom our laboring search has had
this fair success in meeting you.


Tolico. His silence, and his looks argue distraction.


Clown. Nay, he is mad sure, he will not acknowledge my sister, nor the child
neither.


Oswold. Let us entreat your Grace along with us, your sight will bring new
life, to the King your Brother.


Toclio. Will you go sir?


Prince. Yes, any whether, guide me, all is hell I see,

Man may change air, but not his misery.


Exit Prince Toclio. Joan. Lend me one word with you, sir.


Clown. Well said sister, he has a Feather, and fair Hangers too, this may be
he.


Oswold. What would you fair one.


Clown. Sure I have seen you in these woods e're this?


Oswold. Trust me never, I never saw this place, till at this time my friend
conducted me.


Joan. The more's my sorrow then.


Oswold. Would I could comfort you: I am a Bachelor, but it seems you have a
husband, you have been foully o'reshot else.


Clown. A woman's fault, we are all subject to go to it, sir.


Enter Toclio. Toclio. Oswold away, the Prince will not stir a foot without you.


Oswold. I am coming, farewell woman.


Toclio. Prithee make haste.


Joan. Good sir, but one word with you e're you leave us.


Toclio. With me fair soul?


Clown. She Will have a fling at him too, the Child must have a Father.


Joan. Have you never seen me sir?


Toclio. Seen thee, 'Sfoot I have seen many fair faces in my time, prithee look
up, and do not weep so, sure pretty wanton, I have seen this face before.


Joan. It is enough, though your never see me more.


sinks down. Toclio. 'Sfoot she is fallen, this place is enchanted sure, look to
the woman fellow.


^xit. Clown. Oh she is dead! she is dead, as you are a man stay and help, sir:
Joan, Joan, sister Joan, why Joan Go to it I say, will you cast away your self,
and your child, and me too, what do you mean, sister?


Joan. Oh give me pardon sir, 'twas too much joy oppressed my loving thoughts, I
know you were too noble to deny me, (...)* Where i^ he?


Clown. Who, the Gentleman? he is gone sister.


Joan. Oh! I am und one then, run, tell him I did but faint for joy, dear
brother haste, why do thou stay? oh never cease, till he give answer to thee.


Clown. He: which he? what do you call him tro?


Joan. Unnatural brother, show me the path he took, why do thou d^lly? speak,
oh, which way went he?


Clown. This way, that way, through the bushes there.


Joan. Were it through fire, the Journey's easy, winged with sweet desire.


Exit. Clown. Hey day, there is some hope of this yet, I Will follow her for
kindreds sake, if she miss of her purpose now, she will challenge all she finds I
see, for if ever we meet with a two legged creature in the whole Kingdom, the
Child shall have a Father that is certain.


Exit. Loud Music. Enter two with the Sword and Mace, Cador, Edwin, two
Bishops, Aurelius, Os^orius leading Artesia Crowned, Co^stancia, Modestia,
Octa, Proximus ^ Magician, Donobert, Gloucester, Oswold, Toclio, all pass over the
Stage. Ma^^es Donobert, Gloucester, Edwin, Cador. Dono. Come Gloucester, I do not
like this hasty Marriage.


Gloucester. She was quickly wooed and won, not six days since arrived an enemy to
sue for Peace, and now crowned Queen of Britain, this is strange.


Dono. Her brother too made as quick speed in coming, leaving his Saxons, and
his starved Troops, to take the advantage whilst 'twas offered, fore heaven I
fear the King's too ^redulous, our Army is discharged too.


Gloucester. Yes, and our General commanded home, Son Edwin have you seen him
since?


Edwin. He Is come to Court, but will not view the presence, nor speak unto the
King, he is so discontent at this so strange aliance with the Saxon, as nothing
can persuade his patience.


Cador. You know his humor will endure* no check, no if the King oppose it, all
crosses feeds both his spleen, and his impatience, those affections are in him
like powder, apt to inflame with every little spark, and blow up all his reason.


Gloucester. Edol of Chester is a noble Soldier.


Dono. So is he by the Rood, ever most faithful to the King and Kingdom, how
e're his passions guide him.


Enter Edoll with (...). Cador. See where he comes, my Lord.


Omnes. Welcome to Court, brave Earl.


Edol. Do not deceive me by your flatteries: Is not the Saxon here? the League
confirmed? the Marriage ratified? the Court divided with Pagan Infidels? the
least part Christians, at least in their Commands? Oh the gods! it is a thought
that takes away my sleep, and (...) my senses so I scarcely know you: Prepare
my horses, I Will away to Chester.


Capt. What shall we do with our Companies, my Lord?


Edol. Keep them at home to increase Cuckolds, and get some C^ses for your
Captainships, smooth up your brows, the wars has spoiled your f^ccs, and few
will now regard you.


Dono. Preserve you^ patience, Sir.


Edol. Preserve your Honors, Lords, your Countries Safety, your Lives, and
Lands from strangers: what black devil could so bewitch the King, so to
discharge a Royal Army in the height of conquest? nay, even already made
victorious, to give such credit to an enemy, a starved foe, a straggling
fugitive, beaten beneath our feet, so love dejected, so servi^e, and so base,
as hope of life had won them all, to leave the Land for ever?


Dono. It was the Kings will.


Edol. It was your want of wisdom, that should have laid before his tender
youth, the dangers of a State, where forain Powers bandy for Sovereignty with
Lawful Kings, who being settled once, to assure themselves, will never fail to
seek the blood and life of all competitors.


Dono. Your words sound well my Lord, and point at safety, both for the Realm
and us, but why did you within whose power it lay, as General, with full
Commission to dispose the war, lend ear to parley with the weakened foe?


Edol. Oh the good Gods!


Cador. And on that parley came this Embassy.


Edol. You will hear me.


Edwin. Your letters did declare it to the King, both of the Peace, and all
Conditions brought by this Saxon Lady, whose fond love has thus be witched him.


Edol. I will curse you all as black as hell, unless you hear me, your gross
mistake would make wisdom her self run madding through the streets, and quarrel
with her shadow, death! why killed ye not that woman?


Dono. Glost. Oh my Lord.


Edol. The great devil take me quick, had I been by, and all the women of the
world were barren, she should have died e're he had married her on these
condi^ions.


Cador. It is not reason that directs you thus.


Edol. Then have I none, for all I have directs me, never was man so palpably
abused, so basely mar^ed, bought and sold to scorn, my Honor, Fame, and hopef^l
Victories, the loss of Time, Expenses, Blood and Fortunes, all vanished into
nothing.


Edwin. This rage is vain my Lord, what the King does, nor they, nor you can
help.


Edol. My Sword must fail me then.


^ador. Against whom will you expose it?


Edol. What Is that to you, against all the devils in hell to guard my country.


Edwin. These are airy words.


Edol. Sir, you ^read too hard upon my patience.


Edwin. I speak the duty of a Subjects faith, and say again had your been here
in presence,

What the King did, you had not dared to cross it,

Edol. I will trample on his Life and Soul that says it.

Cador. My Lord.


Edwin* Come, come.


Edol. Now before heaven.


Cador. Dear sir.


Edol. Not dare? thou lie beneath thy lungs.


Gloucester. No more son Edwin.


Edwin. I have done sir, I take my leave.


Edol. But thou shall not, you shall take no leave of me Sir.


Dono. For wisdoms sake my Lord.


Edol. Sir, I Will leave him, and you, and all of you, the Court and King, and
let my Sword, and friends, (...) for Edol^ safety: stay you here, and hug the
Saxons, till they cut your throats, or b^ing the Land to servile slavery, such
yokes of baseness, Chester must not suffer,

Go, and repent bet^ mes these foul misdeeds,
For in this League, all our whole Kingdom bleeds,
which I Will preve^t, or perish.

Glost. See how his rage transports him!


Exit Edol. Capt. Cador. These passions set apart, a braver soldier breathes
not in the world this day.


Dono. I wish his own worth do not court his ^^ine.

The King must Rule* and we must learn to obey,
True virtue (...) direct the noble way.

Loud Music. Enter Aure^ius, Artesia, Ostorius, O^ta, Proximus, (...) Osw^la,
Hermit. (...). Why is the Court so dull? me thinks each room, and angle of our
Palace should appear stuck full of objects fit for (...) and triumphs, to show
ou^ high content. Oswold fill wine, must we begin the Revels? be it so then,
reach me the cup: I Will now begin a Health to our loved Queen, the bright
Artesia, the Royal Saxon King, our warlike brother, go and command all the
whole Court to pledge it, fill to the Hermit there* most reverent Ansel^^,
we will do thee Honor first, to pledge my Queen.


Her. I drink no healths great King, and if I did, I would be loath to part
with health, to those that have no power to give it back again.


Aurel. Mistake not, it is the argument of Love and Duty to our Queen and us.


Arts. But he ows none it seems.


Her. I do to virtue Madam, temperate minds covets that health to drink, which
nature gives in every spring to man, he that does hold

His body, but a Tenement at will
Bestows no cost, but to repair what is ill,
Ye^ if your healths or heat of Wine, fair Princes,
Could this old frame, or these cras'd limbs restore,
Or keep out death, or sickness, then fill more,
I Will make fresh way for appetite, if no,
On such a prodigal who would wealth bestow?

Ostorius. He speaks not like a guest to grace a wedding.


Enter Toclio. Arts. No sir, but like an envious imposter.


Octa. A Christian slave, a Cinick.


Ost^r. What virtue could decline your Kingly spirit, to such respect of him
whose magic spells met with your vanquished Troops, and turned your Arms to
that necessity of fight, which the despair of any hope to stand but by his
charms, had been defeated in a bloody conquest?


Octa. 'Twas magic, hellbred magic did it sir, and that is a course my Lord,
which we esteem in all our Saxon Wars, unto the last and lowest ebb of servi^e
treachery.


Aurel. Sure you are deceived, it was the hand of heaven, that in his virtue
gave us victory, is there a power in man that can strike fear thorough a
general camp, or create spirits, in recreant bosoms above present sense?


Ost^r. To blind the sense there may with apparition of well armed troops
within themselves are air, formed into humane shapes, and such that day were by
that Sorcerer raised to cross our fortunes.


Aurel. There is ^ law tells u^, that words want force to make deeds void,
examples must be shown by instances alike, e're I believe it.


Ost^r. It Is easily performed, believe me sir, propose your own desires, and
give but way to what our Magic here shall straight perform, and then let his
or our deserts be censured.


Aurel. We could not wish a greater happiness, then what this satisfaction
brings with it, let him proceed, fair brother.


Ost^r. He shall sir, come learned Proximus, this task be thine, let thy great
charms confound the opinion this Christian by his spells has falsely won.


Prox. Great King, propound your wishes then, wha^ persons, of what State, what
numbers, or how armed, please your own thoughts, they shall appear before you.


Aurel. Strange art! what think thou reverent Hermit?


Her. Let him go on sir.


Aurel. Will thou behold his cunning?


Her. Right gladly sir, it will be my joy to tell,
That I was here to laugh at him and hell.

Aurel. I like thy confidence.


Arts. His saucy impudence, proceed to'th' trial.


Prox. Speak your desires my Lord, and be it place't in any angle underneath
the Moon, the center of the Earth, the Sea, the Air, the region of the fire,
nay hell it self, and I Will present it.


Aurel. We Will have no sight so fearful, only this, if all thy art can reach
it, show me here the two great Champions of the Trojan War, Achilles and brave
Hector, our great Ancestor, both in their warlike habits, Armor, Shields, and
Weapons then in use for fight.


Prox. It Is done, my Lord, command a halt and silence, as each man will respect
his life or danger.


Armel, Plesgeth. Enter Spirit. Quid vis?


Prox. Attend me.


Aurel. The Apparition comes, on our displeasure let all keep place and silence.


Within Drums beat Marches. Enter Proximus bringing in Hector attired and armed
after the Trojan manner, with Target, Sword, and Battel-ax, a Tr^mpet before
him, and a Spirit in flame colors with a Torch; ^t the other door Achilles
with his Spear and Falch^n, a Trumpet and a Spirit in black before him;
Trumpets sound alarm, and they manage their weapons to begin the Fight: and
after some Charges, the Hermit steps between them, at which seeming, (...) the
spirits, and tremble. Thunde^ within* Prox. What means this stay, bright Arm^^,
Pl^sg^th? why fear you and fall back? (...) the Alarms, and enforce the Combat,
or hel^ or darkness circles you for ever


Arm. We dare not.


Prox. Ha!


Plesgeth. Our charms are all dissolved, Armel away,
It Is worse then hell to us, whiles^ here we stay.

Exit all. Her. What* at a Nonplus fi^? command them back for shame.


Prox. What power o're^aws my Spell! return you Hell Hounds* Armel, Plesgeth,
double damnation seize you, by all the Infernal powers, the prince of devils is
in this Hermits habit, what else could force my Spirits quake or tremble thus?


Her. We^k argument to hide you^ want of skill: does the devil fear the devil,
or war with hell? they have not been acquainted long it seems. Know
mis-believing Pagan, even that Power

That overthrew your Fo^ces, still lets you see,
He only can cont^oul both hell and thee.

Prox. Di^grace and mischief, I Will enforce new charms, new spells, and spirits
raised from the low Aby^s of hells unbottom'd depths.


Aurel. We have enough sir, give over your charms, we will find some other time
to praise your Art. I dare not but acknowledge that heavenly Power my heart
stands witness to: be not dismayed my Lords, at this disast^r, nor thou my
fairest Queen* we will change the Scen^ to some more pleasing spo^^^ * Lead to
your Chamber,

How^ere in this thy plea^ures find a ^ross,
Our joy's too fixed here to ^uffer los^.

Toclio. Which I shall add to sir, with news I bring: The Prince your Brother,
lives.


Aurel. (...)!


Toclio. And comes to grace (...) high and heaven-knit Marriage


A^r^l. Why do thou flatter me, to make me think such happiness attends me?


Enter Prince Uter and Oswold. Tocli^. His presence speaks my truth, sir.


Dono. Force me, (...)


(...) ^


(...) ^


(...) ^


(...) ^


(...) (...) saw her, captived my senses, and thus many (...) barred me ^froth^
all society of men: how came she to this place, brother (...) ^ Speak that
Angels name, her heaven-blest name, oh speak it (...) Sir.


Aurel. It is Artesia, the Royal Saxon Princes^.


Prince. A woman, and no Deity: no feigned shape, to mock the reason of
admiring sense, on whom a hope as low as mine may live, love, and enjoy, dear
Brother, may it not?


Aurel. She is all the Good, or Virtue thou can name, my Wife, my Queen.


Prince. Ha! your wife!


Arts. Which you shall find sir, if that time and fortune may make my love
but wor^hy of your trial.


Prince. Oh!


Aurel. What troubles you, dear Brother? Why with so strange and fixed an eye
do thou behold my Joys?


Arts. You are not well, sir.


Prince. Yes, yes, oh you immortal powers, why has poor man so many entrances
for sorrow to creep in at, when our sense is much too weak to hold his
happiness? Oh say I was born deaf: and let your silence confirm in me the
knowing my defect, at least be charitable to conceal my sin, for hearing is no
less in me, dear Brother.


Aurel. No more, I see thou art a Rival in the Joys of my high Bliss. Come my
Artesia,

The Day's most praised when it is ecclipst by Night,
Great Good must have as great Ill opposite.

Prince. Stay, hear but a word; yet now I think on it,

This is your Wedding-night, and were it mine,
I should be angry with least loss of time.

Arts. Envy speaks no such words, has no such looks.


Prince. Sweet rest unto you both.


Aurel. Lights to our Nuptial Chamber.


Arts. Could you speak so, I would not fear how much my grief did grow.


Aurel. Lights to our Chamber, on, on, set on.


Exeunt. Manet Prince. Prince. Could you speak so, I would not fear how much my
griefs did grow. Those were her very words, sure I am waking, she wrung me by
the hand, and spoke them to me with a most pas^ionate affection, perhaps she
loves, and now repents her choice, in marriage with my brother; oh fond man,
how dare thou trust thy Traitors thoughts, thus to be^ray thy self? 'twas but
a waking dream wherein thou made thy wishes speak, not her, in which thy
foolish hopes strives to prolong

A wretched being, so sickly children play
With (...) toys, which for a time delay,
But do not ^ure the ^it: be ^hen a man,
Meet that destruction which thou can not fly
From, not to live, make it thy best to die,
And call her now, whom thou did hope to wed,
Thy brothers wife, thou art too never a kin,
And such an act above all name's a sin
Not to be blotted out, heaven pardon me,
She Is banished from my bosom now for ever,
To lowest ^bbes, men justly hope a flood,
When vice grows barren, all desires are good.

Enter Waiting Gentlewoman with a Jewel. Gent. The noble Prince, I take it sir.


Prince. You speak me what I should be, Lady.


Gent. Know by that name sir, Queen Artesia greets you.


Prince. Alas good virtue, how is she mistaken.


Gent. Commending her affection in this Jewel, sir.


Prince. She binds my service to her: has a Jewel it is a fair one trust me, and
methinks it much resembles something I have seen with her.


Genesis It is an artificial crab, Sir.


Prince. A creature that goes backward.


Gent. True, from the way it looks.


Prince. There is no moral in it aludes to her self?


Gent. It Is your construction gives you that sir, she is a woman.


Prince. And like this, may use her legs, and eyes two several ways.


Gent. Just like the Sea-crab, which on the Mussel prays, whilst he bills at a
stone.


Prince. Pretty in troth, prithee tell me, art thou honest?


Gent. I hope I seem no other, sir.


Prince. And those that seem so, are sometimes bad enough.


Gent. If they will accuse themselves for want of witness, let them, I am not
so foolish.


Prince. I see thou art wise, come speak me truly, what is the greatest sin?


Gent. That which man never acted, what has been done Is as the least, common
to all as one.


Prince. Do think thy Lady is of thy opinion?


Gent. She Is a bad Scholar else, I have brought her up, and she dares owe me
still.


Prince. I, it is a fault in greatness, they dare owe many e're they pay one,
but dare thou ^^pose thy scholar to my examining?


Gent. Yes in good troth sir, and pray put her to it too, it is a hard lesson if
she answer it not.


Prince. Thou know the hardest.


Gent. As far as a woman may, sir.


Prince. I commend thy plainness, when will thou bring me to thy Lady?


Gent. Next opportunity I attend you, sir.


Prince. Thanks, take this, and commend me to her.


Gent. Think of your Sea-crab sir, I pray.


Exit. Prince. Oh by any means, Lady, what should all this tend to? if it be
Love or Lust that thus incites her, the sin is horrid and incestuous; if to
betray my life, what hopes she by it? Yes, it may be a practice 'twixt
themselves, to expel the Britains and ensure the State through our
destructions, all this may be valid with a deeper reach in villainy, then all my
thoughts can guess at, however

I will confer with her, and if I find
Lust has given Life to Envy in her mind,
I may prevent the danger; so men wise
By the same step by which they fell, may rise.
Vices are Virtues, if so thought and seen,
And Trees with foulest roots, branch soonest green.

Exit. ACT. 3. SCENE 1.
Enter Clown and his Sister. Clown. COme sister, thou that art all fool, all
mad-woman.


Joan. Prithee have patience, we are now at Court.


Clown. At Court! ha, ha, that proves thy madness, was there ever any woman in
thy taking traveled to Court for a husband? 'slid, it is enough for them to get
children, and the City to keep 'em, and the Country to find Nurses: every
thing must be done in his due place, sister.


Joan. Be but content a while, for sure I know this Journey will be happy. Oh
dear brother, this night my sweet Friend came to comfort me, I saw him, and
embraced him in mine arms.


Clown. Why did you not hold him, and call me to help you?


Joan. Alas, I thought I had been with him still, but when I wak't!


Clown. Ah pox of all Loger-heads, then you were but in a Dream all this while,
and we may still go look him: Well, since we are come to Court, cast your Cats
eyes about you, and either find him out you dreamt on, or some other, for I Will
trouble my self no further. Ent. Dono. Cador, Edw. and Toclio See, see, here
comes more Courtiers, look about you, come, pray view 'em all well; the old man
has none of the marks about him, the other have both Swords and Feathers: what
think thou of that tall young Gentleman?


Joan. He much resembles him; but sure my friend, brother, was not so high of
stature.


Clown. Oh beast, wast thou got a child with a short thing too?


D^no. Come, come, I Will hear no more on it: Go Lord Edwin, tell her this day her
sister shall be married to Cador Earl of Cornwall, so shall she to thee brave
Edwin, if she will have my blessing.


Edwin. She is addicted to a single Life, she will not hear of Marriage.


Dono. Tush, fear it not: go you from me to her, use your best skill my Lord,
and if you fail, I have a trick shall do it: haste, haste about it.


Edwin. Sir, I am gone, my hope is in your help more then my own.


Dono. And worthy Toclio, to your care I must commend this business, for Lights
and Music, and what else is needful.


Toclio. I shall my Lord.


Clown. We would entreat a word sir, come forward sister.


Ex. Dono. Toc. Cador. Edwin. What lackst thou fellow?


Clown. I lack a father for a child, sir.


Edwin. How! a Godfather?


Clown. No sir, we mean the own father: it may be you sir, for any thing we
know, I think the child is like you.


Edwin. Like me! prithee where is it?


Clown. Nay, it is not born yet sir, it is forth coming you see, the child must
have a father: what do you think of my sister?


Edwin. Why I think if she never had husband she is a whore, and thou a fool,
farewell.


Exit. Clown. I thank you sir: well, pull up thy heart sister, if there be any
Law in the Court this fellow shall father it, 'cause he uses me so scurvily.
There Is a great Wedding toward they say, we will amongst them for a husband for
thee.

Enter Sir Nicodemus with a Letter. If we miss there, I Will have another bout
with him that abused me. Seel look, there comes another Hat and Feather, this
should be a close Letcher, he is reading of a Love-letter.


Sir Nic. Earl Cador's Marriage, and a Masque to grace it, so, so. This night
shall make me famous for Presentiments. How now, what are you?


Clown. A couple of Great Britains, you may see by our bellies, sir.

Sir Nic. And what of this sir?

Clown. Why thus the matter stands sir: There Is one of your Courtiers Hunting
Nags has made a Gap through another man's Enclosure. Now sir, here is the
question, who should be at charge of a Fur-bush to stop it?


Sir Nic. Ha, ha, this is out of my element: the Law must end it.


Clown. Your Worship says well; for surely I think some Lawyer had a hand in
the business, we have such a troublesome Issue.


Sir Nic. But what is thy business with me now?


Clown. Nay sir, the business is done already, you may see by my sisters belly.


Sir Nic. Oh, now I find thee, this Gentlewoman it seems has been humbled.


Clown. As low as the ground would give her leave sir, and your Worship knows
this: though there be many fathers without children, yet to have a child
without a father, were most unnatural.


Sir Nic. That Is true in faith, I never heard of a child yet that e're begot his
father.


Clown. Why true, you say wisely sir.


Sir Nic. And therefore I conclude, that he that got the child, is without all
question the father of it.


Clown. I, now you come to the mat^er sir: and our suit is to your Worship for
the discovery of this father.


Sir Nic. Why, lives he in the Court here?


Joan. Yes sir, and I desire but Marriage.


Sir Nic. And does the knave refuse it? Come, come, be merry wench, he shall
marry thee, and keep the child too, if my Knighthood can do any thing; I am
bound by mine Orders to help distressed Ladies, and can there be a greater
injury to a woman with child, then to lack a father for it? I am ashamed of
your simpleness: Come, come, give me a Courtiers Fee for my pains, and I Will be
thy Advocate my self, and justice shall be found, nay I Will sue the Law for it;
but give me my Fee first.


Clown. If all the money I have in the world will do it, you shall have it sir.


Sir Nic. An Angel does it.


Clown. Nay there is two, for your better eye sight sir.


Sir Nic. Why well said: give me thy hand wench, I Will teach thee a trick for all
this, shall get a father for thy child presently, and this it is, mark now:
You meet a man, as you meet me now, thou claimest Marriage of me, and layest
the child to my charge, I deny it: push, that is nothing, hold thy Claim fast,
thy words carries it, and no Law can withstand it.


Clown. Is It possible?

Sir Nic. Past all opposition, her own word carries it, let her challenge any
man, the child shall call him Father; there is a trick for your money now.


Clown. Troth Sir, we thank you, we will make use of your trick, and go no further
to seek the child a Father, for we challenge you Sir: sister lay it to him, he
shall marry thee, I shall have a worshipful old man to my brother.


Sir Nic. Ha, ha, I like thy pleasantness,.


Joan. Nay indeed Sir, I do challenge you.


Clown. You think we jest sir.


Sir Nic. I by my troth do I, I like thy wit in faith, thou shall live at Court
with me, did never here of Nicodemus Nothing? I am the man.


Clown. Nothing, 'slid we are out again, thou wast never got with child with
nothing sure.


Joan. I know not what to say.


Sir Nic. Never grieve wench, show me the man and process shall fly out.


Clown. It Is enough for us to find the children, we look that you should find
the Father, and therefore either do us justice, or we will stand to our first
challenge.


Sir Nic. Would you have justice without an Adversary, unless you can show me
the man, I can do you no good in it.


Clown. Why then I hope you will do us no harm sir, you will restore my money.


Sir Nic. What, my Fee? marry Law forbid it, find out the party, and you shall
have justice, your fault closed up, and all shall be amended, the Child his
Father, and the Law ended.


Exit. Clown. Well, he has deserved his Fee indeed, for he has brought our suit
to a quick end, I promise you, and yet the Child has never a Father; nor we
have no more money to seek after him, a shame of all lecherous placcats; now you
look like a Cat had newly kitten'd, what will you do now tro? Follow me no
further, lest I beat your brains out.


Joan. Impose upon me any punishment, rather then leave me now.


Clown. Well, I think I am bewitch with thee, I cannot find in my heart to
forsake her, there was never sister would have abused a poor brother as thou
have done, I am even pined away with fretting, there is nothing but flesh and
bones about me, well and I had my money again, it were some comfort, hark
sister, Thunder. does it not thunder?


Joan. Oh yes, most fearfully, what shall. we do brother?


Clown. Marry e'ene get some shelter e're the storm catch us: away, let us away
I prithee.


Enter the Devil in man's habit, richly attired, his feet and his head horrid.
Joan. Ha, it is he, stay brother, dear brother stay.


Clown. What Is the matter now?


Joan. My love, my friend is come, yonder he goes.


Clown. Where, where, show me where, I Will stop him if the devil be not in him.


Joan. Look there, look yonder, oh dear friend, pity my distress, for heaven
and goodness do but speak to me.


Devil. She calls me, and yet drives me headlong from her,
Poor mortal, thou and I are much uneven,
Thou must not speak of goodness nor of heaven,
if I confer with thee: but be of comfort, whilst men do breath, and Britiains
name be known,
The fatal fruit thou bear within thy womb,
Shall here be famous till the day of doom.

Clown. 'Slid who is that talks so? I can see no body.


Joan. Then art thou blind, or mad, see where he goes, and beckons me to come,
oh lead me forth, I Will follow thee in spite of fear or death.


Exit. Clown. Oh brave, she will run to the devil for a husband, she is stark mad
sure, and talks to a shadow, for I could see no substance: well, I Will after
her, the child was got by chance, and the father must be found at all
adventure.


Exit. Enter Hermit, Modesta, and Edwin. Modesta. Oh reverent sir, by you my
heart has reached at the large hopes of holy Piety, and for this I craved your
company, Here in your sight religiouslly to vow,

My chaste thoughts up to heaven, and make you now the witness of my faith.


Her. Angels assist thy hopes.


Edwin. What means my Love? thou art my promised wife.


Modest. To part with willingly what friends and life Can make no good
assurance of.


Edwin. Oh find remorse, fair soul, to love and merit, and yet recant thy vow.


Modest. Never: this world and I are parted now for ever.


Her. To find the way to bliss, oh happy woman,
Thou Have learned the hardest Lesson well I see,
Now show thy fortitude and constancy,
Let these thy friends thy sad departure weep,
Thou shall but loose the wealth thou could not keep,
My contemplation calls me, I must leave ye,

Edwin. O reverent Sir, persuade not her to leave me,

Her. My Lord I do not, nor to cease to love ye,
I only pray her faith may fixed stand.
Marriage was blessed I know with heavens own hand.

Exit. Edwin. You hear him Lady, it is not a virgins state but sanctity of life,
must make you happy.


Modest. Good sir, you say you love me, gentle Edwin, even by that love I do
beseech you leave me.


Edwin. Think of your fathers tears, your weeping friends whom cruel grief
makes pale and bloodless for you.


Modest. Would I were dead to all.


Edwin. Why do you weep?


Modest. Oh who would live to see
How men with care and cost, seek misery.

Edwin. Why do you seek it then? What joy, what pleasure, can give you comfort
in a single life?


Modest. The contemplation of a happy death, which is to me so pleasing that I
think no torture could diver me: What Is this world wherein you would have me walk,
but a sad passage to a dread Judgment Seat, from whence even now we are but
bailed, upon our good abearing, till that great Sessions come, when Death, the
Crier, will surely summon us, and all to appear, to plead us guilty or our bail
to clear: what musick's this?


Soft Music* Enter two Bishops, Edwin, Donobert, Gloucester, Cador, Constancia,
Oswold, Toclio. Edwin. Oh now resolve and think upon my love, this sounds the
Marriage of your beauteous sister, virtuous Constancia, with the noble Cador,
look, and behold this pleasure.


Modest. Cover me with night,
It is a vanity not worth the sight.

Dono. See, see, she is yonder, pass on son


Cador. Daughter Constancia, I beseech you all unless she first move speech,
salute her not. Edwin what good success?


Edwin. Nothing as yet, unless this object take her.


Dono. See, see, her eye is fixed upon her sister, seem careless all, and take
no notice of her: on before there, come my Constancia.


Modest. Not speak to me, nor dain to cast an eye,
To look on my despised poverty?
I must be more charitable, pray stay Lady, are not you she whom I did once
call sister?


Constan. I did acknowledge such a name to one whilst she was worthy of it, in
whose folly

Since you neglect your fame and friends together,
In you I drowned a sisters name for ever.

Modest. Your looks did speak no less.


Glost. It now begins to work, this sight has moved her.


Dono. I know this trick would take, or nothing.


Modest. Though you disdain in me a sisters name, yet charity me thinks should
be so strong to instruct e're you reject, I am a wretch even follies instance,
who perhaps have er'd, not having known the goodness bears so high and fair a
show in you, which being expressed

I may recant this low despised life,
And please those friends whom I moved to grief.

Cador. She is coming in faith, be merry Edwin.


Consta. Since you desire instruction you shall have it, what is it should make
you thus desire to live vowed to a single life?


Modest. Because I know I cannot fly from death, oh my good sister, I beseech
you hear me;

This world is but a Masque, catching weak eyes,
With what is not our selves but our disguise,
A Vizard that falls off, the Dance being done,
And leaves Deaths Glass for all to look upon,
Our best happiness here, lasts but a night,
Whose burning Tapers makes false Ware seem right;
Who knows not this, and will not now provide
Some better shift before his shame be spied,
And knowing this vain world at last will leave him,
Shake off these robes that help but to deceive him.

Constable. Her words are powerful, I am amazed to hear her!

Dono. Her soul's enchanted with infected Spells.
Leave her best Girl, for now in thee
I Will seek the fruits of Age, Posterity.
Out of my sight, sure I was half asleep, or drunk, when I begot thee.

Constable. Good sir forbear. What say you to that sister?
The joy of children, a blessed Mothers Name!
Oh who without much grief can loose such Fame?

Modest. Who can enjoy it without sorrow rather?
And that most certain where the joy's unsure,
Seeing the fruit that we beget endure
So many miseries, that often we pray
The Heavens to shut up their afflicted day:
At best we do but bring forth Heirs to die,
And fill the Coffins of our enemy.

Constable. Oh my soul.

Dono. Hear her no more Constantia, she is sure bewitched with Error, leave her
Girl.


Constable. Then must I leave all goodness sir: away, stand-off, I say.


Dono. How Is this?


Constable. I have no father, friend, no husband now, all are but borrowed robes,
in which we masque to waste and spend the time, when all our Life is but one
good betwixt two Ague-days, which from the first, e're we have time to praise,
a second Fever takes us: Oh my best sister, my souls eternal friend, forgive
the rashness of my distempered tongue, for how could she knew not her self,
know thy felicity, from which worlds cannot now remove me.


Dono. Art thou mad too, fond woman? what is thy meaning?


Constable. To seek eter^al happiness in heaven, which all this world affords not.


Cador. Think of thy Vow, thou art my promised Wife.


Constable. Pray trouble me no further.


Omnes. Strange alteration!


Cador. Why do you stand at gaze, you sacred Priests? you holy men be equal to
the Gods, and consummate my Marriage with this woman.


Bishop. Her self gives bar my Lord, to your desires, and our performance;
it is against the Law and Orders of the Church to force a Marriage.


Cador. How am I wronged! was this your trick, my Lord?


Dono. I am abused past sufferance; grief and amazement strive which Sense of
mine shall loose her being first; yet let me call thee Daughter.


Cador. Me, Wife.


Constable. Your words are air, you speak of want, to wealth, And wish her
sickness, newly raised to health.


Dono. Bewitched Girls, tempt not an old man's fury, that has no strength to
uphold his feeble age, but what your sights give life to, oh beware, and do not
make me curse you.

Kneel.


Modest. Dear father, here at your feet we kneel, grant us but this, that in
your sight and hearing the good Hermit may plead our Cause; which if it shall
not give such satisfaction as your Age desires, we will submit to you.


Constable. You gave us life, save not our bodies, but our souls from death.


Dono. This gives some comfort yet: Rise with my blessings. Have patience,
noble Cador, worthy Edwin, send for the Hermit that we may confer, for sure

Religion ties you not to leave
Your careful Father thus; if so it be,
Take you content, and give all grief to me.

Exeunt. Thunder and Lighning, Enter Devil. Devil. Mix light and darkness,
earth and heaven dissolve, be of one piece again, and turn to C^aos, break all
your works you powers, and spoil the world, or if you will maintain earth
still, give way and life to this abortive birth now coming, whose fame shall
add unto your Oracles. Lucina, Hecate, dreadful Queen of Night, bright
Proserpine, be pleased for Cerer love, from Stigian darkness, summon up the
Fates,

And in a moment bring them quickly hither,
Lest death do vent her birth and her together,
Thunder Assist you spirits of infernal deeps, squint eyed ^ricth^, midinght
Incubus.
Enter Lucina, and the three Fates. Rise, rise to aid this birth prodigious.
Thanks Hecate, hail sister to the Gods, there lies your way, haste with the
Fates, and help, give quick dispatch unto her laboring throws, to bring this
mixture of infernal seed, to humane being,

Exit Tates. And to beguil her pains, till back you come,
Anticks shall dance and Music fill the room.

Dance. Devil. Thanks Queen of Shades.

Lucina. Farewell, great servant to the infernal King,
In honor of this child, the Fates shall bring
All their assisting powers of Knowledge, Arts,
Learning, Wisdom, all the hidden parts
Of all-admiring Prophecy, to foresee
The event of times to come, his Art shall stand
A wall of brass to guard the Britain Land,
Even from this minute, all his Arts appears
Manlike in Judgment, Person, State, and years,
Upon his breast the Fates have fixed his name,
And since his birth place war this forest here,
They now have named him Merlin Silvester.

Devil. And Merlins name in Britain shall live,
Whilst men inhabit here, or Fates can give
Power to amazing wonder, envy shall weep,
And mischief sit and shake her ebbone wings,
Whilst all the world of Merlins magic sings.

Exit. Enter Clown. Clown. Well, I wonder how my poor sister does, after all
this thundering, I think she is dead, for I can hear no tidings of her, those
woo^s yields small comfort for her, I could meet nothing but a swinherds wife,
keeping hogs by the Forestside, but neither she nor none of her sowes would
stir a foot to help us; indeed I think she durst not trust her self amongst the
trees with me, for I must needs confess I offered some kindness to her; well, I
would fain know what is become of my sister, if she have brought me a young
Cousin, his face may be a picture to find his Father by, so oh, sister Joan,
Joan Go-too't, where art thou? Within Joan. Here, here brother, stay but a
while, I come to thee.


Clown. O brave, she is alive still, I know her voice, she speaks, and speaks
cherfully methinks, how now, what Moon-calf has she got with her?


Enter Joan and Merlin with a Book. Joan. Come my dear Merlin, why do thou
six thine eye so deeply on that book?


Merlin. To sound the depth of Arts, of Learning, Wisdom, Knowledge.


Joan. Oh my dear, dear son, those studies fits thee when thou art a man.


Merlin. Why mother, I can be but half a man at best,
And that is your mortality, the rest
In me is spirit, it is not meat, nor time,
That gives this growth and bigness, no, my years
Shall be more strange then yet my birth appears,
Look mother, there is my Uncle.

Joan. How do thou know him son, thou never saw him?


Merlin. Yet I know him, and know the pains he has taken for ye, to find out
my Father, give me your hand, good Uncle.


Clown. Ha, ha, I Would laugh at that in faith, do you know me sir? Merlin, Yes, by
the same token that even now you kissed the swinherds-wife 'ith' woods, and would
have done more, if she would have let you, Uncle.


Clown. A witch, a witch, a witch, sister: rid him out of your company, he is
either a witch or a conjurer, he could never have known this else.


Joan. Pray love him brother, he is my son.


Clown. Ha, ha, this is worse then all the rest in faith, by his beard he is more
like your husband: let me see, is your great belly gone?


Joan. Yes, and this the happy fruit.


Clown. What, this Hartichoke? A Child born with a beard on his face?


Merlin. Yes, and strong legs to go, and teeth to eat.


Clown. You can nurse up your self then? There Is some charges saved for Soap
and Candle, 'slid I have heard of some that has been born with teeth, but never
none with such a talking tongue before?


Joan. Come, come, you must use him kindly brother, did you but know his worth,
you would make much of him.


Clown. Make much of a Moncky? This is worse then Tom Thumb, that let a fart in
his Mothers belly, a Child to speak, eat, and go the first hour of his birth,
nay, such a Baby as had need of a Barber before he was born too; why sister
this is monstrous, and shames all our kindred.


Joan. That thus against nature and our common births, he comes thus furnished
to salute the world, is power of Fates, and gift of his great father.


Clown. Why, of what profession is your father sir?


Merlin. He keeps a Hot-house in the Low Countries, will you see him sir?


Clown. See him, why sister has the child found his father?


Mer. Yes, and I Will fetch him Uncle.


Exit. Clown. Do not Uncle me, till I know your kindred, for my conscience some
Baboon begot thee, surely thou art horribly deceived sister, this Urchin cannot
be of thy breeding, I shall be ashamed to call him cousin, though his father be
a Gentleman.


Enter Merlin and Devil. Merlin. Now my kind Uncle see;
The Child has found his Father, this is he.

Clown. The devil it is, ha, ha, is this your sweetheart sister? have we run
through the Country, haunted the City, and examined the Court to find out a
Gallant with a Hat and Feather, and a silken Sword, and golden Hangers, and do
you now bring me to a Ragamuffin with a face like a Drying Pan?


Joan. Fie brother, you mistake, behold him better.


Clown. How Is this? do you juggle with me, or are mine eyes matches? Hat and
Feather, Sword, and Hangers and all, this is a Gallant indeed sister, this has
all the marks of him we look for.


Devil. And you have found him now sir: give me your hand, I now must call you
brother.


Clown. Not till you have married my sister, for all this while she is but your
whore, sir.


Devil. Thou art too plain, I Will satisfy that wrong to her, and thee, and all,
with liberal hand: come, why art thou fearful?


Clown. Nay I am not afraid, and you were the devil, sir.


Devil. Thou needst not, keep with thy sister still, and I Will supply your wants,
you shall lack nothing that gold and wealth can purchase.


Clown. Thank you brother, we have gone many a weary step to find you; you may
be a husband for a Lady, for you are far fetched and dear bought, I assure you:
Pray how should I call your son, my cousin here?


Devil. His name is Merlin.


Clown. Merlin! Your hand, cousin Merlin, for your fathers sake I accept you to
my kindred: if you grow in all things as your Beard does, you will be talked on.
By your Mothers side cousin, you come of the Go-too'ts, Suffolk bred, but our
standing house is at Hockly^ in the Hole, and Layton-buzzard. For your father, no
doubt you may from him claim Titles of Worship, but I cannot describe it; I
think his Ancestors came first from Hell-bree in Wales, cousin.


Devil. No matter whence we do derive our Name,
All Brittany shall ring of Merlin's fame,
And wonder at his acts. Go hence to Wales,
There live a while, there Vortiger the King
Builds Castles and strong Holds, which cannot stand
Unless supported by young Merlins hand.
There shall thy fame begin, Wars are a breeding.
The Saxons practice Treason, yet unseen,
Which shortly shall break out: Fair Love, farewell,
Dear son and brother, here must I leave you all,
Yet still I will be near at Merlins call.

Exit. Mer. Will you go Uncle?


Clown. Yes, I Will follow you, cousin: well, I do most horribly begin to suspect
my kindred; this brother in law of mine is the Devil sure, and though he hide
his horns with his Hat and Feather, I spied his cloven foot for all his cunning.


Exit. Enter Ostorius, Octa, and Proximus. Ostor. Come, come, time calls our
close Complots to action: go Proximus, with winged speed fly hence, hye thee
to Wales, salute great Vortig^r with these our Letters, bid the King to arms,
tell him we have new friends, more Forces landed in Norfolk and Northumberland,
bid him make haste to meet us; if he keep his word, we will part the Realm
between us.


Octa. Bend all thine Art to quit that late disgrace the Christian Hermit gave
thee, make thy revenge both sure and home.


Prox. That thought sir, spurs me on, till I have wrought their swift
destruction.


Exit. Ostor. Go then, and prosper. Octa, be vigilant: Speak, are the Forts
possessed? the Guards made sure? Revolve I pray on how large consequence the bare
event and sequel of our hopes jointly consists, that have embark't our lives
upon the hazard of the least miscarriage.


Octa. All Is sure, the Queen your sister has contrived the cunning Plot so
sure, as at an instant the Brothers shall be both surpised and taken.


Ostor. And both shall die, yet one a while must live, till we by him have
gathered strength and power to meet bold Edol their stern General, that now
contrary to the Kings command, has reunited all his cashiered Troops, and
this way beats his drums to threaten us.


Octa. Then our Plot's discovered.


Ostor. Come, thou art a fool, his Army and his life is given unto us: where is
the Queen, my sister?


Octa. In conference with the Prince.


Ostor. Bring the Guards nearer, all is fair and good, Their Conference I hope
shall end in blood.


Exeunt. Enter Prince and Artesia. Arts. Come, come, you do but flatter, what
you term Love, is but a Dream of blood, wakes with enjoying, and with open eyes
forgot, contemned and lost.


Prince. I must be wary, her words are dangerous. True, we will speak of Love no
more then.


Arts. Nay, if you will you may,
It Is but in jest, and yet so children play
With fiery flames, and covet what is bright,
But feeling his effects, abhor the light.
Pleasure is like a Building, the more high,
The narrower still it grows, Cedars do dye
Soonest at top.

Prince. How does your instanced suit?

Arts. From Art and Nature to make sure the root,
And lay a fast foundation, e're I try
The uncertain Changes of a wavering Sky.
Make your example thus. -- You have a kiss. -- was it not pleasing?


Prince. Above all name to express it.


Arts. Yet now the pleasure's gone, and you have lost your joys possession.


Prince. Yet when you please this flood may ebb again.


Arts. But where it never ebbs, there runs the main.


Prince. Who can attain such hopes?


Arts. I Will show the way to it, give me a taste once more of what you may enjoy.


Kiss. Prince. Impudent whore! I were more false than Atheism can be, Should I
not call this high felicity.


Arts. If I should trust your faith, alas I fear you soon would change belief.


Prince. I would covet Martyrdom to make it confirmed.


Arts. Give me your hand on that, you will keep your word?


Prince. I will.


Arts. Enough: Help husband, king Aurelius, help, rescue betrayed Artesia.


Prince. Nay then it is I that am betrayed I see,
Yet with thy blood I Will end thy Treachery.

Arts. How now! what troubles you? Is this you sir, that but even now would
suffer Martyrdom to win your hopes, and is there now such terror in names of
men to fright you? nay then I see what mettle you are made on.


Prince. Ha! was it but trial? then I ask your pardon: What a dull slave was I
to be so fearful? I Will trust her now no more, yet try the utmost. I am resolved,
no brother, no man breathing, were he my bloods begetter, should withhold me
from your love, I Would leap into his bosom, and from his breast pull forth that
happiness Heaven had reserved in you for my enjoying.


Arts. I now you speak a Lover like a Prince: Treason, treason.


Prince. Again.


Arts. Help Saxon Princes: Treason.


Enter Ostorius, Octa, etc. Ostor. Rescue the Queen: strike down the Villain.


Enter Edoll, Aurelius, Donobert, Cador, Edwin, Toclio, Oswold, at the other
Door. Edol. Call in the Guards: the Prince in danger! Fall back dear Sir, my
breast shall buckler you.


Aurel. Beat down their weapons.


Edol. Slave, were thou made of brass, my sword shall bite thee.


Aurel. Withdraw on pain of death, where is the Traitor?


Arts. Oh save your life, my Lord, let it suffice my beauty forced mine own
captivity.


Aurel. Who did attempt to wrong thee?


Prince. Here me, Sir.


Aurel. Oh my sad soul! was it thou?


Arts. Oh do not stand to speak, one minutes stay, prevents a second speech
for ever.


Aurel. Make our Guards strong: My dear Artesia, let us know thy wrongs, and
our own dangers.


Arts. The Prince your brother, with these Britain Lords, have all agreed to
take me hence by force, and marry me to him.


Prince. The Devil shall wed thee first: thy baseness and thy lust confound and
rot thee.


Arts. He courted me even now, and in mine car shamed not to plead his most
dishonest love, and their attempts to seize your sacred person, either to shut
you up within some prison, or which is worse, I fear to murder you.


Omnes Britains. It Is all as false as hell.


Edol. And as foul as she is.


Arts. You know me, Sir?


Edol. Yes, Deadly Sin, we know you, and shall discover all your villainy.


Aurel Chester forbear.


Ostor. Their treasons sir, are plain: Why are their Soldiers lodged so near
the Court?


Octa. Nay, why came he in arms so suddenly?


Edol. You fleering Anticks, do not wake my fury.


Octa. Fury!


Edol. Ratsbane, do not urge me.


Arts. Good sir, keep farther from them.


Prince. Oh my sick heart, she is a witch by nature, devil by art.


Aurel. Bite thine own slanderous tongue, it is thou art false, I have observed
your passions long ere this.


Ostor. Stand on your guard, my Lord, we are your friends, and all our Force is
yours.


Edol. To spoil and rob the Kingdom.


Aurel. Sir, be silent.


Edol. Silent! how long? till Doomsday? shall I stand by, and hear mine Honor
blasted with foul Treason, the State half lost, and your life endangered, yet
be silent?


Arts. Yes, my blunt Lord, unless you speak you^ Treasons. Sir, let your
Guards, as Traitors, seize them all, and then let tortures and devulsive racks,
force a Confession from them.


Edol. Wilde-fire and Brimstone eat thee. Hear me sir.


Aurel. Sir, I Will not hear you.


Edol. But you shall: Not hear me I were the worlds Monarch, Caesar, livi^g, he
should hear me. I tell you Sir, these serpents have betrayed your Life and
Kingdom: does not every day bring tidings of more swarms of lousy slaves, the
offal sugitives of barren Germany, that land upon our Coasts, and by our
neglect settled in Norfolk and Northumberland?


Ostor. They come as Aids and Safeguards to the King.


Octa. Has he not need, when Vortiger's in arms, and you raise Powers, it is
thought, to join with him?


Edol. Peace, you pernicious Rat.


Dono. Prithee forbear.


Edol. Away, suffer a gilded rascal, a low-bred despicable creeper, an
insulting Toad, to spit his poisoned venom in my face!


Octa. Sir, sir.


Edol. Do not reply, you Cur, for by the Gods, though the Kings presence guard
thee, I shall break all patience, and like a Lion roused to spoil, shall run
foul-mouthed upon thee, and devour thee quick* Speak sir, will you forsake
these scorpions, or stay till they have stung you to the heart?


Aurel. You Are traitors all, this is our wife, our Queen: brother Ostorius,
troop your Saxons up, we will hence to Winchester, raise more powers, to m^n with
strength the Castle Camilot: go hence false men, join you with Vortiger, the
murderer of our brother Constantine: we will hunt both him and you with dreadful
vengance,

Since Britain fails, we will trust to foreign friends,
And guard our person from your traitorous ends.

Exeunt Aurel. Ostor. Octa. Arts. Toc. Osw. Edwin. He Is sure bewitch.


Glost. What counsel now for safety?


Dono. Only this sir, with all the speed we can, preserve the person of the
King and Kingdom.


Cador. Which to effect, it is best march hence to Wales, and set on Vortiger
before he join his Forces with the Saxons,


Edwin. On then with speed for Wales and Vortiger, that tempest once o'reblown,
we come Ostorius to meet thy traitorous Saxons, thee and them, that with
advantage thus have won the King, to back your factions, and to work our ruins.

This by the Gods and my good Sword, I Will set
In bloody lines upon thy Burgonet.

Exeunt. ACT. 4. SCENE. 1.
Enter Clown, Merlin, and a little antic Spirit. Mer. HOw now Uncle, why do
you search your pockets so? do you miss any thing?


Clown. Ha, Cousin Merlin, I hope your beard does not overgrow your honesty, I
pray remember you are made up of sisters thread, I am your mothers brother,
whosoever was your father.


Merlin. Why, wherein can you task my duty, Uncle?


Clown. Your self, or your page it must be, I have kept no other company, since
your mother bound your head to my Protectorship, I do feel a fault of one side,
either it was that Sparrowhawk, or a Cast of Merlins, for I find a Covy of
Cardecu's sprung out of my pocket.


Merlin. Why, do you want any money U^cle? sirrah, had you any from him?


Clown. Deny it not, for my pockets are witness against you.


Spirit. Yes I had, to teach you better wit to look to it.


Clown. Pray use your fingers better, and my wit may serve as it is sir.


Merlin. Well, restore it.


Spirit. There it is.


Clown. I, there is some honestly in this, 'twas a token from your invisible
Father Cousin, which I would not have to go inv^sibly from me again.


Mer. Well, you are sure you have it now Uncle?


Clown. Yes, and mean to keep it now, from your pages filching fingers too.


Spirit. If you have it so sure, pray show it me again.


Clown. Yes, my little juggler, I dare show it, ha, cleanly conveyance again, ye
have no invisible fingers have ye? It Is gone certainly.


Spirit. Why sir, I touched you not.


Mer. Why look you Uncle, I have it now, how ill do you look to it? here keep
it safer.


Clown Ha, ha, this is fine in faith, I must keep some other company if you have
these slights of hand.


Merlin. Come, come, Uncle, it is all my Art which shall not offend you sir,
only I give you a taste of it, to show you sport.


Clown. Oh, but 'tls ill jesting with a man's pocket though -- but I am glad to
see you cunning Cousin, for now will I warrant thee a living till thou die.
You have heard the news in Wales here?


Mer Uncle, let me prevent your care and counsel, 'twill give you better
knowledge of my cunning, you would prefer me now in hope of gain, to Vortiger
King of the Welsh Britains, to whom are all the Artists summoned now, that
seeks the secrets of futurity, the Bards, the Druids, Wizards, Conjurers, not
an Aurasper with his

Whisling spells, no Capuomanster with his musty fumes,
No Witch or Juggler, but is thither sent,
To calculate the strange and feared event
Of his prodigious Castle now in building, where all the labors of the painful
day, are ruined still in the night, and to this place you would have me go.


Clown. Well, if thy mother were not my sister, I would say she was a witch
that begot this; but this is thy father, not thy mother wit, thou have taken my
tale into thy mouth, and spoke my thoughts before me; therefore away, shuffle
thy self amongst the Conjurers, and be a made man before thou come to age.


Mer. Nay, but stay Uncle, you overslip my dangers: the Prophecies and all the
cunning Wizards, have certifi'd the King, that this his Castle can never stand,
till the foundation's laid with Mortar tempered with the fatal blood of such a
child, whose father was no mortal.


Clown. What Is this to thee? If the devil were thy father, was not thy mother
born at Carmarden? Diggon for that then, and then it must be a childs blood,
and who will take thee for a child with such a beard of thy face? Is there not
diggon for that too Cousin?


Merlin. I must not go, lend me your ear a while, I Will give you reasons to the
contrary.


Enter two Gentlemen. 1 Gentle. Sure this is an endless piece of work the King
has sent us about!


2 Gentle. Kings may do it, man, the like has been done to find out the
Unicorn.


1 Gentle. Which will be sooner found I think, then this fien'd begotten child
we seek for.


2 Gentle. Pox of those Conjurers that would speak of such a one, and yet all
their cunning could not tell us where to find him.


1 Gentle. In Wales they say assuredly he lives, come let us enquire further.


Mer. Uncle, your persuasions must not prevail with me, I know mine enemies
better then you do.


Clown. I say thou art a bastard then if thou disobey thine Uncle, was not Joan
Go-too't thy mother, my sister? if the devil were thy father, what kin art thou
to any man alive, but Bailys and Brokers? and they are but brothers in Law to
thee neither.


1 Gentle. How Is this, I think we shall speed here.


2 Gentle. I, and unlook't for too, go never and listen to them.


Clown. Have thou a beard to hide it, will it thou show thy self a child, will it
thou have more hair then wit? Will It thou deny thy mother, because no body knows
thy father? Or shall thine Uncle be an ass?


1 Gentle. Bless ye friend, pray what call you this small Gentleman's name?


Clown. Small, sir, a small man may be a great Gentleman, his father may be of
an ancient house, for ought we know sir.


2 Gentle. Why? do you not know his father?


Clown. No, nor you neither I think, unless the devil be in ye.


1 Gentle. What is his name sir?


Clown. His name is my Cousin sir, his education is my sisters son, but his
manners are his own.


Merlin. Why ask ye Gent^^men? my name is Merlin.


Clown. Yes, and a Goshawk was his father, for ought we know, for I am sure his
mother was a Wind-^ucker.


2 Gentle. He has a mother then?


Clown. As sure as I have a sister, sir.


1 Gentle. But his father you leave doubtful.


Clown. Well Sir, as wise men as you, doubt whether he had a father or no?


1 Gentle. Sure this is he we seek for.


2 Gent. I think no less: and sir, we let you know the King has sent for you.


Clown. The more child he, and he had bin ruled by me, he should have gone
before he was sent for.


1 Gent. May we not see his mother?


Clown. Yes, and feel her too if you anger her, a devilish thing I can tell ye
she has been, I Will go fetch her to ye.


Exit. 2 Gent. Sir, it were fit you did resolve for speed, you must unto the
King.


Mer. My Service sir, shall need no strict command, it shall obey most
peaceably, but needless it is to fetch what is brought home, my journey may be
staid, the King is coming hither with the same quest you bore before him, hark,
this drum will tell ye.


Within Drums beat a low March. 1 Gent. This is some cunning indeed ^r.

Flourish. Enter Vortiger reading a letter, Proximus, with Drum and Soldiers,
etc. Vorti. Still in our eye your message Proximus, we keep to spur our speed:
Ostorius, and Octa, we shall salute with succor against Prince Vter and
Aurelius, whom now we hear incamps at Winchester, there is nothing interrupts
our way so much, as does the erection of this fatal Castle, that spite of all
our Art and daily labor, the night still ruins.


Prox. As erst I did affirm, still I maintain, the fien'd begotten child must
be found out, whose blood gives strength to the foundation, it cannot stand
else.


Enter Clown, and Joan, Merlin. Vorti. Ha! Is It so? then Proximus by this
intelligence he should be found: speak, is this he you tell of?


Clown. Yes Sir, and I his Uncle, and she his mother.


Vorti. And who is his father?


Clown. Why, she his mother can best tell you that, and yet I think the child
be wise enough, for he has found his father.


Vort. Woman, is this thy son?


Joan. It is, my Lord.


Vor. What was his father? Or where lives he?


Merl. Mother speak freely and unastonisht,
That which you dared to act, dread not to name.

Joan. In which I shall betray my sin and shame,
But since it must be so, then know great King, all that my self yet knows of
him, is this: In pride of blood and beauty I did live, my glass the Altar was,
my face the Idol, such was my peevish love unto my self, that I did hate all
other, such disdain was in my scornful eye, that I supposed no mortal creature
worthy to enjoy me, thus with the Peacock I beheld my train, but never saw the
blackness of my feet, often have I child the winds for breathing on me, and cursed
the Sun, fearing to blast my beauty, in mid^t of this most leaprous disease, a
seeming fair young man appeared unto me, in all things suiting m^ aspiring
pride, and with him brought along a conquering power, to which my frailty
yielded, from whose embraces this issue came, what more he is, I know not.


Vorti. Some Incubus, or Spirit of the night begot him then, for sure no mortal
did it.


Mer. No matter who my Lo^d, leave further quest, since it is as hurtful as
unnecessary more to enquire: Go to the cause my Lord, why you have sought me
thus?


Vorti. I doubt not but thou know, yet to be plain, I sought thee for thy
blood.


Mer. By whose direction?


Prox. By mine, my Art infalable instructed me, upon thy blood must the
foundation rise of the Kings building, it cannot stand else.


Mer. Have thou such leisure to enquire my Fate, and let thine own hang
careless over thee? Know thou what pendelous mischief roofs thy head, how
fatal, and how sudden?


Prox. Pish, bearded abortive, thou foretell my danger my Lord, he trifles to
delay his own.


Mer. No, I yield my self: and here before the King, make good thine Augury, as
I shall mine, if thy fate fall not, thou have spoke all truth, and let my blood
satisfy the Kings desires: if thou thy self wilt write thine Epitaph, dispatch
it quickly, there is not a minutes time 'twixt thee and thy death.


A stone falls and kills Proximus. Prox. Ha, ha, ha.


Mer. I, so, thou may die laughing.


Vorti. Ha! This is above admiration, look, is he dead?


Clown. Yes sir, here is brains to make mortar on, if you will use them: Cousin
Merlin, there is no more of this stone fruit ready to fall, is there? I pray
give your Uncle a little fair warning.


Mer. Remove that shape of death, and now my Lord for clear satisfaction of
your doubts, Merlin will show the fatal cause that keeps your fatal Castle
down, and hinders your proceedings: Stand there, and by an apparition see the
labor and end of all your destiny. Mother and Uncle, you must be absent.


Clown. Is your father coming Cousin?


Mer. Nay, you must be gone.


Joan Come, you will offend him brother.


Clown. I would fain see my Brother i'law, if you were married I might lawfully
call him so.


Merlin strikes his wand. Thunder and Lightning, two Dragons appear, a White
and a Red, they fight a while and pause. V^r. What means this stay?


Mer. Be not amazed my Lord, for on the victory
Of loss or gain, as these two Champions ends
Your fate, your life, and kingdom all depends,
therefore observe it well.

Vor. I shall, heaven be auspicious to us.


Thunder: The two Dragons fight again, and the White Dragon drives off the Red.
Vor. The conquest is on the white Dragons part, now Merlin faithfully expound
the meaning.


Mer. Your Grace must then not be offended with me.


Vor. It is the weakest part I found in thee, to doubt of me so slightly, shall
I blame my prophet that foretells me of my dangers? thy cunning I approve most
excellent.


Mer. Then know my Lord, there is a dampish Cave, the nightly habitation of
these Dragons, vaulted beneath where you would build your Castle, whose enmity
and nightly combats there, maintain a constant ruin of your labors: To make it
more plain, the Dragons then your self betoken, and the Saxon King, the
vanquished Red, is sir, your dreadful Emblem.


Vort. Oh my fate!


Mer. Nay, you must hear with patience Royal sir, you slew the lawful King
Constantius, 'twas a red deed, your Crown his blood did cement, the English
Saxon first brought in by you, for aid against Constantius brethren, is the
white horror who now knit together, have driven and shut you up in these wild
mountains, and though they now seek to unite with friendship, it is to wound
your bosom, not embrace it, and with an utter extirpation to rout the Britains
out, and plant the English. Seek for your safety Sir, and spend no time to
build the airy Castles, for Prince Vter armed with vengeance for his brothers
blood is hard upon you, if you mistrust me, and to my words craves witness sir,
then know here comes a messenger to tell you so.


Exit Mer. Enter Messenger. Messen. My Lord Prince Vter^


Vort. And who else sir?


Messen. Edol, the great General.


Vort. The great Devil, they are coming to meet us.


Messen. With a full power my Lord.


Vort. With a full vengeance they mean to meet us, so we are ready to their
confront as full march double footing, we will loose no ground, nor shall their
numbers fright us,

If it be Fate, it cannot be withstood,
We gotour Crown so, be it lost in blood.

Exeunt. Enter Prince Vter, Edol, Cador, Edwin, Toclio, with Drum and Soldiers.
Prince. Stay, and advice, hold drum.


Edol. Beat slave, why do you pause? why make a stand? where are our enemies?
or do you mean we fight amongst our selves?


Prince. Nay, noble Edol, let us here take counsel, it cannot burt, it is the
^urest Garrison to safety.


Edol. Fie on such slow delays! so fearful men that are to pass over a flowing
river, stand on the bank to parley of the danger, till the tide rise and then be
swallowed, is not the King in field?


Cador. Proud Vortiger, the Trator is in field.


Edwin. The Murderer, and Usurper.


Edol. Let him be the devil so I may fight with him, for heavens love sir march
on, oh my patience, will you delay until the Saxons come to aid his party? A
Tucket.


Prince. There Is no such fear, prithee be calm a while, hark, it seems by this,
he comes or sends to us.


Edol. If it be for parley, I will drown the summons, if all our drums and
hoarseness choke me me not.


Enter Captain. Prince. Nay, prithee hear, from whence art thou?


Cap. From the King Vortiger.


Edol. Traitor, there is none such: Alarm drum, strike slave, or by mine honor
I will break thy head, and beat thy drums heads both about thine ears.


Prince. Hold noble Edol, let us hear what Articles he can enforce.


Edol. What articles, or what conditions can you expect to value half your
wrong, unless he kill himself by thousand tortures, and send his carcass to
appease your vengeance, for the foul murder of Constantius, and that is not a
tenth part neither. Prince It Is true, my brothers blood is crying to me now, I
do ap^a^d thy counsel: hence, be gone.

Exit Capt. We Will hear no parley now but by our swords.


Edol. And those shall speak home in death killing words, Alarm to the fight,
sound, sound the Alarm.


Exeunt. Alarm. Enter Edol driving all Vortigers Force before him, then Enter
Prince Vter pursuing Vortiger. Exit. Vort. Do follow me?


Prince. Yes, to thy death I will.


Vort. Stay, be advised, I would not be the only fall of Princes, I slew thy
brother:


Prince. Thou did black Traitor, and in that vengeance I pursue thee.


Vort. Take mercy for thy self, and fly my sword, save thine own life as
satisfaction, which here I give thee for thy brothers death.


Prince. Give what is thine own: a Traitors heart and head, that is all thou art
right Lord of; the Kingdom which thou usurp'st, thou most unhappy Tyrant, is
leaving thee, the Saxons which thou broughtst to back thy usurpations, are
grown great, and where they seat themselves, do hourly seek to blot the Records
of old Brute and Britains, from memory of men, calling themselves Hingest-men,
and Hingest-land, that no more the Britain name be known; all this by thee,
thou base destroyer of thy Native Country.


Enter Edol. Edol. What, stand you talking? Fight.


Prince. Hold Edol.


Ed. Hold out my sword, and listen not to King or Princes word, There Is work
enough abroad, this task is mine.


Alarm. Prince. Prosper thy Valor, as thy Virtues shine.


Exeunt. Enter Cador and Edwin. Cador. Bright Victory her self fights on our
part, and buckled in a golden Beaver, rides triumphantly before us.


Edw. Justice is with her, who ever takes the true and rightful cause, let us
not lag behind them.


Enter Prince. Cador. Here comes the Prince, how goes our fortunes Sir?


Prince. Hopeful, and fair, brave Cador, proud Vortiger beat down by Edols
sword, was rescued by the following multitudes, and now for safety's fled unto
a Castle here standing on the hill: but I have sent a cry of hounds as violent
as hunger, to break his stony walls, or if they fail,

We Will send in wild fire to dislodge him thence,
Or burn them all with flaming violence.

Exeunt. Blazing Star appears Flourish Tromp. Enter Prince, Vter, Edol, Cador,
Edwin, Toclio with with Drum and Soldiers. Prin. Look Edol: still this fiery
exalation shoots his frightful horrors on the amazed world, see in the beam that
'bout his flaming ring, a Dragons head appears, from out whose mouth two
flaming flakes of fire, stretch East and West.


Edol. And see, from forth the body of the Star, seven smaller blazing streams,
directly point on this affrighted kingdom.


Cador. It Is a dreadful Meteor.


Edwin. And does portend strange fears.


Prince. This is no Crown of Peace, this angry fire has something more to burn
then Vortiger; if it alone were pointed at his fall; it would pull in his
blasing Piramids, and be appeased, for Vortiger is dead.


Edol. These never come without their large effects.


Prince. The will of heaven be done, our sorrows this we want, a mistick Pithon
to expound this fiery Oracle.


Cador. Oh no my Lord, you have the best that ever Britain bred, and durst I
prophecy of your Prophet sir, none like him shall succeed him.


Prince. You mean Merlin.


Cador. True sir, wondrous Merlin, he met us in the way, and did foretell the
fortunes of this day successful to us.


Edwin. He Is sure about the Camp, send for him sir.


Cador. He told the bloody Vortiger his fate, and truly too, and if I could
give faith to any Wizards skill, it should be Merlin.


Enter Merlin and Clown. Cador. And see my Lord, as if to satisfy your
Highness pleasure, Merlin is come.


Prince. See, the Comet's in his eye, disturb him nor.


Edol. With what a piercing judgment he beholds it!


Mer. Whither will Heaven and Fate translate this Kingdom? what revolutions,
rise and fall of Nations

Is figured yonder in that Star, that sings
The change of Britains State, and death of Kings?
Ha! He Is dead already, how swiftly mischief creeps!
Thy fatal end sweet Prince, even Merlin weeps.

Prince. He does foresee some evil, his action shows it, for e're he does
expound, he weeps the story.


Edol. There Is another weeps too. Sirrah do thou understand what thou
lamentst for?


Clown. No sir, I am his Uncle, and weep because my Cousin weeps, flesh and
blood cannot forbear.


Prince. Gentle Merlin, speak thy prophetic knowledge, in explanation of this
fiery horror, from which we gather from thy mournful tears, much sorrow and
disaster in it.


Mer. It Is true fair Prince, but you must hear the rest with patience.


Mer. I vow I will, though it portend my ruin.


Mer. There Is no such fear, this brought the fiery fall of Vortiger, and yet
not him alone, this day is fallen a King more good, the glory of our Land, the
mild, and gentle, sweet Aurelius.


Prince. Our brother!


Edwin. Forefend it heaven.


Mer. He at his Palace Royal sir at Winchester, this day is dead and poisoned.


Cador. By whom? Or what means Merlin?


Mer. By the Traitorous Saxons.


Edol. I ever feared as much: that devil Os^orius, and the damned witch
Artesia, sure has done it.


Prince. Poisoned! oh look further gentle Merlin, behold the Star again, and do
but find revenge for me, though it cost thousand lives, and mine the foremost.


Mer. Comfort your self, the heavens have given it fully, all the portentious
ills to you is told, now hear a happy story sir from me, to you and to your
fair posterity.


Clown. Me thinks I see something like a peeled Oinon, it makes me weep again.


Mer. Be silent Uncle, you will be forced else.


Clown. Can you not find in the Star, Cousin, whether I can hold my tongue or
no?


Edol. Yes, I must cut it out.


Clown. Phu, you speak without book sir, my Cousin Merlin knows.


Mer. True, I must tie it up, now speak your pleasure Uncle.


Clown. Hum, hum, hum, hum.


Mer. So, so -- now observe my Lord, and there behold above yo^ flame-hair'd
beam that upward shoots, appears a Dragons head, out of whose mouth two
streaming lights point their flame-feather'd darts contrary ways, yet both
shall have their aims: Again behold from the ignifirent body, seven splendant
and illustrious rays are spread, all speaking Heralds to this Britain Isle, and
thus they are expounded: The Dragons head is the Herogliphick that figures out
your Princely self, that here must reign a King, those by-form'd fires that
from the Dragons mouth shoot East and West, emblem two Royal babes, which shall
proceed from you, a son and daughter: her pointed constellation Northwest
bending,

Crowns Her a Queen in Ireland, of whom first springs

That Kingdoms Title to the Britain Kings.


Clown. Hum, hum, hum.


Mer. But of your Son, thus Fate and Merlin tells, all after times shall fill
their Chronicles with fame of his renown, whose warlike sword shall pass
through fertile France and Germany, nor shall his conjuring foot be forced to
stand, till Romes Imperial Wreath has crowned his Fame with Monarch of the
West, from whose seven hills with Conquest, and contributory Kings, he back
returns to enlarge the Britain bounds, his Heraldry adorned with thirteen
Crowns.


Clown. Hum, hum, hum*


Mer. He to the world shall add another Worthy, and as a Loadstone for his
prowess, draw a train of Marshal Lovers to his Court: It shall be then the best
of Knight-hoods honor, at Winchester to fill his Castle Hall, and at his Royal
Table sit and feast in warlike orders, all their arms round hurled, as if they
meant to circumscribe the world.


[he touches the Clowns mouth with his wand Clown. Hum, hum, hum, oh that I
could speak a little.


Mer. I know your mind Uncle, again be silent.


[strikes again Prince. Thou speakst of wonders Merlin, prithee go on, declare
at full this Constellation.


Mer. Those seven beams pointing downward, sir, betoken the troubles of this
Land, which then shall meet with other Fate; War and Dissension strives to make
division, till seven Kings agree to draw this Kingdom to a Hepterchy.


Prince. Thine art has made such proof, that we believe thy words authentical,
be ever near us, my Prophet, and the Guide of all my actions.


Mer. My service shall be faithful to your person, and all my studies for my
Countries safety.


Clown. Hum, hum, hum.


Mer. Come, you are releast, sir.


Clown. Cousin, pray help me to my tongue again, you do not mean I shall be dumb
still I hope?


Mer. Why, have thou not thy tongue?


Clown. Ha! yes, I feel it now, I was so long dumb, I could not well tell
whether I spoke or no.


Prince. Is It thy advice we presently pursue the bloody Saxons, that have slain
my brother?


Mer. With your best speed, my Lord, Prosperity will keep you company.


Cador. Take then your Title with you, Royal Prince, 'twill add unto our
strength, Long live King Uter.


Edol. Put the Addition to it that Heaven has given you: The DRAGON is your
Emblem, bear it bravely, and so long live and ever happy styled Vter-Pendragon,
lawful King of Britain.


Prince. Thanks Edol, we embrace the name and title, and in our Shield and
Standard shall the figure of a Red Dragon still be born before us, to fright
the bloody Saxons. Oh my Aurelius, sweet rest thy soul; let thy disturbed spirit

Expect revenge, think what it would, it has,
The Dragon's coming in his fiery wrath.

Exeunt. ACT. 5. SCENE. 1.
Thunder, then Music. Enter Joan fearfully, the Devil following her. Joan.
HEnce thou black horror, is thy lustful fire kindled again? not thy loud
throated thunder, nor thy adulterate infernal Music, shall e're bewitch me
more, oh too too much is past already.


Devil. Why do thou fly me? I come a Lover to thee, to embrace, and gently
twine thy body in mine arms.


Joan. Out thou Hell-hound.


Devil. What hound so e're I be,
Fawning and sporting as I would with thee,
why should I not be stroakt and played withal, will it thou not thank the Lion
might devour thee, if he shall let thee pass?


Joan. Yes, thou art he, free me, and I Will thank thee.


Devil. Why, whither would? I am at home with thee, thou art mine own, have
we not charge of family together, where is your son?


Joan. Oh darkness cover me.


Devil. There is a pride which thou have won by me, the mother of a fame shall
never die, Kings shall have need of written Chronicles, to keep their names
alive, but Merlin none, ages to ages shall like Sabalists

Report the wonders of his name and glory,
While there are tongues and times to tell his story.

Joan. Oh rot my memory before my flesh, let him be called some hell or
earth-bred monster, that never had hapless woman for a mother: sweet death
deliver me, hence from my sight, why should thou now appear? I had no pride
nor lustful thought about me, to conjure and call thee to my ruin, when as at
first thy cursed person became visible.


Devil. I am the same I was.


Joan. But I am changed.


Devil. Again I Will change thee to the same thou were, quench to my lust, come
forth by thunder led, my Coajutors in the spoils of mortals.

Thunder. Enter Spirit. Claspe in your Ebon arms that prize of mine, mount her
as high as palled Hecate, and on this rock I Will stand to cast up fumes and
darkness over the blew faced firmament; from Britain, and from Merlin, I Will
remove her, they never shall meet again.


Joan. Help me some saving hand, if not too late, I cry let mercy come.


Enter Merlin. Mer. Stay you black slaves of night, let loose your hold, set
her down safe, or by th'i^fernal Stix, I Will bind you up with exorcisms so
strong, that all the black pentagoron of hell, shall never release you, save
you selves and vanish.


^xit Spirit. Devil, Ha! What Is he?


Mer. The Child has found his Father, do you not know me?


Devil. Merlin!


Joan. Oh, help me gentle son.


Mer. Fear not, they shall not hurt you.


Devil. Relievest thou her to disobey thy father?


Mer. Obedience is no lesson in your school, nature and kind to her, commands
my duty, the part that you begot was against kind, so all I ow to you is to be
unkind.


Devil. I Will blast thee slave to death, and on this rock stick thee an eternal
Monument.


Mer. Ha, ha, thy powers too weak, what art thou devil, but an inferior lustful
Incubus, taking advantage of the wanton flesh, wherewith thou do beguile the
ignorant? put off the form of thy humanity, and cral upon thy speckled belly,
serpent, or I Will unclasp the jaws of Achoron, and fix thee ever in the local
fire.


Devil. Traitor to hell; curse that I e're begot thee.


Mer. Thou did beget thy scourge, storm not, nor stir, the power of Merlins
Art is all confirmed in the Fates decretals, -- I Will ransack hell, and make thy
[Thunder and Lighting in the Rock. masters bow unto my spells, thou first shall
taste it, -- Tenibr arum precis, devitiarum, and infirorum, Deus, hunc Incubum
in ignis eterni abisum, accipite aut in hoc carcere tenebroso, in sempeternum
astringere mando. [the Rock incloses him.] So, there beget earthquakes or some
noisome damps, for never shall thou touch a woman more: How cheer you mother?


Joan. Oh now my son is my deliverer, yet I must name him with my deepest
sorrow.


Alarm afar off. Mer. Take comfort now, past times are never recal'd, I did
foresee your mischief and prevent it: hark, how the sounds of war now call me
hence to aid Pendragon, that in battle stands against the Saxons, from whose
aid Merlin must not be absent: leave this soil, and I Will conduct you to a place
retired, which I by art have raised, called Merlins Bower, there shall you
dwell with solitary sighs, with groans and passions your companions, to weep
away this flesh you have offended with, and leave all bare unto your aierial
soul, and when you die, I will erect a Monument upon the verdant Plains of
Salisbury, no King shall have so high a sepulcher, with pendulous stones that I
will hang by art, where neither Lime nor Mortar shall be used, a dark Enigma to
the memory, for none shall have the power to number them, a place that I will
hollow for your rest,

Where no Night-hag shall walk, nor Ware-wolf tread,
Where Merlins Mother shall be sepulcher'd.

Exeunt. Enter Donobert, Gloucester and Hermit. Dono. Sincerely Gloucester, I have
told you all: My Daughters are both vowed to Single Life, and this day gone
unto the Nunnery, though I begot them to another end, and fairly promised them
in Marriage, one to Earl Cador, the other to your son, my worthy friend, the Earl
of Gloucester. Those lost, I am lost: they are lost, all is lost. Answer me this
then, Is It a sin to marry?


Hermit. Oh no, my Lord.


Dono. Go to then, I Will go no further with you, I persuade you to no ill,
persuade you then that I persuade you well.


Gloucester. 'Twill be a good Office in you, sir.


Enter Cador and Edwin. Dono. Which since they thus neglect, my memory shall
lose them now for ever. See, see the Noble Lords, their promised Husbands! had
Fate so pleased, you might have called me Father.


Edwin. Those hopes are past, my Lord, for even this minute we saw them both
enter the Monastery, secluded from the world and men for ever.


Cador. It Is both our griefs we cannot, Sir: but from the King take you the
Times joy from us; The Saxon King Os^orius slain, and Octa fled, that
Woman-fury, Queen Artesia, is fast in hold, and forced to re-deliver London and
Winchester (which she had fortified) to Princely Vter, lately styled Pendragon,
who now triumphantly is marching hither to be invested with the Britain Crown.


Dono. The joy of this, shall banish from my breast all thought that I was
Father to two Children, two stubborn Daughters, that have left me thus: Let my
old arms embrace, and call you Sons, for by the Honor of my Fathers House, I Will
part my estate most equally betwixt you.


Edwin. Cador. Sir, you are most noble!


Flor. Tromp. Enter Edol with Drum and Colors, Oswold bearing the Standard,
T^clio the Shield, with the Red Dragon pictured in'em, two Bishops with the
Crown, Prince Vter, Merlin, Artesia bound, Guard and Clown. Prince. Set up our
Shield and Standard, noble Soldiers, We have firm hope that though our Dragon
sleep, Merlin will us and our fair Kingdom keep.


Clown. As his Uncle lives, I warrant you.


Glost. Happy Restorer of the Britains fame, uprising Sun let us salute thy
glory, ride in a day perpetual about us, and no night be in thy thrones
zodiac, why do we stay to bind those Princely brows with this Imperial Honor?


Prince. Stay noble Gloucester, that monster first must be expelled our eye, or we
shall take no joy in it.


Dono. If that be hindrance, give her quick Judgment, and send her hence to
death, she has long deserved it.


Edol. Let my Sentence stand for all, take her hence, and stake her carcass in
the burning Sun, till it be parcht and dry, and then fley off her wicked skin,
and stuff the pelt with straw to be shown up and down at Fairs and Markets, two
pence a piece to see so foul a Monster, will be a fair Monopoly and worth the
begging.


Arts. Ha, ha, ha.


Edol. Do laugh Erictho?


Arts. Yes, at thy poor invention, is there no better, torturemonger?


Dono. Burn her to dust.


Arts. That Is a Phaenix death, and glorious.


Edol. I, that is to good for her.


Prince. Alive she shall be buried circled in a wall, thou murdress of a King,
there starve to death.


Arts. Then I Will starve death when he comes for his prey, and in the mean time
I Will live upon your curses.


Edot. I, it is diet good enough, away with her.


Arts. With joy, my best of wishes is before,
Thy brother's poisoned, but I wanted more.

Exit. Prince. Why does our Prophet Merlin stand apart, sadly observing these
our Ceremonies, and not applaud our joys with thy hid knowledge? Let thy
divining Art now satisfy some part of my desires; for well I know it is in thy
power to show the full event, that shall both end our Reign and Chronicle:
speak learned Merlin, and resolve my feats, whether by war we shall expel the
Saxons, or govern what we hold with beauteous peace in Wales and Britain?


Mer. Long happiness attend Pendragons Reign, what Heaven decrees, fate has no
power to alter: The Saxons, sir, will keep the ground they have, and by
supplying numbers still incease, till Britain be no more. So please your
Grace, I will in visible apparitions, present you Prophecies which shall concern

Succeeding Princes, which my Art shall raise,
Till men shall call these times the latter days.

Prince. Do it my Merlin, and Crown me with much joy and wonder.


Merlin strikes Hoeboys. Enter a King in Armor, his Shield quartered with
thirteen Crowns. At the other door enter diverse Princes who present their
Crowns to him at his feet, and do him homage, then enters Death and strikes
him, he growing sick, Crowns Constantine. Exeunt. Mer. This King, my Lord,
presents your Royal Son, who in his prime of years shall be so fortunate, that
thirteen several Princes, shall present their several Crowns unto him, and all
Kings else shall so admire his fame and victories, that they shall all be glad
either through fear or love, to do him homage; But death (who neither favors
the weak nor valliant) in the midst of all his glories, soon shall seize him,
scarcely permitting him to appoint one in all his purchased Kingdoms to succeed
him.


Prince. Thanks to our Prophet for this so wished for satisfaction, and hereby
now we learn that always Fate must be observed, what ever that decree,

All future times shall still record this Story,
Of Merlin's learned worth, and Arthur's glory.

Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.

