EMMANVEL, OR THE LOVE of CHRIST Explicated and Applied in his INCARNATION,
Being made under the LAW, AND HIS SATISFACTION. IN XXX Sermons.

Preached by JOHN ROW, Minister of God's Word: AND Published by SAMUEL LEE.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Tyton Bookseller at the Three Daggers near the
Inner Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet. 1680.

TO THE PIOUS READER.
THIS Treatise here presented to thine eyes first sounded in the ears of a
gracious Society by that Gospel-Trumpet, Mr. John Row. It was a Darling-child
brought forth from a judicious head and a sanctified heart. The Ancients
compared John to the Eagle in the Vision of Cherubims, because soaring high in
the contemplation of our Lords Divinity. Our John, as if he had lain in the
bosom of that John, who lay in the bosom of our Savior, has sweetly attempted
to descant upon the Song of Angels about the Union of Heaven and Earth, God and
man together. Luke 2.10.
The heavenly Host answered in a heavenly Anthem to that single Angel, who
brought the good Tidings of great joy for all people to the Shepherds of
Bethlehem, and behold here one of the Shepherds of Zion sings his Epiphonema to
theirs, Glory to God in the highest. Indeed the union of two Natures in one
Person, and of three Persons in one Essence are Mysteries unaccountable by
Angels: but the joy of its influence shall never forsake the Harps of Angels or
Saints to all Eternity. None but who is assumed into that glorious Union can
exhaust the Treasury of Divine Wisdom. Rev. 5.5.
John the beloved Disciple could not unloose the seven Seals of these
Mysteries, but must weep at the foot of the Lamb to do it. Yet what is to be
believed, admired, adored, may and ought to be the subject of our most profound
Meditations and delight. What God has revealed let none presume to count
impertinent to dive into, though they can feel no bottom: they will find more
amiable Gemms than Pearl and Coral adhering to the sides of the adamantine
Rocks in this unfathomable Abyss. True, none can fully explain this Union but
he that injoys it. To delineate some glittering rays that stream from it,
requires deep communion with the person in union. We are not able to conjecture
what pleasures flow in upon the palates of Angels, as they stand drinking of
the beams of the Divine Essence, neither can they transfuse or pour out those
Paradise-rivers into our broken cisterns. How far this holy man has added to
the point, I rather leave to the Candidates of these Mysteries, than determine.
Each may see deeper into their own Notions than others, and it is far easier to
conceive than express; and yet there is infinitely more left for all Ages in
the remainder of the Spirit, than ever was uttered, or can be thought of. Yet I
think, with respect had to others, he has rendered some things more
intelligible, and many things more applicable and useful to common capacities.

The Cherubims that stood looking down upon the crowned Mercy-seat might (...),
Exodus 25.11. 1 Pet. 1.12.
but could not (...), they might gaze upon it, but not through it. It was not
transparent Gold like the streets of Jerusalem; Rev. 21.21.
but too thick a plate of Ophir for an Angels eye to pierce. They may pry into
the state of Saints in Glory, but not the contrivance of Grace to bring Saints
thither. Much less can man, and man fallen, receive or sustain wings strong
enough to fly into the depth of this amazing Firmament. What God bath made on
the backside of the exterior Heavens has a terminating bound, because a
Creature: though it pose Astronomy it self to measure and square the Circle of
the Heavens: so what God has written is infinitely true, though our finite and
crooked thoughts can never unfold or draw a parallel what Scripture reveals;
though it do not fully unveil, it is our duty both to study and embrace. Divine
love, say the Platonists, made the Universe, and therefore more capacious; and
were it not more comprehensive than all created love, it would never take a
Saint. He finds a bottom in all created joy, and not like the Sea, the fresher
at the bottom, but sometimes more salt and bitter: but uncreated love has no
shoars nor center, but the bosom of God and the depth is upward, still higher
and sweeter. These things are reserved for such as pass Kidron and Olivet: let
us a while step into the Sanctuary, and study to grow in the Mystery of the
Father and of Christ, and pray that the Spirit would reveal in us what the Son
has revealed to us from the Father, Joh. 1.1^
and then draw spiritual and sweet consequences from above.

Did the Son of God come down from Heaven to earth, was it not to take the sons
of men from earth to Heaven? Did not the second Person partake of the humane
Nature, that we might partake of the Divine? He took not the persons of Enoch,
or Abraham, or Paul, that they only might be happy; but the nature of the first
Adam, that all who by faith are united to the second Adam in Grace, may triumph
in Glory. Did not he lie in David's Inn at Bethlehem, that we might lie in the
Son of David's mansions that are above in that Zion of Zions? Was not he made of
a woman in Canaan to restore us to a better Paradise than what was lost by the
woman of Eden? Was not he made under the Law, that we might be new born under
Grace? Was not he exalted on the Cross; this Joseph's Son, to speak with
reverence, to erect a more firm and sublime Ladder into Heaven, than Jacob's?
That Patriarch saw only a Vision of Angels by starlight; but we by this Ladder
ascend up to the Angels themselves, that are singing in the Noon of Glory. Was
not his most precious Blood poured out as a Ransom for many to the remission of
sins, that ours might not be poured out like oil to feed the perpetual Lamps in
the flames of Hell? Did not the Father make his love honorable (as the Prophet
speaks) by his Son's more honorable obedience, and justify his Justice by his
Son's Righteousness, and quench his anger in the Ocean of his Son's love? Thus
does our blessed Author from the Son's Deity proceed to the great Doctrine of
his most meritorious Sufferings and full Satisfaction for the sins of all the
Elect. The Father by his Eternal love made way for his Temporal anger to his
beloved Son, that he might redeem his adopted sons from eternal wrath, and made
a way through the heart of his Son for them to pass into eternal love. This
point he no less sweetly than substantially clears against the Socinians venom,
who aim by darkning the Deity of Christ to extinguish the glory and honor of
his Satisfaction. Act. 20.28.
For if it had not been the Blood of God, it could never have purchased the
Church. But it is that glorious Person, Heb. 1.3.
who having by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the
Majesty on high. Rev. 1.5.
He who is Alpha and Omega, who is before Abraham was, the first and the last,
who is, was, and is to come, has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his
own Blood, and has made us Kings and Priests unto God, even his Father: to him
be glory and dominion for ever and ever.

I shall not proceed by Arguments to evince this great Scripture-truth, which
has been so oppugned both by ancient and modern Heretics, and so nobly
vindicated by Primitive Councils and Fathers, and by nervous and learned Pens
of latter days. Polyaenus in his Roman Stratagems is but a wrigling slowworm to
this old Serpent in his direful Arts, who like a Revelation-Scorpion carries
death both in head and tail: to bite with the teeth of fiery lies, and with his
persecuting tail to slash the third part of the Stars out of the Heaven of the
Church. This Hydra has not only hissed, but mortally stung many a Soul in the
Polonian, Hungarian, Transylvanian, and Belgic Churches: and I could hearily
wish had never swum after Pelagius through the British Seas with whole folio's
tied about its neck, to lay its poisonous eggs in our Seminaries. The Lord
speedily crush them in pieces, that they may never hatch into fiery flying
Serpents, to provoke the Lord to vengeance. What Country in Europe has
sweltred under more tearing scourges, bitter State-confusions and convulsions,
and dreadful shakings than Poland? where it had first principal vent and
patronage. And how far the Belgian Lion has had his nails pared, and his teeth
knocked out by that hammer of Gods wrath in Europe since the publication of
those blasphemous Treatises, I wish both they and we did seriously lay to heart.

Blessed be God for the many Champions sent out of Isreal's Camp against Goliath
of Gath in the Reformed Churches abroad and at home. It may prove some
mitigation of Divine displeasure, and a prolonging of our tranquillity; and I
heartily pray, that godly Magistrates would stir up their strength against it,
and put to their seal and sanction. I am glad to find th^^ holy man bending his
searches into this subject, I hope to the preservative convinction of many, and
the establishment of others in that grand point of Christ's Satisfaction. The
Lord of the everlasting Covenant I pray to sprinkle both this Book and all the
People with the precious Blood of the Cross: Heb. 9.12.
By which he is entered into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption
for us. Verse. 26.
Who as he did appear to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself: so unto them
that look for him, he will appear the second time without sin unto salvation.
Lev. 16.4.
Like as the High Priest of old, being clothed only in linen, went into the
holy of Holies with the expiation-blood in a golden Basin; but came out in all
his gorgeous attire to bless the people: Verse. 23.
so did the glorious High Priest of our profession enter into the Heavens, not
in so conspicuous a manner, being seen but of few, when he ascended from Mount
Olivet; but when he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified by the
presentment of his Blood, and Intercession to the Father, will come again in
all his Royalty, and receive us to the mansions purchased and prepared for
them, Zech. 6.13.
and will sit down as King and Priest upon his Throne for ever.

But not to prevent your progress from the threshold into the lovely Building
of this Treatise, composed by a Person of great worth and approbation in the
Churches of Christ, pray give me leave in the Porch to point at some material
things respecting this holy Author. I confess, I am not so furnished with
sufficient and copious matter, as to digest a full description of his life, but
what I had from his gracious Son Mr. Thomas Row, I shall succinctly contract,
and add somewhat of my own Observation, and then recommend you to God and the
Word of his Grace.

Let me cast all under these four Heads, his Personage, Qualifications,
Studies, and Sayings.

His stature inclined to tallness, his visage affable and somewhat smiling: his
gestures grave and decent: his behavior meek and courteous; and what is very
observable and much to be imitated, 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
he meddled with his own business, not interposing, much less imposing on other
Churches, being averse to ostentation and public appearance: of a quiet
spirit, and replenisht with the desires of Heaven: as it is observed by
Naturalists, that the dew never falls in a stormy or cloudy night.

As to his Studies, letting pass the usual Cursus in the Arts and Sciences,
which he followed in the enjoyment of the Methods of both Universities: his
skill in the copious and elegant Greek with its curious Criticisms deserves a
remarkable accent. Among the various Sects of ancient Philosophers, he was most
addicted to Plato and the shades of the Academick walks. From the Grecian
Schools he stepped into the Roman Cloisters to hear what they had to say, before
the Reformation sprang. The Civilians having found the Justinian Laws as I
remember at Pisa, and considered the Theodosian Codex, began to digest them
into some Method. The Divines took example, and collected a Body of Sentences.
Among whose numerous Gladiators, he most fancied the fencings of Aquinas,
Bradwardin, Suarez, and Alvarez, being pleased with their reason, but not their
subtilties, their substantial Arguments, but not their Quiddities, finding some
little Pearls in great Dunghils, was wont to say, They had great heads, but
little hearts. And indeed when the original Fountains of Scripture were stopped
up by the Philistines, and little but rage and fury filled most places with the
blood of the slain Professors of the Truth, who could expect but the Owl (which
once) should often fly in the Lateran?

Wherefore from the Papal Schools he went beyond Sea, and stood under the
Fathers Pulpits, and delighted in hearing the African Wits, Athanasius, Cyril,
and Austin. Athanasius he highly honored for his notable Writings against the
Arians, and his strenuous Vindication of the Deity of Christ, and the Doctrine
of the three Persons by the holy Scriptures: and was wont to say, That he wrote
so like an Apostle, that he was even ravished with him. Cyril he also greatly
esteemed for his Ephesine conflicts on the same account. Austin of the Latin
Communion, he passed from Alexandria to Hippo, on purpose to see and discourse
with him because of his shining holiness, and especially his irresistible
Defense of irresistible Grace. And indeed I may add, there is no hearty Enemy of
free Grace but such as want it, and those that feel its power in the heart, are
its greatest Lovers. His Book of the Trinity, though he judged somewhat
obscure, yet not without some light. He had a value also for Basil and the two
Grecian Gregory's, and indeed in whom he found aliquid Christi, something to
the honor of Christ, he would crown them with praises. For Christ was the
chief scope of his meditations and studies, as it is of all faithful Ministers
to turn Souls to him, and enamour them with him, delighting to dig in that Rock
of Zion more than in a Rock of Diamonds.

These illustrious Truths about the Trinity and the Incarnation of our Lord he
styled Stars of the first magnitude, and indeed it may be justly added, they
are the Sun of the Gospel heavens, wherein he said, he could meditate night and
day: and sometimes thought he was carried out too long; insomuch that being in
his Country-recess, and upon the wing, as bath been observed, his nobler
spirits towred up so high, as to leave his animal spirits bird-limed in a maze
below, and having found sweeter food above the Firmament, did soon forget the
refreshment of his deserted body, drawing nigh the flight of some of the
Ancients, of whom it is storied, they forsook the earth, and found their Souls
embalmed in the bosom of eternal Love. The sweetness of these dainties
nourished his conceptions, that Aristotle hit right when he placed happiness in
the contemplation of Truth. Nevertheless he became through Grace the more
humble, verifying the excellency of sanctified knowledge, that it grows most
luxuriant in the sat valleys of humility. It was said of one, That he sailed so
long upon the Ocean of Knowledge, that at last he was tossed into the Haven of
Ignorance; and when arrived to the knowledge of more than most of Mortals,
determined to grave upon Minerva's Pillars, Ne plus ultra, or, Nihil scitur: or
to use Scripture Phrase, That there is no finding out the Almighty to
perfection in any of his ways or works. But our Contemplator, though he found
new Regions of Light and Science above the Heavens, was humbled by searches,
and exalted by humility, and did much condemn such as dared to determine any
thing of God without book; not only when against, but besides the sacred
Oracles. When any did irrationally and irreverently apply the term of Extension
to an infinite Being, or were so bold as to state peremptory Conclusions about
the Decrees and Prescience of God, undertaking to unlade the deep waters above
the Heavens with their Brainsick pan, he used that of Bradwardin [Si non
possis minimum, quomodo maximum.] If no Anatomist can unwinde the texture of
the Brain of an Ant, or discover the wisdom of that minute Insect, how much
less can any wade into, or feel the bottom of those holy, precious,
unfathomable depths of the Eternal God, whom the Heaven of heavens cannot
contain? Or as that annexed at the bottom of Bernard [Quomodo te si non
meipsum.] The World is not yet come to an issue about the humane Soul, and why
will they burn their wings at the rays of the inaccessible Light? He then put
his experimental seal to that of the holy Burgundian Abbot [Scrutator
Majestatis opprimetur a gloria.] He who charges the Seraphims of folly in
comparison with his infinite Wisdom, might upon their crying, Holy, Holy, Holy,
cause his Sinai-voice to sound with imputations of grand Unholiness and
Uncircumcision to their lips and hearts.

This holy man found the eye of his Soul more dazzled by prying into these
radiant Mysteries, than that of his body by gazing on the fiery Lamp of the
material Heavens; affirming, that nothing did so effectually humble him, no not
his sharpest afflictions, nor the bitterest cups make him so stagger into the
dust, as some glittering reflections of the Divine Majesty upon his Soul: and
cry out with Agur, I am more brutish than any; or with that other Saint, I am
like a Behemoth, a great beast before thee. But for points revealed in
Scripture, he took more peculiar pains, and sucked more satisfying delight from
the breasts of the Incarnation. He endeavored to open that Mystery of
Godliness [God manifest in the flesh] in so plain and familiar a way, as the
truth might bear, that weak capacities might gather strength, and those of
greater light might find greater afflux of spiritual oil to their Lamps from
this Olivetree in the Courts of God. And I hope the Lord will raise up some
other that has walked from the Passiongarden in Gethsemane along with our
Thorn-crowned Lord through the dolorous way to the Passion-mount of Golgotha,
and have found the Sympathy, Nails, and Spear in their own hearts, that will
lament his sorrows with so bitter a cry, as to pierce the souls of many to
entertain a bleeding Savior within the chambers of their hearts. It was his
saying whose Treatise follows, He knew no other bottom whereon to lay the
stress of his Salvation, than the Son of God incarnate: most certainly true of
all, who spend their joys on his Incarnation, and breathe out their believing
sighs upon his Passion. So that this having been his great study, he said a
little before his departure: That though most were apt to look upon these as
speculative Subjects, yet he esteemed them as the most practical, and the very
heart and kernel of our Salvation involved in them.

In the delivery of these and other great Doctrines of the Gospel, that he gave
in Precept to his Son, he gave in President to others in imitation of Christ,
who taught his Disciples as they were able to bear both as to gradual matter,
and as to a pleasant form in apt similitudes in his occasional walkings, and
constant heavenly teachings. Thus our Author esteemed that character of an
Orator to be no less useful than ancient [To teach, persuade, and delight] to
teach by cogent Arguments, to persuade by insinuating Motives, and to delight
with elegant Metaphors. As the Lord himself speaks, Eccles. 12.10.
I have used similitudes by my Servants the Prophets; and that the wise
Preacher sought to find out acceptable words as well as words of truth, such as
might be like Apples of gold in Pictures of silver, as well as goads and nails
fastened by the Masters of Assemblies: such as may not so much please the ears
as prick the heart, as Jerome glosses, Non placentia, sed pungentia; adding
further, Lachrymae auditorum, etc. The tears of Auditors are the Pearls of
Preachers. Such did our grave Author use, not jingling Bells, but deep Peals of
repentance; not bald and slovenly, but apt and significant terms, that the Lamb
might wade, and the Elephant swim in the fluency of his expressions.

When near the time of taking his flight to Glory, having been versed in the
Divine Methods of the Holy Spirit in the communications of Grace, and the
sensible instillations of it into the souls of men, he treated of the Deity of
the Spirit, his procession from the Father and the Son, and his powerful
operations on the heart, and being ravished with the effusions of the Spirit
here, went up to enjoy his more plentiful infusions in the celestial Mansions.
Being nearer his time of recess into the Country of Canaan above, he dived into
the meditation of that Text of Paul [The time is short] having prepared some
heavenly Notions about the shortness of time, and the uncertainty of life,
concluded thus: We should not desire to continue longer in this world, than to
glorify God, and finish our given work, and be ready to say, Farewell Time,
welcome blessed Eternity: even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Thus this Evening-Star set in an Ocean of Joy, to arise a Morning Star in the
Eastern Ocean of Glory. But before his disappearance, the frame of his Spirit
being much agitated with solicitude about the Church of God, and particularly
in this Land and Nation, uttered a Swan-like Song, testifying somewhat of a
prophetic Spirit [If God begin to deliver his Church in an October, remember
me] which how far began to be fulfilled in October 1678. the Saints surviving
may give in evidence, and I humbly pray it may never end, though it may mix
with some overshadowings, till we see Zions full deliverance past.

Thus much of that holy Soul, I shall now conclude with a Direction and a
Prayer. A Direction as to the Faith and Holiness of former Saints and
Ambassadors of Christ, and as to such as survive.

To such as are gone up to Enjoyment, I might apply what is said of Astraea,
that when ascending to Heaven, left a train of light all the way, like the Via
lactea, to illuminate the Followers of Justice in the same illustrious path to
Happiness. Lee's hear the Apostle: Remember them which have the rule over you,
Heb. 13.7.
who have spoken to you the word of God, whose faith follow, considering the
end of their conversation, Jesus Christ the same yesterday and to day and for
ever. As to infirmities (for who is without them) imitate the Spirit of God in
the New Testament, who never relates or remembers the infirmities of Saints in
the Old. They are at rest in the bosom of Christ, let them be at rest in your
bosom as in a bed of Spices. As it is said of Josiah, his name was like precious
Ointment composed by the Art of the Apothecary.

For such as survive, learn of the same Apostle, To obey them that have the
rule over you, Heb. 13.17.
and submit your selves; for they watch for your souls, as they that must give
account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief, for that is
unprofitable for you. We beseech you, brethren, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.
to know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and
admonish you, and esteem them very highly in love for their works sake, and be
at peace among your selves.

Forget not, that when Moses and Aaron were gone to Heaven from two distinct
Mountains, God set apart Joshua and Eleazar in two distinct Valleys to lead
their surviving children into the Land of Promise: and withal told Joshua,
Josh. 1.5.
There shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days of thy life:
as I was with Moses, I will be with thee; I will not fail thee, nor forsake
thee. Nay what is doubly remarkable: Moses could only lead them through the
Wilderness, but Joshua must bring them into Canaan. The Law can only school us
to Christ, Heb. 4.
but it is our heavenly Jesus or Joshua that can safely bring us to the Eternal
rest: and besides its observable, we read of no murmurings under Joshua, as
formerly under Moses. Thus God provides for his Church. When Elijah was rid
into Heaven, Elisha must follow in the power and spirit of Elias. When one
stream is slid and shed into the Ocean, another circulates from the same Ocean
through the bowels of the earth into the springs under the mountains, and
refreshes the scorched Plains. When one Star sets, another rises to guide the
wandering traveller, and at length the bright Morning-lamp glitters in the East,
and then the glorious Sun of Righteousness. While the Church sits fainting
under a Juniper-tree in the Wilderness, there shall fly Prophets to feed her
till the blessed resurrection of the Witnesses. It Is our high duty to study
present work, and prize present help, and greatly rejoice when the Lord sends
forth (as once) both Boanerges and Barnabas together. Pray for the mantle,
girdle, and blessing of Elijah, for the love of John, and the zeal of Paul, to
twine hands together to draw Souls to Heaven: till the Beloved comes like a Roe
or a young Heart upon the mountains of spices: till the shadows flee away: till
the day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your hearts.

My prayer shall end with the same Apostle: Heb. 13.20.
Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the sheep through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make
you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is
well pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

From Bignal near Bisseter, Sept. 13. 1679. SAMVEL LEE.

EMMANVEL; OR, THE Love of Christ explicated in his Incarnation, being made
under the Law, and his Satisfaction.
BOOK I.
SERMON I.
Ephesians. 3. verse. 17, 18, 19. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith;
that ye being rooted and grounded in love,

May be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height:

And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.


THE work of a Christian lies especially in two things: First, in the study of
himself; secondly, in the study of Christ. The study of a man's self will
acquaint him with his own sin and misery, and make him see the infinite need
that he has of Christ; the study of Christ will cause him to admire the Plot
of Divine Wisdom and Grace, which has provided all that in one Christ, which
is answerable to all that sin and misery that is in us.

The Mystery of Christ is the greatest Mystery that ever was. There are
breadths and lengths, depths and heights in this Mystery. It is Calvin's Comment
on the Text, Continet una Christi dilectio omnes sapientiae numeros. Calv.
that one love of Christ contains in it all the dimensions and measures of
wisdom. When the Apostle speaks of breadths, lengths, depths and heights, that
which he intends is, that in one Christ is the height, breadth, length, and
depth of all true wisdom: in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, Col. 2.3. and in him are ye complete. A Christian needs to study
nothing but one Christ, there is enough in Christ to take up his study and
contemplation all his days; and the more we study Christ, the more we may study
him. There will be new wonders still appearing in Christ. The Name of Christ is
called wonderful, Isa. 9.6. and indeed well may it be called so: every thing in
Christ is a wonder, most wonderful; his eternal Generation from the Father; his
personal subsistence in the Godhead; his taking our nature; the Union of the
two Natures, the Nature of God, and the nature of man in that one person of
Christ; his Passion; his Resurrection; his Ascension into Heaven; his sitting
at the right hand of God in our nature: all these are wonders. Now his love is
the root and foundation of all, and runs through all whatsoever respects us;
whatsoever Christ is, whatsoever Christ does, with relation to us, his love is
the root of all, and runs through all: his love runs through his Incarnation,
Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and sitting at the Fathers right hand. It was
out of love to us he took up our nature, subjected himself to the Law, dyed in
our nature, rose again in it, carried our nature into Heaven, and wears it
there, and will wear it to all Eternity: I say, his love is the root of all
this.

My desire is to speak a little of this infinite Love of Christ. The Apostle
intimates in the Text, that it is a great duty incumbent on us to take in as
much as possibly we can of this infinite and incomprehensible love of Christ,
That ye may comprehend with all Saints what are the heights, etc. Here it may
be inquired what is this expression added with all Saints; I conceive it is to
show us two things.

First, That Grace in the hearts of the Saints does naturally put them upon
this study. It is the natural tendency of the Spirit of Saints as they are
Saints, to study and take in as much of the love of Christ as is possible. That
ye may comprehend with all Saints; as much as if he should say, This is that
which all Saints are pressing after and aspiring unto, they all desire to know
more and more of the love of Christ.

Secondly, This expression is added to show, that it is the great duty of all
the Saints to make the Love of Christ their great study. That ye may comprehend
with all Saints; as much as if he should say, It is your duty, and the duty of
all the Saints to study the dimensions of Christ's love. What will Heaven be,
but a clear and perfect knowledge of the love of God in Christ? Then shall we
know and understand perfectly what the purpose of the Father was to communicate
himself to the Elect by the Son: and so shall we be filled with the fullness of
God, as the expression is here in this Text; and elsewhere it is said, God
shall be all in all. 1 Cor. 15.28.
Not that we shall be able in Heaven it self to comprehend and take in the
whole of this love; for our understanding being finite, cannot fully comprehend
the infinite love of God: but the souls of the Elect shall then be brim-full of
it; they shall take in as much of this love as they are able to contain. Now
there is something of this love may be understood and taken in here on earth;
for the Apostle is speaking of something that may be taken in here on earth,
when he says, that you may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
height and depth, and breadth and length of the love of Christ: as much as if
he should say, This is that knowledge that the Saints ought to be pressing
after here on earth, all Saints ought to aim and level at this mark. The more
we know and understand of this love of Christ, the more will our hearts be
ravished with it, and the more shall we be overpowered and swallowed up in the
admiration of it; for we love him because he first loved us. Amor est qui
amatur.
It is love it self that is that which we love: it is Gods love to us, made
known to us in and by his Son that must draw our hearts to love him. The great
end why God chooses his people is, that they should be holy and unblameable
before him in love, Ephesians. 1.4. Now this being the great end of God to bring us
to love him, the more we come to know and understand his infinite love to us,
the more will our love be perfected toward him.

There are two things that lie in the words of the Text.

1. Here is a Supposition. The Supposition is, that the love of Christ is
exceeding great, and carries all dimensions in it. That ye may comprehend what
is the height and the depth, and the breadth and length of the love of Christ.
The Apostle supposes this, that there are heights, and depths, and breadths,
and lengths in the love of Christ.

2. We have in the Text the Apostles prayer for the Saints upon this
supposition; and that is, that the love of Christ being so great, they may
know, understand, and comprehend it more and more.

There are two Observations or Doctrines that do naturally arise from the words
of the Text.

Love of Christ is infinite and surpassing great, and such a love as carries
all manner of dimensions in it; there are heights, and depths, and breadths,
and lengths in Christ's Love.

ought to be the endeavor of all the Saints to know, understand, comprehend
and take in more and more of this infinite and surpassing love of Christ.

I shall begin to speak to the first Observation, which is,

That the Love of Christ is infinite and surpassing great, such a love as
carries all manner of dimensions in it; there are heights and depths, breadths
and lengths in the Love of Christ.

Here there are two things I shall treat of.

1. Show what the Love of Christ is.

2. Show how the greatness, infiniteness, and surpassingness of this Love may
be a little described and set forth to us.

1. We must open the Nature of Christ's Love in the general.

To understand this there is a threefold Love we may distinguish of. 1. There
is a love of Benevolence or good will. 2. There is the love of Beneficence. 3.
There is the love of Complacency.

1. There is the love of Benevolence or goodwill, and this is nothing else but
an intention, purpose, or decree of doing good to another.

2. There is the love of Beneficence, and this is that love whereby a man does
not only will good to another, but does actually confer and bestow some good
upon him: and this is not so properly love, as the effect of love.

3. There is the love of Complacency, and that is, when a man takes delight and
pleasure in that good which is in another.

According to this threefold distinction we may a little conceive of the Love
of Christ.

1. There is the love of Benevolence or good will in Christ. This is such a
love whereby a man wills good to another, purposes and intends to bestow good
upon him. This love was in the Lord Jesus Christ. Christ had a purpose and
intention from Eternity to bestow grace and glory upon his people. To
understand which, we must know, that all the works of the Trinity which do
respect the creature, are undivided. What the Father does, the Son does, and
the Spirit does: what the Father purposes, the Son purposes, and the Spirit
purposes. It is true, Election is in a peculiar manner attributed to the
Father: Ephesians. 1.3, 4. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
according as he has chosen us in him. Here we see Election is in a peculiar
manner attributed to the Father: but when Election is attributed to the Father,
the Son and the Spirit are not to be excluded from electing: for Election being
an act of Gods will, there is but one and the same essential will in Father,
Son, and Spirit; what the Father wills, the Son must needs will, and the Spirit
wills also: and the reason is, As there is but one and the same Essence, so but
one and the same Will in the three persons. Therefore the Father willing to
bestow grace and glory upon such a number of men, the Son must needs will it
too: Therefore Christ says, All thine are mine, and mine are thine, Joh.
17.10. All the Elect are common to the Father and the Son: they are both the
Father's, and Christ's. As the Father has chosen them, so the Son has chosen
them: and as the Father is glorified in their salvation, so is the Son:
therefore are the Elect said to be Christ's own, Joh. 13.1. -- and they are
called his sheep, and these sheep he knows, Joh. 10.14. -- How does he know his
sheep? he knows them from Eternity, and loves them from Eternity. So that there
is the love of Benevolence or good will in Christ. Therefore he says in Joh.
10.28. I give unto them eternal life. It is in the present Tense, (...).
I do give unto them eternal life. How can Christ be said to give to his sheep
eternal life? they are not as yet perfectly and completely possessed of eternal
life: The meaning is, Christ from Eternity has decreed to bestow eternal life
upon them, he gives them the beginnings of it in this world in their
Justification and Sanctification; and they shall as certainly have the
complement and perfection of it in Glorification at last, as if they had it
already.

2. There is the Love of Beneficence in Christ. Christ does not only will good
to his people, but he bestows good upon his people. As he did from Eternity
intend to bestow grace and glory upon them, so he does in time actually conser
grace and glory upon them. This is expressed by the Apostle to the full, Romans
8.30. Whom he did predestinate, them he also called; whom he called, them he
also justified; whom he justified, them he also glorified. The creatures love
is oftentimes a barren love; men may wish well to others, they may have a
purpose and desire to do good to them, but ostentimes they want that power and
ability to do the good they would: but Christ's love is a fruitful love, he
actually bestows that good upon his people he intends. Vocation, Justification,
Sanctification, Glorification are all the fruits of this eternal Love of his.
Christ's Love is such a love as brings all manner of spiritual blessings along
with it, Ephesians. 1.3. not only Election, which is the Decree of God to bestow good
things upon us, but also Adoption, the forgiveness of sin, the acceptance of
our persons: all which the Apostle speaks of in the same place, and these
things are actually conferred on Believers, and they are brought into the
possession of them.

3. There is the love of Complacency in Christ, which is that love whereby he
takes delight in the persons and graces of his Saints.

1. Christ takes delight in the persons of his Saints: Isa. 43.2. I have called
thee by name, thou art mine. The Lord tells Moses, Thou have found grace in my
sight, and I know thee by name, Exodus 34.17. What is it for God to know Moses
by name? It was to take special delight in Moses, to know him, so as he did not
know other men, to take that delight in him, which he did not in other men.
Isa. 43.4. Since thou have been precious in my sight, thou have been
honorable. Zeph. 3.17. The Lord thy God will rejoice over thee with singing,
he will rest in his love. Isa. 62.5. As the bridegroom rejoices over his
bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee.

2. Christ takes delight in the graces of his people. He first bestows grace
upon his people, and then he delights in his own graces: Psalm. 147.11. The Lord
takes pleasure in them that fear him. Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me.
God is Love, and he loves the love of his people: If any man love me, he shall
be beloved of me, and I will manifest my self to him, Joh. 14.21. Thus we have
seen what the nature of Christ's love is in general.

We come now to the second particular, and that is to speak of the dimensions
of Christ's love. The love of Christ is such a love as has breadths and
lengths, heights and depths in it.

What are these dimensions of Christ's love?

We are now lanching into the vast Ocean: the love of Christ is such an Ocean
as has no bounds nor bottom in it. We may as soon think to comprehend the
Ocean in the hollow of our hands, as comprehend his love: the Apostle tells us
it passes knowledge; and if so, then it is in vain for us to think to
comprehend it: but though we cannot comprehend it, yet there is something we
may know of it, otherwise the Apostle would not have prayed as he does in the
Text, that ye may comprehend with all Saints what are the heights, etc. We may
gather in some drops of the Ocean, though we may not think to drain the Ocean;
and all that we can hope for is to make known some drops of the infinite love
of Christ. And that we may be able a little to conceive of it, we shall
consider the love of Christ these three ways.

1. In the properties of it.

2. As it is to be found in both his Natures, the love that is in his humane,
and that is in his Divine nature.

3. In the effects of it.

1. The love of Christ will appear to be a furpassing love, to have all manner
of dimensions in it, if we consider the properties of Christ's Love.

1. Christ's love is an ancient love: Christ's love is more ancient and of longer
standing than the world: Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him before
the foundation of the world. The effects of Christ's love are seen in time, but
the love it self was before all time. Gods love to his people is as ancient as
his love to himself: Gods love to himself is from Eternity, and his love to us
is from Eternity; therefore does he say, I have loved thee with an ever lasting
love, Jer. 31.3. It is a saying of one of the Ancients, Mirus profecto amor
hominum una cum Deo aeternus. Cyril.
Wonderful indeed is the love of God to man, which is, together with God,
eternal, that is, eternal as God is eternal. Where can we place the beginning
of this love? The Scripture teaches us expressly, that it was before the
foundation of the world, and therefore consequently before all time: and if
before all time, then it must needs be from Eternity. Christ loved us before we
had a being, yea, it was his love that first of all gave us a being, and he
therefore gave us a being, that he might demonstrate and set forth the riches
of that grace and love he had in his heart toward us: Romans 9.23. That he might
make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had before
prepared unto glory. The Lord had prepared glory in his thoughts and purpose
for the vessels of mercy from Eternity, and he therefore gave them being, that
he might bestow that glory on them, which he had prepared for them from
Eternity. Christ's delights were with the sons of men from Eternity, Prove. 8.31.
Christ's delight from Eternity was to think what he should do for us, before
ever we had a being; even then, when he was the object of the Fathers delight;
as it is in the verse immediately preceding, I was daily his delight. Even
then, when the eternal Son who lay in the bosom of the eternal Father, was the
Fathers delight, yet, if we may so speak, he had another delight that took him
up, and that was to think what he should do for us. It is the property of love
not to be pleased in its own happiness only, but have desires of the happiness
of the person whom it loves. Christ was infinitely happy in the Fathers bosom
in being his delight, but he loved us, and therefore was not satisfied with his
own happiness, but pleased himself with the thoughts of making us happy.

2. Christ's love is a free love. The freeness of Christ's love appears in three
respects.

1. Christ's love is free, because it was not necessary: Christ was not drawn
from any necessity of nature to love us, as if he could not choose but love us:
he might have chosen whether he would have loved us. God indeed loves himself
necessarily: he loves himself, and cannot but love himself; but God loves the
creature freely and arbitrarily, he might have chosen whether he would have set
his love upon it yea or no: Romans 9.15. I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy. Gods will is the reason of his own love to the creature. God was under
no constraint to show mercy; but he therefore shows mercy, because mercy
pleases him; he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy. Gods goodness and
perfections were sufficient for himself; and if he had needed any thing, the
creature could have given him nothing, for the creature had nothing to give him
but what God had first given to it: and therefore Gods love was most free. God
was not necessitated to have made the creature, or to have given it a being,
much less was he necessitated to have given it such a supernatural good as
grace and glory was. God might have made man, and never ordained him to the
glory of Heaven; he was not necessitated to make man at all, to give him so
much as a natural being, much less was he necessitated to give the happiness
and glory of Heaven to him.

2. Christ's love is free, for as much as there is no advantage or profit that
comes to him by loving us: Romans 11.35. Who has first given to him, and it
shall be given to him again? God did not stand in need of any thing out of
himself, he had alsufficiency and perfection in himself, within the compass of
his own essence, if we may so speak; whatsoever is in the creature, is first in
God after an eminent manner before it is in the creature. There is nothing in
the effect but is first in the cause: therefore the Ancients have this
observation, All created things are more perfectly in God than they are in
themselves, even as silver is more perfect in gold than in it self. That virtue
whereby the creatures were produced, was first in God as the cause, before it
was drawn forth in the creature as the effect: and therefore it is well
observed by Austin, God had a purpose from Eternity to make the creatures, but
he therefore made them in time, that he might show he did not stand in need of
the creatures, but had been perfect and happy without them from Eternity.

3. Christ's love is free, for as much as it was without respect of merit in us:
Romans 9.11, 13. The children being yet unborn, neither having done good or evil,
it was said, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated. 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has
saved us and called us, not according to our works, etc. Romans 8.28. All things
work together for good to them who love God, to them who are the called
according to his purpose. It is true, the Elect do love God, yea but they are
first called, first loved of God. It was not our love to God was the cause of
Gods love to us, but Gods love to us is the cause of our love to him. God first
elects, and then calls us, and then we love him. God decrees to give to the
Elect both faith and obedience, Tit. 1.1.1 Pet. 1.2. therefore his love cannot
possibly be grounded upon the foresight of our faith and obedience, but is
every way most free. Sweet are the expressions which Bernard has: Amat Deus,
nec aliunde hoc habet, sed ipse est unde amat; and ideo vehementius, quia non
amerem tam habet, quam hoc ipse est. Bern.
God (says he) loves, neither has he his love from any thing out of himself,
but himself is the cause of his own love: and therefore his love is most
strong, because he is not so properly said to have love, as himself is love.

1. It is a special peculiar love. There is a common general love which God
bears to all creatures; but there is a special peculiar love which God bears to
his people. God loves all his creatures with a general love; but it is some
only he loves with a special and peculiar love. God, Omnes quidem diligit, sed
non ad aequale honum. Tolet.
as one observes, loves all his creatures indeed, but he does not love them so
as to will the same good, or to bestow the same equal good upon them all. God
is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works. He feeds the
ravens, clothes the lilies, gives life, breath, being to all creatures; but
then there is a special love which he bears to his people. First, he gives
himself to them: Heb. 8.10. This is the covenant I will make with them, I will
be their God. Secondly, he gives them his Son: Having given us his Son, Romans
8.32. Joh. 3.16. Thirdly, he gives Heaven, Salvation, and eternal life unto
them, Luke 12.32. 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. These are the things that God bestows upon his
people: so then it is a special love in this respect. God bestows common
blessings upon others; he bestows many temporal blessings upon all men; but his
special favors are reserved for the Elect: therefore he is said to be the
Savior of all men, especially of those that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. God
preserves and saves all men by a common Providence, but he is in a special
peculiar manner the Savior of Believers: therefore he is called the Savior of
the body, Ephesians. 5.23. Compare these Scriptures together; in one place he is said
to be the Savior of all men, and in another place he is said to be the Savior
of his body the Church. Christ is the Savior of all men in some respect, but
not so as he is the Savior of his body the Church: he saves all men with a
common salvation, but he does not save all men with a spiritual eternal
salvation, it is the Church only he so saves.

2. The love of Christ is a discriminating love, because it is such a love as
is bestowed upon some persons which is not bestowed upon others: Whom he
foreknew, them he did predestinate, Romans 8.29. How did he foreknow them? he
foreknew them so as to love them. He knows all his creatures from Eternity, but
he does not so foreknow all as to love all alike: but he foreknows some after a
special manner, he so foreknows some as he does not foreknow others: he so
foreknows some from Eternity as to love them from Eternity: he so foreknows
some as to pass by others: hence it is said, he loved his own which were in the
world, Joh. 13.1. he has chosen them out of the world, Joh. 15.19. and he
prays for them, not for the world, Joh. 17.9. Here we may cry out with the
Apostle, O the depths! There was no reason on the part of the Elect why they
should be chosen, and not others, Mal. 1.2. Was not Esau Jacobs brother, says
the Lord? yet I loved Jacob. As much as if it had been said, What pre-eminence
had Jacob more than Esau, when I made my Election? Was not Esau Jacobs brother?
Did not Esau and Jacob stand upon equal ground? and might I not have taken one
as well as another? Nay Esau was the elder brother, yet, says God, Jacob have
I loved. There is no dignity or worth in the Elect why they should be chosen
more than others: the Elect themselves were involved in the same common
condition of sin and misery with others: but God who is rich in mercy, for the
great love wherewith he has loved us, Ephesians. 2.4. has bestowed that love on
some which he has denied to others. The reason of this love is not from any
thing on the Elects part, but from Gods own Sovereign will; he has mercy on
whom he will have mercy. Those who are chosen are not better and more worthy
than others, but God out of his own love will make them to be vessels of mercy
when as he will pass by others.

1. Sinners. O labor from what has been spoken, to be sensible of your
mifery: while you lie out of Christ, and continue in your sins, you can
challenge no part in this rich and glorious love: Romans 8.29.
whom he predestined, them he also called; therefore till you be called, you
have no evidence of your Election of God. Think then of thy sad condition, poor
sinner, poor unconverted soul. O there is all this rich and glorious love in
the heart of Christ, but for any thing that yet appears, thou art never like to
have share in it; why? thou art yet uncalled, and lie wallowing in thy sins.
The first dawnings of Christ's love appear and break forth in vocation: Ephesians.
5.26. Christ loved the Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of water by the word. Christ's love to the Church is seen in sanctifying
the Church, and cleansing it by the Word and Spirit: O but thou wast never
sanctified and cleansed by the Word and Spirit to this day. Thou art a poor
creature wallowing in thy blood, thou continuest in thy ignorance, unbelief,
profaneness, hardness to this day? Whoever thou art whilst thou continuest
such, thou have no evidence as yet of thy election of God, that thou have any
share or part in this glorious love of Christ. O pray that thou may feel the
sanctifying and cleansing work of Christ's Spirit, that the Word may have a work
on thy soul for conversion. Christ loves the Church, and sanctifies and
cleanses it with the washing of water by the word. The Word is the ordinary
means by which the Elect are sartctified; and therefore Christ prays, Sanctify
them by thy truth, thy word is truth, Joh. 17.17. If thou would have some
evidence of Christ's love, pray that the Word of God may have some effect upon
thee to bring thee from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God.

To the People of God. Use 2.
Is there such a rich and glorious love in the heart of the Lord Jesus Christ?
Oh then labor to admire and adore this glorious love: labor to get your
hearts affected with this love: stand and wonder at it, that the Lord Jesus
should have such love for you: such ancient, free, peculiar love for you: that
you should be made the objects of this ancient, free, peculiar love of his,
when so many are passed by. Meditate much on this love, think of it night and
day, never cease thinking of Christ's love, till you have thought your selves
into love to him. It is an excellent speech of Bernard: When the love of Christ
does so swallow up our affections, that we even forget our selves, and can
think of nothing else but Jesus Christ, and the things of Jesus Christ, then is
love perfected in us. The love of Christ is a great abyss, that we should be
swallowed up in, and lose our selves in the contemplation of it, and the more
spirituality we grow unto, the more shall we contemplate this love, and the
more we contemplate the love of Christ, the more shall we find our selves drawn
out in love to him.

The end of the first Sermon.
SERMON II.
Ephesians. 3. verse. 17, 18, 19. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that
ye being rooted and grounded in love,

May be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height:

And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.


WE have already heard three Properties of Christ's love, viz. that it is
ancient, free, peculiar. The fourth Property of Christ's love is, that it is an
intense and a strong love. He is said to have the greatest and strongest love
to another that intends most good to another, and is willing to be at the
greatest cost and charges to procure that good for him. If a father intend to
settle such an inheritance upon his child, and will lay out all the money he
has to purchase that inheritance, it is a sign he loves that child well. So is
it in this case: the things that God intends to bestow upon his people are the
greatest things, and he has been at the greatest cost and charges to bring
them to this inheritance.

1. God bestows upon his people the greatest things, and therein he shows how
strong his love is to them. What things are they? no less than himself, his own
glory, and blessedness, all the riches of Heaven; Heirs of God, coheirs with
Christ, Romans 8.17. Heirs of God, what is that? We shall inherit God himself for
our portion, we shall enjoy all that he is, all that God has, so far as we are
capable, or according to the measure and capavity of creatures.

2. As the things are great in themselves which God bestows upon his people, so
God has been at great charge and expenses to bring us to this inheritance. He
has given us his Son, his Spirit, his Promises, his Providence, his
Ordinances, to bring us to this inheritance. All things work together for good
to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose,
Romans 8.28. Observe the last expression, the called according to his purpose.
Those whom God has a purpose to save, those whom he has laid out his eternal
love upon, all things are ordered to bring them to that happiness he has
purposed to bestow upon them. God lays the train of all his providence so as
to bring his Elect to that happiness he has chosen them to.

3. The love of Christ is constant, unchangeable, and everlasting. The
unchangeableness of Gods love arises from the unchangeableness of his nature:
Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not, therefore the sons of Jacob are not
consumed. As much as if God should have said, My nature is unchangeable, and
that is the reason my love and mercy toward you is never changed. The
manifestation of Gods love may be changed toward us; we may not apprehend the
same effects of love at one time as at another; therefore does the Church
complain, Lam. 5. ult. Thou have utterly rejected us, thou art very wroth
against us: but yet the root and fountain of Gods love is still the same. Whom
the Lord loves he rebukes and chastens, Rev. 3.20. Gods correction of his
people proceeds from his love. Not but that God is truly displeased with the
sins of his people: when his people give way to such particular sins, he
disapproves of such particular acts of theirs, and disapproves of them in
relation to those acts; therefore when David committed that sin in taking
Vriah's wife, the Text says expressly, but the thing which David did,
displeased the Lord, 2 Samuel 11. ult. It is contrary to the nature of God, who
is Holiness it self, to approve of the sins of his people, or of them with
relation to such sinful acts: nay God may be so far angry for particular
miscarriages in his people, as to take up the rod and correct them; yet in this
very case Gods original love remains. The Scripture is very clear to this
purpose, Psalm. 89.30, 31. If his children forsake my law, etc. then will I
visit their transgression with the rood, etc nevertheless my loving kindness
will I not utterly take from him. Here we see Gods paternal displeasure or his
fatherly corrections may consist with his love: yea in some sense Gods
corrections are the Fruit of his love. 1 Cor. 11.32. We are chastened of the
Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world; he therefore chastens, that
he may not condemn. Gods love to his people is a fixed, unalterable thing. Gods
love is founded in his eternal purpose: now there is no changing of Gods
purpose. It is a great expression that of the Apostle, Romans 9.11. That the
purpose of God according to election might stand. The purpose of God in
election stands firm, and this is matter of singular and unspeakable comfort to
the Saints of God. If thou can once see a line of electing love drawn forth
upon thee, thou may conclude the purpose of God remains unalterable
concerning thee. Now it is possible a Saint may know his election, 1 Thessalonians.
1.4. Knowing, beloved, your election of God. A Saint may know his Election by
his Vocation, 2 Pet. 1.10. Give diligence to make your calling and election
sure. Now if thou can find out thy election, thou may conclude the purpose
of God stands unalterable to thee. Christ's love is from Eternity, and his love
never ends. Having loved his own, he loved them to the end, Joh. 13.1.

2. Having spoken of the Properties of Christ's love, I come to speak of the
love that is to be found in both his Natures, in the Divine and in the humane
nature.

The Love of Christ is a great love, if we consider the love that is to be
found in each of his Natures, the Divine and humane nature. Ephesians. 5.25. it is
said, Christ has loved the Church, and given himself for it. Christ, as God,
has loved the Church from Eternity; therefore is it said, I have loved thee
with an everlasting love, Jer. 31.3. Now to this ancient and first love of his
there was a new love added, and that was the love of Christ as Man: this love
which is founded in his humane nature had a beginning, even as the humanity it
self had a beginning: but yet it is such a love as never shall have an end.
Christ therefore loves his Church with a twofold love, with a Divine and a
humane love, each of which is the most sincere, the greatest, the most perfect,
the most constant, and abiding love. I shall speak

1. Of the love that is in his humane nature, because that will help us to
conceive the better of the love that is in his Divine nature: the love that is
in the humane nature is the product or effect of the love that is in his Divine
nature: and if the love of his humane nature be so great, the love of his
Divine nature must needs be far greater, as we shall hear.

The love which is in his humane nature is exceeding great. To understand
which, we must consider, as there are two natures in Christ, the Divine and
humane nature; so there are two wills, the Divine and humane will: and as there
are two wills in Christ, so we must necessarily suppose a twofold operation of
those wills, and so by consequence a twofold love in Christ; for love is
nothing but the efflux of the will, some motion in the will whereby some good
is willed to another: now the love that is in Christ's humane nature is
exceeding great. It is true, that which the School men call Habitual grace,
which is in the soul of Christ, is not simply infinite, and the reason that
they give is this: The humane soul of Christ being but a creature, and not
infinite, the habits of grace which do inhere in his humane soul, as the
subject, they themselves cannot be supposed to be infinite; for the habits
cannot exceed the capacity of the subject: if the humane soul of Christ be but
a created thing, then the habits of grace which are in it, are not simply
infinite; yet notwithstanding this, the love which is to be found in Christ's
humane nature, is exceeding great, and a love surpassing the love of men or
Angels: and the reason is, the humane soul of Christ has the Divinity
inhabiting in it: now as the Son receives all the Father has in the eternal
Generation, (the whole substance of the Father is communicated to the Son in
the eternal Generation, there is no perfection that is in the Father but it is
to be found in the Son) therefore by consequence it follows, that the love of
the Father must necessarily be communicated to the Son, and does reside in the
Son, and there is but one and the same Divine love both in the Father and in
the Son. Now the Son, the second person in Trinity, taking our nature, both the
love of the Father and the Son (for, as an Holy man observes, Sweet is this
contemplation) does in some sort abide and reside in our nature; therefore the
humane Soul of Christ being inflamed and set on fire with the fire of Divine
love (which is so near it, which inhabits and dwells in it) must needs be
fuller of love than any creatures heart ever was. The humane nature of Christ
by means of its Union and Conjunction with the Divinity, takes in the influence
of the Divinity; and the Divinity thus personally united to the Humanity, must
needs fill his soul with that love that no creature was ever filled with:
therefore we must necessarily suppose there was the greatest love imaginable in
Christ's humane soul, the greatest as was possible there could be in any created
nature. The Godhead dwelling in Christ bodily, that infinite love of God must
be supposed in some sense to dwell in the heart of Christ Man. How loving, how
tender, how affectionate must that heart be that has all the love of the
Father and the Son poured out into it? For consider it, the Son receives all
from the Father by eternal Generation, the Son takes up our nature and dwells
in it; the humane nature united to the Son, takes in the influence of the
Fathers and the Sons love by means of its personal Union with the Son. And thus
the humane nature is not only warmed, but wholly set on fire by the Divinity
inhabiting in it. Therefore it is well observed by one of the Ancients, There
is some warmth, some heat that comes from Christ the eternal Word into all the
Saints hearts; In hac anima ipse ignis divinus substantialiter requievisse
credendus est. Orig.
but in Christ's humane Soul the very fire of Divine love dwells substantially:
there it rested substantially; for in him the fullness of the Goahead dwells
bodily, Col. 2.9. Therefore there is the greatest love imaginable to be found
even in the humane Soul of Christ. More particularly the love that was in the
humane Soul of Jesus Christ may be described and set forth under three
considerations.

1. The heart of Christ-Man was filled with the most sweet, tender, merciful,
compassionate dispositions, that ever any heart was filled with. Hence is it,
that we have those expressions, that he is a merciful and a faithful High
Priest, Heb. 2.17. that he is touched with the feeling of our infirmities, Heb.
3.15. We read also of the bowels of Christ, the meekness, the gentleness of
Christ, 2 Cor. 10.1. Never were there such words of love and sweetness spoken
by any man as by him: never was there such a loving and tender heart as the
heart-of Jesus Christ, Grace was poured into his lips, Psalm. 45.3. Certainly
never were there such words of love, sweetness, and tenderness spoken here upon
this earth as those last words of his which were uttered a little before his
Suffering, and are recorded in the 13, 14, 15, 16, and 17 Chapters of John.
Read over all the Books of love and friendship that were ever written by any of
the sons of men, they do all come far short of those melting strains of love
that are there expressed. So sweet and amiable was the conversation of Jesus
Christ, that it is reported of the Apostle Peter in the Ecclesiastical History,
that after Christ's Ascension he wept so abundantly, that he Quoties
recordaretur illius suavissimae conversationis Christi.
was always seen wiping his face from the tears; and being asked why he wept
so, he answered, He could not choose but weep as often as he thought of that
most sweet conversation of Jesus Christ.

2. The love of Christ as Man, or which was in his humane nature, may be seen
in the compliance of his humane will with the Divine will in point of
suffering. It is true, it was the Divine will that gave up the humane nature to
suffer, Joh. 6.51. The bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will give
for the life of the world. It was the Divine will that gave up the humanity to
suffer, yet his humane will complied with the Divine will: Father, not as I
will, but as thou will. There is a will and a will in Christ, a Divine will and
a humane will, and the humane will complies with the Divine will. Father, save
me from this hour, nevertheless for this cause came I to this hour, Joh. 12.27.
Hence is it, that the Apostle tells us he was obedient unto the death, Phil.
2.8. The Lord Jesus knew right-well how great a burden the weight and pressure
of his Fathers wrath was, and yet he was content to undergo this burden for our
sakes. The cup which my Father has given me to drink, shall not I drink of it?
Joh. 18.11. I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straightened till
it be accomplished, Luke 12.50. It is true, had he not been God, he could never
have stood under such a burden as the burden of Divine wrath: and had not his
love been more than a created love, had his love been the love of a mere
creature, he would never have undertaken such a work. But being supported by
the Godhead, he was enabled to undergo his Sufferings, and also his humane will
influenced by the Deity, was made willing to suffer: therefore it is said, For
their sakes I sanctify my self, Joh. 17.19. There was a concurrence of his
Divine and humane will in his suffering: the Divine will in the person of the
Son sanctifies and sets apart the humane nature to suffer; the humane will
concurs with the Divine, and is made willing to suffer, Joh. 10.17, 18.
Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life. The person that
lays down his life is the Son of God incarnate, the life which he lays down is
the life of his Humanity; for the life of his Divinity could never be laid
down. Now the Divine person had the humane soul and body united to himself in
the bond of personal Union. The Divine person gives up the humane soul and body
to be separated from each other at his death, and yet holds them both to
himself in the bond of personal Union. Divines use an apt similitude to
illustrate this by: It is as if a man held a sword in his hand sheathed, and
should draw forth the sword out of the sheath: the sword and sheath are
separated one from the other, yet the hand holds both. Here then is the acting
of the Divine will, the Divine will in the person of the Son gives up the
humane nature to suffer; this is intimated in those expressions, No man takes
away my life from me, but I lay it down of my self; I have power to lay it
down, and I have power to take it up again. Now the humane will knowing that it
is the pleasure of the Divine will that the humanity should be given up to
suffer, submits unto, and complies with the Divine will: this is implied in
that expression, This commandment have I received of my Father, Joh. 10.18. The
Divine will of the Father and of the Son are all one. Now the humane will
knowing that it was the pleasure of the Divine will, that the humane nature
should be given up to suffering and death, complies with the Divine will herein.

3. The third consideration to set forth the love of Christ, as he is Man, or
in his humane nature, is this: The love of Christ, as he is Man, may be seen in
the Petitions he offered up to the Father for us whilst he was here on earth.
Much of that love which dwelt in his humane soul may be seen by the prayers and
petitions he offered up to the Father for us. It is true, Christ's Intercession
is a work that belongs to him as Mediator: now Christ is Mediator not according
to one nature only, but according to both natures; and there is a communion of
both natures in this action of his praying for us, as well as in the rest of
his Mediatory actions: but yet although the person praying for us be God-man
(that very person who subsists in both natures) yet that nature in which he is
most properly said to pray, is his humane nature: as in his sufferings, the
person suffering is God-man, yet the nature according to which he is said to
suffer, is the humane nature; therefore he is said to be put to death in the
flesh, 1 Pet. 3.18. So in his praying for us, the person praying is Godman, but
the nature in which he prays, is the humane: the whole action proceeds from the
person, but the proximate and immediate principle is the humane will. Christ's
praying was the act or desire of his humane will, though it be true, that will
was acted, influenced, and governed by the Divine will. Hence is that saying of
the Ancients, Christus orat ut homo, ut Deus adoratur, ut homo orat Patrem.
Christ prays as he is man, as he is God so he is prayed unto: as he is man so
he intercedes, prays, and supplicates to the Father for us.

Now we may consider the love of Christ in the desires that were in his humane
will for us. It is true, it was the Godhead that directed and inclined his
humane will to those desires, and gave that virtue and efficacy to his prayers.
If they had been the prayers of a mere man, they had not had such efficacy. But
yet we may consider the love that was in his humane soul when he prayed here on
earth for us. There was no small love in the Humane soul of Christ, when he
asked such great things for us a little before his going out of the world. It
is true, his humane love is not all or the principal thing to be considered in
the great things he asked for us. If his love had not been more than the love
of a man, he could not have asked such great things for us, as we read of in
Joh. 17. yet certainly there was a great deal of love in his humane soul, which
was filled by the Divinity inhabiting in it. His heart was brim-full of love
when he came to make that last prayer of his to the Father for us. Judge of his
love by the things he asks for us. Cujus Christiani cor non liquescit dum
manifest cognoscit Filium Dei aeternum pro se rogasse Patrem, ut unum sit cum
ipsis?
What are the things Christ asks? No less than Union with himself and the
Father, Joh. 17.21, 23. It is a good speech of one of the Ancients: What
Christian heart is it that does not melt when he does clearly understand that
the eternal Son of God did ask for him in particular, that he might be one with
him and the Father? Can we desire a greater happiness than this, to be one with
the Father and the Son? This is the happiness Christ asks for us, that we might
be one in the Father and the Son. And as he prays for this Union, the top of
all, so he prays for many other blessings; as,

1. That the Father would keep all that are his through his own Name, verse. 11.
How would he have them kept? He would have them kept unto this union. So it
follows, That they may be one as we are one. As the Father and the Son had
intended the Elect unto this union, so he prays that they may be preserved unto
this union: preserved unto eternal life, preserved from miscarrying, that they
might come unto that union the Father and the Son had elected them unto. What
comfort is this, that our Lord Jesus has prayed we may be kept to our last
happiness, that God would be his own power keep us to Salvation? The Salvation
of the Elect must needs be secure, when Christ has prayed the Father, that he
would keep all his by his own power to Salvation.

2. He prays that we might be kept from the evil of the world, verse. 15. You
that fear to be overtaken with any scandalous sin, you may know the worth of
this prayer.

3. He prays for our Sanctification, verse. 17.

4. He prays that we might be where he is, verse. 24.

5. He prays that we might have a share in his Glory; not only that we might be
with him, but also behold the glory that the Father had given him. What love
must that heart needs be filled with, that prays for such things. It is true,
it was not the love of a mere man that could ask such things; but it was the
Divine love filling his humane soul and acting of it, that carried him forth to
ask such things. And thus I have finished the consideration of the love that
was in the humane nature of Christ.

2. There is the love that is in Christ's Divine nature. The love which is in
the humane nature is very great; but the love of the Divine nature is
infinitely greater. The love which is in the Divine nature is the fountain and
spring of all the love that is in the humane nature, and it was meet we should
contemplate a little the love that was in Christ's humane nature, that by this
consideration we might rise up to contemplate the love of the Divine nature,
which is the fountain and head-spring. Now to help us a little to conceive of
the love which is in the Divine nature of Christ, I shall propound you three
considerations to illustrate it.

1. All the love of the Father resides and is to be found in the Divine nature
of the Son. The Scripture, when it speaks of the love of God, does all along
commend and set forth the love of God the Father. Behold what manner of love
the Father has showed us, 1 John 3.1. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
the love of God, etc. 2 Cor. 16.14. The love of God, that is, the love of the
Father: for when Christ and God are set in distinction, by God we are to
understand the first person of the Trinity, the Father. So Joh. 3.16. God so
loved the world, that is, God the Father. Still we see the Scripture describes
the Father to us as the fountain of love. As the Father is the Fountain of the
Deity, (...).
so he is the fountain of love. Now then if all the love of the Father resides
and is to be found in the Son, then certainly the Divine nature of the Son must
needs be full of love: but so it is, the whole entire love of the Father is to
be found in the Divine nature of the Son; and the reason is, because there is
but one and the same Divine nature in the Father and in the Son. Non (...), sed
(...).
The Father and the Son are not of alike Essence, but they are of the same
Essence, and because of the sameness of the Essence in the Father and in the
Son, there is the same love in the Father and in the Son. Love is an essential
property belonging to the Essence of God; there being the same Essence both in
the Father and the Son, there must needs be the same love in both. The Father
communicates all he is and has to the Son in the eternal Generation, Joh.
16.15. All that the Father has is mine: therefore the Son receiving all from
the Father in the eternal Generation, the whole entire love of the Father is
communicated to him, and resides in him. Therefore he is called the express
image of his person, the brightness of his glory, Heb. 1.3. The whole nature of
the Father is to be seen and is made conspicuous in the person of the Son.
Therefore if we conclude, that there is the highest and most immense love in
the Father, we must necessarily conclude there is the same love in the Son, who
is the express image of his person. Hence is that expression of our Savior,
Joh. 14.21. If any man love me, he shall be loved of my Father, and I will love
him. Observe it, my Father will love him, and I will love him. We may not
conceive there is a twofold love, one of the Father, and another of the Son,
but both Father and Son do love with the same love. There is but one and the
same Divine love in the Father and the Son. It is true, if we understand it as
some do, of the love that is in Christ's humane nature, then we may suppose a
twofold love; and so there is a Learned man that gives this sense, My Father
will love him, and I will love him, i. e. I will love him, not as God only (for
so the Father and the Son love with one love) but I will love him as man also.
Quomodo Pater sine Filio, aut Filius sine Patre diligeret, quomodo cum
inseparabiliter operentur, separabiliter diligant? Aug.
But I incline rather to understand it as Austin of the Divine Love, there is
but one and the same Divine love in the Father and the Son. It is Austins
Exposition upon the Text: How is it possible the Father should love without the
Son, or the Son without the Father? How is it possible, when the Father and the
Son work inseparably, their love should be divided and separated? The Son
having all the Fathers love in him, and the Scripture describing the Father to
be the fountain of all love, the Divine nature of the Son must needs be full of
love.

We come now to make a little Use of what has been opened. new wonder. Well
may we cry out with the Apostle, O the heights, and depths, and breadths, and
lengths of the love of Christ! Here is love, the most glorious love in both the
natures of the Lord Jesus, in his humane, and in his Divine nature.

1. Great was his love in his humane nature; his humane nature was filled with
that love that no creature was filled with: great are the affections that are
seated in his humane heart, never so much sweetness, kindness, tenderness,
compassionateness to be found in any heart as his. Never any thing so sweet, so
lovely, so amiable in the whole Creation of God as the Humanity of Jesus
Christ. Thou art fairer than the sons of men, Psalm. 45.2. The humane soul of
Christ was composed and made up all of love and sweetness: yea, the humane
nature was the receptacle as it were, into which the Divinity poured forth all
its love. In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. It is
not a particle or some small portion of the Divinity, but the fullness of the
Godhead; and if all the fullness of the Godhead, then all the fullness of Divine
love dwells in the humane nature assumed. Not that the love of the Humanity is
formally and essentially the same with the Divine love, or that the love which
immediately flows from his humane will and affections, is simply infinite as
the Divine love is, (although it is a far greater love than ever was found in
the heart of any creature) but thus we may conceive of it. The Humanity is as
it were the seat of the Divine person; in this humane nature that person (who
is love it self) dwells. Gods nature is love: now in the humane nature assumed,
that very person (who is love it self) dwells and takes up his abode; how
sweet, how full of love must the heart of Christ be, that has love it self
dwelling and inhabiting in it!

2. Here is the love of the Divine nature: and how great that love is, no heart
can conceive, no tongue can express. A few words from hence to Sinners, and to
the Saints of God.

O that poor Sinners would be persuaded to look after a share in this love.
love like the love of Christ. Look upon the love of Christ-man, it is the
sweetest love that ever was, never any created love like to his; but then look
to his Divine love, and where will you find a parallel? What are a few drops to
the Ocean? All the love that is scattered among the creatures, is but as a
drop; the Godhead, that is the Sea and Ocean of love. Here are you drawn by a
double cord of love, by the love of his humanity and his Divinity. When Christ
would win upon souls, how does he do it? He sets his love before them, I love
them that love me, Prove. 8.17. If any man love me, he shall be loved of my
Father, and I will love him, Joh. 14.21. Love is the thing which is most
naturally loved: who can withstand the power of love? Can you hear of all this
love in the heart of this amiable person the Lord Jesus, and not find it in
your hearts to love him? Never will you find so much love and sweetness any
where else as in the Lord Jesus. The things that have been set before you are
the greatest realities, and not mere notions of words or love. We hear much of
love in this world, men speak much of love; but the love that is spoken of in
the world, is for the most part nothing but words and air, there is little
reality in it; but the love of Christ is the most real, solid, substantial
love. Here is the love of God himself, the love of the Divinity, here is love
lodged in a part of your own nature, lodged in that nature which is akin to
you: here is the love of your own flesh and blood: should not the consideration
of this sweet matchless love of Christ joined with the consideration of your
extreme misery and necessity make up the most powerful argument to draw souls
to Christ? Here you have the sweetest and most glorious love in the world to
invite you on the one hand, and on the other you have the necessity of your own
misery. Unless you believe that I am he, you shall dye in your sins, Joh. 8.24.
He that believes not on the Son, the wrath of God abides on him, Joh. 3. ult.
As many as are under the law are under the ^erse, Gal. 3.10. If you despise and
reject this Lord Jesus, do you know where to find another Savior? If ever you
be saved, Divine Justice must be satisfied, an angry God must be pacified, your
debts must be discharged, otherwise your ^^ns will be all charged upon you
another day. If you neglect such a Savior whose love is most sweet, and your
need of him so great, your condemnation will be most just. If any man love not
the Lord Jesus, let him be anathema maranatha.

You that are the Saints of God, his Divine nature; let us ponder and consider
these things, surely our hearts are hard frozen indeed, if they will not melt
under these considerations.

The end of the second Sermon.
SERMON III.
Ephesians. 3. verse. 17, 18, 19. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that
ye being rooted and grounded in love,

May be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height:

And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.


WE are yet under the consideration of the Love that is in Christ's Divine
Nature, we have mentioned one consideration about it, the second follows.

2. The second Consideration about the love that is in Christ's Divine nature.
To help us to conceive of the love that is in the Divine nature of Christ,
consider, That love is most natural to God. We have heard in the first
consideration, That the Divine nature of the Father is in the Son. As the
Father has the whole nature of God in him, so the Son has the whole nature of
God in him; therefore does John say of the Son, This is the true God, 1 John
5.20. The Father and the Son are but one and the same true God. Now love is
most natural to God, love is his very Essence: hence it is said, God is love, 1 John 4.7. I do not remember in all the Scripture, that God is called anger,
wrath, or hatred. It is true, anger, wrath, hatred are attributed to God, but I
do not remember that it is formally or categorically expressed thus, that God
is wrath, anger, hatred; but, God is love, his very nature and essence is love.
In some sense we may say, Had it not been for sin, there had been no such thing
as hatred in God. Not that we do or can suppose that there are, or can be any
new immanent acts in God, for then it could not be said, that God was without
variableness or shadow of change, Jam. 1.17. God always was what now he is: God
was from Eternity that which now he is: all the change is from the creatures
part, there is no change in God: what God is once he is for ever, there is no
manner of change in him. But thus we ought to conceive of it, That property in
God whereby he is inclined to hate sin, which is natural and essential to him
(as the Psalmist tells us, Thou love righteousness, and hate iniquity) had
never had an object to work upon, had not sin entered into the world. But now
God had himself and his own goodness to love, had there been no such thing as
sin for him to hate; therefore love is most natural to God: it is most natural
to God to love, yea it were a wonder he should not love. Austin observes, it is
as natural for God to love, as it is for him to be and live. God is an
intellectual Being, and being so, he must needs know, understand, and love
himself: and God being a pure Act, he cannot sometimes love, and sometimes not
love, but as he knows himself always, so he loves himself always. It is true,
Gods love to the creature is not necessary, as it is to himself. God loves
himself necessarily, but he loves the creatures freely and arbitrarily: but yet
thus we ought to conceive of it, God being love, love being his very nature and
essence, God loves the creatures freely indeed, but yet he loves according to
the condecency, or becomingness of his own goodness. What so proper to Love, as
to love? God is love, Bonum est sui ipsius diffusivum.
and therefore he loves us. The more good any thing is, the more diffusive it
is of it self. God is good by nature and essence, there is no one good but God,
Mat. 19.17. Creatures are good by participation, but they are not originally,
essentially good; but the Essence of God is goodness: therefore God being
goodness it self, it is most agreeable to his nature to impart and communicate
good to the creature.

3. The third Consideration.
The love that is in the Godhead or Divine nature in Christ, is the cause of
all the love that is to be found in his humane nature. The humane nature indeed
is the glass in which the perfections of the Divine nature do shine forth, but
the Godhead is the source and spring of all. Gods love is most visible to us in
the effects of it: that God should be incarnate and become man; that the Law
should be fulfilled for us; that the pains and torments of Hell should be
suffered and undergone for us; that our nature should be carried into Heaven
and filled with glory there: these are the effects of Divine love, and these
effects of love are made visible and conspicuous in the humane nature; but the
Divine nature is the principal Efficient in all these: For mark it, it is the
Divine nature, in the person of the Son, which sanctifies the humanity and
assumes it into unity of person, that carries forth the humanity as to all
actions and sufferings; so that if these be demonstrations of the highest love,
for God to dwell in our nature, to see the Law fulfilled for us, to see the
torments and pains of Hell undergone for us, to see Divine Justice satisfied
for us, we ought to behold and contemplate the love of the Divine nature as the
first root of these things; for it is the Divine nature that is the principal
efficient cause of all. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, etc. 1 John 3.16. There was the love of the humanity which did concur in
Christ's laying down his life for us. That the world may know, that I love the
Father, and as the Father gave me commandment, even so I do, Joh. 14.31. Christ
as man loved the Father, and having received a commandment from the Father, he
laid down his life for the sheep. He was willing even as man out of love to the
Father and to the sheep, to lay down his life; but notwithstanding this, the
love that was in his Divine nature was the principal; therefore does John say,
Hereby we perceive the love of God, that he laid down his life for us, 1 John
3.16. Therefore we ought not to terminate our thoughts, or to stick merely in
the consideration of the actions and sufferings of Christman; but we ought to
contemplate the love of the Divine nature in all these things, for it was the
Godhead was the primary and principal cause, Habuit rationem causae minus
principalis and ministrae.
and the humane nature is to be considered as the less principal cause, and as
the servant to the Divinity. So that whatsoever is sweet or amiable in Christ
as man, consider all his actions and sufferings in the humane nature, and
whatsoever may make him amiable in that respect, we ought to look to the Divine
nature as the principal cause, and to the humanity as acted by the Divinity:
the humanity is the Organ of the Divinity in all these things. Thus have we
passed over the second Consideration, there are heights, and lengths, and
depths, and breadths in the love of Christ, if we consider the love of Christ
distinctly, as it is to be found in both his natures, in his Divine and humane
nature.

3. I proceed in the third place to speak something of the effects of Christ's
love. As the love of Christ has heights, depths, lengths, and breadths, and
all manner of dimensions in it, if we consider it in the properties of it; and
as it is to be found in both his natures: so it has the same dimensions in it,
if we consider the effects of his love. The effects of Christ's love are most
admirable.

1. The first effect of Christ's love is his Incarnation. O that God would give
us an heart to listen to the great Mysteries of God that are contained herein
as the weight of these things requires; that the Word should be made flesh;
that God should assume a part of humane nature, and become true man: here are
heights, breadths, lengths, Opus mirabile, opus singular, inter omnia and
super omnia opera sua.
and depths of love indeed. Bernard calls the Incarnation of Christ a wonderful
work, a singular work among all the rest of Gods works, yea above all the rest
of his other works. The work of Incarnation is the greatest of all the works of
God, it is a greater work than the creation of Heaven and Earth; for God to
make all creatures out of nothing, this is a work suitable to the Majesty of
God; but for God to come into the nature of his own creature after he has made
it, this is more wonderful. Quid potentius quam conjungere Creatorem and
creaturam? Creator ac Dominus omnium unus voluit esse mortalium: qui manens in
forma Dei fecit and hominem, idem in formaservi factus est homo. Leo. Non miror
miracula mundi, miror Deum in utero Virginis.
What greater Argument of power than to join the Creator and the creature in
one? Phil. 2.7, 8. Made in the likeness of men, and found in fashion as a man.
They are melting expressions to any one that weighs them, and considers what
the meaning of them is. For the God of Heaven to be made in the likeness of
men, and to be found in fashion as a man, this will overcome and swallow him up
that understands a little what the meaning of that is, Heb. 4.15. This work of
Christ's Incarnation is a stupendous work, the greatest work that ever was
done, the greatest that ever shall be done. The glorification of all the Saints
in Heaven is not so much as this, for the Godhead to dwell personally in our
nature. This was that made Cyprian to say, I do not wonder at the other
miracles that are in the world, I wonder at this, that God should be in the
womb of a Virgin: that God who is incorporeal, should cover himself with the
covering of our flesh: that he who is invisible, should after a sort make
himself visible: that he who is the immortal God; should become a mortal man:
that he who is infinite and uncircumscribed, should take to himself a finite
nature, these are wonders indeed. But that I may speak a little particularly to
show the dimensions of Christ's love, to show what are the heights, breadths,
lengths, and depths of Christ's love in the work of Incarnation, I shall
propound several things. Oh let us consider the wonders that are in this
Mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God. The love of Christ in his
Incarnation appears

1. That God should choose to manifest his love to man this way. When God would
manifest his love to man to the uttermost, he himself would become man. 1 Timothy
3.3. Great is the mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh. Here is
the Mystery of mysteries, the Wonder of wonders, that God should take flesh. So
great was this Mystery, that it drew the admiration of Angels; therefore the
Apostle, after he had declared the sum of this Mystery, (...).
that God was manifested in the flesh, he adds this, he was seen of Angels, or
he appeared to Angels. What is the meaning of that? The meaning is, he appeared
visibly in flesh to Angels. He was seen in his simple naked Divinity of Angels
before his Incarnation; but God was never seen as made visible in the flesh,
Quod Angelis visum esse dicit, intelligit tale spectaculum fuisse quod tam
novitate sua, quam praestantia Angelos in se converterit. Calvin. Non potuit
magnificentius praedicari augusta hujus mysterii majestas.
until after the Son of God was incarnate and made man, the Angels beheld this
sight (God made visible in flesh) with wonder and astonishment. Whereas it is
said, he was seen of Angels: The meaning is, says Calvin, it was such a
spectacle to see God incarnate, God made visible in flesh, that it drew the
Angels to look upon it with admiration, by reason of the novelty and excellency
of it. And another Learned man has this expression concerning it: He was seen
of Angels, the most august Majesty of this great Mystery could not be set forth
more magnificently than by this that it is said, He was seen of Angels: for no
doubt it was an incredible delight to the Angels to see God made flesh, as
appears from that Song of theirs, Luke 2.14. Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world.
He loved the world, and he so loved it. God might have loved the world, and not
have so loved it. God might have manifested his love to man in some other way,
and not so as to send his Son into the nature of man. It was great love for God
to create man at first after his own image, and if God had confirmed man in his
first estate (as the elect Angels were) so that man had never sinned and
fallen, this had been great love: but when man was fallen, for God to send his
Son into the nature of man to recover man, this was greater love. This is
illustrated by that Scripture, Heb. 2.16. Verily he took not on him the nature
of Angels. It is the observation of a Learned man, the Apostle speaks here of
the good Angels. The good Angels we know are confirmed in grace, so that they
never fell; but the Son of God took not on him the nature of Angels; this was
an honor cast upon poor man more than on the Angels, that the Son of God came
into the nature of man, not into the nature of Angels. But here the observation
of Calvin must be taken in, That the Son of God has preferred us above the
Angels, this is not to be understood in respect of the dignity or excellency of
our nature, but in respect of our misery. Look upon angelical nature simply,
and that is superior to humane nature; and therefore it is said of man, that
he was made a little lower than the Angels. Therefore there is no cause (as
Calvin goes on) that we should glory as being superior to Angels, unless it be
in this respect, that God has showed greater mercy to us, which was that we
needed: so that the Angels themselves have reason to stand and admire from on
high, that goodness that is bestowed upon poor man here on earth. However this
is clear, that it is the highest demonstration of Gods love, that God should
take the nature of man, and in this respect there is an honor cast upon humane
nature more than upon Angelical nature. God did not come into the nature of
Angels, but into the nature of man.

2. The love of Christ in his Incarnation appears in this, That so great a
person should come into our nature: Isa. 9.7. Unto us a Son is born. But who
and what is this Son? His name is Wonderful, the mighty God, the everlasting
God. He is so the Son, as that he is also the mighty God. He is so the Son of
the everlasting Father, as that he himself is also the everlasting Father of
all creatures. He is the Son, yet the mighty God, the everlasting Father:
therefore is it said concerning him, In the beginning was the Word, the Word
was with God, and the Word was God: by him all things were made, and without
him was not any thing made that was made, Joh. 1.12, 13. This Son had not his
existence first of all when he took flesh from the Virgin: he was the Son
before and God before, Prove. 8.24, 25, 26. When there was no depths was I
brought forth. Micah 5.2. His goings forth were from everlasting. Now that this
great person, this eternal person should be incarnate, and take to himself a
created nature in time, this sets forth the greatness of his love. Si personam
venientis intueor, non capto excellentiam Majestatis: stupent Angeli de novo
videntes infra se, quem supra semper adorant.
Hence is that of one of the Ancients: If I behold the person of him who comes,
I cannot comprehend the excellency of his Majesty: the Angels are amazed to see
him stooping all of a sudden into a nature below themselves, whom they always
worshipped and adored above. The Son of God was the object of the adoration of
Angels before his Incarnation. Now that he who was known and worshipped by the
Angels in Heaven as God before his Incarnation, that he should come into the
nature of man, and be reputed and taken for a man, and but a man, by the
generality of men; O the heights, and depths, and breadths, and lengths of this
love! Isa. 53.10. He was despised and rejected of men. Joh. 10.33. Thou being a
man make thy self God. Here the Jews account him to be a man and but a man,
who was true God as well as man. Now that so great a person should come into
our nature, this is another thing does commend to us the love of Christ in his
Incarnation.

3. The love of Christ in his Incarnation appears in the great condescension of
that person who assumed our nature. Here we must inquire, wherein did the
condescension of Christ appear in his Incarnation or in his assumption of our
nature? I shall open that in several particulars.

1. In that the Son of God came into a nature so inferior to his own. What
comparison is there between God and the creature? That the eternal God should
join himself so nearly to the nature of his own creature, this is admirable.
This was that made Bernard say, When I consider the person of him who comes,
Dignationis magnitudinem expavesco.
I cannot comprehend the excellency of his Majesty; when I consider to whom he
comes, I tremble at the greatness of his condescension. To whom was it that
this great person came? He came to us poor men, who dwell in houses of clay.
And will God indeed dwell with men? Yea he dwells with man: The Word was made
flesh, (...).
and dwelt among us, Joh. 1.14. He pitched his Tent and Tabernacle in a part of
our nature; he did not only converse familiarly, and was seen among men, but he
pitched his Tent and Tabernacle in a part of our nature. Without controversy
great is the mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh. God was in that
very flesh which the Son of God assumed. God was in that flesh that was once
seen here on earth, and was afterward given as a Sacrifice for the life of the
world, yea so in it as to dwell personally in it. Therefore does the Son of God
call the flesh he assumed his own flesh, Joh. 6.53. Now consider it, what a
disproportion is there between God and our flesh? Yet the eternal Word is made
flesh, he who was with God in the beginning, and who was God, this very Word is
made flesh, Joh. 1.14. It is a notable expression one uses to illustrate this:
Although it was not suitable to humane flesh, according to the condition of its
own nature, to be united to God in the unity of person; yet this was becoming
God, in the infinite excellency of his own goodness. It was nothing but
infinite goodness could move God to condescend so low as to take a part of our
flesh, and cloth himself with it.

2. The condescension of Christ in his Incarnation appears in this, in that the
Son of God took a part of our nature, after humane nature had been infected,
and when the whole mass of humane nature lay infected with original sin. Let
none mistake here, that part of humane nature which was united to the person of
the Son of God, had no taint or pollution of sin in it; but thus we ought to
conceive of it: The mass of humane nature out of which this part or particle of
humane nature was taken, was infected with original sin, and in the same moment
that the Word, the second person in Trinity, joined himself to our nature, that
part or parcel of humane nature that was joined to his person, was sanctified
by the Holy Ghost; so that in the same moment or instant the union was made,
that part of humane nature which was assumed was sanctified by the Holy Ghost:
neither was it sanctified before assumed, nor assumed before sanctified, but
both were done in the same instant: as soon as there was flesh, so soon was it
the flesh of the Word. We must not suppose any instant of time, when that part
of humane nature that was joined to the Son of God, should have a subsistence
of its own before it was united to his person: no, but at the same time it was
flesh, (...).
at the same time it was the flesh of the Word: but this is that which commends
the love of Christ, and his great condescension, that he should take part of
our nature, when the whole mass of it lay under the contagion of original sin.
God who was Purity and Holiness it self, might justly have loathed and abhorred
such impurity as ours, he might justly have disdained to have sought out a
habitation for himself among such polluted creatures. None of the children of
Adam was exempt and free from the contagion of original sin, no not the Virgin
her self, who was the Mother of our Lord: now that God should seek out and
prepare for himself a habitation out of such an impure sink as our nature was,
by reason of sin, this is that which greatly commends the love and
condescension of the Son of God.

3. The greatness of Christ's love in his Incarnation with respect to his
condescension appears in this, in that he took our nature together with its
infirmities: He was in all things made like to us, sin only excepted. The Son
of God did not only take flesh, but he took passible mortal flesh, such a
nature as was subject to suffering and death, this was a great commendation of
his love. For we must know the Divinity inhabiting in Christ's humane nature,
could have prevented all suffering and death: the Godhead which was personally
united to the humane nature, could have made the humane nature impassible and
above suffering. Therefore it is observed by a Learned man: It was by the good
pleasure of the Divine will, Beneplacito Divinae voluntatis permittebatur carni
pati and operari quae propria.
that it was permitted to the humanity to do and suffer the things which were
proper to it self. The great end why the Son of God assumed our nature was,
that he might satisfy for the sins of men. Now one is then said to satisfy
for the offense of another, when he takes upon himself the punishment that is
due for such offenses: now suffering and death was the punishment due for sin.
By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, Romans 5. Therefore the
Son of God out of his great love to us was not only willing to take our nature,
but also the infirmities of our nature: Isa. 53.4. He has born our griefs,
(...).
and carried our sorrows. That which was not assumed was not healed; if Christ
had not born our infirmities, our infirmities had not been healed.

4. The greatness of Christ's condescension in his Incarnation appears in this,
in that he suffered the glory of his Divinity to be hid and veiled for a time
in our nature, after he had assumed it. This is that which the Scripture calls
his emptying himself, (...).
Phil. 2.7. We read it, He made himself of no reputation; in the Original it
is, He emptied himself. How did Christ empty himself? The former words compared
with those that follow do acquaint us, He was in the form of God. Now that he
that was in the form of God, should take upon him the form of a servant, should
be made in the likeness of men, and was found in fashion as a man, there was
his emptying himself. He might always have continued in the form of God only,
without taking to himself the form of a servant; or if he will take the form of
a servant, he might presently and immediately show forth the glory of his
Divinity in that humane nature which he assumes; but this he does not do: he is
made in the similitude of man, and found in fashion as a man: that is, as
Austin expounds it, Habitu inventus est ut simplex homo.
he was found in fashion, habit, and appearance as a mere man. He did for a
time keep in and hide the glory of his Divinity, and did not display the
brightness of it, as he might have done. Non potuit Christus abdicare se
Divinitate, sed eam occultam tenuit.
It was not possible for the Son of God to divest himself of his Divinity, but
he hid his Divinity and kept it secret. The Son of God, when incarnate and
become man, when he was in the form of a servant, did not cease to be the Son
of God and true God; but for as much as the Divinity lying hid in that flesh of
his, did not manifest it self presently, nor at all times, nor in all things,
nor so clearly nor perfectly as afterward; therefore he is said to empty
himself, as Zanchy observes, therefore our Translation renders it, He made
himself of no reputation. He did not obtain that reputation of the generality
of men, as to be thought to be what he was: he was in the form of God, true
God, equal with the Father, but taking upon him the form of a servant; being
found in fashion as a man, he was called the Carpenters Son, and owned by the
generality of men as no other but the Son of Joseph and Mary. Look as the light
and glory of the Sun is hid and veiled by some dark cloud interposing; so the
humanity was as a cloud that veiled his Divinity: the Divinity repressing and
keeping in its own rays from breaking forth so illustriously. In the time of
his humiliation, when the Lord Jesus did but let forth some beams of his
Divinity in his Transfiguration, the Evangelist tells us, That his face did
shine as the Sun, and his raiment was white as the light, Mat. 17.20. Now he
that appeared in that glory at one time, might have appeared so always if he
pleased. This sight was so glorious, that the Disciples who were with him could
not behold it long, but they fell upon their face and were sore afraid. This is
an argument that he contained and kept in the beams of his glory at other
times. It is true, the Lord Jesus did upon occasion let forth the glory of his
Divinity in his Miracles, and otherwise, and those who were spiritually
illuminated and had familiar converse with him, beheld his glory as the glory
of the only begotten Son of God, Joh. 1.14. But they were but a few in
comparison, that had this knowledge in the days of his flesh here on earth. The
Son of God did so far contain and keep in his glory, that it may be truly said
he made himself of no reputation, that is, he was not seen and acknowledged to
be what indeed he was, by the generality of men. Hence are these expressions of
the Prophet, Isa. 53.2. He has no form nor comeliness: and when we shall see
him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. Now this is a great Argument
of the condescension of the Lord Jesus, that when he might have let forth the
glory of his Divinity in such a way, that he might have convinced all men, that
he was true God; yet he was pleased so far to repress and keep in his own
glory, that he might accomplish the work of his Mediatorship, and thereby our
Salvation. If he had not hid and kept in as it were the glory of his Divinity,
he could not have suffered and dyed; and if he had not suffered and dyed, what
had become of our Salvation? The day is coming when the Lord Jesus shall appear
in the glory of his Divinity in the humane nature he has assumed, so as that
he shall be acknowledged to be God by all creatures: Phil. 2.11. Every tongue
shall confess that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father. How is
this, to the glory of God the Father? Why, thus we ought to conceive of it:
When Christ shall come to Judgment, he shall come in the glory of his Father,
Mat. 16.27. The glory of the Son and the Father is but one and the same glory;
the Divinity of the Son and the Father is one and the same: therefore when the
Son comes in the glory of the Father, he shall come in the glory of his own and
his Fathers Divinity. What is it to appear in the Divinity of himself and
Father? What is it for the Son to come in the glory of his own and the Fathers
Divinity? Certainly, it is to manifest the glory of his Divinity in and by the
humane nature assumed; there shall be so clear a manifestation of God in the
person of the Son, when he comes to Judgment, that all men shall know that
Jesus Christ is true God as well as true Man. Now that which Christ will
certainly do when he comes to Judgment, viz. he will manifest the glory of his
Divinity to all men in and by the humane nature assumed, he could have done, if
he had pleased, whilst he was on earth; but here lay the greatness of his
condescension, That he was pleased to hide and keep secret in a great measure
the glory of his Divinity, that he might accomplish the work of our Salvation.
And here we may cry out with the Apostle, Oh the heights, etc. Behold, stand
and wonder at this love! Man out of the pride of his heart will be as God ( Ye
shall be as Gods, Genesis 3.5.) God out of the greatness of his love will become
man: and though he continues to be God still when he is become man too; yet
such is the humility of God incarnate, that he is content to lay aside the
glory of his Divinity, that he might exalt man that labored to dethrone and
depress him. Should not this love overcome us? Oh what dull and stupid hearts
have we, that these wonders do not affect us!

The end of the third Sermon.
SERMON IV.
Ephesians. 3. verse. 17, 18, 19. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that
ye being rooted and grounded in love,

May be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height:

And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.


4. THE greatness of the love of Christ in his Incarnation may be seen in the
nearness of the Union that is made between the two Natures, the humane and the
Divine nature in the person of the Son of God. The humanity of Christ, by
virtue of this union, is become the Spouse as it were of the Divinity. God has
married himself to our nature, the Son of God has given his own person to it:
the Divine nature has drawn the humane nature into that most excellent unity
of the Divine person; so that now there is but one and the same person of the
Divine nature and the humane nature assumed: so that the humane nature (as it
is well expressed by one) is by means of this union rooted in the Divine stock.
To understand this, we must know that the Son of God was a person before his
Incarnation, and subsisted in the Divine nature; by the work of his Incarnation
the humane nature having no subsistence of its own, has the Divine person of
the Son communicated to it, and so subsists in and by that person: so that now
here is one and the same person that subsists in two natures. The same person
who subsisted in the Divine nature only, before his Incarnation; after his
Incarnation subsists in both natures, the Divine and humane nature. All this is
implied in that great Scripture, Joh. 1.14. The Word was made flesh. The
Evangelist speaks of Christ the Son of God, the eternal Word; The Word was made
flesh, that is, the Son of God, the second person in Trinity was made flesh, or
became man. That Christ was a person, and had his subsistence in the Divine
nature before his Incarnation, that the Evangelist had shown us in the two
first verses, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God: Here the Evangelist shows us plainly, that Christ had his
subsistence before his Incarnation, he subsisted in the Divine nature, he
subsisted with the Father in the same Divine Essence. Now after he comes to
acquaint us, that this very person whom he calls the Word, and who did first of
all subsist in the nature of God only, did afterward become man, and was made
flesh; and after his Incarnation subsists in both natures, the nature of man as
well as the nature of God, who before his Incarnation subsisted in the nature
of God only. The Word was made flesh. How is this to be understood, made flesh?
Not by any conversion in the natures, as if so be the Divinity was absorpt by,
or turned into the humanity, or as if so be the humanity was swallowed up into
the Divinity: but the Word is made flesh, thus we ought to conceive of it, the
Word, that is, the eternal Word, the second person of the Trinity, who was a
person before, draws the humane nature into the Unity of his own person, so
that the natures remain distinct and unconfounded, but the person is but one.
The Word who was a person before his Incarnation, assumes and takes the humane
nature (destitute of any personal subsistence of its own) into the unity of his
own personal subsistence; so that now by means of the Incarnation of the Word,
there is one and the same person of the Word and the humane nature assumed.
This is in short the sum of that Doctrine which we call the Hypostatical, or
personal Union; which is therefore called the Hypostatical or personal Union,
because both the natures, the Divine and the humane nature are united into that
one Hypostasis or person of the Son of God.

Now consider the greatness of Christ's love in this Union. This union (the
union of the two natures in that one person of Christ) is the greatest of all
unions, next to the union of the three persons of the Sacred Trinity, which
indeed may not so properly be called a Union as a Unity. Summa illa Trinitas
nobis hanc exhibuit Trinitatem.
The highest Trinity has exhibited to us this Trinity, that these three, the
Word, the flesh and humane soul of Christ should be one: one not by any
confusion of substance, but one in person. In the Sacred Trinity the persons
remain distinct, but the nature is one; in the personal Union the natures
remain distinct, but the person is but one. Now this is the highest of all
unions next that of the three persons in the Trinity in one and the same
Essence: namely, that a created nature, as the humane nature in Christ is,
should be made one person with the Son of God, who also himself is God. By this
union God communicates himself after the highest manner that was possible unto
the creature; and the nature of the creature is united to God in the most
perfect manner as it was possible for the creature to be united to God. In the
Incarnation of the Son of God, man who is the last creature in Creation, is
joined with his first Cause and Principle, in such a union, as that there is
none greater under God. To illustrate yet farther the greatness of this union
that is made in the two natures, in the person of Christ, consider, There is a
presence of God, and an inhabitation of his Spirit in the Saints; but this
falls far short of the personal Union which we are now speaking of: for
notwithstanding the mystical Union, notwithstanding the inhabitation of the
Spirit in Believers, yet a Believer remains a true person, the person of a
Believer and the person of Christ remain distinct persons, though Christ and
Believers be one mystically and spiritually. The Scripture, He that is joined
to the Lord is one Spirit. There is a mystical, spiritual Union between Christ
and Believers, yet Christ and Believers remain distinct in their persons; but
in this other union (the personal union, the union of the two natures in the
person of Christ) the humane nature of Christ has no subsistence of its own,
but subsists wholly in and by the person of the Son of God, who was a person
from Eternity, and gives his own person to the humane nature destitute of any
personality of its own; so that could we suppose it were possible for the
humane nature to be deserted by the Divine person that supports it, it would be
reduced to nothing: so that here is a vast difference between this union and
all other unions. Yet a little farther to illustrate this:

It is the observation of a Learned Divine, this Union is so near, individual,
inseparable, indissoluble, that the Divine nature of the Son will not, cannot,
ought not to be thought on, sought for, apprehended out of this union which it
has with the humane nature; but it ought to be thought of, sought for,
apprehended in that most near union and conjunction it has with the humanity:
and the humane nature, which is assumed, ought not not to be thought of,
conceived, or apprehended out of, but within the most intimate embracings of
the second person in Trinity who assumed it. And that God is not to be sought
for any where but in Christ, is clear from that passage, 1 John 5.20. The Son
of God is come, and has given us an understanding, that we might know him that
is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ, this is
the true God. The sum of this Scripture, says Calvin, is this: When once we
have Christ, then we have the true and eternal God, because God is to be sought
for no where else. The Son of God has so assumed a part of our nature, as that
he has made it his own proper flesh; so that, that body which he has assumed,
is not the body of any other person, or individual, but it is the proper body
of the Son of God; therefore is it called the Temple of his body, Joh. 2.21.
elsewhere it is said, Feed the Church of God which he has purchased with his
own blood, Act. 20.28. And we have that expression, The body of his flesh, Col.
1.22. That particle or parcel of our nature which the Son of God assumed and
took up, was so individually, inseparably, indissolubly united to him, that it
became his own proper flesh; therefore is it said, The bread I will give is my
flesh, Joh. 6.51. To sum up this particular, what love is this, that the Son of
God, so great a person as we have heard, should take up a part of our nature,
join it to himself in the bond of near union, and does wear it, and will wear
it to all Eternity!

5. The admirableness of the work of Christ's Incarnation appears in this, in
that by means of the Incarnation all the Trinity are brought near to us, and by
the Son incarnate we come to have communion with all the Trinity. Hence is that
expression of the Apostle John, 1 John 2.24. If that which ye have heard from
the beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son and in the
Father. By continuing in the Son we come to continue in the Father. This is the
order, we must continue in the Son, if ever we mean to continue in the Father.
He had said before, He that denies the Son, the same has not the Father, now
he says, By abiding in the doctrine of the Son, we shall continue in the Son
and in the Father. What is the doctrine of the Son, which if we continue in, we
shall continue in the Son and in the Father? The doctrine of the Son is, That
the Word is made flesh. Compare this with 1 John 4.2. and 2 John 7. and we
shall see it clear, that the doctrine concerning the Son is, That the Son is
come into the flesh, or that the Word is made flesh. Now by continuing in this
doctrine we shall continue in the Father: by continuing in the doctrine of the
Son incarnate, we shall continue in the Father. How so? He that has the Son
has the Father. The Divinity of the Father is brought down to us in the person
of the Son incarnate. It is a great speech of a Learned Divine: Divinitas in
una sui hypostase^^^ tota nobis communicavit.
The whole Divinity has communicated it self to us in the Incarnation of one
of the Persons. To understand which, we must know, although the Son only be the
person who is incarnate, not the Father, or the Spirit, yet both the Father and
the Spirit are to be found in that one person of the Son who is incarnate; and
the reason is, because the Divine persons, although they are distinct, yet they
have an inbeing in each other, Joh. 14.10. The Father is in the Son, and the
Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son; so that in the person of the Son
who only is incarnate, the other persons are to be found. Hence is that speech
of Luther, and it is a great speech: Vbi ille Deus Christus Jesus est, ibi est
totus Deus seu tota Divinitas, ibi invenitur Pater and Spiritus S. Luther.
Where that God Christ Jesus is, there is whole God, or the whole Divinity,
there the Father and the holy Spirit is found. The Son has assumed our nature,
now the Father is in the Son, and the Spirit proceeds from the Father and the
Son; therefore in the Son incarnate all the Trinity are represented to us. We
begin first of all at the flesh of Christ, we conceive first of all of the
humanity of Christ, and from thence we ascend to the contemplation of the
Divinity of the Son inhabiting and dwelling in the humane nature, and by that
means we come to communion with the whole Trinity. This may be illustrated
further to us by two Considerations.

1. At the same time we apprehend the Divinity of the Son, we do also apprehend
the Divinity of the Father. Joh. 14.9. He that has seen me has seen the
Father. There is one and the same undivided Divinity, Trium personarum una,
eadem, and individua est Divinicas, Essentia, Omnipotentia, Sapientia. Essentia
unius personae est essentia alterius.
Essence, Omnipotency, Wisdom of all the three persons; therefore when we
apprehend and conceive of the Divinity of the Son, we do at the same time
apprehend the Divinity of the Father and Spirit, which is common to all the
three persons. The essence of one person is the essence of another. We must not
fancy or imagine, because we speak of more persons than one in the Deity,
therefore there are more Deities; as if there were as many Deities as persons:
no, all the three persons are but one and the self same Deity or Godhead: and
when we apprehend the Divinity or Deity of one of the persons, we apprehend the
same Deity that is common to them all.

2. By the apprehension of the person of the Son we are led into communion with
the Father: so that we may say with the Apostle, 1 John 1.3.
Truly our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ. The
Divinity of the Father and the Son is the same; so that when we apprehend the
Divinity of the one, we must necessarily apprehend the Divinity of the other.
Yet there is a distinction between the Father and the Son, the distinction is
not in point of Essence, for there is one and the self same Essence or Divinity
common to them both. Therefore if there be a distinction between the Father and
the Son, and that distinction be not in point of Essence, the distinction must
necessarily be conceived to be as to the person of the one and of the other:
each person includes the whole Essence; and when we conceive of one person, we
must conceive of the whole Essence. Yet thus we ought to take it, the same
Essence is to be conceived after a distinct manner of subsisting in the Father:
and the self same Essence is to be conceived after a distinct manner of
subsisting in the Son. Or we may take it in other words thus: One and the self
same God after such a manner of subsisting is the Father: one and the same God
after such a manner of subsisting is the Son. For that which we call a person
in the Godhead, is nothing else but the Divine Essence it self distinguished by
some proper manner of subsisting; as for instance; When we conceive of the
Father, we conceive of him as the first person in the Deity, who is of himself,
and from no other, and gives being to the Son as the Son, this is his manner of
subsisting: When we conceive of the Son, we conceive of him as the second
person in the Deity, who has the same whole and entire nature of God in him as
the Father has; yet as he is the Son, so we conceive of him as begotten by the
Father, and proceeding from the Father by eternal Generation; this is his
manner of subsisting. Here is one and the self same Essence still, the Father
has the whole Essence in him, and is depending upon no other: the Son has the
same Essence; but as he is the Son, so he is begotten by the Father, and
proceeding from him by eternal Generation. Now by the person of the Son
incarnate we are brought in to communion with the Father. How so? Whilst we
apprehend and conceive of the person of the Son who is incarnate, we may
reflect upon the Father, from whom the Son proceeds, and between whom and the
Father there is the most perfect communion of natures, the nature of the Son
being the nature of the Father also; and thus by having fellowship with the
Son, we have fellowship and communion with the Father also. It is a great
Scripture to illustrate this, Joh. 14.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me.
Fides in Christum non est praejudicio fidei in Deum Patrem, etc. Nihil vetat
quo minus sit fides in plures personas, modo essentia sit una eademque. Roloc.
in Joh. 14.
It is the observation of a Holy man and Learned Divine upon that Text: Faith
in Christ is no prejudice to faith in God the Father; neither is faith in the
Holy Ghost any prejudice to faith in the Father and in the Son: for there is
one and the same God, although the persons are distinct in that one nature of
God. And he adds: Nothing forbids us but that faith may be in more persons than
one, so we be sure to retain one and the self same Essence. To understand
which, we must consider:

When we conceive of one person in the Trinity, or direct an act of faith to
one person, we must take in the whole Deity or whole God in our apprehension or
conception: when we conceive of another person, or direct an act of faith to
another person of the Trinity, we must take in the whole Deity or Essence in
our apprehension: we must take heed that we never part or divide the Essence in
our conception of any of the persons. When you conceive of each person, be sure
you take in the whole Essence in that conception; as for instance: When I
conceive of God the Father, I conceive of the first person in the Deity, whole
God subsisting in the Divine Essence after such a manner: when I conceive of
the Son, I conceive of the second person in the Deity, whole God subsisting in
the Essence after such a manner. The Essence is common to all the persons, and
the persons do subsist in the self same Essence; therefore in the conception of
each person, we must be sure to take in the whole Essence. Now by the Son
incarnate we are brought to communion with the Father; the humanity of Christ
leads us to the Divinity, we begin at the humanity, and we ascend from thence
to the consideration of that person, who assumed the humane nature. Now in this
one person is whole God, there is the Divinity of the Father and of the Spirit:
now, when by the eye of faith we can contemplate the Divinity in the person of
the Son, we may be the same eye of faith reflect upon the person of the Father
as subsisting in the same Divinity, and who is no otherways distinguished from
the Son but by his relative property. Nihil absurdi est, dum concipimus
Deitatem Patri, Filio, and Spiritui communem, si intuitus Filii mentes nostras
reflectit ad Patris personam. Calvin.
It was a wise and great speech of Calvin to this purpose: There is nothing of
absurdity in this, if when we do conceive of the Deity or Godhead, which is
common to the Father, Son, and Spirit, the aspect and contemplation, which
faith has of the Son, do reflect and turn back our minds upon the person of
the Father: for the distinct respects which are between the Father and Son as
such, make no division or partition in the Essence; although the Son be not the
Father, nor the Father the Son, yet both the Father and the Son are one and the
same God, and there is one and the same Essence common to them both: I and the
Father am one, Joh. 10.30. Therefore when by the eye of faith we cast an aspect
upon the person of the Son, and see him subsisting in the Divine Essence, we
may by the same eye of faith reflect upon the person of the Father, and see him
subsisting in the same Essence; and thus our fellowship is both with the Father
and his Son Jesus Christ, as the Apostle speaks.

Learn from what has been opened, Joh. verse. 9. Whosoever transgresses and
abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God. Whosoever he be who
transgresses, (...).
whosoever he be that swerves or turns aside from Apostolical doctrine, the
doctrine delivered by Christ himself and the Apostles concerning Christ, the
same has not God; he that continues not in the doctrine of Christ. What is the
doctrine of Christ?

Christ is the name of that person who subsists in both natures, Christus est
nomen personae in duabus subsistentis naturis.
Christ is the name of the person of the Mediator, which is constituted of both
natures, the Divine and humane nature; neither is the Divine nature without the
humane nature, nor the humane nature without the Divine: that Christ which the
Scripture reveals, but both natures united in the person of the Son of God. Who
is that Christ the Scripture reveals to us? His name shall be Emmanuel, God
with us: God manifested in the flesh, declared to be the Son of God according
to the Spirit of holiness, Romans 2.3. The Scripture when it speaks of Christ as
Me^iator, when it speaks of that person who must bring us to God, it speaks of
him as that person that subsists in both natures, in the nature of God and of
man. They therefore who deny the Divine nature to be in Christ, as the
Socinians do, and they who deny the truth of his humanity by affirming, Christ
has no longer any humane body, these cannot be said to continue in the
doctrine of Christ, and all such have not God: all that continue not in the
doctrine of Christ, have not God. Whatsoever knowledge of God men may pretend
unto, unless they own God in the person of the Mediator, and Christ in the
truth of both his natures, the same have not God, they have no such knowledge
of him as to have any interest in him, and at last to be brought to the
enjoyment of him. 1 John 4.15. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of
God, God dwells in him, and he in God. How must Jesus be confessed to be the
Son of God? He must be so confessed to be the Son of God, as to be God: the Son
of God, and God, that is the meaning: compare this with 1 John 5.20. He that is
the Son of God is the true God: to confess Jesus to be the Son of God, is to
confess him so to be the Son of God as to be the true God. Now if he only
dwells in God, and God in him, that thus owns the Divinity of Christ, what
shall become of them that deny his Divinity? Certainly God does not dwell in
them, nor they in God, they are never like to have any thing to do with God.

To own Christ in words, light within that is Christ; but take heed of being
deceived in so great a matter as salvation is. Believe it, your salvation lies
at stake here, the light within is not that that can save us: that Christ who
must save us is no other but the Word incarnate, he who in the beginning was
with God, and who in the beginning was God, he by whom all things were made,
and without whom nothing was made that was made, and who afterward in the
fullness of time was made flesh, this is he by whom you must be saved, if ever
you be saved. It was not by the light within that we were made, no, the light
within is but a creature; Christ the eternal Word is the light of men, Joh.
1.4. All the light that is in men is but a created spark from Christ, who was
the first increated light: it is by him you must be redeemed and saved, by whom
you were at first made and created. The same eternal Word, who was with God in
the beginning, and by whom all things were made at first, is he who afterward
was made flesh, and by whom we must be saved. Was the light within from
Eternity? or will you call the creature of God, God himself? The light within
is a thing of Gods creation: where was that which some call the Light within,
before Adam was? If it had a beginning, then it was a creature. If men will
tell you, there is something of God, a measure of God that is let down into
every man, unless by something of God, they understand some created thing, they
do apparently confound the Being of God and the being of the creature, and so
do make the creature it self to be God; but it is God himself must be our
salvation: so the Church sings in that triumphant Song of hers, Isa. 12.2. Take
heed how you go off from, how you frame to your selves any other Savior
besides this great Savior, whose Name is the Lord our Righteousness: who is
God and man in one person.

Learn from what has been said, with God and the whole Trinity, and that is by
studying much the Son incarnate. The study of one Christ will bring us to the
highest knowledge of God that we are capable of: Joh. 14.6. I am the way, the
truth, and the life. He that injoys Christ, has all that can be desired; and
therefore it is a good observation Calvin has upon that Text: If Christ be the
way, the truth, and the life, he must needs soar beyond perfection, aspire at
something beyond the last perfection, who is not content with one Christ.
Christ is the way, the truth, and the life, he is the beginning, middle, and
end: in him we must begin, in him we must go on and make progress, and in him
we must end. Christ-man is the way, and Christ as he is one and the same God
with the Father, so he is the life. The humanity of Christ is the gate or
portal that opens the way to the Divinity: when by the sight of his humanity,
we are led to the sight of him as God, then is he to be acknowledged to be
wholly in the Father, and the Father to be wholly in him, He that has seen
him, has seen the Father, 2 John 9. Most sweet are those promises of the Lord
Jesus, Joh. 14.21, 23. If any man love me he shall be beloved of my Father, and
I will love him, and we will come and make our abode with him. If we would have
the Father and the Son make their abode with us, we must first begin at the Son
incarnate: we must be fond of him, if I may so speak; make much of him, have an
high esteem of him. If any man love me, he shall be beloved of my Father, and I
will love him. Christ speaks now as being present in our nature, as clothed
with the humanity, and says: He that loves me, shall be beloved of my Father:
that is, he that loves me who am the Son incarnate. God has brought down
himself to us in the person of the Son who is incarnate. All the Trinity is
brought near to us in that one person: the Divine persons, though they are
distinct in their relative properties, yet they are inseparable; where the one
is, the other is: wherefore let us keep close to the Son, love the Son, adhere
to the Son, the Son incarnate will lead us to the Father. By this Son we shall
have the sweetest communion with God; therefore make much of Christ, it is a
vain thing to think of getting God any other way.

The end of the fourth Sermon.
SERMON V.
Ephesians. 3. verse. 17, 18, 19. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that
ye being rooted and grounded in love,

May be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height:

And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.


WE have already mentioned five Propositions to discover the greatness of the
love of Christ in the work of his Incarnation: we now come to the sixth.

6. The sixth Proposition is this: The greatness of the love of Christ in the
work of his Incarnation will appear in the great advancement that comes to our
nature by the Incarnation of the Son of God. It is the greatest advancement of
humane nature imaginable, that God should take a part of our nature into unity
of person with himself. This I shall illustrate by four Considerations.

1. By means of the Incarnation of the Son of God a part of our nature is
advanced above the Angels, Heb. 2.16. Verily he took not on him the nature of
Angels. (...).
The Particle (...) is an Adverb of confirmation, a word that is used to assert
the truth of a thing more vehemently and strongly. The Apostle lays much weight
and stress upon this, Verily he took not upon him the nature of Angels. It is
as much as if he had said, Truly herein is our nature advanced above Angels, in
that the Son of God did take part of our nature, and did not assume Angelical
nature. If we look upon Angelical nature in it self, and consider the nature of
Angels simply, so Angelical nature is superior, a nature superior to our
nature; therefore is it said, that man is made a little lower than the Angels.
Humane nature simply considered in it self, is inferior to Angelical nature:
but then look upon our nature as it is advanced in Christ the Head of the
Church, and so it is preferred above Angels; therefore is it said, that Christ
is exalted far above principalities and powers, might and dominion, and every
name that is names not only in this world, but in that which is to come, Ephesians.
1.20, 21. The Apostle in that place is speaking of Christ-man: Now Christ-man
is exalted above Principalities and Powers, that is, above the Angels, yea and
above every name that is named not only in this world, but in that which is to
come: hence is it that the Angels are commanded to worship Christ, Heb. 1.6.
Now although it be true, that the Divine nature in Christ is the proper and
formal object of worship, yet the Angels are commanded to worship the Son of
God in our nature, to worship the Son of God clothed with our nature.
Therefore is it said, When he brings in his first-begotten Son into the world
he says, Let all the Angels of God worship him. The Angels were not only to
worship the Son of God before his Incarnation, but after his Incarnation. The
Son of God when incarnate and clothed with our flesh, did not cease to be the
natural coessential Son of God, he was the Son of God, and God, before he took
the nature of man upon him: In the beginning was the word, and the word was
with God, and the word was God, Joh. 1.1. This is spoken of him before his
Incarnation: therefore as the Angels were to worship him before he was clothed
with our nature, so they were to worship him after he was clothed with our
nature.

2. The second Consideration is this: The advancement of our nature by the work
of Incarnation appears in this, In that by means of the Incarnation a part of
our nature is joined to the second person in Trinity, continues in personal
union with him; so that the Son, or that Person whom the Scripture calls the
Word, with the humane nature assumed, is, and continues to be the second person
in Trinity. We have already heard, how that by means of the Incarnation of the
Son of God we come to have communion with the whole Trinity. That which I have
to add in this Proposition, is to show what that near relation is which the
humane nature assumed has unto the Trinity, and how that by means of the
personal union the humane nature assumed has a nearer relation unto the
Trinity than any creature whatsoever. It is a Position and a Maxim both of
ancient and modern Divines, (...) cum propria sua carne socunda persona
Trinitatis. Chemnit. lib. de duabus in Christo Natur^s.
That that person of the Trinity whom the Scripture calls the Word with his
proper flesh is the second person of the Trinity. Now we must understand this
aright, when Divines say, The Son or the Word with his proper flesh is the
second person of the Trinity, 1. we must not suppose that hereby is intended
any conversion in the natures, as if so be the humane nature assumed were taken
into the substance or essence of the Trinity, for that is impossible: we must
still remember how that the two natures, the Divine and humane nature after
this union is made in the person of the Son, always remain essentially
different and distinct: that is, the Divinity does always remain to be the
Divinity, and the humanity to be the humanity, that is, it remains true humane
nature after the personal Union.

2. Neither must we suppose, that the Son of God assumes a humane person, but a
humane nature; for if the Son of God had assumed a humane person, then there
had been a Quaternity, not a Trinity, four persons, not three any longer; and
this the doctrine of the Gospel is most abhorring from. For the Gospel tells
us, That there are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and
the Holy Ghost, 1 John 5.7. The Gospel speaks but of three, and this the Gospel
speaks of after the Incarnation of one of these persons, namely, after the
Incarnation of the Word, which is the second of these three; for when John
wrote this Epistle the Word was made flesh, and had carried that nature assumed
of his into Heaven, and yet notwithstanding the Apostle says there are but
three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; so
that the Word with his own proper flesh is but one and the same person. There
is a new person added to the Trinity by the Word's being made flesh, as he is
said to be, Joh. 1.14. But that person whom the Scripture calls the Word, or
the Son of God, I say, the Word assuming humane nature, is, and continues to be
the second person of the Trinity; therefore we ought to conceive of it thus:
The humane nature in Christ subsists not of it self, or by it self, neither
does the humane nature constitute any peculiar person by it self; but the
humane nature is taken into the unity of the person of the Word, and subsists
wholly in and by the person of the Word, who is the second person in Trinity.
The Word who was a person from Eternity, and subsisted in the Divine nature
only before the Incarnation, by reason of the Incarnation subsists in both
natures, the Divine and humane; so that the Word which the humane nature
assumed, is and remains to be the second person in Trinity. Mark, the Word's
assumption of humane nature does not make him cease to be a person in the
Trinity, which he was before the Incarnation: That he was a person in the
Trinity before his Incarnation, is clear from Joh. 1. Neither does the Word's
assuming of humane nature make an addition of any new person to the Trinity;
but thus we ought to conceive of it, One and the same person who subsisted in
the Divine nature only before his Incarnation, by means of his Incarnation
subsists in both natures: so that we may truly say, The Word with his proper
flesh, that is, the Word with the humane nature assumed, is, and remains to be
the second person in Trinity. It is a speech which Austin has: Homine assumpto
non auctus est numerus personarum Trinitatis, sed eadem Trinitas mansit.
When the nature of man was assumed by one of the persons of the Trinity, the
number of the persons was not increased, but the same Trinity still remains.
But here we may observe the singular advancement of our nature, which is all
that I aim at in what has been spoken. By what we have heard we may see, how
by reason of the Incarnation a part of our nature stands in so near a relation
to the Trinity. The humane nature in Christ has a nearer relation to the
Trinity than any creature whatsoever, Humanitas Christi licet sit creatura,
tamen quia sola and nulla alia ita adhaeret Deo, ut una sit persona cum
Divinitate, oportet igitur tam altiorem supra and extra omnes alias creaturas
esse, tamen sub solo Deo. Luther.
whether Angels or men. It is a speech of Ambrose: Humane nature is not to be
despised, which is taken into so near society and fellowship with the holy
Trinity. And it is a great speech of Luther: The humanity of Christ, although
it be a creature, yet because this only and no other creature does so adhere to
God, as that it is one person with the Divinity, it is higher than all other
creatures, and above all other creatures, yet under God alone.

3. The third Consideration is this, the advancement of our nature by the work
of Christ's Incarnation appears in this, In that by means of the Incarnation a
part of our nature is become the Temple as it were of the Divinity: Destroy
this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up; but he spoke of the Temple
of his body, Joh. 2.21. Here we see the body of Christ, or the humanity of
Christ is plainly called a Temple; and whose Temple was it? the Temple of the
Divinity: Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up. He that
could raise up the Temple of his body when it was destroyed by death, must
needs be God; therefore the person dwelling in this Temple was God: so that
Christ calls his own humanity, the Temple of his Divinity. Col. 2.9. In him
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. The fullness of the Godhead dwells
in the humanity of Christ as in its proper seat or Temple. It is a saying of
one of the Ancients: Totum ejus corpus implet tota Divinitas.
The whole Divinity fills his whole humanity. Yet we must take this aright;
when we say that the humanity of Christ is the Temple of the Divinity, we must
not suppose that the God head is or can be circumscribed; but thus we ought to
conceive it, that by means of the personal Union the Godhead dwells in the
humane nature of Christ, so as it dwells not in any other creature whatsoever.
Now what an advancement is this to our nature, that a part of our nature should
be as it were the proper seat and Temple of the Divinity? That God should
manifest himself in, by, and through our nature assumed: that the Divinity
should shine through our nature, and show it self to us by our nature. A
notable Scripture to illustrate this in Joh. 1.14. The word was made flesh, and
what follows? We beheld his glory as the glory of the only begotten Son of God.
The meaning is, we beheld some rays and beams of the Divinity breaking forth
through that flesh of his. God was made visible to us in the person of his Son,
who had assumed a part of our nature. Hence is it, that the body of Christ, or
the humane nature of Christ is called a Tent or Tabernacle, Heb. 8.2. and 9.11.
Why is the body of Christ, or the humane nature of Christ called a Tabernacle?
For this reason: Look as the glory of God filled the Tabernacle of old, so the
glory of the Divinity has filled his humane nature. The body of Christ or his
humane nature (as Calvin's expression is up on that place) It is that Temple in
which the whole Majesty of God dwells. Templum in quo tota Dei Majestas
habitavit. Calvin.


4. The fourth and last Consideration to show how our nature is advanced by the
Incarnation of the Son of God, is this, By means of the Incarnation, Christ-man
has supreme Authority, Jurisdiction, and Dominion over all creatures, and the
Government of the World, and the ordering of all the affairs of it are
committed to him by the Father. There are clear Texts of Scripture to prove
this, Joh. 5.22, 27. The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment
to the Son. And has given him authority to execute judgment because he is the
Son of man. Matthew. 28.28. All power and authority is given to me in heaven and
in earth. Psalm. 110.2. The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand.
Hence is that speech of Austin: Est haec and fiducia and gloriatio nostra, quod
nostrum singulorum portio, ca^o, and sanguis sedeat in coelo ad dextram Dei
Patris aeterni. August.
This is our confidence and the matter of our rejoicing, that a part of our
nature, flesh of our flesh, bone of our bone sits at the right hand of God the
eternal Father. Christ's sitting at the right hand of God imports two things.

1. His advancement and pre-eminence above all creatures. God has given him a
Name above every name, Phil. 2.9.

2. It imports his supreme Power, Authority, Jurisdiction, and Dominion over
all creatures. Ephesians. 1.22. and Psalm. 8.6. He has put all things under his feet.
The Radix or root of this Power which Christ is said to have over all creatures
lies primarily and originally in the Divine nature of the Son. The Son, the
second person in Trinity, as he is one and the same God with the Father and the
Spirit, has power and dominion over all creatures; and as he is the Son
incarnate, as he is made man, so he has all power in a way of Dispensation,
all power is committed to him, and he exercises that power ministerially as
the Delegate of the Father, which yet is in him originally and essentially as
he is one God with the Father. Hence is it that Divines observe, If the
question be asked According to which nature it is that Christ is said to sit at
the right hand of God? The answer must be, That it is according to both his
natures: for as Christ is appointed to be Mediator according to both natures,
so he is King of the Church according to both natures; only there is this
difference to be observed, The Divine nature in Christ receives nothing new
which it had not before. When all Power and Authority is said to be given to
Christ, the Divine nature in Christ receives nothing new which it had not
before: only there is a new manifestation of the Divine power and glory by the
humane nature, as Christ prays: Joh. 17.8.
Glorify me with the glory which I had with thee before the foundation of the
world. As he was the eternal Son, so he was possessed of the same glory as the
Father had from Eternity: now he prays, that that glory which he had as the Son
and as God, might be manifested in and by the humane nature; therefore we must
remember, the Divine nature received nothing but only a new manifestation of
the glory it had before, in and by the humane nature assumed: but the humane
nature is that which has properly Power and Authority given to it. Hence is
that speech of one of the Ancients: Vthomo accepit quod ut Deus habebat.
Theodor.
Christ received that as he was man which he had always as he was God. As he
was God, he always had Power and Authority invested in him, now he received
that as man which he had always in him as God. The Son, as he was God, did
always reign with the Father before his Incarnation: And hence that speech of
Christ, My Father works hitherto, and I work, Joh. 5.17. But although the Son
did reign before his Incarnation, yet it was then as God, nakedly and simply
considered: as God not as yet clothed with our flesh; Vt Deus sine carne.
but since his Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven, he reigns as God
manifested in the flesh. A^te regnabat ut Deus nudus seu sua tantum gloria in
latus, at post ut Deus carne nostra etiam vestitus.
Before his Incarnation, says a Learned Divine, he reigned with the Father as
God, nakedly and simply considered, as clothed with his essential glory; but
after his Incarnation he reigned as God clothed with our nature: That is, says
he, God the Father did not account the Son unworthy of this Honor and
Authority, although covered with our vile flesh, and admitted him as the Son
incarnate into a Copartnership with him in his Kingdom, casting this honor
upon the humane nature, because it was joined to his own Son in personal Union.
Just as if a Kings Son had taken some old garments to himself and clothed
himself therewith, far inferior to the dignity of that Relation he bears unto
his Father, and his Father should admit him with those garments to sit down
with him in his Throne: so the Son of God, though clothed with our nature,
covered with our flesh, is not divested of his Government; but he, together
with the Father, governs this World. This was that which made one of the
Ancients use this expression: That he who is God should sit with God, that he
who is the Son should reign with the Father, is no such wonderful thing; for,
he that has the sameness of nature, may well have the same power and dominion:
but that a part of our nature should have the same honor with him that assumed
it, this is that which exceeds all wonder. But when Divines say, whole Christ,
that is, Christ not only as God, but as man, has power over all creatures, or
the humane nature in the person of the Son of God, reigns over all creatures,
we must understand this aright. We must not suppose that Christ, considered as
mere man without his Divinity, or that the humanity separate and abstract from
the Divinity, has this Sovereignty and supreme Dominion over all creatures;
for supreme Power, Dominion, and Sovereignty over all creatures is proper to
God only, it is such a Dignity as is proper to God only; therefore is it said
Isa. 45.22. I am God, and beside me there is no other: and what follows? To me
every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear. He must needs be God, to whom
every knee must bow, and every tongue must confess: therefore it is not
compatible to any creature, simply and by it self considered, to have dominion
over all things. But we ought thus to conceive of it: The humanity of Christ is
to be looked upon as an Instrument that is conjoined with the Deity: the Son of
God, because he has the humane nature united to him, exercises all Rule,
Power, and Authority by the humanity, as by an instrument conjoined with him:
The Power remains in the Divine nature primarily, radically, and fundamentally,
and this Power is exercised by the humane nature secondarily and ministerially:
that is to say, whatsoever Christ wills by his Divine will, the same does he
will by his humane will; whatsoever he does in the Church as God, he does it
also as man. Not that the humane nature is omnipotent, but the person who
subsists in the humane nature as well as in the Divine is omnipotent, and there
is a concourse of both natures in every action, the person working by each
nature what is proper to each nature.

We come now to make some use of what has been opened; there are several Uses
will arise from the Doctrine that has been delivered.

We may learn from what has propounded, vast difference between Christ and
Believers. Believers have Union with the Father and the Son; yet the humane
nature in Christ, or Christ as he is man, has a pre-eminence above all
Believers: and that will appear by reflecting a little upon what has been
spoken.

1. Consider this: the humane nature in Christ has that relation to the
Trinity, that no Believer in the world has. It is a Maxim with Divines. The
humanity of Christ belongs personally to the Trinity. Humanitas Christi
personaliter pertinet ad Trinitatem.
Now when Divines say, That the Humanity of Christ belongs personally to the
Trinity, their meaning is not, that the humanity of Christ brings in a new
person, for then there would be a Quaternity, four persons instead of three:
but when they say, the humanity of Christ belongs personally to the Trinity,
their meaning is, the humanity of Christ belongs and has relation unto the
Word, who is one of the persons in the Trinity, and that it stands in personal
Union with him; so that the second person in Trinity subsists personally in the
humane nature assumed, which he does not in any other creature whatsoever. So
that none of the Elect has that kind of relation to the Trinity, which the
humane nature in Christ has: for the humane nature in Christ does not subsist
of it self out of the second person in Trinity; but the second person in
Trinity takes the humane nature into the subsistence of his own person; so that
the humane nature in Christ has that relation to one of the persons in the
Trinity, (to whom in person it is united) and thereby to the whole Trinity,
that no other creature, whether Angels or men, ever had or shall have.

2. The humane nature in Christ is the Temple of the Divinity. God manifests
himself to us in and by that humanity which the Son has assumed. This cannot
be said of Believers. For though it be said of Believers, that they are the
Temple of the Holy Ghost, and that the Spirit of God dwells in them; yet it is
no where said of Believers, Col. 2.9.
that the fullness of the Godhead dwells in them bodily. It is a memorable
speech of one of the Ancients, which may clear the matter in hand: By that
nature which is seen, Per naturam quae cernitur, adoretur quae non cernitur
Divinitas.
the Divinity which cannot be seen may be worshipped. We worship God in and by
the humane nature of Jesus Christ; but this cannot be said of any of the
Saints: we cannot worship God in and by any of the Saints, as we do in and by
the humane nature of Jesus Christ.

3. Consider, Christ-man has Dominion and Sovereignty over all creatures, as
has been showed at large. This cannot be said of Angels or men, that they have
this Sovereignty over all creatures. So that we see Christ has the
pre-eminence in all things, as the Apostles expression is, Col. 1.18.

These things are necessary to establish our judgments, when many have been so
injurious to the honor of the Lord Jesus, as to level his person and dignity
with the persons of the Saints.

Learn to admire the great Love of God in Christ. done for us: therefore is it
said, Blessed be God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed
us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. And in
another place, He has made us to sit together in heavenly places with him.
Christ's advancement in some sort is our advancement, his exaltation is our
exaltation. God has honored our nature in advancing Christman so high: the
Divine nature in Christ needed nothing, it was capable of receiving nothing: as
he was the Eternal Son, so he was coequal and coessential with the Father; all
the glory that comes to him in time, is cast upon the humane nature. Now that
God should advance our nature so much as he has done in our Head, this should
affect our hearts greatly. What is man that thou art mindful of him, or the son
of man that thou should magnify him? Psalm. 8.4. That the Divinity should
show it self in and by a part of our nature, that a part of our nature should
stand and continue in personal union with the second person in Trinity; that a
part of our nature should be advanced above Angels, set in authority above all
creatures, this should astonish us. Chrysostom says he was swallowed up by
this consideration: It is a great thing, says he, a thing full of wonder and
amazement, that our flesh should sit at the right hand of God, and be adored by
Angels and Archangels. When I think of this, says he, I find my self put into
an ecstasie.

Learn from what has been opened, Christ: the humanity of Jesus Christ is the
Temple of the Divinity; here therefore it is we must seek for God, and here may
we hope to find him. It is an expression that Luther has: Deus nec vult nec
pocest inventri, nisi in hac humanitate, and per hanc humanitatem. Luther.
God neither will, nor can be found but by the humanity of Jesus Christ: which,
says he, God has lifted up as a Standard, that by it he may gather to himself
all his children out of the world. Christ himself has told us, He is the way
to the Father, Joh. 14 6. How is he the way to the Father? The Son incarnate,
the Son become man is the way to the Father. Joh. 1.18. No man has seen God at
any time, the only begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father, he has
revealed him. How does the Son reveal him? In and by the humane nature assumed.
He that has seen me has seen the Father, Joh. 14.9. How is it, that he that
has seen Christ has seen the Father? The meaning is, the Divinity lay hid in
that humanity of his, and the Divinity was to be seen and apprehended by that
humanity of his. This is notably set forth by the Apostle, Heb. 10.19, 20.
Having boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and
living way which he has consecrated for us, thorough the veil, that is to say,
his flesh. It is an observation which Calvin has upon this Text: The flesh of
Christ is not be despised, because it is as a veil that does cover the Majesty
of God, and yet directs us the way to enjoy all that is in God. Look as the
veil in the Temple did cover all those things that lay hid and secret in the
Sanctuary, Nec quisquam Deum inveniet, nisi cui via and ostium erit Christus
homo. Calv.
and yet withal was the way that opened unto all: so the Divinity that lay hid
in the flesh of Jesus Christ brings us to Heaven. No man shall ever find God
unto whom Christ-man is not the way and the door. This is that our Savior
means, when he says, Ye believe in God, believe also in me, Joh. 14.1. The
naked absolute Divinity is at too great a distance from us, and we know not
where to find God in his naked simple Essence; therefore our Savior directs us
to look to God manifest in his flesh. By the Son incarnate there is a fair way
opened for us to the Father.

Ephesians. 1.22. And has put all things under his feet. That is, he has put all
things under Christ's feet. God the Father has subjected all things to
Christ-man, the Head of the Church: the government is upon his shoulders. Now
says the Apostle, No man ever hated his own flesh, etc. Ephesians 5.29. The Church
is near akin to Christ, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone; no wonder
therefore that Christ takes care of the Church, which is so nearly related to
himself. The Church is as it were a part of Christ, the head and members make
up Christ mystical: so also is Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. The Apostle speaks there
of Believers, As the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of
that one body being many are one body, so also is Christ. All Believers,
together with Christ their Head, make up Christ mystical. Christ may be
considered personally, and he may be considered mystically. Christ personally
considered, is that person who was born of the Virgin, dyed on the Cross, rose
again the third day, ascended up into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of
God. Christ mystical is Christ and all Believers, the head and members in
conjunction. The Church is said to be the Body of Christ, the fullness of him
who fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.22. Now then the Church standing in such near
relation to Christ as to be his body, a part of himself, this is the reason
that Christ has preserved it, and will preserve it to the end of the world;
Mat. 18. I will build my Church. See here, he calls it his Church, he
challenges a peculiar interest in it. Feed the Church of God which he has
redeemed with his own blood, Act. 20.28. Therefore the Church standing so
nearly related to Christ, no wonder Christ takes such care of it. Learn from
hence to whom to attribute all the deliverances of the Church, it is our
faithful, omnipotent, sympathizing, compassionate Head, that has been the
Author of all the preservations and deliverances we have seen, and upon him we
must depend for the time to come.

Lastly, God has highly exalted him, etc. Phil. 2.9. Now though it be true,
Christ must be allowed his pre-eminence, the head has a pre-eminence above the
members, yet the members shall follow the head, they shall have their measure
of glory, though not the same degree of glory. In Heb. 6. ult. we read how
Christ is entered into heaven as our forerunner. If Christ be in Heaven, the
Saints who are members of his body, shall certainly follow after. It is the
last passage in that last prayer of our Savior: That the love wherewith thou
have loved me, may be in them, and I in them, Joh. 17. ult. It is the
inestimable privilege of the Saints (says Calvin upon this Text) that Christ
was beloved of the Father for our sakes, that we might be partakers of the same
love. If the Father has glorified Christ, he will certainly glorify us, if we
be his members. Only we must consider what is spoken in the last clause of all,
and I in them. As we expect to be comprehended in that love with which our Head
is embraced, we must be sure to be in him. We must see that we be in Christ and
Christ in us, we must have true and real union with him; and if we be thus
united to him, then the love wherewith the Father has loved him, shall be
communicated to us: therefore let us endeavor to make sure of our Union with
Christ, and in-being in him, and then as the Father has commended his love to
him the Head of the Church, in glorifying him, he will also commend his love to
us, in glorifying us in like manner.

The end of the fifth Sermon.
SERMON VI.
Ephesians. 3. verse. 17, 18, 19. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by says; that
ye being rooted and grounded in love,

May be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height:

And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.


7. THE seventh Particular, to demonstrate the greatness of the Love of Christ
in the work of his Incarnation, is this: The love of Christ in his Incarnation
appears in this, In that by means of the Incarnation of the Son of God, our
nature, as it is in the Head of the Church, is restored to its ancient purity,
integrity, and perfection. It is a good observation of one of the Ancients:
Filius Dei naturam nostram sibi conjunxit, ut eam in se primo and per seipsum
ad pristinam pulchritudinem restitueret. Cyril.
The Son of God has joined our nature to himself, that first of all he might
repair our nature in himself, and by himself restore our nature to its ancient
beauty. To understand this, we must know, that Adam had lost original
Righteousness, infected and corrupted man's nature with the contagion and taint
of Original sin. Now the Son of God by his Incarnation, has repaired our
nature, and restored it to its primitive beauty and perfection. The first Adam
by his Fall left our nature under the contagion of Original sin; the Son of God
in his Incarnation took up our nature without sin, and as the second Adam,
represents our nature in himself pure and spotless. Such an High Priest became
us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, Heb. 9.26. So that
this is the singular privilege of Believers, although they be poor sinful
creatures in themselves, groaning under the body of sin and death; yet they
have this to glory in, that their Head the Lord Jesus is without sin, and
presents their nature pure and spotless before the Throne of God. In him is no
sin, 1 John 3.5. He does not say, In him was no sin; that is true indeed: for
in him was no sin, neither was there any guile found in his mouth. But the
Apostle says here, In him is no sin: It is as much as if he should say, As
Christ was without sin here on Earth, so he is without sin in Heaven, he
presents our nature pure and spotless before the Throne of God. This is the
singular privilege of Believers, that they may glory in Christ their Head,
when they have nothing to glory in of their own. Hence is it, that which the
Apostle faith, We glory in Christ Jesus, or we boast in Christ Jesus, etc.
Phil. 3.3. as much as to say, We do not boast in our selves, we do not glory in
our own righteousness, but we glory in the Righteousness of Christ: we glory
and boast in this, that we have that righteousness and perfection in our Head,
which we have not in our selves.

8. The love of Christ in his Incarnation appears in this, In that by means of
the Incarnation of the Son of God, there is a foundation laid for our
acceptance with God: This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Mat. 3.
ult. This is spoken of the Son incarnate, after he was made man. God the Father
delights in the Son when incarnate. To understand this, we must know, as he was
the eternal Son, the express image of the Fathers person, proceeding from the
Father by eternal Generation, so he was eternally his delight. This is clear
from Prove. 8.30. I was daily his delight. Now that which we are farther to
consider is, As the Father delights in the Son, as his eternal Son, so he
delights in the Son when incarnate, when made man, he delights in the Son when
clothed with our nature: the eternal Son being the object of his Fathers
delight and complacency, and the Son taking our nature into personal Union with
himself, the love, delight, and complacency of the Father redounds and
overflows (if I may so express it) unto the humane nature assumed. Joh. 3.35.
The Father loves the Son. And how does he love him? Not only as the Son simply
considered, but he loves him as the Son incarnate; he loves him as the Son come
into our nature, he loves him as he is Mediator. To open this a little further,
we may consider, that the humane nature, by means of the Incarnation of the Son
of God, has its standing as it were in the Divine Person: yea, I find how some
of the Ancients go further. (...) suae personae. Damasc. Pertinet ad
integritatem Verbi incarnati. Chemnit.
Damascene's expression is, That the humane nature is a part as it were of his
person. And a modern Divine observes, The humane nature belongs to the
integrity and compleatness of the person of the Word incarnate. Yet to prevent
all mistakes, we must understand this cautiously; That person whom the
Scripture calls the Word, or the Son, which is the second of those three the
Scripture speaks of, (There are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father,
the Word, and the Spirit) was a Person from Eternity, and the humane nature is
not properly and strictly a part of his person, neither does it add any thing
to the completing of his person, simply considered: but on the contrary, the
humane nature having no personal subsistence of its own, receives personality
from the Word, or the Son of God, who was a person from Eternity. Hence is it
that Divines observe, That the person of Christ in one respect may be called a
Person that is simple and uncompounded; look upon Christ simply as the second
person in Trinity, and so his person is most simple and uncompounded, and his
humanity adds nothing to it: but in another respect, look upon him as he is
Mediator in a way of Dispensation, and so they say Christ's person is a person
that may be said to be compounded; that is to say in plain terms, consider
Christ under the notion of Mediator, so the humane nature is not to be excluded
from the person of the Mediator: it is not to be excluded from the
consideration of Christ as Mediator. For Christ is not Mediator according to
one nature merely: not according to his Divine nature merely, nor according to
his humane nature merely; but Christ, as Mediator, is Mediator according to
both natures: and is to be considered as Mediator according to both natures.
Christus est ex duabus naturis, and in duabus naturis.
Christ, as Mediator, is to be considered as consisting of both natures, and as
subsisting in both natures. It is a passage of one of the Ancients: It is a
thing of equal danger to believe Christ to be God only, without believing him
to be man; or to believe him to be man only, without believing him to be God:
for the Mediator is to be believed to be both God and man, the Mediator is both
God and man in one person. Now to return to what was first proposed. The
Mediator being both God and man, the love of the Father extends it self to the
whole person of the Mediator, who is man as well as God, and all the
complacency and delight of the Father is taken up in him: so that a part of our
nature being taken into unity of person with the Son of God, there is a
foundation laid for the Fathers delight and complacency in us. Hence it is
said, He has made us accepted in the beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. Christ is first
beloved, and we are beloved in him. The Father has a part of our nature always
before him, which is ever in his eye, which stands in personal union and
communion with his own Son, and Christ man has no sin in him, but is perfectly
pure and righteous; and being so, is perfectly pleasing and delightful to the
Father; and he being Head of the Church, all that are members of his body are
looked upon in him, and are accepted in him. To understand this more clearly,
we must consider, that our nature by sin is alienated and estranged from God,
lies under wrath and the curse; but now by the Incarnation of the Son of God,
our nature is again brought near to God. The Son incarnate and made man is
perfectly the object of the Fathers delight, and our nature being represented
pure and spotless before the The One of God in the person of the Son of God, the
Father reflecting on our nature, as it stands in personal union and conjunction
with his Son, accepts of us and delights in us through his Son: so that by
means of the Incarnation of the Son of God, there is a foundation laid for our
acceptance with God.

9. The love of Christ in his Incarnation appears in this, In that by means of
the Incarnation of the Son of God, Grace is brought down, deposited, and lodged
as it were in our nature, as in a fountain near at hand, that we may know where
to go and have recourse for all grace. The Godhead it self is the original
spring and fountain of all grace: it is proper only to God to create grace;
therefore is it we have that expression, The God of all grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. But
look upon the Divinity or Godhead, simply or absolutely considered, and so it
is as a spring that is more remote, and kept hidden and secret from us; but in
the Incarnation of the Son of God, God is manifested in the flesh, and so the
Godhead, which is the Original and head-spring of all grace, is brought near
unto us: With thee is the fountain of life, Psalm. 36.9. Now in Christ the
fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily; therefore the fullness of the Godhead
dwelling in Christ bodily, by necessary consequence the fullness of life and
grace must necessarily dwell in Christ. The Divine nature empties it self as it
were into the humanity of Christ, and from God in Christ we receive all grace.
Hence is it said, Joh. 1.14. The Word is made flesh, and what follows upon
that? full of grace and truth. Immediately upon the Words being made flesh, the
humane nature, which the Word assumed, comes to be replenished with grace and
truth. Observe the order or gradation that is here set down, first the Word,
the second person in Trinity, assumes our nature, the Word is made flesh; what
follows upon this? The Word being made flesh, he having the Godhead in him
fills the humane nature with all grace. Hence is that expression, The Word is
made flesh and dwelt among us, full of grace and truth. What follows upon this?
Out of his fullness we receive grace for grace. The Word incarnate, the Word
made flesh, the Son of God becoming man, he is now the proximate and next
fountain of grace to us. The Godhead of the Son, which is one and the same with
the Godhead of the Father, is the original fountain of all grace, and the Son
in our nature is the proximate and next fountain of grace to us; and hence is
it that the Ancients call the humanity of Christ the Receptacle of grace. (...).
The humanity of Christ is the first receptacle of all grace: Of his fullness we
receive and grace for grace. The Evangelist does not say, Of him we receive
grace for grace: that is true; but he expresses it thus, Of his fullness we
receive and grace for grace: which expression intimates thus much, That the
humanity of Christ is the first receptacle of all grace. To understand this we
must know, that our nature had lost original righteousness, our nature was
deprived of the image of God, was alienated from the life of God, and the way
was barred and shut up as to our reception of grace; for our iniquities had
separated between God and us, as the Prophets expression is, Isa. 59.1. The Son
of God therefore by his Incarnation has so united the Divine nature to the
humane, that he has brought down and deposited as it were the whole fullness of
the Godhead in the humane nature assumed, that so grace, life, salvation, from
which we were estranged and alienated by sin, might be brought near to us
again; and grace being now deposited in a part of our nature, from this part of
our nature which is taken into personal union with the Son of God (which is a
nature consubstantial with ours, and near akin to us) grace, life, salvation
might be derived to us, from his fullness we might receive grace for grace. Heb.
2.14. Because the children were made partakers of flesh and blood, he also took
part of the same. Now says the Apostle elsewhere, No man ever as yet hated his
own flesh. He that is a brother indeed, it is no grief to him to part with some
of his substance, with some of the goods he is possessed of, to his own
brethren, who are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone. It is a great
Scripture yet farther to illustrate this: As the Father has life in himself,
so has he given to the Son to have life in himself, and has given him
authority to execute judgment because he is the Son of man, Joh. 5.26, 27.
Calvin observes from that expression [because he is the Son of man] Christ was
therefore ordained by the Father to be the Author of life, that so we might not
have life to seek afar off: Christ received nothing for himself, as if he
needed any thing for himself, but he received that wherewith he might enrich
us: and the sum of these two verses he makes to be this, That is laid open to
us in Christ man, which did before lie hid in God; because the Majesty of God,
as it is at a great distance from us, is like to a spring that lies hidden and
latent, Habemus promptum and expositum fontem, ex quo haurire licet. Calvin.
therefore God has displayed himself openly to us in Christ. We have in Christ
a fountain that is near and ready at hand, and that which lies open to us, from
whence we might receive all grace.

10. The love of Christ in his Incarnation appears in this, In that by means of
the Incarnation of the Son of God, grace is not only brought near to us, but it
is made most firm and sure. That which a mere man received might be taken away
and lost as it was in Adam; therefore grace was deposited in the hands of one
who was God as well as man, that so grace might be made most sure and firm. The
best of creatures are mutable things and subject to change: hence is that
expression, Job 4.18. Behold, he puts no trust in his servants, and his Angels
he charge with folly. The Angels themselves, which are the highest rank of
creatures, are subject to change: the good Angels who never sinned, yet might
have sinned and fallen, had they not been confirmed by Divine grace. And that
they might have done so, it appears plainly by the instance of the evil Angels.
The evil Angels were created at first in the same state of dignity and glory as
the good Angels were; but they being left to the mutability of their own will,
fell from God: whereas the good Angels were confirmed by grace. It is a wise
speech of Austin: God, Deum sic ordinasse Angelorum and hominum vitam, ut in ea
prius ostenderet quid posset liberum arbitrium, deinde quid posset gratiae suae
beneficium. Aug.
says he, has so ordered and disposed concerning the life of Angels and men,
that he has shown first of all what free will could do, and then what the
benefit of his grace could do. Free Will both in Angels and men discovered it
self to be a mutable thing; therefore that grace might be laid sure, it was
laid in the hands of one who was God as well as man. Austin observes, Christ
was predestined to be Head of the Church, and we are predestined to be his
members. Now grace in the Head of the Church is laid most sure. The Godhead in
Christ is an indeficient, never failing Principle of grace. So that the humane
nature of Christ had not only created habits in it, as Adams soul had, but the
Godhead was personally united to it; so that unless we could suppose a
dissolution of the Hypostatical or personal Union, it is impossible that the
humane nature in Christ should cease to be filled with Divine grace. Hence is
that expression of Christ, Joh. 6.57. As the living Father has sent me, and I
live by the Father. It is as much as if our Savior had said, The Godhead is a
living spring, a living fountain of grace. It is usual with Christ, when he
speaks of those things which belong to the Divine nature which is common to him
and the Father, to attribute them to the Father; therefore he says, I live by
the Father. The Father is the first person in the Deity: and although the Son
be possessed of the same Deity, yet when Christ speaks of such things as belong
to the Deity or the Divine nature, he uses the name of the Father, in which
expression his own Divinity is comprehended. So Joh. 14.10. The Father that
dwells in me, he does the works: his meaning is, the Divine nature. The
Divine nature is common to him and the Father; but he expresses it thus, The
Father in me does the works. Now says he, As the living Father has sent me,
and I live by the Father: his meaning is, the Divinity which is united to my
flesh is a living Spring and fountain of grace: my humanity receives all grace,
life, and virtue from the Divinity inhabiting in it. The Divine nature in the
person of the Son holds the humane nature in the nearest, closest, and most
indissoluble union; and being so nearly and strictly united to the humanity,
fills the humanity with all grace. So that the firmness and sureness of grace
to the Elect depends upon a treble Basis or foundation.

1. It depends upon the firmness and indissolubility of the Union that is
between the two Natures in Christ.

2. It depends upon the Indeficiency of grace, and the inexhaustible Fullness
that is in the Godhead.

3. It depends upon a Believers Union with Christ.

1. If the personal Union can never be dissolved, then the humane nature which
always abides in the nearest union with the Divine, must always partake of the
power, virtue, and efficacy of the Divine.

2. If the spring of grace which is in the Divine nature, do never fail or be
dried up, then the grace in the humane nature, which is always fed and
maintained by this spring, can never cease.

3. Believers standing in union and conjunction with their Head as members of
his body, must needs partake of the virtue and influence of their Head, 1 Cor.
6.17. Ephesians. 5.30. and 1.23.

I shall conclude this particular with a passage of one of the Ancients. Those
things which a mere man received, might be taken away from him, as they were
from Adam: that therefore grace and the gifts of God may remain firm; therefore
Christ, who is God and man, received power as he was man, which he had always
as he was God, that his humanity receiving all things, those things might be
delivered over to us out of his humanity to be firmly and surely possessed by
us.

Learn from what has been spoken, that must comfort us in reference to the
ruins of the Fall. Man was a glorious creature, an excellent piece as first he
came out of the hand of God: but what ruin, what deformity has sin brought
upon this glorious and excellent creature! Who is there that turns his eyes in
and upon himself, and has not cause to lament the sad and miserable ruins sin
has made there? The understanding is full of darkness, the will perverse, and
wholly carried off from God the chief good, the affections wholly bent and set
upon sensible objects, the whole man depraved and out of order, lying under the
sad effects of original sin. What is it that may comfort us in reference to
these ruins, and this sad deformity sin has brought, but only the
consideration of the Incarnation of the Son of God? By the Incarnation of the
Son of God our nature is restored to its ancient beauty and perfection: let us
turn our eyes upon the Head of the Church, and there we may see Holiness
shining forth in its greatest beauty and perfection: there we may see our
nature without sin, a mind full of Divine light and knowledge, a will exactly
conformed to the Divine will, affections most pure and regular. Now our nature
being thus repaired and restored to its ancient purity in our Head, we have
this assurance it shall be repaired in us. We have in Christ an instance what
we may expect, if we be his members; for God has predestined us to be
conformed to the image of his Son: and he is the firstborn among many
brethren, Romans 8.29.

Christ. You are by nature children of wrath, unlovely, unacceptable in the
sight of God; if ever you be taken from being children of wrath to be children
of God, if ever you be made sons and daughters of God, you must first of all be
implanted by faith into him who is the natural Son of God: if ever your persons
be made lovely and acceptable in the sight of God, you must be accepted in him
who is the beloved Son of God. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased. There is not one drop of Gods love runs out of Christ, all the love of
the Father descends upon the Son incarnate, and it is conveyed and let down by
him upon the sons of men. If you be found out of Christ, you cannot expect to
see or taste one drop of the love of God toward you. O labor to get into
Christ. Is it not sad to lie under Divine wrath, to be alienated and estranged
from God, to be able to lay no claim to God as your God and your Father, to
have no ground for the acceptance of your persons? Till you get into Christ
and be implanted into him, this is your condition: you are under Divine wrath,
you are alienated and estranged to God, you are able to lay no claim to God as
your God and Father, you have no ground for the acceptance of your persons;
For this is the beloved Son in whom the Father is well pleased. The Father
looks upon none with a favorable eye, but whom he looks upon in the beloved
Son: if you have nothing to do with the beloved Son, you have nothing to do
with the Fathers love. Let this press such as are yet strangers to Christ, to
give themselves no rest day nor night till they get into Christ.

By way of Exhortation to Believers, keep close to Christ. It is the interest
and concernment of Believers to labor to keep close to Christ, and to see that
Christ dwell in their hearts by faith yet more and more. The Apostle prays for
the Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.17.
that Christ might dwell in their hearts by faith. The more Christ dwells in
our hearts by faith, the greater sense we shall have of our Adoption and the
acceptance of our persons. The Son of God taking our nature, lays the
foundation for our Adoption and the acceptance of our persons; therefore the
more firmly we embrace the Son of God clothed with our nature in the arms of
our faith, the greater sense we shall have of our sonship and acceptance.
Christ is the natural Son of God, if we embrace him and adhere to him by faith,
the greater evidence shall we have that we are the adopted sons of God by faith
in him. Gal. 3.26. Ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus.
That which makes us sons at first will be the means to continue the sight and
comfort of this sonship to us. It is faith makes us the sons of God; therefore
if we would have the comfort of our sonship, let us look to this, that Christ
dwell in our hearts by faith. When Christ promises to manifest the Fathers love
to us, how is it that he will do it? He says, I in them, Joh. 17.26. Let us
consider it well, the way by which Christ manifests the Fathers love to the
Elect, is by his being in them. If ever we expect the manifestation of the
Fathers love, Christ must be in us, and we in him. Let us take heed therefore
how we let our eye go off from Christ, we can expect no love from the Father
but as he looks upon us through the Son: and we cannot expect to have the sense
of the Fathers love let in upon us through the Son, but as we take hold of the
Son. The more possession we have of Christ in our hearts by faith, the greater
sense and manifestation of the Fathers love will be let in upon us.

Learn from what has been opened, Joh. 7.38. If any man thirst, let him come
to me and drink. There is a spring of grace opened to us in a part of our own
nature, here may we come and be supplied. Col. 1.19. It pleased the Father that
in him all fullness should dwell. If any man thirst, let him come unto me and
drink. If you thirst for grace, it is but turning your eyes upon the Lord
Jesus, who is God in your nature, and there is a fountain of grace set open.

Adam indeed had a stock committed to him, but he being a creature, and
therefore mutable, did not keep that stock committed to him: the Lord Jesus
Christ, the second Adam, the Head of the Church, is God as well as man, and
grace being deposited in him, it is now lodged in a sure hand. Joh. 14.19.
Because I live, ye shall live also. As much as if our Savior had said, Your
life depends upon my life; when my life fails, your life may fail; but while my
life continues, your life shall continue. And our Savior tells us, The
salvation of the Elect depends upon his and his Fathers power. A great
Scripture, Joh. 10.27, 28, 29. he is there speaking of his sheep, and of them
he says, None shall pluck them out of my hand, my Father is greater than all,
and none shall pluck them out of my Fathers hand. The sum of our Saviors
asseveration is this, That if he and his Father be able to keep the sheep from
perishing, and bring them to eternal life, then they shall never perish, never
fail of eternal life; therefore are we said to be kept by the power of God to
salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. So that if the Divine power can preserve the Saints,
they shall be preserved to eternal life. Let us labor to be in the number of
Christ's sheep, such as truly follow him, and he has undertaken to keep us from
perishing, and to bring us safe to eternal life.

The end of the sixth Sermon.
SERMON VII.
Ephesians. 3. verse. 17, 18, 19. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that
ye being rooted and grounded in love,

May be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height:

And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.


WE now come yet to some other Propositions for the opening of this great
Mystery, to show the greatness of the Love of Christ in the work of his
Incarnation.

11. The eleventh Proposition is this, The love of Christ in his Incarnation
appears in this, In that by means of the Incarnation of the Son of God, there
is a foundation laid for our Adoption and being made the sons of God. It was a
speech of Irenaeus: The Son of God was made the Son of man, Filius Dei factus
est filius hominis ad hoc, ut and homo fieret filius Dei. Irenaeus.
for this very end, that man might be made the son of God. Romans 8.29. Christ is
said to be the firstborn among many brethren. Peter Martyr observes from that
expression; So good is God, that when as God had a Son, and such a Son whom he
took perfect delight and complacency in, yet he was pleased to adopt more sons
of the stock of mankind, among whom Christ is the first born: and whereas it is
said, He was the firstborn among many brethren, this must be understood in
respect of his humane nature assumed; for as to the Divine nature, Christ is
not so properly called Primogenitus as Vnigenitus, the first born as the only
begotten Son of the Father. Christ is the Head of all the Elect; (...).
therefore he is said to be foreordained before the foundation of the world, 1
Pet. 1.20 that is, before the foundation of the world he was ordained to be the
Head of the Church. Sicut praedestinatus est ille unus ut caput nostrum esset:
ita and multi sumus praedestinati ut essemus ejus membra. Aug. Deus Christum
ipsum quatenus homo est, primum omnium praedestinavit, in quo caeteros servaret.
It is Austins expression: As Christ was that one only who was predestined to
be our Head, so we being many are predestined to be his members. Hence is
that expression we have Ephesians. 1.6. Having predestined us to the adoption of
children by Jesus Christ. The Original of our Adoption is Gods Predestination,
having predestined us: the foundation of our Adoption is in Jesus Christ;
having predestined us to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ. God did
first of all predestinate Christ himself as he was man, that in him he might
save all the rest of the Elect. To understand this, we must consider

That Christ was the natural Son of God, the only begotten Son of God from
Eternity; therefore is he said to be the only begotten Son who is in the bosom
of the Father, Joh. 1.18. Now the natural and only begotten Son of God being
pleased to assume a part of our nature, he is and remains to be the natural Son
of God in and with the humane nature assumed. Christ did not cease to be the
natural Son of God by his Incarnation and taking our nature upon him. As he was
the natural Son of God before his Incarnation, so he is after his Incarnation.
Now the natural Son of God being come into our nature, the humane nature
assumed is one in person with the Son of God, and Christ remaining to be the
natural Son of God after his assumption of our nature, makes way for us to be
the adopted sons of God. The Civil Lawyers observe, that no one can obtain the
Right and Privilege of Adoption but by leave of him who is the natural son. If
there be a natural son, none can be an adopted son without the leave of the
natural son. Christ is the natural Son, and he being come into our nature,
(...).
gave this Right or Power, that we should become the sons of God, even to as
many as receive this natural Son by faith into their hearts, Joh. 1.12. They
who receive the natural Son by faith, are made adopted Sons. Hence is it said
Gal. 3.26. Ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ. It is an
excellent expression Zanchy has upon that Text Ephesians. 1.5. Having predestined
us to the adoption of sons by Jesus Christ. For this very end did Christ assume
our nature, being made our Brother according to the flesh, that we having his
Spirit given to us, might be made the sons of God, and the brethren of Christ;
and for this cause is he said to be the firstborn among many brethren.

12. The twelfth Proposition for the clearing of this Mystery, and showing the
greatness of Christ's love in the work of his Incarnation is this, That by means
of the Incarnation of the Son of God, God has brought himself down to us,
rendered himself more facile and easy to be apprehended and conceived by us,
and also more sweet for us to approach to him. We have showed before, how that
by means of the Incarnation of the Son of God, grace is brought down to us,
lodged in our nature: now we shall show, how that by the Incarnation of the Son
of God, God himself is brought down to us, brought near to us; so that we may
the better apprehend and conceive of him, and also he is made more sweet for us
to approach to him.

1. By means of the Incarnation of the Son of God, God has brought himself
down to us, and rendered himself more facile and easy to be apprehended and
conceived of by us. If we consider God in his simple and absolute nature, God
dwells in light inaccessible, and of him it is said, Whom no man saw, nor can
see, 1 Timothy 6.16. The naked, simple, absolute Divinity is too bright an object
for our weak eyes to look upon; therefore God who is invisible in himself, has
made himself visible (as it were) in the person of his Son: therefore is it
said, Christ is the image of the invisible God, Col. 1.15. and the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God shines in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6.
In the face of the Son incarnate we may see and behold all the glory of God.
Joh. 1.18. No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son who is in
the bosom of the Father he has revealed him. It is Calvin's observation, That
as Christ is the Mediator of Reconciliation, so he is the Medium of Revelation,
he reveals God to us, and by him we come to the knowledge of God. To understand
this more clearly and distinctly, we must know, Eadem natura Divinitatis tota
and perfecta est in singulis personis.
this is a sure Maxim: The same nature of the Divinity is whole and perfect in
each of the persons. The Godhead is not divided, each person is whole God;
therefore does our Savior say, Joh. 14.7. If ye had known me, ye should have
known my Father also. When the Divinity of the Son is known, Quaelibet persona
est totus Deus.
the Divinity of the Father must needs be known, there being but one and the
same Divinity common between them both. Now then when the Son of God, the
second person in Trinity, assumes our nature, the whole nature of God is
brought down to us in Christ, This is the true God, 1 John 5.20. And he that
has seen me has seen the Father, Joh. 14.9. There is but one and the same
Divinity common between the Son and the Father; therefore he that sees and
apprehends the Divinity of the Son, does at the same instant apprehend and see
the Divinity of the Father. Now the humanity of the Son is the Medium by which
we come to see and apprehend the Divinity of the Son and of the Father. The
humanity is not the Divinity; yet the humanity is the Medium by which we are
helped to conceive and apprehend the Divinity: and that is the meaning of that
expression, He that has seen me has seen the Father. That is, (as a Learned
man expounds that passage) As my Divinity is seen and apprehended by this
assumed flesh of mine, Sicut mea Divinitas per hanc carnem assumtam videtur,
ita etiam videtur Divinitas Patris, quae eadem est.
so also is the Divinity of the Father apprehended by this assumed flesh of
mine, which is one and the same Divinity. Hence is that expression of our
Saviors, Joh. 12.44. Jesus cried and said, He that believes on me, believes
not on me, but on him that sent me. Our Savior lays much stress upon it, he
cries and says, as if he would proclaim it to all the world, and would have all
the world take notice of it. And what is the truth he proclaims with so much
solemnity? He that believes on me, believes not on me, but on him that sent me.
What, believe in Christ, and not believe in Christ? this is a seeming
contradiction. But the plain meaning is this, he that believes in me, believes
not in me only, but he believes on him that sent me. Our Savior would have all
men take notice of this, That his Divinity and the Divinity of the Father was
one and the same; therefore he says, He that believes on me, believes not on
me, but on him that sent me. As much as if he had said, The Father is in me,
the Divinity, Power, Majesty, Essence, all the Divine perfections of the Father
are found in me, and ye need not seek for God any further than in me; therefore
he says Joh. 14.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. Our Savior does not
here intimate, that there is a double object of faith, as if the Father were
one object of faith, and he another: for though the Father and the Son be
distinct persons, yet the Divinity common to them both is but one and the same,
and there is but one object of faith in both. When therefore he says, Ye
believe in God, believe also in me, his meaning is, that we should direct our
faith to God inhabiting in him, inhabiting in his humane nature. It is a great
help to faith, that we may conceive of God in and by the humanity of Jesus
Christ. The humanity of Christ is the Temple of the Divinity, as has been
shown heretofore. In this Temple it is we must seek for God, and here we may
find him. In the days of the Old Testament the Ark of the Covenant was the
Symbol of Gods presence, and that external Symbol was some help to their faith.
The people of God in those days directed their prayers to God before the Ark,
and they worshipped him that dwelt between the Cherubins. In the days of the
New Testament Christ is our Ark, God has manifested himself to us in and by
the flesh of his Son; Col. 2.9. In him the fullness of the Godhead dwells
bodily. It is the observation of a Learned man, That one fruit of the
Incarnation of the Son of God, Bishop Usher.
and of the conjunction of the two natures, the Divine and humane nature in
Christ, is this, That whereas God has no shape comprehensible, either to the
eye of the body or the soul, and the mind of man cannot rest but in a
representation of something that his mind and understanding can in some sort
reach unto; man considering God in the second person of the Trinity, who has
taken our nature, whereby God is revealed in the flesh, has whereupon to stay
his mind. Faith begins at the humanity of Christ, and then by degrees climbs up
to the Divinity: this is apparent in those words of Thomas, My Lord and my God,
Joh. 20.28. First he says, My Lord, Dominum propter humanam, Deum propter
Divinam dicit naturam.
then my God. He calls him Lord in respect of his humane nature, God in respect
of the Divine nature. Now Thomas says first, My Lord, then my God, it is one
and the same person that is Thomas his Lord and his God; but faith could more
easily apprehend Christ in his humane nature than it could in the Divine
nature; and therefore Thomas his faith begins there, my Lord, and from thence
climbs up and ascends to the Divinity, my God. Hence is that expression, 1 Pet.
1.21. By him we believe in God.

2. As by means of the Incarnation God has brought himself down to us, and
rendered himself more facile and easy to be apprehended and conceived of by us:
so by means of the Incarnation God has rendered himself more sweet for us to
approach unto him. We may now approach to God as dwelling in our nature, and
God dwelling in our nature must needs be sweet, kind, benign, propitious to
them that draw nigh to him. Hence is that expression, 2 Cor. 5.19. God is in
Christ reconciling the world to himself. God having brought himself down to us,
in Christ is full of grace and compassion to poor sinners. It is an expression
I have met with in Luther: Christ is nothing else but mere and infinite mercy
giving it self, Christus nihil aliud est quam mera and infinita misericordia
donans and donata. Luther.
and being given to poor sinners. This is a true description of Christ. When
Divine love and grace would put forth it self and manifest it self to the
uttermost, then it manifests it self in the gift of Christ. Hence Christ is
called the gift of God, Joh. 4.10. If thou knew the gift of God. The Mystery
of Christ, the Incarnation of the Son of God is the greatest instance and
demonstration of Divine love that ever was. Hence God is called Love upon this
account, 1 John 4.8. God is love, why so? The next words tell us, In this was
the love of God manifested, because that God sent his only begotten Son into
the world, that we might live through him. As much as if it had been said, Here
was the great demonstration of Divine love, that God sent his Son. God in
Christ is God manifesting himself all love, all grace, all kindness, and
compassion to poor Sinners. Hence is that expression Tit. 3.4. But after that
the kindness and love of God our Savior had appeared to mankind. The words are
emphatical: first, we have here the kindness of God. (...).
The Critics in the Greek Tongue tell us, this word properly signifies the
study of doing good to another; that is kindness, when a man studies to the
uttermost how he may do good to another. God (to speak after the manner of men)
studied how he might recommend his love to man, 1 John 4.10. Herein is love,
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins. Here is the kindness of God, the study that was in
God to express his good will to the sons of men. And then there is another word
(...), the Philanthropy of God; God took an affection to our race, to our kind,
as it were; God took that affection to our nature, as he did not to Angelical
nature, if we may so speak. Heb. 2.16. Verily he took not on him the nature of
Angels: as much as if he should say, He did not take such an affection to
Angelical nature, so as to cloth himself with a part of their nature; but it
was his affection to our nature, that he would cloth himself with it. Now God
taking such affection to us to come into our nature, and cloth himself with
it, he must needs be most sweet, most benign, and kind for man to approach
unto, for as much as God himself now dwells in the nature of man. It is a
notable Scripture to illustrate this, Heb. 12.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. There
are two things which the Apostle here designs to set forth. 1. The greatness
and excellency of Gospel Grace above the Legal Dispensation, and that he does
in the 22 and 23 verses. 2. The sweetness of Gospel Grace, Tandem subjicit
Jesum Mediatorem, quoniam is solus est per quem nobis placatur Pater, and qui
serenum atque amabilem ejus vultum nobis reddit. Calv.
this is described to us at the 24. verse: And to Jesus the Mediator of the new
Covenant. Calvin observes: Last of all the Apostle speaks of Christ the
Mediator, because it is by him only that the Father is pacified, and it is he
that renders the countenance of the Father sweet and amiable to us: by Jesus
the Mediator is the Father become sweet, propitious, and benign to poor sinners.

3. By means of the Incarnation, God does actually give and communicate himself
to his people. The flesh of Christ (as Luthers expression is) is the covering
as it were of the Divine Majesty. Involucrum Divinae Majestatis.
God, by means of this flesh of his Son, communicates and gives himself to his
people: the humanity of Christ is the Medium by which God exhibits, offers, and
gives himself to be enjoyed by his people. Acts 20.28. God has redeemed the
Church with his own blood. Though it was the flesh only that was capable of
suffering and dying, yet God was he who was in that flesh, and it was he that
did all in that flesh. So in that other place, God is in Christ reconciling the
world. Faith ought to apprehend God in Christ, as giving himself to the soul,
and as doing all for the soul: though we ought to contemplate Christ-man, yet
faith ought not to rest or terminate it self in Christ's humanity; but faith
ought to apprehend God in Christ, as giving himself to the soul, and doing all
for the soul: He has loved me, and given himself for me, says Paul, Gal.
2.20. And that passage of the Church in that triumphant Song of hers, is most
remarkable, to illustrate this point, Isa. 12.2. Behold, God is my salvation,
etc. This Prophecy has a manifest relation to the days of the Messiah, and it
speaks clearly of Christ and his Kingdom. Now what shall be the thanksgiving
Song of the people of God in the days of the Messiah? This shall be the Song,
Behold, God is my salvation, etc. The faith of the Saints looks to God in
Christ, they see God in Christ doing all for them, and giving himself to them.
Though God has sent his Son to take up the humanity, and is pleased to make
use of that Medium, yet they see it is God himself that is the Author of their
salvation, and that it is God who does all for them by his Son. 2 Cor. 5.18.
All things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ. And
that passage of our Savior is most remarkable to this purpose, Joh. 17.7.
where he makes this to be the property of the Elect: They have known, that all
things that thou have given me are of thee. The Saints do know, that whatever
Christ is, that God himself is to them by Christ: so that as God has brought
himself near to us in that way in the first place, to make himself more facile
and easy to be apprehended by us, and to render himself more sweet and kind
for us to approach to him; so God in Christ does actually communicate and give
himself to us, and God in Christ is the Author of our salvation, and does all
that is done in the business of our salvation.

13. The thirteenth Proposition for the clearing of this great Mystery is, the
love of Christ in his Incarnation is seen in this, In that by means of the
Incarnation of the Son of God, as God is brought near to us, so we are brought
near to him: Christ is the bond of our union unto God. Nexus unionis nostrae ad
Deum Christus est. Cyril. Quod homo est Christus esse voluit, ut homo posset
esse quod Christus est. Cyprian.
Christ is he that ties the knot between God and us. Christ as man is united
unto us; Christ as God, so he is naturally united to the Father. It was a good
speech of Cyprian: Christ would be that which man is, that man might be that
which Christ is. This will be illustrated by considering that great Scripture
Joh. 14.20. At that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me,
and I in you. These words are some of the most mysterious words in all the Book
of God, and I remember Cyril says of this Text, It is a difficult Text, and
prays for Divine grace to help him to understand it. I shall modestly give, as
I am able, the interpretation of this Text: here are three great Unions
insinuated in this Text. 1. The essential Union. 2. The Incarnation of the Son
of God, the Union of the two Natures in the person of Christ. 3. The mystical
Union. All these three great Unions are held forth to us in this Text.

1. The essential Union, the Union of the Son and Father in the self-same
Essence. In those words, In that day you shall know I am in my Father: that is,
you shall know that I am the natural Son of God, and that the Father has
communicated all his perfections unto me by eternal Generation: Joh. 16.15. All
that the Father has is mine. You shall know that I am in the Father by the
unity of the Divine Essence. Inspecto Christo videtur illa unitas essentiae ac
gloriae Patris ac Filii.
Or else (as another Learned Divine expounds this Phrase, You shall know that I
am in the Father) Christ being once looked upon and beheld by the eye of faith,
the unity of the Essence and the glory of the Father and the Son, is seen both
at once. You shall know that I am in the Father; that is, you shall know me to
be the Son of God, true God, of one and the same Substance, Essence, and
Divinity with the Father.

2. There is the Union of the two Natures in Christ implied in these words, You
shall know that you are in me: Percipietis Divinae meae incarnationis mysterium.
that is, as a Learned man expounds those words, You shall perceive the Mystery
of my Divine Incarnation, by means of which the humane nature is united to my
Divinity, and taken into unity of person with the Son of God, by means of
which, you also (after a sort) may be said to be in me. To understand this, we
must know, although it be true, that the Son of God assumed humane nature, (not
the whole mass or lump of it, but in a certain part and particle of it) and
hereupon that part of humane nature which is taken into personal union with the
Son of God, has a nearer relation to the Trinity than any creature whatsoever:
yet the Son of God assuming a part of our nature into personal union with
himself, all the Elect being united to Christ by faith, are included in Christ
as Members relating to the Head, and so enjoy the benefit of his Incarnation.
Heb. 2.14. For as much as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he
also himself took part of the same. So that, although the union be personally
made in one part of humane nature, viz. that part which was personally united
to the Son of God, yet all the seed have benefit by Christ's Incarnation, and
being implanted into Christ by faith, are made members of his body, Sicut
membra in capite, sicut contentum in continente, sicut palms in vite, sicut
effectus in fontali principio.
of his flesh, and of his bone, and are comprehended in him as in their Head.
You shall know that you are in me; that is, (as one explains this Phrase) As
the members are in the head, as the thing contained in the thing containing, as
the branches in the Vine, as the effect is in its fontal Principle. This
interpretation is further confirmed by that Scripture, Ephesians. 1.10. That in the
dispensation of the fullness of time, he might gather together in one in Christ.
The word in the Original is an emphatical word, (...).
which Chrysostom interprets thus: To reduce all things under one head. All
the Elect are reduced and brought under Christ as their common Head: and thus
we are said to be in him: You in me. We are in him as members in the head. And
it is observed further by a Learned man, That the Elect are said to be in
Christ in respect of both his natures. 1. As Christ is man, Per communionem
naturae, ut in causa servante and conservante, and sicut in ultimo fine.
so we are said to be in him by communion of nature. 2. As Christ is God, so we
are in him as in the saving and conserving cause, and as in the last end. Hence
are those expressions, Preserved in Jesus Christ, Jude 1. Col. 1.16. All things
were created by him and for him.

3. Here is the Mystical or Spiritual Union set down, and I in you. As Christ
is in the Father by Unity of Essence, we in Christ as being taken in to be
members of his body, and standing related to him as a Head: so Christ is in us
by his Spirit. 1 Cor. 6.16. He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit. This
is another part of the love of Christ in his Incarnation, that by this means we
are brought near to God, as one of the Ancients expression is: Consummati sumus
reductique ad unionem Dei Patris mediatione Salvatoris. Cyril.
We are consummated and brought back again into union with God the Father by
the mediation of Christ our Savior. This is that our Savior prays for in that
great and famous Prayer of his, Joh. 17.21. That they all may be one, as thou
Father art in me and I in thee, etc. And verse. 23. I in them, and thou in me,
that they may be made perfect in one. That which our Savior intends in this
passage, is, not only that the Faithful should be united among themselves, but
that they should be united unto God. This is the most firm binding and knitting
together of things, when God is in Christ, Christ is in us, and the Faithful
united among themselves. God the Father is the root, Christ the stock, the holy
Spirit as the sap, we the branches, and the graces of the Saints are the
fruits. And that this union may be effected, Christ took from us a part of our
nature, on the other hand he has given to us his own flesh and blood: and that
we might be united to God, he has given to us the holy Spirit.

Is it so, desire to be a child of God? If we would be the children of God,
here we may see the ready way how to attain this privilege. If we desire to be
the sons and daughters of God, we must choose and close with Christ the natural
Son of God. A great and choice Scripture, 2 Cor. 6.18. I will be a father unto
you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. If we will
be the sons and daughters of God, we must first see that we close with Christ
the natural Son of God. God says of Christ, I will be unto him a Father, Heb.
1.5. God is first a Father unto Christ, before he is or will be a Father unto
us. Now we must close with the natural Son of God, as ever we desire to be the
adopted sons of God. Joh. 1.12. To as many as received him he gave power to
become the sons of God. We are by nature children of wrath, children of hell,
children of the curse; and are we contented to abide so always? Are we
contented always to abide in that condition of distance and estrangement to
God? If you would have God a Father, you must get into Christ. God out of
Christ is a sin revenging God. Let us therefore look well to our faith: Gal.
3.26. We are the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. If our faith be not
right, if we have not closed with Christ in a right manner, we have no evidence
that we are the children of God. There is a spurious, a bastard faith, a false
faith that is not a true faith: there is a mere historical faith, which is a
consenting that the Scripture is true: there is a temporary faith, when there
are some flashes and pangs of affection toward Christ: but then there is the
faith of Gods Elect, let us look after this. You will ask, What is this faith?
That faith takes a man wholly off himself, takes him perfectly from his own
bottom, and makes him look to another for wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification. This is faith, to go out perfectly out of our selves, and to
live perfectly upon another as to all the parts of our salvation; and this is
the faith that the just must live by. If we be in Christ by faith, then shall
we be the sons of God.

If by means of the Incarnation God has brought himself down to us, Scrutator
Majestatis opprimetur a gloria.
He that thinks to dive into the Abyss of the Divinity, will soon find himself
overwhelmed with the Divine glory. The Lord has said, No man can see his face
and live. We cannot behold the Sun in the Firmament, in its noonday glory: we
can much better behold the Sun in a cloud, than behold it in its simple glory:
so God has veiled his glory in the flesh of his Son, and the way for us to
behold God, is to contemplate God in the face of Jesus Christ. It is far more
easy for us to conceive of the humane nature in the person of Christ, than to
conceive of the naked, simple, and absolute Divinity. When we conceive of the
humane nature in the person of Christ, the mind has something to rest and stay
it self upon, and by the humanity we climb up by degrees to the Divinity. It is
true, faith ought not to terminate it self in the humanity, but by the humanity
we ought to climb and ascend up to the Divinity. By him we believe in God, 1
Pet. 1.21. It is Calvin's opinion, Tunc remoto velo, palam cernemus Deum in sua
Majestate regnantem, neque amplius media erit Christi humanitas quae nos ab
ulteriore Dei conspectu cohibeat. Calv. in 1 Cor. 15.,
That in Heaven, when God shall be all in all, we shall then see God without
the veil of Christ's flesh, then, say she, the veil being removed, we shall
behold God openly reigning in his Majesty, neither shall the flesh of Christ
oppose it self as a Medium to hinder us from the farther sight of God. How far,
and with what limitation this opinion of his may take place, I shall not now
inquire; but sure I am, whilst we are here on earth, we cannot behold God
without this veil, the veil of Christ's flesh. Whilst we are here on earth, the
new and living way into the holiest is consecrated for us through the veil,
that is to say, his flesh, Heb. 10.19, 20. Upon this Text Calvin himself has
this passage: No man shall ever find God, but he unto whom Christ-man is the
door and the way. The flesh of Christ is that veil which covers God, and by
this veil we must come into the holy of Holies, and have admittance into the
Divine presence. It is dangerous for us to think of God, or to approach to him
any other way but in Christ. He is the way, the truth, and the life, and no man
comes to the Father but by him: that is, no man can come to the Father but by
him. They are weighty and memorable passages Luther has concerning this point,
Qui scrutando volet non errare, nec a Majestatis gloria opprimi, is fide tangat
and apprehendat Filium Dei in carne manifestatum. Luther.
with which I shall close this Use: He that in searching would not err, nor be
overwhelmed by the glory of the Divine Majesty, let him by faith touch and
apprehend the Son of God incarnate, the Son of God manifest in the flesh. In
another place he says: Let us not hear them who say the flesh profits nothing,
let us rather invert the words and say, Without the flesh God profits nothing:
our eyes ought to be fastened upon the flesh of Christ, and we ought to say, We
neither apprehend nor know any God out of that flesh, Dei Filius incarnatus est
illud involucrum in quo Divina Majestas cum omnibus suis-donis se nobis offert.
Luther.
out of that humanity: The Son of God incarnate is that covering in which the
Divine Majesty offers himself to us with all his gifts. This is that only
aspect of the Divinity, which in this life is facile and possible for us: here
is no seeing God out of Christ. If we would conceive of God aright, let us
direct our faith to God in Christ.

If by means of the Incarnation we are brought near to God, faith may be deeply
rooted in Christ. Our happiness lies in this, In being taken into Christ, in
being comprehended in him, in being made members of his body. Our nature, by
means of the Incarnation of the Son of God, is brought near to God. Now if we
would be brought near to God, we must be implanted into Christ by faith, and
made members of his body. Part prays for himself Phil. 3.9. That I may be found
in him. An emphatical expression, found in Christ. Paul would not for a
thousand worlds be left out of Christ, no, he would be found in him. And for
the Ephesians he prays, That Christ might dwell in their hearts by faith, Ephesians.
3.17. Our happiness lies in conjunction with our Head, standing and abiding in
relation to Christ as our Head, in being comprehended in Christ as it were,
this is our happiness. This is the misery of the fallen Angels and all
Unbelievers, they have nothing to do with Christ as their Head: and this is the
great happiness of all the Elect, they are gathered under him as their Head,
Behold I and the children which God has given me, Heb. 2.13. Wherefore let us
see that our faith take deep rooting in Christ, and then we are on a safe
bottom. Christ is the Captain of the Salvation of the Elect, and by him many
sons are brought to glory, Heb. 2.10. If our faith has taken deep rooting in
Christ, then are we safe, then are we comprehended in him, and where the Head
is, there the members shall be also.

The end of the seventh Sermon.
SERMON VIII.
Ephesians. 3. verse. 17, 18, 19. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that
ye being rooted and grounded in love,

May be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height:

And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.


SEveral Propositions have been mentioned already to illustrate the greatness
of Christ's love in the work of his Incarnation, I shall add three or four more,
and so I shall finish this subject.

14. The love of Christ in his Incarnation is seen in this, In that Christ
becoming true man, and wearing a part of our nature, the consideration of his
humanity may be a great help and strengthening to our faith to assure us of his
propension and readiness to supply us in all our wants, and also to sympathize,
pity, and compassionate us in all our afflictions. Hence it is, that one of the
Ancients brings in Christ speaking thus: Ego corpus illorum gesto.
I do wear their body, and carry about with me a part of their flesh. Christ
wears as it were the flesh of the Elect, Now no man ever yet hated his own
flesh, but nourishes it and cherishes it as the Lord the Church, Ephesians. 5.29.
That common humanity wherein Christ shares with us, cannot but incline him to
be most kind, sweet, benign to his own kindred who participate of the same
nature with him. Because the children were made partakers of flesh and blood,
he also took part of the same, Heb. 2.16. Christ was a man of sorrows,
therefore he knows how to pity us in our sorrows; Christ was deserted,
therefore he knows how to pity us in our desertion: Christ was tempted in all
points like to us (sin only excepted) therefore he knows how to succor us in
our temptations. Christ in the humane nature assumed has felt the same
miseries and afflictions that we are subject unto, and therefore he knows
experimentally (by what he himself has felt and endured) how to pity us. The
Apostle sets this down as one great fruit of the Incarnation, Heb. 2.16, 17.
Because the children were made partakers of flesh and blood, he also took part
of the same. What is the fruit and advantage of this? Why was it that Christ
took a part of our nature? The next verse tells us, It was that he might be a
merciful and a faithful High Priest. Calvin observes upon this Text, When all
sorts of miseries do oppress us, we ought to remember there is nothing befalls
us, which the Son of God has not experienced in himself, neither ought we to
doubt, but he is so present with us to help and pity us, as if he himself were
afflicted with us. The experience of our miseries does so bend and incline
Christ to compassion, that he is exceeding solicitous of obtaining help from
God for us. Hence is it said in the last verse, For in that he himself has
suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted. Christ
having been exercised with the same miseries and afflictions that we are, is
most propense and ready to afford help and relief to us. Christ now he is in
Heaven, has not forgotten his own sorrows and sufferings here on earth, and
the remembrance of his own sufferings cannot but incline him to pity and
compassionate his people (who are a part of his own nature) in the like
sufferings. It is true, Christ as he is God, wants no love, neither needed
Christ to have known what sufferings and afflictions were, experimentally, to
have inclined him to a merciful disposition, for God is love. God is so in his
own nature, and it was the love that was in the Divine nature, that inclined
him to assume our nature: but because we could not be otherwise persuaded that
there was so much kindness in his heart; therefore in condescension to our
infirmity, and for the strengthening of our faith, Christ would become man and
taste of sufferings and affliction, that having done so, we might be the better
assured he would be the more ready to pity and help us. True indeed, God is
love in himself, his name is the Lord, gracious, merciful, long-suffering,
pardoning iniquity, transgression, and sin; but God being at such a distance
from us, and also a God of such infinite Purity and Majesty, we are apt to
doubt, whether God will take any notice of such vile and sinful worms as we
are: therefore in a way of condescension God is come down into our nature, that
so faith may have the greater encouragement, that since God dwells in the
nature of man, he will not shut up his own bowels against them who are his own
brethren and kindred. Christ is akin to us, nearly allied to us in respect of
his humanity, one in nature with us in respect of his humanity: as he is nearly
allied to his Father, and one in nature with him in respect of his Divinity,
Heb. 2.11. The Apostle here speaks of Christ and his Members, He that
sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are of one; that is, they are one and
the same nature, of one and the same common nature. We may well suppose that
part of our nature which Christ wears, will put him in mind to be kind to us,
if he were not otherwise inclined unto us. There is a common Law of humanity
which commands some compassion in all men, even in those who are most
degenerate by sin: the Law of common humanity will force some bowels from the
worst of men to them that are in great distress. How powerful then is this Law,
where the force of it is not abated by any allay from sin, but where this Law
is heightened and elevated by the greatest measures of grace, and the presence
of the Divinity inhabiting in the humanity? Thus it is in Christ, Christ has
the greatest perfection of grace in him, and the presence of the Divinity
inhabiting in his humanity. Hence it is our Savior comforts the hearts of his
Disciples upon this account, Joh. 14.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me.
It is as much as if he should say, You take this for granted, this is a
confessed Principle among you, you ought to believe in God; now you believe in
God, believe also in me. Our Saviors meaning is this, Look upon God come down
into a part of your nature, behold God in my humanity, Ye believe in God,
believe also in me. Faith in Christ is no prejudice to faith in God the Father;
at the same time we believe in Christ we believe in God the Father: for the
Divine Essence is one and the same in all the three persons; at the same time
we believe in the Son, we believe in the Father. Now our Savior, to encourage
us to believe, would have us to behold God in the glass of his humanity: You
believe in God, believe also in me. As much as if he should say, I that am now
speaking to you, am God and man in one person: you cannot think that I your
Lord and Master who have been conversing with you so long, and of whose
tenderness and compassion you have had so much experience, should want any
bowels or tenderness in me to do you good: now I am God as well as man; if you
think I am inclined to pity you as I amman, I want no power to help and relieve
you as I am God.

15. The love of Christ in his Incarnation is seen in this, In that by means of
his Incarnation there is a foundation laid for the work of his Mediatorship in
general, and also for executing those three great Offices of Prophet, Priest,
and King in particular. My design is not at present to treat of Christ's
Mediatorship at large, nor to speak largely of his Offices, but only to show
how Christ's Incarnation, or his taking of our nature, lays the foundation for
his undertaking the work of Mediatorship in general, and also of executing
those three great Offices in particular of a Prophet, Priest, and King: and
also to show how his love is demonstrated to us in this. (1) Christ's
undertaking the Office of Mediatorship is the great demonstration of his love
to us; for Christ as Mediator brings us back to God, we were at variance with
God: now we being at a distance from God, and at enmity with him by reason of
sin, there was need of a Mediator to reconcile the difference, and bring God
and us together. Now here was the great demonstration of the love of Christ,
that the Son of God would undertake the Office of Mediator, and that he might
do so, he was willing to take up our nature in his Incarnation, that he might
perform the Office of Mediator in it. Hence is that expression of the Apostle,
1 Timothy 2.5. There is one Mediator between God and man, the man Jesus Christ.
The Apostles intention in using this expression the Man Christ Jesus, is not to
exclude the Divine nature from the person of the Mediator; for it is here
observed by Calvin, when the Apostle calls him Man, he does not hereby deny him
to be God; for this is a sure Rule in Divinity, The person of the Mediator
accomplisheth the work of Redemption according to both natures, so that the
work of Redemption is the work of the person working in both natures that which
is proper to each nature. Hence is it, that a Judicious Divine observes, By a
wonderful temperament it is so ordered, that the Hypostatical union of the two
natures is made in the person of Christ, Vt esset mediatrix humana Divinitas
and Divina humanitas. August.
that he who is our Mediator should be Man-God, and God-man; therefore we ought
thus to conceive of it: Christ took up our nature, that he might perform the
Office of Mediator in it; and this is expressed by the Apostle, Heb. 10.5. When
he comes into the world he says, Sacrifices and burnt-offerings thou would
not, but a body have thou prepared me. [When he comes into the world.] Christ
came into the world by his Incarnation, by his Assumption and taking up of our
nature; and wherefore did he come into the world? It was to perform the Office
of a Mediator, to reconcile us to God, to offer up the great Sacrifice for sin.
Other Sacrifices would not serve the turn; and therefore the Son of God would
offer the great and true Sacrifice, namely, the Sacrifice of himself, and by
this means reconcile us to God. Now what must Christ do that he may perform the
Office of Mediator and reconcile us to God? He must take a true humane body.
Sacrifices and burnt-offerings thou would not, but a body have thou prepared
me. The Son of God must assume man's nature, if he will be a Mediator between
God and man. It is the office of a Mediator to conjoyn and unite those, between
whom he is a Mediator. The extremes are united in some middle, and he that is
Mediator had need to have some interest in both parties to be reconciled:
Christ therefore being to reconcile us to God and to unite us to him, that he
might be a fit Mediator, takes upon him the nature of man, that so being God
and man in one person, and having interest in both parties, he might bring God
and man together. Hence is it, that the Mediator has this appellation of
Christ given to him, Luke 2.17. Unto you is born this day a Savior which is
Christ the Lord. Christ (you know) signifies the anointed. Under the Old
Testament Kings, Priests, and Prophets were wont to be anointed. Now Christ
being to undertake the office of Mediator in general, and those three Offices
in particular of Prophet, Priest, and King, he also is anointed. Christ's
Unction or Anointing properly belongs to his humane nature: Act. 10.38. God
anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost. For although it be true, that
Christ is the name of the person subsisting in both natures, and the name of
Christ does not only agree to Christ as he is man, but as he is God manifested
in the flesh: yet Christ's anointing properly respects his humane nature. As
God, he needed not any anointing, for he had all fullness in himself; therefore
he was properly anointed as man. If it be asked what this anointing of Christ
was, I answer, It is that plenitude and fullness of the gifts of the Holy Ghost;
yea, the fullness of the Godhead which dwells personally in the humane nature
assumed, whereby he is qualified to perform the office of Mediator. Christ
being to undertake the Office of Mediator, has his humanity filled with all
habitual grace, and also the presence of the Divinity inhabiting personally in
his humane nature. So that Christ's assumption of our nature, anointing it with
the Spirit of all grace, lays the foundation for the great work of his
Mediatorship. It is well observed by a Judicious Divine: That we may more
firmly believe, Chemnitius
that the benefit of Redemption does belong to us, therefore did the Son of God
assume a nature that was of the same substance with ours, and near akin with
us, by which (in the virtue of the Divinity) he might accomplish our
Redemption: that as by humane nature in Adam sin and death entered into the
world; so by the same nature in Christ, righteousness and life might be
restored to the world.

2. As the Incarnation of Christ lays the foundation, and prepares the way to
the work of Mediatorship in general; so by the Incarnation Christ is fitted and
prepared, as it were, to enter upon the execution of those three great Offices
of his, the Office of a Prophet, Priest, and King.

1. The Lord Jesus assuming man's nature, performs the office of a Prophet to
the Church in the humane nature assumed. The great work of the Prophets of old
was to be the Messengers of God to the people, the Interpreters of Gods mind
and will, they were to reveal Gods mind and will to the people. The Lord Jesus
undertaking our nature, is the great Messenger of the Covenant, the Interpreter
of the Fathers counsels, he has revealed the whole will and mind of the Father
to us. Heb. 1.2. God has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son. Joh.
15.15. All things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you.
Should God speak to us immediately from Heaven, we should be affrighted at his
presence, and terrified with his Majesty, as they were when they heard God
speaking to them from Mount Sinai, and said, Let not God speak to us, but let
Moses speak to us, Exodus 20.19. Therefore has the Son of God assumed our
nature and appeared visibly in flesh, and conversed among men like one of us,
that we might receive the Law at his mouth. The humanity of Christ is the Organ
of the Divinity. And this is one great commendation of the office of the
Ministry, as Peter Martyr has observed: That the Son of God, who was God over
all blessed for ever, was pleased to take up humane nature, that he might
perform the office of a Minister in it. Therefore is Christ called, Romans 15.8.
A Minister of the Circumcision, that is, to the Jewish Church. There is some
Controversy among Divines concerning the knowledge that was in the humane soul
of Jesus Christ; but this is certain, Christ as man had all things made known
to him, that did concern our salvation: now whatsoever the Lord Jesus as man
received from the Father, that (as the great Prophet of the Church) he has
faithfully revealed to his people. Joh. 17.8. I have given unto them the words
which thou gave me. Christ as man receives all from the Father, and he gives
out all to the Church. Thus his Incarnation prepares him for the execution of
his Prophetical Office.

2. The Son of God by assuming man's nature, is prepared for the execution of
his Priestly Office. Two great works were incumbent on the Priests under the
Law. 1. To offer Sacrifices, and make atonement for the people. 2. To intercede
and pray for the people. 1. One Office of the Priest was to offer Sacrifice and
make atonement. So Heb. 8.3. Every High Priest is ordained to offer gifts and
sacrifices. 2. Another office of the Priest was to pray for the people.
Therefore says Samuel, God forbid that I should cease to pray for you. Now the
Son of God, by assuming our nature, is qualified to perform both these works of
a Priest.

1. Christ by his Incarnation is fitted to offer Sacrifice. God took no delight
in the Sacrifices of beasts and cattle: Sacrifices and burnt-offerings thou
would not; therefore did the Son of God take a true humane body, and offered
himself for a Sacrifice. Heb. 9.26. Now once in the end of the world has he
appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. Christ is Priest, Altar,
and Sacrifice. Christ is the Sacrifice that is offered: so verse. 28. Christ was
offered to bear the sin of many. Christ is the name of the person subsisting in
both natures; so that there is a concourse of both natures, the Divine and
humane nature in the work of Satisfaction. The humane nature was the nature
suffering, and the Divine nature that sanctified the sufferings of the
humanity. The Divinity was in the humanity in the time of its offering: that
body which hung upon the Cross, which suffered and dyed, was the body of him
who was God; it was filled and replenished with God, the Godhead did personally
inhabit in it, in the time of its suffering. Although the Godhead did not put
forth its operation as it might have done, but did rest and suspend its
operations for a time, (...)
that it might give liberty to the humane nature to suffer, (for if the Godhead
should have put forth its operation as it might, it could have hindered all
passion and suffering in the humane nature) yet the personal union always
remained; the Son of God did always retain and keep the humane nature in the
bond of personal union in the height of his sufferings, and he corroborated and
strengthened the humane nature in suffering; so that as the Apostle says, it
was Christ that was offered. There was a concourse of both natures in his
Satisfaction. If he were not man, he could not have suffered; and if he were
not God, he could not have satisfied. Christ is a Priest in our nature: and as
the High Priest under the Law bare all the names of the children of Israel upon
his Breast Plate, so Christ bears all the names of the Elect upon him. Christ
sustains the persons of all the Elect: Because the children were made partakers
of flesh and blood, he also took part of the same. Christ assuming the nature
of man, sustains the persons of all the Elect, and in their room, and in their
stead, in a part of their nature, presents himself to God, and taking their
guilt upon him, is willing to bear the punishment due to them: therefore he
suffers and dies in their nature, and remains under the power of death for a
time.

2. Christ by his Incarnation is fitted for the work of his Intercession. As it
was the work of the Priest to offer Sacrifice and make atonement, so to
intercede and pray for the people. Now Christ by taking our nature is fit for
this work also. Christ as to his Divine nature is equal with the Father, and so
is the object of prayer together with the Father; but Christ according to his
humane nature is inferior to the Father, and so fit to intercede. And
therefore it is a common saying among Divines: Christ intercedes and prays as
he is man and Mediator.

3. Christ by assuming our nature performs the Office of a King to the Church.
Christ has a natural Kingdom, and he has a dispensatory Kingdom. As he is
God, so he has a natural Kingdom over all creatures. Thy kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion is an everlasting dominion. As he is
God-man, so he has a Kingdom by way of donation and dispensation. Yet have I
set my King upon my holy hill of Sion, Psalm. 2.6. The Father judges no man,
but has committed all judgment to the Son, Joh. 5.22. that is, to the Son
incarnate. Christ as Head and King of the Church dispenses all grace to the
Church, rules and governs the Church in and by the humane nature assumed, Ephesians.
1.21, 22, 23.

Thus have we shown how that Christ by the work of his Incarnation, lays the
foundation for the work of Mediatorship in general, and for the executing of
those three great Offices of Prophet, Priest, and King in particular.

16. The love of Christ in his Incarnation is seen in this, In that by means of
Christ's Incarnation, our nature which was alienated from God, deprived of
communion with him, lay under the curse, was subject to all sorts of miseries
and unto death it self, is now restored to communion with God again, delivered
from the curse, set above all misery and death, clothed with immortality, and
possessed of perfect happiness.

1. The Son of God by his Incarnation has restored our nature unto communion
with God. Adam by his Fall was turned out of Paradise, banished from the
presence of God, lost his communion with God. Now the Son of God taking a part
of our nature into unity of person with himself, has brought our nature near
to God again, our nature in Christ is admitted to the sight of God and
communion with him. Christi humana natura semper usque; a primordio
incarnationis vidit Deum
Divines observe, That the humane nature in Christ had the sight of God from
the beginning of his Conception and Incarnation: and the reason of this
assertion is this, Christ was full of grace, he had the Spirit of God given to
him not by measure. Aquinas observes, That Christ from the beginning of his
Incarnation, had more grace given to him than the Saints in Heaven. Now the
Saints in Heaven are admitted to a clear sight and vision of God; therefore if
Christ had more grace given to him from the beginning than the Saints in
Heaven, we must suppose Christ had a clear sight and vision of God: besides,
the great demonstration of Christ's love in his sufferings was, that he was
content to be deprived of the sight and comfort of his Fathers love; therefore
he cries out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? This argues, Christ had
been used and accustomed to the sight of his Fathers face and countenance,
otherwise why did he cry out, Why have thou forsaken me? But for our sakes he
was content to have his Fathers face hid from him for a time, that it might not
be hid from us for ever. Now then Christ in his humane nature being admitted to
the sight of God, all the Elect in their measure shall have a share in this
privilege. Scientia visionis competit Christo ut capiti, electis ut membris.
The knowledge of vision is first given to Christ as the Head, to the Elect as
Members: and although all the Elect be not as yet admitted to the vision of
God, yet it is certain they shall be as Christ now is: When he shall appear, we
shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.3. and in the mean
time, our life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3. hid as in the fountain,
root, Tanquam in font, radice, principio.
and principle of that life. Christ in his humane nature being admitted unto
the sight of God and communion with him, is an argument all the Elect also
shall be brought to the same happiness.

2. The Son of God by his Incarnation has delivered our nature from the Curse,
set it above misery, sorrow, and death, and clothed it with immortality. The
sentence pronounced concerning man, was, That in case he sinned, he should dye
the death, Genesis 2.17. Christ by taking our nature, and dying in it, has born
the substance of that curse. The curse comprehended two things in it. First,
natural death, the separation of the soul from the body. Secondly, spiritual
death, the separation of the soul from God. Here lay the sting of the curse,
Thou shall dye the death, or, In dying thou shall dye; thou shall not dye once
only, but dye twice as it were, thy soul shall not only be separated from thy
body, but both body and soul shall be separated from me. Now Christ under-went
both parts of the curse, if rightly understood. First, Christ in a right sense
endured that part of the curse which consisted in a separation from God; for
although the personal Union was never dissolved; neither was Christ's humane
soul ever separated in love or affection from his Father, his soul clave in
love and affection to his Father in the midst of all his sufferings (Christ did
not undergo separation from God in either of those respects) yet his humane
soul was separated for a time from the light and comfort of his Fathers love;
as was hinted before, when he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? He was deprived of the sense and comfort of his Fathers love. Secondly,
Christ suffered natural death, his humane soul was truly separated from his
body. Now Christ having satisfied that Law, In the day that thou eatest, thou
shall dye the death: by suffering the penalty of that Law, has fully delivered
his people from the curse, Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of
the law, being made a curse for us. A Learned man observes, Because (according
to the sentence of the Divine Judgment) in that day Adam fell and sinned,
humane nature ought to have been punished with eternal perdition: therefore the
Son of God offered himself to assume humane nature, and afterward did assume
it, that so man might not dye the death. And the same Learned man has another
expression to the same purpose: Because humane nature was depraved and lost, so
that it became the body of sin and death; therefore the Son of God in lieu
thereof, was pleased in the humane nature assumed to condemn sin, and abolish
death, and in his own person restore humane nature to righteousness, life, and
happiness. Christ having dyed for sin once, dies no more, death has no more
dominion over him, Romans 6.9, 10. Our nature, as it is in Christ, it is above
death, and the fear of death. O let us think of these things, these things are
the most solid grounds of comfort. Our nature in Christ is above death and the
fear of death, it is possessed of life and immortality, and brought to perfect
happiness. Hence is that expression, 2 Timothy 1.10. Christ who has abolished
death, and has brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel.
Christ has already brought life and immortality into our nature: Christ does
already stand possessed of immortality in his own person. And this is the
singular comfort of Believers, that they may see a part of their own nature set
above sorrow, misery and death, and brought to the greatest happiness they can
wish or long for, and that they may be assured they shall be possessed of the
same happiness in their measure which Christ their Head is possessed of. This
Christ assures them of, Joh. 17.22. The glory which thou have given me I have
given them. Christ had glory with the Father from Eternity as he was his
natural and coessential Son: this he speaks of verse. 5. Glorify me with thy
self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was. Now besides
this, there is a glory which is given to him, the glory which thou gave me I
have given them. Christ had a glory given to him as man and Mediator. Now the
glory which was given to Christ as man and Head of the Church is given to the
Elect; so that all the Elect do participate and share in it in their measure.
The glory which thou have given me I have given them. Calvin observes upon that
Text: The Samplar or pattern of perfect happiness is so expressed and set forth
in Christ, that nothing is confined to Christ only; but Christ was therefore
enriched, that he might enrich Believers, the glory which thou have given me I
have given them. Christ and his Members share in glory in common, only
reserving the difference between Head and Members; Christ has the glory of the
Head, Believers have glory as Members. Christ's glorification is the surest
pledge of our glorification; for how is it possible, that he who is our Head,
and is now in glory with the Father, should leave us to those miseries we are
now obnoxious to, whenas we are so nearly related to him, we being members of
his body, of his flesh and of his bones? Ephesians. 5.30. and he that is joined to
the Lord is one Spirit. The Church being so nearly related to Christ, and
Christ being in glory, how is it possible Christ should leave them under those
miseries they are now subject unto?

17. The greatness of Christ's love in his Incarnation appears in this, In that
by means of the Incarnation all the Elect shall have a standing Monument before
their eyes, wherein they may see and behold the infiniteness and transcendency
of the love of God to all Eternity. And the reason of this Proposition is this,
Because the Hypostatical or personal Union shall not be dissolved in Heaven,
the humane nature shall remain and abide united to the Divinity to all
Eternity. As in Heaven we shall be admitted to the sight of God, we shall see
the Unity in Trinity, and the Trinity in Unity, we shall see the Unity of the
Essence, and the three persons, Father, Son, and Spirit, subsisting in this one
Essence of God: so in Heaven we shall see the great Mystery of the personal
Union, the Mystery of the two Natures in the person of Christ more than now we
can. And this will be one part of the happiness of Heaven, that we shall see
our nature united to the Divinity in the person of the Son of God, and by this
means we shall come to understand the greatness of the love of God by seeing
how near our nature is taken unto God in the person of our Head. The
Hypostatical or personal Union is the foundation of the mystical Union, viz. of
our union and communion with God: God has taken a part of our nature into
personal union with himself, and by means of this we have union and communion
with him. Now in Heaven we shall have a clear sight what that glory is which
Christ our Head is advanced unto by the personal union. And this I take to be
carried in that great Text, Joh. 17.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou
have given me be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou
have given me. The happiness of Heaven will be to gaze upon the glory of
Christ, as a Learned Divine expresses it, That they may behold my glory: as if
so be this would be Heaven enough for the Elect to see the glory their Head is
possessed of. And what glory is this? That they may behold my glory, certainly
the glory of his Divinity. Christ had glory with the Father before the
foundation of the world, Joh. 17.5. He was in the form of God, says the
Apostle: now all the Elect shall see and behold his glory, that is, they shall
see the glory of his Divinity: and how so? They shall see and behold the glory
of his Divinity shining forth through his humanity. The humane nature is united
to the Divinity in the person of the Son; now the Elect in Heaven shall see
that person who has assumed their nature to be true God, and to have all the
glory of the Divinity in him. As the second person in Trinity is true God, and
has all the glory of the Divinity in him; so the Elect in Heaven shall see the
humane nature united to the Divinity in the person of the Son. Therefore is it
added in the close of the verse, For thou have loved me before the foundation
of the world. Let us take heed how we mistake here, the Love of the Father was
not the cause of the Divinity of the Son: although the Son be begotten of the
Father, yet the Generation of the Son proceeds not from an act of Gods will;
the Father did not first love the Son, and then beget him, but the Generation
of the Son was natural: the Father begets the Son from Eternity, and cannot but
beget him; God does necessarily understand himself, therefore his eternal Son
is his natural Image. Therefore in this last clause, For thou have loved me
before the foundation of the world, Christ speaks of himself as man; the
humanity of Christ was beloved of the Father, from Eternity, above every
creature: that humanity of his was so chosen and beloved above all creatures,
as to be united to the Divinity. Now in Heaven the Elect shall see that Christ
is in the possession of that which he was elected and chosen unto from
Eternity. And this will be one singular demonstration of the love of God to
them, that they shall see themselves taken so near to God in the person of
their Head. For although it be true, there will always remain a vast difference
between Christ the Head and the Elect that are Members to him (none of the
Elect have, or can have that personal union which his humanity has to the
Divinity) yet all the Elect in the glory of their Head shall see and behold the
greatness of the love of God to themselves; for it was for their sakes he took
part of their nature into personal union; and a part of their nature being
united to God, all the Elect are confirmed in their Head, and by means of their
Head are brought into the nearest communion with God they are capable of. So
that I say, this will be matter of wonder to the Elect to Eternity, to see a
part of their nature placed so near to the Divinity, yea to see a part of their
nature so intimately united to the Divinity in the bond of personal union, and
to become the seat and Temple of the Divinity to all Eternity.

O the heights, and lengths, and depths, and breadths that are in the love of
Christ in his Incarnation! I have shown you in seventeen Propositions how great
the love of Christ is in the work of his Incarnation; and when we have dived
never so much into this Mystery, it is but little that we do understand of the
glory of it in comparison of what it is in it self. O study more this great
work of the Incarnation of the Son of God: this is the greatest of all the
works of God, the greatest work that ever he has done, or that ever he will
do. The Incarnation of the Son of God is more than the glorification of all the
Saints in Heaven. O therefore study this Mystery; the more we study it, the
more will our hearts be ravished with it, and the reason why we are no more
affected with it, is, because we know and understand so little of it. And let
us not only labor to understand the greatness of the thing it self, but also
of what importance this work of the Incarnation of the Son of God, is, to our
salvation. The work of the Incarnation is that which has laid the foundation
of the whole work of Redemption. The Son of God therefore took our nature and
became true man, that he might transact the business of our Salvation in the
humane nature assumed. Vnigenitus venit in hominem propter hominem. Hoc Deus in
nobis salvavit quod pro nobis accepit. (...).
They are memorable passages which the Ancients have: The only begotten Son of
God came into the nature of man, for man. If the Word had not been pleased to
have become flesh, no flesh could have been saved. God has saved that in us,
which he has assumed and took for us. And it is a common saying among the
Ancients: That which was not assumed, was not healed. If Christ had not assumed
the whole of our nature, our whole nature had not been healed and restored. We
have heard somewhat of the Mystery of Christ in his Incarnation, let us
meditate on what we have heard. Our work will be to meditate on these Truths
all our days. The best of us have arrived but to a little understanding in the
Mystery of Christ. The Apostle prays for the Saints, Col. 2.2. That their
hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all riches of
the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the mystery of
God, and of the Father, and of Christ. Let us pray for great affection to
Christ. Great love to the Person of Christ will procure great manifestation of
Christ. So Christ has promised, Joh. 14.21. He that loves me shall be loved
of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my self to him. The more
you love Christ, the more fond you are of his person, if I may so speak, the
more will Christ discover himself to you. The more you love him, the more will
Christ lead you into the understanding of those Mysteries concerning his
Person, Divinity, the Union of his Natures, his Offices, his Grace, which the
rest of men are little acquainted with. They that love most, shall know most.
Love Christ much, and then Christ will manifest and discover himself much to
you; and the more Christ discovers himself to you, the more sweet will you find
the knowledge of Christ to be from day to day.

The end of the eighth Sermon.
SERMON I.
Gal. 4. verse. 4. But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his
Son made of a woman, made under the Law.


THat which has been in my desire, has been to unfold (as I am able) some
part of the Mystery of Christ, and to speak something concerning the great
dimensions of the Love of Christ. And as a bottom to build upon, I pitched upon
that Text, Ephesians. 3.18, 19. That ye may be able to comprehend with all Saints
what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height. And to know the love of
Christ which passes knowledge.

Now to show what these dimensions of Christ's love were, I propounded to speak
to three things.

1. To show the Properties of Christ's Love.

2. To show that this love of Christ is surpassing great, as it is to be found
in both his Natures, in his humane and in his Divine nature. And here we
considered the love of Christ distinctly: the love that was found in his humane
nature, and in his Divine nature.

3. To show that the love of Christ is surpassing great, if we consider the
great and eminent effects of his love.

1. The first great effect of Christ's love, which has been instanced in, and
already finished is this, the work of his Incarnation. That the Son of God, who
was God by Nature, and had his subsistence as the second person in Trinity in
the Divine Essence from Eternity, should take to himself a created nature in
time, and become true man: so that he that was a true person before his
Incarnation, should by means of his Incarnation become God and man in one
person; this is one great effect and demonstration of the love of Christ.

2. I come now to speak of the second great effect of Christ's love, and that
is, his being made under the Law for us. And for this end I have chosen this
Scripture: But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made
of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that are under the Law, that we
might receive the adoption of sons. This was another great demonstration of the
love of Christ, that he would not only take our nature and become true man, but
that he would be made under the Law for us. To understand which, we must know,
that the Son of God might have been incarnate, and yet not have subjected
himself to the Law in that manner as he did: for he might have glorified the
humane nature in the same moment that he assumed it: but that Christ would
become subject to the Law, and pass under such a course of obedience before he
entered into his glory; this was the great love of Christ to us.

There are great Articles of Faith contained in these words; Paueis verbis
multa complexus est.
in a few words there are many things comprehended. We shall find seven or
eight great Articles of Faith comprehended in these few words.

1. The first great Article of Faith is this, That God had a Son, one that was
in a peculiar manner his Son, and distinguished from all other sons. [God sent
forth his Son.] There is a great Emphalis lies in that expression, his Son. God
sent a Son that was peculiarly his Son, his Son in a way of eminency and
peculiarity from all others sons. Therefore is this Son elsewhere called his
own Son, his proper Son, Romans 8.32. and his only begotten Son, Joh. 1.18. The
Son of the living God, Joh. 6.69. The Angels and Adam were the sons of God by
creation, but these were not such sons as this Son was. This Son that the Text
speaks of, was not the Son of God by Creation, but by eternal Generation, Joh.
16.28. I came out from the Father, and ar^ come into the world. Christ came
forth from the Father by eternal Generation, he came into the world by his
Incarnation. There we see his coming forth from the Father, and his coming into
the world are distinguished one from the other. He came forth from the Father
by his eternal Generation, and he came into the world by his Incarnation: Heb.
1.5. To which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have
I begotten thee? Prove. 8.25. Before the mountains were settled was I begotten.
Hence is Christ said to be the first-begotten of every creature, Col. 1.25. It
is not said the first created of every creature, but the first begotten of
every creature. The meaning is, that before the creatures were made and
created, Christ was begotten by the Father. He is not therefore to be placed in
the rank of creatures, he was begotten, not created; he was before the creature
had any being and existence, and therefore by consequence from Eternity.

2. The second Article of Faith delivered in these words, is this, That the Son
of God had a preexistence, and was in being before he took our nature. Mark how
the Apostle expresses it, God sent forth his Son. He sent him forth: (...),
emisit.
it is not simply expressed, he sent him, but he sent him forth. Now if God
sent forth his Son, it supposes he was in being before he was so sent forth.
And if we would know where this Son was before he was sent forth, the
Evangelist tells us, Joh. 1.2. The same was in the beginning with God. That
very Son, who afterward he says was incarnate and made flesh, verse. 14. this
very Son in the beginning was with God. Therefore the Son was with the Father,
coexistent with him before he was sent forth into man's nature. Some Heretics
have denied that Christ is the Son of God in respect of eternal Generation, and
that Christ had no existence before he took flesh from the Virgin; but this
Scripture cuts the throat of that Heresy: for this Scripture plainly teaches
us, That Christ was the Son of God before he was sent, before he was made of a
woman, before he was made under the Law. God sent forth his Son made of a
woman, made under the Law. He was first his Son, before he was sent forth,
before he was made of a woman, before he was made under the Law.

3. The third Article of Faith contained in these words is this, That God had
decreed and promised to send forth his Son before he did actually send him into
our nature. God sent forth his Son. This is implied, God had a purpose to send
him forth before, and he had promised to send him forth; and when the fullness
of time was come, then did he actually send him forth. In the fullness of time
God sent forth his Son: as much as if it had been said, What he he had purposed
and promised before, he did in due time accomplish. If it be asked, Where did
God promise to send forth his Son? The first great promise was in Genesis 3.15.
The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head. The meaning of that
promise was, the Son of God should take flesh of the seed of the woman, and so
become a Redeemer to the Elect. This promise was renewed to Abraham, when God
told him, In his seed all the nations of the earth should be blessed. This
promise also was renewed to David, when God told him, Of the fruit of his
loins, according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his Throne,
Act. 2.30. It was also made to the Prophets in those many promises that were
made concerning the Messiah.

4. The fourth Article contained in these words is this, That the Son of God,
who was promised long before, was actually exhibited and manifested in the
flesh. God sent forth his Son: that is, he sent him into our nature to take
flesh, Joh. 1.14. The Word was made flesh. He sent forth his Son. We must
conceive of this aright, not that Christ as to his Divine person, did cease to
be where he was before: no, it is said of him, Joh. 1.18. The only begotten Son
who is in the bosom of the Father, (...)
speaking in the present tense. Who is in the bosom of the Father. The only
begotten Son after his Incarnation is still in the bosom of the Father.
Therefore our Savior says of himself, even whilst he was here on earth, Joh.
3.13. The Son of man who is in heaven. He that was on earth at that time in
respect of his humane nature, was in Heaven at the same time in respect of his
Divine nature. Therefore whenas it is said here, God sent forth his Son, thus
we ought to conceive of it, God sent forth his Son, not by any change of place,
but of condition. He that was in the form of God before, by his Incarnation
took on him the form of a servant. Christ therefore as God did not begin to be
and exist when he was first incarnate, no, in the beginning he was with God:
but he began by his Incarnation to be true man, who was God before from
Eternity.

5. The fifth Article of Faith contained in these words is this, That the Son
of God was incarnate and made man in the best time. When the fullness of time
was come God sent forth his Son. Our curiosity is apt to inquire, Why did not
Christ come in the flesh sooner? Had it not been more for our benefit and
advantage, if the Son of God had sooner taken our nature? But the Spirit of God
silenceth all these reasonings by telling us, When the fullness of time was
come, God sent forth his Son. God lost no time, he slipped no time; when the
complete time was come that was predetermined in his holy Decree, and before
signified in his promises, then he sent forth his Son. God accomplisheth all
his promises in the best time and season.

6. The sixth Article of Faith is this, That the manner of Christ's Conception
and Incarnation was wonderful and extraordinary. God sent forth his Son made of
a woman. It is not said born of a woman, but made of a woman. Made of a woman,
(...).
that is, he did partake of the substance of the Virgin. Because the children
were made partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of
the same, Heb. 2.14. He was made of a woman, that shows he was true man, and
had a true humane nature: but in that it is said he was made, not born or
begotten, that shows Christ had his Original as man not in the common way of
generation. Eve was made out of one of the ribs taken out of Adams side, and
Adam could say of her, She is flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bone: and
Christ as man his humanity was formed out of the substance of the Virgin; so
that we may say, This was flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone. Made of a
woman.

7. The seventh Article of Faith comprehended in these words is this, That
although Christ has two Natures in him, yet he has but one Person. For here
is but one Son that is spoken of in the Text. God sent forth his Son made of a
woman. He that was the Son of God from Eternity, and made of a woman in time,
is still one and the same Son. It is the Son that is sent forth, the Son that
is made of a woman, the Son that is made under the Law: so that still, though
Christ has two Natures, yet he has but one Person. Christ had not a new
Person, but a new Nature added to him by his Incarnation; and therefore we
commonly say, the humane nature is without any personal subsistence of its own,
but it subsists in the Divine person, who was a person from Eternity. These
seven great Articles of Faith are comprehended in these few words; so that we
may say with one of the Ancients, I adore the fullness of the Scriptures. See
how many great weighty Articles of Faith are comprehended in a few words.

8. The last Article contained in this verse is this, That Christ was made
under the Law. God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the Law. The
end of his being made under the Law is set down in the next verse, To redeem us
who were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.

This is the second great effect of Christ's love I am now to speak of, viz.
Christ's being made under the Law. For this we must carry all along with us,
whatever Christ was, whatever he did, and suffered, was for us: Unto us a Child
is born, unto us a Son is given, Isa. 9.6. Hence is it, that Christ is called
the gift of God, Joh. 4.10. Christ is the gift of God to us. He is made of God
to us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. Whatsoever Christ
was, whatsoever he did, it was not for himself, or his own sake, but for us;
and therefore his being made under the Law was for us, and so it is expressed
here in the Text, He was made under the Law to redeem them that were under the
Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. The end of Christ's being made
under the Law was to accomplish our Redemption. Here there are two things to be
spoken unto.

1. What it is for Christ to be made under the Law.

2. Wherein did the greatness of Christ's love appear in being made under the
Law?

1. What is it for Christ to be made under the Law? Before I come to enter upon
the main subject, I must necessarily lay down some preliminary or previous
Propositions for the clearing of the whole.

1. The first Proposition is this, The Law of God is the Transcript or Copy of
Gods Holiness. The holy Nature of God and his pure Will is decypher'd and
displayed to us in his Law. The Law of God is nothing else but the declaration
of his holy nature, and of his holy will. Hence is that expression, Be ye holy,
for I the Lord your God am holy, 1 Pet. 1.16. Holiness in us is our conformity
to the Law; when we are conformable to the Law (which is the Rule of Holiness)
then are we in our measure holy as God is holy. In the Law of God we see what
things are consonant to Gods nature, what are repugnant to his nature; in the
Law we see what is agreeing to the will of God, what is dissonant and
disagreeing to his will. The Law of God is nothing else but the declaration of
the eternal Will of God. God that is most holy in himself, cannot but will
every thing in the most holy and perfect manner. And the Law is nothing else
but the declaration of Gods holy will concerning his creatures. Now the will of
God being most perfect and holy in it self, the Law (which is the declaration
of Gods will) must needs also be most perfect. Therefore is there this Epithete
given to the Law, Psalm. 19.7. The law of God is perfect, converting the soul.
Also that it is very pure, Psalm. 119.140. The Law of God is the pure will of a
pure God.

2. The Law of God is immutable, perpetual, and everlasting. Still we must
remember I am now speaking of the Moral Law, for the Ceremonial Law is of
another nature. But that which we call the Moral Law is immutable, perpetual,
and everlasting. And the reason is, God being immutable and unchangeable in his
nature and his will, the Law (which is the declaration of his nature and will)
must needs be immutable, perpetual, and everlasting. Hence are those
expressions, Psalm. 119.142. Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness,
and thy law is the truth. And verse. 144. The righteousness of thy testimonies
is everlasting. Hence also is it that our Savior says, One iota and tittle of
the law shall not pass away, Mat. 5.18. The Law of God is of eternal equity,
and therefore it cannot pass away.

3. Every reasonable creature is necessarily and indispensably under the
authority of the Law. There are two things implied in every Law.

1. A Declaration of the Will of the Lawgiver.

2. An Obligation upon the persons to whom the Law is given, to obey and keep
the Law.

Now every reasonable creature is under the obligation of the Law. It implies a
contradiction for God to make a creature, and not to make him under a Law; for
he who is not supreme, must needs be subject to the will of him who is supreme.
Either the creature's will must be a law to it self, or else Gods will must be
a law to it: the creature's will cannot be a law to the creature, because it is
a created will, and there is an increated will which is above it: the creature
receives its being from another, and therefore must needs be under the will of
him, and under the dispose of him, from whom it receives its being. It is
impossible for God to make a creature, and not that creature to be under an
obligation to love, fear, serve, and obey his Maker.

4. The fourth Proposition is this, God justifies no person, nor receives any
person into actual favor and acceptance with him without a perfect
righteousness answering exactly to the law. And the reason of this depends upon
the former Propositions. The righteousness that is in the Law is the Transcript
and Copy of Gods Holiness: now God requires holiness in the creature answerable
to his own Holiness. The righteous Lord loves righteousness, Psalm. 11.7. God
being righteous in his nature, requires righteousness from the creature. The
Law of God is immutable, perpetual, and everlasting, and God does indispensably
require righteousness from the creature. Romans 10.5. Moses describes the
righteousness of the law, that the man that does these things shall live by
them. The Law gives life to none but where it is fulfilled; the man that does
these things shall live by them. It is true, the Law of the Covenant of Works
did not only require perfect obedience, but it also required personal
obedience. The Law of the first Covenant did not admit of obedience by a
surety, but it required that a man should obey the Law in his own person. But
this is dispensed with in the second Covenant. The second Covenant accepts of
obedience from a surety: but obedience is still required, yea perfect exact
obedience. God justifies no person but where there is a perfect complete
righteousness every way answering the rule of the Law. It is not possible, that
the righteousness of the Law can be disanulled, and therefore there must be a
righteousness answering the righteousness of the Law. Hence is that expression,
Romans 3.26. God is just, and the justifier of him which believes in Jesus. God
must find out a righteousness somewhere before he justifies any person.

5. The fifth Proposition is this, No man since the Fall can fulfill the
righteousness of the Law, or perform that obedience which the Law requires.
Hence is it, that the Apostle tells us, Romans 8.3. that The law is weak through
the flesh. The plain meaning of that Scripture is this, The Law would justify
men in case men could keep the Law, but no man is able to keep the Law, and
therefore he cannot be justified by it. The Law is weak, that is, it is weak as
to Justification. The Law is able to justify no man: but this weakness of the
Law is through the flesh. The weakness is not on the Laws part, but on man's
part, that he is not able to keep the Law. Man since the Fall cannot keep the
Law, and so the Law is weak through the flesh. Man since the Fall is become
carnal and fleshly. And the Apostle tells us in the same Chapter, Romans 8.7. The
carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law of God,
neither indeed can be. Man by his Fall has weakened himself, man has lost his
power to fulfill the Law, and so cannot possibly attain to life by the Law.

6. The sixth and last Proposition is this, If God justify any person, he must
find out and prepare a righteousness of his own, and bestow that upon men for
their Justification. Therefore since man cannot fulfill the Law himself, and God
will not dispense with the righteousness of the Law, God (if he please to save
men) must find out some other way how the Law may be fulfilled. And this was
the way God found out, The Son of God must take to himself the nature of man,
and in the nature of man must fulfill the righteousness of the Law. And thus
Christ is said to be the end of the Law for righteousness, Romans 10.3. The Law
which was never fulfilled before, was perfectly fulfilled by Christ. The
complement of the Law (says a Learned man) lies in this, That our sins are
pardoned for Christ's sake, and that the Righteousness of Christ is imputed to
us, whenas he is our Head and we are his Members. Hence is the righteousness of
the law said to be fulfilled in us. It is an emphatical expression, That the
righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, Romans 8.4. Not that it is
possible for a Believer to fulfill the righteousness of the law in his own
person; but a Believer being one with Christ, fulfils the righteousness of the
law in the person of his Head. The Son of God taking humane nature, does
perfectly fulfill the law in the humane nature assumed. So that now in Christ,
who was made under the law for us, there is found such a righteousness as is
every way answerable to the law, and this Righteousness of his is imputed to
Believers. Therefore is Christ said to be made of God to us righteousness, 1
Cor. 1.30. And, We are made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21.

In the first place, righteousness of this own, by an inherent righteousness:
the reason is, If a man be justified by an inherent righteousness, a
righteousness of his own working, he must produce such a righteousness as is
perfect and exact, and every way answering and conformable to the law. The Law
of God admits of no such righteousness for Justification as is not perfect and
exact, and every way answerable to that purity and perfection the law requires.
Consider what the Apostle says, Romans 7.14. The law is spiritual. Spiritual,
what is the meaning of that? The law requires utmost perfection, Angelical
perfection, such a kind of obedience as has not the least flaw or defect in
it. The law speaks after this manner, Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things which are written in the Book of the law to do
them. First, if a man be justified by the Law by an inherent righteousness, a
man must do all things the law requires. If it could be supposed a man could do
many things that the law requires, yet if he did not do all things, if he did
not fulfill to every part and punctilio in the law, he would fall short of life
by the law. Secondly, as a man must be universal in his obedience, so he must
be constant and uniform in his obedience; Cursed is he that continues not in
all things. If it could be supposed a man could fulfill the whole law for that
part of his life which is to come, yet if he have not fulfilled it for that
part of his life which is past, he has fallen short of what the law requires.
The law requires constant and uniform obedience. Now which of the sons of Adam
is there that can say he has fulfilled the law in every point and tittle, and
this constantly throughout his whole life? If none of the sons of Adam dare say
so, then certainly none can be justified by an inherent righteousness. It is
true, that Justification and Sanctification are inseparable companions, and
where the Righteousness of Christ is imputed for Justification, there also is a
work of Sanctification, and in that sense inherent righteousness wrought in the
Soul by the Spirit of Christ: but because the work of Sanctification is but
inchoate, begun, and imperfect only in this life, therefore that cannot be the
matter of our righteousness before God. Therefore we must seek for another
righteousness, a righteousness without us, and that is the Righteousness of our
Head the Lord Jesus, who was made under the law for us, and has brought in
such a righteousness as is every way answerable to the law. For God will accept
no righteousness for a man, without it be that which is every way exact and
commensurate to the law.

From what has been laid down, Cor. 6.10. Know ye not, that the unrighteous
shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Now all that are in the state of nature,
that are not implanted into Christ by faith, are unrighteous. The Scripture
speaking of all men in the state of nature, what they are before faith, it
tells us, There is no man righteous, no not one, Romans 3.10. In short, this is
the misery of Unbelievers, they cannot produce such a righteousness of their
own for which the law should justify them: nay, they have all that sin and
unrighteousness in them for which the law condemns them. And as they have not
that righteousness of their own, for which the law should justify them; so
they can lay no claim to the Righteousness of Christ, they have no interest in
the righteousness of a surety that should answer for them. They never believed
and closed with Christ, and so have no part in his Righteousness. Great and
inexpressible is the misery of all such who content themselves to remain and
abide out of Christ, God is resolved to have his Law satisfied one way or
other, either the Law of God must be satisfied in a way of obedience, or else
the penalty of the law must be inflicted on the Sinner for default of that
obedience. For thus does the tenor of the law run, Romans 2.9. Tribulation and
anguish upon every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of
the Gentile. There is a great Emphasis in those words, upon every soul of man:
as much as if it had been said, Upon every individual person. The Law of God
spares no man; the Law of God spares no person whatsoever; the Law of God
wherever it finds a Sinner, it does condemn him. Tribulation and anguish upon
every soul of man that does evil. The Law of God remits not of that obedience
which it requires, nor of that punishment which it threatens for want of such
obedience. And this is the reason why the Damned lie under the wrath of God,
and the curse of the Law to all Eternity; they have not satisfied the law in a
way of obedience, and therefore the law is still satisfying it self upon them
in a way of punishment. O therefore let it not seem an indifferent thing to any
of us, whether we get into the Lord Jesus yea or no, and whether we get a part
in his Righteousness yea or no. Unless you can produce such a righteousness as
is answerable to the law, a perfect righteousness, when you come to stand
before Gods Tribunal, you will never escape condemnation. Now this perfect
righteousness you can never find in your selves, therefore you have reason to
seek for it elsewhere, and that is in Christ, and in him only. Joh. 3.18. He
that believes on the Son is not condemned, Although we deserve condemnation as
we are Sinners, yet we have his own word for it, If we believe on the Son, we
shall not be condemned, He that believes on the Son is not condemned. Though
men deserve condemnation, yet he that believes on the Son is not actually
condemned. He has something in him condemnable, he has sin in him that would
condemn him, but believing on the Son he is not actually condemned. There is no
way to save men from the condemnation of the Law, but by getting a part in the
Lord Jesus. If we believe on the Son of God, God will accept of the
Righteousness of his Son, as if we had wrought out righteousness in our own
person. 2 Cor. 5.21. He has made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him.

See and behold the infinite love of God to his people, Paul in his Epistle to
the Romans, Romans 1.17. The righteousness of God is revealed from faith to
faith. God reveals a righteousness for us of his own bestowing, whereas we had
none of our own, neither could procure any of our own. Romans 3.21. Now the
righteousness of God without the law is manifested, being witnessed by the Law
and the Prophets, even the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus
Christ unto all and upon all them that believe. As much as if he had said,
Herein is the great love of God to his people, that he finds out and bestows a
righteousness upon them which they could never find nor work out for
themselves. Isa. 46.12, 13. Hearken unto me, ye stout-hearted, that are far
from righteousness, I bring near my righteousness, it shall not be far off. We
were all far from righteousness, but God has brought near his Righteousness, a
Righteousness wrought by his own Son in a part of our nature. God has now
deposited a Righteousness for us in a part of our own nature. Christ that was
flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, was made under the law, and has
fulfilled the law in our nature.

This should exhort us humbly to accept of that Righteousness which God has
provided and freely tenders. Our work, With the heart man believes unto
righteousness, Romans 10.10. Believing here, is nothing else but the souls humble
and affectionate acceptance of that righteousness which God reveals. That
righteousness which is the matter of our Justification before God, is prepared
of God, wrought out by the Son of God in the humane nature assumed, and our
work is humbly to accept of this righteousness. The Church triumphs in this,
Isa. 12.2. Behold, God is my salvation, I will trust and not be afraid, for the
Lord Jehovah is my strength and my song, he also is become my salvation. She
repeats this twice, that God was become her salvation. The Church by the eye of
faith sees God in Christ doing all for her, becoming all to her. God in Christ
is become her Wisdom, her Rightcousness, her Strength, her Sanctification, her
Redemption, her Salvation. Acts 20.
God has redeemed the Church with his own Blood. Now (says our Savior) they
have known that all things whatsoever thou have given me are of thee, Joh.
17.7. Christ being made under the Law, his obedience active, passive, all is
the gift of free grace. God is in Christ doing all these things, and bestowing
all these things upon his people. God in Christ is become their Righteousness,
their Wisdom, their Redemption, their Salvation. God in Christ does all for his
people, and gives all to his people. And this is the work of faith to see God
doing all for us, giving all to us in the person of his Son, and humbly to
accept what God has done for us, and is willing to bestow upon us.

The end of the first Sermon.
SERMON II.
Gal. 4.4. But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son
made of a woman, made under the Law.


IN our former Discourse two things were propounded to be spoken unto.

1. To show what it is for Christ to be made under the Law.

2. To show wherein the greatness of Christ's love does discover it self in
being made under the Law for us.

1. What is it for Christ to be made under the Law?

I shall explain this in three Propositions.

1. For Christ to be made under the Law, it is for Christ to take upon him the
Office of a Mediator and Surety for us: 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one Mediator
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. So likewise Heb. 7.27. Christ is
called the surety of a better Testament, or the surety of a better Covenant. A
Mediator, Surety, or Undertaker, so the Critics in the Greek Tongue explain
that word. (...).
A Surety is one that mediates for another, he freely and voluntarily
undertakes fro him, undertakes to be responsible for him, and to discharge his
debt. No man is compelled to be a Surety, but it is his own voluntary act. He
is free in himself, yet he is willing of his own accord to undertake the
concernments of another. Thus Christ who is our Surety was free in himself from
all subjection to the Law, but he was pleased freely and voluntarily to become
our surety, and to undertake the discharge of our debt. And thus Calvin
expounds this Text, Christus Filius Dei qui immunis jure fuisset omni
subjectione, legis fuit subjectus. Calv.
He was made under the Law, that is, says he, Christ the Son of God, who by
right had been free from all subjection, was yet subject to the Law. Why so? It
was for our sake, and it was in our name and stead, that he might obtain
liberty for us: even as he that was a freeman himself, by becoming furety for
another, redeems him that was captive, and by taking his Fetters and Bonds upon
him, delivers him from his bonds: so Christ would make himself liable to the
keeping of the Law, that he might purchase liberty for us; for otherwise Christ
had in vain taken the yoke of the Law upon him; for certainly it was not for
his own sake that he took it. Every son and daughter of Adam is necessarily
under the Law, and owes a debt of obedience to the Law. Now we being insolvent,
and not able to pay that debt of obedience which the Law requires, Christ was
made under the Law, and was content to pay the debt that we could not pay. It
is true, Christ being made under the Law, does not exempt Believers from being
under the Law as a Rule, Believers are still under the Law as a rule of life
and obedience. But thus we ^^ght to conceive of it, It being not possible for
us to fulfill the Law, and to perform that exact obedience which the Law
requires, and yet a perfect obedience being required, Christ is the end of the
Law for righteousness, as is expressed in Romans 10.3. that is, Christ undertook
to perform that perfect obedience which the Law required, and so to answer the
end of the Law for righteousness. The Law was given to man in Innocence, for
this end, that it might have been the matter of man's righteousness, in case he
had obeyed and kept the law. The righteousness of the law is described by this,
The man which does those things shall live by them, Romans 10.5. But now no man
since the Fall being able to keep the law and fulfill it, and yet God requiring
still that the law should be obeyed, and the righteousness of it fulfilled,
Christ was content freely and of his own accord (who was otherwise free and
disingaged) to be under the Law, and by obeying the law to bring in such a
righteousness as the law requires.

2. For Christ to be made under the law is to put himself under the obligation
of the law, and to make himself liable unto it. Although a man be willing to be
Surety for another; yet till he brings himself under bonds and obligations, he
is not properly a Surety. A Surety is one that takes the obligation upon
himself, when the principal debtor is not able to pay: so that whatever the
debt is, the surety who is engaged, stands under an obligation to see it
satisfied. Christ then becoming our Surety, all that obligation that lay upon
us from the law, is now derived upon him. Now Christ brings himself under this
obligation to the law two ways. 1. By his own free consent and stipulation to
the Father. He that is otherwise free, if he enter into Bonds and Covenants to
discharge another debt, become an engaged person. Though he were free before,
he is now no longer free, but becomes engaged by his own voluntary consent.
Thus Christ who was free and disingaged in himself, did enter into a Covenant
and agreement with the Father to undertake our cause, and to do and suffer what
was necessary to be done and suffered in order to our Salvation: Heb. 10.7.
Then I said, Lo I come, in the volume of the book it is written of me, To do
thy will, O God. When Christ saw the Fathers heart was set on the Salvation of
man, and that for that end the Father was willing Christ should undertake the
cause and business of their Salvation, Christ was as willing as the Father was,
and he says, Lo, I come to do thy will. Hence is it that the Counsel of Peace
is said to be between them both, Zac. 6.13. The Father (to speak after the
manner of men) propounds, and the Son consents: so that the Son (who was free
and disingaged in himself) brings himself under an obligation by his own free
promise and stipulation. Hence it is, that Christ becomes the Head of the
second Covenant, the second Adam, and all the Elect are his seed, and Christ
undertakes for them, Isa. 53.10. 2. Christ brought himself under obligation to
the Law by his own voluntary assumption of our nature, for that end, that he
might become subject to the Law in it. This the Apostle sets forth at large,
Phil. 2.6. He was in the form of God, and counted it no robbery to be equal
with God, but he made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of men; and being found in fashion as a
man, he humbled himself and became obedient. Here are two things by which the
Apostle sets forth the greatness of Christ's Condescension. 1. That he being in
the form of God, and who might have continued in the form of God only, yet that
he was pleased to take upon him the form of a servant and become true man, this
is one part of his condescension. The other part of his condescension is, that
he would take upon him the form of a servant and become man, for this very end,
that he might become obedient, and that he might perform all the acts of
obedience in the humane nature assumed. Christ was not bound to take our nature
at all, but he might have continued always in the form of God only; or if he
will take our nature, he was not bound to take it in that servile way, so as to
be bound to all acts of obedience: but here was the greatness of Christ's
condescension, as he will take our nature, so he will take it for that end,
that in our nature he may obey and fulfill the Law for us. And therefore it is
emphatically expressed in the Original, (...). Factum seu redactum sub lege.
He was made obedient, and so in the Text, He was made under the Law. Christ
was made or reduced under the Law, so some render it. Christ was reduced to
that state and condition, as to be in a state of subjection to the Law, whereas
he was naturally above it. Christ was made or reduced under this power and
authority of the Law by his own free consent, whereas naturally the Law had no
such power or authority over him.

3. The third and last Proposition is this, For Christ to be under the Law is
to be under the Judirisction of the Law, and to be actually subject to it.
Christ having put himself under the obligation of the law, the law has full
power and authority over him, and the law requires perfect and exact obedience
from him, as it does from any other man, and Christ does now stand bound and
obliged to yield and perform that obedience which the law requires. Hence
Christ is called, Isa. 42.1. the Fathers servant, he is said to love the
Father, to do and keep the Fathers commandments, Joh. 14.31. and 15.10. Christ
as man was under a law of love and obedience to his Father, he was also subject
to his Parents after the flesh, he submitted to the Baptism of John, and gives
this reason for it, Thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness, Mat. 3.15.
Christ being made man, becoming our surety, and being made under the law for
us, was bound to all the moral Duties which the law requires, and so to fulfill
all righteousness for us. And the reason of it is, If Christ had left any thing
undone that the law requires of us, then there had been so far a defect in that
which was to become our righteousness, for the obedience of Christ was to be
the matter of our righteousness, Romans 5.19. By the obedience of one shall many
be made righteous. The law accepts of nothing but a perfect complete
righteousness; therefore if Christ had left any thing to be done that the law
requires to be done, there had been so far a defect in that which must be our
righteousness for Justification; therefore Christ was obliged to all that
obedience which the law required from us.

2. I come now to the second thing, to show wherein the greatness of the love
of Christ does appear and discover it self in his being made under the Law.

I shall lay down several Propositions for the clearing of this.

1. The love of Christ in being made under the law appears in this, In that
Christ in respect of his Original right was free from all subjection to the
law. Christ in respect of his person and his Divine nature was above the law;
Christ as he was God, was Supreme and the Author of the law; as he was the
second person in the Trinity, so he was equal to the Father, and of equal
authority with him. It is true, the humane nature in Christ was a creature, and
therefore in a state of subjection, as every creature must necessarily be
supposed to be. But then we must consider, that although the humane nature of
Christ be a creature, and considered simply so, is in a state of subjection;
yet Christ in respect of his Original right is free from all subjection. And
this may be evidenced from these following Considerations. 1. Although it be
true, that the humane nature in Christ be a creature, yet the humane nature
has its subsistence in and by that person who is Divine and increated. And
hence is it, that the Schoolmen do deny, that Christ is to be called a
Creature. There is a great difference between these two Propositions, to say,
That the humane nature in Christ is a creature, and to say, that Christ is a
creature; for Christ is the name of the person that subsists in both natures.
Therefore though it be true, Christus est nomen personae in duabus subsistentis
naturis.
that one of the natures in Christ is a creature, yet the person is Divine, and
no creature; and therefore the Apostle says, Romans 9.5. that Christ, though he
came of the fathers concerning the flesh, yet he is over all, God blessed for
ever. Although Christ, as to the flesh, and in respect of his humanity, came of
the Fathers, and we say truly and properly his humanity is a creature: yet his
person is Divine, and Christ is still God blessed for ever. 2. We must know
that the humane nature of Christ never in any moment of time subsisted of it
self or by it self, but always had its subsistence in the Divine person: and
the reason is this; If we should suppose the humane nature at any time subsist
in it self out of the Divine person, that would necessarily infer there were
two persons in Christ, which is most contrary to the Doctrine of the
Scriptures. Therefore although we do suppose the humane nature, simply in it
self considered, to be a creature, and in a state of subjection; yet
considering that the humanity was always personally united to the Divinity, and
the humane nature never subsisted out of the Divine person, we must conclude
that Christ was no otherways in a state of subjection, than what he brought
himself into by his voluntary condescension. Therefore the Apostle tells us, He
emptied himself, and took upon him the form of a servant, and became obedient.
As it was part of his condescension he would take upon him the form of a
servant: so this was another part of it, he would become obedient for our
sakes. 3. We must consider it was a voluntary act in Christ to assume our
nature. Christ took our nature indeed, but he was not bound to it, it was his
own free and voluntary act, that he did assume it. 4. We must also consider,
that Christ did not lose the Digniey of his person by his assumption of our
nature. He was the Son of God before his Incarnation, and so he was after; he
was God before he took man's nature, and so remained still. It is true, Christ
in the state of his Humiliation, was content to have the Glory of his Divinity
hid and obscured for a time: and this is that the Apostle calls his emptying
himself. But yet Christ did not, neither could he divest himself of his
Divinity, neither did he lose the essential Dignity of his person. He was the
Son of God, and God after as well as before his Incarnation. 5. Christ might,
if he had pleased, without running such a course of obedience here on earth,
have glorified the humane nature when first he assumed it. For this is granted
by Divines, That Christ, by virtue of the personal Union, had a natural right
unto Glory. The Son of God incarnate and become man, continues to be the Son of
God, yea the natural Son of God. And hence is it the Schoolmen do truly say,
That Christ-man is the natural Son of God. Therefore the Apostle tells us, That
Christ is more excellent than the Angels, because he has obtained a more
excellent name by inheritance than they, Heb. 1.4. And what name is this? to be
the Son of God. Consider verse. 5. To which of the Angels said he at any time,
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Now the Apostle tells us,
Christ had this name by inheritance, that is, he was naturally the Son of God,
and therefore naturally an Heir to all the Father was possessed of. Now as he
was the Son of God before his Incarnation, so he did not cease to be the Son of
God by his Incarnation. Therefore Christ had a natural right to Glory, and
might, if he had pleased, have glorified the humane nature when he assumed it.
Now then, as the result of all that has been said, follows, That Christ would
become, and put himself into a state of subjection and obedience, this was for
our sakes, and it was his voluntary condescension so to do. Nay the Apostle
tells us expressly in the Text, He was made under the Law to redeem them that
were under the Law: So that it was for our sakes Christ put himself into this
state of subjection, and it was his voluntary condescension so to do. We may
not suppose Christ was necessitated to be in this state of subjection. True
indeed, it is said of Christ as man and Mediator, That the Father is greater
than he, Joh. 14.28. and Christ as man is under God as his Head: 1 Cor. 11.3.
The head of every man is Christ, and the head of the woman is the man, and the
head of Christ is God. But then we must still remember: 1. It was at Christ's
liberty, whether he would have become man yea or no. He was not bound to take
our nature till he did freely of his own accord engage to do so. 2. Remember,
inequality of Office makes no inequality of Person or Essence, although Christ
as Man and Mediator be inferior to the Father, in a state of subjection to the
Father; yet that makes him not to be inferior to him as to his Person or
Essence. Consider Christ as the second Person in Trinity, he accounts it no
robbery to be equal with God, that is, with the Father. Consider him as God, so
he and the Father are one. Now that he who was equal with God, and so above all
Authority, should take upon him the Office of Mediator, and put himself into a
state of subjection, this was mavelous condescension. O stand and admire this
love! How great was his love that would come to serve and obey, who was Lord of
all, and had all obedience of right due to him from all creatures!

2. The greatness of Christ's love in being made under the Law appears in this,
That although Christ was free from the Law; yet by his own voluntary
condescension he made himself subject to the Law as much as any of us. This the
Apostle sets forth Heb. 2.11, 12, 13. For both he that sanctifies, and they who
are sanctified are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them
brethren. Saying, I will declare thy Name unto my brethren; in the midst of the
Church will I sing praise unto thee. And again, I will put my trust in him: and
again, Behold, I and the children which God has given me. Christ does here put
himself into the rank of his brethren, and he performs the same duties in
common with them. To praise God in the Congregation, to trust in God, to obey
God, all these are moral duties: now Christ having assumed our nature, performs
these duties in common with the rest of his brethren.

3. The third Proposition is this. The love of Christ in his being made under
the Law appears in this, That Christ took upon him the whole debt of obedience
which the Law requires. Our Savior teaches us expressly, That he came to fulfill
the law, yea the whole law, Mat. 5.17. Think not that I am come to destroy the
Law or the Prophets, I came not to destroy but to fulfill. Christ came to fulfill
the law; and how? what, a part of it? nay the whole law. Our Savior explains
himself to this purpose in the next words, Verily I say unto you, Till heaven
and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law till
all be fulfilled. All the law, every part and tittle of it was fulfilled in and
by Christ. It is the observation of Divines, That Christ fulfilled the natural
Law and the Law of Moses most perfectly. By the natural Law they understand all
the moral Duties comprehended in the Ten Commandments: and by the Mosaical Law
they understand those Rites and Ordinances of Worship, which were in a peculiar
manner given to the Jewish Church. Thus Christ was circumcised and presented to
the Lord in the Temple, and they offered a Sacrifice for him, according to that
which is said in the Law, A pair of Turtle-doves or two young pigeons, Luke
2.22, 23, 24. Christ also observed the Ordinance of the Passover; and as Christ
observed all the Legal Ordinances, so he submitted to the Ordinance of Baptism,
which was to be a standing Ordinance under the Gospel: and he gives this reason
for it, Thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness, Mat. 3.15.

Behold, infinite Humility of the Son of God. Christ that was Lord of all, was
yet content to become a servant. Christ was the Fathers servant, and he was our
servant. 1. He was the Fathers servant, Isa. 42.1. Behold my servant. 2. He was
our servant: therefore he is said to be a Minister of the Circumcision, Romans
15.8. that is, a Minister to the Jewish Church. And he says of himself, he
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, Mat. 20.28. How did Christ
minister? Christ is said to minister as he does work and do those things which
do concern our Redemption and Salvation. He is a Minister for us, a Minister to
accomplish the great work of Redemption and Salvation. Christ was made under
the Law, that he might redeem us who were under the Law. Christ became a
Servant as he took upon him the Office of Mediator, and as he obeyed and
fulfilled the Law for us. Now this is a Rule in Divinity, Tota person a propter
assumtam servi formam facta nobis est serva. Zanch. Actiones sunt suppositorum.
That Christ is Mediator according to both his Natures; so that the whole
person, by means of his taking on him the form of a servant, is become a
servant to us. It is the Person that humbles himself, it is the Person that
obeys, it is the Person that suffers in and by the humane nature assumed.
Actions belong to persons. Now that so great a Person as the Son of God was,
should become a Servant, a servant not only to the Father, but to us: what an
instance of humility is this! that the God of Heaven should come down from
Heaven to serve: what an instance of humility is this! It is Calvin's
observation upon Phil. 2. He made himself of no reputation, or he emptied
himself. This expression is to be understood of whole Christ, as he is God
manifested in the flesh, though this agrees to him in respect of his humane
nature only. For we must know, that whereas there is but one person consisting
of both natures, he that was the Son of God, truly and really God equal with
the Father, did yet contain and keep in the rays of his own glory, whenas in
our flesh he did take upon him the form of a servant; this humility of Christ
should teach us great humility. And the Apostle presses humility upon us on
this very account: Let the same mind be in you that was in Christ Jesus, how
so? who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God,
but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and
was made in the likeness of men, and being found in fashion as a man, he
humbled himself and became obedient. Here is the great Pattern of humility,
says the Apostle, he who was in the form of God, took upon him the form of a
servant: he that was above all obedience, took upon him to be obedient. Should
Christ, who was in such a height of excellency, so debase himself as to take
upon him the form of a servant, and become obedient, and should we lift up our
selves? How unlike does this make us to our Head? Let us study the great
condescension and abasement of God incarnate, who though he were Lord of all,
yet put himself into the form of a servant, to obey and serve for us, and then
see whether there is such reason we should think so highly of our selves, stand
so much upon our own dignity and honor. Christ was content to lay aside his
honor, and to have the glory of the Divinity unseen for a time, that he might
be a servant to the Father and to us in working out our Salvation. If we would
be like our Lord and Head, we ought to be content to lay aside our own honor
and glory, if we may any way be serviceable to him or his interest. The
humility of Christ should teach us great humility.

The end of the second Sermon.
SERMON III.
Gal. 4. verse. 4. But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his
Son made of a woman, made under the Law.


I Mentioned a third Proposition, wherein the love of Christ, in being made
under the Law, did appear, and shall now prosecute it a little further.

3. The love of Christ in being made under the Law appears in this, That Christ
took upon him the whole debt of obedience which the Law required. Now there are
two things which the Law of God requires of us. 1. The Law requires habitual
purity and sanctity of nature. 2. The Law requires actual obedience to
whatsoever is commanded by it. 1. The Law of God requires from the creature
habitual purity and sanctity of nature; God made man upright; man was created
at first in a state of Integrity. Man in his original constitution had not the
least inclination to any thing that was evil, but man's will and affections in
their primitive constitution were inclined to good. It is true, man had liberty
of will, and it was possible for him to sin, otherwise he had never sinned; but
man was not, in his original constitution, as he was first framed by God,
inclined to the least evil, nay man had that rectitude put upon all his
faculties, as that in respect of his original constitution, his nature was so
framed by God, as that it was set and inclined to do that which was good; for
otherwise it could not have been said of man, as it was said of all the other
Works of God, that God beheld all the things which he had made, and behold they
were all good, very good. If man had not been made with such a frame and
constitution at first, as that he had not the least inclination to evil, but
that he was framed and made so, as that he was fitted to do good; it could not
be said of man, as of other the Works of God, That they were good: but God made
all things very good, so also did he make man. Man was made upright according
to the Image of God, and this is that which is commonly called Original
Righteousness. Man was endued at first with original righteousness: now God
creating man in such a state of Purity and Righteousness at first, he does
still require that purity and righteousness from man in which he was at first
created; for God may justly expect that from man which first he gave him. God
created him in a state of Purity, and God expects man should retain that purity
in the inward frame and disposition of his heart. And therefore Divines
observe, As Original sin is forbidden, so Original righteousness is commanded
in the last Commandment, when it is said, Thou shall not covet. 2. The Law
requires actual obedience to whatsoever is commanded by it. The righteousness
of the Law speaks on this wise, That the man that does these things shall live
by them, Romans 10.5. The Law requires that there should be a doing, an actual
performance of the things that are commanded by it: and the Law says, Cursed
is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the book of
the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10. Now our Savior sums up the duty of the Moral
Law in those two great Precepts; the first is, That we should love the Lord our
God with all the heart, and with all the soul, and with all the mind: and the
second is, That we should love our neighbor as our self, Mark 12.30. Now
Christ being made under the Law for us, took upon him all this debt of
obedience which the Law required of us.

1. Whereas the Law of God requires purity and integrity of nature, the Lord
Jesus assuming our nature, adorns and invests it with all that habitual purity
and sanctity which the Law of God requires. Hence was it, that Christ took up
our nature without sin, brought original righteousness into it, and has
preserved it in a state of purity all along. Christ's Conception and Nativity
were without sin; therefore is he said to be that holy thing which should be
born of the Virgin, Luke 1.35. The inward dispositions of Christ's soul were
such as the Law of God required to be; therefore is the Law said to be in his
heart, Psalm. 40.8. And in general it is said of him, that he was holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, Heb. 7.26. That in him was no sin,
1 John 3.5. That he was a Lamb without blemish and without spot, 1 Pet. 1.19.
All these things speak the Purity and Sanctity of his nature, that Christ in
the inward frame of his nature answered that habitual purity the Law of God
required and called for.

2. Whereas the Law required actual obedience to what is commanded by it,
Christ being made under the Law for us, left no part of the Law unfulfilled.
Christ did perfectly perform in thought, word, and deed what the Law commanded.
He fulfilled the Law as to every branch of it: this we heard before, that not
one iota or tittle of the Law was to pass away till all was fulfilled. All was
perfectly and exactly fulfilled by Christ. Hence is it, that he is called the
holy One, and the Just, Acts 3.14. Hence also is it, that he challenges the
Jews, Which of you can accuse me of sin, Joh. 8.46. And it was prophesied of
him before, That he had done no violence, neither was any deceit found in his
mouth, Isa. 53.9. Christ performed all duties toward God, and all duties
toward man. 1. For duties toward God. He loved his Father perfectly, feared
him perfectly, obeyed him perfectly. Hence is it said of him, He always did the
things that were pleasing in his sight, Joh. 8.29. And therefore when he came
to dye he could say, I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work
that thou gave me to do, Joh. 17.4. 2. As for duties toward man, Christ was
so exact in all moral Righteousness, that in the matter of paying Tribute,
though he knew he was not in strictness bound to it, yet to prevent offense,
and avoid all appearance of evil, he would work a Miracle rather than leave it
undone, Mat. 17.24.

4. The fourth Proposition to illustrate the greatness of the love of Christ in
being made under the Law for us is this, Christ having taken upon him the whole
debt of obedience which the Law required, persevered and continued in the
course of his obedience till all was finished. Hence is it said of him, He
became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.8. Christ was
obedient all along, his obedience lasted throughout his whole life, he was
obedient unto death. It is an emphatical expression, He was obedient unto
death: that is, his obedience continued through the course of his life, and
continued unto death, and his death was the last act of his obedience. Hence
was it, when our Savior came to dye, he used this speech, It is finished. He
had finished all that obedience which the Law had required, and his Father had
enjoined him. The Law requires constant, perpetual obedience, as well as
perfect obedience. The Law requires obedience, not only in one time and season,
but in the whole of our life. Now there was no failing in any part of Christ's
obedience to the law at any time. He was never found guilty of any sin in the
whole course of his life. Hence is that expression, Isa. 53.9. In him was found
no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth. And as he was never found
guilty of the least sin, so he persevered in all acts of obedience to the last.
Hence is it said, Joh. 4.34. His meat and drink was to do the will of him that
sent him, and to finish his work.

5. The fifth Proposition is. The greatness of Christ's love in being made under
the Law appears in this, In that what Christ did in a way of obedience to the
Law, it was for us. Hence is it said, that Christ is made sin for us, and we
are made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. Christ took upon him our
person, Christ sustained the persons of all the Elect, Christ did that for us
which we should have done. Hence is it, that Christ is said to be the second
Adam. The obedience which Christ performed to the Father was in our name, in
our room, in our stead. Hence is it said, that Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness unto every one that believes. Romans 10.4.
The meaning is, Christ performed that righteousness for us which the law
required of us. The Papists say, That Christ first merited for himself, and
then for us; but this is a very fond Opinion. What need had Christ to merit any
thing for himself, who was Lord of all things? Christ needed nothing for
himself, all that he did and suffered was for us. The end of his Incarnation
and being made man was for us: To us a Son is born, to us a Child is given,
Isa. 9.6. The end of Christ's being made under the Law was for us: he was made
under the law to redeem them that were under the law, as the Text tells us. The
end of his Sufferings was for us, 1 Pet. 4.1. Christ has suffered for us in
the flesh. The end of his Resurrection was for us, who was delivered for our
offenses, and was raised again for our justification, Romans 4.25. The end of his
Ascension and Glorification was for us. Hence is it said, The glory which thou
gave unto me, I have given unto them, Joh. 17.22. Hence also are we said to
be set together in heavenly places with Christ, Ephesians. 2.6. Christ never sought
any thing for himself, nor received any thing for himself, but he received all
things for us. Spiritus S. nihil aliud vult nos in morte Christi cernere,
gustare, reputare, sontire, agnoscere quam meram Dei bonitatem. Calvin.
They are Calvin's words: The Spirit of God would have us behold nothing else,
taste nothing else, make account of nothing else, perceive nothing else,
acknowledge nothing else in the death of Christ but the mere love of God to us.
And what is true of his death, is true of his life; as Christ dyed for us, so
he lived for us. And this will yet further appear in the

6. The sixth and last Proposition which is this; The end of Christ's obedience
to the Law was, that Christ's obedience might be the matter of our
righteousness. Hence is it said, By the obedience of one many are made
righteous, or constituted righteous; (...).
so the word signifies, Romans 5.19. It is Davenants expression: Christ's very
obedience is imputed to us, Ipsissima ejus obedientia nobis imputatur, quasi
esset nostra personalis.
as if so be it were our personal obedience: like as that very disobedience of
Adam in eating the forbidden Fruit is imputed to his posterity, as much as if
it had been committed by their own actual will. In this sense, the obedience of
Christ or his righteousness is said to be the formal cause of our
Justification, because the obedience of Christ or his righteousness is accepted
of God in reference to our Justification, as much as if it had been wrought by
us in our own persons. Hence is it said, Christ is made of God to us
righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. An emphatical Phrase, that Christ is made of God to
us righteousness. It is not said, that Christ does infuse a Principle of
righteousness into us; though that is true, and might have been said, and the
Apostle says as much as that comes to in the next expression, when he says,
Christ is made of God to us sanctification. How is Christ made Sanctification
to us? One way is, as he infuseth grace into us, and thereby works a work of
Sanctification and Holiness in us, which is inchoate and begun in us: but here
is another expression the Apostle uses, He is made of God to us righteousness,
that is, he himself is made to us righteousness. It is one thing for Christ to
work righteousness in us, and another thing for Christ himself to be made
righteousness to us. The one is done in a physical way (as they speak) in a way
of proper operation: the other is done in a moral way, by way of imputation.
Christ is made of God to us righteousness. That which the Apostle intimates in
this expression is, That the most perfect righteousness which Christ has in
himself, is made ours by true application and imputation. Christ's own
righteousness, that righteousness which inheres in Christ's own person is made
ours by imputation and application. Hence is it said in the Text mentioned
before, Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to them that believe,
Romans 10.3. The meaning is, Christ answers that end of the Law, so as by his
obedience to bring in that righteousness whereby we may be justified and
accepted of God. The Law is still a rule of life to Believers, but there is no
more use of the Law to Believers as a Covenant of Works; no, Christ's obedience
to the Law is the complete and entire matter of our righteousness. Christ has
supplied and answered that end of the Law, that his obedience is the matter of
a Believers righteousness, and all a Believers obedience is not looked upon on
this account to be a part of his righteousness whereby he should stand before
God, or be justified in his sight. This is clear from that Text, Romans 4.2. If
Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God.
The meaning of that Scripture is, If Abraham did good works, those good works
might be praise worthy and commendable in the sight of man, but they were not
of that value and worth as to procure his Justification in the sight of God.
Abraham's best works were too short to justify him before God; therefore it is
Christ's obedience, that is, that which God tooks upon in the point of
Justification, is his righteousness, and that only. Therefore is it said, Dan.
9.24. He has brought in everlasting righteousness, and he is the Lord our
Righteousness. Hence also is that expression, Heb. 7.12. The Priesthood being
changed, there is made of necessity also a change of the law. How is there a
change of the Law? I take it to be a good interpretation which a Learned man
gives of this Text: Facta est translatio legis in Mediatorem.
There is (says he) a translation of the Law made upon the Mediator in this
manner, That he being made under the Law, should satisfy the Law for us. Now
Christ satisfies the Law these two ways. 1. By yielding most perfect obedience
to the Law. 2. By undergoing that punishment which we deserved. Hence is it
said, That we are made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. It is not
said, the righteousness of God by him, but the righteousness of God in him.
Videte duo, justitiam Dei, and non nostram, in ipso, and non in nobis. August.
And it is an excellent passage of Austin upon that Text: Behold (says he) two
things; the Righteousness of God, not our righteousness, and this righteousness
is said to be in him, not in us. And it is well observed by another Learned
man: Christ (says he) has not merited that we should be just before God by
some other thing (as the Papists say, Christ has merited that we might merit)
but the obedience and satisfaction of Christ is that very thing that is imputed
to us for righteousness. Hence is that expression, Isa. 45.25. Surely shall one
say, In the Lord have I righteousness and strength. In Domin^ justitiae meae.
In the Original it is in the Plural number, In the Lord are my righteousnesses.

From what has been opened, Justification, and that is unto the Righteousness
of Christ, who was made under the Law for us. God accepts of nothing but a
perfect righteousness for Justification, Romans 3.26. That he might be just, and
the justifier of him that believes in Jesus. Therefore though we must aim at
the most perfect obedience and conformity to the Law ( Be ye perfect as your
Father who is in heaven is perfect, that is, let your aim be at perfection, let
your endeavor be after perfection) yet when we come to God for Justification
and acceptance, we must lay aside all thoughts of our own righteousness, and
lean upon the perfect and complete Righteousness of our Head, who has fully
answered the Law, and brought in such a righteousness as the Law requires. If
ever we be justified, we must be justified by our own fulfilling of the law, or
by another's fulfilling of the law for us: by our own fulfilling of the law we
cannot be justified, for that it is utterly impossible we should fulfill the law
in our imperfect, weak, and corrupt state. The Apostle teaches us this
expressly, Romans 8.3. The law is weak through the flesh, that is, the law cannot
justify us, because we cannot fulfill it. Therefore if we cannot be justified
by our own fulfilling of the law, if ever we be justified, it must be by
another's fulfilling of it for us, and that is by Christ, who has fulfilled it
for us. It is well observed by a Learned man: God does infuse some Principles
of inchoate Righteousness and Holiness into us here on earth, whereby we are in
some measure fitted to do good works; but because that inherent righteousness,
which is in us, does not attain to legal perfection, Hac utendam, illa ^itendum.
we must indeed use this, that is, we must study the practice of holiness and
righteousness: but when it comes to dependence, we must rest and rely alone
upon the Righteousness of Christ for justification and acceptance. The Lord
sees many flaws and defects in our best obedience, our righteousness is but as
a menstruous cloth; therefore when we come to God for Justification, we must go
out of our selves, and look nakedly and singly to the Lord Jesus Christ. In the
Gospel the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, Romans 1.17.
that is, the righteousness which is wrought by the person of the Son of God in
our nature, is the righteousness propounded and offered to us in the Gospel for
our Justification, and this is revealed from faith to faith; this is the
righteousness our faith must have recourse unto, here must faith direct it
self, and here must it pitch: and if our faith has once embraced it, it must
embrace it still; this is the meaning of that expression, from faith to faith.
Faith must rise up higher and higher; if faith has apprehended a little of
this righteousness, it must labor to apprehend it more clearly and distinctly.
And therefore it is added, The just shall live by faith. To live by faith, is
to have a constant recourse to the righteousness of Christ for justification.
Let us not think this a light matter or a common point I am now pressing.
Possibly some may say, Who knows not this, that we must go to the Righteousness
of Christ for Justification? But O let me say, the best Christians have need to
be more distinct and explicit in their faith, in apprehending the
Righteousness of Christ for Justification. It is an easy thing to assent to
this Truth of God, but in practice to come off from our selves, and clearly to
apprehend this, that God looks upon nothing in us, no not upon our best Duties
and Performances; but that he sets the naked righteousness of his Son before
him, and the obedience wrought by his Son, not any obedience wrought by us as
the matter of our acceptance, this is a mavelous difficult thing to
apprehend and believe. Therefore let us labor after more skill in the great
Mystery of Believing, and going to the Righteousness of Christ for
Justification.

This may comfort poor Believers in reference to their failings, and
imperfections. When a child of God sees so many failings in himself, so many
defects and imperfections in his obedience, so many mixtures of sin and
corruption with that little good that is in him, his many defects and comings
short of the rule in the best things he does, he thinks with himself, How is it
possible God should accept of such a one as I am? The great relief as to this,
is, that Christ was made under the Law, and he has perfectly fulfilled it.
Though thou come far short of what the law requires; yet if thou be a
Believer, thou art accepted in the complete Righteousness of Christ; although
thy obedience is imperfect and short, and is no way such, upon the account of
which God should accept thee, yet thou art accepted in Christ who is thy Head,
who has wrought out a complete obedience for thee. Hence is it said, We are
complete in him, Col. 2.10. God, when he accepts thy person, does not look upon
what thou have done, but upon what Christ has done. Christ is the end of the
law for righteousness. If thou be a Believer, God considers thee according to
what thou art in Christ, and not according to what thou art in thy self: he
considers Christ's obedience, not thy obedience. Not but that a Believer is
still bound to obedience, and the law is still a rule of obedience to him, but
in the point of Justification God has respect to Christ's obedience, not to our
obedience. Our obedience at the best is but imperfect obedience; and therefore
God in justifying his people, has respect to the obedience of his Son. Thou
come infinitely short of fulfilling the law; but if thou be a Believer, thou
art reputed in Christ as having fulfilled the law. Hence is the law said to be
fulfilled in us, Romans 8.4. That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled
in us. The righteousness of the law never was, nor can be perfectly fulfilled
in and by any individual Believer; but it is fulfilled for us in a part of our
nature, the righteousness of the law is fulfilled in Christ our Head. Christ
has perfectly obeyed the law for us in a part of our nature, and so the
righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us, that is, it is fulfilled in Christ
who bare our nature, and so (by imputation) in us. It is Davenants observation:
When I am called to account, and the whole debt of obedience the law requires
is exacted from me, a Believer must then show his Surety, and say, Behold here
is my Surety which has paid my debt, and therefore I am free, and the
handwriting that was against me is blotted out, Col. 2.14. This is the great
and only relief to the people of God in reference to their infirmities. We
ought to aspire and breathe after the most perfect, yea, if it were possible,
the most Angelical obedience; but when we have done all, we shall find we are
still unprofitable servants, and come infinitely short of what was our duty and
of what the law requires: but here is our relief, that Christ is the end of the
law for righteousness, he has so answered that end of the law, as to bring in
that righteousness which must justify us. God in Justification imputes
righteousness without works, Romans 4.6. God has no consideration of our works
and obedience in the matter of Justification, but he respects the Obedience and
Satisfaction of Christ purely and singly. Therefore though we find our selves
sinners and ungodly, yet we may believe in him that justifies the ungodly, as
Abraham did, Romans 4.5. When we are so far from having any sense of a
righteousness that we nay appear before God withal, as that we have a great
deal of guilt which troubles our conscience; yet we may look to a
righteousness without us, and see the law fulfilled and satisfied for us in
Christ our Head. But here let me give this caution, Take heed of abusing this
Doctrine. The end of this Doctrine is not to make men loose and licentious, as
that men should reason thus with themselves, Christ has fulfilled the law for
us, and therefore it is no matter how we live, Christ has done all, and
therefore it matters not what we do; this is to turn the grace of God into
wantonness. And the Doctrine of free Grace does not in it self teach any such
thing, but the corruption of man makes this ill use of this Doctrine. The
Doctrine of the Gospel teaches another thing. The grace of God which brings
salvation teaches us, that denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, we
should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present evil world, Tit.
2.11, 12. The end of this Doctrine is not to be an encouragement to security,
but to relieve afflicted consciences. Christ came to heal the broken in heart;
and if there be any such who are conscious to themselves of their daily
infirmities, and seeing the many failings they are guilty of in all they do, go
mourning under their failings and imperfections, this Doctrine concerns them.
Christ has undertaken to answer the Law as a Covenant of Works; though the law
be still a rule of obedience, yet Christ has performed it as a Covenant of
Works. That perfect, exact, complete obedience the law requires, Christ has
performed it in our name and stead.

3. If Christ was made under the Law, let us learn to admire and adore the
height, depth, breadth, and length of the love of God in Christ. God in Christ
is become the sole Author of man's Salvation. God in Christ has done that for
us which we never did do, nor could do for our selves. Christ has fulfilled
the Law for us, and wrought out that righteousness for us, which we could never
work out for our selves. Quid ex se agere poterat, ut semel amissam justitiam
recuperaret homo, servus peccati, vinctus Diaboli? Assignata est ei proinde
aliena qui caruit sua. Bernard.
It is an excellent passage of Bernard: What could man do of himself, (who was
the servant of sin, the bond-slave of the Devil) to recover that righteousness
which once he had lost? Therefore there was another righteousness assigned and
given to him who wanted a righteousness of his own. There was another
righteousness given to man who had none of his own. What the Law could not do,
in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness
of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness
of the law might be fulfilled in us, Romans 8.3. Well therefore may we take up
the Church her Song, Isa. 12.2. Behold, God is my salvation, I will trust and
not be afraid; for the Lord Jehovah is my strength and my song, he also is
become my salvation. God in Christ has done all for us. Christ was made under
the Law, he has fulfilled the Law for us, which we could never have fulfilled,
and so our righteousness is of him, as the expression is, Isa. 54.17. This is
the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me,
says the Lord.

The end of the third Sermon.
SERMON I.
Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.


OUR Savior having exhorted his Disciples to love one another, and having
propounded his own love as a motive and as a pattern to them to induce them to
love one another; This is my commandment, that ye love one another as I have
loved you: He comes in this verse to show us what that love of his to his
people was, and wherein the greatness of that love did manifest it self.
Therefore it is well observed by Grotius upon this Text, That our Savior does
here explain what it is that he means by that expression in the former verse,
As I have loved you. This is my commandment, that ye should love one another,
as I have loved you. The pattern of your love each to other ought to be my love
to you, as I have loved you. Now if you desire to know how it is that I have
loved you, I will plainly declare it to you, I am ready to offer up my life a
Sacrifice for you. This certainly is the highest demonstration of love that can
be on my part; my love to you is such, as that I am ready to lay down my life
for you; such ought your love to be one toward another, 1 John 3.16. Hereby
perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us, and we ought
to lay down our lives for the brethren.

This I take to be the plain coherence of these words. In the words themselves
we have two Assertions.

1. The first Assertion is this, That Christ has laid down his life for his
people, or for his friends. This is clearly implied, Greater love than this
has no man, that a man lay down his life for his friends. But I intend to lay
down my life for you, or I am ready to lay down my life for you: this is the
Minor Proposition, as we call it, that is necessarily implied.

The Major Proposition is expressly laid down, Greater love than this has no
man, that a man lay down his life for his friends. But I have laid down my life
for you, or I am ready to lay down my life for you: this is the minor
Proposition that is necessarily implied; for otherwise the Argument of our
Savior here in the Text would have no force in it. The scope of our Savior in
the Text is to persuade his Disciples to love one another upon the account of
his love to them; and he lays down this as the main Proposition, That it is the
highest love for any man to lay down his life for his friend. Now unless the
Assumption be supposed, That Christ has laid down his life for us, the
Argument would fall to the ground and come to nothing; therefore this is
supposed, and this is the minor Proposition necessarily to be understood, That
Christ has laid down his life for his friends, Greater love than this has no
man, that he lay down his life for his friends. But this is my love to you, I
have thus laid down my life for you, I am just now about to do it, and
therefore it is as certain as if it were already done: this must necessarily be
supposed.

2. The second Assertion is, That Christ's laying down his life for his friends,
is the highest demonstration of love: Greater love than this has no man, that
he lay down his life for his friends. Our Savior speaks here after the manner
of men, he speaks of that which is the highest love among men. The highest love
among men is, when one man is ready to lay down his life for another. Now,
says our Savior, I am ready to lay down my life for you; it is the work I am
now going about; I am now going to lay down my life for you, and therefore my
love to you is the highest and greatest love.

From these two Assertions there are these two Propositions that do naturally
arise.

The first is, That our Lord Jesus Christ has laid down his life for his
people.

The second is, That the love of Christ in laying down his life for us, was the
highest demonstration of love. Greater love than this has no man, that he lay
down his life for his friends.

To begin with the first of these.

The first Proposition then is this, That our Lord Jesus Christ has laid down
his life for his people. This, my Beloved, is a point of great weight and
moment, and there are many things of great weight and moment that will
necessarily fall in in speaking to it. In the Explication of this Point, I
shall proceed in this Method.

1. I shall show what the import of this Phrase is, what it is for a man to lay
down his life for another.

2. I shall show how it was that Christ laid down his life for us.

3. I shall show how it is said, that Christ laid down his life for his
friends; whenas elsewhere it is said, that Christ dyed for us whilst we were
enemies.

4. I shall take occasion from this Text to speak something concerning the
Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction. I have already treated of the Love of Christ,
(1) In his Incarnation: (2) Of the Love of Christ in his being made under the
Law for us. And when I first undertook to speak to those Heads, there were two
more I had in my thoughts to speak to; the one was to speak of the Love of
Christ in his Satisfaction, and the other was to speak of the Love of Christ in
his Intercession; and now I shall take occasion from this Text to treat of that
Argument, viz. of the Love of Christ in his Satisfaction: Greater love than
this has no man, that he lay down his life for his friends. It is one main
demonstration of Christ's love to us, That he has laid down his life for us.
But first I shall begin to open this Phrase, what the import of this Phrase is,
what it is to lay down a man's life for another, and then I shall show how it
was that Christ laid down his life for us.

1. What is the import of this Phrase, what does it signify for a man to lay
down his life for another? Greater love than this has no man, that he lay down
his life. If we would go about to translate it exactly according to the letter,
we might render it, (...), ut quispiam animam suam ponat sive deponat.
That a man lay down his soul for his friends. It is an Hebrew Phrase, the Soul
is put for the life, which is the effect of the Souls presence or being in the
body. It is the presence of the Soul that causes life, take away the Soul and
life cease; and therefore it is that the Soul is put for life: so that to lay
down a man's soul, which is the Phrase here used, it is to lay down a man's life
for another. The import of this Phrase is no more than we, in our ordinary way
of speaking, are wont to express thus, it is for a man to be willing and ready
to dye for another. Thus Peter says, Joh. 13.37. I will lay down my life for
thy sake. It is the same Phrase, as in the Text, I will lay down my life for
thy sake: that is, I am ready to dye for thee. So 1 John 3.16. We ought to lay
down our lives for the brethren: that is, we ought to be ready to dye for them,
if the case so requires. So that Christ's laying down his life for us, is no
more than his voluntary undergoing of death for us, his giving up himself to
dye for us.

But here we must inquire a little, before we go any farther, what was that
life which our Savior was willing to lay down for us: Greater love than this
has no man, that he lay down his life for his friends.

I answer, It was his corporal life, the life of his humanity, or his life as
he was man; for as for the life of his Divinity, that was not possible for him
to lay down. As he was God, so he lives always, and could not dye: as he was
God, he was above the power of death. It is true, that person who was God
assumed our nature, and according to that nature he dyed, he laid down the life
of his Humanity, but still he retained the life of his Divinity. This our
Savior himself explains, and it is a great Text, Joh. 10.17, 18. Therefore
does my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I may take it again.
No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self: and then it follows, I
have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. Christ had power
to lay down his life; this he had not had, if he had been a mere man: no mere
man has power to lay down his own life; every man's life, that is but a mere
man, is under the power of God, it is at Gods dispose and not at his own, and
no man may dispose of his own life till God, who gave him his life, give him a
command and call him to lay it down; and therefore they who are self-murderers,
and would take away their own lives, do violate the Law of their Creation, they
put that in their own power which God alone has a power over: they take upon
them to dispose of their own lives, which God alone, who is their Creator and
Sovereign Lord, has power to dispose of; for none but he that gave us our
lives, has a power and right to dispose of them. But now Christ was God as
well as Man, and therefore Christ had a right to dispose of his own life: I
have power (says he) to lay it down, and I have power to take it again.
Christ, as he was God, being the Author, Conserver, and Maintainer of his own
life; as he was Man, had power to dispose of that life: and this was his love
to us, that he laid down his life for us, which he had power to dispose of.

We come now to the second thing, and that is, to show you how it was that
Christ laid down his life for us. This I shall open to you in several
Particulars.

1. Christ is said to lay down his life for us, in that he was ready to do it.
He did not refuse to part with his life for us, but was most ready to give it
up for our sakes. Greater love than this has no man, that he lay down his life
for his friends: that is, greater love than this has no man, that he is ready
to lay down his life for his friends: he is certainly the best friend, who is
ready to venture and hazard his life for his friend. Such a friend was Christ,
he was ready to offer and give up his life for our sakes. As Paul said, He
counted not his life dear to him, so he might finish his course with joy, and
the ministry which he had received of the Lord Jesus, Act. 20.24. And in
another place he says, He was ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at
Jerusalem for the Name of our Lord Jesus, Act. 21.13. So this was much more
true of Christ, he counted not his life dear to him, but was ready to offer it
up for our sakes. I am the good shepherd, (...).
the good shepherd gives his life for his sheep, Joh. 10.11. Here is the same
Phrase as in the Text. Grotius observes upon the former Text, (...), mortem non
defugere.
that the Phrase to lay down a man's life, signifies, not to decline death, not
to shun death. Christ is the good Shepherd, he does not refuse to dye for the
preservation of his sheep. It is said of Paul and Barnabas, that they were men
that had hazarded their lives for the Name of the Lord Jesus, Act. 15.25. They
had hazarded their lives. The words in the Original are, They had delivered up
their souls, (...).
that is, their lives: their lives were not actually taken from them; but the
meaning is, they carried their lives in their hands, they were ready to give
them up, they often put their lives in hazard, they were ready to have parted
with them: so Christ was ready to expose and give up his life for the good of
his people. This is one thing, but the least thing.

2. The second Particular for clearing of it is this, Christ did freely and of
his own accord give up his life and subject himself to death, when there was no
necessity of nature, nor violence from men that could have compelled him
thereunto. To understand this we must know, That all other men, besides Christ,
being found sinners, were under a Law of death by reason of sin: For by one man
sin entered into the world, and death by sin, Romans 5.12. And the wages of sin is
death, Romans 6. ult. But now it was otherwise with Christ, Christ being not a
Sinner, and his Humanity being united to the second Person in Trinity, he was
exempt from the power of death and all manner of sufferings, any further than
he in a way of voluntary condescension was pleased to subject himself to death
and sufferings. This our Savior plainly declares to us, Joh. 10.15. I lay down
my life for my sheep: and more fully verse. 18. No man takes it from me, but I
lay it down of my self. The Divinity in Christ could, if it had pleased, have
preserved the humane nature from death and all manner of suffering; but says
our Savior, I lay it down of my self, when no man could have taken away my
life without my permission, yet I did freely and of my own accord give up my
life. It is possible that one man may venture his life, and expose himself to
death for another; but then he that does so venture his life for another, must
otherwise first or last have dyed according to the course of Nature. But now it
was not thus with Christ, there was no necessity of Nature compelling Christ to
dye, but only upon supposition of his own free condescension. It is true,
Christ was born a mortal man, subject to suffering and death, as we are, but
that was only his own voluntary submission and condescension. Voluntar
submissio. Calvin.
For look upon the flesh of Christ as it was personally united to the Word the
second Person in Trinity, so that flesh of his (setting aside the consideration
of his own voluntary subjecting of it to death and suffering) I say that flesh
of his, by means of its union with the Word the second Person in Trinity, had
been immortal and impassible, and by reason of that union immortality was due
to it; but it was for our sakes, and the sheeps sake, which he dyed for, that
he made himself passible and mortal: I say it was for the sheeps sake, that he
that was impassible and immortal, made himself passible and mortal. Hence is
that expression of one of the Ancients: Impassibilis Deus non dedignatus est
esse homo passibilis, and immortalis, mortis legibus subjacere. Leo.
The impassible God did not disdain to become a passible man, and he that was
immortal to subject himself to the Laws of death. Christ, in the time of his
death and suffering, did so far suspend the virtue of his Divinity, as that the
glory and virtue of his Divinity did not extend it self so far to his flesh as
to keep him from suffering and dying. It is true, the power of the Divinity
supported Christ in dying; therefore is it said, that By the power of the
Eternal Spirit he offered himself without spot to God; Heb. 9.14.
but it did not hinder him from dying. If the glory and virtue of the Divinity
had exerted it self fully in Christ, it would have kept him from death and all
manner of suffering. But such was the love of Christ to us, that the Divinity
in Christ suspended its virtue so far, that Christ might be in a capacity to
suffer and dye for us. And if you weigh and ponder these things, you may well
cry out, O the depths! O the depths of Christ's love!

3. The third Particular is this, The Heart of Christ was much in this work. As
Christ was ready and prepared to dye, and what he did was free and voluntary,
of his own accord, without any necessity compelling him thereunto, but what he
voluntarily brought himself under; so the heart of Christ was much set upon
this work of laying down his life for us. Lo, I come to do thy will, O God,
Heb. 10.7. I have a Baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straightened till it
be accomplished! Luke 12.50. The Heart and Spirit of Christ, as he was man, was
most intent upon this work, yea there was the concourse of both his Wills, his
Divine and humane will in laying down his life for us. Here I shall show a
little, how there was the concourse of both Christ's Wills, his humane and
Divine will, in this work.

1. Christ as man according to his humane will, was willing to suffer and dye
for us. For though he prayed, Father, save me from this hour, Joh. 12.27.
and thereby showed the verity and truth of our nature in him, and the
greatness of the sufferings he was to undergo; yet presently he adds in the
very next words, Nevertheless for this end came I to this hour: hereby plainly
declaring, that although the Verity of humane nature, which was in him, had a
natural aversness in it from suffering; yet such was his love to the Father and
to our Salvation, that that love overcame that inclination of nature, if I may
so call it, or that natural aversness rather which was in humane nature from
suffering, Save me from this hour, for this end came I to this hour. Though
Nature would have abhorred suffering and spared it self, take it as to its
natural inclination and tendency, yet such was his love to his Father and us,
that it made him lay aside the inclinations of Nature, and to break through
that natural aversness that was in humane nature from suffering.

2. Christ, who was God as well as true man, according to his Divine will was
willing to dye and suffer even in that nature of ours which he had assumed. The
Divinity did not suffer, could not suffer; but the person who was God as well
as man, according to his Divine will as well as according to his humane will,
was willing to suffer and dye in that nature of ours which he assumed, Joh.
17.19. For their sakes sanctify I my self. For what was it that Christ was
sanctified? he sanctified himself to be a Sacrifice for our sins, he sanctified
himself by his Death and Sufferings, so is this Text generally expounded by
Divines, I sanctify my self to suffer: well, but how did Christ sanctify
himself? he sanctified himself in that nature in which he suffered and dyed: he
suffered in the humane name; therefore it was in that nature that he sanctified
himself. O but who was the person sanctifying all this while? It was I, I
sanctify my self. None but God can say, I sanctify my self: no mere creature
can say, I sanctify my self; Christ therefore that was God could say, I
sanctify my self. Christ therefore as he was God, or according to his Divine
will, sanctifies himself as man to be a Sacrifice for our sins. Hence is it
that we have that expression, Heb. 10.10. By the which will we are sanctified,
even by the offering up the body of Jesus once for all. By the which will we
are sanctified. The will here spoken of is the will of God the Father, as is
plain by the Context. Now then this will of the Father and Christ's will as he
is God, is one and the same; for as the Father and the Son have but one
Essence, so they have but one Will. Now by the Divine will, which is one and
the same in the Father and the Son, are we sanctified. By the which will we are
sanctified by the offering up of the body of Jesus once for all, says the
Apostle. It was the Divine will, that the body of Jesus should be offered up,
and Christ according to his humane will was willing to offer himself up; for
the Son being in our nature, speaks to the Father after this sort, Lo, I come
to do thy will: so that, as I said, there was the concourse of both wills in
Christ, the humane and Divine will, in offering up himself, in laying down his
life for us. And this I speak to show how willing, how infinitely willing
Christ was in this work of offering himself, and that his heart lay wholly in
this work; both his wills, his will as God, and his will as man was engaged in
this work of laying down his life for us.

4. The fourth Particular is this, As Christ was ready and willing to give up
his life for us, so he did actually lay down his life for us; Ephesians. 5.24. Christ
loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that is, he gave himself actually
for the Church. It was not only in the purpose and intention of his heart to do
it; but he gave himself actually for the Church, Christ did actually offer up
his life a Sacrifice for us: Ephesians. 5.2. Christ has loved us, and given himself
for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. In every
Sacrifice there is the thing sacrificed, the Altar, the Priest, and the
Oblation, or the offering up of the Sacrifice. Now Christ did actually offer up
himself a Sacrifice for us. It was not enough that the beast to be sacrificed,
was brought to the Altar, but he must be slain there, and offered up upon the
Altar. Thus Christ gave his body to be crucified, and he actually offered
himself to Divine Justice for us: hence is it said, that He was delivered up
for our offenses, (...).
Romans 4.25. Who was delivered up, that is, delivered up to death, delivered up
to death and suffering by the Fathers will and pleasure, and by his own
voluntary offering up of himself. Hence is it that we read of the offering up
of the body of Jesus once for all, (...).
Heb. 10.10. By the oblation of the body of Jesus. Christ made an offering or
oblation of himself to the Father, Heb. 9.26. Now once in the end of the world
has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. The meaning is,
Christ has appeared in our nature to destroy and abolish sin by offering up
himself a Sacrifice for sin.

5. The fifth and last Particular is this, That Christ in laying down his life
for us, intended it as a price and ransom to expiate and take away the guilt of
our sins. The Socinians, the great Adversaries to Christian Religion, cannot
bear this. They will not admit that Christ laid down his life as a price or
ransom, or by way of satisfaction, to atone God for the sins we have committed.
They tell us indeed, that Christ dyed to confirm the Truth which he had
preached, and also, that his dying and rising again, and taking possession of
eternal life, was to give us an assurance of eternal life, and that we shall
come thither in due time: also they tell us, that he dyed for an example, but
they will not admit that Christ dyed by way of satisfaction, or that his death
was by way of price and ransom; but the Scripture is most express and full as
to this: and I shall have occasion to speak more fully to it hereafter, only at
present I shall hint a few Scriptures, Mat. 20.28. The Son of man came not to
be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many. So
likewise 1 Timothy 2.6. Who gave himself a ransom for all. Here we have two words
(...) and (...). (...).
The Critics in the Greek Tongue tell us, that (...) were gifts that were
given for the ransom of Prisoners, such gifts as were given for the setting
free and releasing of persons taken Captive in War. We were held captive by Sin
and Satan, we were Prisoners in the hands of Divine Justice. Now Christ gave
his life as a price to set us free, that is the proper signification of the
Greek word (...), it signifies the price of redemption; but the compound word
(...) is more full and pregnant, that signifies a price or ransom laid down
for, or instead of another. Christ gave his life for our lives: as the life of
the beast sacrificed went for the life of the man, so Christ gave his life for
our lives. Hence is it said, that we are redeemed by Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18. Ye
were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain
conversation received by tradition from our fathers; but with the precious
blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot. (...).
Ye were redeemed by price or ransom, so the word signifies, the Blood of
Christ was the Price that was laid down for our Redemption. What can be more
full and express to this purpose, than what our Savior declares to us, when
he says, that he gives his flesh for the life of the world? Joh. 6.51. The
bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world. The Son of God assumed our nature, and offered it up, this he calls his
flesh, and this he gives for the life of the world, that is, to purchase and
procure life for the world. The world lay dead before, dead in sin, dead in
respect of condemnation, the world was obnoxious to Divine wrath. Now Christ
gives his flesh for the life of the world, that is, he gives his flesh to
deliver the world from that state of condemnation in which it was, and to bring
it into reconciliation with God, Joh. 3.17. God sent not his Son into the world
to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved.

A word for Application. Has Christ laid down his life for his sheep?

Behold here as in a Mirroir the greatness of Christ's Love. Joh. 3.16. Hereby
perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us. That person
who was God and man both, laid down his life as man for us, he laid down the
life of his humanity for us. But this I may have occasion to speak to more
hereafter.

This is matter of infinite comfort and support to poor doubting Christians,
fled for refuge to the hope that is set before them, and yet have many
remaining doubts within them concerning their Salvation, whether they shall be
saved in the conclusion yea or no. That which is matter of comfort to them is
this,

1. That Christ has laid down his life for them. Now this is certain, Christ
has not dyed in vain, Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect? it is God that justifies; who is he that condemns? it is Christ that
dyed. If thou should be condemned for thy sins, the guilt of which thou
fear, whenas thou art a poor Believer, and have fled to Christ for refuge,
then has Christ dyed in vain, because the end of Christ's dying was, that those
who believe on him might not perish. So our Savior himself tells us, Joh.
3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes on him should not perish. If therefore thou who have fled
to Christ for refuge to save thee from the stroke of Divine wrath, and from the
condemning power of the Law, if thou should perish, Christ has dyed in vain.
If Christ has laid down his life to purchase eternal life and Salvation for
thee, and thou should go without it who art a poor Believer, and runnest to
him for Salvation, then Christ has dyed in vain. Consider what the Apostle
says, Gal. 2.20. If righteousness come by the Law, then is Christ dead in
vain. If God should put thee to work out a righteousness for thy self, and
there were no possibility of Salvation but by perfect keeping the Law, then
there had been no necessity of Christ's death; but Christ's death was not in
vain, Christ dyed to satisfy Gods Justice for them who could not fulfill the
Law for themselves, and therefore there is ground of hope, that such who have
fled to Christ for refuge, shall not be disappointed of Salvation.

2. A second thing to comfort doubting Christians is, that Christ who has the
power to dispose of eternal life to whom he pleases, has invested poor
Believers with a Right and Title to eternal life.

1. Christ, as he is Man and Mediator, has a power given to him to give
eternal life to whom he pleases: Joh. 17.2. As thou have given him power over
all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him.

2. Christ having this power given to him, has invested Believers with a Right
and Title to eternal life. It is a great Text to comfort such who are concerned
about their Salvation more than any thing else, Joh. 10.29. Christ speaking of
his sheep says, I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish. If
Christ has given them eternal life, how shall they be deprived of it? If
Christ has given them eternal life, who shall take it from them? What Christ
has once given, he never takes back again; For the gifts and calling of God
are without repentance. Christ therefore having made over a Right and Title to
eternal life unto those that are his sheep, to all that obey and follow him,
they must of necessity have it. These things may be of use to support poor
doubting Christians, who are concerned about their Salvation: other men are
concerned about their temporal interests in this world; but the great
concernment of serious Souls is to secure their Salvation. Now these
considerations may be of great use unto such.

The end of the first Sermon.
SERMON II.
Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.


IN the former Discourse I dispatched the two first Particulars.

1. I opened the import of the Phrase, what this Phrase did import, for a man
to lay down his life for his friend.

2. I showed you how it was that Christ laid down his life for us.

It remains now that I proceed to speak something to the third thing, and that
is this, How is it said that Christ laid down his life for his friends, whereas
elsewhere it is said, that we were enemies when Christ dyed for us, Romans 5.10.
For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son.
Here it is said, that we were enemies when Christ dyed for us; and yet in the
Text it is said, that Christ did lay down his life for his friends. How are
these two to be reconciled?

I shall lay down several Particulars for the clearing of this, which also are
necessary to be laid down for the understanding of the Text it self.

1. It is certain, that by Nature we are all enemies unto God, and Christ, when
he dyed for us, when he laid down his life for us, found us in a state of
enmity. Although some of the Elect, who then lived when Christ suffered, were
already reconciled to God, yet consider them and us all by nature, we are
enemies unto God, and Christ dyed for us when we were enemies: so in the Text
before, If when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son, Romans 5.10. Also it appears from another Text, Col. 1.21. You that were
sometimes alienated and enemies in your minds by wicked works, yet now has he
reconciled in the body of his flesh through death. Sin is a plain rebellion
against God, sin is a fighting against him, a perfect opposition to the will of
God; so opposite is the sinner to Gods will, and so much bent upon his own
will, that he is angry with God, and hates God, because Gods will crosses his
will. Now when we were sinners and enemies, when we stood in this direct
opposition and desiance to God, even then Christ dyed for us: Romans 5.8. God
commended his love to us, that whilst we were yet sinners Christ dyed for us.
Those who are called Sinners in this verse, are called Enemies in the 10.
verse: If when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son. Every sinner is an enemy to God, Christ therefore dyed for us when we were
enemies: that is the first thing.

2. The second Particular to clear the Point in hand, is this: Though we were
truly and properly enemies unto God, yet in some sense God accounted us, and
looked upon us as friends, how so? not as being friends to him, but as he being
a friend to us; not that we had any love or affection for God, but that God had
good will and kindness for us. It is a great Text to clear this, 1 John 4.10.
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that God loved us, and gave his Son
to be the propitiation for our sins. Hence is it, that one of the Ancients has
this expression: Etsi nondum quidem amantibus, sed tamen jam amatis.
Christ (says he) dyed for his friends, although not for such friends as did
already love him, yet for such friends as were in some sort beloved by him. For
it was out of his love that he dyed for us.

3. The third Particular to clear it is this, Christ's Death was the means to
make us friends, and to reconcile us to God, Col. 1.22. You has he reconciled
in the body of his flesh through death. It is a Speech of one of the Ancients:
Christus non aliter pro amicis mortuus est, nisi pro acquirendis, scil. ut
amicos faceret ex inimicis.
Christ did no otherwise dye for his friends than that he might make them
friends, that is, that he might make them friends who were enemies before, and
Christ's death was influential to make us the friends of God, or to reconcile us
to him these two ways.

2. Christ by his death has abolished and taken away the enmity that was
between God and us. Hence is it said expressly, that Christ has slain the
enmity by his Cross, Ephesians. 2.16. That he might reconcile both in one body by the
Cross, having slain the enmity thereby. That he might reconcile both, that is,
that he might reconcile both Jews and Gentiles in one body, by the Cross, that
is, by the Sacrifice of himself upon the Cross. Having slain the enmity
thereby, that is, having taken away the enemity that was between God and us by
the Sacrifice of himself upon the Cross. God was infinitely offended with us by
reason of sin: now Christ offering himself as a Sacrifice upon the Cross for
our sins, hereupon God is pacified and appeased, the enmity that God had
against us is now slain and taken quite away. God has now no more against us,
There is now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. Now
the enmity that was between God and us being slain and removed, there is a
foundation laid for friendship between God and us: whilst two persons remain
unreconciled, they cannot cordially love one another; whilst the difference
remains, there are heats and animosities, heart burnings one against another;
but when the difference is taken up, then there is a foundation laid for love
and friendship. So in this case: so long as we apprehend that God has a
controversy with us, that he is angry with us for our sins, that he is ready
to condemn us for them, this drives us farther from God, we cannot love him
whilst we are under such apprehensions; but when we know that God is reconciled
by the death of Christ, that his Justice is satisfied, that he will not condemn
us for our sins, this lays the foundation for friendship, then are we engaged
to draw near to God, and to give up our selves in ways of obedience to him. Now
Christ by his death has satisfied Gods Justice, and thereby slain the enmity
that was between God and us, and so laid the foundation of friendship between
God and us.

2. Christ by his death has purchased the spirit of regeneration, which does
renovate and change our hearts, and take away the natural enmity that is in
them against God, and inclines our hearts unto God. Tit. 3.5. According to his
mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy
Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior. The
Holy Ghost is shed on us through Jesus Christ our Savior, that is, through the
Merits of Jesus Christ our Savior. It is God that sheds the Holy Ghost into
our hearts, but it is through the Merits of Jesus Christ our Savior. It is
through the Merits of Christ's death that this Spirit is purchased for us. Well!
but what does the Holy Ghost do when he is sent into our hearts as the purchase
of Christ's death? He regenerates and renews us. So the former verse tells us,
According to his mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration and renewing
of the Holy Ghost. The Spirit of God takes away the heart of stone, and gives
us a heart of flesh. The Spirit of God working grace in the heart, takes away
the enmity and opposition that naturally lies in our heart against God, and
inclines our hearts to love God, and to fear him.

4. The fourth Particular we would lay down for the clearing of the Point is
this, That our Savior here in the Text is speaking of the greatest love
amongst men: Greater love than this has no man, that a man lay down his life
for his friends. The greatest love amongst men will go no higher than this, for
one man to lay down his life for another. Now, says our Savior, you cannot
complain that my love is defective toward you, in that I am ready to do as
much for you as ever any man did for his friend. The highest love that you can
instance in is, when one man does lay down his life for another: now I am ready
to lay down my life for you; therefore it is that our Savior says here,
Greater love than this has no man, that a man lay down his life for his
friends.

5. Another Particular for the clearing of it is this, The Disciples to whom
Christ was here speaking (Greater love than this has no man, that he lay down
his life for his friends) were already made friends; but yet they and all
others, who were made friends before his incarnation, were made friends to God
by virtue of that Sacrifice, which now he was about to offer up. For Christ was
a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, and the virtue of his death and
sufferings was extended to all the Saints that were made so in all Ages:
therefore although they to whom Christ was now speaking, were already made
friends; yet it was through the virtue of his death and sufferings, that now he
was to undergo, that they were made so. All men by nature are enemies alike,
and that now any were made friends, was by virtue of the death of Christ, that
he was to suffer and undergo for them. For it was the Decrce of God, that
Christ should dye and suffer before he did dye and suffer; and it was in the
virtue of his sufferings, that all the Elect that lived before his Incarnation,
and those that lived in the time when he was here in the flesh, were reconciled
unto God.

6. The sixth Particular is this: Christ had in the former verse been exhorting
his Disciples to love one another, according to the Pattern himself had given
to them, This is my commandment, that ye love one another as I have loved you.
Now in this verse he shows wherein he did manifest his love to them, he was
ready to manifest his love to them, by Laying down his life for them: therefore
if they intended to love one another in conformity to his Pattern, they must be
ready to show the highest offices of love one to another. He would have them
love one another, even as he has loved them. His love to them made him willing
to lay down his life for them; and therefore if they would love in conformity
to him, they should be ready to perform the highest offices of love one toward
another: Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for
us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren, 1 John 3.16.

7. Our Savior was about to own them as his friends, and to acquaint them,
that he intended to deal with them as with friends. Now it was not accommodate
to his present design and scope in this place to say he would lay down his life
for his enemies; for immediately after he tells them, that he owns them for his
friends in the 14. verse, Ye are my friends, if you do whatsoever I command
you. Henceforth I have not called you servants, but I have called you friends.
And he tells them, he deals with them as with friends: The servant knows not
what his Lord does: but I have called you friends; for all things that I have
heard of my Father, I have made known to you, Joh. 15.15. Christ tells them,
that he looked upon them as friends, and that he intended to deal with them as
friends; therefore it was not accommodate with our Saviors present scope and
design in this place to use the expression of enemies (though we were all
enemies when Christ dyed for us) but he chooses to express it thus: Greater
love than this has no man, that a man lay down his life for his friends. Upon
these accounts I conceive it is in this place that Christ says, he laid down
his life for his friends, whereof elsewhere it is said, we were enemies when
Christ dyed for us.

Thus have I dispatched the third Particular to show you how it is said, Christ
laid down his life for his friends. It remains now that I should enter upon the
fourth Head, and that is, to speak something concerning the Doctrine of Christ's
Satisfaction; but because I choose to reserve that entire to be spoken to by it
self, I shall make some Application of what has been mentioned, and indeed the
Use that arises from hence is of great moment.

The first Use therefore shall be this. friends? Let us be exhorted from hence
to be sensible of the condition that we are in by nature, we are not born
friends, but we are made so by the Death of Christ. We are so far from being
born friends, as that we are born enemies unto God: now we ought to be sensible
of the natural enmity that is in us against God. But here it may be said,
Wherein does this enemity consist? How does it appear, that we are enemies unto
God? I answer, It appears in these three Particulars.

1. It appears in this, That our wills are most opposite to the Will of God.
That natural enmity that is in us against God appears in this, Qui alterius
voluntati adversatur, says a Learned man, He that resists and sets himself to
cross the will of another, and does this always, so that his will can by no
means consent or agree to another will, he is said to be a man's enemy. Now
such is the will of every natural man: the will of every natural man does
perpetually rise in opposition against Gods Will. Romans 8.7. Because the carnal
mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither
indeed can be. Herein does the hostility or enmity of the carnal mind discover
it self, that it cannot be subject to the Law of God. The carnal mind always
crosses and thwarts the Will of God. Let the Law of God forbid such a sin, it
will not be restrained from it. Let the Law of God command such a Duty, it will
not be brought to the performance of it. (...).
It is not subjected to the Law of God, the carnal mind refuses to be brought
into order. The Law of God would set bounds to men's thoughts, wills, and
affections, but they will not be kept within those bounds, whatsoever the Law
says to the contrary; they will think what they have a mind to think, covet
and desire what they have a mind to covet and desire, will what they have a
mind to will; they will not be kept within those bounds the Law of God has set
for them. Now this is that that shows the hostile disposition that is in
corrupt nature against God, in that the corrupt mind does always thwart the Law
of God. The Law of God says, such and such sins are to be avoided, such and
such Duties are to be performed; the carnal mind will take no notice either of
the one or the other, but thwarts and contradicts the mind and will of God:
this discovers the natural enmity that is in our hearts against God.

2. The natural enmity that is in our hearts discovers it self in this, In that
naturally men do not only hate the Will of God, but they hate God himself. Mark
the expression, (...).
The carnal mind is enmity against God, not only most repugnant to the Law of
God, it is not subject to the Law of God, but it is enmity against God himself.
Hence it is said, that natural men are haters of God, Rem. 1.30. and in this
very Chapter where the Text lies, Joh. 15.24. They have both seen and hated me
and my Father.

You will say, Object.
This is a very severe charge. Is it possible that ever any man should hate
God? God is good, the chief good, yea goodness it self, how is it possible that
any man should hate the chief good? To this I answer, Men do not hate God under
that notion precisely as he is good, and as he is the chief good; but they hate
him under another notion, they hate him as he is a Lawgiver, and as he is a
Judge, they hate him as he is a holy and just God, they hate him as his Nature
and Will is most directly opposite to the lusts which they love above any thing
in the world. Hence is it said, Peccatum est Deicidium.
that sin is a kind of God-murder. Why so? Because the sinner could even wish
that God were not in Being, that he were removed out of the way, because his
Will and his Law stand in opposition to his lust. This is another thing wherein
the enemity that is in the natural mind against God does discover it self, in
that men by nature, whilst they are unreconciled, hate God himself. Little do
men think that there is this venom and poison in their natures as to hate God,
the best and most excellent Being; yet we are bound to believe the Word of God
before what men think or say of themselves.

3. The natural enmity that is in the heart against God, is discovered in this,
In the constant bent and tendency that is in the heart unto evil, Col. 1.21.
Enemies in your minds by wicked works. The mind of a natural man is always set
upon evil, sometimes it is set upon gross and heinous evils, as Murder,
Adultery, Fornication, Theft, Rapine, and the like: and when the mind of a
natural man is not set upon these grosser evils, it is always set upon other
evils, as Pride, Self-love, Vainglory, Covetousness, and the like. The enmity
that is in every natural man's mind always discovers it self in one of these
ways: Either by having his affections let out to grosser sins, or else to more
spiritual sins. Now, faith the Apostle, we are enemies in our minds by wicked
words. When the mind is violently set upon those things which are most directly
opposite to the Nature and Will of God, this is that which does discover the
hostility and enmity that is in us against God. Now it concerns us all to be
deeply sensible of this enmity that is in our hearts against God. For first of
all, the more sensible we are of this enmity, this may be one good means to
humble us; what cause of confusion should this be to us, that we should not
only have a will that does still reluctate against Gods Will, against the
Divine Will, and is most repugnant to it; but that we should be enemies to God
himself, and that we should have a Principle in us that should fight against
God, and stand in direct opposition to him?

2. The more sensible we are of this enmity, the more need we shall have of
medicinal and healing grace to heal the natural venom and malignity that is in
our natures against God. Certainly they are much to be pitied, Nemini salus
concedenda, nisi cui divinitus revelatus fuerit unus Mediator Dei and hominum,
Jesus Christus. Aug.
who think that moral Virtue is sufficient to bring men to Heaven, and that the
Heathens by Philosophy and the help of moral Virtue may please God, and attain
to Salvation. This was the Error of some of the Ancients, and some of late
have fallen into it. But much more true is that of Austin: We may not suppose,
that Salvation is vouchsafed to any man, but to him to whom that one Mediator
between God and man Jesus Christ is divinely revealed. There is no name given
under heaven by which we can be saved, but the Name of Jesus Christ, Acts 4.12.
And although some of the Heathens have pretended, that they have loved God
above all things; and some of the corrupter School men have affirmed, That men
by the power of Nature may love God above all things; yet if the matter be
diligently inquired into, we shall certainly find that which Peter Martyr
observed to be most true, Sub illa simulata dilectione, under that feigned love
to God, which they pretended unto, the greatest hatred did lie hid. For those
very Heathens who spoke so highly and so seraphically of loving God above all
things, yet they themselves were found guilty of Idolatry, than which nothing
can be more contrary to the true love of God. But the Divine Oracles will be
found to be most true, and they tell us, That the natural mind is enmity
against God, and that those that are in the flesh cannot please God: therefore
it concerns us all to look after medicinal Grace to heal and restore our
natures, otherwise that natural enmity that is in us will never be removed.

reconciliation with God, and to labor that we may be made friends with God.
Christ laid down his life for us, not because we were made friends before, but
to make us friends. Since therefore the end of Christ's death was to reconcile
us to God, we should seek after reconciliation with him. This is the Apostles
Argument, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and has committed to us the
word of reconciliation. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God
did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God. It
is as much as if the Apostle had said, God is willing to be reconciled to us,
and he has testified his willingness in giving his Son to dye for our sins,
and making satisfaction to his Justice. Now since God has expressed himself to
be so willing to be reconciled to us, we ought to be willing to be reconciled
to him. We pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.

Here it may be inquired, But what is it for us to be reconciled to God? When
the Apostle prays us here with so much earnestness in Christ's stead to be
reconciled to God, what is the reconciliation he aims at? how ought we to be
reconciled to God? Two or three things I conceive are here intended.

1. We ought to seek after reconciliation with God, Isa. 55.6. Seek ye the Lord
while he may be found, that is, seek his face and favor, seek reconciliation
with him. Secure sinners are not aware of the difference that is between God
and them; although the sinner thinks little of it, sin makes a vast breach, an
hostile difference between God and him. God is angry with the wicked every day,
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 7.11. And The wrath of God is revealed from heaven
against all the ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, Romans 1.18. God does
maintain his controversy against thee whilst thou go on in the ways of sin;
therefore seek reconciliation with him, Agree with thy adversary quickly whilst
he is in the way, Mat. 5.25. Labor to take up all differences between God and
thee.

2. To be reconciled to God, is to accept of the reconciliation which God
tenders, humbly to embrace that grace which God offers. God is in Christ
reconciling the world, and has committed to us the word of reconciliation. As
much as if he should say, God has put himself into Christ on purpose to
exhibit and give forth grace and mercy to sinners, and he sends his Ministers
and Ambassadors on purpose to make a tender of grace and mercy to him. Now then
are we reconciled to God when we do humbly embrace this grace and mercy offered
to us, Romans 10.10. With the heart man believes unto righteousness. We ought
with the full bent of our affections to embrace the grace of God offered to us
in the Gospel.

3. If we would be reconciled to God, we ought to pray for renewing grace, that
we may lay aside the old enmity that lurks in our hearts against God. It is sin
that first of all made the quarrel and difference between God and us; and how
can we expect in reason, that ever we should be brought into perfect
reconciliation with God, so long as that which first bred the quarrel and made
the difference between God and us, is retained and kept by us? Isa. 59.2.
Your iniquities, says the Prophet, have separated between you and your God.
Sin is that which sets us at a distance from God. If therefore we would have
the breach made up, and the difference reconciled, we must pray for that grace
from God, whereby we may lay aside that which first made the quarrel. The
Apostle tells us, we are enemies in our minds by evil works, Col. 1.21. So long
as our minds are set upon sin, so long as we continue in the love and practice
of any thing that God hates, Amicorum est idem velle and nolle.
how is it possible we should be friends with God? It is the property of
friends to will the same thing, and nill the same thing. If we would be the
friends of God, we must will what God wills, hate what God hates, and love what
God loves: You that love the Lord hate evil, Psalm. 97.10.

This therefore is the second Use, an Use of Exhortation, to exhort us to seek
after reconciliation with God.

In the third and last place, Christ's love to us, who, in some sense, accounts
us friends, whereas indeed we are enemies: Greater love than this has no man,
that a man lay down his life for his friends. We are all by nature enemies, so
we have heard, and yet in some sense Christ accounts us friends. Christ had a
purpose of good will to us, even when we were enemies toward him. It was from
his love that God sent his Son to dye for us when we were enemies: Herein God
commended his love toward us, in that whilst we were yet enemies, Christ dyed
for us, Romans 5.8. So that God had a purpose of good will in his heart toward
us, when we were full of enmity in our hearts toward him. Only that none may
abuse this Doctrine, take this caution. No man can conclude, that God has a
purpose of good will to him that remains an enemy to God, and persists in his
enmity: but he has reason on the contrary to think, that he being an enemy to
God by nature, and continuing still to be so, God remains so to him. But
however, this was the love of God to the world in general, that when the whole
world were enemies, and all were found in a state of enmity against God, God
loved the world so far, as to find out and prepare a means of Salvation for the
world. God loved the world so far, as that he gave his only begotten Son to
deliver the world from its perishing condition, and to bring it eternal life:
this was the love of God to us; and this commends and sets forth the greatness
of Gods love to us, that when we were enemies to him, he had a kindness for us;
and so great was his kindness to us, that he sent his Son to bring us unto
life. Joh. 4.9. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that
God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him.

The end of the second Sermon.
SERMON III.
Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.


THE general Proposition that I have laid down as the foundation of our
Discourse from these words, has been this, That our Lord Jesus Christ has
laid down his life for his people.

In speaking to this Doctrine I have propounded to speak to these four Heads.

1. To open the import of this Phrase, what it is to lay down a man's life for
another.

2. To show how it was that Christ has laid down his life for us.

3. To show how it is said here in the Text, that Christ has laid down his
life for his friends, whereas else where it is said, that Christ dyed for us
whilst we were enemies. And

4. I propounded to speak something from hence, concerning the great Doctrine
of Christ's Satisfaction.

Having already spoken something to the three first of these Particulars, it
remains now that I should treat of the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction.

The Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction is a Doctrine much impugned. The
Socinians deny it altogether; and the Papists do in a manner enervate this
Doctrine, by bringing in other Satisfactions besides that of Christ. This
Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction is a Doctrine of great moment it is the great
Pillar upon which our Saivation stands, and the main Hinge upon which our
comfort turns; for if Christ have not satisfied for us, then are we liable to
make satisfaction to God in our own persons.

That I may therefore speak something to this great Doctrine, I shall

1. Explain the name or word a little.

2. I shall come to speak to the thing it self.

1. To explain the name, some are offended at the name it self. As they are
offended at the word Trinity, and at the word Person, and at the word
Sacrament, because they are not Scripture-words: so some have been offended at
the word Satisfaction, because it is not a Scripture-word. But our Answer to
this is very plain.

Names are but expressive of things, and necessity compels us to think of the
most proper names or words to express things by. If therefore the things
themselves be to be found in Scripture, there seems very little reason why any
should reject the names and words that are used to express those things by.
Therefore to touch briefly upon those words that some have been offended at.

Although the word Trinity be not found in Scripture, yet the thing it self is
certainly found there: There are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father,
the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one, 1 John 5.7. If there be
three, then there must needs be a Trinity: so for the word Person, although we
have not the word (...) in Scripture in that sense that we commonly apply it to
a person in the Trinity; yet we have another word (...), Heb. 1.3. where it is
said, Christ is the Character of his Fathers Person, so we render it, and
indeed the word in the Original is equivalent with the former word (...),
(...). Phavor.
and is so explained by the ancient Critics in the Greek Tongue.

So also for the third Word mentioned, which was Sacrament. Though the word
Sacrament be not found in Scripture, yet we have such Representations and
Symbols, as Baptism and the Lords Supper are, to signify and set forth some
spiritual Mysteries unto us, and this is what we understand by the word
Sacrament. Invisibilis gratiae visibile signum.
A Sacrament is a visible sign of some invisible grace, as Austin expresses
it. We must have some word or other to express things by. So now for this very
word that we are here treating of, although we have not the word Satisfaction
mentioned in Scripture, yet we have the thing it self frequently and copiously
set before us, what else is the meaning of those expressions, that God has
laid on him the iniquity of us all, and that he has born the chastisement of
our peace, Isa. 53.5, 6. If the punishment that should have been laid on us,
was laid on Christ, this is properly Satisfaction, what else shall we call
Satisfaction? Now this is clear from that expression, when it is said, The
chastifement of our peace was upon him. Hence also it is said, That Christ was
made sin for us, That he made his Soul an offering for sin, That he gave his
life a ransom for many. And there are other places, which I may urge in their
proper place; but these are enough to show, that the thing it self is in
Scripture, and the thing it self being there, there is little reason, why any
should quarrel at the name or word.

Now for the import and signification of this word, the Latin word
satisfacere, to satisfy, the Critics tell us, Satisfacere, sacere quod satis
alicui sit, quo ille acquiescat and contentus sit. Satisfacere, est tantum
facere quantum sit irato ad vindictam.
That it is to do that which may be accounted enough by the person unto whom it
is done, so that he may be content with it, and acquiesce in it. This is the
notion of Satisfaction, and in matters of offense they tell us, That to
satisfy is to do so much as is necessary to pacify the offended person in
reference to the wrong or injury which he has sustained. And thus Christ is
said to have satisfied God, who was angry and offended by reason of our sins,
for as much as the punishment that we had deserved was transferred upon Christ
our Surety, and he bearing the punishment for us, God is hereby pacified and
appeased.

I come now to the consideration of the thing it self, and here

1. I shall give a description of the nature of Christ's Satisfaction, and open
the parts of that description. And then

2. I shall lay down several Propositions for the clearing of the whole
Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction.

1. For a description of the nature of Christ's Satisfaction, we may take a
description of it thus. The Satisfaction of Christ is one of Christ's
Mediatorial actions, A description of Christ's Satisfaction.
particularly an act of his Priesthood, whereby Christ offering up himself a
facrifice for our sins, has made a full compensation to the Justice of God for
the sins of his people, and thereby pacified or turned away Gods wrath, and
has procured pardon of sin, and eternal life for us. This description will
take in the whole nature of Christ's Satisfaction. Here we have the several
parts of this description to unfold: and here

1. We must show how the Satisfaction of Christ is one of Christ's Mediatorial
actions.

2. We must show how it is an Act of his Priesthood.

3. We must show what the matter of this Satisfaction is, Christ offers himself
a sacrifice for our sins, so we have it in the Scriptures.

4. What the form of this Satisfaction was, Christ made a-full compensation to
the Justice of God for the sins of his people.

5. What the effects of this Satisfaction are, and they principally three.

1. The turning away of Gods wrath.

2. The obtaining pardon of sin.

3. The procuring eternal life for us.

These things explained, will give us some light into the nature of Christ's
Satisfaction.

1. We say, That the Satisfaction of Christ is one of Christ's Mediatorial
actions.

To understand this, we must take in two things.

1. Consider Christ as one God with the Father and the Spirit, so Satisfaction
is made to him. Consider Christ as Mediator, and so he is that Person that
makes the Satisfaction. Every sin is an offense committed against the Divine
Majesty. Now for as much as all the Trinity have the same Essence of the
Divinity in them; therefore we must of necessity suppose, that when
Satisfaction is made to one of the Persons, Satisfaction is made to the other
also, because they have all one and the same Essence, and it is the Divine
Majesty that is offended in all. The Son therefore, the second Person in
Trinity, considered as God, so Satisfaction is made to him as well as to the
Father and the Spirit; but now consider him as God-man and Mediator, so he is
the Person that makes the satisfaction; and Christ considered as Mediator,
makes satisfaction to himself, considered as God. Hence are those expressions,
Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity,
and purify unto himself a peculiar people. Here we see how Christ has
redeemed and purified to himself a peculiar people. So Ephesians. 5.7. That he might
present it to himself a glorious Church. Neither is it incongruous or improper
to say, that Christ has made satisfaction to himself, because amongst men one
man does not satisfy himself, but one man makes satisfaction to another; I say
this is not incongruous or improper in respect of Christ; and the reason is,
because Christ may be considered two ways.

1. Christ may be considered in respect of his Divine Nature, as he is one with
the Father. Hence it is said, I and my Father are one, Joh. 10.30. In this
respect, Christ is the Person offended. Consider Christ in respect of his
Divine Nature merely, so he is the Person offended.

2. Christ may be considered as to his Office, which he voluntarily undertook;
and so, though he were the Person offended, yet was he willing to take our
nature, and in that nature to become a Mediator between God and us by his own
voluntary condescension: so that the same Person, after a different respect or
consideration, receives the satisfaction, and also gave it. Christ received the
Sacrifice of Atonement, considered as God, he also offered the Sacrifice as
Mediator as God-man in a way of voluntary condescension.

2. Another thing that is to be laid down is this: We say that Christ's
Satisfaction is one of his Mediatorial actions, because there was the concourse
of both the Natures in Christ in this work of his Satisfaction. Christ is
Mediator according to both Natures, and in all the Mediatorial actions of
Christ, the Person acts in both Natures, influencing each nature to do that
which is proper to it self. It is a known Rule in Divinity: Vtraque Natura agit
cum communione alterius.
Each of the Natures in Christ acts with a communion of the other Nature. The
work of Satisfaction is neither accomplished by the Divinity without the
Humanity, neither is it performed by the Humanity without the influence and
virtue of the Divinity. The Divine Nature in Christ is the principal efficient
cause, and the humane Nature is to be considered as the ministering or
subservient cause, Joh. 6.63. our Savior tells us, That the flesh profits
nothing, it is the Spirit that quickens. Although the actions and sufferings
performed by him in his Humanity, were the matter of his satisfaction, yet it
was the Divinity that gave virtue and efficacy unto all. It is in the humane
Nature that Christ obeyed, suffered, dyed; but it is by virtue of the Divine
Nature, that his obedience becomes meritorious, and his sufferings become
satisfactory.

2. We say in the description, That the Satisfaction of Christ is one of his
Mediatorial actions, and particularly an act of his Priesthood. To understand
this, we must consider, that there were two things that did belong to the
Office of the Priests under the Law.

1. To offer Sacrifice.

2. To pray and intercede for the People.

Christ therefore being made of God a High Priest according to the order of
Melchisedec, Heb. 6.20.
he also must have some Sacrifice to offer, without a Sacrifice he could not be
a Priest. This the Apostle teaches clearly, Heb. 8.3. Every High Priest is
ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices, therefore it is of necessity that this
man have something also to offer. If Christ be a Priest, he must have something
to offer, there must be some Sacrifice that he must offer.

3. The third thing we have to inquire into is this, What the matter of this
satisfaction is; for we say in the description, Christ offers himself a
Sacrifice for our sins. I know it is commonly said, That the humane Nature was
the Sacrifice that was offered. Now although this expression, if rightly
understood, may be admitted, because it is said, Christ suffered in the flesh
for us; so we have the expression, 1 Pet. 4.1. That for as much as Christ has
suffered for us in the flesh, that is, in his Humanity; it was by means of the
humane Nature that Christ was capable of suffering, and it was in that nature
that he did suffer; also we read, that Christ had a body prepared for him, and
that body was offered up, Heb. 10.10. By the which will we are sanctified by
the offering up the body of Jesus once for all: Yet notwithstanding this is
evident, that the Scripture, when it speaks of the Sacrifice of Christ, does
most commonly and frequently call it, the Sacrifice of himself. There are many
Texts to this purpose: Gal. 1.4. He gave himself for our sins. Gal. 2.20. He
gave himself for me. Ephesians. 5.2. Christ has loved us, and given himself for us.
Ephesians. 5.25. Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it. Tit. 2.14. Who
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to
himself a peculiar people. Heb. 1.3. When he had by himself purged our sins,
sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high. Heb. 7.27. This he did
once, when he offered up himself. Heb. 9.14. By the eternal Spirit he offered
himself without spot to God. And he put away our sins by the sacrifice of
himself. And it is an emphatical Scripture, 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare
our sins in his body on the tree. (...). Ipsemet, sui ipsius oblatione, ut
simul and Sacerdos esset and victima. Beza in loc.
By all these expressions it appears, that Christ himself was the Sacrifice, we
may not exclude either of the Natures in Christ in any of his Mediatorial
actions, Christ is our Mediator according to both Natures, and he is Prophet,
Priest, and King of the Church according to both Natures, and in this work of
his Satisfaction he gave himself according to both Natures. For though it were
the humane Nature only that was capable of suffering; yet the Divine Nature was
united to the humane nature in the time of Christ's suffering. The Word, the
second Person in Trinity, was conjoined with the flesh, and it was his own
flesh that he gave for the life of the world. Hence is that speech of
Athanasius: (...). Athanas.
That very flesh was not the flesh of any other person, but it was the flesh of
the Word himself. And the same Athanasius has another expression to the same
purpose: They do err, says he, who say that there was another Son which did
suffer, and another which did not suffer; for there was not another besides the
Son of God, who underwent death and sufferings for us. The Word, the second
Person in Trinity, was conjoined with the flesh. Though the flesh only was
capable of suffering, yet the Word was in conjunction with the flesh; therefore
our Savior says, It is my flesh which I will give for the life of the world,
Joh. 6. It was his own flesh, and not the flesh of any other. To illustrate and
confirm this yet farther we ought to consider, that in the sufferings of Christ
there was the voluntary humiliation of that great Person who was God as well as
man, He who was in the form of God emptied himself, taking on him the form of a
servant, and he humbled himself and became obedient to the death, even the
death of the Cross, Phil. 2.6, 7.

Here are two Acts spoken of.

1. His emptying himself.

2. His humbling himself.

His emptying himself was discovered in his Incarnation, and taking on the form
of a servant.

His humbling himself was seen in his sufferings, and in the work of his
Satisfaction, in being obedient to death, even the death of the Cross. Not but
that his Incarnation was also a part of his humbling of himself; but the
Apostle speaks of these two distinctly. He tells us, That he who was in the
form of God emptied himself, taking on him the form of a servant, and he
humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.

Now both these Acts of his, his humbling and his emptying himself, they are
the Acts of the Person; they are the acts of that Person who was in the form of
God. It was he, who being in the form of God, who emptied himself by taking
upon him the form of a servant: and it was he that was in the form of God, that
humbled himself, and became obedient to the death, even the death of the Cross.
So that in the Satisfaction of Christ we ought to consider more than the bare
oblation of the humane nature, we ought to consider the conjunction of the
Word, the second Person in Trinity, with the flesh, and we ought to consider
the voluntary humiliation of that glorious Person, the Son of God, who being in
the form of God, did not only stoop so low as to come into our nature; but
being in that nature, humbled himself so far as to become a Sacrifice for us. I
say, in the Sacrifice of Christ we ought to consider the will of the Person,
who being God as well as man, there was the condescension of the Divine will as
well as the concourse of his humane will. The Son of God being in our nature,
voluntarily offers himself in that nature as a Sacrifice for our sins.

4. The fourth Particular to be spoken to is this, The form of Christ's
Satisfaction, and that consists in this, That Christ made a full compensation
to the Justice of God for the sins of his people.

There are three things that concur to make up this.

1. That Christ suffered the substance of what we ought to suffer. Hence it is
said, That Christ suffered for us, 1 Pet. 2.21. And The chastisement of our
peace was upon him, Isa. 53. And By his stripes we are healed, 1 Pet. 2.24. The
stripes that should have been laid upon us, were laid upon Christ: so that
Christ suffered the substance of what we ought to suffer. The Law pronounced a
Curse upon all the transgressors of it. Cursed is every one that continues not
in all things that are written in the book of the Law to do them. Now Christ
was made a curse for us, Gal. 3.10. If Christ did not suffer the whole
punishment due to us for our sins, then that part of the punishment, which he
did not suffer, remains still for us to be suffered; for this is certain, Not
one iota or tittle of the Law shall pass away, till all be fulfilled, Mat.
5.18. The whole preceptive part of the Law must be fulfilled, the minatory or
threatening part of the Law must be fulfilled. Therefore if there be any part of
that punishment, which the Law would inflict upon us, not undergone, it remains
to be fulfilled by us. But now Christ has redeemed us from the whole Curse of
the Law, Gal. 3.10. Therefore Christ has born the punishment that we ought to
undergo: but of this more hereafter.

2. Christ has suffered what Divine Justice could demand, otherwise there was
not a full compensation to Divine Justice. But now this is the excellency of
Christ's Satisfaction, that in the Satisfaction of Christ there is as much given
as Divine Justice could demand, Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood. The scope of the Apostles argument
tends to this, That it is a righteous thing with God to forgive sins when he
has received satisfaction for them. Now if the compensation had not been
perfect that was given, the Righteousness of God had not so much appeared in
the forgiveness of sins; but God having received a full compensation, having
received whatever Divine Justice could require at the hand of Christ, now he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins. It being therefore a part of Gods
Justice to give remission of sins to as many as Christ's Satisfaction is
applied, it is a certain sign Christ has suffered as much as Divine Justice
could demand or require.

3. Lastly, Christ having suffered the substance of what we were to suffer, and
Christ having suffered what Divine Justice could demand, God is perfectly
pleased and satisfied in what Christ has suffered, and has nothing more to
lay to the charge of his people: Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? it
is Christ that dyed. When the debt is fully paid, the Creditor has full
satisfaction, he desires no more. Thus Christ having fully discharged our debt,
God expects no more from us to answer his Justice, he is fully satisfied in
what Christ has done: that is the fourth thing in the description.

5. The fifth and last thing is this, What the effects of Christ's Satisfaction
are, and they are three.

1. The averting and turning away of Gods wrath.

2. The purchase of pardon of sin.

3. The procuring of eternal life for us.

1. One effect of Christ's Satisfaction was the averting and turning away of
Gods wrath, God is highly offended and displeased with us as we are sinners.
Sin exposes us to Divine wrathhence is it said, That by nature we are children
of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. And the sentence of the Law is Indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil, Romans 2.8, 9.
Wrath is due to us as we are sinners; now Christ by the work of his
Satisfaction turns away this wrath from us. He it is that trod the wine press
of divine wrath, Isa. 63.3. And Christ bearing the wrath of God for us,
delivers us from that wrath. Hence it is said, We are saved from wrath through
him, Romans 5.9. And that We are delivered from wrath to come by him, 1 Thessalonians. 1.
ult. Jesus that delivers us from the wrath to come.

2. The second effect of Christ's Satisfaction is the procuring of pardon of sin
for us. Thus in those known words of the Institution of the Lords Supper our
Savior tells us, This is the new Testament in my blood that was shed for the
remission of sins. The blood of Christ was shed on purpose to procure the
pardon of sin, and it does procure pardon of sin for us: Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we
have redemption through his blood the forgiveness of sins. One great fruit of
Christ's Satisfaction, and our Redemption by Christ is, that by means of that
Satisfaction and Redemption of his, we should have forgiveness of sins;
therefore in the Text mentioned before it is said, Whom God has set forth to
be a propitiation through faith in his blood to declare his righteousness for
the remission of sins, Romans 3.25. The meaning I take to be this, That God
having received satisfaction through the death and sufferings of Christ,
thereupon he gives forth pardon and remission of sins to us.

3. The third effect of Christ's Satisfaction is eternal life. Christ by his
Satisfaction procures eternal life for us: hence is it, that we read of the
promise of an eternal inheritance through the death of Christ, Heb. 9.15.
Christ's sufferings are not only satisfactory, but they are also meritorious.
Christ's sufferings did not only turn away the evil of punishment from us, but
they procured the good of eternal life for us. Hence it is said, That grace
reigns through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans
5. ult. The obedience of Christ active and passive is operative to bring us to
eternal life.

1.

1. Without an interest in Christ's Satisfaction we are liable to answer to
Divine Justice in our own persons. Divine Justice will be satisfied one way or
other, for God himself has pronounced it, That he will by no means clear the
guilty, Exodus 34.7. God is just, and the justifier of them that believe in
Jesus, Romans 3.26. Therefore if we do not get an interest in Christ, that he may
fatisfie for us, we are liable to be cast into prison by the hand of Divine
Justice, and we shall not come forth thence till we have paid the uttermost
farthing.

2. Without an interest in Christ's Satisfaction Divine wrath still hangs over
us. It is Christ only that by his Satisfaction pacifies and turns away Gods
wrath; therefore unless we have a part in Christ's Satisfaction, infinite and
unsupportable wrath hangs over our heads every moment, and will assuredly fall
upon us, and we know not how soon it may do so. He that believes not on the Son
has not life, but the wrath of God abides upon him, Joh. 3. ult.

3. Without an interest in Christ's Satisfaction we cannot have the pardon of
sin; for it is by the Satisfaction of Christ, as we have heard, that pardon of
sin is procured. We are liable to answer to Gods Justice for all our sins, and
all our sins will certainly come in against us to condemn us, unless we have a
part in Christ's Satisfaction.

4. Without an interest in Christ's Satisfaction we can make out no title to
eternal life. Heaven is called the purchased inheritance, Until the redemption
of the purchased possession, Ephesians. 1.14. Heaven is the purchase of the death and
sufferings of Christ; therefore unless we have an interest in the virtue of
Christ's sufferings, we can have no title to the heavenly inheritance. Here it
may be said, But what shall we do that we may have a part in Christ's
Satisfaction?

1. Let us labor to see our infinite need of Christ and his Satisfaction: we
never see the worth of Christ's Satisfaction till first we see our selves to be
condemned persons. O let us be more deeply sensible what the Law and Divine
Justice have against us. As we are sinners, we are condemned persons in Law.
The wages of sin is death. The soul that sins shall dye. This is the sentence
of the Law. O let us labor to be deeply sensible of this, and then we shall
see the need of Christ's Satisfaction.

2. If we would have an interest in Christ's Satisfaction, let us labor to know
Christ and him crucified. Paul says, That he determined to know nothing but
Jesus Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. You will say, Why is the knowledge
of a crucified Christ so necessary to Salvation? The reason is, because the
death and sufferings of Christ is the only means of atonement, and to bring us
unto reconciliation with God: Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation
through faith in his blood, Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation. There is no pacifying of an angry God but by the Blood of Jesus
Christ, and it is Faith in his Blood that gives us an interest in the
atonement: Him has God set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood. We must therefore close with a crucified Christ by faith, cast an aspect
of faith upon the Son of God in our nature offering himself up to God as a
Sacrifice for our sins. It is faith in this Sacrifice of Christ that must
procure reconciliation for us, Joh. 3.14, 15. As Moses lifted up the serpent in
the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever
believes on him should not perish, but have eternal life.

Christ is lifted up as the brazen Serpent was lifted up. It was their looking
on the brazen Serpent that brought healing to them that were stung by the fiery
Serpents; and it is our looking upon a crucified Christ by an eye of faith,
casting an aspect of faith upon Christ as crucified, and the virtue of his
sufferings that must bring Salvation to us, who are sinners, and who deserve to
perish as we are such.

The end of the third Sermon.
SERMON IV.
Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.


I Now proceed to the second thing, which is to lay down several distinct and
particular Propositions for the clearing of this great Doctrine, the Doctrine
of Christ's Satisfaction.

And here the Propositions that I shall lay down will for the most part depend
one upon another, and the former Proposition will be introductory and leading
to them that do succeed.

Before I come to lay down those Propositions that do immediately concern the
Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction it self, there are some Propositions to be
laid down that are preliminary; and necessary to make way thereupon.

1. The first Proposition then is this: Man was created under a Law of service
and obedience to his Maker. Man, when first he came out of the hands of God,
must needs see himself in a state of inferiority unto God; he saw that God was
above him, and that he had received his being from God, and that receiving his
Being from God, he must necessarily be in a state of inferiority and subjection
to him. Man also saw, that having received his Being from God, he was under a
vast obligation of gratitude, love and service into God, who had given him
Being, and such an excellent Being: man also saw, that receiving his Being from
another, and not having it from himself, it was most just and reasonable that
he should be under the will of him who gave him his Being, and not under the
conduct and government of his own will.

These deductions do naturally flow from the principles of right reason, which
we must suppose to be in man in his primitive estate.

2. The second Proposition is this: That man was every way fitted and qualified
to give obedience to the Law of his Creation. Man, we know, at first was
created after the image of God in Righteousness and true Holiness; and man
being clothed with the image of God, was every way fitted to give to God that
obedience which the Law of his Creation required from him. Man's mind or
understanding was filled with light and knowledge, whereby he clearly
understood what the will of God, and what his own duty was. Man's will also, as
it was first created, had no obliquity in it, but was inclined to good, his
affections were all regular. God made man upright, as the Scripture speaks,
Eccles. 7.29. Every thing was upright, most upright in man in his first
Creation, there was nothing out of order in him, the will of man was then
upright. It is true, although the will of man was made upright and good at
first, yet it was not made immutably good; but that it was possible for man to
decline from good to evil, otherwise it had not been possible for man to have
fallen and sinned; but sin and fall he did, and that we know by our own sad
experience. But yet, though man was not created at first in an impeccable
estate, but that it was possible for him to sin; yet he was created in so
perfect a state, that it was possible for him not to have sinned. Tale erat
adju^orium quod desereret cum vellet, and in quo permaneret si vellet, non quo
fieret ut vellet. Aug.
Hence is that of Austin: Adam had that help and assistance given to him at
first, which he might desert when he would, and in which he might have abode
and continued, in case he would; but he had not that help and assistance
whereby he should so will.

3. The third Proposition is this: God, to lay a further engagement upon man to
persevere in the course of his obedience, entered into a Covenant or stipulation
with man, promising him life in case of obedience, and threatening him with
death in case of disobedience. This we have expressed in that known Text, Genesis
2.16, 17. And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the
garden thou may freely eat. But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil
thou shall not eat of it, for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall
dye the death. Here we have a positive Law supperadded unto the natural Law,
the Law of man's creation, and there is a threatening annexed to deter man from
breaking this Law, in which threatening also there is a promise supposed to be
included in case man did not break it; for if God threatened man, in case he did
eat, that he shall dye, this is to be supposed, if he did not eat nor
transgress this command, he should not dye, else the threatening had been in
vain. Now we must know, that man by virtue of the natural Law, the Law of his
creation, was bound to observe this positive Law of God: And the reason is,
because man being a creature, must necessarily be under the will and at the
dispose of him that makes him, and therefore must necessarily be obliged to
observe his Creators will in all things that he shall declare to be his will;
therefore it pleasing God to give out this positive Law concerning the not
eating of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, as a trial of man's obedience,
man by virtue of the natural Law, the Law of his creation, is bound to give
obedience to God in this positive Law of his. For man, as he is a creature, is
bound to give obedience to the Law and Will of his Creator in that way God
requires and expects it of him; and God having manifested this to be his Will,
the Law of his creation obliges him to testify his respect and obedience to
God according as he has discovered his mind to him.

4. The fourth Proposition is this: That man sinning, God is highly offended
with him by reason of sin. Sin is most displeasing to God upon several accounts.

1. Because sin is most contrary to the Nature and Will of God.

1. Sin is contrary to the Nature of God, Psalm. 5.4. Thou art not a God that
has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee. Hab. 1.13.
Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity. 1 John 1.5. God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. God is perfection,
and sin is imperfection, God is purity and Holiness it self, and sin is a
defect of that purity; therefore the nature of God is most diametrically
opposite to sin.

2. Sin is contrary to the Will of God. The Will of God is expressed and
declared in his Law. Now the Law of God commands rectitude, nothing but
rectitude: The commandment is holy, just and good, Romans 7.12. Thy righteousness
is an everlasting righteousness, and thy law is truth, Psalm. 119.142. Now sin
is a deviation from that rectitude which the Law requires, sin is a perfect
contradiction to the will of God revealed in his Law.

2. Sin is most displeasing unto God, because it is a casting off of Gods
Authority. This we must necessarily suppose, that God being infinitely
superior unto man, and the Author of man's Being, must needs have the most
perfect and absolute authority over man. Now man when he sins, when he takes
upon him to sin, acts according to his own will, and takes no notice of the
Divine Law, and so consequently casts off Gods Authority. Man when he sins,
acts after that manner as if so be there were none above him, whose will he
were bound to take notice of. Hence is that expression in the Book of Job, Job
21.15. Who is the Almighty that we should serve him? This is the language of
wicked men, this is virtually the language of every sin. Every sin is a
disavowing of Gods Authority, it is virtually and interpretatively a renouncing
Gods Authority.

3. Man by sin, as he does virtually and interpretatively cast off Gods
Authority: so he does properly and formally cast off his own subjection unto
God. God gives to man a Law as the Rule of his obedience, and he does plainly
refuse to be subject to that Law. This is that which the Lord complains of in
many places, Jer. 11.7, 8. For I earnestly protested to your fathers, in the
day that I brought them up out of the land of Egypt, even unto this day, rising
early, and protesting, saying, Obey my voice. Here is Gods command; but what
follows? Yet they obeyed not, but walked every one in the imagination of their
evil heart. Sin is a perfect casting off of the creatures subjection unto God.

4. Another account upon which sin is so displeasing unto God is this: Man by
sin prefers his own will before his Creators will. God has declared this or
that to be his will in such or such a Law of his, but man's will lies cross and
contrary hereunto; and when man sins, he makes Gods will to stoop to his will:
now what is this but a manifest contempt of God, when man, who is but a
creature, prefers his own private will above the supreme and sovereign Will of
his Maker?

5. Sin is most displeasing unto God upon this account, because man by sin
makes himself his last end, and refers all to himself. Man, when he sins, seeks
not to please God, but seeks to please himself only, and what is this but to
make himself his last end? Now as the quintessence of Holiness lies in love to
God, so the very quintessence of sin lies in self-love. Now when man is wholly
taken up in self-love and self-pleasing, he is perfectly carried off from God
as his last end, and wholly centers in himself; and when man makes himself his
last end, what does he do but as it were make himself a God to himself: For
what is more proper to God than this, to be his own end, to make himself his
last end? that which is proper to God is to be the first cause and the last
end. Now man by sin makes himself his last end, and so by consequence makes
himself a God to himself. If this be the nature of sin, that it causes man to
dethrone God, and to set up himself for God instead of God, this must needs
render sin most displeasing unto God, and he must needs be highly offended with
man by reason of it.

5. The fifth Proposition is: Man having sinned, the Nature of God as he is
just, as well as the Will of God as he is true and faithful to his word,
inclines him to punish sin. I will not enter into that dispute, whether or no
God out of his absolute Power might not have pardoned sin without satisfaction.
This is a Question much agitated; but I shall wave that Controversy, and shall
content my self to lay down such Principles as are more plain, and may be more
easily taken in by all.

1. Then I say, That the Nature of God as he is just, inclines him to punish
sin. God is often called in Scripture a Just and a Righteous God, and as he is
a righteous God, so he loves Righteousness, Psalm. 11.7. The righteous God
loves righteousness. And in that place the Righteousness of God is given as
the reason why it is that God punishes wicked men; for in the verses
immediately foregoing it is said, Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire
and brimstone, and an horrible tempest, this shall be the portion of their cup.
And then the reason is added in those words, For the righteous God loves
righteousness. As much as if it had been said, The Righteousness of Gods Nature
inclines him to deal righteously with men. Justitia est suum cuique tribuere.
It is the part of justice to distribute to every man his own. Therefore since
punishment belongs to wicked men, it is the Righteousness of God to measure out
to them what they do deserve. To understand this we must consider, that man
standing in the relation of a creature unto God, and upon that account being
under a Law of obedience to his Maker, God having also laid so great an
obligation upon man by giving him so excellent a Being, in case man sin against
the duty which he is under as a creature; and if he sin against that obligation
which is laid upon him by his Creator in giving him a Being, and so excellent a
Being, man in so doing sins against all right and equity; and God, as he is the
Rector and Governor of the World, cannot but take notice of such obliquity in
man, and testify his displeasure against man for violating the Law of Right
and Equity. Hence is that of the Apostle, Romans 1.18. The wrath of God is
revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. The
plain meaning I take to be, That God is highly offended with men by reason of
sin, and he testifies his displeasure against sin by executing his Judgments in
an open manner many times, even as by a hand from Heaven. The wrath of God is
revealed from heaven, etc. there is a finger stretched out from Heaven in the
Judgments of God, whereby God does testify and declare to all the world his
displeasure against sin. So Romans 1. ult. This is the judgment of God, that they
which commit such things are worthy of death. This is the Judgment of God:
(...).
this Judgment of God I take to be the just and upright determination of God,
the dictate of the Divine Understanding, to speak after the manner of men,
determining what is just, what is fit and equal; this is that which the Divine
Understanding determines, that man sinning, he is worthy of death. This is the
judgment of God, says the Apostle, that they that commit such things are
worthy of death. It is that which the Divine Wisdom and Understanding
determines as just, fit, and equal, that man's sinning should be punished with
death, there is a condignity in the nature of sin that requires punishment: so
that either God must go contrary to what his infinite and most unerring Wisdom
determines to be right, fit, and equal, or else he must punish sin; for this is
the Judgment of God, says the Apostle, that the sinner is worthy of death;
therefore that must not be done which the Divine Wisdom thinks just, fit, and
equal should be done, or else the person that sins must fall under punishment.
Now the Apostle tells us, Romans 2.2. That the Judgment of God is according to
truth, and this is when he is speaking of this very judgment of his in
inflicting death upon the sinner. The judgment of God is according to truth,
that is, God in determining to punish men for sin, determines according to
right and equity: God is not too rigorous and severe in so doing; but he does
determine according to the equity and righteousness of the cause.

Now that the Nature of God, as he is a just and a holy God, inclines him to
punish sin, will appear from three considerations.

1. God hates sin infinitely, Jer. 44.4. O do not that abominable thing which I
hate. Sin is that abominable thing which God hates, and Gods hatred of sin
arises from the Holiness of his Nature: God is so holy, that he cannot but
hate sin. It is not a matter of liberty to God for him to hate sin, or not to
hate it; God hates sin necessarily, he cannot but hate it; as he is necessarily
holy, so he does necessarily hate sin. Now if God do hate sin, if he hate it
infinitely, if he hate it necessarily, then he cannot (to speak after the
manner of men) but have an infinite aversation from it; for what we hate, we
have a perfect aversation from: and if God has an infinite aversation from
sin, as we may suppose that he has, because he hates it, how should he
manifest and declare this aversation but by punishing of it? This is
sufficiently declared in the Text I mentioned before, Romans 1.18. The wrath of
God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men.
As much as if it had been said, God hates sin infinitely, and has all along
manifested this his hatred and indignation against sin by the judgments which
he has executed in all Ages of the World. The drowning of the old World: the
burning of Sodom and Gomorrha by fire and brimstone from Heaven: the swallowing
up of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and all those remarkable Judgments which we
read of in the Word of God, what are these but so many infallible proofs of
Gods hatred of sin, and his indignation against it? His nature is set against
it, and he declares the Holiness and Righteousness of his Nature by the
Judgments he inflicts upon men for the commission of it.

2. That the Nature of God, as he is a holy and just God, inclines him to
punish sin: this also will evince it, That it is a Principle that is inlaid in
the minds of men, that there is corrective or punitive Justice in God, whereby
he is inclined to punish men when they sin. Hence was it, that the Heathens
spoke of an avenging Eye, (...).
such an Eye as saw and beheld all men's evil actions, and was ready to avenge
them. The Apostle speaks of the Gentiles in common, who knowing the judgment of
God, in the Text I mentioned before, Romans 1. ult. As there is such a thing as
corrective or punitive Justice in God, so all men, by the light of Nature,
retain some sense of it in themselves. It is one of those common notions that
is impressed in the minds of men, and I think we may say it is indelible, that
God is just, most just, and as he is just, so he is inclined to render to all
men according to their works. (...).
This the Apostle calls the righteous judgment of God, and this righteous
judgment of God consists in this, that he will render to all men according to
their works. The Apostle speaks of this at large, Romans 2.5, etc. But after thy
hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up to thy self wrath against the day
of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. The Apostle calls it
the righteous judgment of God: and wherein does this righteous judgment of God
consist? he tells us in the next verse, Who will render to every man according
to his deeds. To them who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory
and honor and immortality, eternal life. But unto them that are contentious,
and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil; but glory,
honor and peace to every one that works good. This is the righteous judgment
of God. And if we compare this with the foregoing verses, it will appear, that
men have some sense of this righteous judgment of God in themselves; for in the
first verse of the second Chapter it is said, Thou art inexcusable, O man,
whosoever thou art that judge. What is it that men judge? They judge that
which is spoken of in the last verse of the first Chapter, Who knowing the
judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death. Men
have this judgment in themselves, that when they sin they are worthy of death:
this is the judgment which they have in their own consciences.

3. As this impression is left in the hearts of men that God is just, so men
are under some fear and expectation of punishment after they have sinned, upon
this account, because God is just. Hence is it, that God tells Cain, In case
thou do evil sin lies at the door, Genesis 4.7. Sin lies at the door, that is,
the guilt of sin. No sooner does a man commit sin, but conscience, if it be
awakened, will tell him presently that punishment is due for that sin. Now
these three considerations show that God is holy and just, and as he is holy
and just, so his nature inclines him to punish sin.

2. The second thing is this: The Will of God, as he is true and faithful to
his word, inclines him to punish sin. God threatened, that in the day that man
sinned, he should dye the death. Now God must be true to his own word. This is
certain, God decreed to punish sin, and he could decree nothing but what was
just. God having therefore justly decreed to punish sin, and manifested that
Decree in his word of threatening, God must be true to his own Decree and his
Word in punishing man when he sinned. Pertinent to this is that passage, which
I have met with in a Learned man: God, says he, cannot act or do any thing
contrary to his own will, now God wills that which is just, and this was just,
that the punishment and all the punishment that was due by the Law should be
suffered and undergone. Hence he infers, that this Proposition is always true,
That God could not have delivered mankind from misery, but by a full
satisfaction, and that all that which the Law requires to be undergone should
be undergone; Dei posse, velle est, non posse nolle.
God could not, because he would not: he could not, because he had determined,
that the punishment which the Law did denounce, should be undergone and
inflicted. It is a good speech of one of the Ancients: Quod ad potentiam Dei
omnia ei possibilia funt, quod adjustitiam possibilia sola quae justa.
As to the power of God, all things are possible unto God; but as to the
justice of God, nothing is possible but what is just. Therefore God having
decreed, and that most justly, to punish sin, God could not but punish sin.

6. The sixth Proposition is: That God being merciful as well as just, does in
his infinite Wisdom find out a way, how his Justice may be salved, and man not
perish. This is that which the Apostle declares to us, Romans 3.24, 25, 26. All
have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, being justified freely by his
grace, through the redemption which is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth
to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, To declare his righteousness,
for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God, to
declare, I say, at this time his righteousness, that he might be just and the
justifier of him that believes in Jesus. The scope of the Apostle is plainly
this, To show that God has a mind to forgive sin, and yet he would be just
too; therefore that he might be merciful and just both at once, God found out a
way how he might forgive sin, and yet his Justice not be prejudiced. Hence was
it, that God appointed Christ to be a ransom for us, that so Christ bearing the
punishment that we deserved, the Justice of God might be satisfied in what
Christ suffered, and yet his Mercy might be glorified in remitting the
punishment to us: Him has God ordained to be a propitiation, through faith in
his blood, says the Apostle. God remits sin freely as to us, and so his mercy
is glorified as to us; and yet he receives full satisfaction from Christ, and
so his Justice is glorified in him. Thus mercy and truth are met together,
righteousness and peace have kissed each other, Psalm. 85.10. God having found
full satisfaction to his Justice in the blood of Christ, there is a sweet
reconciliation between those two seeming contrary Attributes, the Justice and
Mercy of God. This is elegantly set forth by one of the Ancients after this
manner: There is a controversy or a strife as it were between the Justice and
the Mercy of God; Altercatio est inter Dei justitiam and misericordiam.
but this strife is ended in the death of Christ, because in the death of our
Savior Divine Justice is satisfied in all that it did desire. Divine Justice
says, If Adam dye not I am lost; and Mercy on the other hand says, If Adam
does not obtain mercy one way or other I am lost: now Christ interposing by his
death, each of these Attributes have what they do desire.

Learn from what has been said the Justice, Psalm. 98.9. With righteousness
shall he judge the world, and the people with equity. Ezekiel. 18.29. Art not my
ways equal, are not your ways unequal? The ways of God are full of equity; when
God punishes sin, there is the greatest equity that he should do so, there is
that demerit in sin, and there is that Holiness and Justice in the Nature of
God that calls upon him to punish sin. Sin is after a sort infinitely evil, not
that it is simply and in it self so; but sin may be said to be infinitely evil
with respect to the object, as it is contrary to the glory of God, who is Bonum
infinitum, an infinite good. God also who is the Governor of the World, seeing
how much the Sinner had violated the Law of Right and Equity, judges it a just
and righteous thing, that Sinners should undergo punishment: therefore no man
has cause to quarrel with God, and to think hardly of him, for inflicting
punishment upon him because of sin; for, This is the judgment of God, that they
which do such things are worthy of death, Romans 1.32. This is the judgment of
God, as much as if it had been said, God has determined this in his infinite
Understanding. It is the upright and just determination of the most wise God,
that the Sinner is worthy of death: God is not too rigorous in his judgment in
this case, he judges according to the equity of the cause. Romans 2.2. The
judgment of God is according to truth. Isa. 3.11. Woe unto the wicked, it shall
be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given him. The reward of
his hands shall be given him. O this is certain, every man's condemnation will
be found just at last, and it will appear to him that it is most just. God
condemns no man but for sin, and there is that desert in sin for which God may
justly condemn men: and I conceive that a great part of the torments of the
Damned consists in this, That they shall have their eyes opened, and their
understandings enlarged (which are now shut and closed up) to see that
turpitude, baseness, unworthiness, monstrousness, unreasonableness that was in
sin, and that they are justly punished for committing that which was so
contrary to the Law of their Creation, and to the Principles of their own
Beings, as they are reasonable creatures: For what is more just, equal, and
reasonable than that the creature should honor, obey, and serve his Creator,
and take notice of his Laws, and yield conformity to them? And what more
unjust, unreasonable, and unequal than the creature should cast off Gods
Authority, and live in contempt of his Maker, and defiance of his Laws. Now
when men shall have their understandings opened to take in this more fully,
then they will see that God is just in punishing sin, and that their
condemnation is most just.

Learn from hence, guilty Soul to appear before God but by flying to the
Satisfaction of Christ. God is so holy, that he cannot but hate sin, so just,
that he cannot but punish sin. How then can a poor guilty creature appear
before the presence of the Divine Majesty laden with all his sins? O it is an
easy thing for a secure Sinner that knows neither what the nature of sin is,
nor what the nature of God is, to slight sin. But he that once comes to see a
little of the turpitude and deformity that is in sin, and will summon himself
into Gods presence, and consider what the Holiness, Purity, and Justice of Gods
Nature is, will soon have other thoughts of sin, and of his own condition by
reason of sin. God is of purer eyes than to behold the least iniquity, and he
will by no means clear the guilty; therefore he that has but a little sight of
Gods Holiness, and of his infinite Justice and Righteousness, will soon cry out
with the Prophet, I am undone, Isa. 6.5. And nothing can ease or quiet a poor
trembling Soul in this case, but flying to the Satisfaction of Christ. When a
man compares his impurity with Gods infinite Purity and Holiness; when he
compares his own sinfulness and unworthiness with Gods infinite Justice and
Righteousness, then he must needs see himself worthy of condemnation; and
nothing can give ease and quiet to trembling consciences in this case, but for
a man to turn his eye upon the Satisfaction of Christ, and see the Justice of
God satisfied in Christ. In Christ the Justice of God is satisfied to the
utmost, upon him was the wrath of God poured out to the full, and the whole
punishment that was due to us, was inflicted upon him; hither it is therefore
that we must fly for refuge: whenever we are under the sense of guilt, and
under fears of condemnation by reason of sin, there is no refuge but by flying
to the Satisfaction of Christ.

The end of the fourth Sermon.
SERMON V.
Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.


I Proceed now to the seventh Proposition, which is this: It was the compact
and agreement between the Father and the Son, that the Son, the second Person
in Trinity, should take our nature, and in that nature become our Surety, and
undertake the payment and discharge of our debt for us. I say this was the
compact and agreement between the Father and the Son: hence is it said, The
counsel of peace was between them both, Zach. 6.13. Some Learned men render it,
Between those two, Inter illos duos.
that is, between the Father and the Son, the counsel of peace was between them
both.

Here it may be said, one, the Divine Essence is but one, and the Divine Will
but one: How then could there be this compact and agreement between the Father
and the Son, since they are both one and the same God, and have one and the
same essential Will?

To this the Answer is plain, Essence of the Father and the Son is but one, so
the Will is but one. But for as much as the Father and the Son are considered
as distinct Persons, so the counsel of peace is said to be between them both.
Here are two Persons spoken of, from which also the third the Holy Ghost is not
to be excluded, but all the three Persons agree in one and the same will. Now
according to the counsel of the whole Trinity, the Son, the second Person of
the three, is to take our nature, and in that nature to become our Surety;
hence is it said, That Jesus is made a surety of a better Testament, Heb. 7.22.
And Christ being made a Surety by virtue of the compact that was between him
and the Father, he is to undertake the payment of our debt, for that is the
nature of a Surety. A Surety is properly an Undertaker, (...).
one that undertakes another cause and debt. There are some Divines that call
this compact between the Father and the Son, the Covenant of Redemption, and
this Covenant of Redemption they describe after this fort, namely, The Covenant
of Redemption, say they, it is the agreement between the Father and the Son,
who was designed to be Mediator concerning the Elect, who are supposed to lie
in sin and misery by their own demerit, together with the rest of men. I say
concerning the Elect, to be converted, sanctified, and saved by virtue of the
obedience of the Son as Mediator, which was to be performed to the Father, this
they call the Covenant of Redemption. The Apostle does plainly intimate this
compact or agreement that was between the Father and the Son, Heb. 10.5, 6, 7.
Wherefore when he comes into the world he says, Sacrifice and offering thou
would not, but a body have thou prepared me. In burnt-offering and sacrifice
for sin thou have had no pleasure. Then said, I Lo, I come (in the volume of
the book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God. When Christ says here,
Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will, O
God, he plainly refers to that ancient Decree and Compact that was between the
Father and himself. It was the Fathers will from Eternity, that the Son should
take a body and offer up that body to make satisfaction for the sins of the
Elect, and the Son consented to this will of the Father, and what he did in
time in assuming a body, and in offering up that body, was in pursuance of that
ancient Decree and Compact that was between him and the Father; therefore it is
said, In the volume of the book it is written, I come to do thy will, O God.

The eighth Proposition is this: That Christ becoming our Surety stands
responsible to the Law, and is liable to pay all the debt we owe to God. Hence
are those expressions, that he was made under the Law, Gal. 4.4. That he was
made a Curse for us, Gal. 3.10. To understand this, we must know that Christ is
to be considered as a common Person as sustaining the persons of all the Elect.
Look as the first Adam was a common person, the obedience which he was bound to
perform, we were obliged unto; and therefore when he sinned, we sinned in him,
and when he became obnoxious to the curse and to death by reason of sin, we
also became obnoxious to the same Curse and death in him: Romans 5.12. Wherefore
as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed
upon all men, for that all have sinned. So Christ is to be considered as a
common Person, Christ undertaking to be our Surety, the obedience which we were
bound to perform, Christ is bound to perform, and the punishment which we are
obnoxious unto, by reason of our violation of the Law, Christ becoming our
Surety, is obnoxious to the same punishment. Hence is it said of the first
Adam, (...).
That he is the figure of him that was to come, Romans 5.14. The figure of him
that was to come, that is, the Type of Christ: the first Adam is the Type of
the second Adam. How so? As the first Adam was a common person, and all his
seed were comprehended in him, and represented by him: so the second Adam is to
be looked upon as a common person, and all his seed are comprehended in him,
and represented by him; therefore Christ is called the second Adam, 1 Cor.
15.45. The first Adam was made a living soul, the second Adam was made a
quickening Spirit.

Here it may be inquired, How was it that the first Adam was made a common
person? And how was it that Christ the second Adam became a common person?

I answer briefly: The first Adam was made a common person by Divine ordination
and appointment, and by the Law of his Creation, he being the head and root of
all mankind: and Christ was made a common person partly by Divine ordination
and appointment, and partly by his own consent.

1. He was made a common person by the Divine appointment and ordination, 1
Pet. 1.20. Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but
was manifested in these last times. (...).
Christ was foreordained before the foundation of the world to be the Head of
the Elect.

2. Christ was made a common person by his own voluntary undertaking. I lay
down my life for my sheep, Joh. 10.17. and verse. 18. he says, No man takes it
from me, but I lay it down of my self, I have power to lay it down, and I have
power to take it again. So that by the Fathers appointment and by his own free
and voluntary consent, Christ became a common person.

The ninth Proposition is: Christ by the Fathers appointment and by his own
voluntary undertaking becoming a debtor to the Law, stands obliged not only to
perform the obedience which the Law requires, but also to undergo and suffer
the punishment the Law exacts for the breach and violation of it.

How it is that Christ stands obliged to give that obedience which the Law
requires, I have had occasion to open this heretofore, when I spoke of that
subject, how he was made under the Law; the other part of the assertion is,
That Christ having taken upon him to be our Surety, makes himself liable to
bear the punishment of the Law, that is that which I am now to speak to, and to
show how Christ bears the punishment which we owe to the Law: hence it is said,
That the chastisement of our peace was upon him, Isa. 53. that is, the
punishment which we deserved is laid upon Christ. This must be opened in two
Particulars, to show you how it is that the punishment that is due to us, is
laid upon Christ.

1. That Christ becoming our Surety, the guilt of our sins is laid upon Christ.
Christ, says a Learned man, took our sins upon him, as if so be they had been
his own, and presented himself before the Tribunal of God, as being laden and
burdened with the sins of all the Elect. The Scripture confirms this in that
known Text, 2 Cor. 5.21. He has made him to be sin for us. How is Christ made
sin for us? Not as if so be there were any sin in Christ in a way of inhesion;
for he was a Lamb without spot and without blemish: and the Text it self does
sufficiently explain it self as to this; for it tells us, He was made sin that
knew no sin. Therefore when it is said, that Christ was made sin, it is plain
it was not that he had any sin inhering in him, as if there were any sin that
did cleave to him. How then was he made sin? Certainly it was in a way of
imputation, for as much as the guilt of all our sins was imputed to him: Christ
had no sin of his own, but the guilt of our sins was transferred upon Christ:
hence is it said, That he bare our iniquities, Isa. 53. and in this sense that
expression of Luther is to be understood, Maximus peccatorum.
That Christ was the greatest of Sinners: for as much as he that had no sin of
his own, took upon him the guilt of all the sins of the Elect; and indeed we
may well say with a Learned man: If Christ did not take upon him the guilt of
our sins, then we our selves must of necessity be guilty before God to this
very day. Christ therefore took upon him the guilt of our sins in a way of
imputation, as our sins were imputed to him and stood charged upon him.

2. The second Particular is: The punishment it self which guilt obliges unto,
was laid upon Christ. Reatus est obligatio ad poenam.
Guilt is an obligation unto punishment: Christ, as he took upon him the guilt
of our sins, so he bare the punishment that guilt made him liable unto. The
chastisement of our peace was upon him, by his stripes we are healed, Isa. 53.
It is a speech of one of the Ancients: In illo facta est punitio quae nobis
debebatur.
That punishment was inflicted upon Christ that was due to us.

The tenth Proposition is: That Christ taking upon him the guilt and punishment
of our sins, he suffered the substance of what we ought to have suffered. This
is a Proposition of great weight and moment, and will bring us nearer the very
heart and spirit of the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction. Christ did not
undergo this or that punishment only, but he underwent the substance of all the
punishment that we were to suffer; and as I shall show you hereafter, he
suffered the substance of the torments of Hell for us. It is true, there are
some circumstances and adjuncts in the punishment of the Damned which Christ
did not undergo, as namely, Eternity of punishment, the worm of conscience,
despair, these Christ did not suffer, he could not suffer these, and yet Christ
suffered the substance of the punishment that we should have suffered, yea he
suffered the substance of the torments of Hell for us. Divines observe, that
Christ in some respect suffered idem, the same that we should have suffered,
and in other respects he may be said to suffer tantundem, that which was
equivalent. It was not necessary that Christ should undergo all the
circumstances and adjuncts of punishment that the Damned undergo; but yet he
suffered the substance of what we ought to have suffered. To speak a little to
those three adjuncts, that I named, of the punishment of the Damned which
Christ did not suffer, I will show first how Christ was exempted from those
adjuncts of the punishment, and yet how he suffered the substance of it.

1. As for the Eternity of punishment: It was not necessary that Christ should
suffer that, because the dignity of Christ's Person was such, that it was
possible for him to satisfy the Justice of God, and he did satisfy the
Justice of God fully, without suffering eternally. The reason why eternal
punishment is inflicted on the Damned is, because they cannot suffer enough at
once to satisfy Divine Justice; therefore what is wanting in a present
suffering, must be made up by duration and continuance: but now it was not thus
with Christ, Christ was able to satisfy the Justice of God at once; therefore
it is said, That by one offering he has for ever perfected them that are
sanctified, Heb. 10.14. What was wanting in the length and duration of Christ's
suffering, was made up two ways.

1. Partly in the greatness of his sorrows and sufferings. Christ suffered more
grief and sorrow, as Divines observe, than if all the sorrows and sufferings of
all men had been put together.

2. Partly by the dignity of his Person, he being the Son of God, and God by
nature, yet took upon him our flesh, and gave that flesh for the life of the
world, Joh. 6.51. therefore it was not necessary that Christ should undergo
that adjunct, the Eternity of punishment, because he was able to satisfy the
Justice of God by his sufferings without suffering to Eternity.

2. As for that which we call the Worm of Conscience, which is one thing in the
punishment of the Damned, Christ could not undergo that, and the reason is,
because that which is called the worm of conscience is an inseparable adjunct
of sin inhering in the person in whom it is: now Christ was most free from sin
in his own person; it is true, he had sin imputed to him, the guilt of our sins
was imputed to him, but he had no guilt of his own, and therefore he could not
have this worm of conscience; for that which we call the worm of conscience is
nothing else but conscience reflecting upon a man's actions, and tormenting him
upon the account of the obliquity and deformity that has appeared in them. Now
Christ having done nothing that was contrary to the Law, He had done no
violence, neither was guile found in his mouth, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 53.
it was not possible he should undergo the worm of conscience, because this
supposes sin in the person that underwent it, which Christ was most free from.

3. As for that of Despair, some Divines are of opinion, that despair is not
properly in the Damned, and the reason they give is this: As hope in the godly
after the last Judgment shall cease, because hope shall then be swallowed up in
fruition; so they suppose that despair shall cease in the wicked, because that
perdition and destruction is then actually come upon them, which before they
feared.

But it may be said: Do not the Damned see that they are miserable, and that
they shall be miserable for ever, and does not this cause them to despair?

To this they answer: It is true, the Damned see themselves in that misery from
which they shall never be delivered; but yet it may still be doubted, whether
this may be called Despair yea or no: and the reason is, say they, because
despair supposes a sense of some future time, but now in Eternity there is no
time. The Damned have a certain knowledge of misery that they are under, they
feel it at the present, and therefore, say they, that which they do already
feel they need not fear. Hence is that speech of one of the Ancients: Grief
has no fear in it, because fear does no longer torment the mind, when a man
begins already to suffer what he did fear. But I know not whether it be worth
the while to dispute, whether despair be properly in the Damned yea or no. This
I am sure of, that the Damned know that they are miserable, and they know that
this misery shall continue always, they know that it shall not be otherwise
with them than now it is, and this is equivalent unto despair; but this is
rather an adjunct of their torment and punishment, than the substance of it:
therefore it was not necessary Christ should undergo it.

2. We say, That despair, as it is opposite to the grace of hope, so it could
not be in Christ, because despair, at it is opposite to hope, speaks a
deordination, and it would suppose some sin, which Christ was most free from;
and therefore Christ, when he was in the very (...) and height of all his
sufferings, when he had lost the sense and feeling of Gods love, yet he
manifested the highest faith, when he says, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Though he had not the sense and feeling of Gods love, but
complains that he was forsaken, yet he calls God his God, and that manifested
his faith, and where there is faith, there will be hope, for hope is the
daughter of faith; therefore despair was not in Christ. But though Christ did
not suffer some circumstances and adjuncts of punishment that the Damned
suffer, yet Christ suffered the substance of what we were to suffer: and this
is that which I must now begin to speak unto. And here I am to show how it was
that Christ suffered the substance of what we ought to have suffered.

1. Christ made himself passible and mortal for our sakes, that is, he made
himself subject to suffering and death for our sakes. Sin is the inlet of
suffering and death: had there been no sin, there had been no suffering or
death. It was sin that brought in both suffering and death: when man had
sinned, God first said to the woman, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow, and
thy conception, in sorrow shall thou bring forth children, Genesis 3.16. To the
man he says, Cursed be the ground for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it
all the days of thy life, Genesis 3.17. Here we see sin brought in sorrow and
suffering, so also sin brought in death, Genesis 2. In the day thou eatest thou
shall surely dye. Romans 5.12. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin. Now Christ our Surety, that he might bear the punishment that
was due to us, he put himself into a state of suffering and death for us, sin
having brought in suffering and death into the world as the just demerit of it,
and the curse that was due to it: Christ, I say, being our Surety put himself
into a state of suffering and death for us. To understand this, we must know,
that although the Son of God had assumed our nature, yet he needed not, unless
he had pleased, to have subjected himself unto suffering and unto death. For
Christ assuming our nature without sin, was in respect of the innocence of his
Humanity, and also in respect of the personal Union exempted both from the Law
of suffering and of death; but Christ becoming our Surety, and being to bear
the whole punishment that was due to us by reason of sin, and it being the
nature of the Curse,

1. That we should be liable to suffering and death; And

2. That we should actually undergo suffering and death; therefore Christ did
voluntarily undergo both these.

1. He did subject himself to a passible and mortal state. And

2. He did actually undergo suffering and death for us.

1. Christ did subject himself to a passible estate; he that was above all
suffering, made himself subject to suffering for our sake. Hence is it said,
that he was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, Isa. 53.3. Hence also
is it said, He was tempted in all points like unto us, sin only excepted, Heb.
4.15. Christ was exposed to all manner of sufferings and temptations whatsoever
excepting sin.

2. Christ did subject himself to a mortal estate for our sakes. The flesh of
Christ, as it was united to the second Person in Trinity, who was God, had been
immortal, had he not voluntarily subjected himself to death for our sakes; but
that being part of the Curse, that man should become mortal and subject to
death by reason of sin, Christ was willing to subject himself to that part of
the Curse: Dust thou art, and to dust shall thou return, Genesis 3.19. was the
Curse pronounced upon man for sin. Terra es, and in terram reverteris.
Earth thou art, and unto earth shall thou return. By this expression Divines,
both ancient and modern, understand a state of mortality that should come upon
man by reason of sin. Earth thou art, and to earth shall thou return, that is,
thou shall become mortal. Terra es, ostendit hominem in deterius commutatum.
Aug.
Austin observes that expression, Thou art earth, it shows, that the whole man
was changed for the worse. Man that had been immortal, had it not been for sin,
is now become mortal, by means of sin: there is nothing that men fear more than
death. The Apostle tells us, That men through fear of death are all their
lifetime subject to bondage, Heb. 2. When man by sin was brought into a mortal
state, he was always in fear and expectation of death. A man that is condemned
does not dye presently, but he is in a dying condition, and he is always in
expectation of death; and a man that is infected with the plague, does not, it
may be, dye presently, but he carries his deaths wound about him: so man having
sinned, he had the matter of death in him, he had that in him, which would
certainly and infallibly bring him unto death, man having sinned brought
himself into a mortal state: therefore the Lord Jesus Christ our Surety, that
he might deliver us from this part of the Curse, put himself into a state of
mortality, makes himself liable to death. Hence is that of the Apostle, Phil.
2. He took upon him the form of a servant, and became obedient to the death,
even the death of the cross: that is, he took our nature, and made himself
mortal in it. Had the Divinity in Christ exerted it self in its full power and
strength, it could have prevented suffering and death in Christ; but it being a
part of the Curse, that we s^^uld be subject to suffering and death, the
Divinity did so far suspend it self, that Christ might become passible and
mortal; therefore Christ who was immortal in himself, made himself mortal for
our sakes. In Romans 8.2. we read of the Law of sin and of death. The Law of sin
is, as Austin observes, that whosoever sins shall dye, Lex peccati ut quicunque
peccarit moriatur. August.
the soul that sins shall dye. The Law of death is, Dust thou art, and to dust
thou shall return. Therefore man being subjected to a state of mortality by the
Curse, Christ underwent this Curse for us, Heb. 2.14. That through death he
might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil. That through
death he might destroy him, etc. The end why the Son of God assumed our nature
was, that he might suffer and dye in it; he so assumed our nature, as that
being in our nature, he might become passible and mortal in it. Ought not
Christ to have suffered these things? Luke 24. He that would be our Surety and
pay our debt, must suffer and dye for us; and therefore that Christ might fully
discharge our debt, he was pleased to put himself into a state of suffering and
death.

Learn from hence, infinite love of Christ, that Christ who was free, would
become our Surety, and bring himself under bonds for us, and make himself
liable to the Law and to the penalty of it for our sakes; yea not only so, that
Christ who was most free, would take upon him the payment of our debt, but that
he who in some respect was the Creditor, and had the debt owing to him, should
yet in another respect, and in a wonderful way of dispensation become the
Surety, and pay the debt for us. Consider Christ as God, sin was an offense
against him as well as against the other Persons of the Trinity, and Christ
might have demanded and exacted punishment from men; but yet Christ in a
wonderful way of dispensation, by assuming our nature, and bearing the
punishment due to us in it, would become our Surety, and pay the debt that was
owing to himself. Have we not reason here, with the Apostle, to cry out, O the
depth! O the heights and depths, and lengths and breadths of the love of
Christ! that when Christ might have demanded satisfaction from us, he was
pleased to take our nature, and make satisfaction for us.

This shows us the great happiness and the singular privilege of Believers,
agonies and terrors of conscience. Those that truly belong to God may sometimes
have such thoughts as these are: What if I should be put to lie under the wrath
of God? What if the torments of the Damned should be inflicted upon me? Holy
Souls themselves have had some sips and tastes of Divine wrath. Now that which
may be of unspeakable comfort in such a case is this: If thou be a true
Believer, if thou have closed with Christ by faith, thou have already suffered
punishment in Christ thy Head, thou have after a sort satisfied Divine Justice,
and born the torments of Hell in Christ thy Head. Paul said, I am crucified
with Christ, Gal. 2.20. I am crucified together with Christ, concrucified. When
Christ was crucified, (...).
we were crucified together with him. Christ suffering the punishment in our
nature, which was due to us, it is in Gods account as if we had suffered. Hence
it is said, He was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21.
and we are made the righteousness of God in him. Now thou that art a true
sincere Believer, who love Christ, and prizest him above all the world, if
thou have already suffered the wrath of God and the torments of Hell in Christ
thy Head, it is to be hoped thou shall not be put to suffer it in thy own
person. Who shall condemn, says the Apostle, it is Christ that has dyed, Romans
8.33. If Christ has dyed, thou shall not dye; and if Christ has been
condemned, thou shall not be condemned.

This shows the unspeakable misery of such who have no interest in Christ,
liable to bear the punishment of their own sins. As this is the singular
privilege of Believers, that they are exempted from punishment, because Christ
their Head and Surety has born it for them: so this is the unspeakable misery
of all Unbelievers, of all such as lie out of Christ, that they are liable to
bear the punishment of their own sins, because they have no interest in that
person that should take off this punishment from them. The misery of all
Unbelievers and such as lie out of Christ, appears from these two
considerations.

1. Because the Sentence of the Law stands in full force against them, that Law
that says, The soul that sins shall dye. The wages of sin is death. That Law is
still in force against them; and if they have not a Surety to bear this penalty
of the Law for them, they are liable to it themselves. The Law exacts death
from the sinner, therefore thou must either dye in thy own person, or in a
Surety; for the sentence of the Law cannot be reverst, that says, The soul
that sins shall dye.

2. Divine Justice calls for punishment. The Nature of God, as he is a holy and
just God, inclines and obliges him to punish sinners; therefore if Divine
Justice do not find out some other way to be satisfied in, it will satisfy it
self upon the Sinner himself. In how sad a case is every person that is found
out of Christ! he is already condemned by the Law, and is in danger of being
arrested and seized upon by Divine Justice every moment. O how does it concern
us all to secure our interest in Christ to get a part in his Satisfaction! for
as much as unless we can obtain an interest in Christ as our Surety, to
satisfy the Law and Divine Justice for us, we are liable to bear the
punishment which our sins deserve, and to make satisfaction in our own persons.

The end of the fifth Sermon.
SERMON VI.
Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.


I Now proceed to that which remains: The second Particular therefore is this,
That Christ did not only make himself passible and mortal for us, but Christ
did actually undergo suffering and death for us: This I shall open in several
Particulars.

1. Our Lord Jesus Christ, that he might bear the punishment of our sins,
underwent all manner of sufferings in his body for us, he suffered hunger,
thirst, weariness, pain, grief, and the like, Isa. 53.4. He has born our
grief, and carried our sorrows: and verse. 7. He was oppressed, and he was
afflicted. Whatever pressures and loads of afflictions we may feel, Christ felt
the same, yea he has felt them in a far greater measure than we do. It was
part of the Curse pronounced upon ^lam after his Fall, Cursed is the ground for
thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life, thorns also
and thistles shall it bring forth to thee, Genesis 3.17, 18. By these expressions,
Learned men observe, That all the miseries and calamities of this life are set
forth; this was part of the Curse, that man should be subject to all the
miseries of this life, the miseries that we all feel and experiment, such as
hunger, weariness, pain, and the like. Now that being part of the Curse, that
we should be subject to all these miseries, Christ underwent the miseries that
we are subject unto.

2. Christ was exposed unto, and suffered shame, ignominy, contempt, and
reproach for our sakes. Hence was it, that he was arraigned and condemned as a
Malefactor by an earthly Judge: hence it came to pass, that he was buffeted,
reviled, spit upon, crowned with thorns, mocked, derided, crucified between two
thieves, all which circumstances were matter of great reproach and contempt,
and all this our Savior bare as the punishment of our sins, and we cannot have
a just and due contemplation of the sufferings of Christ, what they are in
themselves, nor make the right use of them as to our selves, unless we
apprehend, that whatever Christ suffered, he suffered it as the punishment for
our sins. We read in the History of the Gospel what shame and contempt was
poured on our Savior, in his being buffeted, spit upon, derided, mocked, and
crowned with thorns; but I fear there are too few that consider, that he bare
these things as the just punishment of our sins. We read this as a History, and
that is all; but if we look upon this with a spiritual eye, we ought to
consider, that our Savior bare all this as the just punishment of our sins;
for shame and contempt is one part of the punishment due to sin. Hence is it,
that when the punishment of the wicked is described at the last Day, it is
described by this, Some shall rise to shame and everlasting contempt, Dan.
12.2. so that shame and everlasting contempt is part of the punishment that is
due to sin. Now then our Savior bearing the whole punishment of our sins, has
born that shame and contempt that we deserve. Hence are those expressions, Isa.
50.6. That he gave his back to the smiters, and his cheeks to them that plucked
off the hair, he hid not his face from shame and spitting.

3. Christ suffered in his Soul, as well as in his body, for us; yea, our
Saviors sufferings in his Soul were his greatest sufferings. Though the
sufferings of his body were great, yet the sufferings of his Soul were by far
the greatest sufferings, Joh. 12.27. Now is my soul troubled. Mat. 26.28. My
soul is exceeding sorrowful. The Papists and some others will not admit these
sufferings of our Savior in his Soul, they make the main of Christ's sufferings
to be in his body. But the Scripture is clear in this, That Christ suffered in
his Soul as well as in his body; and it was most necessary, that Christ, who
was our Surety, should suffer in his Soul as well as in his body: and the
reason is, because Adam did primarily and principally sin in his soul: sin
first began in the soul; and therefore it was meet, that Christ should
primarily and principally suffer in his Soul that punishment that was due to us
for our sins. It is the observation of a Learned man, Christ, says he, is to
be considered under the notion of a Surety, or Undertaker for us: Thence, says
he, it follows, that his body was constituted and appointed as a Surety for our
body, his Soul was constituted a Surety for our souls: so that Christ was to
suffer that punishment in his Soul, that we were to suffer in our souls, and
Christ was to undergo that punishment in his body, that we were to suffer in
our bodies; and if we should suppose, that our Savior had not suffered that in
his Soul which we should have suffered, but only has suffered such grief as
belongs to the sensitive part, then it would follow, that the Soul or Spirit
that is in us, is not yet redeemed; for what Christ has not born for us, does
remain still for us to suffer and to be undergone. If therefore Christ suffered
nothing in his Soul of what the Law of God and Divine Justice would inflict
upon our spirits and souls as the punishment of sin, it remains still to be
undergone by us. But much more sweet and comfortable is that speech of Ambrose:
My mind or spirit is crucified in Christ, Men's mea in Christo crucifixa est.
Ambr.
the meaning of which I take to be, That the punishment which was due to my
mind or spirit is laid upon Christ, and I having suffered that in my mind or
spirit, in Christ my Head, which I deserved to suffer, I hope hereby to be set
free from that punishment. Christ, I say, suffered in his Soul: hence is it
said, that Christ was smitten of God, Isa. 53.4. We did esteem him stricken,
smitten of God, and it pleased the Lord to bruise him, and to put him to grief,
verse. 10. Christ was stricken of God, immediately stricken in his Soul, Psalm.
69.26. They persecute him whom thou have smitten. Mat. 26.31. I will smite the
shepherd. If Christ was smitten of God, how should that be but immediately in
his Soul? Hence is that of one of the Ancients: God, says he, was justly angry
with us for our sins, and Christ interposing himself as the middle person, took
off the stroke, and bare the punishment that hung over us. Neither may it seem
strange to us, that our Savior should suffer in his Soul, for as much as he
was pleased to take upon him the guilt of all our sins. It is a memorable
passage of a late modern Divine: The guilt, Dickson. Therapeut Sacr.
says he, of all our sins, wickednesses, and most heinous offenses, which from
the beginning of the world to the end of it have been committed by any of the
Elect, all these were imputed to one Christ, altogether, and all at once; and
although Christ by taking the guilt of all these sins upon him, did not pollute
or defile that holy Soul of his, yet nevertheless he did burden his Soul with
them, by obliging himself to suffer the punishment that was due to the sins of
the Elect, as if so be those very sins had in some sort been his own sins. Now,
says he, whenas we see the most profligate and impure sinners, liars, thieves,
adulterers, and the like, when we see these, they cannot patiently hear
themselves to be called liars, or thieves, or adulterers, though guilty of such
enormous crimes, although it is manifest that they are guilty of them, neither
can they bear the shame and disgrace of their own guilt that yet does
manifestly lie upon them; with how great a grief and passion of mind, with how
great a darkening of that sanctity and glory that was in our Savior, must we
suppose that Christ did take upon his shoulders this most noisome dunghill of all
our sins, than which nothing could be more abhorring from the purity and
sanctity of nature!

4. Christ suffered death it self for us: hence is it said, That he tasted
death for everyman, Heb. 2.9. Nothing less than death could satisfy the Law,
the sentence of the Law was, That the soul that sins shall dye; therefore he
that will be our surety, and bear the punishment due to us, must undergo death
it self for us. Some of the Papists tell us, That such was the dignity of
Christ's person, that the least drop of his Blood, the least tear, the least
sigh of his heart would have been sufficient to redeem us. But our Divines do
well answer: To what purpose then were all the rest of Christ's sufferings, his
temptations, his grief, his reproaches, and all that which he underwent both in
his life and death? If one drop of Christ's blood had been sufficient to redeem
us, then all the rest that Christ suffered, must needs be supposed to be
superfluous and unnecessary. But we must know, that notwithstanding the dignity
of Christ's person, the Law requires death, In the day that thou eatest thou
shall dye the death: therefore Divine Justice demanded the same punishment to
be undergone, which was threatened by the Law; therefore death being threatened
by the Law, nothing less than death would satisfy Divine Justice. The Apostle
tells us in the Epistle to the Hebrews, That under the Law, without shedding of
blood there was no remission; the sacrifice must be killed and slain before
there could be remission of sins. Christ therefore being the true Sacrifice for
our sins, he was to be slain and put to death, before remission of sins could
be obtained for us. It is true, there were many advantages that did accrue by
the dignity of Christ's person, some of which are such as these, which Divines
mention.

1. That the death of one should be sufficient for the Redemption of so many.
If Christ's person had not been of that dignity and worth, it could not have
been supposed, that the death and suffering of one person would have sufficed
for the Redemption of so many. It is well observed by one of the Ancients: If
Christ had not been God, how could he alone have been sufficient to have been a
price for our Redemption? Therefore there is that advantage which arises from
the dignity of Christ's person, that the excellency of his person is such, he
being an infinite person, that he is able to make satisfaction for all.

2. The dignity of Christ's person made the death of Christ to be meritorious;
for what may we not suppose, that so great a Person, who was of equal Majesty
and Glory with the Father, should not merit at the hand of his Father?

3. The dignity of Christ's person was available as to this, That some
circumstances of punishment, which were not fit for him to undergo, Christ
undergoing that which was equivalent, might be omitted; as one circumstance
which Divines mention is this, namely, That the torments of Hell, which were to
be suffered and undergone by us in the next life, were suffered and undergone
by Christ in this life. These advantages did accrue from the dignity of Christ's
person; yet notwithstanding this dignity of Christ's person, he that was to be
our Surety was to undergo the substance of that punishment that we were to
undergo. Now death being the punishment that was to be suffered by the
transgressors of the Law, as being threatened by the Law, Christ being our
Surety, was to undergo and suffer death for us.

5. Christ did not only undergo natural death, but he also tasted of
supernatural death, and so by consequence suffered the pains and torments of
Hell for us. Christ suffered the whole curse of the Law as to the substance of
it. Hence is that of the Apostle, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
Law, being made a curse for us, Gal. 3.13. Now the Curse of the Law was, In the
day that thou eatest thou shall dye the death: or as it may be rendered, In
dying thou shall dye, that is, thou shall dye doubly, thou shall dye a twofold
death, thou shall dye naturally, and thou shall dye spiritually, thou shall dye
a natural death, in having thy soul separated from thy body, and thou shall dye
a spiritual death, in having thy soul separated from me. Therefore it is well
observed by one of the Ancients, I think it is Ambrose's observation;
Therefore, says he, it was said to Adam, In dying thou shall dye, or as it is
rendered, Thou shall dye the death, and not simply, Thou shall dye, because the
death here spoken of concerns both soul and body. Now then as Adam, and we in
him, became subject to a double death, one of the body, the other of the soul:
So our Savior being pleased to be our Surety, subjected himself to a double
death for our sakes, to a natural death, and to a supernatural death.

1. To a natural death, the separation of his humane soul from his body.

2. To a supernatural and spiritual death, the separation of his soul for a
time from the comfort of Gods presence. Hence is it that we read, that our
Savior did not only suffer death in the Singular number, but he underwent
deaths in the Plural number, as if it were intimated, that there was a double
death that he suffered, Isa. 53.9. He made his grave with the wicked and with
the rich in his death, in the Hebrew it is in his deaths in the Plural number;
and this was not without some special Mystery in it, as some Learned men
conceive: yea, there is a judicious Divine that says expressly, he is
persuaded, that both kind of deaths, natural and supernatural, are intimated by
that expression, when it is said, He made his grave with the rich in his
deaths. Our Savior underwent therefore a double death, a natural death and a
supernatural death. That our Savior suffered the first death, a natural death,
a separation of his humane soul from his body, that we do all know and believe.
Now that he tasted of the second death, or supernatural death, the separation
of his soul from God (taken in a right sense) that I must speak unto. To
understand this we must know, that the soul may be said to be separated from
God two ways.

1. By a voluntary aversion from God by sin, this was not in our Savior, and
could not be in him, his will did always firmly and inseparably adhere to God
even in the midst of his greatest sufferings. It is true, this is part of the
punishment of sin in us, namely, that our wills are turned aside from God, Adam
voluntarily deserting of God, this is now part of the punishment that is come
upon him, that he is now left to himself, and thereupon there is an aversion of
his will from God, and this is that which we call spiritual Death, when the
will declines and turns from God, the chief Good. But this kind of death could
not be in our Savior, and the reason is, because he that was to bear the
punishment of all other men's sins, must necessarily be supposed to be without
all sin himself. Christ could not have been a Surety for our sins, born the
punishment of them, if he had not been without all sin himself. This aversion
of the soul from God, as it is the punishment of sin, so it is in it self a
sin. Now Christ so bears the punishment of our sins, as that he himself is
still without all sin in a way of inhesion. Christ has the guilt of our sins
laid upon him by way of imputation, but he has no sin in him by way of
inhesion.

2. The soul may be said to be separated from God in a way of deprivation,
namely, when the soul is deprived of the comfort of Gods love and presence. Now
this our Savior did undergo, he was deprived of the comfort of his Fathers
love and presence for a time, as we shall show more hereafter. Psalm. 88.14.
Lord, why castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? This is
spoken in the letter in the person of Heman; but Learned men conceive, that
Christ's sufferings are here represented to us under these expressions: Lord,
why hidest thou thy face from me? Gods face was hid from Christ for a time,
that so it might not be hid from us for ever. And this was the spiritual death
that our Savior underwent, not a death in sin, which we are all subject to;
not any aversion of his will from God, but desertion of God in point of
comfort; to be deserted and forsaken of God, as our Savior was, is in some
sense the spiritual death of the soul. It is a good speech of one of the
Ancients: That is not death so properly that separates the soul from the body;
but that is most properly death, which separates the soul from God. God is
life, life it self; he therefore that is separated from God must needs be dead;
as the body lives from the soul, so the soul, ut beat vivat, that it may live
happily, must live from God. Hence are those expressions of Austin: The life of
the body is the soul, but the life of the soul is God; the body dies, when the
soul recedes from it, and the soul dies, when God recedes from it. Therefore
when our Savior was so far forsaken and deserted of God for our sakes, as to
have no sensible taste of his love and favor for a time, in this sense he
underwent spiritual and supernatural death for us.

6. The sixth Particular which follows upon this is, That our Savior tasting
of supernatural death for us, he did in so doing undergo the very pains of Hell
for us. Hence are those expressions, Psalm. 116.3. The sorrows of death
compassed me, the pains of hell got hold of me, I found trouble and sorrow. So
likewise, My soul is heavy to the death, Mat. 26.38. It is a great expression
which we have, (...).
Act. 2.24. Having loosed the pains of death, or the sorrows of death. The
Greek word properly signifies the sorrows of a travailing woman, and what were
these sorrows? Those which he had in the Garden, when he was in his Agony, and
when he sweat drops of blood, and those which he had upon the Cross, when he
cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? These are called the
sorrows or pains of death, but indeed they were the sorrows or pains of Hell;
and therefore the vulgar Latin renders it, the pains of hell, because in these
sorrows our Savior did not only taste of the sorrows of natural death, but he
also tasted of the sorrows of supernatural death, that is, of the pains of
Hell. Hence is it, as Learned men have observed, That the sufferings of Christ,
and those great sorrows that he underwent, are set forth in such a variety and
multitude of expressions in the Scripture, that sometimes they are set forth by
the grave, by darkness, sometimes by the land of oblivion, sometimes they are
called wounding, killing; sometimes they are set forth by his being forsaken,
forsaken of his friends, of his kindred, yea of God himself: sometimes they are
called debts, afflictions, tempests, solitude, prison, cuting off, abjection,
treading under foot; all which, and many more which the Scripture is full of,
sets forth those most perfect, consummate, and complete sorrows and pains which
our Savior did suffer and undergo for our sake. In Psalm. 22. which is
certainly a Prophecy of Christ, and a description of his sufferings, we have
these sufferings notably set forth, in verse. 1. My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? and verse. 14. I am poured out like water, all my bones are out of
joint, my heart is like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels, my
strength is dried up like a potsherd, and my tongue cleaves to my jaws, and
thou have brought me into the dust of death. He that thinks this is spoken of
some ordinary sufferings, which are common to other men, must needs have a very
slender consideration of these things, certainly they are more than common
ordinary sorrows that drew such expressions from our Savior, in whose person
here the Psalmist speaks: our Savior then tasted of supernatural death, he did
undergo the pains of Hell for us. Now that I may unfold a little more
particularly and distinctly how it was that Christ suffered the pains and
torments of Hell for us, I must do it in some particular Propositions, and I
would speak of this a little for these two ends.

1. That we might more fully understand what it was that we deserved by our
sins.

2. That we might admire the love of Christ so much the more, that he should
suffer such pains and torments for us, that we might be delivered from them.

1. Our Savior suffered the greatest and most inexpressible dolors, anxieties,
and perplexities in his mind for us, and yet without sin: no sorrows were ever
like to his sorrows. Hence is that expression, Mark 14.33. He began to be sore
amazed, (...).
and to be very heavy; or, He began to be afraid and grievously troubled. The
first word properly signifies to be struck with fear, or to be astonished with
fear, our Savior was as a person astonished: this is the proper import of the
word. This amazement, as we express it, was such a passion as was stirred up in
our Savior, by which (from the sudden commotion of all the faculties of his
Soul) he was as a person astonished, all over in a fear, astonished at the
greatness of the things he had to suffer: neither d^d this astonishment speak
any imperfection of Holiness in the humane nature of our Savior, but only
demonstrated the greatness of his sufferings; for it is possible, that the mind
by some sudden and vehement commotion from some terrible object, may be so
occupied and taken up, that there may not be the free exercise of the thoughts
for the present, and yet this without sin: this was the case of our Savior, he
was like a person astonished at the greatness of the sufferings that he was to
undergo, and that he saw coming upon him, all the faculties of his Soul were
moved and stirred in him at the torrent of Divine wrath that he saw ready to
break in upon him.

2. The second word used by the Evangelist is, He began to be amazed, and very
heavy. This word is well rendered by our Translators, very heavy; for I find
that Phavorinus renders the Substantive, (...). Phavorinus.
sadness of soul, He began to be amazed, and very sad. Now concerning this fear
and this grief that our Savior underwent, I shall speak more particularly
hereafter; but before we proceed to that, I shall make some use of what has
been already opened.

Learn from hence in the first place, evil sin is, nothing shows more clearly
what an evil sin is, than those great sorrows and sufferings of our Savior,
that God should cast so innocent a person as Christ was in himself, merely
because he was our Surety, and took upon him the guilt of our sins, into such
great sorrows and inexpressible dolors both in soul and body, this shows what
an infinite evil sin is, and how much God hates it, and what it is that we
deserve by it. We may slight sin, and think it a light and trivial thing; but O
let us stand by the Cross of Christ a while, and see what it was that the Son
of God and God suffered in our nature: consider what grief, what anguish, what
trouble and perplexity of soul he underwent, and then we shall see that God
does not look upon sin as such a slight and trivial thing whatever we may do.
Would God have exposed his own innocent Son who was so near to him, who was so
tenderly beloved by him, who always pleased him, and who never offended him, to
so much ignominy, to so much contempt and shame, to so much pain, grief, and
sorrow, had he not hated sin infinitely, had not his soul been infinitely set
against it? O when we find our hearts begin to play and dally with sin, it is
good for us to soak our hearts in the meditation of Christ's sufferings, to take
a turn at the Cross of Christ, and behold the Son of God incarnate made a
spectacle to men and Angels, and bearing the wrath of God to expiate the guilt
of our sins.

Learn from hence what remains still to be suffered by Unbelievers, those
dolors, those sorrows, torments of soul and body; that death which Christ has
not suffered for them remains still to be suffered by them in their own
persons, for the sentence of the Law must take place: therefore unless thou
have suffered in a surety, thou art liable to suffer in thy own person; the
sentence of the Law is, In dying thou shall dye, dye nuturally and dye
spiritually, taste of natural and supernatural death; therefore unless thou
have suffered this in a surety, thou art liable to suffer this in thy own
person. Now all Unbelievers, who are guilty either of positive, or negative
unbelief, have no part in Christ or his sufferings.

1. They who are guilty of positive unbelief, such as reject Christ, and will
have nothing to do with him, as they said, We will not have this man to reign
over us, these have nothing to do with Christ and his sufferings.

2. Such as are guilty of negative unbelief, such who do not believe on Christ,
who do not close with him, who do not embrace him by a lively faith, all such
have no part in Christ and in his sufferings; therefore it necessarily follows,
that that which Christ has not suffered for them, remains still to be suffered
by them in their own persons, Joh. 3. ult. He that believes not on the Son
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. O how should this make
every soul of us to tremble, lest we should be found out of Christ! Can thou
bear the terror of the first death, when the sting of it is not taken away? Or
can thou bear the fear of supernatural death, to have thy soul separated from
God for ever? If thou have not a part in Christ and in his death, thou art
liable to both these, to the terrors of natural death, and to the terrors of
supernatural death. O let us not think it an indifferent thing, whether we get
a part in Christ yea or no; certainly God did not put his innocent Son to
suffer all these things, we have heard of, in vain; and certainly, if the
Gospel be true, Christ has suffered all these things; and if Christ has
suffered all these things, then all of us did stand in need of them; and if we
need them, it concerns us deeply to make sure our part and interest in them.

The end of the sixth Sermon.
SERMON VII.
Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.


I Come now to speak particularly of that which was formerly mentioned in the
general, and here we shall show

1. How it was that our Savior suffered fear, and what the fear was that he
underwent.

2. I shall show how it was that he suffered grief, because these are the two
things which the Evangelist insists upon in the Text formerly mentioned, Mark
14.33.

1. Our Savior was afflicted with sore fear, yea he was even overwhelmed and
oppressed by fear, yet without sin: hence is that expression of the Apostle,
Heb. 5.7. He was heard in that he feared.

But here it may be said, Object.
What was that fear that our Savior was struck with, when he is said to be
amazed with fear, or astonished with fear?

I answer, Answ.
It was the fear or horror of Divine wrath due to us for our sins. Certainly it
was not a corporal death that our Savior feared so much; many of the Martyrs,
by the Grace they had received, were much carried above the fear of a corporal
death; much more may we suppose, that the perfect and consummate Grace that was
in the heart of our Savior, would have carried him above the fear of a natural
death: but it was the fear of Divine wrath that he was struck with; therefore
is it that he cries out, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.
What was this cup? Certainly the cup of Divine wrath, as I may show you more
hereafter: this then was that which our Savior feared, the wrath of God. Fear,
says a Learned man, was cast into the humane nature of our Savior, which being
a creature, fear might possess it, lest it should be swallowed up of an angry
God, who did exact as much as rigid justice ought or could require from so
great a person who was the Surety or Undertaker. Our Savior knew right-well
that he was to bear, not the guilt of one or two or a few sins, not the guilt
of some lesser sins only, but the guilt of the greatest sins; he knew that he
was to bear the guilt, not of the sins of some of the Elect only, but the guilt
of all the sins of all the Elect; what a torrent then, or sea rather of wrath
must our Savior needs see coming on his most holy Soul, when the wrath of God,
which was due for the sins of all the Elect, was like to come upon him at once?
Well therefore might he be afraid. If it be possible for Satan to aggravate and
blow up the guilt of a little sin (as we would account it) in the eye of a man's
conscience, so as it shall seem the greatest sin in all the world, as certainly
he can, and those that have to do with troubled consciences, know how often he
does it, and such a sin is ready to make a soul to despair, unless Divine Grace
do step in and help it; into what a consternation then may we well suppose the
humane soul of our Savior to be cast, when the sins of all the Elect, the most
great, horrid, and heinous sins, as well as the least, were bound upon him by
the omnipotent hand of God his Father, and he knew he was to answer for them
all? well might our Savior fear in this case. Neither is it to be wondered at,
that our Savior should be thus struck with fear and astonishment, if we
consider that Christ did not only take our nature, but he took the infirmities
of our nature, namely, such as were inculpable and without sin, and he also
assumed our natural affections, as grief, sorrow, and the like. It is natural
to the creature to fear and tremble at the sight and presence of an angry God:
thus we read how the rocks clave in sunder, and the mountains have trembled
when God has shown forth the terribleness of his Majesty; and it is natural to
men, when any terrible object presents it self, and some evil approaches,
although it be not as yet inflicted, especially when some such evil approches,
as is greater than a man's strength, to fear and be astonished: therefore our
Savior having the verity and truth of our nature in him, and having the verity
and truth of humane passions in him, yet without sin, having the most terrible
object that ever was, set before him, and that which would have been too great
for him to bear, had he been but mere man, and that is the wrath of the great
God due to the sins of all the Elect, well might he be astonished and fear.

2. Our Savior was oppressed with grief and sorrow as well as fear. Fear is
such a passion as arises from some imminent or impending evil, grief is a
passion that arises from some present or inflicted evil. Fear is the
expectation of some suture evil, grief is that which arises from the sense of
some present evil. Now our Savior had not only fear, but grief; he felt that
in his most holy Soul which was cause of greatest grief and sorrow to him. This
is set forth by the Evangelist Matthew, Mat. 26.37. (...).
He began to be sorrowful and very heavy. He began to be grieved and very
heavy. The Greek word is a full and a significant word. The Critics in the
Greek Tongue render it by other words, which signify to be in an agony, to be
very much grieved. Our Savior was in an agony of sorrow, oppressed and
overwhelmed with sorrow; and therefore it follows in the next words, He began
to be grieved, and very heavy, and he said to them, that is, to his Disciples,
My soul is exceeding sorrowful. So great was our Saviors sorrow, that he could
not contain himself, he must needs vent his sorrow, by telling it to his
Disciples: I say, our Savior seeks a vent for his sorrow, by acquainting his
Disciples how great his sorrow was, he says to them, My soul is exceeding
sorrowful. There are many holy Souls that will bear great sorrows, and undergo
many burdens and temptations, and yet declare them unto none. Certainly, had
our Saviors sorrows been but common and ordinary, he would not have complained
of them to his Disciples; but so great was his sorrow, that he is fain to seek
for a little ease, by venting himself to his Disciples. And what is it that he
says? (...), undequaque tristis est anima mea.
My soul is exceeding sorrowful. My soul is sorrowful on every side, so the
word properly signifies, my soul is environed or compassed about with sorrow,
sorrow and grief possess me all over. Yet that is not all, but he adds farther,
My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death. So great was his grief and
sorrow before he came to the Cross, and the sufferings that he underwent there,
that the greatness of his grief and sorrow had almost brought him to death
beforehand; yea, we may well suppose, that had not our Savior had the power
of the Divinity to support him, the strength of his sorrows in the Garden,
before he came to the Cross, might have taken away his natural life. He says,
his soul was heavy to the very death. We see how many are killed with grief,
when grief and sorrow rises to a great height, many have had their natural
spirits suppressed, and dyed away under it. Now our Saviors sorrows did far
exceed the sorrows of all other men: yea, if all men's sorrows were put
together, our Saviors sorrows exceeded them all; and the reason is, because he
sustained the person of all the Elect, and he bare the punishment, not only of
a few sins, but of all the sins of all his people at once. Therefore if he had
not had the power of the Divinity to have supported him, the greatness of his
sorrows might have sunk him, and brought him down to death; but having other
things to suffer upon the Cross, besides those things he suffered in the
Garden, he was not sorrowful unto death absolutely, that is, not sorrowful so
as to dye in and by those sorrows; but yet he was sorrowful next to death,
setting aside death it self, his sorrow and grief in the Garden was so great,
as it could not have been greater, even in death it self, My soul is sorrowful
unto death.

Thus I have showed how our Savior suffered a great deal of anxiety and
perplexity in his mind in respect of fear, in respect of grief; but this is
only in general. But to come a little nearer the matter, and the thing it self.

2. Our Savior conflicted with the sense of Gods wrath in his soul. I have
showed how he suffered the greatest anxiety, perplexity, and grief in his mind.
Now I shall show how the great sorrows our Savior underwent did arise from the
conflict he had with Gods wrath in his soul, Mat. 26. Father, if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me. What cup was this? Truly the cup of Divine
wrath. The cup of God is the wrath of God, Calix Dei, ira Dei est, ira Dei
justa est vindicta quae imponitur a justo Judice.
the wrath of God is the just revenge which is inflicted by a just Judge for
our sins, and this is the cup our Savior drank of: our Savior, that he might
bear the punishment that was due to us for our sins, tasted of the wrath of
God, conflicted with the sense of Gods wrath. The better to take in this we
must consider, that the sense of Divine wrath is part of the punishment that is
due to us for our sins, yea it is a principal part of the punishment, and a
great part of the pains and torments of Hell consists in it. It is a speech of
Luther: The greatest temptation of all others, is that temptation by which God
is set in direct opposition to a man, and appears contrary to him. Qua Deus
contrarius homini ponitur.
This temptation, says he, is an unsupportable temptation, and is properly
Hell it self, and no man can tell how great this temptation is, but he that
has felt it. Now when a man is under the sense of Gods wrath, he apprehends
God to be contrary to him, and to be set in direct opposition against him, and
as was said, this is part of the punishment that is due to us for sin. Observe
what is spoken to this purpose, Romans 2.8, 9. But to hem that are contentious,
and obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man that does evil. The Apostle is
here speaking what is the punishment that shall come upon men for sin, now he
describes it by this, Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish. Now by
these expressions, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, I conceive
the Apostle does not only intend the effects of Divine wrath, all the miseries
that shall be laid upon the damned, as the effects of Divine wrath; but he also
intends the impression of Divine wrath upon the conscience of the sinner: and
therefore he expresses it by so many words that intimate so much, indignation
and wrath, tribulation and anguish: these words plainly intimate the horror and
anguish that shall be upon the spirit of the damned, and whence does this
tribulation and anguish arise? certainly from the fense of Gods wrath. When our
first Parents had sinned, God appeared to them as an angry God, in an angry
manner: to Adam he says, Have thou eaten of the tree whereof I said thou shall
not eat? and to the Woman he said, What is this that thou have done? Both these
are expressions of anger. When therefore man had sinned, God appears to him as
an angry God. Now our Savior being to take upon him the guilt of our sins, he
was to conflict with the sense of Gods wrath, and therefore he had great and
deep apprehensions fastened upon his soul concerning the displeasure that was
due from God to us by reason of sin. Christ, when he came to suffer for our
sins, saw the Justice of God armed with revenge against us for our sins, he saw
the Justice of God ready to take hold on him as our Surety, who had taken upon
him the guilt of our sins. There is a Learned man, who is no friend to the Soul
sufferings of Christ, but makes it his business to oppose them, that yet in
discussing that argument, is at last brought to this confession: Christ, says
he, in his sufferings had a present sight of the Divine Majesty, sitting as it
were in Judgment, and armed with the infinite power of Divine Justice to avenge
the sins of men. This is the confession of an Adversary that opposes the
Soul-sufferings of Christ. Now they which do assert the Soul-sufferings of
Christ do only add thus much more, That Christ did not only see Gods wrath that
was due to us for our sins, but he tasted of it, and felt it, and conflicted
with the sense of it; for to what purpose should he see it and not feel it? Or
how could Christ's seeing the weight of Divine wrath that was due to us, and not
bearing it, have expiated and taken away the guilt of our sins? The sense of
Divine wrath was that which was due to us as the punishment of sin; for the Law
says, Cursed is he that continues not in all things. Now the Curse is a
certain token of loathing and detestation in the person who is the Author of
it: the Curse speaks utmost displeasure in him that pronounces it. No man
curses another, but he that has the utmost displeasure against him; Christ
therefore being our Surety, we must suppose that he did contest with the utmost
displeasure of God, so much as a finite nature, supported by an infinite
Person, could undergo. Hence is it, that we read of our Saviors being in an
agony, Luke 22.44. Being in an agony he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat
was as it were great drops of blood, falling down to the ground. This is a
great Text to set forth the sufferings of our Savior, and therefore we must a
little speak to it: and here we have two things to be considered.

1. The Agony it self.

2. The Effects of it, it made him sweat great drops of blood falling down to
the ground.

1. We have the Agony it self, (...).
Being in an agony. The Greek word (...), properly signifies that fear and
terror that is apt to come upon such as are entering into battle, and going to
fight for their lives. I say, it properly signifies the fear that comes upon
Combatants, when they are going to fight for their lives. Our Savior was now
about to conflict with Divine wrath, and this put him into this agony; for, to
suppose that Christ should be in such an agony merely from the fear of natural
death, is a thought most unworthy of our Savior, and most derogatory to his
honor, whenas we read of some of the Martyrs that have gone rejoicing and
triumphing to the very flames: therefore it was not the fear of the pains of a
natural death (far be it from us so to think) no it was the pains of
supernatural death, the wrath of God he was now conflicting withal, that
brought him to this agony and conflict. Now in every conflict there is some
person or thing that does oppose; where there is nothing to oppose or struggle
with, there can be no conflict; therefore when our Savior was in an agony, we
must suppose, that there was something that did oppose it self, something that
he was to struggle with, and what could that be but the wrath of his Father?
Certainly our Savior did now see his Father averse and contrary to him;
contrary to him, though not considered as in himself, for so he was always most
pleasing to him; but he saw his Father averse and contrary to him as he was our
Surety, and as he had voluntarily taken upon him the guilt and punishment of
our sins; he saw that God, as he was a just and a righteous God, so he was now
about to avenge the sins of all the Elect upon him, who had undertaken to bear
the punishment of them, this was the agony our Savior was in, namely, the fear
of conflicting with the sense of Gods wrath, God opposing his Justice and
setting it in battel-aray against the sons of men, in behalf of whom he was now
to be a Surety, and to take upon himself what they should have undergone, this
was the agony it self.

2. We have the Effect of this Agony, it made him sweat drops of blood: His
sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground. (...).
His sweat was as it were clods of blood, so the Greek word properly signifies.

1. Consider his sweating blood, this was certainly preternatural; for when is
it that we have heard of men's sweating of blood? and if any such thing has
ever been heard of, this is some rare accident, and beyond the common course of
Nature, the common course of Nature acquaints us with no such thing.

2. That it should be great clods of blood, this certainly was most
extraordinary, and what does this show us, but that all the powers of Nature
were shaken, and the utmost strength and vigor of the Humanity, and that
supported by the Divinity too (for what was there that could have caused such a
defluxion of clods of blood from our Savior, but the utmost concussion of the
powers of Nature? certainly all the created strength that was in the Humanity
of our Savior, and that supported by the Divinity and increated power of the
Deity) was now put to it to bear the wrath of God, and it was the sense of that
great, immense, unconceivable, and inexpressible wrath of his Father, that put
him into this agony, and drew these clods of blood from him, and shook all the
powers of nature in him. O who can think of these things as he ought to do, and
not be astonished with the consideration of the infinite evil that is in sin
that cost our Savior so dear? Hence also it was, that he needed the visible
presence of an Angel to comfort him, Luke 22.43. There appeared an Angel
strengthening him. Certainly, these sorrows must needs be the greatest sorrows,
that our Savior himself should need the presence and help of an Angel to
comfort him. We read of many of the Martyrs, who had far less grace than our
Savior, that were carried through their sufferings with joy, without any such
extraordinary help; and yet our Savior, notwithstanding all the assistance of
Divine grace, which he had in perfection, yet he needed the presence of an
Angel to comfort him: therefore we must suppose, that our Saviors sufferings
were far other kind of sufferings than the sufferings of any of the Martyrs
were; it was the sense of Gods wrath in his soul, that put him into this agony,
he conflicted with Divine wrath opposing it self against him. Hence is that
expression, De torrente in via bi^et.
Psalm. 110. ult. He shall drink of the brook in the way, He shall drink of the
torrent in the way. Christ drank of the torrent of Divine wrath, he drank of
the torrent of the Curse of the Law, all the Curses of the Law did meet upon
him at once. He did not only drink of the Cup of Gods wrath, but he drank of
the torrent of Divine wrath, the wrath of God flowed all over him, yea it
entered into his very soul. Hence is that expression, Isa. 53.10. It pleased the
Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief. It was not the Jews only that did
buffer and bruise him, but the Lord himself did bruise him, he put him to
grief; it was something immediate from God himself. The sense of Gods wrath was
impressed on the humane Soul of our Savior, by God himself.

But it may be said, How could this be? Object.
Christ was an innocent and a just person, and never offended God, he was the
Son of God, and was always beloved of God; how then was it possible, that he
should suffer any wrath from God? How was it possible, that the sense of Gods
wrath should be impressed upon him?

I answer, Consider, Christ in himself, Answ.
as he was an innocent and a just person, consider him as he was the Son of
God, so he was always beloved of God, and could not but be beloved of him.

But then consider him as a common Person, as our Surety and Undertaker, as one
that had voluntarily undertaken to bear the punishment that was due to us for
our sins, and so it was that he felt the sense and weight of Gods wrath. If
Christ will undertake to pay our debts, and to suffer the punishment that did
belong to us, though he be never so innocent in himself, if the wrath of God
belong to us, he must bear it. Now the wrath of God did belong to us, it was
due to us, and therefore Christ must of necessity undergo it. Volenti non fit
injuria.
No injury is done to a person that will voluntarily and of his own accord take
such or such a thing upon him. If a person that was free and disingaged before,
will take upon him to pay another debt, his own engagement makes him liable
and responsible, though he were never so free before. It is true, the Law, the
Justice, and Wrath of God had nothing to do with Christ, considered in himself,
because he was without sin: but Christ did voluntarily and of his own accord
undertake to bear the punishment due to us, he undertook to be our Surety and
to pay our debts, and therefore he was to suffer that which we ought to have
suffered; and since he was to satisfy for us, he must bear the sense of that
wrath which we deserved to bear.

Learn from what has been opened, fear and tremble at the thoughts of Gods
wrath. O if our Savior that had no sin of his own, but only bare the guilt of
our sins, did fear and tremble at Gods wrath; if he were amazed and astonished
at it, if he complained, That he was poured out like water, That all his bones
were out of joint, That his heart was melted within him as wax, many such like
expressions we have of him, Psalm. 22.13, 14. I say, if our Savior complains so
bitterly in the apprehension of Divine wrath, well may it become us to fear and
tremble at it, Psalm. 90.11. Who know: the power of his anger? according to his
fear, so is his wrath. How will thou do, poor sinner, to bear that wrath which
made Christ himself to tremble? If Christ were astonished at the thoughts of
this wrath; if Christ was afraid of it, well may thou be afraid of it. O
consider it, what will it be for a poor guilty sinner to meet an angry God,
laden with the guilt of all his sins? If Christ did labor so much under the
burden of Divine wrath, as that the apprehension of it made him sweat drops of
blood, although he had the power of the God head to support him under his
sufferings, how will thou, a poor clod of earth, be able to stand under it?

Learn, Sinners who live and dye in their sins, and have no part in Christ, to
escape Gods wrath. If Christ have suffered such things, if he has conflicted
with Gods wrath, then it is not possible for sinners, who live and dye in their
sins, and have no part in Christ, to escape Gods wrath. If these things be done
in the green tree, what shall be done in the dry? Christ was as the green tree,
he had no sin of his own, he was only our Surety, and bare the guilt of our
sins. Now if the wrath of God burnt so hotly upon him, who was but as the green
tree, what will become of sinners that have so many sins of their own, who are
as the dry tree, fit suel for the wrath of God to kindle upon? The wrath of God
had found nothing in Christ to fasten upon, or take hold of, had not Christ
voluntarily taken upon him the guilt of our sins, and yet notwithstanding we
see how hotly the wrath of God burnt against him; what then is like to become
of sinners, who have so much in their nature and lives which renders them fit
fuel for Divine wrath to work upon? Certainly, if Christ himself that was only
a Sinner by imputation, that took upon him other men's sins, but had no sins of
his own; if Christ that was a Surety only, did not escape the dint of Divine
wrath, we who are the true offenders, the true and proper offenders and
transgressors of the Law, are not like to escape this wrath, unless we get a
discharge from the guilt and punishment of our sins through the sufferings and
Satisfaction of Christ. In the sufferings of Christ we may see clearly and
plainly, as in a glass and miroir, what it is that sin deserves, and what it is
that we must undergo, unless we have a part in his sufferings. If Christ
suffered the wrath of God, we must of necessity suffer it, unless we be
exempted from it, by the Merit of Christ's sufferings; therefore it concerns us
all to look after a part in Christ, and union with him, since it is only by the
Merit of what he has suffered, that we can hope to escape what he himself has
suffered, and we deserve to suffer.

The end of the seventh Sermon.
SERMON VIII.
Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.


I Come now to a third Particular, to show how it was that Christ suffered the
pains and torments of Hell for us.

The third Particular is this: That our Savior suffered spiritual dereliction
and desertion in his Soul in point of comfort. This is a sublime Argument, and
requires our most diligent attention. Divines observe, That Christ began to
taste of the Cup of Gods wrath in the Garden, where he conflicted with the
sense of that wrath that was approaching to him; but he drank this cup fully
off in his sufferings upon the Cross, in that which is commonly called his
dereliction, and being made a curse for us. In these two things, Christ's
dereliction or spiritual desertion, and his being made a curse for us, the
(...) and top of his sufferings does consist, all the rest of his sufferings
were as it were preparatory to these two, his dereliction and his being made a
curse.

That which I am first to speak of is his dereliction or being forsaken of God.
That our Savior suffered this dereliction or spiritual desertion appears from
those words of his upon the Cross, where he cries out, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? Mat. 27.46. This dereliction is part of the punishment that
is due to us for our sins. That which I am showing is, how Christ suffered the
pains of Hell, and by suffering them, made satisfaction to Gods Justice for us:
now this dereliction or desertion is one part of the pains of Hell. The pains
of Hell, or the miseries of the damned are commonly thus distinguished: There
is that which they call the pain of loss, Carentia beatitudinis. Privatio
pr^mii bea^^^ci. Perfectionis ad quam erant apti nati carentia, ex peccato
causatae.
and the pain of sense. The pain of loss is the want of blessedness, or else it
is the privation of the beatifical reward. Other School men describe it more
largely thus: The pain of loss is the want of that perfection which men were
capable of, and is brought upon them by reason of sin. Now in this pain of loss
the damned are deprived of all good things, they are deprived of all peace, all
joy, all comfort, all solace and refreshment, they are deprived of the
fellowship of the Saints and Angels; but amongst all the pains of loss which
the damned undergo, the greatest of all is the want of the sight of God; and
therefore some of the Schoolmen describe the pain of loss only by this,
Privatio visionis and fruitionis Divinae.
That it is a deprivation of the Divine vision and fruition: not but that the
damned are deprived of all other comforts and good things, but the sight and
fruition of God comprehends all the rest; being deprived of the sight and
fruition of God, the chief good, they must necessarily be deprived of the
comfort of other particular goods. Now this deprivation of the sight of God
being part of the punishment that is due to us for our sins, this pain of loss
our Savior underwent for us in his dereliction and desertion. His humane soul
was deprived of that clear sight and vision of the Deity for a time. We by sin
deserved to be deprived of the sight of God, and Christ in his dereliction his
humane soul was deprived of the sight of God for a time. Divines are wont
commonly to say, That Christ, from the moment of his conception, had the sight
of God, his humane soul being immediately united to the Deity, Christ from the
very moment of his conception had the sight of God. Now for our Savior, who
had known experimentally how sweet the comfort of his Fathers face had been,
and had lived all his days under the warm beams and influences of the Divinity,
and had had his soul all along refreshed with the sense of the Divine presence,
for him to be left in that horror and darkness, as to have no taste of comfort,
no glimpse of the Divinity breaking in upon his humane soul, how great an
affliction must that needs be unto him? This spiritual dereliction (as was
formerly hinted) which our Savior underwent, was part of the punishment due to
us for our sins. When Adam had sinned, he was driven out of Paradise, he was
banished out of the presence of God, man forsaking God, God forsook him, and
withdrew himself from him: now that dereliction which we deserved in Adam,
Christ suffered for us. Hence is that of Cyril: When Adam had transgressed the
Divine commandment, humane nature was forsaken of God, and made subject unto
the curse and to death. Now these words of our Savior, when he cries out, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? are the words of Christ, manifestly
discharging or paying that debt of dereliction that was come upon us by means
of sin, and pacifying God this way. Hence also is that expression of another of
the Ancients: Deseritur cum desertis, etc.
Christ was deserted with them who were deserted, and Christ paid the tribute
for that nature which he had assumed; that is, Christ paid our debt, Christ was
forsaken with us who were forsaken, that so Divine grace and favor might
return again to us; the face of God was hid from him for a time, that so it
might not be hid from us for ever.

Now if it be asked, But what was this dereliction? I shall

1. Show negatively what it was not; and

2. Positively and affirmatively what it was.

1. What it was not. It was not a dissolution of the union of the two Natures.
The union of the two Natures in Christ continued notwithstanding this his
dereliction; for if the personal Union of the two Natures had been dissolved,
if it had not continued in the time of the sufferings of Christ, then it would
have followed, that it was not God that was the Person that suffered, and so
the merit and efficacy of Christ's sufferings would have been enervated, and
taken away; but the Scriptures tell us, That it was God that redeemed the
Church with his own blood, Act. 20.28. the Person suffering was God, though it
was in our nature that he suffered. Also they tell us, That they crucified the
Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. the Person suffering was God, although it was in and
by the flesh that he suffered. Joh. 6.51. I am the bread that came down from
heaven, if any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever, and the bread
which I shall give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.
The flesh which is given for the life of the world, it is the flesh of the
Word, the flesh of the second Person in Trinity, The Word was made flesh, Joh.
1.14. that person who is called the Word, the second Person in Trinity, who
came down from heaven by his Incarnation, and took flesh, gave that flesh for
the life of the world. The Word is the Person who takes flesh; the Word, the
second Person in Trinity, who takes a part of our flesh, is not disjoined or
disunited from his flesh all the time of his sufferings, it is his flesh still,
The bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world. The Word, the second Person in Trinity, accounts it his flesh, whilst he
suffers, it was the flesh only that was capable of suffering; but the Word, the
second Person in Trinity, stood related to that flesh in the time of his
suffering, yea he was one with it in the bond of personal Union; therefore it
is said, 1 Pet. 4.1. Christ suffered for us in the flesh. It is a remarkable
expression, Christ suffered for us in the flesh, the person suffering is
Christ, the Son of God, though it was in the flesh, in the Humanity, that he
suffered: the humane nature is only capable of suffering; but yet the person of
the Son of God was united to that nature, in the time when he suffered, there
was no dissolution of the union of the two natures. Non dissolutione unionis,
sed substractione visioni^
Christ's dereliction was not by the dissolution of the Union, but by the
substraction of Vision, as one of the Ancients speaks.

2. This dereliction or desertion of our Savior was not a desertion in point
of grace. Christ had all along the same presence of Divine grace with him, to
carry him out to all acts of obedience. There was no failure as to any one act
of obedience in Christ. If Christ had been deserted in point of grace, and any
one act of obedience had been interrupted, then his obedience had not been
perfect and complete; and if his obedience had not been perfect and complete,
it had not been such an obedience as the Law requires and accepts; for the Law
accepts of nothing but perfect obedience, and that consummate to the end of a
man's life: Cursed is he that continues not in all things that are written in
the book of the Law to do them. There must not be the doing of some things only
which the Law requires, but there must be the doing of all things, and that to
the end of a man's life, if a man gives that obedience which the Law will
accept; and therefore we must suppose, that there was not the least
interruption in any one act of obedience in our Savior, no, he was obedient
unto the death, as the Apostle expresses it, Phil. 2.8. He was obedient unto
the death, even the death of the cross: his obedience ran throughout his whole
life, and it extended it self to the very end and last period of his life, He
was obedient unto the death.

3. It was not desertion in point of support, Christ was not so deserted in his
sufferings, as not to be supported under them. Hence is that of one of the
Ancients: Derilictus fuit, non per miseriam, ^ed per misericordiam, nec
amissione auxilii, sed definitione moriendi. Leo.
Christ was forsaken, not in respect of misery as to himself, but out of mercy
toward us; Christ was forsaken, not by the loss of Divine help, but in his
being left to dye, unto which he was determined by the forcknowledge of God.
Christ had supportation in his sufferings, otherwise he had sunk under them. It
is true, our Savior was not so sensible of that support which he had: many of
the Saints are supported under great trials, sore afflictions, and temptations
that they meet with, and yet they are not always so sensible of that support
that is given to them. So was it with our Savior, he had support, and yet he
was not so sensible of his support; and therefore is it that he complains,
Psalm. 22.1. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and mark what follows,
Why art thou so far from helping me? He was helped of God, but yet he had
little sense of help, the sense of support was much taken from him, Why art
thou so far from helping me, and from the words of my roaring? I cry in the day
time, and thou hear not. Though our Savior had indeed support, yet he
complains as one that had no sense and feeling of it: there may be support
under great trials and afflictions, and yet there may be little feeling of that
support; and therefore is it, that some of the Saints have complained of being
overwhelmed. Consider the title of Psalm. 102. A prayer of the afflicted when he
is overwhelmed, the Saints may be overwhelmed. Then is a person said to be
overwhelmed, when he is under great sorrows and sufferings, and has little or
no sense of comfort and support given in to him. Thus has it been with the
Saints, and thus was it with the Head of the Saints the Lord Jesus, he had
support, but yet he had little sense of support; the support he had for it was
the Divinity that strengthened and corroborated him to bear all his sufferings;
therefore is it said, That by the eternal Spirit he offered himself without
spot to God, Heb. 9.14. It was by the power of the Deity, that he was
corroborated to suffer what he did suffer, and yet he complains of the want of
the sense of support in the place formerly mentioned.

Thus we have seen what this dereliction was not. It was not a dissolution of
the Union of the two Natures, not a desertion in point of grace, not desertion
in point of support.

What then was it?

I answer, It was desertion in point of comfort, dereliction in point of
manifestation.

To understand this we must know, That in the death of Christ's body, when his
body dyed, the soul was separated from the body, but how? not personally, Non
(...).
but in respect of place only; the humane soul of Christ and his body were
separated one from the other, but yet neither the soul nor the body were
separated from his person. Divines have an apt similitude to illustrate this: A
man that has his sword in his scabbard, holds it in his hand for a time, then
draws his sword out of his scabbard, the sword and the sheath are separated one
from the other, but neither is separated from the man, the man holds both in
his hands. In like manner in the death of Christ, Christ's humane soul was
separated from his body, but neither was separated from the Divinity, the
Divinity held both: so that in the death of Christ's body, the soul was
separated from the body not personally, but in respect of place. So in this of
his dereliction, which was as it were the supernatural death of his soul, the
Deity was separated from Christ's soul, but how? not personally, the personal
Union remained still; how then was it separated? only in respect of operation;
there was not that operation of the Divinity in the humane soul of our Savior
in a way of comfort, in a way of manifestation as before, the separation was in
point of comfort and manifestation, Quaedam ibi derelictio suit, ubi nulla suit
in tanta necessitate virtutis exhibitio, nulla majestatis ostensio. Bern.
not otherwise. This is elegantly expressed by one of the Ancients after this
manner: Christ, says he, was after a sort forsaken, when there was no visible
tendering of help to him in so great necessity; when there was no beaming forth
of the Majesty of God upon him, but the face of God, and his favor was turned
away from him, because of the wrath of God that was due to us because of our
sins. This then was that dereliction that our Savior underwent, the beams of
the Divinity contained themselves as it were from shining forth upon the humane
soul of our Savior, the Divinity that was wont to shine upon his humane soul
before, withdrew its rays. The Ancients and some other modern Learned men have
many elegant expressions to set forth this dereliction of our Savior. Some of
the Ancients call the sufferings of Christ, the Sleep as it were of the
Divinity; had the Divinity or Godhead exerted it self in Christ, as it might
have done, it could easily have prevented all suffering and death; therefore
the Divinity suspending its operations, is said by the Ancients to sleep and
rest as it were, that so the humane nature might be capable of suffering.
Passio Christi fuit dulcis Divinitatis somnus. Aug. (...). Compressissa se
Deitatem. Subduxit se ad tempus Divinitas. Sequestrata delectatione Divinitatis
aeternae.
Hence is that expression of Austin: The Passion of our Savior was as it were
a sweet sleep of the Divinity. Other of the Ancients have this expression, That
the Divinity did rest, that is, ceased from its operations, it did not put
forth and exert it self in that way as before. Others express it thus, That the
Deity contained and kept it self in. Others, That the Divinity withdrew it self
for a time. And it is an elegant expression which Ambrose has: That the
delight which the Humanity had from the eternal Divinity, was now as it were
sequestered and withdrawn from it. The vision which our Savior had before in
his humane soul of the Deity, was now withdrawn from him, and this must needs
be the highest affliction imaginable. Our Saviors happiness, as he was man,
consisted in the sight and vision of God; look as the Essence of our happiness
consists in the sight of God, so the happiness of our Savior, as he was man,
consisted in the sight of God; Christ, as he was man, had God for his God, and
for him to be deprived of the sight of the face of his God, this must needs be
the greatest affliction to him; therefore does he cry out, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? The happiness of Christ, as he was man, consisted in the
sight of the face of his God; and therefore for him to be deprived of the sight
of this face, must needs be the greatest affliction to him. This subduction or
withdrawing of the Divinity in point of manifestation, the hiding of the face
of God from Christ, must needs be the greatest affliction to him upon these two
considerations.

1. Because our Savior had been inured and accustomed to the sight of God, and
knew what the happiness of it was. Our Savior had walked in the light of his
Fathers countenance all his days until now; therefore is it that he says in
one place, That the Father was with him, and in another place, That the Father
had not left him alone, and elsewhere he says, That he had seen the Father. It
is the common opinion of Divines, That Christ had the sight of God from the
first moment of his conception. Now for him that had once tasted of the light
of Gods countenance, to lose it, this must needs be the greatest and most
bitter affliction to him. The greatest misery we say is, for a person once to
have been happy, and then to lose his happiness. It is not so much for a man
that never knew what the sweetness and comfort of Gods love meant, to be
without it, as it is for another person that has been ravished with the
suavity and delights of Gods love, to be deprived of them. Now this was our
Saviors case, our Savior had tasted of the sweetness of his Fathers love, he
knew what happiness was in the beatifical Vision, and now for him to come to be
deprived of it, O how great an affliction must this needs be! This
consideration may well put us upon this contemplation, whether the sorrows and
sufferings of our Savior in this respect did not exceed those of the damned.
The damned in Hell indeed want the beatifical Vision, they have not the sight
of God for the present, neither are they ever like to have it, O but they never
had experience what the sweetness and happiness of the enjoyment of God was. It
is true, the damned shall have their faculties much more enlarged than now they
have, to apprehend what a loss they do sustain, in being deprived of such an
infinite good as God is, they will have greater apprehensions at last how great
a loss the loss of an infinite good is; but they never had an experimental
sense and taste what the sweetness and happiness is that is to be found in God.
But now our Savior had this experimental taste of the sweetness, delight, joy,
satisfaction that the sight of God could afford to his humane soul; and
therefore for him to be deprived of it, his sorrows in this respect seem to
exceed the sorrows of the damned. The damned may bewail an infinite good that
they have lost, though they know not what he is, nor have any experimental
taste of his sweetness; but now Christ knew what the excellency of God was, and
had the most familiar acquaintance with him, and yet was separated from all
that sweetness for a time, which he had so lively a taste of before.

2. This desertion of our Savior must needs be the highest affliction to him
of all others, because the humane soul of Christ had the clearest sight of God
that ever any creature had. The humane soul of Christ, by means of the personal
Union, was brought nearer to the Deity than ever any creature, man or Angel was
brought unto: look therefore as the habitual grace that is in the humane nature
of Christ, by means of the personal Union, which is the cause of it, does far
excel, as to measure and degree, all that grace that is found either in men or
Angels: so for the same reason we must suppose, that Christ, as he was man, by
virtue of the personal Union, had a clearer sight of God than ever any creature
had. Now then for him that had so clear a sight of the Divinity; that he who
had his faculties enlarged to the uttermost to contemplate the excellency and
perfection of the Deity, should all of a sudden lose this sight; that all of a
sudden the glorious light that had shone upon his soul all his life time
before, should be withdrawn, and that he should be left in perfect darkness,
what a change must this needs be? This was that which made him utter those
words with so much bitterness, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and
the manner how he uttered them is most observable: (...).
Jesus cried out with a loud voice, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Mat. 27.46. He cried out with a great voice. Persons are seldom wont to make
any outcrys, till they come to some great extremity: our Savior was now in the
very top of all his sufferings, he was now come to his greatest extremity, and
when he is in his greatest extremity, he cries out with a loud voice, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? It was the inward grief and perplexity of his
mind, as Calvin observes, that extorted this cry from him; and how great must
the sorrows of our Savior be, that forced him to such an outcry as this is,
that the standers-by must take notice of it? We read of many of the Martyrs
that bare their sufferings without any such sensible commotion, we read of no
such out cries from them, when they were in the midst of the flames. Now our
Savior had his heart fortified and strengthened with far more Grace than any
of them, God gave him grace not by measure, he had grace conferred upon his
Humanity in the highest degree that a created nature was capable of. How
inexpressible then must the sorrows of Christ be, and how far did they exceed
the sorrows of all others, that he should make such an outcry as this is! the
reason of which was, That he did not only feel the wonted presence of his
Father withdrawn from him, but he saw God alienated from him, yea he saw his
Justice armed against him to revenge upon him the sins of the Elect. O this was
more than a thousand deaths.

Learn from what has been opened, pain, the pain of loss is. Learn how great a
misery it is to be separated from the sight of God. This was so grievous to our
Savior, that he could not contain himself from that bitter outcry we heard of
before, he cries out in the bitterness of his soul, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? O if Christ could not bear the want of the sight of God for
so short a season and space (fo^^^ was but for a short space of time this
desertion continued with him) how will thou bear to be separated from God for
ever? Mark what the sentence is that will be pronounced upon wicked men at the
great Day? Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire. O in those words,
Depart from me, is the very Hell of Hell, there is not any thing worse in Hell
than this, Depart from me. Consider also what the Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians. 1.
Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord. How can thou bear the thoughts of being separated from God for ever? I
often think of the expression I heard from a troubled Soul: O, said that
person, I have lost God, and must be separated from him for ever. O can you
think what a misery it is to sustain the loss of God, and be separated from him
for ever? It is true, wicked men love not God, and care not for his presence,
and therefore they think it will be no great loss for them to be separated from
him whom they do not love. But when wicked men shall come to understand, that
there is no happiness but in the enjoyment of God, and that the last perfection
that their Being was capable of, was to enjoy him; though they love not God,
yet they love themselves; though they love not God, yet they love happiness:
therefore though they think it a little thing to be separated from God now,
they will not think it a little thing to be separated from happiness at last:
With thee, says the Psalmist, is the fountain of life, and in thy light we
shall see light, Psalm. 36.9. Being separated from God, they are separated from
light, separated from joy, separated from happiness, separated from every thing
that is good. God, that is the chief good, makes every thing good that is so;
(and what can be good where the chief good is absent?) therefore this will be
matter of eternal torment to lost souls, that they are destitute and come short
of that happiness which their Beings were capable of.

Here is comfort to deserted Souls, was deserted; therefore if thou be
deserted, God deals no otherwise with thee than he did with Christ; thou
may be beloved of God, and not feel it; Christ was so, he was beloved of the
Father, and yet had no present sense and feeling of his love. This may be a
great comfort and support to holy Souls under the suspension of those comforts
and manifestations which sometimes they have felt, Christ himself underwent
such a suspension, therefore such a suspension of Divine comfort may consist
with Gods love. Thou may conclude possibly, I am a Hypocrite, and therefore
God has forsaken me, this is the complaint of some doubting Christians, I am a
Hypcorite, and therefore God has forsaken me: but thou have no reason so to
conclude, there was no failure in Christ's obedience, and yet Christ was
forsaken in point of comfort; therefore desertion, in point of comfort, may
consist with truth of grace; yea with the highest measure of grace, so it did
in our Savior. It is true, there is a root in us of this desertion, some sin
of ours that oftentimes occasions this desertion. It was not so with Christ,
Christ had no sin of his own for which he was deserted, he only bare the guilt
of our sins, and he was deserted for a time, that we might not be deserted for
ever. But though there be that in us that may occasion desertion, yet this is
some relief to us, that Christ has undergone desertion, though not for any sin
of his own, as we do; and the greatest relief of all is, that Christ was
deserted, that we might not be deserted: the face of God was hid from him for a
time, that so it might not be hid from us for ever. Wherefore to conclude this
point: If thou be one that have fled for refuge to the hope that is set before
us; if thou have come to Christ, and believed on him in truth, thou needst not
fear that thou shall be deserted of God for ever, because Christ has born
desertion for us; the Lord may hide his face from thee for a time, but he will
not hide it for ever, because Christ has suffered this part of the punishment
due to us, he has born that absence of Divine comfort which thou deservest to
lie under for ever, Christ has suffered dereliction for us.

The end of the eighth Sermon.
SERMON IX.
Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.


HAving showed already how our Savior underwent the Pain of loss in his
spiritual dereliction or desertion, it remains that I should show how it was
that he suffered the pain of sense, in being made a Curse for us. That which
Divines call the Pain of sense, is a most perfect sense of the wrath of God,
and all the miseries that do attend it; it does, I say, In vivo and efficaci
sensu^irae Divinae.
consist in a quick and lively sense of the wrath of God. Now our Savior, in
being made a curse for us, had this perfect sense of Gods wrath, and felt those
miseries that do attend it, as we shall show more by and by. That Christ was
made a curse for us the Scripture is clear, the Apostle tells us expressly in
that known Text, Gal. 3.10. That Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
Law, being made a curse for us. Sin was the inlet of the Curse, and the Curse
was the punishment of sin. When Adam had sinned, the Lord says to him, Cursed
is the ground for thy sake, Genesis 3.17. Now if the ground be accursed for Adams
sake, Adam himself must needs be much more accursed; Quod efficit tale, est
magis tale.
for that which makes any other thing to be what it is, is much more so in it
self. If therefore Adam be the cause why the ground is cursed, Adam himself
must needs be much more accursed. This is more fully explained in that sentence
of the Law, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Carsed be he that confirms not all the words of the
Law to do them. Every transgressor of the Law is cursed by the Law. Therefore
if Christ will redeem us from the curse of the Law, he must of necessity take
upon him the curse of the Law for us. In opening this Head, this part of the
Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction, there are three things that are necessary to
be spoken unto.

1. To show what the notion of the Curse implies.

2. To show how it was that Christ was made a curse for us.

3. To show how this could be so, how it was possible for Christ to be made a
curse for us, how it could be, that he that was most blessed in himself, should
yet be made a curse for us.

The first thing we are to speak to is, To show what the notion of the Curse
does imply.

1. The Curse implies displicency or displeasure in him that pronounces it. No
man curses another but he conceives displeasure and indignation against him
whom he so curses, Prove. 11.26. He that withholdeth corn, the people shall
curse him. The meaning is, he that keeps in his corn, which is a common
benefit, in a time of common necessuy, the people will curse him, that is,
their hearts will rise in anger and indignation against him. There will be a
common grudge against such a person: the Curse bespeaks displeasure in him that
pronounces it.

2. The Curse implies utmost displeasure and abhorrence in him that utters it.
The Curse does not imply displeasure in general, or some small displeasure, but
it implies the utmost displeasure and abhorrence: the Curse is a sign of
loathing and detestation. Persons are not wont to break forth into curses till
their anger and indignation be boiled up to a height: Isa. 8.21. And it shall
come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and
curse their King and their God. Cursing does usually proceed from rage, when a
person hates another, and is enraged against him, this is that makes him break
forth into cursing.

3. The Curse notes the imprecation or praying down of evil upon another. The
Curse is the imprecating all manner of evils upon another: Prove. Maledictio est
imprecatio malorum.
26.2. The curse causless shall not come. The Curse in this place notes the
imprecating or praying down of evil upon another. He that prays that such and
such evils may come upon another; if he has no ground nor warrant for his
prayer, such a curse shall do no harm. The School men describe a curse to be,
When any one out of anger or hatred imprecates or prays down some evil upon a
person, not for the good of the person, but for his hurt, and out of a desire
of revenge.

4. The Curse implies actual inflicting of evil upon another, so far as it lies
in a man's power. In a curse there is a secret appetite of revenge: now he that
desires revenge upon another, would do him all the mischief that lies in his
power. This we may see plainly in Shimei's cursing of David, it is said of
Shimei, That he cursed David, and threw stones at him, and cast dust, 2 Samuel
16.13. It was not in his power to reach David at that time, and do him a
mischief, but it was in his heart to do it. It is in the nature of a curse for
a man to do a person whom he curses, all the mischief that he can.

5. The Curse does sometimes signify the destruction and extermination of the
thing cursed, the curse brings destruction with it. When our Savior cursed the
barren fig tree, the fig tree did immediately wither; therefore are the curse
and destruction joined together, 2 Kings 22.19. That thou should become a
desolation, and a curse. And it is a full place to explain this, Deuteronomy. 28.20.
The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke, until thou be
destroyed, and thou shall perish quickly. So that the Curse brings perishings
and destruction with it: this is the notion of the Curse in general. Now by
nature we are all under the Curse, and it is proper for us to consider how it
is that we are said to be under the Curse, because Christ was made a curse for
us, to deliver us that were under the curse. The Apostle tells us, That as many
as are of the works of the Law are under the curse, Gal. 3.10. What does this
imply? How is it that we are under the Curse? There are these things implied in
it proportionable to what we have heard.

1. God has conceived displeasure against us by reason of sin, Psalm. 7.11. God
is angry with the wicked every day. Every man, whilst he is in the state of
nature, is in Gods account a wicked man. Though there are degrees of sin, yet
every person is so far a wicked man in Gods account, that God is angry with
him. God is angry with the wicked every day: that is, God is angry with
sinners, as they are sinners; therefore is it said, That by nature we are the
children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3.

2. We are said to be under the Curse in this respect, That God is not only a
little displeased at us, but in that he is highly displeased with us by reason
of sin, the Curse denotes utmost displeasure and abhorrence. The wrath of God
is revealed from heaven against all the ungodliness and unrighteousness of men,
Romans 1.18. God proclaims it to all the world, that he is highly offended with
sinners. The indignation which God has against men by reason of sin (to speak
after the manner of men) is that which provokes him to curse them. When Adam
had sinned, what did the Lord say to him? See how high his displeasure rises
against him, Genesis 3.17. Because, says he, thou have hearkened to the voice of
thy wife, and have eaten of the tree of which I commanded thee that thou
should not eat of it. Here is a plain indication of anger. It is as much as
if God had said, Thou have transgressed my command, my plain command, what
follows? Cursed be the ground for thy sake: as much as if it had been said,
Cursed be thou, and cursed be the earth for thy sake. Sin, I say (to speak
after the manner of men) provokes God to give forth the curse upon men. Thus
the Lord spoke expressly to Cain after he had murdered his brother, Genesis 4.10.
What have thou done? the voice of thy brothers blood cries to me from the
ground, what have thou done? This is a speech noting utmost displeasure, and
what follows upon this? Now, says God, thou art cursed from the earth: thou
have done that which is most displeasing unto me, and now thou art cursed from
the earth, that is, I will withdraw all influences of my love and favor from
thee, thou shall not have the least place in my love, but thou art a cursed
person, one remaining under my utmost displeasure.

3. We are under the Curse, that is, we are under the denunciation of evil. God
has pronounced evil concerning us. When Adam had sinned, part of the Curse was
this, Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return, Genesis 3.9. Here is a
present denunciation of evil upon sin, and the general sentence of the Law is,
The soul that sins shall dye.

4. We are under the Curse, in as much as many penal evils are already
inflicted upon us as part of the Curse, and part of the punishment that is due
to us by reason of sin. Sickness, pain, infirmity of the body, anguish, grief,
sorrow in the mind are part of the miseries that we suffer in this life, and
these things, materially considered, are part of the Curse, for as much as if
there had been no sin, there had been none of these things. It was sin that
brought in sickness, infirmity, pain, grief, and whatever miseries men have
experience of in this life, and these are part of the Curse; and therefore the
happy state of the New Jerusalem is described by this, That there shall be no
more curse there, Rev. 22.3. When sin shall be removed, the effects of sin, all
those miseries which sin has brought in, shall be removed.

5. We are under the Curse, that is, we are liable to destruction of soul and
body in Hell for ever, as the just revenge which God executes upon us by reason
of sin; this is in the nature of the Curse, that it brings destruction with it.
So that when we are said to be under the curse, the meaning is, that we are
liable to the destruction of soul and body in Hell for ever. The Curse has not
spent it self, it has not exhausted all its venom, till it has brought the
sinner to the utmost degree of misery that the sinner is capable of. Therefore
when our Savior pronounces the sentenco of punishment upon the damned, he
expresses it thus: Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41.
It is as much as if he had said, You are cursed persons, the Curse has taken
hold of you, the Curse is come in its full power and strength upon you, and
there is none to deliver you from it; therefore will the Curse carry you into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Nothing will satisfy
the Curse but the utmost misery and destruction of the sinner, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.
Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord. That which the Curse aims at is destruction. Now wicked men are punished
with destruction from the presence of the Lord, destruction is brought upon
them by the Curse as the just punishment of their sin. Though wicked men have a
being still in Hell, yet their well being is taken away, the Curse takes away
their well being, and brings them to the utmost degree of misery that they are
capable of.

The second thing we have to speak unto is, How it was that Christ was made a
curse for us. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us, Gal. 3.10. This I shall endeavor to open in some Particulars.

1. Christ was made a curse for us, in that the displeasure of God and his
indignation against us for sin was poured forth upon Christ to the utmost. Our
Savior began to conflict with the sense of Gods wrath in his Agony in the
Garden, there he saw the wrath of God approaching to him: But now in his
sufferings upon the Cross, there it was that he bare the Curse fully, there was
the wrath of God fully poured out upon him. The Curse speaks anger and
displeasure, as we have heard; if therefore Christ be made a curse for us, as
the Scripture affirms plainly that he was, then of necessity it follows, that
he must bear Gods wrath and anger in some sort or other for us. Benedictus in
justitia sua, maledictus ob peccata nostra. Aug. Maledictum est Deo quod odit
Deus. Beda.
It is a speech of Austin: Christ that was blessed in respect of his own
Righteousness, was yet cursed by reason of our sins. Another Learned man has
this expression: If Christ were accursed, then was he as one loathed and
abhorred. That is said to be cursed of God, which God loathes and hates. Isa.
53.3. it is said there, That Christ was despised and rejected of men. He was
cut off from the land of the living, as a person not fit to live, that was a
sign that he was accursed of men. But that is not all, Christ was not only
accursed of men, but in some sense he was accursed before God himself. For in
that Text in Deuteronomy, which I shall touch upon hereafter, he that hangs
upon a tree was accounted accursed by God himself: So that Christ was not only
accursed before men, but in some respects he was said to be accursed of God
himself. Christ was accursed of God, not in respect of himself (as I shall show
more hereafter, when I come to show you how this could be, that he that was
most blessed could be made a curse) but in respect of us, whose sins he bare.
Yet Christ in respect of us the guilt of whose sins he bare, was accursed of
God. The Apostle tells us, that Christ was made a curse, Who has redeemed us
from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, Gal. 3.10. If Christ were
made a curse, of whom, or by whom was it that he was made a curse? Of his
Father certainly. He that made him sin for us, made him also a curse for us.
Now who was it made him sin for us? That was God himself; so the Apostle tell
us, 2 Cor. 5.20. He has made him to be sin for us. He that might be made sin
for us, might be made a curse for us. Christ was made sin, therefore he was
made a curse; and it was God that made him sin, therefore God that made him a
curse. If Christ then were made a curse by God himself for us, then he was not
only accursed before men, and in the sight of men; but as he was our Surety,
and as he bare the guilt of our sins (though he were an innocent person in
himself, and as considered in himself always beloved of God) he was accursed by
him by whom he was made a curse. That which also confirms this, is this
consideration, That Christ was made a curse for us, as undergoing that
punishment the Law exacted, so the Apostle teaches us, He has redeemed us from
the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us. If therefore Christ be made a
curse in conformity to the Law, he must sustain that Curse that the Law
threatens and will inflict. Now this is certain, that the wrath of God is
comprehended in the curse of the Law; for what is the curse of the Law? The
curse of the Law is this, Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon
every soul of man that does evil, Romans 2.8, 9. Therefore if Christ bare the
curse of the Law, he must of necessity bear the sense of Gods wrath in his soul
for us. Neither let us wonder at this, That Christ, as to his own sense and
apprehension, should be as a person loathed and abhorred of God for our sakes,
who was always beloved of God in himself; but let us rather wonder at the
greatness of our sins, that he that was so dear to God in himself, should yet
be made the object of his wrath and indignation, and be dealt withal, as if he
were a person hated of God merely to expiate the guilt of our sins. It is an
elegant expression which a Learned man has: Quid mirum, si maledictus dicitur
Deo, qui habet in se quod odit Deus, hoc est peccatum?
What wonder is it that he should be accounted accursed of God that has that
upon him, which God hates that is sin? Christ was looked upon by God as
standing guilty of our sins in a way of imputation, He has made him to be sin
for us. How made him to be sin? In a way of imputation. Christ had no sin of
his own, but he was made sin by way of imputation. Therefore Christ sustaining
the person of a Sinner, although he had no sin of his own, he is accursed of
God, the wrath of God breaks forth upon him. Neither was it a little wrath that
was let forth upon Christ, but there was a whole Sea and Deluge of wrath let
forth upon Christ; so much wrath as the humane nature was capable of bearing,
so much must we suppose was let in upon him; and the reason is, because sin
deserves the utmost degree of punishment that the nature of the creature is
capable of; therefore must we suppose, that the wrath of God was consummated in
our Savior. Whatever wrath the humane nature supported by the Divinity was
capable of bearing, all that we must suppose was poured out upon our Savior.
Hence is that expression of the Prophet, I have trodden the winepress alone,
and there was no one with me, Isa. 63.3. Our Savior in his Passion, in his
Sufferings in the Garden and on the Cross has trodden the wine press of Divine
wrath, the wrath of God was expressed and poured forth upon him to the utmost.
Now who knows, who can conceive what this means? Who knows what the power of
Gods anger is? Who knows what that wrath is, that is let forth upon the spirits
of the damned? Job complains in his afflictions, That God hunted him as a
fierce lion, and that he did show himself mavelous upon him, Job 14.16. Now
if God might show himself thus mavelous and terrible to his own children whom
he does love, how mavelous and terrible does he show himself to the damned
whom he hates! Now Christ, our Surety, though he was always beloved of God as
in himself, yet he bare the very pains of Hell for us. Look therefore what
wrath the damned feel, who lie under the heat and fierceness of Gods wrath,
that must Christ feel who is our Surety, that we may be delivered from it. O
let us consider these things, and let them sink deeply into our hearts: Let us
consider with our selves, in what wrath it is that God manifests himself to a
damned soul; in the same wrath did God manifest himself to Christ who was our
Surety, that so we might be kept from damnation; for if Christ had not suffered
the pains of Hell for us, we must have been left to suffer them our selves.

2. Whatever shame, whatever ignominy and contempt, whatever pain and torment,
whatever sorrow and grief either in his soul or body, our Savior suffered and
underwent upon the Cross, he saw plainly that it was the effect of the wrath of
God, and the just punishment that was due to us for our sins. The sting of an
affliction is, when a man suffers as a guilty person, when he sees clearly,
that what he suffers, he suffers it as an effect of Gods wrath, and as a just
punishment of sin from an angry God. A man might suffer great things as long as
he sees no mixture of wrath in all his sufferings; but when he plainly sees a
vein of wrath from God in all his sufferings, this is the sting of all his
sufferings. Now our Savior, though he was most innocent in himself, yet he
sees that the Justice of God proceeds against him as standing under the guilt
of our sins; and whatever was inflicted upon him, was nothing else but the
effect of Divine wrath due to us. The death of Christ was a shameful death, and
a painful death.

1. Crucifixion, or the death of the Cross, was a shameful or ignominious
death. Hence is that expression of the Apostle, Heb. 12. He endured the cross,
and despised the shame. The death of the Cross had shame and ignominy attending
of it. Crucifixion was such a kind of punishment as was wont to be inflicted
upon servants, Crux erat servile supplicium, and mors turpissima.
and was one of the basest kinds of death. And the reason why Crucifixion or
hanging upon a tree was accounted so infamous, was, because he that was hung
upon a tree, by being lifted up in that manner, was looked upon as an execrable
person, as one that was not fit to live upon the earth, as one that was fit to
be thrust out of the world, turned out of the society of mankind; (...).
therefore is it, that the Heathens accounted this death an impure and filthy
kind of death.

2. Crucifixion was painful as well as shameful. To have several parts of the
body thrust through with nails, and fastened to a tree, and hang there several
hours together, this must needs be a painful death. Now our Savior sustained
all this, all this shame, all this pain, and that which was the venom of all,
this he sustained and underwent as the effect of Gods wrath, and the just
punishment that was due to us for our sins. So likewise he sustained the
greatest sorrows and dolors in his soul, as I have showed at large heretofore.
Our Savior finding himself forsaken and deserted of God, finding God himself
alienated from him, yea set against him to cut him off, this must needs fill
his most holy Soul with the greatest anguish and sorrow: and yet all this,
which he so underwent, the pain and shame, the anguish and sorrow, whatever it
was he underwent in either kind, in his soul or body, he suffered it all as the
fruit of Gods anger and displeasure against sin, avenging our sins upon him as
our Surety. And that our Savior saw all these things coming upon him, and
actually inflicted upon him as the effect of Gods wrath, is plain by what the
Apostle adds, Gal. 3.13. Christ was made a curse for us; for it is written,
Cursed is every one that hangs upon a tree. The Apostle proves his assertion,
Christ was made a curse for us, by this Topic or Argument; for it is written,
Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree. Christ being crucified in that
manner, being exposed to that kind of suffering and death, it was a plain sign
and token that he was looked upon and dealt with as a person accursed of God.
Maledicti symbolum crux. Crux signum maledictae mortu.
The Cross was a Symbol of the Curse: the Cross was a sign of an accursed
death. Now it is well observed by a Learned man, The death of the Cross, simply
and in it self considered, was no more accursed, than any other kind of death;
but therefore was the death of the Cross an accursed death, because the person
that was to undergo it, was an accursed person. Transgressio pendentis
maledictionem contrabit.
The transgression of him that was hanged upon the tree was that which did
contract the curse. If a person had committed a sin worthy of that death, he
was an accursed person. If Christ had not taken upon him the guilt of our sins,
the death of the Cross could not have rendered him accursed. Maledictum cones
peccati.
The Curse is that which accompanies sin, and follows upon it: therefore it is
an elegant passage of one of the Ancients: Non ideo maledictus quia pendet, sed
ideo pendet quia maledictus. (...). Maledictio Dei, upensus.
A person is not therefore accursed, because he hangs upon the tree; but he is
therefore hanged upon the tree, because he is accursed. The Text from whence
the Apostle takes this is, Deuteronomy. 21.23. He that is hanged is cursed of God: so
we render it, and so the Septuagint renders it, Cursed of God. Arius Montanus
renders it, A person that is hanged is the curse of God. He is the curse of
God, that is, the curse of God is upon such a person; and because the curse of
God is upon him, therefore does he suffer that punishment. The Chaldee
Paraphrase therefore renders it well: For as much as he has sinned against the
Lord, therefore he is hanged upon the tree. Sin preceding, brings the curse;
and the curse of God being upon such a person, that kind of punishment was to
be inflicted. Our Savior therefore being carried to the Cross and crucified,
saw plainly that the punishment of our sins was laid upon him; our sins were
imputed to him as our Surety, and he being by this means led to the Cross, saw
plainly that he suffered the punishment that was due to us. The Cross was a
sign and Symbol of Christ's being made a curse for us. And Learned men have this
apprehension, that in this place in Deuteronomy, the Lord did beforehand, in
his infinite Wisdom, point out that kind of death hanging upon the tree, as an
accursed death, because he intended that the death and sufferings of Christ
should be signified thereby, and that Christ dying in this manner, his death
should be the expiatory Sacrifice to expiate and take away the Curse that lay
upon the whole world.

By way of admonition. to take heed of being offended at the Cross of Christ.
Flesh and blood, carnal reason are apt to be offended at the Cross of Christ;
the wisdom of this world is apt to be offended at Christ's sufferings; carnal
reason cannot bear, that he that is the Savior of the world should be exposed
to so much shame and contempt. Christ crucified, says the Apostle, was to the
Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness, 1 Cor. 1. The Jews in
derision call Christ, He that was hanged up. Talui, suspensus.
But we may say with the Apostle, God forbid that we should glory in any thing
save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. He that is ashamed of the cross and
sufferings of Christ, let him be ashamed of his own Salvation. Christ suffering
what he did, was the cause of our Salvation, if ever we saved. We may speak to
such as are offended at Christ's cross, and at the shamefulness of his
sufferings, in the words of Tertullian: Parce unicae spei totius orbis,
quodcunque Deo indignum est, mihi expedits Tertul.
Be contented to spare the only hope of the whole world, thou that destroyest
so necessary a pillar of faith, whatsoever it is that may seem unworthy of God,
that was most necessary and expedient for man. This is plain and evident, if
Christ had not been crucified, and born the curse of the Law, the curse of the
Law had still lain upon us, and remained to be born by us. The Law says
expressly, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are
written therein to do them: and as many as are of the works of the Law are
under the curse. Therefore if we are under the curse, as certainly we are; if
Christ has not born the curse for us, we must have been still left to bear it.
Therefore we have reason to be so far from being offended at the sufferings of
Christ, and at the ignominiousness of his death, that we have infinite reason
to be so much the more thankful; Quanto major est injuria, tanto major debetur
gratia.
by how much the greater injury and indignity Christ underwent for us, by so
much the more thanks we owe to him for suffering so much for us: for what
relief or comfort could we have had against the pains of Hell, and that curse
which we deserved, if Christ had not suffered the pains of Hell, and been made
a curse for us? Therefore take heed of being offended at the Cross of Christ.

sad and deplorable our condition by nature is. Has Christ been made a curse
for us, then we by nature are all under the curse. Christ that was most blessed
in himself was made a curse for us. Christ was not born for himself, nor lived
for himself, nor suffered nor dyed for himself, but all that Christ did and
suffered was for us. If therefore Christ was made a curse for us, it is a
certain sign we are all by nature under the curse, and O what a sad and
deplorable thing is it to be under the curse of God! The curse is the
comprehension of all evil, it is the Epitome of all misery, the curse
comprehends in it all the miseries in this life, and eternal damnation in the
next. The Apostle opens the nature of the Curse to us at large, when he says,
Romans 2.8, 9. Indignatin and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every soul of
man that does evil. This is but a Paraphrase on the Curse, and this is the
curse that all of us by nature are subject to, Indignation, wrath, tribulation,
anguish, who can bear the thoughts of these things? Who of us can think of
remaining and abiding under the wrath of God at present, and of suffering
eternal damnation hereafter? Of how much concernment then is it to every one to
see that he come out from being under the curse? For this is certain, we are
all by nature under the curse, and what will it be to lie under the power of
the curse, and under the power of the wrath of God for ever? O it is of
infinite concernment to us to make haste to him, and to embrace him that was
made a curse for us, that we might be delivered from the curse. Christ was made
a curse for us, that he might deliver them from the curse, who flee for refuge
to the hope set before them. Nothing can pacify the sin-revenging Justice of
God, but holding up Christ in the arms of our faith, who was made a curse, and
upon whom the curse has spent all its venom, all its force and strength. He
that believes on the Son is not condemned, Joh. 3.18. Oh let the Doctrine of
the Curse, which has been opened, make Christ more and more precious to us;
let us embrace him with both the arms of our faith. If we can hide our selves
in the Righteousness and Satisfaction of Christ, the curse which we have
deserved shall never overtake us.

The end of the ninth Sermon.
SERMON X.
Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.


I Come to a third Particular, to show you how it was that Christ was made a
curse for us.

The third Particular is this: In Christ's being made a curse, the wrath of God
was consummated upon him. Christ in being made a curse for us, bare the whole
punishment that was due to us. It was not part of the punishment only, but the
whole punishment which was due to us that Christ underwent. All the curses of
the Law did as it were meet upon him; and there was nothing wanting which the
Law would inflict upon sinners as sinners, but the curse brought upon Christ as
our Surety. The curse notes the utmost execution of evil upon the sinner. It is
in the nature of the curse to imprecate the greatest evil upon a person, and to
bring the utmost evil upon him that it can. Therefore Christ being made a curse
for us, he bare all the punishment that the Law could inflict. Maledictio
Christi continet omnem poenam nostram.
Christ's being made a curse, says a Learned man, contains in it all our
punishment. Whatever punishment was due to us was contained in this, That
Christ was made a curse. And another Judicious Divine has a passage to this
purpose: In Christ's being made a curse, the fullness of Gods wrath, and the
dregs of that horrible cup was wholly poured out upon that sacred head of his,
when together and at once, Heaven and Earth and Hell seemed to conspire
together to exact from our Surety that punishment that was due to our sins in
that cursed kind of death, which was a sign or Symbol of the Divine curse that
lay upon him. The whole punishment that was due to us for our sins, was laid
upon Christ in his being made a curse. Hence is that expression, Isa. 53.6, 10.
The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all: or as it is in the Margent,
He has made the iniquity of us all to meet upon him. The sins of all the Elect
did meet on Christ, that is, God did charge all the sins of the Elect upon
Christ; Christ was reckoned a sinner by imputation, as it is in the last verse
of that Chapter, He was numbered with the transgressors, and he bare the sins of
^^ny. He was numbered with the transgressors. Christ, though he was no sinner in
himself, yet he was reckoned a sinner, 1 Cor. 6.20. He made him to be sin that
knew no sin. Now as all the sins of the Elect were charged upon Christ in a way
of imputation, so the punishment of their sins was laid upon him. Hence is that
expression, The chastisement of our peace was upon him, Isa. 53.3. that is, the
whole punishment due to us was laid upon Christ, and this is called the
chastisement of our peace, because Christ's undergoing of this punishment was
that which was necessary to make our peace; the Justice of God required
satisfaction, and unless the punishment which the Law threatens were some way
born and undergone, God would not be at peace with us; therefore says the
Prophet, The chastisement of our peace was upon him, that is, the punishment
that was due to us was inflicted and laid upon our Surety, that so we that were
at variance with God before, might now be brought into peace with him.
Therefore it follows in the same place, By his stripes we are healed; the
chastisement of our people was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed.
Christ bearing that which we should have born, he undergoing our punishment,
this is the means to make our peace with God. Hence also is that expression of
the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body
on the tree. Christ our Surety bare all our sins, he has born the guilt and
punishment of all the sins of the Elect, and that wholly and fully: whatever
the Law and Divine Justice would inflict upon us as sinners, that Christ our
Surety has born for us. Hence is it that our Savior immediately before his
death, uttered these words, It is finished, Joh. 19.30. It is finished, (...).
Acta, transacta omnia. Beza.
consummated, or perfected: all things were done and transacted by Christ that
were necessary to be done by him. Christ did not make an end of his sufferings
until he had suffered all that he was to suffer. It is finished, that is, as
another expounds that expression, Christ fulfilled all the
Scripture-prophecies, the subst ance of the Types were fulfilled in him, and he
fulfilled all that which God determined to be paid for the expiation of sin.
Christ finished the whole work of our Redemption, he left nothing undone and
unsuffered that was to be done and suffered in order to the accomplishment of
our Salvation. It is finished, as much as if it had been said, Nothing remains
more to be suffered but the very act of dying, and giving up his life, which he
was now just about to do, all that the Law and Justice could inflict upon him
was inflicted upon him, and therefore he said, It was finished. Hence are those
expressions we have in the Book of Daniel, Dan. 9.24. Seventy weeks are
determined upon thy people and upon thy holy city to finish the transgression,
and to make an end of sin, and to make reconciliation for iniquity. Consider
those expressions, to make an end of sin, and to make reconciliation for
iniquity. That expression which we translate to make an end of sin, it is in
the Originai to seal up sin: Christ has sealed up sin in respect of the guilt
of it as to condemnation. Christ by his death has so sealed up sin, that sin
has no more power to condemn those who believe on him, he has perfectly taken
away the condemning power of it. Hence is it said, That Christ has rased out
the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us,
and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross, Col. 2.14. and he is the
Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world, Joh. 1.29. that is, he has
perfectly taken away sin as to the guilt and condemnation of it. Now this could
not have been, if Christ had not suffered all that was to be suffered, he could
not have made an end of sin, he could not have taken away the condemning power
of it, if all the punishment that was to be inflicted upon the sinner, had not
been inflicted upon him; but now Christ by offering himself a Sacrifice for our
sins, has born the whole punishment, so that nothing more remains to be
suffered that Divine Justice can demand. This is implied in his being made a
curse, namely that the wrath of God was spent upon Christ to the utmost, and
that Divine Justice could desire no more than what was laid upon him.

The last Particular to clear this, how Christ was made a curse, is this: The
curse took hold on Christ so far, as that Christ was exterminated and cut off
by it. The utmost punishment that can be inflicted upon a Malefactor amongst
men is death, the extermination of him from mankind, cutting him off from the
land of the living, separating him from the society of mankind. Now the curse
proceeded upon Christ so far, as that Christ was cut off by it. Hence are those
expressions of the Prophet, He was cut off from the land of the living, for the
transgression of my people was he smitten or stricken, Isa. 53.8. So likewise
we have the same expression in the Book of Daniel, Dan. 9.26. After sixty two
weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself. Christ, the true Messiah,
was to be cut off, but not for himself, that is, not for any sin of his own,
but he was cut off for us, because he bare the guilt of our sins. To understand
this we must know, that nothing satisfies the Law but the death of the sinner.
We know what the sentence was that God pronounced upon our first Parents, In
the day that thou eatest thou shall dye the death: and this is the general
sentence of the Law, The soul that sins shall dye; and, The wages of sin is
death. Death is part of the curse, yea death is as it were the consummation of
the curse. Death, as it is the inlet unto eternal death, so it is the
consummation of the curse. The curse aims at the extermination and utter
destruction of the sinner. A man that is taken away by a corporal death, he is
for ever destroyed as to men, though his soul survive, yet he is taken from
amongst men, he has no communion with mankind. Death is the destruction of a
person as to any fellowship and communion that he is to have with mankind any
longer in this world; and therefore death is the utmost consummation of
punishment amongst men. Thus the curse cuts off Christ, and Christ dies as
bearing the curse; yea the curse is consummated in the death of Christ: Christ
was accursed even as Adam was. It is a good expression of one of the Ancients:
Christ descended as low as Adam did, and so dissolved the curse. (...).
Christ by descending where Adam had brought himself by his Fall, dissolves the
curse that Adam had brought upon himself and his posterity: the curse that was
upon Adam brought him to death, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return.
The curse lying upon Adam, subjected him to a state of mortality, and brought
him under the power of death. Christ therefore being made a curse for us, the
curse subjects him to death, and takes away his life. Hence is that expression,
Heb. 2.9. That Christ tasted death for every man. Death is the completion of
the curse, because the death of the body is the inlet to eternal death to those
who are still under the power of the curse. It is true, Christ did not taste
the pains of eternal death after his natural life was ended; but Christ tasted
the pains of supernatural death before the taking away of his natural life, as
I have showed heretofore; and here we may observe this difference in Christ's
sufferings and the damned's sufferings. The damned suffer the pains of Hell
after this life, Christ suffered the pains of Hell here in this life: corporal
death is but the beginning of the damned's punishment; but Christ at his death
finished his sufferings. So that in the order of suffering there is some
difference between what Christ suffered, and what the damned suffer. The damned
suffer the pains of Hell after this life, Christ suffered them in this life;
yet Christ underwent death as a part of the curse, and death as it is a part of
the curse, and a fruit of Gods wrath is a terrible thing, yea most terrible;
and yet Christ, that he might make satisfaction for us, conflicted with this
King of Terrors, Christ as he was man, had a natural fear of death, as we have,
yet without sin; and the reason is, because Christ taking on him our nature,
took also upon him the infirmities of our nature. Now there may be a natural
fear of death without sin, nature abhorring that which is contrary to it self,
and this was in our Savior. Christ being our Surety, and seeing death coming
upon him as part of the curse, and as a part of the punishment due to us for
our sins: this made him to fear death. Hence is that expression, Heb. 5.7. He
offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears to him that
was able to save him from death, and was heard in what he feared. Christ feared
death as he was man, especially he feared it as he saw it a part of the curse
that was due to us; and yet though he feared it, the thing that he feared came
upon him. It is true, the Apostle says, He was heard in what he feared. How
was he heard? Was Christ heard so as to his fear of death, as to be delivered
from death? No certainly, if Christ had not dyed, we must have dyed in our
sins. If Christ had not dyed, we must have undergone death as a part of the
curse. How then is it said, He was heard in what he feared? He was heard so, as
that he was supported when he dyed, and he was heard in being raised from the
dead the third day; so that he was heard in what he feared, in his supportation
under his sufferings, and in his Resurrection: but dye he must, death was part
of the curse, yea the completion of the curse, therefore Christ our Surety
cannot escape death. Christus sponsor noster communi maledictione nobis debita
feriendus erat.
Christ, says one, being our Surety, was to be struck with that common curse
that was due to us: death was due to us, the great thing threatened upon sin,
therefore Christ being our Surety, must of necessity undergo it. Hence is that
of Austin: Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree. Why is it said, Every
one? That so Christ himself, says he, might not be excluded. Christ who was
blessed in his own Righteousness, was yet accursed for our sins. The curse
prevailed so far as to take away Christ's life, to separate his soul from his
body. It is true, the curse could not prevail so far, as to separate either
from his person, to separate his soul or his body from his person; the Person
of the Son of God, the second Person in Trinity, remained united to the soul
and body of Christ, even when his body and soul were separated each from other,
and it is our greatest happiness that it was so, viz. that the curse could not
reach the Person of Christ, if I may so express it, that is, reach his Person
so as to dissolve the Union of the two Natures; for if the curse could have
reached the Person of Christ in the sense I am now speaking of, that is, if the
curse could have extended it self to the Person of Christ, so as to dissolve
the Union of the two Natures, this would have made the death of Christ
ineffectual; if death could have dissolved the personal Union, Christ's death
would have been no more than the death of a mere man, of a just man, and so his
death could not have been meritorious, and have satisfied for the sins of the
world. But though the curse could not take hold of Christ's Person, so as to
dissolve the union between his Person and our nature, yet the curse took hold
of our nature united to Christ's Person. The curse did prevail so far as to
separate his humane soul from his body. To understand this a little more
clearly, let us consider, the Divine nature in Christ was above the Law, and
above the curse: the curse could not reach his Divine nature, it could not
possibly hurt that; but now Christ having assumed our nature, and voluntarily
made himself subject to the Law and to the curse in our nature, the Law has to
do with our nature in Christ. We being under sin and under the curse, the curse
had dominion over us; therefore the Apostle tells us, That sin reigned unto
death, Romans 5.21. Now Christ being our Surety, and the Law finding our nature
in Christ, and that Christ had transferred the guilt of our sins upon himself,
the Law armed with the curse deals with Christ as a sinner, and it proceeds so
far as to make the utmost breach upon our nature that it can, it rends his holy
soul from his pure body. And thus for a time the curse seems to triumph over
our nature as it stood in Christ. Hence is that of the Apostle, Romans 6.9.
Christ being dead, dies no more, death has no more dominion over him. This
plainly intimates, that death and the curse had dominion over Christ for a
time, and the curse proceeded so far as to the extinction of his natural life,
his soul was separated from his body, though the union between the two natures
was not dissolved.

I come to the third and last Particular, and that is this: How it was possible
for this to be; Christ was most blessed in himself, how then was it possible
for him thus to be made a curse? The curse implies anger, wrath, displeasure in
him that pronounces and inflicts it, as has been shown: how then was it
possible for Christ to suffer the wrath of God, that was always beloved of God?

To this several things are to be answered.

1. Consider Christ in himself, and so he was always beloved of God, Mat. 3.17.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Isa. 42.1. Behold mine Elect
in whom my soul delights. And Christ as he was man had more titles than one
to his Fathers love.

1. Christ had a title to his Fathers love, as his Humanity is taken into so
near a relation to the natural Son of God. The humane nature in Christ is made
one in person with the natural Son of God, so that there is not another
subsistence of the second Person in Trinity and the humane nature; but there is
one subsistence to the second Person in Trinity and to the humane nature:
therefore the humane nature being taken in, as it were, to have its subsistence
in the person of the natural Son of God, being taken into the unity of the same
person, must needs be beloved of the Father, upon that account, above all
creatures.

2. Christ is beloved of the Father as he is a just and an innocent person, and
he must needs be beloved of the Father upon that account, Isa. 46.8. The Lord
loves the righteous. Christ being a just and a righteous p^^son, the Father
could not but love him as considered in himself.

3. The Father loved Christ upon the account of his obedience, Joh. 10.17.
Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life for my sheep: and
in the next verse, This commandment have I received of my Father. Christ
obeying his Father in laying down his life for his sheep, is one title he has
to his Fathers love; therefore consider Christ in himself, so he was always
beloved of the Father.

2. Christ suffered the wrath of God as he was our Surety, and as he stood in
our stead, 1 Pet. 4.1. Christ has suffered for us. 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ has
once suffered for sin, the just for the unjust. This is a clear Text, Christ
was a just person in himself, and as he was a just person, so he was always
beloved of God, and could not but be beloved of him. But now as he that was a
just person in himself gave himself to suffer for the unjust, so it was that he
bare the wrath of God. The wrath of God was due to the unjust, Tribulation and
anguish, indignation and wrath upon every soul of man that does evil, Rom 2.
Therefore if the just will suffer for the unjust in their room and stead, he
must then suffer what they must have suffered. It is a true speech of Austin:
Mors Christi fuit conditionis, non criminis. Aug.
The death which Christ underwent was not in respect of any crime or offense
that he himself had committed, but it was in respect of the condition that he
brought himself into; that is, Christ suffered the wrath of God, not for any
crime or offense of his own, but in the condition of a Mediator, because of our
sins. Hence is it said, That he was delivered up for our offenses, Romans 6. ult.
So in that of the Prophet, Isa. 53.5. He was wounded for our transgressions, he
was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him.
Christ took upon him the discharge and payment of our debt; therefore though he
was always beloved of God in himself, yet as personating and representing us
who were sinners, so it was that he sustained the wrath of God. All we like
sheep have gone astray, says the Prophet, and the Lord has laid on him the
iniquity of us all, Isa. 53.6. We were the offenders, and yet the punishment
was laid upon Christ who was an innocent person. Therefore it is a good
expression of one of the Ancients: Non ille maledictus, sed in te maledictus.
Christ was not accursed in himself, but he was accursed in thee. It was we
that deserved the curse, the curse was due to us, but the curse lighted upon
Christ, that so it might not fall upon us: Therefore it is wisely observed by
another of the Ancients, That no one ought to be offended at this, that Christ
is said to be made a curse, who himself was without sin: Because, says he,
Christ was made a curse, Factus est ille maledictus, non natus.
he was not born a curse. Christ was most free from the curse in himself, but
he most voluntarily took the curse upon him. Therefore another of the Ancients
observes: Christ was made a curse, Non per necessitatem, sed per obedientiam.
not out of necessity, but in a way of obedience. He was made under the Law,
and therefore he subjected himself to the curse of the Law: he that would be
made under the Law must undergo all that the Law required of him: now the Law
required obedience, and the Law requires suffering; therefore Christ being made
under the Law must not only do, but suffer what the Law requires. Divines
observe, That Christ was born and dyed after a special Law different from other
men. Christ was born, not for himself, but for others, and he dyed, not for
himself, but for others; Manifestum est Christum potuisse non mori, sed
voluisse, ut mors sua nobis prodesset. Ambros.
Christ is to be considered as a common person. Hence it follows, Christ's
bearing the curse was not for himself, but for others, Christ suffered and
underwent the wrath of God which we should have born. Hence is that of one of
the Ancients: It is manifest that Christ might have chosen whether he would
have dyed; but he therefore chose to dye, that his death might become
profitable.

Learn from what has been opened, infinite evil sin is, that he who was most
blessed in himself, should yet be made a curse for us, that the fountain of
blessing should become a curse. O how great a venom is there in sin, that
Christ having no sin of his own, but being a sinner only by imputation, should
be made a curse, that sin should cause him that was the Author of all blessing
to become a curse!

Learn from hence the severity of Gods Justice, no sin of his own, but only
took upon him the guilt of our sins, that yet Divine Justice should fall so
foul upon so innocent a person; He spared not, says the Apostle, his own Son,
Romans 8. Christ taking upon him the guilt and punishment of our sins, God did
not spare him, but executed upon him the severity of his Justice. Now if Divine
Justice did not spare him who was but a Surety, how shall it spare us, if we be
found under the guilt of our sins? Certainly every impenitent sinner may read
his own destiny in the sufferings of Christ. If Christ suffered such things who
was merely a Surety, and bare the guilt of other men's sins, not his own, what
is like to become of us that must bear the guilt and punishment of our own
sins, as certainly we must, if we continue in unbelief and impenitency? He that
believes not on the Son, the wrath of God abides upon him, Joh. 3. ult. O it is
of infinite concernment to us all to secure our part and interest in the
sufferings and satisfaction of the Lord Jesus; for if the Justice of God
arrested Christ, seized upon him, and proceeded so severely against him, as we
have heard, if the curse did cut off him, we cannot expect but Divine Justice
will seize on us, and cut us off, unless we be hid in the clefts of this Rock.
Oh let us endeavor to get a part in him that was made a curse, that we may be
delivered from the curse.

The end of the tenth Sermon.
SERMON XI.
Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.


THere is one thing more to be answered to that inquiry (to make the answer
full and complete, over and above what was said in the last Discourse) How was
it possible for Christ to suffer the wrath of God that was always beloved of
him?

The third thing therefore that is to be said is this: It was possible for
Christ by faith to know that he was beloved of God, and he did know that he was
beloved of God, when yet as to sense and feeling he tasted of Gods wrath. Faith
and the want of sense are not inconsistent; there may be no present sense of
Gods love, nay there may be a present sense of his wrath, and yet there may be
faith at the same time. This is manifest from that description of faith which
the Apostle gives, Heb. 11.1. Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the
evidence of things not seen. Faith makes those things evident, which are not
evident and apparent unto sense. This also is manifest from the experience of
several of the Saints. It is said of Abraham, That he believed in hope, against
hope, Romans 4.18. Abraham had the hope of faith against the dictates of sense,
his faith prevailed against sense, he believed when all things in sense made
against him. Thus was it with Job, in one place he says, That God hunted him
as a fierce lion, and that he showed himself amrvellous upon him. And yet in
another place he says, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. Here was
faith against sense. In like manner in another place he says, That God counted
him for his enemy: in his sense and feeling God seemed as an enemy to him. And
yet in another place he says, I know that my Redeemer lives. Here was an
opposition to sense. Thus was it with Heman, he complains Psalm. 88.7. That Gods
wrath lay hard upon him, that God had afflicted him with all his waves: and in
the sixteenth verse of that Psalm he says, Thy fierce wrath goes over me: and
yet in the beginning of the Psalm he calls God, the God of his salvation, O
Lord God of my salvation, verse. 1. here was faith contradicting sense. Thus was
it with our Savior, Christus licet se in anima derelictum sentiret, ut in
nobis fuit, tamen in anima intellexit in sese semper deamatum fuisse.
our Savior had a present sense and feeling of Gods wrath, and yet by faith he
might know he was beloved of God. Hence is that of a Learned man: Christ
although he felt himself forsaken, as he was in us, yet he understood that he
was always beloved, considered as in himself.

Thus have I spoken that which I think may be sufficient for the clearing of
that objection, How Christ that was a person always beloved of God, could yet
bear the sense of his wrath.

And now I would make a little farther use of what has been opened as to
Christ's being made a curse, and then I shall proceed to the other Propositions
that remain for the clearing the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction.

Christ, as we have heard, has been made a curse, the wrath and displeasure of
God has been poured forth upon him; whatever he underwent upon the Cross, all
that shame and pain, all that grief and sorrow which he felt in soul and body
was the effect of Gods wrath, the punishment due to us for our sins, the wrath
of God was consummated upon him, and he was cut off by the curse, he underwent
death as part of the curse. Let us see what use may be made of this.

This may serve by way of direction to us, agony of conscience, under the fear
and terror of Gods wrath due to us for sin. Who is there among us, that some
time or other may not lie under the fear of Gods wrath? that may not be
terrified with the apprehension of Gods wrath due to him for sin? Now the
proper relief in this case is to consider that Christ was made a curse. If
Christ has felt what we fear, if he has suffered and undergone what we
deserved, what so proper a ground to relieve us as this? We fear the wrath of
God, and Christ has suffered that wrath. This is the case of many of the
children of God, they do many times lie under dreadful apprehensions of Gods
wrath and displeasure. David in the trouble and anguish of his soul cries out,
Cast me not away from thy presence, Psalm. 51.11. And that Saint we mentioned
even now in Psalm. 88.14. Lord, why castest thou off my soul? Now when we begin
to apprehend, that God has cast us off in displeasure; when we are under
trouble and anguish of soul, and apprehend that God is highly incensed, and his
wrath is waxed hot against us, what can give us relief in this case, but to
consider that Gods wrath was poured out to the utmost upon Christ our Head and
Surety, that the wrath of God spent it self, and had a full vent upon him? This
therefore is the only course we can take, when we are under the fear and
apprehension of Gods wrath, to lift up Christ in the arms of our faith, and to
interpose him between us and the wrath of an angry God. If his wrath be kindled
but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in Christ, Psalm. 2.12.
This Doctrine of Christ being made a curse is of mavelous and unspeakable use
in the serious exercises of faith, when the soul is under sore conflicts from
the fear of Gods wrath. If thou art burdened with the guilt of sin, and the
fear of Gods wrath, thou may go to God and tell him, that Christ has
suffered as much as ever thou have deserved to suffer; that there is nothing
that he may justly inflict upon thee, but it has already been executed and
inflicted upon Christ to the uttermost; and will he punish sin twice? Will he
punish sin in thee, and will he punish it in the person of his innocent Son,
who had no sin of his own, but only took upon him their cause that were not
able to deliver themselves from wrath?

From this Doctrine of Christ's being made a curse, true and proper Antidote is
against the fear of death. The proper Antidote against the fear of death is
this, That Christ has suffered death as part of the curse; therefore Christ
having undergone death for us as a part of the curse, if we be in Christ, the
curse of death is taken away from us. It is true, Believers undergo death
still, but here lies the comfort to a Believer, that death is no longer a curse
to him, Christ by undergoing death as a part of the curse, yea as the
completion of the curse has taken away death as it is a curse. Death is now no
more a curse unto Believers, but a passage unto life. It is a sweet Text, Hos.
13.14. O death I will be thy plague, O grave I will be thy destruction. Christ
by dying has destroyed and overcome death, and Believers are freed from death
as a curse; therefore is it that our Savior says, He that believes on him
shall never dye, Joh. 11.26. What better news to any of the sons and daughters
of men, than to tell them they shall never dye? Our Savior assures us of this,
He that believes on him shall never dye, Joh. 11.26.

O but do not Believers dye as well as other men?

Yes they do, curse, they dye not as malefactors, as condemned persons. (...).
Athanas.
Death is now as no death to a Believer, it is only a passage unto eternal
life; a Believers true life is not interrupted by death, Joh. 10.28. I give to
them eternal life, and they shall never perish. If death did interrupt, or take
away a Believers true life, then there might be a time when he might be said to
perish; but our Savior speaks it with the strongest asseveration, and with the
greatest solemnity, They shall never perish: I give unto them eternal life, and
they shall never perish; therefore there is such a life given to a Believer by
Christ that shall never perish; though this natural life be taken away from
him, yet that which is the true life, eternal life shall never be taken from
him: his natural life may be taken from him, but instead of it he shall have
eternal life, I give unto them eternal life.

I proceed now to some other Propositions for the clearing the Doctrine of
Christ's Satisfaction.

The next Proposition therefore is this.

The eleventh Proposition, God has charged upon Christ the guilt and
punishment of the sins of his people. There is an act of God in this, Christ
did not only suffer such things as we have heard, but he has suffered them
from the hand of God, laying these things upon him as our Mediator and Surety.
Hence is it said, That God has made him to be sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. God
has laid upon him the iniquities of us all, Isa. 53.6. God has laid upon him:
there is the act of God, the act of Divine Justice put forth in laying upon
Christ all the punishment that he underwent. Hence are those expressions that
are so frequent in Scripture, that Christ was made sin, made under the Law,
that he was made a curse, that he was made of God to us Redemption: all which
expressions plainly show, that there was an act of God put forth, whereby
Christ is made or appointed of God to be our Surety, and that God did exact
that debt of obedience and punishment from Christ which we should have
performed. This is of mavelous sweet consideration to consider, that the
guilt and punishment of our sins is taken off from us, and transferred upon
Christ our Surety. Not but that we are Sinners still considered in our selves,
and that we are obnoxious unto punishment as we are Sinners considered as in
our selves; but here lies the sweetness, to consider that such is the free
grace of God toward us, that he has transferred the guilt and punishment of
our sins upon Christ our Surety, and exacts that from Christ, who stands in the
place of our Surety, that he might have exacted from us, who were the principal
debtors. Thus we read of the escape Goat, that the iniquities of the Children of
Israel were put upon him, Lev. 16.21. Aaron was to lay his hand upon the head
of the escape Goat, and to confess over him the sins and iniquities of the
Children of Israel, and he was to put them upon the head of the Goat. So the
expression is in the Text, Putting their sins upon him. The escape Goat was
certainly a Type of Christ, Christus peccata nostra in se transtulit. Calvin.
and herein was intimated, as Calvin well observes, That Christ did transfer
our sins upon himself.

The twelfth Proposition is, That Christ as our Surety did freely and
voluntarily offer himself to suffer what we should have suffered. As God did
charge our sins upon Christ, and laid the guilt and punishment of them upon
him, so Christ our Head and Surety did freely and voluntarily offer himself to
suffer what we should have suffered; as the Father did charge upon Christ the
payment of our debts, so Christ did freely and voluntarily take upon him the
payment of them, Isa. 53.6. He was afflicted and he was oppressed: the vulgar
Latin renders it, Oblatus est, quia ipse voluit.
Christ was offered, because he himself would. Had he not been willing, he
might have chosen whether he would have been offered; but he freely offers
himself, No man takes away his life, but he lays down his life for his sheep,
he lays it down of himself, Joh. 10.15. This is a mavelous sweet
consideration: Look as the sin and disobedience of the first Adam was
voluntary, so the obedience of Christ our Surety was voluntary: Adam did
voluntarily break and transgress the Law of God, and Christ our Surety did
voluntarily obey the Law. Adam sinning deserved punishment for that sin, and
Christ did voluntarily undergo that punishment. Hence is it, that Adams
disobedience and Christ's obedience are compared together, Romans 5.19. As by one
man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one many shall
be made righteous. Adam was not more voluntary in his sin and disobedience,
than Christ our Surety was voluntary in his obedience. Much of the dignity and
excellency of Christ's Satisfaction is to be seen in this, That as sin was
voluntarily committed in our nature, so obedience was performed voluntarily in
our nature, and suffering was voluntarily undergone in it by him who was our
Surety. Look as sin was voluntarily committed in the nature of man by the first
Adam, so we have the same nature of man in the person of the second Adam,
voluntarily obeying and voluntarily suffering whatever Divine Justice would
require from us: and when we come to transact things between God and our souls
in the matters of our salvation, we shall find these things of infinite
concernment more than now we may be aware of. This also is farther to be
considered, That as Christ freely and voluntarily offered himself to suffer for
us, so he did offer himself to suffer for us with this intention to make
satisfaction for our sins, Mat. 20.28. The Son of man came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister and to give his life a ransom for many. Christ speaks
here of the end of his coming, it was the end of his Incarnation to give his
life a ransom for many; and this was his intention in his death to make
satisfaction for our sins, I lay down my life for my sheep, that is, I do it
intentionally for the good of my sheep, For their sakes I sanctify my self,
Joh. 17.19.

The thirteenth Proposition is, God having charged upon Christ the guilt and
punishment of our sins, and Christ having freely and voluntarily offered
himself to suffer what we should have suffered, and having actually suffered
what we should have suffered, Divine Justice can now demand no more. Here lies
the very essence of satisfaction. The School men describe satisfaction to be a
voluntary rendering of that which is equivalent of somewhat which was otherwise
not due, Redditio voluntaria aequivalentis, alias indebiti.
for some wrong or injury that has been done. Also they tell us that
satisfaction speaks some compensation that is commensurate or correspondent to
some precedent injury, and that this must be voluntary; for if it be not
voluntary, it is not so properly satisfaction as satispassion. Take a damned
soul in Hell, from whom punishment is exacted for the sins that he has
committed, such an one bears punishment; but he does not satisfy properly,
because he does not suffer voluntarily; and therefore the torments of the
damned never expiate and take away sin, although they still detain and keep the
person under the power and hand of Divine Justice. But now where there is a
voluntary submission unto punishment, and this punishment is equivalent to the
offense committed, and as much as Justice can require, this is properly
satisfaction: and this makes the Satisfaction of our Savior most perfect and
complete; where the person that tenders the satisfaction, tenders as much as
the person wronged and injured can require by way of compensation; and when the
person that has received wrong and injury, receives as much by way of
reparation as is suitable to the wrong and injury that is done to him, and as
much as he desires, here is satisfaction. Now Christ has made a full
compensation to Divine Justice, the utmost punishment that the Law could
inflict upon us as we are sinners, Christ has voluntarily undergone, he has
suffered that grief, those pains, that death of the body which we deserved; he
has undergone those dolors, those perplexities in his mind, that dereliction,
that curse in his soul that was due to us; therefore the whole punishment which
the Law denounced, being executed upon Christ our Surety. Divine Justice can
demand no more. When the penalty that the Law demands, and is pronounced
against such a crime is undergone, the Law is satisfied, it can demand no more.
If a man commit a crime worthy of death, all that which the Law requires is
death; if death be undergone, if the person be cut off from the land of the
living, the Law is satisfied, and can demand no more. Now the Law has had its
full force and stroke upon Christ, Isa. 53. He was cut off from the land of the
living. Now the curse of the Law being poured out upon Christ, the Law has no
more to demand. When there is a full payment made, there is no more debt can be
exacted; Christ's obedience was full and complete, there remained nothing more
for him to suffer: Therefore is it said, That he has brought in everlasting
righteousness, Dan. 9.24. By one offering he has perfected for ever them that
are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. Who was delivered up for our offenses, and raised
again for our justification, Romans 5. ult. Christ was delivered up for our
offenses, that is, delivered up to death, Christ in dying bare the guilt and
punishment of our sins, but he was raised again for our justification. Now if
Christ had not satisfied and discharged the debt to the utmost, he could not
have been raised for our justification; for if there had been any part of the
punishment not suffered, the Law might have exacted part of us: but, says the
Text, Christ was raised again for our justification. Therefore it is plain and
evident, that Christ in dying bare the whole punishment that the Law would have
inflicted upon us. When the debt is paid, the prisoner is let out of prison:
Christ being our Surety was under an arrest by the Law and by Divine Justice;
but now Christ our Surety having fully paid the debt, Christ is released out of
prison, having paid the debt which he owed, in his sufferings, he is raised
again for our justification. Christ's Resurrection was an evidence that our debt
was fully paid and discharged by our Surety. Hence also is that of our Savior
himself, Joh. 16.8, 9. The Spirit shall convince the world of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment. Why of righteousness? Because I go to the
Father. Christ's Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven was a certain evidence
that Christ was a righteous person. For if Christ had not fully answered the
Law, he had never been raised up from the dead, and taken up into glory, he had
been detained and kept in prison still; and the reason is plainly, that which
was intimated before, that Christ was not born for himself, nor dyed for
himself, but he was born a common person, he was born for us, and dyed for us;
therefore Christ being a common person and our Surety, and so transacting our
cause, the Law would not have been satisfied, neither would Divine Justice have
been quieted, till all that had been undergone that we deserved. Therefore when
it is said, that Christ went to his Father after his suffering; and when it is
said, He was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our
justification, it is plain and evident, that the Law and Justice had taken
their fill of Christ, and had nothing more to demand of him.

The fourteenth Proposition is, That Divine Justice being satisfied in what
Christ has suffered, God acquits and discharges Believers from the guilt and
punishment of their sins, Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods elect? it is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? it is Christ
that dyed. It is as much as if the Apostle should say, A Believer is acquitted
and discharged from the guilt of his sins, no one can lay any thing to his
charge, because God has justified him, no one can condemn him, because Christ
has born the punishment that he should have born, who is he that condemns? it
is Christ that dyed. A Believer is not liable to condemnation, because Christ
has been condemned for him, and the Law has sat in Judgment upon Christ, and
has arraigned and condemned him: now the Law is not wont to punish the same
crime twice. The Justice of God having punished sin in Christ the Head and
Surety of the Elect, will not punish sin the second time in Believers
themselves. It is a good expression of one of the Ancients: Caput and corpus
unus est Christus: satisfecit ergo caput pro membris, Christus pro visceribus
suis. Ambros.
The head and body are but one Christ; Christ therefore being the head, has
satisfied for his members, Christ has satisfied for Believers who are his own
bowels.

The last Proposition is this, That Christ's Satisfaction has merit in it;
though merit and satisfaction are near akin, yet they are distinct notions.
Satisfaction does properly signify the turning away of some evil that is
impending, and Merit properly respects some good to be procured. Now Christ by
his Satisfaction does not only turn away that evil from us that we deserve, but
he also merits and procures good for us.

1. Christ by his Satisfaction turns away evil from us. He turns away the wrath
of God from us, he turns away the curses of the Law, and all the effects of
Divine wrath: Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us. Hence also is that expression, Romans 11.26. The Redeemer shall
come from Zion, and turn away ungodliness from Jacob, that is, he shall turn
away the guilt and punishment of sin from Believers, he shall turn away all the
evils and miseries that sin would bring upon us: His name shall be called
Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins, Mat. 1. But this is not
all, Christ by his Satisfaction does not only turn away evil, but

2. He procures good for us, he procures righteousness and the favor of God,
the Spirit, the grace of the Spirit, and eternal life for us. The Sufferings of
Christ have merit in them to purchase good things for us. Hence is that
expression of our Savior in the Ordinance of the Supper, This cup is the new
Testament in my blood. The meaning is, that all the good things in the new
Covenant, all the blessings comprehended in the Covenant of Grace are purchased
by the blood of Christ. The Covenant of Grace is the Charter in which all good
things are contained, and all these things are the purchase of the blood of
Christ.

The end of the eleventh Sermon.
SERMON XII.
Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.


IT remains now that I should come to make some general Application of this
great Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction. Although there have been some
particular Uses of this Doctrine all along in the several branches of it; yet
it may be meet in the close to annex some general Application as to the whole
Doctrine about Christ's Satisfaction.

The first Use shall be an Use of Confutation, to confute the Adversaries of
this Truth. There are two great Adversaries to this Doctrine of Christ's
Satisfaction.

1. The Socinians, who deny the Satisfaction of Christ altogether.

2. The Papists, who bring in other Satisfactions besides that of Christ's.

1. The Socinians; they are the most professed Adversaries to the Doctrine of
Christ's Satisfaction: they tell us, that the sufferings of Christ were only a
kind of Martyrdom, that Christ dyed to confirm the truth that he had preached,
also that his sufferings were for an example; but they wholly deny, that what
Christ suffered had any influence as to the satisfying of Gods Justice. Now the
whole Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction that has been opened does oppugn this
assertion of theirs; for it has been proved at large, that Christ has
suffered the substance of what we ought to have suffered, and that what Christ
did suffer was with this intention, (...). Vnus exolvit quod ab omnibus
debebatur. Ambros.
to make satisfaction for us, Mat. 20.28. The Son of man came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many. It is
a speech of one of the Ancients: One has paid that which was due from all. If
the death of Christ were only a kind of Martyrdom, and to confirm the truth
which he had taught, and were only for an example, and for no other ends but
these, then the death of Christ would be very little different from the deaths
of other of the Saints; for other of the Saints have laid down their lives to
confirm the truths they have professed, and the sufferings of other of the
Saints are given to us for an example. We have an express Scripture for this,
Jam. 5.10. Take, my brethren, the Prophets who have spoken in the name of the
Lord, for an example of suffering affliction and of patience. Here we see the
Prophets sufferings are given for an example to us: but certainly the
sufferings of Christ are far of another nature than the sufferings of the
Prophets or of any of the Saints whatsoever. It is an excellent speech of one
of the Ancients: Although, says he, the death of many of the Saints has been
precious in the sight of God, yet notwithstanding the death of no innocent
person, besides Christ himself, was the propitiation for the world. It is the
expression which the Apostle John uses, 1 John 2.2. where he tells us, That
Christ is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world. Though the deaths
of the Martyrs were precious, yet none of their deaths was the propitiation for
the sins of the world: and then our Author goes on: Acceperunt justi, non
dederunt coronas, exempla nata sunt patientiae, non dona justitiae.
Those just persons who have been martyred for the truth, have received, not
given Crowns, and from the courage and fortitude of the Martyrs in their
sufferings, we have examples of patience afforded to us, not any gifts of
merit. Theirs were but single deaths that were undergone by them, neither does
one pay another debt, there was only one Lord Jesus Christ found among the
sons of men, in whom all were crucified, all have dyed, all have risen again.
They who deny and take away the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction, endeavor to
take from us a principal part of the Gospel, and to remove from us the
principal pillar of all our comfort and support; for one of the great Truths
which the Gospel reveals, is the Righteousness of Christ for the justification
of a sinner. So the Apostle tells us, Romans 1.16, 17. I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, for therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith
to faith. The Apostle here gives us an account of the Gospel, what it is that
the Gospel reveals, it reveals to us the Righteousness of God; the great and
fundamental Truth revealed in the Gospel, is that righteousness whereby men may
be justified in the sight of God. What this righteousness is, the Apostle does
more fully make known to us in another place of this Epistle, Romans 3.25, 26.
Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the
forbearance of God, to declare, I say, at this time his righteousness. So that
the righteousness which the Gospel reveals is, That God is willing to pardon
sinners, and to accept them as righteous upon the account of the death and
sufferings of his Son, and upon the account of the satisfaction which he has
made. So that they who go about to subvert the Satisfaction and Righteousness
of Christ, do in effect undermine the whole Gospel, and do as much as lies in
them disannul it. For if the scope of the Gospel be to reveal the Righteousness
of Christ, which is the result of his death and sufferings, the result of his
obedience active and passive; then they that would take away this, would take
away a main part of the Gospel from us. So likewise, as the denying of Christ's
Satisfaction is the overthrow of a principal part of the Gospel: so it is that
which takes away the main pillar of our comfort. For if Christ has not
satisfied for us, we are still liable to satisfy the Justice of God in our own
persons, for God is a just and righteous God. He has said, That he will by no
means clear the guilty, and the sentence of the Law remains firm upon us, That
the soul that sins shall dye, and Cursed is every one that continues not in
all things that are written in the book of the Law to do them. Therefore unless
Christ has made satisfaction for us, all these things must of necessity stand
firm against us: unless there be a ransom found for us, we are still liable to
answer to Divine Justice. It is a great Scripture to confirm this, Job 33.23,
24. If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter one of a thousand, to show
unto man his uprightness, then is he gracious to him, and says, Deliver him, I
have found a ransom for him. To show unto man his uprightness. The uprightness
here spoken of is conceived by Learned men, not the uprightness of man himself,
but the uprightness of God. To show unto man his uprightness, that is, the
uprightness of God. What is this uprightness of God? It is Gods uprightness in
dealing with man according to the tenor of Gospel Grace. Compare this with
Romans 3.22. Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption which is
in Jesus Christ. Here we have a description of the tenor of Gospel grace; the
grace of the Gospel consists in this, That we are justified freely by Gods
grace through the redemption which is in Jesus Christ. Now this is the
uprightness of God, Gods dealing with men according to the tenor of his grace
promulgated in the Gospel. God having discovered this to be his mind, that he
will pardon men's sins upon the account of the death and sufferings of his Son:
when this uprightness of God is thus discovered to men, and they by faith lay
hold of the grace of God thus promulgated and made known to them, then God has
found a ransom. Now when God has found a ransom for men, then he says,
Deliver them, then is he gracious, and says, Deliver him from going down into
the pit, for I have found a ransom for him. Had there not been a ransom found
for us, there had been no deliverance from the pit of destruction: here lies
all our comfort, Homo qui debuit, homo qui solvit. Propter nostram
justificationem sic dictum est per Christum: nam nos peccatores in ipso
infernales poenas, quae just merebamur, exolvimus.
That Christ has born what we should have born, he has suffered what we
should have suffered. It was man that owed the debt, and man that paid the
debt. It is a memorable passage of a Learned man: For our Justification it was
that Christ was so dealt with; for we sinners have suffered and undergone in
Christ those very pains of Hell which we deserved.

2. The Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction confutes the Papists, who bring in
other satisfactions besides that of Christ. The Papists tell us, That a man by
some good act, as they call it, an act of charity or love to God, may satisfy
for sin; also they tell us, That we may make satisfaction by external works, as
by Fasting, Prayers, and Almsgiving, and the like: also some of them have
affirmed, That one man may make satisfaction to Divine Justice for another. But
all these assertions are impious and most derogatory to the honor of our
Saviors Satisfaction. For if it had been possible for us to have satisfied
Divine Justice our selves, what need our Savior have suffered and undergone
such things as we have heard? Besides the Scripture teaches us, That by one
offering Christ has for ever perfected them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14.
That one Sacrifice of his was sufficient to make satisfaction for sin;
therefore if Christ's Satisfaction were sufficient, whatever is done by us must
needs be superfluous upon that account. If that one offering of Christ were
enough, there is no need of other satisfactions of men's invention and bringing
in, Heb. 9.26. Christ has appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of
himself. (...).
He has appeared to the abrogating of sin, to the disannulling of sin, so the
word properly signifies. Christ by his Sacrifice has taken away the condemning
power of sin wholly; so that the power which sin had before to condemn us, is
perfectly abrogated and cancelled. Therefore there is no need of humane
satisfactions, or if there were need of some satisfaction to be made by us,
what should we be able to bring to satisfy God? Will the Lord be pleased with
thousands of rams, or ten thousands of rivers of oil, shall we give the fruit
of our body for the sin of our soul? as the Prophet expresses it, Mic. 6.7. If
we should attempt any of these things, none of these would be able to satisfy
God, what then will become of all the Popish Satisfactions? They tell us
indeed, That an act of love to God, especially if it be intense and strong, may
satisfy for sin; but how can that satisfy for a crime committed, which is in
it self due, and a just debt? Love to God, yea the highest degree of love is a
just debt that we owe to God. The first and great Commandment of the Law is,
That we should love the Lord our God with all our heart, with all our soul,
with all our strength, with all our might. Therefore it is not possible, that
by any good act, as they call it, we should satisfy God for any sin committed
by us; and the reason is, because that good act was a thing due, that which is
a just debt in it self cannot satisfy for a former debt. Besides there is no
proportion between the act of a finite creature to make satisfaction, and an
infinite Majesty that is offended. And whereas they suppose that some external
works, as Fasting, Alms, Penances, and the like, may pacify God, and make
satisfaction for sin, this proceeds from gross ignorance of the Nature of God,
and of the nature of sin. For if God be infinitely holy, and do infinitely hate
sin; and if God be infinitely just, that he cannot but punish sin, and that in
the highest manner; and if the demerit and desert of sin be such, as that it
deserves no less than the wrath of God and the torments of Hell, it is very
ridiculous to imagine, that the Justice of God should be satisfied with such
pitiful things as men may impose upon themselves. And that one man, who is but
a mere man, should be able to satisfy for another, this is much more absurd.
For if a man be not able to satisfy for himself, how is it possible that he
should satisfy for another? Si alio peccante, alium poenitet, non est ista
prudens, sed insana poenitentia. August.
And we may well apply that speech of Austin: If when one man sins another man
thinks to repent, and to make satisfaction for it, that is not a prudent, but a
mad and frantic repentance. And yet Bellarmine and other of the Papists tell
us, That one man may compensate and bear the punishment for another. But we may
oppose to them another speech of Austin: Christus suscipiendo poenam, and non
suscipiendo culpan, and culpam delevit and poenam. Aug.
Christ by taking upon him the punishment of our sins, and not taking upon him
sin it self, has blotted and taken away both sin and punishment. If Christ
has fully born the punishment that was due to our sins, nothing need to be
done by us by way of satisfaction; for that is but a diminution to what our
Lord Jesus Christ himself has suffered and done for us.

The second Use is by way of Exhortation. Satisfaction, and to have recourse to
it upon all occasions in our approaches unto God, this is in effect the use
which the Author to the Hebrews makes of the Doctrine of Christ's Priesthood:
Christ's Satisfaction belongs to his Priestly Office, and is a principal part of
it. Christ's Satisfaction is that act of his Priestly Office whereby he offers
himself as a Sacrifice to God to make atonement for our sins. Now we ought by
faith to have continual recourse to this great and eternal Sacrifice of the Son
of God. This is the Use which the Apostle teaches us to make of the great
Doctrine of Christ's Priesthood, Heb. 10.19, 20, etc. Having therefore,
brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest, by the blood of Jesus, by a new
and living way which he has consecrated for us through the veil, that is to
say, his flesh, and having an High Priest over the house of God, let us draw
near with a pure heart in full assurance of faith. Having therefore boldness to
enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus: it is the Blood of Christ that
lays the foundation for out access to God, and our acceptance with him. This
expression, By the blood of Jesus, is a Synecdoche, a part being put for the
whole, the blood of Christ signifies his whole sufferings, that Sacrifice of
his, and the work of his Satisfaction upon the Cross; by that great and most
perfect Sacrifice of his, it is (he offering himself up by the eternal Spirit)
that we now have liberty of access to God. Having therefore liberty by the
blood of Jesus, says the Apostle, let us draw near, that is, let us draw near
unto God in confidence of this Sacrifice, in the virtue of this Sacrifice.
Whenever we draw near to God we must have respect to the great and eternal
Sacrifice of Christ, and why so? because sin separates between us and God, and
till sin be removed and taken out of the way, there is no access for us to God.
Now it is by having recourse to the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ that
the guilt of sin is removed, and so we have access to God: therefore does the
Apostle add, Having your hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience. We must draw
near to God, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience; we must first
dip our consciences in the blood of Christ, as Luthers expression is, that is,
get the blood of Christ upon our consciences, look after the pardon of our sins
by the blood of Christ, before we can expect to have access to God, or
acceptance with him. This is one great part of the life of faith, to have a
constant recourse to the Satisfaction of Christ, and to make use of that great
and eternal Sacrifice of the Son of God, in order to the pardon of our sins,
and our acceptance with God. The Scriptures teach us, That the just must live
by faith, Romans 1.16. Now our living by faith notes a continued course, living
by faith is more than a single act, it notes a constant course. Now wherein
does this life of faith consist? Certainly one main part of the life of faith
consists in this, In having a constant recourse to the Sacrifice and
Satisfaction of Christ, and making use of that for the pardon of our sins, and
our acceptance with God. This is very clear and evident from that of the
Apostle Paul, Gal. 2.20. I live by the faith of the Son of God. Paul here
speaks of his living by faith, The just shall live by faith; and Paul lived by
faith, and how was it that he lived by faith? I live by the faith of the Son of
God, who has loved me, and given himself for me. Paul's living by faith
consisted in this, In having respect to Christ as giving himself for him. Now
how was it that Christ gave himself for Paul? Certainly it was in the virtue of
that great and eternal Sacrifice of his: compare this with Ephesians. 6.2. Christ
has loved us, and given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice unto God.
So that Christ giving himself for Paul was his giving himself an Offering and
Sacrifice for him. Now Paul lived by the faith of the Son of God, who loved him
and gave himself for him, that is, he lived by says on the Sacrifice and
Satisfaction of Christ, he had continual recourse to the Sacrifice and
Satisfaction of Christ, this was his living by faith. Now here it may be said,

1. Why ought we thus to live by faith on the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of
Christ. And

2. How ought we to make use of the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ so as
to draw down the virtue and benefit of Christ's Satisfaction to our selves.

1. Why ought we to make use of the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ, and
live by faith upon it.

The first reason is, Because the Satisfaction of Christ is the only means of
our Reconciliation with God. Hence is it said That Christ has made peace
through the blood of his cross, Col. 1.20. And We are reconciled to God by the
death of his Son, Romans 5.10. Whenever we would treat with God about terms of
peace and reconciliation with him, we must be sure to have recourse to the
death, sufferings, and satisfaction of Christ; all our peace with God is
founded in the blood of Christ, Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins, etc. Here are two means of our reconciliation with God set
down, the principal and the instrumental. The principal means of our
reconciliation with God is the blood of Christ, Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood. The instrumental means of our
reconciliation is our faith, Faith in his blood. That expression [his blood]
comprehends the whole work of Christ's Satisfaction, Christ's laying down his
life was the completing or consummating act of his sufferings, and therefore
all his sufferings, in the whole work of his Satisfaction, are comprehended
under that expression of his blood. Christ's Satisfaction then is the principal
means of our reconciliation with God. Now that which must make this
Satisfaction of Christ profitable and available unto us must be our faith, Whom
God has ordained to be a propitiation through faith in his blood: there must
be the acting of our faith to make Christ's Satisfaction profitable unto us. I
call it our faith, not as if so be faith were a work of our own, either wrought
at first, or exerted afterward by any power and strength of our own; but I
call it our faith, because it is such an act as is wrought in us and by us,
faith it self is the gift of God: so the Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 2.8. It is not
of our selves, it is the gift of God. Yet it is an act in us, and put forth by
us; though God works it, yet it is such a work as God works in us, not without
us, we make use of our faculties. Faith, I say, is an act in us, and put forth
by us, and there must be something done in us and by us in order to our
receiving benefit by Christ's Satisfaction. Christ's Satisfaction is a work
wrought without us, wrought by Christ himself in our nature for us, without us;
yet there must be an act put forth in us by the help and assistance of the
Spirit of God, whereby we may reach forth unto and take hold of the
Satisfaction of Christ that is wrought without us, and without this acting of
faith we cannot expect the benefit of Christ's Satisfaction to our selves. The
Lord expects it at our hands that we should apply and betake our selves to the
Satisfaction of his Son, before ever we be admitted into favor and
reconciliation with him. This is confirmed to us by another Scripture, Joh.
3.14, 15. And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must
the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have eternal life. The lifting up of the Serpent in the Wilderness was a
Type of Christ's being lifted up upon the Cross. Now, says our Savior, whoever
will have benefit by me, and would be delivered from perishing and
condemnation, he must direct the eye of his faith to me as crucified, he must
behold me in my Satisfaction, there is no other means of reconciliation or
peace with God but this; he that believes on me as crucified, he that looks
upon me as lifted up on the Cross to make satisfaction for the sins of men, he
it is that shall not perish, but have eternal life: Therefore it is that Paul
said, He determined to know nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor.
2.3. Paul knew that the foundation of our happiness lay in Christ's crucifixion
and sufferings, and in the satisfaction that was made to God by them; therefore
this was the fundamental Doctrine that he insisted upon: and in another place
where he tells what the substance of the Gospel is, he says, That God was in
Christ, reconciling the world to himself, not imputing to them their
trespasses, but imputing to them the righteousness of his Son, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20,
etc. So that the substance of the Gospel consists in this, That God offers
reconciliation unto men by the death, sufferings, and satisfaction of his Son.
If therefore the death of Christ and his satisfaction be the only foundation of
our peace with God, and the alone means of our reconciliation with him, it
concerns us to make much of Christ's satisfaction, and to apply our selves by
faith unto it.

2. Christ's sufferings and satisfaction are the food and nourishment of our
souls: Christ's sufferings and satisfaction are the means to continue us in the
love and favor of God, as well as to bring us into the love and favor of God
at first. This is notably set forth by our Savior in that mysterious Sermon of
his in the sixth of John, which many of his Hearers were not able to bear
because it was so spiritual. In that Sermon our Savior calls himself the bread
of life, and he tells us, The bread which he will give is his flesh which he
will give for the life of the world, verse. 51. This Text does plainly point out
to us the work of Christ's Satisfaction: Christ gives his flesh for the life of
the world, that is to say, he gives himself to suffer that in a part of our
flesh which he assumed, which we ought to have suffered; and in this respect it
is that he says, He gives his flesh for the life of the world, this is a plain
intimation of his satisfaction. Now what is it that our Savior says of this
work of his satisfaction? verse. 55. My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is
drink indeed. It is as much as if he had said, My sufferings and my
satisfaction are the true food and nourishment of souls. Here it is that souls
must repair for spiritual food and nourishment. Whenever guilt lies upon the
conscience, when the load and burden of sin oppresses the soul, there is no
remedy but by flying to the flesh of Christ who was crucified, and to his blood
which was shed to make atonement for sin. My flesh is meat indeed. Look as
natural life is maintained by the constant use of our food, and taking of it
in, (omit the use of food but for a few days, and the body is starved, natural
life cease) so the life of our souls is maintained by a daily living upon
Christ crucified, by living upon his sufferings and satisfaction; and the
reason is plainly this, The life of the soul consists in the favor of God, In
thy favor there is life, says the Psalmist, and thy lovingkindness is better
than life. Without the favor of God there is no life, there can be no life to
the soul; for God to frown upon the soul, to manifest himself as an enemy, this
is the death of the soul. Now it is a constant recourse to the sufferings and
satisfaction of Christ, that is the only means to keep us in the favor of God:
for it is sin that separates between God and us. Now the sufferings and
satisfaction of Christ are the means to take away the guilt of sin, The blood
of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. Therefore as we
would have the life of our souls maintained, which consists in the favor of
God, and in the sense of his love, we must have a constant recourse to the
Satisfaction of Christ; for we cannot expect one smile from God out of Christ,
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Sin does in its own nature
tend to alienate the heart of God from us. Now it is the respect that God has
to the Satisfaction of his Son (Christ having born that displeasure, that
punishment which we deserved) that is the only means to turn away Gods
displeasure from us. Therefore is it said, We have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, 2 John
1.1. It is as much as if the Apostle had said, Sin does in its own nature
incline God to anger and displeasure toward us, but God respects the
satisfaction of his Son, he respects what Christ has done and suffered, and so
he turns away his anger, and becomes propitious, kind, and savourable upon the
account of what Christ has done and suffered for us: therefore it becomes us
to keep the satisfaction of Christ much in our eye, because this is the means
of preserving us in the favor of God as well as of bringing us into it at
first. Hence are we said to be preserved in Christ Jesus, Jude 1. The merit of
Christ's obedience and sufferings is a means to preserve us in the love of God.
We might soon fall from the love of God, did not Christ preserve us and
continue us in his love by the merit of his satisfaction. Hence also are we
said to be saved by his life, Romans 5.10. If when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall
be saved by his life. Saved by his life, that is, continued in the love and
favor of God, brought to the perfection of salvation. The Apostle supposes
that we are brought into the love and favor of God when he tells us, We were
reconciled when we were enemies: therefore this expression of being saved
implies our being kept and continued in the favor of God, and our being
brought to the consummation and perfection of salvation. We are saved by his
life, that is, Christ's living to make Intercession for us, and pleading by his
Intercession, the virtue and merit of his sufferings, this is the means to keep
us in the favor of God, till we be brought to salvation; therefore we ought to
have a constant recourse to the death, sufferings, and satisfaction of Christ,
because it is the means of continuing us in the love and favor of God all
along, as it was to bring us into the favor of God at first. Hence is that
expression in Jude 21. Keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the
mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. It is that grace and mercy
which is given to us in Christ, through his merit and satisfaction, that
carries us along till we are brought to eternal life, therefore the
Satisfaction of Christ is of constant Use to us.

The end of the twelfth Sermon.
SERMON XIII.
Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.


THat which we were last upon was, Why we ought to live by faith upon the
Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ. Two Considerations have already been
offered.

1.

2. Sufferings and Satisfaction are the food and nourishment of our souls, the
means to continue us in the favor of God, as well as to bring us into it at
first. I shall only add a third, and then proceed.

3. ordained and appointed the death of Christ as the means of reconciliation,
and offers it to us for that end. That the death of Christ is the means of our
reconciliation with God, has been shown at large heretofore: that it is so by
Divine ordination and appointment, and that God propounds and offers it to us
to be received by faith on our part, is that which I am now to speak of; and
for this we must have recourse unto that Text, Romans 3.25. Whom God has set
forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood. (...). Quem proposuit
Deus.
Whom God has set forth, or propounded as a propitiation. This expression,
Whom God has set forth, may have relation to two things.

1. It may have relation to the Eternal Decree of God, namely, that God from
Eternity has decreed Christ to be our propitiation, and decreed his death to
be the means of our propitiation, 1 Pet. 1.18. Ye were not redeemed with
corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ,
as of a lamb without blemish and without spot, who verily was foreordained
before the foundation of the world. Consider that expression, Who verily was
foreordained. (...).
Christ was foreordained before the foundation of the world to be a slain Lamb,
his death was decreed and foreordained to be the means and only means of our
reconciliation with God.

2. This expression, Whom God has set forth, may have reference and respect to
the revelation and tender that is made of Christ in the Gospel. Whom God has
propounded or set forth, that is, God has propounded Christ and his death in
the Gospel as the means of reconciliation. The Apostle speaking of the Gospel
says, That therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith,
Romans 1.17. God has revealed the righteousness of his Son in the Gospel as the
great object of our faith. Now Christ's righteousness is nothing else but the
result of his obedience, active and passive, as it is commonly called; Christ
giving that obedience to the Law which the Law requires, Christ suffering and
undergoing the punishment which the Law exacts from us for the breach of it,
this is the righteousness of Christ, and this is that which the Gospel tenders
to us as the object of our faith, to be embraced and received by us, Therein,
says the Apostle, is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith: as
much as if he should say, The Gospel reveals the righteousness of Christ to be
embraced and entertained of us by faith on our part. Now if God do propound the
righteousness of Christ, whereof the sufferings and satisfaction of Christ are
a principal part, as the great object of our faith, it concerns us then to have
a constant recourse to this, and to make use of it; and therefore that
expression is very observable in the Text before mentioned, The righteousness
of God is revealed in the Gospel from faith to faith. Why from faith to faith?
The meaning I take to be, that our faith ought to take a firm and fast hold of
the righteousness of Christ, and to take a deeper rooting in it from day to
day. We should not be content with some general apprehensions of this
righteousness, and that we have known a little of it; but we should grow from
faith to faith, our faith should take deeper and firmer rooting in it
continually.

I now come to the second thing propounded, and that was to show how we ought
to make use of the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ, so as to draw down the
virtue and benefit of it unto our own souls.

I take this to be an inquiry of great moment, because much of the life of
faith consists in the right understanding and practice of it. I shall therefore
propound several things by way of direction, to show how we ought to make use
of the satisfaction of Christ, so as to draw down the benefit and virtue of it
unto our own souls.

1. If we would make use of the Satisfaction of Christ, let us look upon our
selves as guilty persons, most worthy of Divine wrath and condemnation, as
considered in our selves. Satisfaction supposes guilt, an innocent person need
not to have any satisfaction made for him, an innocent person has done no
wrong, and therefore nothing need to be tendered for him by way of
compensation. If therefore we would have the benefit of Christ's satisfaction,
we must first see that we are guilty and condemned persons in our selves. This
was shadowed forth in the Levitical Ordinances, he that brought his offering to
the Priest, was to lay his hand on the head of the Sacrifice, Levit. 1.4. And
he shall put his hand upon the head of the burnt-offering, and it shall be
accepted for him to make atonement. This Rite of laying the hand on the head of
the Sacrifice or Offering by him that brought it, did carry in it a tacit or
secret confession of the persons guiltiness, he did hereby confess that he was
worthy to be put to death for his sin. He that brought the Sacrifice by laying
his hand on the head of the Sacrifice, did hereby profess that the beast
suffered what he deserved. That the beast being slain was an argument and token
that he deserved to be so dealt with himself, that he deserved to be destroyed
for his sins: therefore when we come to make use of the Satisfaction of Christ
and his Sacrifice, we ought to be sensible of our own guiltiness and worthiness
of condemnation: consider what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11.31. If we judge our
selves, we shall not be judged of the Lord. If we would have benefit from
Christ's satisfaction, we must first judge our selves worthy of condemnation.
Christ's righteousness and satisfaction is sweet to none but a self-condemned
person: Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you
rest, says our Savior, Mat. 11.28. We must be weary and heavy laden with the
sense of our own guiltiness before we can prize the satisfaction of Christ. We
ought therefore, when ever we come to make use of the satiffaction of Christ,
to see what the desert of our own sins is in the sufferings of Christ. Whatever
Christ suffered, was nothing but the desert of our sins, it was that which we
deserved should have been laid upon us. Therefore when we come to make use of
the sufferings of Christ, his soulsufferings or his bodily sufferings; when we
consider his soul-sufferings, viz. his dereliction, or his being forsaken of
God, the sense of Gods wrath that he underwent in his soul; when we consider
the pain, grief, torment, and death that he suffered in his body, we ought to
consider with our selves, that these were the very things we deserved, we were
the persons that deserved to be forsaken of God, to have the face of God hid
from us, we were they that deserved to feel the wrath of God, to be made the
butt of Gods wrath and displeasure, we deserved that pain, anguish, and death
it self, and all as part of the Curse; for Christ suffered all these things for
us, and was made a Curse for us. So that in the sufferings of Christ, as in a
glass or mirroir, we may see what we deserved; there was nothing Christ
suffered but we deserved it, and our hearts ought to be deeply soakt in these
considerations, as ever we desire to take in the benefit of Christ's
satisfaction. He that does not see himself worthy to be cast off, nay I may
say, he that does not see himself worthy to be cut off by the wrath of an angry
God for his sins, will never prize the satisfaction of Christ as he ought to
do. Christ in the work of his satisfaction trod the wine press of Divine wrath;
therefore it becomes us to be sensible, deeply sensible of our desert and
worthiness of his wrath, as ever we desire to have benefit by Christ's
satisfaction. Our Savior in the sixth of John does at several times promise to
us eternal life upon eating his flesh and drinking his blood: verse. 54. He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood shall have eternal life. Now it is a good
observation of one: If thou would eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his
blood, so as to have eternal life by him, do thou first taste death; be
sensible of what thou deservest by reason of sin, be sensible of the spiritual
death thou art subject to, namely separation from God, obnoxiousness to his
wrath, which is the death of the soul; when once thou art sensible of spiritual
death, what it is to be separated from God, what it is to lie under his wrath,
then thou will come with spiritual hunger and thirst to the sufferings of
Christ to obtain life from him.

The second Direction is: If we would make use of the Sufferings and
Satisfaction of Christ, so as to draw home the benefit of it to our selves, let
us direct the eye of our faith unto our natures suffering in Christ. It was our
nature that sinned, and it is in our nature that satisfaction must be made, and
this is the great relief unto faith to see satisfaction made in the nature of
man, as sin was committed in the nature of man. Consider what the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 15.21. Since by man came death, by man also came the resurrection
from the dead. The Apostle plainly intimates, that this is the singular
happiness and comfort of Believers, that as happiness was lost at first in and
by our nature, so happiness is now recovered and restored in and by our nature.
It was the nature of man that sinned in the first Adam, and it is the nature of
man that has obeyed and satisfied in Christ the second Adam. It was the nature
of man that was deprived of happiness, and lost communion with God, and was
subject to death in the first Adam, and it was the nature of man that was
restored to happiness, that was admitted unto communion with God, that was
raised from the dead in Christ the second Adam. Therefore is it that in Romans
5.19. we read of two men, Adam and Christ, As by one man's disobedience many
were made sinners. By one man's disobedience, here is Adam the first man. Now
read the fifteenth verse of the same Chapter, If through the offense of one
many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by
one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. Here we have another man, the
second man from Heaven, as he is called, 1 Cor. 15.47. also, The man Christ
Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. Now the scope of the Apostle is to show, that as
disobedience was acted in the nature of man by Adam the first man, so obedience
was performed in the nature of man by Christ, who was the second man from
Heaven. This is a great quiet and relief to faith to find that in our nature
that is adequate and commensurate to the Law, Christ having satisfied the Law
in our nature for us, it is in Gods account as if we had satisfied it. Consider
that expression, Romans 8.4. That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled
in us. Some Learned men interpret that phrase [in us] that is, in our nature,
Christ having fulfilled the Law for us in a part of our nature, it is in Gods
account as if so be we had fulfilled it. This is more fully explained to us by
the Author to the Hebrews, Heb 2.11, etc. For both he that sanctifies, and
they who are sanctified, are all of one, for which cause he is not ashamed to
call them brethren. Christ is here spoken of as the Head of all the Elect. Now
he is the person that sanctifies, He that sanctifies, and they who are
sanctified, Christ is the person sanctifying, all the Elect are sanctified in
him. Now to sanctify another is to make him holy, and to present him holy unto
God. Christ does thus sanctify the Elect, he makes them holy, and presents
them holy to God, first in his own person; and that he may do this, that he may
be in a capacity to do it, he must participate of one and the same common
nature with them whom he does so sanctify: therefore is it that the Apostle
says, He that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are of one: the meaning
is, they are of one and the same common nature, the person sanctifying, and the
persons sanctified are of one and the same common nature, the head is true man,
and the members are true men. This the Apostle does farther amplify at verse.
14. For as much then as the children were made partakers of flesh and blood, he
also himself took part of the same. Christ being the Head of the Elect, and it
being his office to redeem them, he must come into their nature, and do and
suffer that in their nature, which they ought to have done and suffered; they
were made subject to death, therefore Christ tasted death for them, as we have
it verse. 9. Christ taking upon him the same nature with his brethren, did
punctually fulfill for them in their nature whatever was expected from them. Now
in the serious exercises of faith we ought to attend this, we ought to consider
how that all the great things of our salvation were transacted by our Head in a
part of our nature for us; what Christ suffered, our nature suffered in him.
(...). Athanas.
It is a good speech of Athanasius: It was not our Lord himself so much, as we
that suffered in him.

The third Direction is, We should behold our nature in Christ suffering and
undergoing the same things which we deserved and do lie under the fear of. As
it is a great relief to faith to behold our nature suffering in Christ, so that
which makes this relief complete is, to see our nature in Christ suffering the
very same things which we deserved, and are under the fear of. The Apostle
tells us, Romans 4.5. The law works wrath. The Law works the fear of wrath in
the conscience, the Law begets the sense of Gods wrath in the conscience. How
so? The reason is, Because by the law is the knowledge of sin; sin is the
transgression of the law, by the Law I know my self to be a sinner, because I
see I have transgressed such a Law: now the breach of this Law works wrath,
that is, it works the fear of wrath, as that which is due for sin. Hence also
is that expression of conscience of sin, Heb. 10.2. The worshippers once
purged, should have no more conscience of sin. By conscience of sin, here in
this place, I take it, that we must understand a conscience burdened and laden
with the guilt of sin. The meaning is not certainly, that those who are once
purged by the virtue of Christ's Sacrifice, should make no more conscience of
sin; that would be an impious opinion, nay the contrary thereunto is most true,
a conscience purged from the guilt of sin by the Blood and Sacrifice of Christ,
such a person makes more conscience of sin, that is, of committing sin. Shall
we sin because grace abounds? God forbid. The grace of God teaches us to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts. But the meaning of the place is, that those who
have their consciences once purged and cleansed by the blood of Christ, they
ought to have no more conscience of sin as to guilt, that is, they ought to
look upon their consciences exonerated and discharged from guilt by the
Sacrifice of Christ. But that which I quoted this Text for, was to show that
sin brings a conscience of guilt. When sin lies upon the conscience, it fills
the conscience with the fear and horror of Gods wrath: now the great relief to
conscience in this case, must be for a man to turn his eyes upon Christ, and to
see Christ in our nature suffer that which we deserve, and that which we are
afraid of. We are afraid of Gods wrath, and Christ that was true man, our Head
and Surety felt and suffered the wrath of God: we fear lest God should forsake
us, lest God should cast us off for ever, now we ought to turn our eyes upon
Christ, and see our nature forsaken and deserted in Christ, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? Do you fear the torments of Hell, Christ has born these
very pains and torments. This is certain, there is no such relief or remedy to
an afflicted conscience, as for a man to turn his eyes upon Christ, and to see
Christ who was most innocent in himself suffering all that for us which we
deserve and fear. Deseritur cum desertis, and pro natura quam assumpserat
tributum solvit.
Christ was deserted with them who were deserted, and paid the tribute for that
nature which he assumed, as we heard heretofore. And another of the Ancients
expresses himself to the same purpose: God, says he, in his righteous
judgment exacted all those things from us which are written in the Law, which
when we our selves were not able to pay, our Lord has paid them for us. Christ
has assumed and volunt arily taken upon himself the curse and condemnation
which we were obnoxious unto; Quae pati debueramus illa ipse pertulit.
those things which we ought to have suffered, he himself has born for us.
This is a great support to faith to consider, that the things we deserved and
feared, those are the things which Christ has suffered and born for us.

The fourth Direction is this, Let us behold our nature in Christ voluntarily
suffering what we deserved to suffer: this also is a great relief to faith. As
it is a relief to faith to behold our nature suffering, and suffering the same
things that we ought to have suffered; so this is another great relief to
faith, to behold our nature in Christ voluntarily suffering what we deserved to
suffer. As we who are the sinful sons of men, have sinned voluntarily, so one
of our kin, one of our stock and lineage, one that was true man has voluntarily
offered himself to suffer for us poor sinful men. So that satisfaction is
voluntarily tendered up to God, in our room and stead, by one who was true man,
and in all points like unto us, sin only excepted. Our sin and disobedience was
not more voluntary than Christ's obedience and offering himself to suffer for us
was free and voluntary. Christ our Head and Surety, when the Justice of God was
coming forth armed against us, has most voluntarily run to meet it, and to
expose himself to those strokes which should have lighted on us. Lo, I come to
do thy will, thy law is in my heart, Heb. 10. The Justice of God was not more
desirous of satisfaction to be made to it, than Christ our Head and Surety was
willing to tender it. Now if a Creditor has never so great a sum of money
owing to him, and the Surety undertake the payment of the whole debt, and be
most free and ready as to the payment of it, as free to pay the debt as the
Creditor is to demand it, what can he desire more? Christ our Surety undertook
the payment of our debt, and was as ready to tender the satisfaction as God was
to require it.

The fifth Direction is, Let us direct the eye of our faith to the person of
the Son of God acting in our nature, and sanctifying all his sufferings by the
dignity of his own person. To illustrate this, let us consider that Scripture,
Heb. 7.26. Such an High Priest became us who is holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sinners, made higher than the heavens: and then it follows in
verse. 28. The Law makes High Priests which have infirmity, but the word of the
oath which was since the Law, makes the Son who is consecrated for evermore.
The scope of the Apostle in this place is to show, that he who is our High
Priest is more than a man, he is the Son of God, The word of the oath makes the
Son which is consecrated for evermore. He opposes the Son of God to the
Priests under the Law. Now this great Person, who is our High Priest,
sanctifies his Sacrifice by the dignity of his person; he is the Son of God,
not a mere man, as the Levitical Priests were, and by the dignity of his own
person puts the highest value upon the Sacrifice which he offered. Hence is
that expression in verse. 27. Who needed not daily, as those high Priests, to
offer sacrifices, first for their own sins, and then for the sins of the
people; for this he did once when he offered up himself. Christ's one Sacrifice
was of more value than all the multitude of the Sacrifices offered by the
Levitical Priests. Why so? He offered himself up, says the Apostle. The reason
why Christ's Sacrifice was beyond all theirs, was because he offered himself.
Christ was both the Priest and the Sacrifice, He offered up himself, so says
this Text: and Heb. 1.3. it is said, That by himself he has purged away our
sins. It was the Son that was the Priest offering, and it was the Son that was
the Sacrifice that was offered. For though it were the humane nature of the Son
only that was capable of suffering and dying; yet the person of the Son was
conjunct with the Humanity in the sufferings of the humane nature. Hence is
that expression of Leo: Verbo inviolabili, non separato a carn^ passibili. Leo.
The inviolable Word that is the Son of God, the second Person in Trinity, who
was inviolable and impassible, was not separated from his passible flesh in the
time of his suffering. And another of the Ancients expresses himself to this
purpose (and it is a memorable passage:) The Son of God, that he might show
that he was not absent from the Temple of his body in the time of his Passion,
but that he was present with it in his suffering, therefore it was, that as he
was God, by the power of his Divinity at the same time when he suffered in his
flesh, he caused darkness to come over the Sun, brake the rocks in pieces, and
raised the dead. So that though it was the flesh that suffered, yet God was
personally united to that flesh that suffered. Hence is that, 1 Pet. 4.1.
Christ has suffered for us in the flesh. Now we ought to turn the eye of our
faith upon this great Person the Son of God transacting all in our nature. It
is true, it was our nature in Christ that obeyed, that suffered, that dyed; but
still we ought to look upon it as influenced by the person of the Son of God,
who assumed it, and did all in it and by it. The humane will in Christ was
governed by the Divine will, yea the humane will in Christ was strengthened and
corroborated by the Divine will. In the work of Christ's Satisfaction the Divine
nature was the principal efficient cause, the humane nature, the less
principal, ministering or subservient cause, as Divines speak. Now this is a
great relief unto faith, that Christ, in regard of the dignity of his Person,
is equal to him to whom the satisfaction is made. For though in respect of his
humane nature, he be inferior to the Father, and the Father is said to be
greater than he, Joh. 14.28. yet in respect of his Divine nature he is equal
with the Father, Joh. 1.1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with
God, and the Word was God: and this was the Word that took flesh, and gave his
flesh for the life of the world. The same was with God in the beginning, he was
with God in the same equality of Power, Glory, and Majesty, he was in the form
of God, and counted it no robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2.6. Now this is
a great relief to faith, the person who tenders the satisfaction is of equal
Power, Majesty, and Glory with him to whom the satisfaction is tendered. This
may greatly comfort such as are distressed in conscience: Great indeed is the
person offended by thy sins, O but great is the person tendering the
satisfaction; the person offended is God, and the person who makes the
satisfaction is God as well as man. Consider that Text, Joh. 10.18. No man
takes my life from me, but I lay it down of my self, I have power to lay it
down, and I have power to take it again. Divinitas filii est quae ponit, and
rursus animam hominis quem serebat, etc.
It is the Divinity of the Son that does lay down, and take again his life as
he was man, 1 John 3.16. Hereby perceive we the love of God, that he laid down
his life for us. Christ as he was man, had power over his own life as he was
man; no mere man has power over his own life, but his life is under the
dispose of God; but Christ being God as well as man, had the dispose of his own
life, and therefore as he was God, he laid down his life as he was man.

The end of the thirteenth Sermon.
SERMON XIV.
Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.


I Come now to the sixth Direction, which is this: If we would make use of the
Sufferings and Satisfaction of Christ, so as to draw down the virtue and
benefit of them to our own souls, we must lay the stress of our faith upon
Christ, and rely entirely upon the virtue of that eternal Sacrifice of his.
This was shadowed forth under the Law, in the day of atonement the Priest was
to lay both his hands upon the head of the live-goat, Lev. 16.21. This the
Priest was to do in the name of the people, by this sign discharging them as it
were, and laying all their sins upon the beast, which was a figure of Christ.
Whoever brought his Sacrifice under the Law, was to lay his hand on the head of
the Sacrifice, Lev. 1.4. Now this Rite of laying the hand on the head of the
Sacrifice, as it did carry in it a tacit confession of guilt, as has formerly
been shown; so also there was in it a profession of faith, an expectation of
pardon and atonement in the virtue of the Sacrifice that was to be offered up.
The man that brought his offering was to lay or impose his hand upon it
himself, while it was yet alive, thereby disburdening himself of sin, as it
were, and laying it on the Sacrifice, and thereby testifying his faith in
Christ the true Sacrifice that was to be slain for him, Mat. 11.28. Come unto
me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Christ
calls all such as are weary and heavy laden with the guilt of their sins to
come to him, and lay the burden of the guilt of their sins on him. The Jewish
Writers tell us, That he that did impose or lay his hand on the head of the
Sacrifice, was to do it with all his might, he was to lay both his hands upon
the beasts head: and what does this teach us, but that our reliance upon Christ
and the virtue of his eternal Sacrifice ought to be most firm and strong? A
weak and feeble hand of faith will bring but weak comfort: a strong hand of
faith will bring strong consolation. Therefore we must (as we mean to have the
virtue of this Sacrifice of Christ) do as an holy Man, Mr. Marshal.
and an eminent Minister of Christ did; when he came to dye he used these
words, I trust strongly, strongly, strongly, repeating these words thrice. I
say, we must rely strongly, strongly, strongly upon this eternal Sacrifice of
Christ, lay the whole stress of our Faith upon the Sacrifice and Satisfaction
of Christ for pardon of sin and reconciliation with God. In the sixth of John
our Savior annexeth the promise of eternal life unto eating his flesh, verse.
54. Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life. All along
in that discourse of his, all the benefit that Christ promises to us from his
flesh and blood is by eating of it, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, dwells in me, and I in him. So in verse. 56. He shall live by me. There
are several great things that are promised to our eating the flesh, and
drinking the blood of Christ. And what is this to eat the flesh, and drink the
blood of Jesus Christ? This is a metaphorical expression, it is not possible
for us to eat the flesh, and drink the blood of Christ in a corporal manner;
therefore to eat the flesh, and drink the blood of Christ imports this, to lay
the whole stress of our faith upon the sufferings and satisfaction of Christ
for pardon of sin and acceptance with God.

The seventh Direction is: If we would make use of the satisfaction of Christ,
we must present the sacrifice and satisfaction of Christ to God and our selves
unto God in the virtue of it. In Exodus 29.10. we read, that Aaron and his Sons
were to put their hands on the head of the bullock. By this Rite the Priest
presented the bullock, a figure of Christ, unto God for them, hereby intimating
(as Junius observes) that they did present themselves to God not in themselves,
Quasi se ipsi sisterent and sacrificarent Jehovae, non in sese, verum in
persona Christi. Junius.
but in the person of Christ. Our persons are full of sin, our duties and
services are mingled with a great deal of sin; therefore we ought to present
our selves to God in Christ who was without sin, and his Sacrifice without the
least blemish or defilement. When ever we come to God, let us think of this,
for there is a greater mystery lies in it than most are aware of: we ought to
transfer our selves out of our selves, put our selves as it were over into
Christ, and pray that we may not be looked upon in our selves, but in Christ.
All true Believers are comprehended in Christ as in their Head, and what Christ
their Head has done in a part of their nature, which he has assumed for them,
is looked upon by God as if so be they had done it: In ipso, non in nobis.
therefore are we said to be the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. In
him, not in our selves, says Austin. Believers are righteous, but how? in their
Head; they have a righteousness, but what is it? not a righteousness of their
own, but they have a righteousness in their Head, his righteousness is
accounted theirs: Believers are looked upon as having fulfilled the Law in
Christ, as having born the Curse of it in Christ: Believers are looked upon as
having satisfied Divine Justice in Christ. These things they could never have
done in their own persons; but for as much as Christ their Head has fulfilled
the righteousness of the Law in their nature, it is accounted by God as if so
be they had done it. Now in the solemn exercise of faith, it is our great
concernment to present Christ our Head unto God, and to lift up his
righteousness before God, that is to say, to mind the Lord what Christ our Head
has done for us. It is one of the promises which Christ has made to
Believers, and it is a great promise, that they shall know that they are in
him, Joh. 14.20. At that day you shall know that I am in the Father, and you in
me, and I in you. Believers are said here to be in Christ. How are Believers in
Christ? Believers are in Christ as they are comprehended in him as their Head:
Believers are in Christ by communion of nature, Christ our Head participates of
our nature, and we are in him by communion of nature, we have the verity and
truth of humane nature in us, Christ has the verity of humane nature in him,
he was true man as we are. Now our nature being sound in Christ, what Christ
our Head acted for us, if we be Members of Christ, if we have an interest in
him (which we have if we be true Believers) it is in Gods account as if we had
acted it. You in me. It is as much as if our Savior had said, I do but
personate you, I do but represent you, I do but act your part. You in me.
Believers in Christ have obeyed the Law, Believers in Christ have undergone the
curse, Believers in Christ have suffered the wrath of God, satisfied Divine
Justice; for as much as Christ their Head has done all these things. Believers
are comprehended in Christ, because he carrying their nature, what he has done
in their nature is accounted by God as if they had done it. As God is said to
be in Christ reconciling the world to himself, so we in Christ have satisfied
Gods Justice. Now this is our concern to take hold of Christ's Satisfaction by
faith to present it unto God, and to present our selves to God in it: For
although Christ has taken up the nature of man, as was said before, and
Believers are said to be in Christ by communion of nature; yet all mankind have
not saving benefit from Christ by virtue of this communion of nature that is
between Christ and them, it is only Believers who are the Members of Christ
that have benefit by what Christ has done; therefore it is our great
concernment by faith to elect and choose Christ as our Head, and having made
such a choice of him as our Head, then to come to God in the righteousness of
our Head, and to present the righteousness of Christ as our Head to God for
acceptance with him. If we have nothing to do with Christ as our Head, we
cannot plead his righteousness; but if we have chosen Christ for our Head, we
may come to God in the virtue of his righteousness, and present that to God for
our acceptance with him.

The eighth Direction is: After we have applied and betaken our selves to the
Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ, we ought in an humble manner to lay hold
of pardon, and with humble confidence to expect pardon and acceptance through
the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ. After we have betaken our selves to
the Satisfaction of Christ, and made use of it in a due manner, we ought to
hope for pardon and acceptance in the virtue of it. To take hold of pardon
before we have betaken our selves to the remedy, and before we have made use of
the means which God has appointed for obtaining pardon, this were presumption;
therefore for any person to run away with this doctrine, Christ has made full
satisfaction to the Justice of God for the sins of men, Christ has suffered as
much as we deserve, therefore we need not trouble our selves, our sins shall
never condemn us, this is but presumption for any man to reason after this
manner, until there be a serious application of the soul by faith to the
Satisfaction of Christ for the pardon of sin. For although there be an infinite
treasure of merit and virtue in the death and sufferings of Christ to all that
come to him; yet this treasure and store house of merit that is in the death
and satisfaction of Christ is opened unto none but unto such who by humble
faith apply themselves to Christ for the virtue of his death. Blessed are they
that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled, Mat. 5.6.
There must be then hungering and thirsting after Christ's righteousness before
we shall be satisfied, and there must be faith in his blood, Romans 3.25. Him
has God ordained to be a propitiation through faith in his blood; therefore it
is but presumption for any man to say, Christ has dyed and satisfied Gods
Justice, therefore my sins shall never condemn me, without any more ado,
without troubling himself with any more than saying so; for what is
presumption? Presumption is to expect the end without using the means. Though
there be an alsufficiency in the sufferings and satisfaction of Christ to save
as many as come to him, yet the satisfaction and sufferings of Christ are
available and effectual to none but to such as by humble says do apply
themselves to him, He is able to save to the utmost all that come to God by
him, Heb. 7.25. There must be a coming then, otherwise there is no salvation to
be expected. We must first see the necessity of the Mediation and Satiffaction
of Christ, and in an humble manner address our selves to God by faith, before
we can expect benefit by his satisfaction; therefore unless thou have seen thy
perishing condition without Christ, unless thou art sensible of the infinite
need of his satisfaction to make thy peace with God, and do in an humble
manner, with holy desire apply thy self to Christ for the virtue and benefit of
his satisfaction, thou can expect no benefit by him. It is the hungring,
thirsting humble soul which sees his perishing condition without the
satisfaction of Christ, and thereupon applies himself to it, that only can
expect benefit by it. But now on the other hand, after a person in due manner
has applied himself to the satisfaction of Christ, and made use of it by faith
as the remedy which God has appointed, it is so far from being presumption in
such a person to lay hold of pardon, as that it is his duty to take hold of
pardon and acceptance, and with humble confidence to expect it. There is an
express Text for this, Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near with a true heart in full
assurance of faith. The Apostle is here speaking of the Priesthood of Christ,
and of the use we should make of his eternal Sacrifice: Now, says he, having
pitched our faith upon Christ as our Priest, and upon the merit and virtue of
his Sacrifice, Let us draw near in full assurance of faith, or with full
certainty of faith: (...).
the meaning is, having made use of Christ as our Priest, having pitched our
faith upon his Sacrifice, let us not doubt of pardon and acceptance, let us
bear up our selves with a full confidence upon the merit of Christ's
Satisfaction. This full assurance of faith is, says a Judicious Divine, a
settled and full persuasion to be accepted through Jesus Christ. When we have
laid the stress of our faith upon the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ, we
ought to bear up our selves with an humble confidence, that we shall be
pardoned and accepted upon the account of the virtue and merit of Christ's
Satisfaction; and not to do this, not to have a humble confidence of pardon and
acceptance, after we have applied our selves to the Sacrifice and Satisfaction
of Christ, would be greatly derogatory to the honor of Christ's Satisfaction,
and also derogatory to the honor of many of Gods Attributes.

1. If we might not have an humble confidence of pardon and acceptance through
the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ, after we have applied our selves to
it, this would be greatly derogatory to the honor of Christ's Satisfaction,
Heb. 9.13, 14. For if the blood of bulls and goats, and the ashes of an heifer
sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flosh, how much
more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself
without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead work to serve the living
God? That which the Apostle asserts here is, That the blood of Christ is able
to purge tho conscience from dead works so as to serve the living God. To perge
the conscience from dead works, is to purge the conscience from the guilt of
sin, to clear the conscience, to absolve the guilt of sin, in the eye of
conscience, so that the conscience shall have no more fear of guilt. Now
consider the Apostles argument: If the blood of bulls and goats, and the like,
were able to cleanse as to the purifying of the flesh, how much more shall the
blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to
God, purge your consciences from dead works to serve the living God? The force
of the Apostles argument comes to this: If the Levitical Rites, if those
Purifications that were used under the Law, were sufficient to cleanse a person
after a legal manner, much more is the blood of Christ, which is the blood of
that person, who is God as well as man, be able to cleanse their conscience,
who do apply themselves by says to him. The Apostle argues thus: They that
lived under the Law had some purifying and cleansing, yea some help as to their
consciences by the Sacrifices that were then offered; therefore much more they
that apply themselves to the blood of Christ, shall have benefit by virtue of
his Sacrifice, which was the true Sacrifice. Under the Law, when a person had
committed a sin, and brought his Offering to the Priest, and had laid his hand
on the head of the Sacrifice, and when the beast that was brought to be
sacrificed was slain, and the blood was put upon the Altar, there was atonement
made for him, and he might know that his sin was forgiven him, Lev. 4.31. The
Priest shall make an atonement for him, and it shall be forgiven him. Now the
Faithful having such an express promise, in the time of the Law, that if they
came and brought their Sacrifice to the Priest after the due order, and did
exercise faith on Christ in that Sacrifice, that their sins should be pardoned
in this way; they might conclude, that when they had offered their Sacrifice
according to the due order, that their sins were pardoned and forgiven to them,
for they had the promise and the Word of God to show for it. All says is
grounded upon the World. Now having a promise, that when they had brought their
Sacrifice according to Gods appointment, they had the Word of God for it, that
their sins should be pardoned. Now when Christ the true Sacrifice, and the end
of all the other Sacrifices, has come and offered himself a Sacrifice for sin,
if Believers applying themselves to the virtue of his Sacrifice, should not
have pardon, and might not know that they are pardoned, then it would follow,
that the privileges of Believers under the Gospel were less than the
privileges of the Faithful under the Law; for they might know, when they had
brought their Sacrifice, that their sins were pardoned, and if we may not know,
when we apply our selves to the Sacrifice of Christ, that our sins are
pardoned, our privileges would be less than theirs were. If the blood of bulls
and goats have such efficacy, if the legal Sacrifices be able to cleanse the
conscience, how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal
Spirit, offered himself without spot to God, cleanse our consciences from dead
works? The Apostle does here oppose the blood of Christ to the blood of bulls
and goats. The blood of bulls and goats, and those Sacrifices that were offered
under the Law, had their effect as to cleansing persons in a typical way; much
more shall the blood of Christ, who was the true Sacrifice, and unto whom all
the other Sacrifices were referred, have this effect to cleanse men's
consciences really: the legal Sacrifices have their effect in a typical way,
therefore the blood of Christ shall purge our consciences really. Christ was
God as well as man, therefore his Sacrifice does excel all their Sacrifices;
therefore does the Apostle add this, How much more shall the blood of Christ,
who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, cleanse our
consciences from dead works? As much as if he should say, Christ offered
himself up to God in the virtue of his Deity, in the virtue and power of his
Divinity, the Godhead was conjunct with his flesh in suffering: not that the
Godhead suffered, but the Godhead was united to the humane nature when he
suffered; therefore he that had the virtue of his Divinity to sanctify his
Sacrifice, his sufferings must needs be effectual to take away sin; therefore
not to expect pardon and atonement in the virtue of Christ's Sacrifice and
Satisfaction, when we have in an humble manner applied our selves to it, is to
forget the dignity of the person who offered the Sacrifice, who was God as well
as man, and did contribute the virtue of his Deity to make his Sacrifice
meritorious. The Apostle puts a mighty weight upon this, If the Sacrifices
under the Law were effectual to take away sin, much more shall the blood of
Christ, who was God as well as man, be able to purge away the guilt of sin from
the consciences of those that apply themselves to him.

2. Not to have an humble confidence of pardon and acceptance after we have
applied our selves to the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ, is derogatory
to many of the Attributes of God.

1. It is derogatory to the Wisdom of God, as if he had not appointed a
sufficient Sacrifice.

2. To the Goodness of God, as if God had not mercy and goodness enough in him
to receive and pardon sinners, after he had received a sull satisfaction for
their sins.

3. It is derogatory to the Truth and Faithfulness of God, as if God would not
be true and faithful to his own word, and to the provision which he has made.
The Sacrifice of Christ is the provision which God has made for the taking
away of sin, Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sin of the world,
Joh. 1.29. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses from all sin, 1 John
1.7. This also is his own word, Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation
through faith in his blood, Romans 3.25. There is a Divine sanction and
appointment upon it, that the blood of Jesus Christ should be the means of
atonement; therefore if we should not have atonement, when we fly for refuge to
the grace that is set before us, the appointment and ordination of God would be
in vain, we should make God not to be true to his own word. Therefore after we
have applied our selves by humble faith to the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of
Christ for pardon and acceptance, it is our duty to expect in an humble manner
pardon and acceptance by virtue of it.

I come now to another Use of the Doctrine.

3. Men have thought to make satisfaction to God by some reformation of their
conversations, by living a more strict and austere life than they did formerly.
A strict life is good in it self, and none can be saved without it; but yet it
is too short to satisfy God. However this is the course some have taken when
conscience has been awakened, and they see the hainousness of their sins, they
think to satisfy God by a strict life, they renounce the world, spend their
time in retirement, abridge themselves of their delights and pleasures, and
live by such and such rules. These and many more ways have men invented to
satisfy God withal. But it is a true speech of a moderate Papist: Whatsoever
was not God, Quicquid Deus non est, non potuerit sufficere.
was not sufficient to satisfy God. All those ways that have been devised by
men, are too short to make satisfaction to the great God; and if we summon our
selves to God Tribunal, and think with our selves how just and holy he is, we
shall soon apprehend his Justice will not be put off with such poor things as
men bring to him to satisfy him withal, nothing less than God can satisfy
God. The satisfaction of Christ is the satisfaction of that person who is God
as well as man, otherwise it had not been available: and herein did the
excellency of Christ's Satisfaction appear, that it was abundantly sufficient.
The dignity and excellency of Christ's Satisfaction may yet farther appear from
these considerations.

1. That Christ's Satisfaction was once made, and but once: the Sacrifice was
but one, and the Satisfaction made by it but one. The Sacrifices under the Law
were many. The Sacrifices offered by the Heathen were many; but Christ's
Sacrifice was but one, and offered once for all, Heb. 10.14. By one offering he
has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ also has
once suffered for sin, the just for the unjust. Heb. 10.10. By the which will
we are sanctified through the offering up the body of Christ once for all, once
only. (...).
The Greek word has a great force in it, as Learned men observe. It signifies,
that what was once done was so perfect and complete, that it was not necessary
it should be done again, nay that it was impious to repeat it. Christ's one
Sacrifice comprehended the virtue of all other Sacrifices in it. All the
Sacrifices that were offered by men in all Ages, both by Jews and Gentiles,
were a plain intimation, that there was some Sacrifice by which God must be
pacified, and that men had an apprehension that God could be pacified no other
way. Now Christ's Sacrifice was the true Sacrifice: that which the world aimed
at, but could never attain, was attained only by the Sacrifice of Christ: that
which the world would fain have been at and attained, was to pacify God: now
this could never be accomplished any other way but by the Sacrifice of the Son
of God. Christ's Sacrifice was but one, and yet by that one Sacrifice he has
for ever perfected them that are sanctified.

2. The Satisfaction of Christ was perfect and complete, there was nothing
wanting in it of what was necessary to make it complete.

1. The person who offers it was most holy, and without sin, Such an high
Priest became us who was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, Heb.
7.26. The Priests under the Law were to offer Sacrifices, first for their own
sins, then for the sins of the people, but Christ needed none of this, for
Christ had no sin; therefore he that was without all sin in himself, was most
fit to make atonement for the sins of others.

2. As the person himself that offered the Sacrifice was most perfect and
complete, so the Sacrifice it self was most perfect and complete, and that
appears by the effect of it, Heb. 10.14. By one offering has he perfected for
ever them that are sanctified. If the Offering and Sacrifice of Christ had not
been most perfect in it self, it could never have perfected others. For this is
a sure rule, That the effect cannot rise higher than the cause; therefore if
Christ's Offering had not been perfect in it self, it could not have perfected
others. But now, says the Apostle, he has perfected, and for ever perfected
them that are sanctified, that is, Christ by his Sacrifice has perfectly
reconciled us to God. There need be no more done to reconcile a person to God
than what Christ has done. Now if the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ
has that virtue and efficacy in it as to bring us into perfect reconciliation
with God, so as that there is no danger of losing it, nor falling from it, then
it is a perfect and complete satisfaction. This shows us the dignity and
excellency of Christ's Satisfaction, therefore we ought to have an high esteem
of it, and be so much the more encouraged to make use of it.

The end of the fourteenth Sermon.
SERMON XV.
Joh. 15.1^ Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.


TO proceed a little farther to show the dignity of Christ's Satisfaction.

3. In the day that thou eatest, thou shall dye the death, thou shall undergo a
double death, death natural, and death supernatural. Now Christ in the work of
his Satisfaction has undergone both these deaths, he has undergone natural
death and supernatural death. All that Divine Justice could require was, that
the sinner should undergo the utmost punishment that the nature of man was
capable of: now the sufferings of Christ were consummate, sufferings in the
highest measure and degree, whatever the humane nature supported by the Deity
could suffer, that our Savior did undergo; therefore his satisfaction was
adequate and commensurate to the Law and Divine Justice.

4. We may see the dignity and excellency of Christ's Satisfaction in this, That
the Satisfaction of Christ in some respect was more than sufficient. Christ in
respect of some circumstances attending his satisfaction, has paid and given
more than the Law required; for it is well observed by a Learned man, The Law
did not require that God should dye, the Law required that man sinning, man
should dye; but now the person dying and satisfying for us, was God as well as
man, God has redeemed the Church with his own blood, Act. 20.28. Neither (1)
did the Law require that any person should dye but for his own proper sin. The
language of the Law is, The soul that sins shall dye. Now every soul was to
bear his own iniquity. Neither (2) did the Law require such a death that should
be of so great efficacy, that it should not be only able to abolish death, but
also be able to introduce life, and that a life far more excellent than that
terrene and earthly life which Adam lost. In these respects the Satisfaction of
Christ was more than sufficient; and therefore one of the Ancients has this
expression: Christ has paid for us much more than we owed, and so much the
more was that which Christ paid, by how much the vast and immense Ocean excels
the least drop. Let us learn then to have high thoughts of the dignity and
excellency of Christ's Satisfaction; this will be of mavelous use to us, when
we are under troubles and conflicts of conscience for sin. Though our sins are
great, exceeding great, considered in themselves, yet being compared with the
infiniteness of Christ's Satisfaction, they are swallowed up in the vastness and
insiniteness of the merit of the sufferings of that person who was God as well
as man.

5. The excellency of Christ's Satisfaction appears in this, In that the
Sacrifice of Christ is an eternal Sacrifice, that is, the virtue and efficacy
of Christ's Sacrifice and Satisfaction is eternal. Christ's Sacrifice is but one,
and that once offered, and yet the virtue of it is eternal. The repetition of
the Sacrifices under the Law did show the imperfection of those Sacrifices; for
if one Sacrifice had been sufficient, what need of such a multitude of
Sacrifices, and those so frequently repeated? Now the Sacrifice of Christ is
but one, and it was not necessary that it should be repeated; for though it was
but once offered, yet the virtue of it is eternal. It is a great expression of
the Apostle speaking of this Sacrifice, Heb. 9.14. Christ by the eternal Spirit
offered himself up without spot to God. Christ offered himself up to God by the
eternal Spirit, that is, he offered himself up to God in the virtue of his
eternal Deity: the Son of God, who offered himself up as a Sacrifice to God in
our nature, being an eternal person, has put eternal virtue and efficacy into
that Sacrifice of his. Such was the dignity of Christ's person, that he being
the eternal Son of God, the virtue and efficacy of his Sacrifice, which was
once offered, and that now in the end of the world, does yet extend it self to
all ages of the world, those that are past as well as those that are to come;
For Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8. The
Sacrifice of Christ is eternal for as much as the virtue and efficacy of it is
eternal, and extends it self to all ages. Hence also is Christ called the new
and living way, Heb. 10.20. That expression which we translate new, (...).
properly signifies that which was newly killed or newly slain: the virtue of
Christ's blood is such in Gods account, as if Christ were just now crucified,
his blood is always fresh, the vigor and efficacy of it remains as if it were
but newly shed. What a mighty encouragement may this be to us, to come and make
use of the sufferings and satisfaction of Christ, since the sufferings and
satisfaction of Christ are as fresh in Gods account, as if Christ had just now
undergone them, as if he were but newly come down from the Cross; and God is as
much pleased and satisfied in them, as if Christ had but newly undergone them.

There is one Use more to be made of the Doctrine.

a sacrifice, by which he will be atoned and reconciled to men, and they
despise this sacrifice, and undervalue this way of reconciliation, it is a plain
sign and evidence that men do not care for reconciliation with God, it is all
one to them, if they continue in open hostility against him. The slighting of
Christ, and neglect of grace offered by the Redeemer, is a plain contempt of
the Divine Majesty, it is a clear sign that men do not regard Gods anger,
neither are they afraid of his wrath: For if men were afraid of Gods anger, and
terrified at the apprehensions of his wrath, they would seek after
reconciliation with God. Now nothing does aggravate sin more than when there is
a plain and manifest contempt of God, and this there is in the refusing of
reconciliation with him. God offers reconciliation to men by a Redeemer, they
neglect it, they reject it, this is a manifest contempt of God: and hence it
is, that God punishes the contempt of the Gospel so severely. I shall
illustrate this by several Scriptures, Mat. 22.1, etc. The kingdom of heaven is
like unto a certain King, which made a marriage for his son, and he sent forth
his servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding, and they would not
come. Again he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden,
Behold, I have prepared my dinner, my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all
things are ready, come unto the marriage. But they made light of it, and went
their ways, one to his farm, another to his merchandise, and the remnant took
his servants, and entreated them spightfully, and slew them. But when the King
heard thereof he was wroth, and he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those
murderers, and burnt up their city. A certain King made a marriage for his
son. God has married his Son to our nature, God has sent his Son into our
nature, and the Son of God has married our nature to himself, by joining it to
himself in the bond of personal union. Upon this marriage, the joining of our
nature to the Son of God, God makes a Feast, a Marriage Feast, and in that
Feast he prepares all good things for the sons of men, he offers righteousness,
life, salvation, and all good things whatsoever in his Son; and God by his
Ambassadors, the Gospel Ministers invites them to partake of these good
things. He sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the
wedding. When God had prepared this Feast of all good things in his Son, opened
the Treasures of his Grace in Christ; when he had set open the Treasure of
Christ's Righteousness for men's Justification, and the alsufficiency of his
Grace for Sanctification, then he sends his Ambassadors and Ministers to
invite men to come and partake of all this grace. But how is it that men
entertain these offers of grace and good things made to them in Christ? read
verse. 5. They made light of it, and went their ways, one 18 his farm, another
to his merchandise. O but mark the issue, how does God take this flighting of
his grace, rejecting of his Son, and despising of the marriage feast? read
verse. 7. When the King heard of this, he was wroth, and he sent forth his
armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burnt up their city. This was the
revenge which God took for his despised and rejected grace. He sent the Armies
of the Romans, burnt up Jerusalem, destroyed the Nation of the Jews, to whom
Christ and the Gospel was first sent. That the Son of God, who was God blessed
for ever, should come from Heaven in person, that he should take to himself the
nature of man, and do and suffer such things for man, in the nature of man, and
yet be contemned and rejected by men, this makes the sin of men very great. In
Joh. 6.51. our Savior tells us, That he was the living bread that came down
from heaven, and the bread which he would give was his flesh, which he would
give for the life of the world. I am the living bread which came down from
heaven. The Son of God, who was life, happiness, salvation, and all good
things, came down into our nature, assumed a part of our flesh, and gave that
flesh for the life of the world. Now when the Son of God himself (so great a
person) and all his sufferings shall be contemned and despised, this must needs
be great sin. This is more fully explained to us in another Scripture, Heb.
10.26, 27, 28, 29, 30. For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain
fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the
adversaries. He that despised Moses law dyed without mercy, under two or three
witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy
who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the
Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite to
the Spirit of grace; for we know him that said, Vengeance belongs unto me, I
will recompense, says the Lord. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God. The scope of the Apostle is to show how severely God
punishes the contemners and despisers of Gospel Grace. The sin of such who
contemn the Gospel, and reject the grace of it, consists in this, That they
neglect and contemn the great Sacrifice that was offered for sin, that is
plainly implied in that expression when it is said, There remains no more
sacrifice for sin. If we sin wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of
the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin. It is as much as if the
Apostle had said, There was a sacrifice for sin, there was a sacrifice
appointed, there was a means to pacify and atone God, namely, the death of his
Son. But they that neglect and reject the grace of the Gospel, they contemn
this sacrifice, this great and only sacrifice; they contemn the sufferings and
satisfaction of Christ, by which they might have peace with God. Now let us
consider, what is the sentence that is passed upon such? What is like to become
of such who thus contemn the Gospel, and despise the grace of it, who contemn
the great and only sacrifice? That which is reserved for such is this, It is
judgment and fiery indignation which shall devour the adversaries. If we sin
wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no
more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and
fiery indignation which shall devour the adversary.

1. Consider, God accounts such adversaries as persist and continue in sin,
after the offer and tender of grace to them. God would be reconciled to men,
but they will not be reconciled to him; therefore they are adversaries, they
continue in open hostility against God.

2. There is judgment reserved for such, a certain and fearful looking for of
judgment. God will judge them according to their deserts, he will execute
judgment upon them according to their demerit; and that we may fully understand
this, (...).
he calls it fiery indignation: Beza renders it, Heat of fire, as much as if it
had been said, The hottest of Gods wrath is reserved for such, and shall fall
upon such as contemn and reject the Gospel. And then the Apostle goes on to
confirm this in verse. 28, 29. He that despised Moses law dyed without mercy
under two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall
he be thought worthy, who tramples under foot the Son of God, and has counted
the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and
has done despite unto the Spirit of grace? The force of his argument comes to
this: He that transgressed the Law of Moses was punished, he therefore that
despises the Gospel shall be much more punished, He that despised Moses law
dyed without mercy. Why does the Apostle call it Moses Law? That which was
called Moses Law was indeed the Law of God, Moses was only the Minister to whom
and by whom it was delivered, but the Law was God's. But Moses is set here in
opposition to Christ, Moses was a Minister and Servant only; but Christ was
more than a Minister and a Servant, Christ was the Son of God; therefore does
the Apostle say, Of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, who
trod under foot the Son of God? Here lies the force of the argument: If God did
not suffer the transgressors of the Law which was published by Moses a
Minister and Servant, to go unpunished, much less will he suffer the rejection
of the Gospel which was published by his own Son, that came out of his bosom,
to go unpunished. The Law came by Mases, but grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ, Joh. 1.17. But this is not all, the Doctrine of the Gospel has not
only a more excellent Publisher than the Law, which is the Son of God, whereas
Moses was a Minister and Servant only; but there is something more in it, the
matter published, and the great object of says propounded in the Gospel, is
the Son of God himself; that expression, Who has trampled under foot the Son
of God, does not only intimate, that Christ the Son of God is the Publisher of
the Gospel; but it also intimates the great sin of them who reject the Gospel,
in that they reject so excellent a Person as the Son of God is, who is the
subject matter of the Gospel. Compare this with other Scriptures, Romans 1.3.
Separate unto the Gospel of God concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. The
great thing which the Gospel reveals is the Son of God, 2 Cor. 1.19. The Son of
God, Jesus Christ, who preached among you by us. The Gospel then is the
revelation of the Son of God. Now that so great and excellent a Person as the
Son of God and God, should be rejected, this is that which makes the sins of
the despisers and contemners of the Gospel to be so great. Now as that is one
thing that aggravates the sin of them that reject the grace of the Gospel, that
they contemn Christ's person, they tread under foot the Son of God; so another
thing is, they contemn his sufferings, they count the blood of the Covenant
wherewith they are sanctified an unholy thing: the meaning is, such as despise
the Gospel despise the satisfaction and sufferings of Christ which are declared
and made known to them in the Gospel; they make the sufferings of Christ to be
no other than the sufferings of a common or an ordinary man; they put no
difference between Christ's sufferings and another man's sufferings, this is
impious and horrid indeed. The Son of God and God, the Creator of all things,
becomes man for man, and when he is so, gives his life, sheds his blood for
men; and after all this love and condescension, his sufferings are counted no
more but as the sufferings of an ordinary man: Is this a little thing that God
should assume flesh, and give that flesh to be crucified, in love to men, for
their Redemption, and that his sufferings should be counted no more than as the
sufferings of an ordinary common man? Is this an ordinary sin? Blush O Heavens,
and be astonished O Earth! They counted it an unholy thing. (...).
To make the sufferings of that person who was God as well man, to be no more
than the sufferings of a common person, this is to make the sufferings of
Christ a profane or common thing. The Apostle aggravates this sin yet further,
and calls it, A doing despite to the Spirit of grace; but I shall not farther
insist upon that. In the next place the Apostle does amplify yet farther the
judgment upon them that reject the grace of the Gospel: We know him that has
said, Vengeance is mine, and I will recompense, says the Lord. And again, the
Lord shall judge his people. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
the living God.

Here are two things affirmed.

1. That God will certainly avenge the contempt and rejection of the Gospel,
Vengeance is mine, and I will recompense, says the Lord.

2. That the revenge God takes on Gospel-rejecters, is most dreadful, It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. There is much implied
in this sentence.

1. That when God takes Gospel-sinners into his hand to punish them, his
judgments on them are most terrible. The judgments which God brings for abusing
the Gospel and the grace of it, are not common, ordinary judgments, no, they
are stupendous and amazing judgments, It is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God. When God comes to take a people in hand, and to call
them to account, how they have carried it toward his grace, and behaved
themselves toward the Gospel which he has sent to them for a long time, he
will deal with them to the purpose. We have had too sad instances of this,
witness the destruction of Jerusalem, where there was not a stone left upon a
stone: witness the two last great Judgments upon the great City of our own Land
that were successive one upon another, the Plague and Fire, which were
unparalleled Judgments, the like never known in our days, nor in the days of
our Fathers, no nor since it was a Nation.

2. This is also implied in it, That when God takes in hand, and begins to
punish Gospel-sinners, such as have despised his grace, he does not soon make
an end with them. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God. As much as if it had been said, When God has once taken men into his hand
to punish them, he does not so soon make an end with them, he is a living God,
and has time enough before him (to speak after the manner of men) to avenge
himself upon his adversaries. God is the living God, he lives this year, and
the next year, and he has various ways, and various seasons to avenge himself
on such as do reject his grace. God does not pour out all his wrath in one
Judgment upon them that contemn his Son, and reject the grace offered by them,
but he sends variety of Judgments on them, and if they will not understand his
wrath by one Judgment, they shall be forced to understand it by variety of
Judgments. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. God
lives to right himself, to avenge the quarrel of his slighted, abused grace and
Gospel. It is much to be feared, that we are fallen under the influences and
effects of this Scripture. Truly the Lord seems to be calling the Churches of
the Gentiles to an account for their behavior and carriage under the Gospel,
as he has the Jews before us. Let us consider that Text, Romans 11.22. Behold
therefore the goodness and severity of God: on them which fell severity; but
toward thee goodness, if thou continue in his goodness, otherwise thou also
shall be cut off. Here the Lord does plainly threaten the Churches of the
Gentiles, that if they abuse his grace, as the Jews have done, they shall be
cut off by his Judgments, as the Jews were; and if we consider what God has
done and is doing in the world, have we not reason to fear and tremble, has
not Judgment began at the house of God? And have not they which make profession
of Christ in opposition to Antichrist, been the subjects of Gods Judgments. Let
us consider one Scripture more, Rev. 14. at the latter end of that Chapter, it
is a Prophecy of the times wherein we are fallen. I looked, and behold a white
cloud, and upon the cloud one sat like unto the Son of man, having on his head
a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle. And another Angel came out of
the Temple, crying with a land voice to him that sat on the cloud, Thrust in
thy sickle and reap, for the time is come for thee to reap, for the harvest of
the earth is ripe. And he that sat on the cloud thrust in his sickle on the
earth, and the earth was reaped. And another Angel came out of the Temple which
is in Heaven, he also having a sharp sickle. And another Angel came out from
the Altar, which had power over fire, and cried with a loud cry to him that had
the sharp sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sickle, and gather the clusters of the
vine of the earth, for her grapes are fully ripe. And the Angel thrust in his
sickle into the earth, and gathered the vine of the earth, and cast it into the
great wine press of the wrath of God. And the wine press was trodden without
the city, and blood came out of the winepress, even unto the horses bridles by
the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs. It is observable, these two
Angels which come out with their sickles to reap down the world with great
Judgments, come not until after the Promulgation of the Gospel, which was made
to the world by the three Angels, which we read of in the beginning of this
Chapter. When God had sent the Gospel to the world, and offered reformation to
it, and the world did not obey the Gospel, nor embrace the reformation offered
to it, then God sent these two Angels to reap down the world with his
Judgments. Cluverus in Apocalyp.
It is the opinion of a Learned man, that this Prophecy concerns the times of
Reformation, when light had been offered to the world, and the world grew
wicked after light and reformation was offered to it. Now that which is
observable in the second Angels Commission is, That he should thrust in his
sickle and gather the cluster of the vine of the earth, And the Angel thrust in
his sickle into the earth, and gathered the vine of the earth. Now this
expression of the Vine, when it is taken mystically, does usually in Scripture
signify the Church of God, Jer. 2.21. I have planted thee a choice vine. And
so in that passage of the Psalmist, Behold and visit this thy vine. The Church
is compared to a Vine frequently in Scripture. Now the Angel is commanded to
gather the vine of the earth; so that the Judgment here Spoken of, is such a
Judgment as did concern the Church, at least the people that do profess
themselves to be the Church. The Reformed Churches which were planted at the
first, as a choice Vine, with purity of Doctrine, and more integrity of
manners, being degenerated from their first purity, and bringing forth wild
grapes of corrupt Doctrine and evil manners, God sends his Angel with his
sickle to cut down the cluster of this Vine. And that which does confirm this
interpretation is this, That the wine press is to be trodden without the City,
the City in the Revelations is Babylon, the Mother of Harlots and abomination
of the earth. Now the wine press was trodden without the City, and blood came
out of the wine press, even to the horses bridles. So that the Judgment here
spoken of does not reach Babylon, Rome which is mystical Babylon; God has his
time when he will visit her, he has reserved a more fore Judgment for her; but
the Judgment that is here spoken of, is a Judgment that reaches the Protestant
Churches, they are the Vine of the Earth, the true Church by profession; but
not living up to their profession, God punishes them for their sinful and
profane lives: and the Judgment which God executes upon these, is no small
Judgment. We read here of blood coming out to the horses bridles. Which notes
the copiousness and abundance of bloodshed which shall be at the time of the
pouring out of this Judgment. The Lord grant that we may not see this Scripture
more and more verified. I have been apt to think, that the destruction which
the Sword has already made, has been in part a fulfilling of this Scripture,
and O that we could say, that the force of this Prophecy, and the strength of
that Judgment which flows from it, were already spent and exhausted; but may
not we yet fear, that this Prophecy may bring forth more wrath and judgment
upon us than yet we have seen? If any thing prevent the farther effusion of
blood (which we read of here in this Scripture) and that great wrath here
threatened, it must be humble, hearty, affectionate cries to Heaven, faith in
the blood of Christ with the through reformation of our lives; for otherwise
there seems to be great wrath determined against us; therefore let us make this
use of it, to cry heartily to God, let us endeavor to stand between the living
and the dead, to divert, if it be possible, that wrath which yet hangs over our
heads.

The end of the fifteenth Sermon.
SERMON XVI.
Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.


THere have been two Observations that have been propounded out of this Verse.

The first was, That our Lord Jesus Christ has laid down his life for his
people.

The second was, That the love of Christ in laying down his life for us, was
the highest expression or demonstration of his love. Greater love than this
has no man, that a man lay down his life for his friends.

Under the former Point I have had occasion to open the nature of Christ's
sufferings, and to unfold (as I was able) the great Doctrine of Christ's
Satisfaction: that which I am now to do in this latter Point is, to show the
greatness of the love of Christ in his suffering, and in the work of his
Satisfaction; for here lies the stress of the Text, to show that the love of
Christ was eminently displayed in the work of his Satisfaction: Greater love
than this, says our Savior, has no man, that a man lay down his life for his
friends. Christ's laying down his life for us, was the most eminent expression
of his love to us. The Scripture, when it speaks of the love of Christ, it
speaks of the heights and depths, lengths and breadths of the love of Christ.

Now there are five things especially wherein these heights and depths, and
lengths and breadths of Christ's love are eminently to be seen, and they are

1. His Incarnation.

2. His subjection to the Law.

3. The work of his Satisfaction.

4. The work of his Intercession.

5. His Headship.

Now having already spoken of the Love of Christ in his Incarnation, and also
of the Love of Christ in his being made under the Law, I come to show how the
love of Christ does manifest it self, and is to be seen in the work of his
Satisfaction. It is very observable, that the Scripture, when it speaks of the
love of Christ, lays the stress here; it sets before us the love of Christ in
his sufferings, making the sufferings of Christ to be the great instance of
Christ's love to us, Ephesians. 5.2. Walk in love, as Christ also has loved us, and
has given himself for us, an offering and sacrifice to God, for a
sweet smelling savor. So at the 25. verse of that Chapter, Even as Christ
loved the Church, and gave himself for it. Christ giving himself for the
Church, that is, giving himself to suffer for it, this was the great instance
of his love: Gal. 2.20. Who has loved me, and given himself for me. Rev. 1.5.
To him that has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood. 2 Cor.
5.12. The love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one
dyed for all, then were all dead. 1 John 4.16. Hereby perceive we the love of
God, because he laid down his life for us. Still we see when the Scripture
speaks of the love of Christ, it expresses it by what he suffered for us. Now
the greatness of Christ's love, the heights and depths, and lengths and breadths
of Christ's love in his sufferings, and in the work of his Satisfaction may be
illustrated by several Particulars. And I shall propound several things for the
clearing up of this truth.

1. That the sufferings of Christ were the lowest degree of his humiliation.
The Scripture speaks of Christ's Exinanition or emptying himself, Phil. 2.7. He
made himself of no reputation, so we translate it: the word in the Original is,
he emptyed himself out of all, (...). Ex omni seipsum ad nihilum redegit,
exhausit. Tertul.
he reduced himself to nothing. One of the Ancients renders the expression, he
exhausted himself. Now this Exinanition or emptying of the Son of God was his
own voluntary laying aside of his own glory as to manifestation, and also his
subjecting himself to the lowest abasement for our sakes. The Son of God did
not, could not divest himself of his essential glory: he did not cease to be
the Son of God and God in the lowest state of his humiliation; but he did strip
and divest himself of his manifestative glory: he was content not to appear to
be what indeed he was, and he submitted-himself to the lowest abasement for our
sakes. Now there were two parts of Christ's Exinanition or emptying of himself.

The first was his Incarnation, his assumption of our nature.

The second was his suffering death for us, and the Apostle speaks of both
these in this place.

The first part of Christ's Exinanition was his Incarnation, He made himself of
no reputation, or emptied himself. How so? He took upon him the form of a
servant, he was in the form of God, says the Apostle, and made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant. That he who was in the
form of God should take upon him the form of a servant, this was emptying
himself indeed. That the eternal God should become a mortal man, this was great
humiliation indeed, He was in the form of God, says the Apostle, and yet he
was made in the likeness of men, and was found in fashion as a man. These
expressions must cautiously be understood: we must not understand them as some
ancient Heretics did, that Christ only had a fantastical body, that is, the
show and appearance of a body, because it is said here the likeness of men, and
that he was found in fashion as a man. I say we must not understand them as if
Christ only had a fantastical body, not a true and a real body; for the
Scripture tells us plainly, That Christ was made of the seed of David, and he
was in all things made like unto us, sin only excepted. And it is a true
expression that of the Ancients: (...).
That which was not assumed was not healed. If the Son of God had not had the
verity of humane nature in him, humane nature could never have been restored.
If he had not assumed a true humane soul and a true humane body, our fouls and
bodies which were tainted with original sin, could never have been recovered;
therefore when it is said, He was made in the likeness of men, and found in
fashion as a man, we must not understand it, as if Christ had the likeness of a
humane body, and not a true humane body; but these expressions, Made in the
likeness of men, and found in fashion as a man, not only set forth the
greatness of his humiliation and condescension, that he that was God blessed
for ever, that he who was so far above men, did yet take to himself the common
nature of men, He was made in the likeness of men, and found in fashion as a
man. The plain meaning seems to be, That the Son of God taking our nature,
appeared among men, as to his external visage and appearance as another man, as
one like the rest of men. It is true, spiritual eyes could behold the beams of
the Divinity breaking through the veil of his flesh: Joh. 1.14. The Word was
made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory as the glory of the
only begotten of the Father full of grace and truth. The Apostles and other
Believers, who saw Christ in the days of his flesh, with spiritual eyes and
hearts that were given to them, could see the beams of the Divinity breaking
through his Humanity, they could see something more than a man in him. But look
upon him as to his external form and habit, and so he appeared to the
generality of men like one of the rest of men, he was wrapped up in swaddling
clothes, laid in a Manger, he was subject to his Parents, he did hunger and
thirst, and eat and drink, and he was subject to the same common infirmities
with other men; and therefore does the Apostle say, He was made in the likeness
of men, and found in fashionas a man, that is, as to his external form and
habit he seemed to be like to the common sort of men. Hence are those
expressions of the Prophet, He was as a root out of a dry ground, He has no
form nor comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we
should desire him, Isa. 53.2. This is the first part of Christ's humiliation,
Creator ac Dominus omnium rerum unus voluit esse mortalium.
that he who was in the form of God should yet take to himself the form of a
servant. He that was the Creator and Lord of all things (as Leo expresses it)
would yet become one of mortal men: and he that abiding in the form of God, did
also make man himself, the very same person taking on him the form of a servant
himself is made man.

The second part of Christ's Exinanition or emptying himself, was his subjecting
himself to death for us. This is that which the Apostle takes particular notice
of in the Text, Phil. 2.8. He humbled himself: and how did he humble himself?
He humbled himself, and became obedient to the death, even the death of the
cross. It is observable, that when the Apostle had spoken of Christ's
Incarnation, or his taking our nature, he calls that his emptying himself; so
likewise when he comes to speak of Christ's sufferings, he calls that his
humbling himself, He humbled himself, and became obedient to the death. This
was great humiliation indeed, that the Lord of glory should be crucified, that
the Prince of life should be killed and hung upon a tree: Impassibilis Deus non
dedignatus est esse homo passibilis, and immortalis mortis legibus subjacere.
Leo.
He that was God impassible did not yet refuse to become a passible man, and he
that was immortal did not refuse to subject himself to the laws of death. It
was a great thing for God to become man; but it was a greater thing for that
person who was God, to put himself into the nature of man to dye for man. Joh.
6.51. I am the living bread which came down from heaven, and the bread which I
will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. Christ is
said to come down from Heaven by his Incarnation; when the Son of God took our
nature into unity of person with himself, this was his coming down from Heaven.
Now that the Word, as he is called, Joh. 1.1. In the beginning was the Word,
that the Word, the second Person in Trinity, should not only assume flesh, but
give that flesh for the life of the world, this was the highest demonstration
of love. Hence is that expression of the Apostle, 1 John 3.16. Hereby preceive
we the love of God, that he lay down his life for us. As if he should say, This
is the most illustrious and glorious manifestation of the love of God to us,
that that Person who was God laid down his life for us. He that was God by
nature took up the humanity in a voluntary way of condescension, and having
voluntarily taken up our nature, voluntarily laid down the life of his humanity
for us. It was not possible for him to lay down the life of his Divinity; but
that Person who was God took up the humane nature, and in that nature laid down
the life of his humanity for us. This is that which sets forth the greatness of
Christ's love, that he should lay down his life for us. What more contrary or
unsuitable to the Nature of God than sin, suffering, and death? and yet Christ
who was God as well as man, God and man in one person; although he had no sin
of his own, no sin inherent in him, yet was he content to be accounted a
sinner, He was numbered among the transgressors, as the Prophet speaks, Isa.
53. yea, He was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God
in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. Christ also who was above suffering and death, exposed
himself to suffering and death for us, He tasted death for every man, Heb. 2.9.
Thus was the Son of God pleased out of the greatness of his love to us to put
himself as it were out of Heaven into Hell, and to descend from the height and
top of happiness, to the lowest degree of misery and abasement: He humbled
himself, says the Apostle, and became obedient to the death, even the death of
the cross. This Doctrine of the Cross is the greatest stumbling block and
offense to carnal reason, to hear of a crucified God, to hear that he that was
to be the Savior of the world should suffer and dye, this is that which carnal
reason cannot away with. 1 Cor. 1.23. We preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness. A crucified Savior was the
great stumbling block to the world, and yet that which was accounted
foolishness by the men of the world, was the Wisdom of God to save the world by
it. This, I say, was the lowest degree of Christ's humiliation or exinanition,
that the Lord of glory should expose himself to suffering and death for our
sakes, this is commonly expressed in that Article of our Faith, That Christ
descended into Hell. When we say, that Christ descended into Hell, we are not
to understand any local descension, as if Christ did descend into the place of
the Damned (thus indeed Bellarmine and some others have understood that Article
of a local descension) but by Christ's descending into Hell we are to understand
the lowest degree of his humiliation, his descending into a state of mortality
and death: first, being content to put himself into a passible and mortal
state, who himself had been impassible and immortal, and then actually
undergoing suffering and death for us. Ephesians. 4.9. That he ascended, what is it,
but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth. What are
those lower parts of the earth into which Christ descended? Compare it with
Acts 2.27. Thou shall not leave my soul in hell, that is, thou shall not leave
it in the grave. So that Christ's descending into the lowest parts of the earth
is his descending into the grave. Christ indeed suffered the pains of Hell; but
we do not read he descended into Hell locally: and Christ suffered the pains of
Hell in this life, as I had occasion to show heretofore. But his soul did not
locally descend into Hell, no, his soul was taken into Paradise, This day,
says Christ to the repenting Thief, shall thou be with me in Paradise. Thou
shall be with me, that is, as a Learned man understands it, thy humane soul
shall be with my humane soul in Paradise. Christ as to the presence of his
Divinity is every where; therefore when he speaks of his being in Paradise,
this is most properly to be understood of his humane soul, that his humane soul
was to be in Paradise. Christ's descending into Hell therefore notes his
descending into the state of the dead, which was the completion of all his
sufferings, and the lowest state of his humiliation.

2. The love of Christ in his sufferings and in the work of his Satisfaction
appears in this, That we were the offending persons, and Christ a person most
innocent. It was we that had done the wrong and injury unto God, and yet Christ
who had not committed the least offense, was content to suffer for us. Isa.
53.6. All we like sheep have gone astray, and the Lord has laid on him the
iniquity of us all. So in verse. 9, 10. He had done no violence, neither was any
deceit in his mouth, yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him. Hence also is that
of the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ suffered for sin, the just for the
unjust. Christ who was a just and an innocent person, gave himself to suffer
for us who were the unjust and nocent persons: yea which is much more
admirable; Christ who was one of the persons offended, unto whom the wrong and
injury was done, he comes to suffer and bear the punishment for them that had
committed the offense. The injured person is content to bear the punishment for
them who had done him the wrong and injury. Sin is an offense against all the
Persons of the Trinity; for as all the Persons of the Trinity have but one
Essence, one Majesty, one and the same Will, so sin strikes at all the Persons,
and is an offense against all, because it is one and the same common Divinity
that is offended in all; and yet the Son of God, who is one of the Persons of
the Trinity, and had received wrong and injury from men, by reason of their
sins, was pleased to take upon him the nature of man, and to bear the
punishment which man had deserved for his offense against himself as well as
against the other Persons. Hence is it said, That Christ has given himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar people zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. Observe that expression, That
he might purify unto himself. Christ did not give himself that he might
purify to the Father only a peculiar people, but also that he might purify to
himself a peculiar people. So Ephesians. 5.25. Christ gave himself for his Church,
that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word,
that he might present it to himself a glorious Church. Here it is said, That he
might present it to himself a glorious Church. As Christ by his death and
sufferings reconciled us to God the Father, so he reconciled us to himself
also. It is true, the Scripture, when it speaks of the work of reconciliation,
does in a peculiar manner attribute it to the Father, as the Person to whom we
are reconciled, and it speaks of our reconciliation to God by Christ, 2 Cor.
5.18* All things are of God^ who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ.
Col. 1.20. By him to reconcile all things to himself. By him, that is, by
Christ: To reconcile all things to himself, that is, to the Father: by Christ
then we are reconciled to the Father. But we must understand this aright. When
it is said, We are reconciled to the Father by Christ, we must not suppose that
the other Persons are excluded. We are not only reconciled to the Father, but
we are reconciled to the whole Trinity, and Christ, considered as Mediator, as
God-man, reconciles us to himself, considered as God simply. And here lies the
Mystery of Divine wisdom and goodness, that God is in Christ reconciling the
world to himself. God is the person offended, and yet in and by his Son it is
he that offers reconciliation to the world.

3. The greatness of Christ's love in laying down his life for us appears in
this, That there was no merit in us to move Christ to lay down his life for us.
It is well observed by Austin, It was our sins, not our merits, that drew
Christ from Heaven to earth. As we could not merit Christ's Incarnation, so
neither could we merit his death and sufferings for us. For what is it that we
can suppose that should merit Christ's death and sufferings for us? Was it our
foreseen faith, or our foreseen obedience? This is all that can be supposed.
Now these were the effects of Christ's death and sufferings; therefore they
could not be the cause of them. It is observed by Alvarez, That Christ's
foreseen Merits were the cause of all that grace that was bestowed upon man in
the state of lapsed nature: Joh. 1.17. Grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.
All the grace that we receive in lapsed nature is by Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 1.4.
God has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ. Christ's Merits are
the foundation of our faith and obedience. Whatever faith and obedience is
found in us, is wrought by the Spirit of Christ in us. Now the Spirit it self
that works all grace in us, is the purchase and fruit of the death of Christ,
Tit. 3.4. After that the kindness and love of God our Savior toward man
appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to
his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior. The
Holy Ghost is shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior, that is,
through the Merit of Jesus Christ our Savior. Now it is by this Spirit that
faith it self and all other effects of grace are wrought in us; therefore it is
said, By grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of your selves, it is
the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8.

4. We were so far from having any merit to oblige Christ to suffer and dye for
us, that we were full of demerit, full of evil merits. We were sinners,
enemies, rebels against God, and herein God commended his love to us, that
while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us, Romans 5.8. The greatest love
amongst men is, when one friend will dye for another, Greater love has no man
than this, that a man lay down his life for his friend. But where was it known,
that ever any man laid down his life for his enemy? Yet Christ has commended
his love to us, in that while we were enemies he dyed for us. Col. 1.21. You
that were sometimes alienated and enemies in your minds by wicked works, yet
now has he reconciled in the body of his flesh through death. It is commonly
said, That sin is a kind of God-murther, Peccatum est Deicidium.
the sinner would dethrone God, and take away the life and Being of God, if it
lay in his power. Now herein the admirable and transcendent love of God to man
appeared, That when man, by sin, would dethrone God, and take away the life and
Being of God, if it were in his power, that God would lay down his life for
them that would take away his life and Being, God redeemed the Church with his
own blood: and, Hereby perceive we the love of God, that he laid down his life
for us.

Learn to study much the greatness of Christ's love in his sufferings,

1. Hereby we shall be strengthened and confirmed in our belief of Christ's love
to us.

2. This will be a means to beget greater measures of love in our hearts to
Christ.

1. The more we contemplate the love of Christ to us in his sufferings and
satisfaction, the more shall we be strengthened and confirmed in our belief of
Christ's love to us, 1 John 4.16. We have known and believed the love that God
has toward us, for God is love. How come we to know and believe the love that
God has toward us? Compare this with the former verses, and they will show
us, verse. 8, 9, 10. God is love. In this was manifested the love of God to us,
that he sent his only begotten Son, that we might live through him. Herein was
love, not that we loved God, but that God loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins. When by faith we can apprehend and believe, that God
has sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins, this will confirm us in
the certain belief and persuasion of the love of God to us. Who has reason to
doubt of Gods love, when he is certainly persuaded, and does firmly believe,
that God has sent his Son from Heaven to earth to take our nature, and being
in our nature to lay down his life and dye for our sins? Certainly he that
believes this, will find no reason to doubt of the love of God. If God sent his
Son to be a propitiation for our sins, if he had no other end in sending of
him, and if the Son of God did freely lay down his life for us, then there is
no reason that we should retain suspicious and jealous thoughts of the Father
or the Son. We know and believe the love that God has to us. How so? Because
God has sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. If we can realize
the sufferings of Christ to our minds by the eye of faith, this will confirm
our souls in the love of God toward us.

2. Another effect of our studying the love of Christ in his sufferings for us
is, This will be a means to beget much love in us to Christ. What more powerful
argument to inflame our love to Christ, than to consider what Christ has done
and suffered for us? Can we behold the Son of God, the second Person in
Trinity, God equal with the Father, Emmanuel God with us, God come down into
our nature, can we behold this great and excellent Person giving himself to
suffer and dye for us, taking the whole curse and punishment upon himself that
we deserve, and not love this person who has so loved us, and has done and
suffered such things for us? The Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 5.14. The love of
Christ constrains us. The love of Christ, that is, Christ's love to us, the
apprehension of Christ's love to us constrains us, why so? Because, says the
Apostle, we thus judge, That if one dyed for all, then were all dead. If Christ
had not dyed, we must all have dyed. If Christ had not suffered the wrath of
God, we must have suffered it to Eternity. If Christ had not been deserted, we
must have been deserted. If he had not undergone dereliction and the hiding of
Gods face, the face of God must have been turned away from us for ever. If
Christ had not conflicted with the Divine displeasure, we must have conflicted
with the wrath of God for ever. If Christ had not been cast into that Agony,
wherein he sweat drops of blood, we must have been cast into those
inexpressible horrors and torments of soul and body, which would have pressed
us down to all Eternity. The deep and serious consideration of these things
cannot but constrain us to love Christ: The love of Christ constrains us, says
the Apostle, because we thus judge, That if one dyed for all, then were all
dead. The consideration of this, That Christ has freed us from that by his
death, which otherwise we must necessarily have undergone, must needs be a
strong engagement upon us to love Christ, We love him, because he first loved
us.

Learn how great the sin and ingratitude of the world is in slighting and
abusing all this love, This is the condemnation, that light is come into the
world, and men love darkness rather than light. And we may say, This is the
condemnation that love is come into the world, that the Son of God who is love
it self, the Son of God who has all the love of the Father in him (and God is
love) that he is come into the nature of man, and has dyed for men, that they
might be saved, and this is not at all regarded by them. When all this love of
his has been published and made known to men, the generality of men have taken
no notice of Christ and his love: so they may have their honors, pleasures,
and profits, take Christ and his grace who will for them: for this so great
contempt of Christ and his grace, when God has offered his love and the grace
of his Gospel to the world, and men have slighted it, taken no notice of it,
has God come to revenge himself upon the ungrateful world, and I speak it with
a bleeding heart, I fear will yet revenge it more sorely.

The end of the sixteenth Sermon.
SERMON XVII.
Job. 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.


I Come now to other Particulars that set forth the greatness of Christ's
suffering for us.

5. The greatness of Christ's love in laying down his life for us appears in
this, That there was no one else that could have satisfied for us. If men or
Angels had attempted this work, their sufferings had been but the sufferings of
finite creatures, there would not have been infinite worth and value in them to
have satisfied for the sins of the whole world. The expiation of sin requires a
price of infinite value, and the reason is, because every sin is committed
against an infinite Majesty; an infinite Majesty being offended, there must be
a price of infinite value to expiate the offense. Now whoever had been but a
mere man, could not have offered a price of infinite value; but Christ's
sufferings were of infinite value, because he was God as well as man: and this
is that which enhanceth the price of Christ's love, that none else could have
suffered for us but Christ, so as to have satisfied Gods Justice; this Christ
himself sets before us, Isa. 63.3. I have trod the wine press alone, and of the
people there was none with me. So verse. 5. I looked, and there was none to
help, and I wondered there was none to uphold, therefore mine own arm brought
salvation. This commends the greatness of Christ's love in his sufferings, That
when none was able to suffer for us, so as to satisfy Gods Justice, Christ
undertook the work.

The sixth Consideration is, The greatness of Christ's love in his sufferings
appears in this, That so great and excellent a person should come to suffer for
us, 1 John 3.16. Hereby perceive we the love of God, that he laid down his life
for us, that is, that he who was the Son of God and God, that he who was so
excellent a person should lay down his life for us. By this perceive we the
love of God, that is, this was the most eminent expression and declaration of
the love of God, that that person who was no other than the Son of God and God,
should lay down his life for us. As the dignity and excellency of Christ's
person gives virtue and value to his Sacrifice, so the dignity and excellency
of his person is that which does enhance the price of his love: that so great
and excellent a person should come to suffer and to dye for us, this commends
the greatness of Christ's love to us, Act. 20.28. God redeemed the Church with
his own blood. The person that redeemed the Church was no other than God in our
nature, Without controversy great is the mystery of godliness, God manifested
in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. In him the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily,
Col. 2.9. The whole Divinity (says one of the Ancients) fills his whole
humanity. Totum corpus ejus implet tota Divinitas.
And Athanasius has this expression: When the Son of God suffered he was not
out of his own body, but the Word was intimately present, was personally united
to the flesh that suffered. Non erat extra corpus.
The Word, the second Person in Trinity, was not absent from, but was
personally united to the flesh that suffered; therefore he says, This is my
body that was broken for you. The Son of God calls it his body when it was
broken. Now that so great a person should give himself to suffer and dye for
us, this is that which demonstrates the greatness of Christ's love to us. This
is notably set forth by the Apostle, Phil. 2.6, 8. Who being in the form of
God, counted it no robbery to be equal with God; and yet verse 8. says the
Apostle, He humbled himself, and became obedient to the death, even the death
of the cross. The Apostle sets forth the greatness of Christ's condescension and
humiliation by this, That so great a person as Christ was should come to suffer
and dye for us: He was in the form of God, and counted it no robbery to be
equal with God. Now that this person who was in the form of God, and counted it
no robbery to be equal with him, that he should come to suffer and dye for us,
this was the admirableness of his love. And that we may see how excellent a
person that was that came to suffer and dye for us, there are several things to
be considered in what the Apostle here speaks of him.

1. The Apostle speaks of Christ as a person long before his Incarnation, that
is to be gathered from that expression, when it is said, (...), qui existens.
Who existing in the form of God. The Apostle says of Christ, That he existed
in the form of God before he took upon him the form of a servant. Christ then
had his existence and subsistence before his Incarnation.

1. He had his Existence, Joh. 1.1. In the beginning was the Word. He speaks of
Christ the essential Word, the Son of God the second Person in Trinity. Now
says the Evangelist, In the beginning was the Word. The Word the Son of God
had his existence in the beginning, that is, in the beginning of the Creation.
The Word was, that is, when all other things had their being and beginning
given them, before that the Word was; the Word had his Being and existence
before that, and therefore by consequence he was from Eternity; for whatever
was before all time, that must needs be from Eternity. Now the Word, the Son of
God, the second Person in Trinity, was in the beginning, that is, he was in the
beginning of time and the Creation; when all other things began to be, he had
his Being and Existence antecedent unto this.

2. The Evangelist does not only say, In the beginning was the Word, but he
also says, The Word was with God; there is his subsistence, he had his
subsistence with the Father in the Divine Essence. The first Proposition, In
the beginning was the Word, declares the Eternity of the Son of God, that his
Being was from Eternity. The second Proposition, And the Word was with God,
declares the manner of his Being, namely, that he had a distinct subsistence in
the Divine Essence with the Father. The Word, the Son of God, the second Person
in Trinity had his subsistence with the Father in the Divine Essence. This is
that which is set forth by the Apostle in this expression, Who being in the
form of God, or as it is most properly rendered, Who existing in the form of
God. The Son of God then had his existence in the form of God, before he took
on him the form of a servant, i. e. before he took up humane nature. And this
perfectly cuts the throat of that Heresy of some of the Ancients, and of the
Socinians their offspring, who deny that the Son of God had any existence
before his being born of the Virgin. The Apostle says plainly, he had his
Being and existence in the form of God, before he took on him the form of a
servant.

2. As the Apostle speaks of Christ as a person before his Incarnation, so he
shows what manner of person he was, he shows him to be an excellent person, yea
the most excellent person: He was, says he, in the form of God, and counted it
no robbery to be equal with God. We ought to consider both these expressions a
little, because this person of whom it is said, He was in the form of God, and
counted it no robbery to be equal with God, this was the person that humbled
himself, and became obedient to the death, even the death of the cross.

1. It is said, He was in the form of God. What does that expression import?
The plain meaning I take to be this, That he was truly and properly God, he was
God by nature, he was not God by name only, as some have been called Gods, and
have had that appellation given to them, but were not so by nature; so
Magistrates are sometimes called Gods, I have said ye are Gods, but ye shall
dye like men, Psalm. 82 6. God said to Moses, I have made thee a God to Pharaoh:
so that some have been called Gods by name and appellation, but were not so by
nature; but Christ was so by nature, truly and properly God, he had the verity
and truth of the Divine Essence in him. In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God, and the Word was God, that is, he was truly and properly
God, as the Father was: whatever might be said of God might be said of him: God
is eternal, infinite, almighty, omniscient, now all this was Christ, because he
was in the form of God; and whatever was proper to God was proper to him,
Essentia Dei suis coloribus depicta. Essentia omnibus suis proprietatibus
vestita.
because he was in the form of God. Zanchy observes that this expression, the
form of God, it signifies the Essence of God set forth with all its Attributes,
the Essence of God clothed with all its properties or perfections. For
although whatever is in God be God, and his most simple Essence really and in
it self, yet in respect of us who cannot conceive of God according to the
simplicity of his Essence, there is a distinction in our understanding between
the Essence and the Attributes of God: so that the form of God (according to
our understanding) notes the Essence of God with the Attributes belonging to
it: so that the meaning is, Christ was in the form of God, that is, he had the
verity and truth of the Divine Essence in him, and he had all the Attributes
belonging to that Essence. He was in the form of God, that is, he was truly and
properly God, he was eternal, omnipotent, omnipresent, and the like: whatsoever
might be said of God may be said of Christ the Son of God, because he was in
the form of God.

2. That he accounted it no robbery to be equal with God. This expression notes
two things.

1. That Christ knew himself to be equal with the Father, he knew that he was
possessed of the same Essence, of the same Majesty, of the same Glory that the
Father was, All things that the Father has are mine, Joh 16.15. The Son
enjoyed all things in common with the Father, the same Essence, the same Power,
the same Majesty, the same Divinity. I and the Father are one, Joh. 10.30. that
is, one in Essence, one in Power, one in Will.

2. This also is implied, That the Son being in the form of God, and equal with
the Father, knew he should do no wrong and injury if he retained and kept to
himself the same honor that the Father did, that is, if he had always kept in
the form of God only, and never emptied himself by his Incarnation and
suffering. The Father abides always in the form of God only, and never took
upon him the form of a servant, it was the Son (not the Father) that was
incarnate, and that took on him the form of a servant. Now if the Son had
always kept in the form of God, and never took upon him the form of a servant,
he had done no wrong or injury, he was in the same honor and dignity of God
with the Father, and he might have retained the same honor and dignity that
the Father did, without abasing himself by his Incarnation and suffering. He
was in the form of God, says the Apostle, that is, he did subsist in the
Divine Essence, as the Father did; he might have continued in the form of God
only, without taking on him the form of a servant, without assuming or taking
to himself the humane nature; but herein his love discovered it self, That
though he was in the form of God, and knew himself to be equal with God, yet he
was pleased in a way of voluntary condescension to take upon him the form of a
servant, and subject himself to the death, even the death of the cross. Now
that so great a person as this, that had his existence and subsistence from
Eternity, who was truly and properly God, possessed of the Divine Essence, and
clothed with all the Divine Attributes, who was equal to the Father, that this
person should not only strip himself, as it were, of his own glory by his
Incarnation, but also expose himself to the lowest abasement by his sufferings
and most ignominious death, this is that which sets forth the greatness of the
love of Christ. Now there are several considerations that arise from the
dignity of Christ's person that serve to set forth the greatness of Christ's love
to us in giving himself to suffer and to dye for us, and O that we could take
in these Mysteries with that reverence and solemnity of spirit, as the Majesty
of them does require.

1. Consider, it was the Word, the Son of God, the second Person in Trinity
that did order and dispose the sufferings that were in his own flesh, his own
humanity. Hence is that of one of the Ancients: (...) erat sibi (...)
dispensator and arbiter humanarum actionum and passionum. Sophronius.
The Word, the Son of God, the second Person in Trinity was the dispenser and
determiner of all the actions and sufferings that were in the humane nature. It
was he that ordered, disposed, and governed the Humanity to do and suffer those
things that were proper to it self. The humane nature in Christ was not moved
of it self to any of its actions or sufferings, but it was moved ad nutum
Verbi, at the beck and command of the Word, that is, according to the direction
of that person who assumed the humane nature: the Word, the Son of God did will
and permit the Humanity to do and suffer such things as were proper to it self,
it was he that governed the actions and passions of the humane nature. Joh.
17.19. For their sakes sanctify I my self. To sanctify is properly the work
of God, and none but God can sanctify; Christ therefore as God sanctified
himself as man, the Divine nature in Christ sanctified and set apart the humane
nature for the work of the suffering; it was the Divine nature in Christ which
did primarily will the sufferings in the humane nature, which did permit the
humane nature to suffer, and which did strengthen and uphold the humane nature
in suffering; and all these things do greatly set forth the love of Christ.

1. It was the Divine nature in Christ which did primarily will the sufferings
of the humane nature. It is true, Christ as man did will his own sufferings,
Christ as man was willing to suffer and dye for us; but yet we must consider,
that his humane will was influenced and governed by his Divine will; the humane
will of Christ willed those things which the Divine will would have it to will:
therefore it being the pleasure of the Divine will that Christ should suffer,
Christ also as man wills his own sufferings by his humane will; but still it is
the Divine will in Christ that is first, and the humane will in Christ is
governed by the Divine will. This is very clear and apparent from our Saviors
own words, Mat. 26.39. Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me,
nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. Here we see, that Christ with his
humane will wills his own sufferings, not as I will, but as thou will: as if
Christ had said, If thou will have me suffer, I will suffer, I am content to
suffer, not as I will, but as thou will: his humane will was bowed to the
Fathers will, the Father willing his sufferings, he wills it too. It is true,
our Savior discovered the verity and truth of humane nature in him in that
aversness that was in him from death and suffering, in those words, Father, if
it be possible let this cup pass from me. Though Christ did discover the verity
and truth of humane nature in him by those expressions, yet his will was not
absolutely bent and set against suffering, and that appears from hence, That
knowing it to be his Fathers will that he should suffer, he did readily and
presently comply with the will of his Father; but when he says, Father, if it
be possible let this cup pass from me, he shows that the verity and truth of
our nature was in him, that the inclination of nature was not to suffer; he
showed this, that humane nature, as humane nature, had no delight in suffering.
But now seeing it was his Fathers will that he should suffer, he puts off
nature as it were, lays aside the inclinations of it, and says, Not my will,
but thy will be done. His Father willing suffering; he wills it too, not as I
will, but as thou will: as much as if he should say, If thou will have me
suffer, I am willing, I am content to suffer; Christ therefore, as man, willed
his own sufferings, but still, as I said at first, his humane will was governed
by his Divine will, so that it was the Divine will that willed his sufferings
primarily, and the humane will was carried out by the Divine will to will them
in conformity thereunto.

2. It was the Divine nature in Christ that did permit the humane nature to
suffer. If the Divinity had exerted it self, and put forth its power and
efficacy, it could and would have prevented all suffering and death in the
humane nature. No man, says our Savior, takes my life from me, I lay it down
of my self, Joh. 10.18. Had not Christ freely and voluntarily laid down his own
life, no man could have taken away his life from him. And hence is it that the
Ancients do often use this expression, That in the Sufferings and Passion of
Christ the Divinity in Christ aid rest, that is, (...).
it did not put forth its virtue; for if the Divinity, which was personally
united to the humane nature, had exerted its virtue, it had certainly prevented
all sufferings in the Humanity; therefore the Divinity did suspend its
influence, that so the humane nature might be in a capacity to suffer. The
Divine nature did not put forth its strength and efficacy to restrain the
sufferings of the humane nature. And this shows the love of Christ, that the
Divine nature suspended its influence, that so the humane nature might be in a
capacity to suffer.

3. It was the Divine nature that did strengthen and uphold the humane nature
in suffering: so great was the burden of our sins, and Gods wrath that was due
to us for them, that it was enough to have sunk a mere creature, if there had
not been infinite and almighty power to support it. Now the Humanity of Christ,
considered in it self, being but a creature, could not of it self have stood
under the weight and burden of our sins and Divine wrath, therefore was it
supported by the infinite and almighty power of the Deity; therefore is it
said, That Christ by the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God,
Heb. 9.14. By the eternal Spirit, that is, Christ was supported by the power of
the Deity in offering himself as a Sacrifice for our sins.

The second Consideration is this, The Word, the second Person in Trinity was
united to the flesh when the flesh suffered, the union between the two natures
in Christ was not dissolved, but it continued firm and inviolable in the time
of Christ's suffering. Verbo inviolabili non sep^rato a carne passibili.
Hence is that of Leo: The inviolable Word was not separated from his passible
flesh; therefore is it that our Savior calls it his flesh, his body, The bread
which I will give you is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world,
Joh. 6.5. So in the words of the Sacrament, This is my body which is broken for
you; the flesh that was given upon the Cross was his flesh, the flesh of the
Word, his own proper flesh, not another man's, but the flesh of the Word, the
flesh of him that came down from Heaven, I am the bread that came down from
heaven, and the bread which I will give is my flesh: so likewise it is said,
This is my body. Hence is that expression of Athanasius: Caro illa trat corpus
Dei.
That flesh which suffered was the body of God: not that God has a body; but
thus we must understand it, God was personally present with, personally united
to that body that suffered. Another of the Ancients has this passage: Dominus
gloriae erat in corpore quod crucifigebatur. Epiphan.
The Lord of Glory was in that body which was crucified, which was struck
through, which did suffer, that body of his being no other but the Temple of
the Word, the Temple of the Son of God, it was full of the Deity. And hence was
it, says he, that the Sun beholding its Maker in the assumed body, withdrew
its rays, and was covered with darkness. So we read, that in the time of our
Saviors Passion there was a darkness over all the earth from the sixth hour to
the ninth hour. O what an astonishing Mystery is this! How great a spectacle
must this needs be to the holy Angels to see the Son of God and God, that
person whom they were wont to worship and adore in Heaven, personally united to
that flesh which was now hanging on the Cross, and suffering in that flesh
which he had assumed. If this must needs be matter of wonder and astonishment
to the Angels, well may it be to us. This is one of the things the Apostle
speaks of, when he speaks of the great Mystery of Godliness, Without
controversy, says he, great is the mystery of godliness, God manifested in
the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, (...), conspectus ab
Angelis.
seen or beheld of Angels. He appeared to the Angels, How did he appear to
them? He appeared to them in such a way he never appeared before. God was seen
of Angels in man's nature, he appeared to the Angels in humane nature, this was
such a sight as the Angels never saw before, they never saw God in man's nature
before the Son of God was incarnate; therefore the Angels were struck with
admiration at the novelty and excellency of this sight, to see God made visible
in flesh. And as this was matter of great admiration to the Angels to see God
come down into our nature, so it ought to be to us; and certainly as it was
matter of wonder to the Angels to see God incarnate, so it was matter of
greater wonder to them to see God suffering and dying in the nature of man for
man.



1. Admire the Fathers love, that he should give so excellent a person as his
own Son, his only begotten Son to suffer and to dye for us, God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, Joh. 3.16. How did he give him? He
gave him to be incarnate, and to become man, that was one way of his giving of
him; and secondly, he gave him to suffer and dye for us, that is another way of
his giving of him, Romans 8.32. He spared not his own Son, but delivered him up
for us all. That the Father should give such a Son, so great a Son, a Son that
was equal with himself, as we have heard, that he should give him to become
man, to suffer and dye for man, how great was the Fathers love!

2. Learn to admire the Sons love, that he that was in the form of God, and
counted it no robbery to be equal with God, should yet come to suffer and dye
for men, Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, Ephesians. 5.25. The love
of Christ in giving himself for us is exceeding admirable; for Christ, as we
have heard, as he was God, willed his own sufferings as he was man, yea he
ordered and disposed of his own sufferings, and that which is more admirable,
he inflicted sufferings on himself for our sakes. This is wonderful indeed! No
man, says the Apostle, ever hated his own flesh, and yet Christ after a sort
might seem to hate his own flesh, that is, he afflicted himself for our sakes,
Isa. 53.10. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, he put him to grief, the hand of
the Father was upon Christ, It pleased the Lord to bruise him, he put him to
grief. It was not only the hand of the Jews that was upon him, but the hand of
the Father was upon him. Now the Father had not only a hand in Christ's
sufferings, but Christ himself as God had a hand in his own sufferings as he
was man. The Lord, that is, the Father, bruised him, says the Prophet, the
Father put him to grief, the Son also bru^sed himself, he put himself to grief;
for all the actions of the Trinity toward the creature are inseparable and
undivided, what one of the Persons does, the other does. If the Father bruised
the Son, and put him to grief as he was man, the Son also as he was God bruised
himself, and put himself to grief as he was man. Now who ever was known to be
cruel to himself? And yet the Son of Son, to express his love to us, after a
sort was cruel to himself, he afflicted his own flesh, and put it to grief for
our sakes; therefore is it said, By his stripes we are healed. Christ gave
stripes and wounds to himself, that so we might escape stripes and wounds.



SERMON XVIII.
Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.


3. THE third Consideration arising from the Dignity of Christ's Person, to show
the greatness of his love in his sufferings is this, It was the Deity, the
Divine nature in Christ that gave virtue and efficacy to the sufferings of the
humane nature. Chemnitius
It is the observation of a Judicious Divine, That it is one thing to speak of
the Passion and death of Christ, as it is the property of the humane nature,
and another thing to speak of the Passion and death of Christ, as by that
Passion and death of his the wrath of God is pacified, the head of the Serpent
broken, death destroyed, and life restored; these are the operations of the
Divine power, although not without the humane nature. The humane nature could
never have done this without the virtue of the Deity. Therefore we must
consider, that although it was in the humane nature that Christ obeyed and kept
the Law; and though it was in the humane nature that he suffered and dyed: yet
it was by the power and virtue of the Deity, that these actions and sufferings
of the humane nature were meritorious and satisfactory as to God, and salutary
as to men, that is, that they had an influence upon our salvation. Had not
Christ been God as well as man, neither would his actions and sufferings been
satisfactory and meritorious with God, neither would they have brought
salvation unto us? Who but God could have conquered death, hell, and the grave?
Who but God could have wrought out redemption and salvation for us? Hence is
it, that the Church in her triumphant Song, when she declares how it was that
her salvation was wrought out for her, she attributes it wholly unto God, Isa.
12.2. Behold, God is my salvation, the Lord Jehovah is my strength and my song,
he also is become my salvation. The Church looks upon all her salvation to be
from God in Christ, God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor.
5.19. It was God in Christ that gave the ranson, and laid down the price for
the Churches redemption, Act. 20.28. Feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood.

The fourth Particular to set forth the greatness of Christ's love in the work
of his sufferings from the consideration of the dignity of his person, That in
the sufferings of Christ there was the humiliation of the whole person of the
Mediator, who was God as well as man. This is a great thing to set forth the
love of Christ in his sufferings, to consider how great a person he was that
humbled himself, Phil. 2.8. He humbled himself, and became obedient to the
death. Who was he that humbled himself? that very person which the Apostle had
spoken of before. Now the person which he had spoken of before, was he who was
in the form of God, and counted it no robbery to be equal with God. Now this
was the person that humbled himself; as this person emptied himself in his
Incarnation; so the Apostle tells us, He made himself of no reputation, he took
upon him the form of a servant; so the very same person humbled himself in his
sufferings, he humbled himself, and became obedient to the death. Christ's
humiliation both in his Incarnation and in his sufferings redounds to the whole
person of the Mediator, who is God as well as man. Zanchy observes from that,
He was in the form of God, and took upon him the form of a servant, That as
Christ is Mediator according to both natures, so the whole person, by reason of
his taking on him the form of a servant, is become a servant. Now as the whole
person of the Mediator, God manifested in the flesh, is humbled in his
Incarnation, humbled in his assumption of our nature; so the whole person of
the Mediator is humbled in his sufferings, in his being obedient to the death,
the death of the cross. It is true, this humiliation of the Son of God both in
his Incarnation and in his sufferings properly agrees and belongs to the humane
nature; and the reason is, because the Deity, simply and in it self considered,
is not capable of humiliation or abasement; but yet we must know by the
communion of Idioms, as they call it, that being attributed to the whole
person, which is proper to either of the natures, the whole person of the
Mediator is said to be humbled both in his Incarnation and in his sufferings:
so that it was the person of the Son of God who humbled himself, taking on him
the form of a servant, and it was the person of the Son of God who humbled
himself, being obedient to the death, even the death of the cross. Now it is a
contemplation worthy of our most serious thoughts to consider how in the death
and sufferings of Jesus Christ there was the humiliation of the whole person,
and this I shall endeavor to open in a few Particulars.

1. This is evident, That Christ as God willed his own sufferings as man. If
Christ had not willed his own sufferings, no one could have brought sufferings
upon him; for no man takes away my life, says our Savior, Joh. 10.18. No man
takes away my life, that is, no one has power to take it away, unless I first
give it. This therefore we may take for granted, That Christ as God willed his
own sufferings as man. Now consider what a condescension was this, that that
person who was in the form of God, and was equal with God, and knew himself to
be so, should yet will the taking up of our nature, and also will his own
sufferings in that nature. This was the greatest condescension, that he that
knew the dignity of his own person, his equality with the Father, should yet in
a voluntary way will his own abasement: that he who was equal with the Father
in respect of his Divine nature, should yet by taking on him the nature of man
and office of Mediator, make himself inferior to the Father; for as he was man
and Mediator, so the Father was greater than he, Joh. 14.28. Compare these two
Texts together Phil. 2. and that of Joh. 14. In Phil. 2. it is said, He was in
the form of God, and counted it no robbery to be equal with God, and in Joh.
14. it is said, The Father is greater than I. How is this to be understood? He
that was equal with the Father in respect of his Divine nature, the same person
becoming man and Mediator, so he made himself inferior to the Father, and so
the Father was greater than he. This was the condescension and love of this
great person, that he that was in an equality with the Father in respect of the
Divine nature, becoming man and Mediator makes himself inferior to him: this
will appear yet farther in the next Particular.

2. Christ by taking on him the office of Mediator, became subject to the
Father; therefore does the Apostle fay, 1 Cor. 11.3. That the head of Christ is
God. Christ as he is made man has God for his head, is subject unto him, is
under God as his head. Hence also is it said, Phil. 2. That he became obedient
to the death. Christ taking on him the office of Mediator became obedient to
his Father, and he underwent suffering and death in a way of obedience to him.
Now this was the great condescension of this excellent person, who when he knew
himself to be in a state of equality with the Father, would yet put himself
into a state of subjection to him, and in obedience to the Fathers will expose
himself to suffering and death. This is that which our Savior himself
intimates to us, Joh. 14.30, 31. Hereafter I will not talk much with you, for
the Prince of this world comes, and has nothing in me. But that the world may
know that I love the Father, and as the Father gave me commandment, even so I
do. Satan or men had nothing to do with Christ, they had no power over his
life; but Christ laid down his own life merely in obedience to the Father, and
out of his love to us. The Prince of this world comes and finds nothing in me.
Satan had no right or power to touch Christ's life, but Christ had the power to
dispose of his own life as he pleased, and having freely and of his own accord
taken on him the office of Mediator, he must be subject to the Father, and
dispose of his life as he pleased, and his Father commanding him to dye, he
must give up his life in obedience to him. Thus he that was the Author and
Prince of life, he that gives life to all others, was content to give up his
own life to be at the Fathers dispose; and this speaks the humiliation of this
great person that was in a state of equality with the Father, that he would in
a voluntary way of condescension make himself subject to him.

3. To set forth the humiliation of the person, how he humbled himself in the
work of his Satisfaction, let us consider, that it is the person of the Divine
Word, or the second Person in Trinity, subsisting in humane nature, that
tenders and offers the satisfaction by the operations of the humane nature. To
understand this we must consider, that the operations and passions of the
humane nature in Christ are not, Non principium quod, sed principium quo.
as the Schools call it, the Principle that makes the satisfaction, but they
are the Principle by which satisfaction is made. The Principle that, as they
call it, which makes satisfaction is the person of the Word, the second Person
in Trinity which subsists in humane nature; and the ground of it is founded
upon this Logical Axiom, That actions belong to persons, Actiones sant suppose,
torum.
or actions flow from persons. It was therefore the person of the Word that
made satisfaction for our sins. Now that a person of that infinite worth and
excellency as the Son of God, the second Person in Trinity, should come to
subsist in our nature, and being in our nature should be the person satisfying
for our sins, this was great condescension and abasement. Thus the Son who was
yet equal with the Father in respect of his Divine nature, by his Incarnation
and sufferings does not only make himself inferior to the Father, but to
himself also. The Son, though he was one of the persons offended, yet he comes
to make the satisfaction, and considered as Mediator, as God-man, does not only
make satisfaction to the Father, but to himself, considered as God simply.

The fourth Consideration is this, That whole Christ, or the whole person of
the Mediator, was the price of our Redemption, 1 John 2.1. If any man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our sins. It is Christ then that is the propitiation for our
sins. Now Christ is the name of the person subsisting in both natures. When we
speak of Christ, Christus est nomen personae in duabus subsistentis naturis.
we understand that person who subsists in both natures, in the nature of God
and in the nature of man. Christ does not signify one of the natures simply,
but Christ is the name of the person subsisting in both natures. Now this is he
who is the propitiation for our sins, that person who is God and man, he is the
propitiation for our sins. Persona Christi sive Christus satisfecit pro
peccatis tanquamquod.
It was the person of Christ or Christ that did satisfy for our sins as the
Principle making satisfaction. To understand this we must consider that which
was before hinted, That Christ is our Mediator according to both natures; he is
not our Mediator as to one of his natures only, but according to both natures;
and as he is Mediator according to both natures, so he gives himself for us
according to both his natures. For though it were the humane nature only that
suffered, yet it was the Divine nature that sanctified the sufferings of the
humane nature, and gave virtue to them; therefore is it said, Himself bare our
sins in his own body on the tree, and that by himself he has purged our sins,
Heb. 1.3. It is not said, By his humane nature merely (though it is true it was
the humane nature only that was capable of suffering, but it is not so
expressed) but by himself. Christ himself is the Sacrifice for our sins, Gal.
2. He loved me, and gave himself for me: and, Christ was once offered up, Heb.
9. And that expression of the Apostle Peter is very emphatical, 2 Pet. 2.24.
Who his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree. (...).
Christ himself who was God-man made satisfaction for sins, and laid down the
price of our Redemption, yea he himself was the price of our Redemption, God
has redeemed the Church with his own blood. To understand this two things are
to be considered in the Satisfaction of Christ, as Alvarez has observed.

1. One is that species or kind of humane actions, by which Christ did
satisfy, and this proceeded from the humane nature, as the formal principle of
them. Thus the Son of God obeyed, suffered, dyed in the humane nature.

2. There is another thing to be considered in Christ's Satisfaction, and that
is the infinite value and worth that was found in it. Now the infinite value
and worth that was in the Satisfaction of Christ proceeded from the person
satisfying, that is, from the Divine Word or the person of the Son of God
subsisting in the humane nature: the actions and sufferings of the humane
nature are the matter of his Satisfaction, but that which gives the virtue and
value to them is the Divinity. Hence are those expressions of the Ancients: If
he had not been true God he had not brought a remedy for us. Si non esset verus
Deus non afferret remedium. Quia ille qui moriebatur erat Deus.
Another observes: That therefore did the death of Christ bring salvation to
the world, because the person who dyed was God. And another has a passage to
this purpose: Death, says he, becoming as it were the death of God, has
demolished death, for the person that dyed was God and man both, the sufferings
of Christ being made the sufferings of that person who was God, received their
virtue from the Divinity. As much as if he had said, By virtue of the Divine
person which suffered in the humane nature, those sufferings received their
virtue to save us, and to make satisfaction for our sins. This is another thing
that discovers the humiliation of Christ's person, That he who was God, and in
his Divine nature simply considered, was the person offended, yet as God man
was pleased to become a ransom for us, 1 Timothy 2.6. He gave himself a ransom for
all. That person who gave himself a ransom for all is the Mediator, and who is
the Mediator but Godman? 1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all sin. There is a great Emphasis upon those words Jesus
Christ his Son. It is the blood of that person who was no other than the Son of
God and God which cleanses us from all sin. It is a memorable speech of
Luther: He gave, says he, not silver, not gold, neither was it a mere man that
he gave, neither did he give all the Angels, but it was himself that he gave as
the price of our Redemption, than which nothing was greater, neither had he any
thing greater to give. Consider this price aright, and we shall find it
infinitely greater than the whole Creation.

5. In the sufferings of Christ we may see the humiliation of his person from
hence, namely, that in the death of Christ the glory of his Divinity seemed to
be most obscured and darkened, and suffered the greatest Eclipse. What more
unworthy of God than suffering and death? What more absurd and incongruous in
the eye of carnal reason than a crucified God? Now herein did Christ commend
the greatness of his love to us, That he permitted the glory of his Divinity,
by means of his death and suffering, to be eclipsed for our sakes: That he who
was the immortal God, should expose himself to suffering and death for our
sakes, as if he had been no more than a passible and mortal man; for though he
were really and indeed the Son of God and God, the Lord of Glory, yet by reason
of his death and sufferings he was by the generality of men thought to be but
as an ordinary man. This is that which the Apostle intimates, 1 Cor. 2.8. Whom
none of the Princes of this world knew, for had they known it, they would not
have crucified the Lord of glory. The Apostle here speaks of Christ crucified,
as the Wisdom of God, this the Princes of the world knew not. The Rabbis among
the Jews, the Philosophers among the Heathen knew not this Wisdom of God, they
were not acquainted with it, they little knew the Lord of Glory was in that
body that was crucified, pierced, and that hung upon the Cross; they were
ignorant of the Divinity of Christ's person, the Son of God containing and
keeping in the rays of his Divinity, and permitting his flesh, his humane
nature to suffer, they thought him to be but as another man. Hence was it, that
the spectators mocked him with those words, If thou be the Son of God come down
from the cross: they took it for granted, that he that was the Son of God and
God, would not have suffered in that manner. Now this was the great, the
wonderful, and stupendous humiliation of this great Person, that the Divinity
in Christ hid it self and withdrew its luster as it were in the time of Christ's
suffering, that so the Humanity might suffer. It is true, there were some rays
of his Divinity let forth in the time of his suffering, that the veil of the
Temple was rent from the top to the bottom, that the rocks clave in sunder,
that the Sun was darkened, and the graves were opened and the bodies of the
dead Saints arose. Such prodigious things as these were manifest tokens that
the person that suffered was more than an ordinary person: therefore the
Centurion and those that were with him said, Truly this was the Son of God. But
yet these things had not such an influence upon the generality of men, but that
the Cross of Christ was to the Jews a stumblingblock, and to the Greeks
foolishness; the world has not been able to bear the Doctrine of a crucified
Savior: and as Luther has observed, There is no Doctrine of Faith that the
world is so offended at as this, That whereas the wisdom and love of God has
been laid out to the uttermost in this way, namely, to save men by the death of
his Son, this has been the greatest offense to the world, Such is the pride
and ignorance of men, that they cannot think of being saved by one that was
crucified. But what does the Apostle say, The foolishness of God is wiser than
men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men. Christ crucified is the
power of God and the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.20, 24. Whatever the world thinks
of it, this is the way of God and the wisdom of God to save men by the death of
his own Son. And herein did the greatness of Christ's love to us appear, That he
who was so great a Person, would suffer the glory of his Divinity to be
obscured and darkened by his death and sufferings, whenas he knew what he did
and suffered for man would expose him to the disesteem of men, and minister an
occasion to them to think the more contemptuously of him than ever they would
have done, had he not stooped so low to do and suffer such things as he did for
their sakes.

Behold, God has redeemed the Church with his own blood, Act. 20. This is
notably set forth by the Apostle Peter, We were redeemed not with corruptible
things, as gold and silver, from our vain conversation, but with the precious
blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18. Precious blood indeed which was the blood of that
person that was God as well as man. It is well observed by Cyril: It was not
the blood of Peter or Paul, or some other particular Saint that was but a mere
man, that we were redeemed by, but it was by the blood of Christ, God-man,
whose name is Emmanuel God with us. Tanta medicina and salus requiritur,
Divinitas incarnata, and sanguis ipse Filii Dei. Luther.
This should teach us to have high thoughts of the work of our Redemption, and
of the price that was laid down for it. O that the work of our Redemption
should cost the death of so excellent a person as the Son of God! So great
aremedy, so great salvation, says Luther, was required that Divinity it self
must be incarnate, and the very blood of the Son of God must be shed for us. O
let us labor to get our hearts more deeply affected with these things.

The end of the eighteenth Sermon.
SERMON XIX.
Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.


THE second Use is this. Heb. 10.29. Of how much sorer punishment shall he be
thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted
the blood of the Covenant by which he was sanctified an unholy thing? The
Apostle here speaks,

1. Of the contempt of Christ's person, Who has trodden under foot the Son of
God.

2. Of the contempt of his sufferings, And counted the blood of the Covenant an
unholy thing. So that to be guilty of the contempt of Christ's person and of his
sufferings, must needs be the most heinous sin.

1. As for the contempt of Christ's person, the Apostle calls it a treading
under foot the Son of God. (...).
Treading upon a thing is an argument of contempt and scorn, we tread upon
nothing but what is vile and of no esteem; we tread upon a worm as upon a poor
abject thing, a thing of no account; yea sometimes treading upon a thing is an
argument of hatred, thus we tread upon spiders and other venomous creatures.
Now that so excellent a person as the Son of God, one and the same God with the
Father, that he should be contemned and looked upon as a vile person, what an
indignity is this which is offered to so excellent a person?

2. The contempt of Christ's sufferings is set forth in that other expression,
And has counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he is sanctified an unholy
thing. We may render it thus, (...).
Who has counted the blood of the Covenant a common thing. To count the blood
of the Covenant, the blood of Christ as common blood, to count the sufferings
of Christ but as the sufferings of a common ordinary man, this is great
contempt. The blood of Christ is the blood of that person who is God as well as
man; and therefore to reckon his sufferings but as the sufferings of a common
ordinary man, this is great contempt. The person suffering for us was no other
than the Son of God, and God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. The
sufferings of this person therefore were not the sufferings of a common
ordinary person, but they were the sufferings of him who was God-man, they were
the sufferings of the Word made flesh, who gave his flesh for the life of the
world. Therefore to contemn so great and excellent a person, and all that he
suffered in love to us, must needs be the greatest sin.

But here it may be inquired, When is the person of Christ contemned, and when
are his sufferings contemned?

1. Then is the person of Christ in a degree at least contemned, when we have
not honorable thoughts of Christ, suitable to the dignity of his person, that
is to say, when we stick in his Humanity without elevating our thoughts to his
Divinity: our faith must indeed begin at the Humanity of Christ, but it must
not stick or rest there, but we must climb up from the Humanity to the
Divinity. When therefore we stick in the Humanity of Christ without elevating
our thoughts to his Divinity, this is not to have so honorable thoughts of
Christ as we ought to have, and so by consequence it is a kind of contempt of
him. Joh. 14.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me: as much as if our
Savior should say, You all take it to be your duty to believe in God: You
believe in God, simply considered, O but that is not enough; as you believe in
God, simply considered, so you ought to believe in God inhabiting in the flesh
of the Son. Consider what our Savior says in the ninth verse of that Chapter,
He that has seen me has seen the Father: the meaning of that I take to be, He
that has seen the Son incarnate with a spiritual eye, with an eye of faith, he
that has seen the Son incarnate as he ought to see him, he has seen the
Divinity of the Father in the person of the Son, the Father and the Son have
but one and the same common Divinity. Therefore if we see the Son aright with a
spiritual eye, with an eye of faith, we shall see the Divinity of the Father in
the person of the Son. Though the person of the Father is distinct from the
person of the Son, yet the Divinity of the Father is not different from the
Divinity of the Son: though the Father and the Son be distinct as to their
persons, yet there is but one and the same common Divinity between them both, I
and the Father are one, Joh. 10.30. He that supposes the Divinity or Godhead
of the Father to differ from the Godhead of the Son, does neither know the
Father nor the Son. When therefore we do not elevate our thoughts to the
Divinity of the Son, we do in a degree contemn Christ: when we do not look
beyond the veil of his flesh, and behold that Divine person that took up that
flesh, we do not give Christ that honor we ought to do.

2. Then is the person of Christ contemned, when we do not believe in Christ
for salvation. Joh. 3.18. He that believes on him is not condemned; but he
that believes not is condemned already, because he has not believed in the
name of the only begotten Son of God. There is a great weight that lies upon
that expression, the name of the only begotten Son of God: the reason why
Unbelievers are condemned is, because so great a person, so excellent a person
as the only begotten Son of God is revealed and offered to them in the Gospel,
and they refuse to close with him. When the Son of God is propounded to men as
the great object of their faith, and so great and excellent a person as this is
rejected by them, this is the greatest contempt, and this is that which brings
condemnation upon men.

3. Then are the sufferings of Christ contemned, when men do not apply and
betake themselves to the virtue of Christ's sufferings to obtain salvation by
them: Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, Joh. 1.29.
Him has God ordained to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, Romans
3.25. The sufferings of Christ were the great propitiatory Sacrifice, the only
means to reconcile us to God. Now when men hearken to the sufferings of Christ,
as a story merely, they can hear it discoursed of and repeated again and again,
that there was such a person that did and suffered such things, but they do not
look upon themselves as concerned, they see no need of the merit and virtue of
Christ's suffering, neither do they apply themselves to the sufferings and death
of Christ, that they may receive atonement by it, this is to make the blood of
the Covenant a common thing, as the Apostles expression is in the
forementioned place. It is as if so be men accounted the blood of Christ but
as common blood, and his sufferings no more than the sufferings of an ordinary
man. A like phrase the Apostle has, when he speaks of some that come
unworthily to the Lords Table, he says, They do not discern the Lords body, 1
Cor. 11.29. Not to discern the Lords body, is not to make a difference between
the sacramental bread and common ordinary bread, not to see the Lords body
represented to us in and by that bread. Not to discern the Lords body, is, not
to own and acknowledge the preciousness of that body, that is, not to be able
to distinguish this body from another body, not to see an excellency in it. In
like manner to account the blood of Christ, the blood of the Covenant a common
thing, is, not to see the preciousness of this blood, not to have a high esteem
of it, and not to apply our selves for salvation to it. They that do not see
the infinite worth and preciousness of the sufferings of Christ, that do not
apply themselves to the death and sufferings of Christ, so as to extract
salvation from them, they contemn the sufferings of Christ. Our Savior himself
says expressly, Joh. 6.53. Except ye eat the flesh, and drink the blood of the
Son of man, you have no life in you. Let us not think that it is an indifferent
thing, a matter of small moment, whether we understand the worth of Christ's
sufferings, and apply our selves to them yea or no. Our Savior tells us
plainly our salvation depends upon it, Except ye eat the flesh, and drink the
blood of the Son of man, ye have no life in you. That is, unless ye have skill
to make use of my sufferings, and to apply your selves to the virtue of them,
ye have no life in you, that is, you have not the life of Justification nor
sanctification in you here in this world, neither shall you have the life of
Glory hereafter: therefore it is not an indifferent thing whether we be
acquainted with the virtue of Christ's sufferings, without this we have no life
in us. Let us therefore take heed how we have slight thoughts of the sufferings
of Christ; this is to slight them, when we do not study the virtue of these
sufferings, when we do not see our need of them, and do not apply our selves to
them, that we may be saved by them.

4. Then are the sufferings of Christ contemned, when we come unworthily to the
Lords Table. The Sacrament of the Supper, it is the Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ; when therefore we rush upon the Sacrament in a rude manner, we
do in an eminent way contemn the sufferings of Christ. The Supper of the Lord
is called a showing forth the Lords death, 1 Cor. 11.26. As often as ye eat
this bread and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come. This
phrase of showing forth the Lords death implies three things in it.

1. It implies the inward assent of the mind, that we do indeed with our hearts
and minds believe, that Christ did dye, and suffer such things for us, as we
read of in the Gospel.

2. This phrase of showing forth the Lords death implies the profession and
confession of our faith before the world, (...).
that we own it and profess it before the world, that we believe such and such
things concerning Christ.

3. It implies our faith in our our reliance upon the death and sufferings of
Christ for salvation, that is our expectation of salvation by the death of
Christ, and by that means only. All this I take to be implied in this phrase of
showing forth the death of Christ: the Sacrament therefore being a showing
forth of Christ's death, when we come to the Sacrament, we have to do with the
death and sufferings of Christ in a peculiar manner; if therefore we rush upon
that Ordinance in a rude or unworthy manner, we must of necessity contemn the
sufferings of Christ, because the Sacrament is the special and peculiar
Ordinance that is appointed to represent to us the death and sufferings of the
Lord Jesus: and that this is one way of contemning Christ's sufferings, the
Apostle is exceeding clear and plain, 1 Cor. 11.27. Whosoever shall eat and
drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of
the Lord. As much as if he should say, Every unworthy Communicant, every
unworthy receiver at the Lords Table is guilty of no small sin, he is guilty of
the very body and blood of Christ, that is, he is as one that has imbrued his
hands in Christ's blood, he is guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. The
Ancients expound it to this sense: Every unworthy receiver and Communicant that
comes in a rude manner to the Lords Supper, is like Judas that betrayed Christ,
like the Jews that buffeted and spit upon him, like to Pilate that condemned
him, and like the Soldiers that crucified him; these dealt unworthily with the
body of Christ, and so does every unworthy Communicant deal unworthily with the
body of Christ. The others indeed abused and dealt unworthily with his natural
body, but every unworthy Communicant deals unworthily with his sacramental
body: and the sin of the one is so much the greater than the sin of the other,
because many of them that had a hand in the crucifixion of the body of our
Savior, looked upon him as an ordinary man, they did not look upon him as the
Son of God. Hence does the Apostle say, If they had known it, they would not
have crucified the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. But now rude Christians who rush
irreverently upon this Ordinance, do profess they believe him to be the Son of
God, the Savior of the world, and yet offer indignity to him. They therefore
that come unworthily to the Lords Table, do in an eminent manner contemn the
sufferings of Christ. But here it may be useful for us to inquire, What is it
to come unworthily? Who are they that come unworthily? Whosoever shall eat this
bread, (...).
and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, 1 Cor. 11.29. The Greek word, as
Peter Martyr observes, Indecenter, parum congrue, minus apposite.
signifies in this place as much as indecently, not congruously, not in that
fit manner as he ought to do: he eats and drinks unworthily that comes in an
indecent manner, without due preparation to this Ordinance.

I shall more particularly show what this unworthy receiving is in two or three
things.

1. Then do we come unworthily to the Sacrament, when we have not a due
reverence of those great and sublime Mysteries that are set before us in the
Sacrament, Whoever shall drink this cup of the Lord, says the Apostle: this
Cup of the Lord, here is an accent, that it is the Lords bread, the Lords cup;
the bread that we partake of in the Sacrament is the Lords bread, and the cup
that we drink of in the Sacrament is the Lords cup.

Some may say, so is all our bread; the bread that we live upon daily, is the
Lords bread, and the cup we drink of daily is the Lords cup, it is he that
spreads our tables for us, and causes our cups to run over.

But we must consider, that the bread here spoken of, the sacramental Bread and
the sacramental Cup, are called the Lords bread and the Lords cup in a peculiar
manner: it is that bread that is instituted to signify and represent the Lords
body, and it is that cup that is instituted to represent the Lords blood;
therefore when we look upon the sacramental bread as common ordinary bread,
when we drink of the sacramental wine as common ordinary wine, this is a
profanation of this Ordinance. We ought to be sensible of the Mystery that is
in this Ordinance, namely, that the Lords body and his blood are represented to
us by the outward signs. The ancient Church were wont to call the Mysteries
represented to us in the Sacrament tremendous Mysteries. O here are tremendous
Mysteries indeed, (...)
if we rightly consider what they are that are set before us in the Sacrament:
to see the incorporeal God assuming a humane body, to see God personally
inhabit in that flesh that suffered, and offering that very body of his in
which he was crucified, dyed, rose again and ascended into Heaven to be the
food of our souls, these are wonderful Mysteries indeed: and yet these are the
Mysteries that are represented to us in the Sacrament; in the Sacrament we see
the Son of God and God to have assumed a part of our flesh, and then offering
himself up in that flesh a Sacrifice for our sins: and as we see the Son of God
first giving himself for us upon the Cross, so in the Sacrament we see him
giving himself to us. Here lies the mystery of the Sacrament: In the Sacrament
we do not only see Christ giving himself for us, but we also see him giving
himself to us; for these are no vain words, This is my body which was broken
for you, setting aside those gross conceits of the Papists, That the bread is
transubstantiated into the body of Christ, and that Christ is corporally
present under the outward form of the Elements (I say, setting aside their
gross conceits) there is certainly a real, though spiritual presence of Christ
to every believing soul in the Sacrament. The humane nature of Christ indeed is
really present in Heaven; therefore is it said, Whom the heavens must contain
till the time of the restitution of all things, Act. 3. Yet the virtue of
Christ's body and blood is still really communicated to every believing soul;
Corpus ipsum in quo passus est and resurrexit.
yea not only so, says Calvin, Not only the virtue of his Death and
Resurrection, but that very body that dyed and rose again, this is offered to
us in the Sacrament: these are great Mysteries indeed. Now not to have a due
reverence to such great and sublime Mysteries as these are, to come to these as
if they were common and ordinary things, or to come to them with a common and
slight spirit, this is to come unworthily.

2. Then do we come unworthily to the Sacrament, when we live in the practice
of any gross sin, or retain the love of any sin. We profess by our coming to
the Sacrament, that we believe that Christ dyed for such and such sins, and yet
we love these sins, or continue in the practice of those sins that cost Christ
his life; this is to offer the greatest indignity to the Son of God. This is as
if a Traitor should come to sit at Table with the King to dine or sup with him,
and yet never repent of his treason, but retain a traitorous mind and intention
in his heart all the while. When a man sits at the same table to eat and drink
with another, it is a sign of friendship; no one would willingly admit another
to his table, but whom he accounts to be his friend. When we come to the Lords
Table, we profess the highest friendship to Christ: now when we profess the
highest friendship to Christ, and yet retain that in our love and practice that
is most directly contrary to the honor and glory of Christ, this is the
greatest indignity that can be. This is that the Apostle calls, the crucifying
the Son of God afresh, and putting him to an open shame, Heb. 6.6. What is this
but crucifying Christ afresh, and making Christ as contemptuous as possibly we
can, whenas we profess to expect salvation by the death and sufferings of
Christ, and yet in the mean time love, harbor, entertain, and practice those
very things we say we believe Christ dyed for? Certainly every loose Christian
that makes a profession of Christ, and yet lives in gross open sins, makes a
plain mock of Christ and his sufferings; for he professes that he believes he
shall be pardoned by the sufferings and death of Christ, and yet he continues
in the love and practice of those sins; as if so be the end of Christ's death
were, that men might continue in their sins, and not be delivered from them.

3. Then do men come unworthily to the Sacrament, when they come without
examining themselves. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
bread, and drink of that cup, 1 Cor. 11.28. It is observable, the Apostle
opposes this examining a man's self to his eating unworthily. In the former
verse he had said, He that eats this bread, and drinks this cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord; now he adds, But
let a man examine himself: so then, if a man do not examine himself, then he
eats unworthily.

But it may be said,

Concerning two things.

1. Concerning his state.

2. Concerning the present frame and dispostion of his heart.

1. A man ought to examine himself concerning his state, whether he be in
Christ, whether he have a right to such an Ordinance, 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your
selves, whether ye be in the faith: prove your own selves. Know ye not your own
selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobate. We must
examine our selves concerning our fundamental estate, whether that be good yea
or no, to examine what standing we have in Christ.

2. We ought to examine our selves concerning the frame and disposition of our
souls, whether we be in a fit frame to partake of such an Ordinance. We ought
to examine our selves, whether our hearts be strongly bent and inclined to any
sin, whether we be under the power of any sin, this is the examination of our
repentance. We ought to examine what the frame of our hearts is Godward,
whether the bent of our hearts be toward God, and the ways of God, this is the
examining of our other graces. Now when we rush upon the Sacrament without
reflection and examination of our spiritual state, this is unworthy coming. And
here let us observe, That the children of God themselves may in a degree come
in an unworthy manner: for there are several degrees of unworthy receiving;
They that have slight and contemptuous thoughts of this Ordinance, they that
live in gross and scandalous sins, they are guilty of unworthy receiving in the
highest degree. But then they that have true grace, and do not retain in their
hearts the love of any sin; yet if they are remiss in searching into their
hearts to find out their secret corruptions, and to judge themselves for them,
they come unworthily in a lesser degree, and God may correct his own children
for their spiritual remisness in this kind. The Apostle tells us, For this
cause many were sickly and weak, and many were fallen asleep, 1 Cor. 11.30.
that is, for coming to the Sacrament without due preparation. Others who grossly
profane this Ordinance, that come to this Ordinance, and live in gross sins,
and continue to live and dye in them, God punishes them otherwise, he
punishes them with eternal condemnation: He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, or judgment to himself,
as the word may be rendered. The godly themselves coming in a rude and careless
manner to this Ordinance, may and oftentimes do bring the judgment of temporal
chastisement upon themselves for not coming in a right manner to so great an
Ordinance. But such as are profane, who come to this Ordinance, and yet live in
sin, they eat to themselves the judgment of eternal condemnation. Now to return
unto what we first propounded, to come unworthily to the Sacrament, is one way
of contemning Christ's sufferings.

And if it be asked, What is the reason of it, why is the unworthy receiving of
the Sacrament a contemning of Christ's sufferings? I answer,

1. Because the Sacrament is a plain revelation and exhibition of Christ
crucified, This is my body which was broken for you. That very body of Christ
in which he suffered, dyed, rose again, is offered to us in the Sacrament to be
looked upon by faith. The Sacrament is, as the Ancients call it, Verbum
visibile.
a visible Word. The Sacrament declares by visible signs and representations
that which the Word does in another way. Now as it is a great sin to contemn
Christ when he is made known to us in the way of the Word, so it is a great sin
to contemn Christ when he is revealed to us by his own signs and symbols which
are of his own institution, instituted on purpose by himself to make himself
known to us.

2. The Sacrament is appointed to confirm our union and communion with Christ:
The bread which we break is it not the communion of the body of Christ? The cup
of blessing which we bless is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? 1
Cor. 10. The ancient Church called the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
Sacramentum unionis.
the Sacrament of Union, because it is that special Ordinance by which our
union and communion with Christ is strengthened and confirmed. And our Savior
in effect tells us as much, when he says, He that eats my flesh and drinks
my blood, dwells in me and I in him, Job. 6.56. When we eat Christ's flesh and
drink his blood, Christ dwells in us and we in him. Now when we profess the
nearest union and communion with the person of Christ, and with the death and
sufferings of Christ, and we slight both his person and his sufferings, this
must needs be a great sin.

Thus have we heard now how Christ and his sufferings may be contemned, there
is another thing that may be added, and that is,

5. That Apostates, such as fall from, deny and renounce the faith of Christ
they once presessed, they do in an eminent manner pour contempt upon the
sufferings of Christ. Of these the Apostle speaks in a peculiar manner, Heb.
10. and of these he says, That they account the blood of the Covenant by which
they are sanctified, an unholy thing. He that apostatizes from the Christian
Profession, what does he do but make a mock of Christ and his sufferings, as if
all that he had formerly professed concerning Christ and his sufferings were
but a mere sable. Now it concerns us greatly to see that we be not found in the
number of such who are contemners of Christ's person or of his sufferings; and
the reason is, because great punishment is denounced on such, Heb. 10.29. Of
how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under
foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he
was sanctified an unholy thing, and has done despite unto the Spirit of grace.
There is a sorer punishment shall be inflicted upon such who despise the person
of Christ, and contemn his sufferings; and I verily believe this is one main
cause of the Judgments which God has already executed, and will yet further
execute upon the unthankful world, because his Son has been revealed to the
world in this last Century of years more than in former Ages, by that clear and
great light that has broken forth; and yet men make no reckoning of Christ and
of his grace, but are grown worse and worse, more profane and atheistical under
the light of the Gospel that has shone upon them. As Idolatry was the great
sin that God did avenge under the Old Testament upon the Jews, that were then
his professing people: so the contempt of the Gospel wherein there has been a
plain and manifest revelation of the Son of God, and of that grace and
salvation which is brought by his death and sufferings, seems to be the great
sin that God is avenging upon professing Christians.

The end of the nineteenth Sermon.
SERMON XX.
Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.


I Proceed now to another Consideration to show the greatness of Christ's Love
in his Sufferings. Heb. 12.2. He endured the cross and despised the shame. Isa.
50.6. I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the
hair, I hid not my face from shame and spitting. That the Son of God should
suffer such things for us poor men, that he should suffer such pains and
torments in soul and body for us, this commends his love to us. The sufferings
of Christ did far exceed the sufferings of any other man; yea, if the
sufferings of all men were put together, they are not to be compared with the
sufferings of Christ; and the reason is, because Christ did suffer the very
pains of Hell for us, as we have heard. Christ did not only suffer from men,
but he suffered from the hands of his Father, it pleased the Father to bruise
him, he put him to grief, Isa. 53. Christ did not only suffer in his body, but
he suffered in his soul, yea his soul-sufferings were the greatest sufferings,
there it was that he suffered dereliction, there it was that he suffered the
sense of Gods wrath, no sorrows were ever like to Christ's sorrows, and yet
these sorrows Christ did voluntarily and electively undergo for our sakes. Our
Savior knew beforehand what his sufferings were like to be, and yet he freely
underwent them. Christ did not rush upon his sufferings unawares, but he knew
what his sufferings would be, and yet he was content to undergo them for our
sakes, Luke 12.50. I have a baptism to be baptized with, he speaks of the
Baptism of his sufferings. The Lord Jesus knew that he was to undergo such sore
and grievous sufferings, and yet he voluntarily underwent them, he did not rum
ignorantly upon them, but he knew beforehand what he was to suffer, and yet he
chose voluntarily to suffer that which he knew would be so bitter and grievous
to him. It is a great alleviation of a man's sufferings, not to know what he
has to suffer; the contemplation of a man's sufferings beforehand is sometimes
almost as great a suffering as the suffering it self that he is to undergo: but
yet the Son of God had the contemplation and foresight in his mind of the
sufferings that he was to undergo for us, yet he was content notwithstanding to
under go them. Mat. 16.21. From that time forth began Jesus to show to his
Disciples how he must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the Elders and
chief Priests and Scribes, and be killed and be raised again the third day. Our
Savior was not ignorant of his own sufferings, but had a perfect contemplation
of them in his mind beforehand, he knew how great and bitter and sore they
would be, and yet he was content to undergo them for our sakes.

The Lord has caused to meet on him the iniquity or perverseness of us all,
Isa. 53. Sin is the perverseness of the creature, it is the crookedness or
depravation of a man's actions; sin is a defection or turning aside from a right
path, and yet the Son of God gave himself to expiate so vile a thing as sin is.
Dedit tam inaestimabile pretium pro tam despecta odioque dignissima re. Luther.
It is a speech of Luther: He gave so inestimable a price for our sins, for a
thing so vile, so despicable, so worthy to be hated. What more abominable, what
more odious in the sight of God than sin? and yet the Son of God gave himself
to expiate our sins. Sin is most hareful to Christ, Heb. 1.9. Thou have loved
righteousness, and hated iniquity, it is spoken of Christ; and yet though
Christ hated sin so much, he gave himself for our sins, Gal. 1.4. Who gave
himself for our sins: and as Christ hated sin, so had he power to punish and to
be avenged for it; and yet rather than we should undergo the punishment that
was due to us, he himself who had power to inflict the punishment, and might
justly have done it, was content to suffer the punishment for us. Well may we
cry out with Luther, O the condescension and love of God to wards man! God was
the person offended, and yet God came to suffer the punishment that man
deserved.

Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands love your wives as Christ loved the Church, and gave
himself for it. It was the Church that Christ gave himself for, Christ knew all
his sheep by name, and he laid down his life for his sheep. Paul could say, He
has loved me, and given himself for me, and every true Believer may say, He
has loved me, and given himself for me. Why, now what an insinite Sea and
Ocean of love must there needs be in the heart of Christ, when as Christ out of
the greatness of his love gave himself as a Sacrifice to expiate the guilt of
all the sins of all the Elect that ever had been committed, or should be
committed to the end of the world. This is set forth by the Apostle, 1 John
2.2. He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for
the sins of the whole world, that is, Christ is not only the propitiation for
ours sins, who do now live and believe on him, but he is also the propitiation
for the sins of all others who shall live after us, and believe on him even to
the end of the world. The virtue of Christ's death, and the efficacy of his
sufferings to the Elect of all Ages.

In the day that thou eatest thou shall dye the death. Death was the great
punishment threatened for sin: hence it comes to pass, that all mankind ever
since the Fall have been under a slavish fear of death and the consequence of
death. The great things which we do naturally dread are death, and what follows
death, Hell and the wrath of God. Now Christ by laying down his life has taken
away the fear of death and the consequences of death. This is fully expressed
by the Apostle, Heb. 2.14. That through death he might destroy him that had the
power of death, and deliver them who through fear of death were all their
lifetime subject to bondage. There are two things which the Apostle intimates
are the great things that do keep men in bondage all their days: the one is the
fear of death; and the other is the power that the Devil had over men, That he
might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil. The Devil
has not the power of death simply and absolutely; but he is said to have the
power of death, as he is the Executioner of Gods wrath, and drags men to the
torments of Hell. Now Christ by his death delivers us from both these, he
delivers us from the fear of death, and from the power of the Devil. 1. Christ
by death delivers us from death, the strength and venom of death is spent in
the death of Christ, Christ underwent death as it was the Curse that was
denounced upon us for sin. Now death is no more a part of the Curse to a
Believer, because Christ has undergone it as a curse for us. 2. Christ has
also undergone the pains and torments of Hell, as formerly has been showed,
and therefore he has enervated, (...).
made void, or frustrated the power of the Devil, as the word signifies. Christ
by his death has taken away Satan's power. The Devil after a sort, as he was
the Executioner of Gods wrath, might be said to have the power of death, that
is, of eternal death, after a sort, and in a sense he has power over those
torments which the damned feel. But now Christ having born those pains and
torments for his people, the Devil has nothing to do with them, he has no
power over them. Could we contemplate death as we ought to do in the death of
Christ, we might see death to have lost all its strength, all its venom in the
death of Christ. It is the observation of Luther: Could we believe so firmly as
we ought to do that Christ dyed for our sins, and rose again for our
justification, there would remain nothing of fear or terror in us; for, says
he, the death of Christ is a certain Sacrament or pledge which certifies us,
that our death is nothing at all. For if death has executed all its power and
strength upon Christ; if death has poured out all its venom and malignity upon
Christ, then there is nothing that remains in death to hurt us. Death had
nothing at all to do with Christ, but only as he put himself under the power of
death for our sakes. Now the Son of God who was above death, freely subjecting
himself to death for our sakes, and death having done all that it could against
Christ, it has nothing more to do against a poor Believer. It is true,
Believers dye still, but yet their death is not part of the Curse, the death of
the Saints is only a passage unto life, and it is that which prepares the way
for a more blessed Resurrection. Whatever was truly formidable or terrible in
death is taken away by the death of Christ. That which was most formidable in
death was this, that it was a part of the Curse, that it was the effect of
Divine wrath. Now Christ having suffered the whole of Gods wrath for us, death
is not inflicted upon Believers as the effect of Gods wrath, nay it is so far
from being sent to a Believer in wrath, that it is sent in mercy to him, and
death is an introduction unto a Believers happiness. All things are yours,
things present, things to come, life is yours, and death is yours, 1 Cor. 3.21,
22. Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, Rev. 14. Death is an
introduction to the Saints unto their perfect and complete happiness: the
Saints happiness is inchoate and begun in this life, when they are first
brought into the Kingdom of Grace, and their happiness is complete and
consummate in the next life, when they are by death ushered into the Kingdom of
Glory.

Heb. 2.14. For as much as the children are made partakers of flesh and blood,
he also himself took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him
that had the power of death, that is the devil. It is as much as if he had
said, Had he not partaken of our nature, he could not have suffered for us; as
he was the Son of God, and possessed of the Divine nature, so he was not
capable of suffering; but therefore did he take on him our nature, and became
the Son of man, that he might be in a capacity to suffer for men. O what
overcoming love was this! that the Son of God did therefore take upon him our
nature, that he might be in a capacity to suffer for men: had he always abode
in the form of God only, it had not been possible for him to suffer; but
therefore would he take upon him part of our passible and mortal flesh, that so
he might be in a capacity to suffer and dye for us.



1. Christ by his sufferings has purchased for us the forgiveness of sins,
Ephesians. 1.14. In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness
of sins.

2. Christ by his sufferings has purchased for us peace and reconciliation
with God, Ephesians. 2.16. That he might reconcile us to God by the cross. Col. 1.21.
You that were sometimes alienated and enemies in your minds by wicked works,
yet now has he reconciled in the body of his flesh through death.

3. Eternal life it self is the purchase of Christ's sufferings, Romans 6. ult.
The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus
Christ our Lord, that is, through the merit of Jesus Christ our Lord; so that
eternal life is the merit of Christ's death. We have another clear Text to
confirm this, Heb. 9.15. For this cause he is the Mediator of the new
Testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions
that were under the first Testament, they which are called might receive the
promise of eternal inheritance. The eternal inheritance, the inheritance which
all the Elect are brought unto in Heaven, is purchased by the death of Christ;
for so the Apostle expresses it, That by means of death those that are called
might have the promise of eternal inheritance. Hence is it, that Heaven is
called a purchased possession, Ephesians. 1.14. Until the redemption of the purchased
possession, the Glory of Heaven is called a purchased possession. Now in every
purchase there must be a price, there can be no purchase without a price: the
price therefore that was laid down for us, that we might obtain eternal life,
was the price of Christ's blood, the death of Christ, as appears from the former
Scriptures.

4. The Spirit of God, and all that grace whereby we are enabled to believe and
obey; and in general, whatever blessings are comprehended in the Covenant of
Grace, these are all the purchase of the death of Christ. This is apparent from
those words of our Savior in the institution of the Supper, This cup is the
new Testament in my blood: as much as if he should say, All the mercies, all
the blessings of the new Covenant are the purchase of my blood, and the
Covenant it self is ratified and confirmed by my blood. Now in the Covenant of
Grace there are many great things promised in it: the Lord promises to forgive
the sins of his people, he promises that he will put his Law in their minds,
and write it in their hearts; he promises that he will give his Spirit to
them, and the like: all these blessings are purchased and procured by the death
of Christ; great therefore must the love of Christ be in giving himself to
suffer and dye for his people, since by the death of Christ such great and
admirable privileges are purchased for them. The Covenant of Grace is the
greatest Charter of all our spiritual Privileges; whatever Privileges belong
to a Believer, they are contained within the compass of the Covenant. Now the
Covenant it self is founded in the blood of the Mediator of the Covenant. How
precious then is that blood that purchased such great things for us? And how
great was the love of Christ that shed his blood to obtain such things for us?

for our sakes and out of love to us, and the desire of our salvation. Now the
more we meditate upon the sufferings of Christ, there are two things that will
follow thereupon.

1. The more we meditate upon the sufferings of Christ, the more shall we
understand what those heights and depths, and lengths and breadths of the love
of Christ are, which the Apostle speaks of. The Apostle speaks of infinite
dimensions in the love of Christ, and the more we study the sufferings of
Christ, the more shall we see what those heights and depths, and lengths and
breadths of Christ's love are. O what immense love was this, that the Son of God
should come from Heaven to Earth to suffer and dye for men! God might have
glorified himself, although man had never been saved. A manifest proof of this
we have in the Angels: the Angels that fell were never recovered out of their
sin and misery, and yet God is glorified upon them; and if fallen man had never
been recovered, God might have glorified himself upon men in their condemnation
and destruction, as he is now glorifying himself upon the fallen Angels. Now
this was the abundant love of God to man, that God did not only will man's
salvation, but that so great a person as the Son of God and God, should come
from Heaven to Earth to save and dye for man. O let us stand and wonder at this
love: the more we soak our hearts in the meditation of these things, that the
Son of God and God should come into the nature of man for this very end, to
suffer such things for man, that man might be saved, the more shall we be taken
up in the admiration of this love.

2. The more we meditate on Christ's sufferings, and of the end which Christ had
in his sufferings, that he suffered such and such things for us, the more shall
we be confirmed in the belief and assurance of our own salvation. Christ did
not suffer in vain, he did not shed his blood in vain. If Christ did indeed
suffer the pains of Hell, that is a certain sign that God has no mind that
such as believe in Christ shall suffer those pains. The sufferings of Christ
are a clear miroir to show us what we are delivered from. What Christ has
suffered we shall not suffer, for God will not punish sin twice. If God has
inflicted the full punishment of our sins upon the person of our Head, he will
not lay the punishment of sin upon us too. God indeed may correct his children
in a way of fatherly discipline, but he will not lay the punishment of sin upon
them in a way of vindictive Justice: and the reason is, because God has
already punished their sins in the person of their Head: Christ their Head and
Surety has born the full punishment of their sins for them. This is the force
of the Apostles argument, Romans 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge
of Gods elect? It is God that justifies: Who is he that condemns? It is
Christ that dyed. As much as if he had said, If Christ has dyed, we shall not
dey: if we be Believers, who shall condemn? It is Christ that dyed, that is, if
Christ has dyed, we shall not dye eternally; if the Law has had its full
power and strength upon Christ, if the Law has put Christ to death, if it has
executed the Curse upon Christ to the uttermost, then it has no more to
execute upon a Believer as a part of the Curse; for Christ has redeemed us
from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, Gal. 3.13. Therefore the
consideration of what Christ has suffered for us may be as food to our faith.
Has Christ indeed suffered such things, as we have heard of in the Doctrine of
Satisfaction, then we shall never suffer them. Has Christ suffered
dereliction, has he been forsaken of God, and that as our Surety, then will
God never forsake us for ever. God may hide his face from us for a moment, but
he will not forsake us for ever. Has Christ born the wrath of God, then shall
we never bear it. O whenever the sense of guilt and the fear of Gods wrath
oppress our consciences, and lie heavy upon us, the best course we can take is
to dip our consciences in the wounds and blood of Christ, as Luther's
expression is; and the realizing by faith what Christ has suffered, will be
the best balm to cure a wounded conscience: for if the sufferings of Christ
were real, then first there is real satisfaction made; and if there was real
satisfaction made, then is God really pacified and really atoned; and if God be
really satisfied, why then should we doubt and call in question his love any
more? Only our great concernment is, to secure our part in Christ, and to
secure our interest in his sufferings; till Christ himself be ours, we can lay
no claim to the benefits of his sufferings, 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son
has life. We must first have the Son himself, before we can have life by the
Son. Our first work therefore is to make sure our interest in the Son himself.

Let me now in a few words close up the whole Doctrine concerning the
Sufferings of Christ and the work of his Satisfaction. We have heard much
concerning the preciousness of Christ's sufferings, and that ample and full
satisfaction that he has made by his sufferings. All that we have heard
concerning the sufferings of Christ and the work of his satisfaction will
signify nothing to us, will nothing at all avail us as to our salvation,
unless we get an interest in that great and blessed Person who has done and
suffered all these things. That which must make the sufferings of Christ and
his satisfaction available unto us, is to know that Christ has suffered as our
Head, that he has suffered in our room and in our stead. Now we cannot know
that Christ has suffered as our Head and as our Representative, unless we
first choose him for our Head, and pitch our faith upon his Person. It is the
Person of the Son of God who has done and suffered all that in our nature
which is necessary to be done and suffered for our salvation: therefore as ever
we expect benefit by what Christ has done and suffered in our nature, we must
first direct the eye of our faith to that great person who has taken up our
nature, and done and suffered such things in it, Joh. 6.40. This is the will of
him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son and believes on him, may
have everlasting life. We must first by the eye of faith see that great Person,
the Son of God come down into our nature, and doing and suffering such things
in it for the accomplishment of our salvation, and then we must close with this
Person, and embrace him with both the arms of our faith. It is the Election of
Christ's Person that gives us union with him. Now we having chosen Christ to be
our Head, we ought to contemplate what was done by him in our nature, and to
have all our expectation of salvation from what was wrought by him in it; thus
shall we have communion in the obedience, death, sufferings, and satisfaction
of Christ, and what Christ our Head has done and suffered in our nature (he
dwelling in our hearts by faith) shall be accounted as if we had done it.

The end of the twentieth Sermon.
FINIS.

