SPEECH OF THAT WORTHY KNIGHT, SIR BENJAMIN Rudierd, spoken in Parliament;
CONCERNING THE PLACING OF GOOD AND ABLE DIvines in Parishes miserably destitute
of Instruction, through want of Maintenance.

AND CONFIRMED BY THE Testimonies of three judicious, and Learned Men.

London Printed for W. Ley, and are to be sold at his Shop at Pauls-Chaine.
1641.

SIR BENJAMIN RUDDIERD His Speech in Parliament.
MAster Speaker, I did not think to have spoken again to this Bill, because I
was willing to believe that the forwardness of this Commit would have
prevented me, but now I do hold my self bound to speak, and to speak in earnest.

IN the first year of the King, and the second convention, I first moved for
the increase and enlargement of poor Ministers Livings; I showed how necessary
it was to be done, how shameful it was, that it had been so long neglected.
This was also commended to the House by His Majesty. There was then, as ^ow
many accusations on foot against scandalous Ministers. I was bold to tell the
House, that there were scandalous Livings too, which were much the cause of the
other: Livings of five Marks, or five pounds a year* that men of worth and of
parts would not be musled up to such pittances. And that there were some places
in England, which were scarce in Christendom, where God was little better
known then amongst Indians. I exampled it in the utmost skirts of the North,
where the prayers of the common people, are more like spells and charms, than
devotions; the same blindness and ignorance is in diverse parts of Wales, which
many of that Country do both know and l^ment.

I declared also, that to p^ant good Ministers in good Livings, was the
strongest and surest means to establish true Religion, that it would prevail
more against Papistry, than the making of new laws, or executing of old* That
it would counterwork court-conscience and lukewarm accommodation. That though
the calling of Ministers be never so glorious within, yet outward poverty will
bring contemp^ upon them; especially among those who measure men by the acre,
and weigh them by the pound, which indeed is the greatest part of men.

Mr. Speaker, I cannot but testify how being in Germany, I was exceedingly
scandalized to see the poor stipendary Ministers of the reformed Churches
there despised and neglected by reason of their poverty, being otherwise very
grave and learned men. I am afraid that this is a part of the burden of
Germany which ought to be a warning to us.

I have heard many objections and difficulties even to impossibilities against
this Bill: to him that is unwilling, there is over a Bear or a Lion in the
way. First let us make our selves willing* then will the way be easy and safe
enough.

I have observed, that we are always very eager and fierce against Papistry,
against scandalous Ministers, and against things which are not much in our
power; I should be glad to see that we did delight as well in rewarding, as in
punishing, and in undertaking matters within our own reach, as this is
absolutely within our power. Our own duties are next us, other men's farther
off: I do not speak this, that I do mislike the destroying or putting down of
that which is ill, but then let us be as earnest to plant and build up that
which is good in the room of it, for why should we be desolate. The best and
the gentlest way to dispell darkness, is, to let in the light; we say that day
breaks, but no man ever heard the noise of it; God comes in the still voice;
let us quietly mend our Candlesticks, and we cannot want lights.

I am afraid this backwardness of ours, will give the adversary occasion to
say, that we choose our religion, because it is the cheaper of the two; that we
would willingly serv^ God with somewhat that would cost us naught. Believe it
Mr. Speaker, he that thinks to save any thing by his religion, but his soul,
will be a terrible looser in the end. We sow sparingly, that^s the reason we
reap so sparingly, and have no more fruit. Me thinks whosoever hates Papistry,
should by the same rule hate covetousness, for that is Idolatry too. I never
liked hot professions and cold actions. Such an heat is rather the heat of
distemper and disease, then of life and saving health.

For scandalous Ministers, there is no man shall be more forward to have them
severely punished, then I will be: when salt has lost its savor, let it be
cast out upon the unsavory place, the d^nghill. But Sir, let us deal with
them, as God has dealt with us. God before he made man, made the world, an
handsome place for him to dwell in; so let us provide them convenient livings,
and then punish them in Gods name, but till then scandalous livings cannot but
have scandalous Ministers. It shall ever be a rule to me, that where the Church
and commonwealth are both of one religion, it is comely and decent, that the
outward splendour of the Church should hold a proportion, and participate with
the prosperity of the temporal estate: why should we dwell in houses of cedars,
and suffer God to dwell in skins?

It was a glorious and religious work of King James, (I speak it to his
unspeakable honor, and to the praise of that Nation, who though their Country
be not so rich as ours, yet are they richer in their affections to Religion)
within the space of one year he caused to be planted Churches through all
Scotland, the Highland and the Borders, worth 30. l. a year a piece, with a
house and some glebe land belonging to them; which 30. l. a year, considering
the cheapnesse of the Country, and the modest fashion of Ministers living
there, is worth double as much, as any where within an 100. miles of London.
The printed Act and Commission whereby it was executed, I have here in my hand,
delivered to me by a noble Gent* of that nation, and a worthy member of this
House, Sir Fran: Steward.

To conclude, though Christianity and Religion be established generally
throughout this Kingdom, yet until it be planted more particularly, I shall
scarce think this a Christian Commonwealth. And seeing it has been moved and
showed in Parliament, it will lie heavy upon Parliaments, until it be
effected. Let us do something for God here of our own; and no doubt God will
bless our proceedings in this place the better for ever hereafter. And for
mine own part, I will never give over soliciting this cause as long as
Parliaments and I live together.

TO confirm the complaint of this worthy and religious Knight: there follows
the testimony of two excellent men of God, whose piety and zeal may move some
to consider of the matter more seriously then they have done hitherto,
especially if they will please to read what is written more at large in their
Sermons of this argument.

The Reverend and learned Bishop Jewel in his Sermon before Q. Elizabeth on
Psalm. 69. 9. The zeal of thine house has eaten me up, says thus* In England
since the Gospel has been received, the maintenance of learning has been
decayed; and the lack of learning will be the decay of the Gospel. Loath I am
to speak, yet the cause so requires, that it is needful to be spoken: I trust
I shall speak in the hearing of them that will consider it. Maintenance of
learning whereby an able and sufficient Ministry may grow and be established in
all the Churches of this Realm, is to be wished for. The good estate of this
noble Kingdom, the comfort of posterity, the stay of Religion, the continuing
of the Gospel, the removing of darkness hangs upon it. One asked sometimes
how it was, that in Athens, so good and great a City, there were no
Physicians: to whom this answe^ was made, because there are no rewards
appointed for them that practice Physic. The same answer may be made for our
times; the cause why the Church of God is so forsaken, is the want of zeal in
them that should either for their courtesy, or for their ability be fosterers
of learning, and increase the Livings, where occasion is, and give hope and
comfort to learned men. Which said I? increase? nay the Livings and provisions
which heretofore were given, or taken away.

Have patience, if any such be here (as I well know there are) whom these
things touch. Suffer me to speak the truth, it is Gods cause: the Livings of
such, as are in the Ministry, are not in their hands, to whom they are due.
All other laborers and arti^icers have their hire increased double as much as
it was wont to be; only the poor man that labors and sweateth in the
vineyard of the Lord of hosts has his hire abridged and abated.

I spoke not of the Curates, but of the Personag^^ and Vicarages, that is, of
the places, which are the Castles and Towers of fence for the Lords Temple.
They seldom pass now adays from the Patron, if he be no better than a
gentleman, but either for the lease, or for present money. Such Merchants are
broken into the Church of God, a great deal more intolerable, then were they,
whom Christ whipped and chased out of the Temple. Thus they that should be
careful for Gods Church, that should be Patrons to provide for the consciences
of the people, and to place among them a learned Minister, who might be able to
preach the Word unto them, out of season, and in season, and to fulfill his
ministry, seek their own, and not which is Jesus Christ's. They serve not
Jesus Christ, but their belly. And this is done, not in one place, or in one
country, but throughout England. A Gentleman cannot keep his house, unless
he have a Personage or two in farm for his provision.

O merciful God! whereto will this grow at last^ if the misery which this
plague works would reach but to one age, it were the more tolerable: but it
will be a plag^e to the posterity, it will be the decay and desolation of Gods
Church: young men which are toward and learned see this, they see, that he
which feeds the flock has least part of the milk; he which goes a warfare,
has not half his wages; therefore they are weary and discouraged, they change
their studies, some become prentises, some turn to physic, some to law, all
shun and fly the Ministry. And besides, the hinderance that thus grows by
the wicked dealing of patrons, by reason of the Impropriations, the vicarages
in many places, and in the properest market towns, are so simple, that no man
can live upon them, and therefore no man will take them. ^they were went to
say, Ben^ficia sine cura; benefices without charge: but now may be said,
Cura^ine benefici^: charge or care without ben^fit.

But there be many which can say, such as ^e Ministers in the Church should
teach freely, without hope of recompense, or hire for their labor, our
Preachers are no better then Peter and Paul, and the other Apostles. They are
no better than the ^^ly Prophets, who li^ed po^^ely, poverty is a commendable
state. So say some (...) like devotion, as did Judas. What needs this waste?
this might have been sold (...) much and given to the poor, not that he cared
for the poor, but because he was a ^^eefe, and had the bag, and bare that
which was given. I dobut not there are many which teach Christ for Christ's
sake, which say in their soul, the Lord is my por^^on; who seek you and not
yours; I doubt not there are such.

But for the hope of posterity, I report me to all you which are Fathers and
^^ve children, for whom you are careful: although your selves have a zeal ^^d
care for the house of God, yet will you breed them up, keep them at ^choole,
and at the Universitie, until 30. or 40. years old, to your great char^^s, to
the end, they may live in glorious poverty, that they may live poorly and
naked like the Prophets and Apostles. Our posterities shall (...) that ever
^^ch Fathers went before them, and Chronicles shall report this contempt of
lear^ing, among the punishments and murraines, and other plagues of God, they
hal^ leave it written in what time, and under whose reign this was done.

In the mean time, what may be guessed of their meaning, who thus ruin and
^olle the house of God, which decay the provision thereof, and so basely
esteem ^he Ministers of his Gospel? they cannot say to God, the zeal of
thine house ^ath eaten me up: however in other things they do well; however
they seem to ^ejoyce at the prosperity of Sion, and to seek the safety and
preservation of the ^ords anointed: yet needs must it be, that by these means
foreign power, of which ^his Realm by the mercy of God, is happily delivered,
shall again be brought ^n upon us. Such things shall be done unto us, as we
before suffered in the times of Popery; the truth of God shall be taken away,
the holy Scriptures burnt and consumed in fire, a marveilous darkness and
calamity must needs ensue, etc.

The ox that treads out the corn is musled, he that goes to warfare,
receives not his wages, the cry hereof goes up into the ears of the Lord of
hosts; he will not abide so great contempt of his Word and Preachers, his
own name is thereby dishonored: our Savior says: Luke 10. He that despises
you, despises me, and Saint Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4. he that despises these things,
despises not man but God; and think we, that he will suffer his holy name to
be despised? nay his wrath is already kindled* he has already begun his
judgments, and therefore many places are left desolate, there is none that can
warn them of their sin, none that can move them to repentance, none that can
preach unto them forgiveness through Christ, none that can instruct them in
the comfort of everlasting life.

For this cause you will live still in your sins, in adultery, in
covetousness, and in pride, without any feeling of conscience, without any
fear of God, thus we provoke God to anger; many walk (of whom we cannot
think but with weeping) they are the enemies of the Cross of Christ; the name
of God is blasphemed among them, etc. These words happily seem sharp and over
vehement, but the darkness of our hearts against God, and the lack of zeal
for his house, enforce me to them: we are almost fallen into the lowest pit; we
are left without zeal, as senseless men, and as if we had clean forgotten
our selves, as the Heathens which know not God: therefore unless we repent,
the kingdom of God shall be taken away from us: he will send upon this land a
famine of the Word. ^^erusalem shall be overthrown and made an heap of stones,
the man of sin, and they which have not the love of the truth shall prevail
with many, and w^^^draw them from obedience to the Prince; this noble Realm
shall be subject (...) foreign nations; all this will the zeal of the Lord of
hosts bring to pass.

I could have spent this time in opening of some other matter, but nothing,
(...) my judgment, is more worthy your good consideration and speedy redress,
and^^ Wherefore he concludes with a grave exhortation to her Majesty, as
followe^^^

O that Your Grace did behold the miserable disorder of Gods Church, or th^^
you might foresee the calamities that will follow! It is a part of your
kingdom^ and such a part, as is the principal prop and stay of the rest: I
will say to yo^^ Majesty, as Cyrillus sometimes said to the godly Emperors
Theodosius and V^^lentinian, ab ea quae erga Deum est pietate Reipub vestrae
status pendet, The good stat^ and welfare of your commonweal hangs upon
true godliness, you are our governor, you are the nurse of Gods Church, We
may open this grief before you; God knows if it may be redressed it is run
so far: But if it may be redressed, there is no other besides your highness,
that can redress it. I hope (...) speak truly that which I spoke without
flattery, that God has endued you^ Grace with such measure of learning and
knowledge as no other Christian Prince; He has given you peace, happiness,
the love and the hearts of you^ Subjects. Oh turn and employ these to the
glory of God, that God may confirm in your Grace the thing which he has
begun. To this end has God placed Kings and Princes in their State, as David
says, that they serve the Lord that they may see, and cause others to see to
the furniture of the Church. The good Emperor Justinian cared for this as
much, as for his life, Constantine, Theodosius^ and Valentinian, and other
godly Princes called themselves vassales, the subject^ and bond-servants of
God. They remembered that God furnished them in th^^ houses, and were not
unmindfull to furnish his house.

When Augustus had beautified Rome, with setting up many fair buildings^ he
said, inveni lateritiam, manmoream reliqui. I found it made of brick, but I
leav^ it made of marble. Your Grace, when God sent you to your inheritance and
the right of this Realm, found the Church in horrible confusion, and in
respect of the true worship of God, a Church of brick; or rathe^, as Ezekiel
says, dawbed^ up with untempered mortar. Your Grace has already redressed the
doctrine, now cast your eyes toward the Ministry, give courage and
countenance unto learning that Gods house may be served: So shall you leave a
Church of God, and a testimony that the zeal of the Lords house has eaten you
up.

Let us have care for the house of God, whosoever is not after this sort
zealous, is a man of a double heart, we may not halt between two opinions: If
the Lord be God follow him, but if Baal be he, then go after him. He that
is not with Christ is against him. Many talk of the Gospel, and glory in
their knowledge, but it is neither talk nor knowledge, which shall save them
in that day: he that fears the Lord, and serves him with a pure heart, and
may truly say, the zeal of thine house has consumed me, he shall be saved;
if they shall no escape, which have zeal without knowledge, what shall become
of us which have knowledge without zeal.

And you, whosoever you are, that have decayed the Lords house, and abridged
the provision and maintenance thereof, and see the miserable wrack of God^
(...) any zeal of God in you, if you have any fellowship of the spirit, if any
compassion and mercy, if you love God, if you desire the conti^uance of the
Gospel; Oh remember you have the patrimony due to them that should attend in
the Lords house; you take unto your selves wrongfully that which was not lotted
for you. Give unto Caesar those things that belong unto Caesar, ^^d unto God
the things which appertain unto him, and make for the beauty and ^rniture of
his house. Enrich your selves by lawful means, and without the ^oile, and
wast of Gods Church. Let not the Ministry by your means be de^ised. You
enriched them heretofore in the days of Popery, which mocked, ^^d blinded, and
devoured you: spoil not them now, that feed, and instruct and ^^omfort you.

That reverend man of God Mr. Perkins in his Sermon of the duties and dig^^ies
of the Ministry gives three reasons of the rareness and scarceness of ^ood
Ministers. The first is, the contempt and disgrace of their calling by wick^d
and worldly men. 2. The difficulty of discharging the duties of their cal^^ng.
The 3. reason is more pecul^ar to this age of the now Testament, namely: ^ant
of maintenance and preferment for men that labor in this calling. Men are
flesh ^^d blood, and in that respect must be allured and won to embrace this
voca^^on by some arguments, which may persuade flesh and blood; the world has
(...) all ages been negligent herein, and therefore God in his Law took such
^^ict order for the maintenance of the Levites; but especially now under the
Gospel, this calling is unprovided for when it deserves best of all to be
rewar^ed: certainly it were a worthy Christian policy to propound good
preferments (...) this calling, that thereby men of the worthyest gifts might
be won with it; and the want thereof is the cause, why so many young men of
special parts and ^reatest hope, turn to other vocations, and especially to
the Law, wherein at this ^ay the greatest part of the finest wits of our
Kingdom are employed, and why? but because they have all the means of rise;
whereas the Ministry for the the most ^art yields nothing but a plain way
to beggary: this is a great blemish in ^ur Church, and surely, I wish the
Papists, those children of this world, were not wi^er in their kind in this
point then the Church of God: the reformation hereof is a work worth the
labor of a Prince and people, and special care is to be had in ^t, else it
will not be reformed: for doubtless had not God himself in the Old Testament
taken such straight order for the livings of the Levites, they had bin put to
no less extremities then is the Ministry of this age, and this reason added
to the other makes them perfect, and all put together make a reason infalli^le:
for who will undergo so vile a contempt, and undertake so great a charge for
no reward: and where there is so great contempt, so heavy a burden, and so
mean a reward, what marvel if a good Minister be one of a thousand?

Rulers and Magistrates are hereby taught, if good Ministers be so scarce, to
maintain and increase, and do all good they can to the Schools of the
Prophets, to Universities, Colleges and Schools of good learning, which are
the Seminaries of the Ministry: herein the example of Samuel is very worthy to
be followed, in whose days the Schools of the Prophets flourished; and ^ven
Saul himself, though he did much hurt in Israel, yet when he came to the
^^hooles of the Prophets, his heart relented, he could do them no hurt, nay he
(...) his rob^^ and (...) amongst them. So should Christian Princes (...)
Magistrates advance their Schools, and see them both well maintained (...)
well stored; the reason is evident and forcible, a good Minister is one of a
(...) sand, if therefore they would have the number increased, let them
maintain^^ Seminaries. And again, if Antichrist to uphold his kingdom (the
kingdom^^ Satan,) be so careful herein to erect Colleges and indow them with
liv^^ to be Seminaries for his Synagogue, and use so great means to sow his
(...) the hearts of young men, that so they may sow them in the hearts of the
(...) abroad, shall not Christian Princes be as careful, or rather much more
(...) for the increasing of the number of Godly Ministers? shall Baal have his
(...) Prophets, and God have his Eli^^ alone? great shame must it be to Aha^,
(...) any King, whose kingdom is in that estate.

Add hereunto that passage of an exc^lling and worthy ^^^ight, Sir Henry
S^^^man, in his tract, de non temerandis Ecclesiis.

Perhaps Lay Approprietaries think they may hold Parsonages and tithe (...)
example of Celledges, Deanes and Chapters, Bishops of the land, and of (...) of
our late Kings and Princes. Before I speak to this point, I take it by
protest^^ on that I have no heart to make apology for it; For I wish that
every man (...) drink the water of his own Well, eat the milk of his own
flock, and live^^ the fruit of his own vineyard: I mean that every member
might attract^^ other nutriment, but that which is proper to it self: yet are
they greatly decel^^ that draw any juice of encouragement from these examples,
for all these (...) there the Seminaries of the Church, or the husbandmen of the
Church, or the ^^thers and nurses of the Church; all de familia Ecclesiae, and
consequently belo^^ing to the care of the Church, and ought therefore to be
sustained by it. For (...) Paul says. He that provideth not for his own, and
namely for them of his household, (...) denies the faith; and is worse then an
infidel. 1 Timothy 5. Therefore before the sta^^^ of suppression of Abbeys, those
that were not merely Ecclesiastical persons, (...) if they were mixed, or had
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, they might by the la^ of the land participate
Ecclesiastical livings, and tithes particularly. And (...) seems to take
some ground out of the Word of God; for the provincial ^^^vites (as I may
term them) whom David severed from the Temple, and (...) abroad in the
country to be rulers of the people, i^ m^tters pertaining to (...) and the
Kings business, 1 Cron. 26. 30. 32. (That is spir^ually and temporal^^^ had
their portion of tithes notwithstanding, as well as the other Levites
^^^ministred in the Temple.

For a farewell; hear what Saint Augustine says Homil. 48. ex lib. 50.
Ho^^^om. 10. majores nostri ideo copiis omnibus abundabant quia Deo deci^^as
dabant (...) Caesari censum reddebant. Our Ancesters did therefore abound in
all riches (...) cause they did pay tithes unto God, and tribute unto Caesar:
but now they (...) not willing to do either.

Act. 28: 24. Some were persuaded with things that were spoken, and some
bele^^^^ not.

FINIS.

