TWO WORTHY SPEECHES Spoken in the Honorable House OF COMMONS, By Sir Benjamin
Rvdyard, At several times.

printer's or publisher's device

London, Printed for Antony Vincent, and are to be sold in the old Baily. 1643.

Two Speeches spoken by Sir Benjamin Rudyard, in the High Court of Parliament.
Mr. SPEAKER,
I Do verily believe, that the Vote we have already passed for the Disbanding
the Armies the first and tenth of March, will find us no further on our way,
then where we now are, besides the ill Accidents that may happen, and so much
precious time spent, as till then.

Sir, The Main Business is, whether we shall have a present Treaty or no? and
this concerns us in all that we Have and Are, since we Refused a Treaty at
Nottingham, I do not find that we have gotten much ground, although our Army
then was fresh, full, and full paid: the people erect, bountiful, and forward
to the war. Now the Disposition of the Kingdom, for the greatest part,
stands bent toward a Peace: so that wheresoever the Refusal or Delay of the
way to it shall be fixed, the Disadvantage will fall on that side. How clear
soever the intentions of the House are, yet abroad it will be taken but as a
show without Reality, and so it will be returned upon us.

For the Propositions, I have not known nor heard, that all the Propositions in
any Treaty of Importance, were ever swallowed whole. If some be harsh and
rough, they may be wrought and suppled by wise Treaters, made fit for an
acceptable agreement. If other be unpassable, they may be totally rejected.
Those that are our unquestionable Rights may be so claimed and held.

Mr. Speaker, We have already tasted the bitter bloody fruits of war, we are
grown exceedingly behind-hand with our selves since we began it: if we
persist, there will such a confluence of Mischiefs break in upon us, as I am
afraid will ruin the King, the Kingdom, the Nation; unless God be merciful
to us, and do step in with a great Miracle, for a little one will not serve our
turn.

I have long and thoughtfully expected, that the cup of trembling which has
gone round about us to other Nations, would at length come in amongst us. It is
now come at last, and we may drink the Dregs of it, the worst; Which God
divert.

There is yet some comfort left, that our Miseries are not likely to last long.
For we cannot fight here as they do in Germany, in that great, large, vast
continent: where although there be war in some parts of it, yet there are
many other remote quiet places, for trade and tillage to support it. We must
fight as in a Cockpit, we are surrounded with the Sea. We have no stronger
Holds then our own Sculls and our own Ribs, to keep out our enemies; so that
the whole Kingdom will suddenly be but one flame.

It has been said in this House, that we are bound in conscience to punish the
shedding of innocent blood: but Sir, who shall be answerable for all the
innocent blood which shall be spilt hereafter, if we do not endeavor a Peace,
by a speedy Treaty? Certainly, God is as much to be trusted in a Treaty as in
a war: it is He that gives wisdom to treat, as well as courage to fight,
and success to both, as it pleases Him. Blood is a crying sin, it pollutes
a Land: why should we defile this Land any longer?

Wherefore Mr. Speaker, Let us stint Blood as soon as we can. Let us agree with
our Adversaries in the way, by a present, short, wary Treaty. God direct us.

A Speech spoken in the Honorable House of Commons by Sir Benjamin Rudyard.
Mr. Speaker,
IN the way we are, we have gone as far as words can carry us: We have voted
our own Rights and the Kings Duty: No doubt there is a Relative Duty between a
King and Sbujects; Obedience from a Subject to a King, protection from a King
to His. The present unhappy distance between people His Majesty and the
Parliament, makes the whole Kingdom stand amazed, in a fearful expectation of
dismal Calamities to fall upon it: It deeply and conscionably concerns this
house to compose and setle these threatening, ruining distractions. Mr. Speaker,
I am touched, I am pierced with an apprehension of the Honor of the House, and
success of this Parliament. The best way to give a stop to these desperate
imminent mischiefs is, to make a fair way for the Kings return hither; It will
likewise give best satisfaction to the People, and will be our best
Justification. Mr. Speaker, that we may the better consider the condition we
are now in, let us set our selves three years back: If any man then could have
credibly told us that within three Years the Queen shall be gone out of
England into the Low Countries, for any cause whatsoever, The King shall remove
from his Parliament, from London to York, declaring himself not to be safe
here, That there shall be a total Rebellion in Ireland, Such discords and
distempers both in Church and State here, as now we find; certainly, we should
have trembled at the thought of it: Wherefore it is fit we should be sensible
now we are in it.

On the other side, If any man then could have credibly told us, That within
three years ye shall have a Parliament, it would have been good news; That
ship money shall be taken away by an act of Parliament, the Reasons and grounds
of it so rooted out, as that neither it nor any thing like, it can ever grow up
again; That Monopolies, that the High Commission Court, the Star Chamber, the
Bishops Votes shall be taken away, the Councell-Table regulated and restrained,
The Forests bounded and limited, that ye shall have a trienniall Parliament;
and more then that, A Perpetual Parliament, which none shall have power to
dissolve without your selves, we should have thought this a dream of
happiness; yet now we are in the real possession of it, we do not enjoy it,
although his Majesty has promised and published he will make all this good to
us we stand chiefly upon further security; whereas the very having of these
things, is a convenient fair security, mutually securing one another: there is
more security offered, even in this last answer of the Kings, by removing the
personal Votes of popish Lords, the better education of Papists children, by
supplying the defects of Law against Recusants, besides what else may be
enlarged and improved by a select Committee of both Houses named for that
purpose. Therefore Sir, let us beware we do not contend for such a hazardous
unsafe security, as may endanger the loss of what we have already; let us not
think we have nothing, because we have not all we desire; and though we had,
yet we cannot make a Mathematical security; All humane Caution is Susceptible
of corruption and failing; Gods providence will not be bound, success must be
his: he that observes the wind and rain, shall neither sow nor reap; if he do
nothing till he can secure the weather, he will have but an ill harvest.

Mr. Speaker, it now behooves us to call up all the wisdom we have about us,
for we are at the very brink of combustion and confusion: If blood once begin
to touch blood, we shall presently fall into a certain misery, and must attend
an uncertain success, God knows when, and God knows what. Every man here is
bound in conscience to employ his uttermost endeavors to prevent the effusion
of blood; blood is a crying sin, it pollutes a Land; let us save our
Liberties, and our Estates, as we may save our souls too. Now I have clearly
delivered mine own conscience, I leave every man freely to his.

FINIS.

