FIVE SPEECHES IN THE HIGH AND HONORABLE Court of PARLIAMENT.

BY Sir Benjamin Rudyerd, Knight, Surveighour of his Majesty's Court of Wards
and Liveries.

Printed according to his own true Copies, the former being absurdly false.

Now published with License.

LONDON, Printed by H. Dudley, for Henry Seile, at the Tigers head in
Fleetstreet over against Saint Dunstan's-Church. 1641.

AN INTRODVCTION to the last Parliament 16. Caroli. 1640.
Concerning moderation and preservation of Parliaments, by Sir Benjamin Rudyerd
Knight, 16. Caroli. 1640.
Master Speaker,
BY Gods blessing, and the Kings savor, a great door and effectual is opened
unto us of doing a great deal of good, if we do not shut in against our selves.
That we are here together in this House, is an evident demonstration that the
Kings heart stands right toward us; for which we do owe him a thankful, a
dutiful, a bountiful retribution.

Parliaments of later times have been disastrous and unfortunate, insomuch as
the very Name of a Parliament has been a reproach, a by word, a hissing. It
now lies in our hands, by Gods assistance, and it ought to be our chief
endeavor, to restore Parliaments to their wonted luster.

There are some here in this House who were present, and many who do (...)
remember when the first Parliament was broken that ever was broken in England:
we know from what (...) it (...), and of the most part, the same Genius has
prevailed ever since, full of subtilty, full of malignity. But now they have
taken upon them such a boldness, such an arrogance, as they stand in
competition with us, who are the better subjects. And some believe they have
carried it: their emulation I shall like, and do hope, but their presumption is
not to be born; for certainly the best religion makes the best subjects, I wish
them no harm, for I wish their conversion, and (...) harsh way to it. Let us
set up more and better Light to lighten their darkness burning shining Lights,
not luke warm, glowworm Lights; that the people in all places of the kingdom
may be diligently taught, carefully instructed, in soundness of doctrine, by
good example (...) their Pastors; taught and instructed to hear prayers, how to
use prayers; for whosoever (...) made the quarrel between praying and
preaching, never meant well to religion, being both so necessary duties not
defranding one another: But I know not how it come about, that in out religion
only a man may I be too religious. The best way to suppress all other
religions, is to up hold our own to the height Light dispells darkness without
noise or bussle. But I never yet know any man beaten him an opinion: I have
known many frighted into dissimulation. A almosity and faintness becomes no
Religion. Although (...) we have bad (...), that by their ^^nning working or
distempers in this House and by their (...) working upon these distempers out
or the House, they have contributed as much to the breaking of Parliaments as
any thing (...) whatsoever, yet bamlperswade to they will not be so active in
this, because of their common Interest with us, as Sulli^^^^ as Englishmen,
there being now; such a general necessity, of having a whole, a happy (...)
Howsoever, it will be wisdom in us, to be ware of Insusions, to keep steady to
our temper.

The maine cause of the infelicity and destraction of these times has been,
the frequent breaking of Parliaments, believe (...) Master Speaker, the
splinters of a broken Parliament, do make the most dangerous wounds in the body
Politic, which having so long festerd, must be pulled out with skillful gentle
hand, else they may rather vex, then cure the wounds they have made. But we
need not despair of a cure. For, in the fourteenth year of Edward the third.
That King had great sums of money granted him in Parliament by way of
Subsidy, for an expedition into France the went over entered into a way but the
ill managing of his treasure at home by his Officers, and the withdrawing of
some payments is by the people for not performance of conditions, enforced him
to accept of a truce, when he was in the full hope of gayning a great victory;
this could not but work strongly upon that greathearted Prince; He returned;
Presently in the fifteenth year he summoned a Parliament, wherein were nothing
but iealousies, contestations, and distempers; so that the Parliament, ended
without fruit. In the 17th. year he called another Parliament, for no other
end, but only to make an atonement between him and his people, which intention
wrought the success: for, by the prudence, and patience of the king. by the
wisdom and humbleness of both Houses, all breaches were closed up, and such a
perfect union made, as there never fell out any difference between him and his
people during the whole time of his long life after. Why may not we be as wise
round? I presume we shall. A Parliament is the bed of reconcilation between a
King and his people, mutually best for both: so that it will be proper and fit
for us, to lay aside all acerbity, and exasperation, To demean our selves with
calmnesse, sweetness, dutyfullnesse,

Although the Prerogative have gone very high, yet if we can but bring our
selves to an equanimity, to an indifferency of judgment, we shall find that
all kings do as naturally love power, as all people do affect liberty: Then is
it no more marvel that Princes do hearken to them who seek to improve their
power, then that Parliaments have too much yielded to some who have pressed to
cut end their liberty; whereas indeed, both Prerogative and liberty are best
preserved, when they are executed within their bounds.

The Law says, That a King of England can do no wrong. As for instruments, If
the matters do start and expose the men, if the things they have misdone be
condemned and reformed, the men, without my more a do, will quickly be
despised, grow as use less as they are worthles, wither and wear away to the
nothing they deserve. It is true that in some times, examples are more
necessary then Laws, especially when Laws grow infirm for want of exercise,
because examples make a deeper impression, strike a greater terror: But at this
time, we should very unhand somly celebrate the Redintegration, and union we
desire and expect, with unsuitable severity, and extremities.

The levying of money to releeve the Kings necessities, has also bred a great
disturbance, and it will do so: for the pe^^ry and scarcity of the Crown will
keep a perpetual inter feering between the King and his people until it be
supplied. The power of a King, and the power of necessity joined both in one
hand, Master (...), will not long be disappointed. But I do hope before this
Parliament be finally concluded, we shall establish such a constant Revenue to
his Majesty, as shall enable him to live plentifully (...) at home, for a high
formidable (...) upon him (...) and that without ^^king any thing away from
him, but such things only as will fall away of them selves. This, nothing but
Parliaments can do. As for subsist, I could never (...) narrow, protecting word
applied to the King without scorn and indignation.

Let us set out thoughts and desires but six (...) back, when we had noe hope
of any Parliament at all (...), what then we would have given, what we would
have done then to have had a Parliament; And we cannot (...) well now; It does
not well (...) with the wisdom and settlednesse of this Assembly. to value
(...) a Parliament we had not, then the Parliament we have; to think better of
an imaginaty Parliament, then of a real one.

I have observed, that whilst Parliaments are sitting, they (...) so high, so
sharp, as if Parliaments should sit always, which indeed does (...): And when
Parliaments are (...) who (...) if Parliament (...) never sit again; (...) a
Parliament (...) into this House (...) us (...) the pieces together, (...) out
right, and our selves with it.

(...) Mr. Speaker, It is so far from being strange, as it can hardly be
otherwise, but that in so long a vacation between Parliaments, many disorders
must needs grow in upon us, as Deviation in Religion, violation of Laws,
invasion upon libertyes: But the work and labor, is how to teduce them, how
to set them right again: The manner of doing it ought to be the principal in
our consideration, for the matters carry in them, stirring, vehement, tempting
provocations. For that very reason, Master Speaker, it behooves us to be the
more wary, the more composed, lest we be transported beyond the attaining our
ends. I confess I do now feel my self in a straight. Shall we only look
forward as they call it, Altogether omit and neglect God in his Religion, the
King in his Honor, the Commonwealth in his gasping extremity? That stands
notwith the integrity of this house, with the (...) our country. Shall we
encounter these enormities with the full force of a Parliamentary strictnes,
rigor, and exactness? In doing thus, we may turn the medcine into a worse
disease, and so undo all, even root out the whole race of Parliaments for
ever, Men and brethren what shall we do, Truly Master Speaker, If I should
speak for my life, as I do for more, I should most humbly beseech this House,
That we may all of us strive to make this a breeding, teeming Parliament, that
it may be the mother of many more, and not cast our selves upon the hazard of
desperate, dismal events. As long as we have Parliaments, we shall know where
to find our selves; when they are gone, we are lost.

AN INTRODVCTION To the PARLIAMENT, November. 7. 1640.
Master Speaker.
WE are here assembled to do Gods business and the Kings, in which our own is
included, as we are Christians as we are Subjects, Let us (...) God, thee shall
we honor the King the more for I am afraid we have been the less prospectus
in Parliaments be cause we have preferred other (...) him. Let Religion be
(...) for all things else are (...) yet we may have them too, (...) and (...);
if we give God his precedence.

We all know, what disturbance has been brought upon the (...), for vain,
petty trifles; How the whole Church, The whole kingdom has been troubled
where to place a Metaphor, an Altar. We have seen Ministers, their wives,
children, and families undone against law; against conscience, against all
bowels of compassion, about not dancing upon Sundays. What do this sort of
men think will be come of themselves, when the master of the house shall come,
and find them thus Beating their fellow servants? These inventions were but
Sives made of purpose to winnow the best men; and that is the devils occupation.
They have a mind to worry Preaching: for I never yet heard of any but diligent
preachers, that were vexed with these, and the like devices. They despise
prophecy, and as one said, they would feign be at something that were like the
Mass, that will not bite; a muzzeld Religion. They would evaporate and
dis-spirit the power and vigor of Religion, by drawing it out into solemn,
specious Formalityes, into obsolete, antiquated ceremonies new furbished up.
And this (belike) is the good work in hand with Docter Heylin has so often
celebrated in his bold Pamphlets. All their acts and actions are so full of
mixtures, involutions, and complications, as nothing is clear, nothing
sincere, in any of their proceedings: let the in not say, that these are the
perverse suspicious, malicious interpretations, or some few factions spirits
amongst us; when a Romanist has bragged, and congratulated in print, that the
face of our church begins to alter, the language of our religion to change. And
Sancta Clara has published, That if a Synod were held, Non intermixtis
Puritanis, setting Puritans aside, our Articles and their Religion would soon
be agreed. They have so brought it to pass, that under the name of Puritans
all our Religion is branded, and under a few hard words against Jesuits, all
Popery is countenanced. Whosoever squares his actions by any rule, either
divine or humane, he is a Puritan. Whosoever would be governed by the King's
Laws, he is a Puritan; he that will not do whatsoever other men would have
him do, he is a Puritan. Their great work, their master piece now is, to make
those of the Religion, to be the suspected party of the kingdom.

Let us farther reflect upon the ill effects these courses have wrought; what
by a defection from us on the one side, and a separation on the other: Some,
imagining whither we are tending, made haste to turn, or declare themselves
Papists beforehand, thereby hoping to render themselves the more gracious, the
more acceptable. A great multitude of the King's Subjects, striving to hold
communion with us, but seeing how far we were gone, and fearing how much
further we would go, were forced to flee the land, some into other inhabited
countries, very many into savage wildernesses, because the land would not bear
them. Do not they that cause these things cast a reproach upon the government?

Master Speaker, let it be our principal care that these ways neither
continue, nor return upon us. If we secure our religion, we shall cut off, and
defeat many plots that are now on foot by them and by others. Believe it Sirs
Religion has bin for a long time, and still is, the great design upon this
Kingdom. It is a known, and a practiced principle, that they who would
introduce another Religion into the church, must first trouble, and disorder
the government of the state, that so they may hide, and work their ends in a
confusion; which now lies at the door.

I come next, Master Speaker, to the King; business, more particularly, which
indeed is the kingdoms: for one has no existence, no being, without the
other, their relation is so near. Yet some have subtly, and strongly,
labored a divorce; which has been the very bane both of King and kingdom.

When foundations are shaken, it is high time to look to the building. He has
no heart, no head, no soul, that is not moved in his whole man, to look upon
the distresses, the miseries of the Commonwealth; that is not forward in all
that he is, and has, to redress them in a right way.

The King likewise is reduced to great streights, wherein it were
undurifulnesse, beyond inhumanity, to take advantage of him: let us rather make
it an advantage for him; to do him best service when he has most need; not to
seek our own good, but in him, and with him Else we shall commit the same
crimes our selves, which we must condemn in others.

His Majesty has clearly and freely put himself into the hands of this
Parliament, and I presume, there is not a man in this House, but feels himself
advanced in this high Trust. But if he prosper no better in our hands, then he
has done in theirs, who have hitherto had the handling of his affairs, we
shall for ever make our selves unworthy of so gracious a confidence. I have
often thought and said, That i^ must be some great extremity that would recover
and rectify this state: And when that extremity did come, it would be a great
hazard, whether it might prove a remedy, or a ruin. We are now, Master
Speaker, upon that vertical turning point; and therefore it is no time to
pall^ate, to foment, our own undoing.

Let us set upon the Remedy, We must first know the disease. But to discover
the diseases of the state, is (according to some) to traduce the government:
yet others are of opinion, that this is the half way to the cure.

His Majesty is wiser then they that have advised him, and therefore he cannot
but see, and feel, their subverting, destructive counsels, which speak
louder, then I can speak of them; for they ring a doleful, deadly knell over
the whole kingdom. His Majesty best knows who they are. For us, let the
matters bolt out the men, their actions discover them.

They are men that talk largely of the Kings service, have done none but their
own, and that is too evident.

They speak highly of the Kings power, but they have made it a miserable power,
that produces nothing but weakness; both to the King and kingdom.

They have exhausted the King's revenue to the bottom, nay through the bottom,
and beyond.

They have spent vast summ^^ of money, wastfully, fruitlesly, dangerously; so
that more money, without other counsels, will be but a swift undoing.

They have always, peremptorily pursued one obstinate pernicious course.
First, they bring things to an extremity; Then, they make that extremity of
their own, making the reason of their next action, seven times worse then the
former; and there we are at this instant.

They have almost ^poil'd the best instituted government in the world, for
Soveraignety in a King, liberty to the Subject, the proportionable temper of
both which, makes the happiest State for power, for Riches, for duration.

They have unmanerly and slubburringly cast all their proiects all their
machinations upon the King; which no wise or good ministers of State ever did
but would still take all harsh, disrastfull things upon themselves, to eleare,
to sweeten their Master.

They have not suffered his Majesty to appear unto his people in his own
native goodness, they have ecelipst him by their interposition: although
gross condense bodies may obscure and hinder the Sun from shining out, yet is
he still the same in his own splendor; and when they are removed, all
creatures under him, are directed by his light, comforted by his beams. But
they have framed a Supercilious-seeming Maxim of State for their own turn;
that if a King will suffer men to be torn from him, he shall never have any
good service done him: when the plain truth is, that this is the surest way to
preserve a King from having ill servants about him. And the divine truth
likewise is; Take away the wicked from the King, and his throne shall be
established.

Master Speaker. Now we see what the sores are in general, and when more
particulers shall appear, lot us be very careful, to draw out the cores of
them, not to skin them over, with a slight, suppurating, festring cure, lest
they presently break out again into greater mischiefs. Consider of it,
cousult, and speak your minds.

It ^th heretofore been boasted, that the King should never call a Parliament,
till he had no need of his people. These were words of division, and malignity.
The King must always, according to his occasions, have use of his peoples
hearts, hands, purses, The people will always have need of the King's
clemency, justice, protection, and this reciptocation, is the strongest, the
sweetest union.

It has been said too of late, that a Parliament will take away more from the
King, then they will give him. It may well be said, that those things which
will fall away or themselves, will enable the Subject to give him more than can
betaken any way else. Proiects and Monopolies are but leaking Conduit pipes,
the Exchequer it self at fullest, is but a cisterne, and now a broken one:
frequent Parliaments only are the fountain; and I do not doubt, but in this
Parliament, as we shall be free in our advises, so shall we be the more free of
our Purses, that his Majesty may experimentally find, the real difference of
better counsels, the true, solid grounds, of raising and establishing his
Greatness, never to be brought again (by God's blessing) to such dangerous,
such desperate perplexities.

Master Speaker, I confess I have now gone in a way much against my Nature,
and somewhat against my custom beretofore in this place. But the deplorable,
dismal condition, both of the Church and State, have so far wrought upon my
judgment, as it has convinced my disposition. Yet am I not Vir Sanguinum. I
love no man's ruin, I thank God, I neither hate any man's Person, nor envy any
man's fortune: only I am zealous of a through reformation, in a time that
exacts, that extorts it; which I humbly beseech this House may be done, with as
much lenity, as much moderation, as the public safety of the King and kingdom
can possibly admit.

Concerning Money to the SCOTS.
Master Speaker,
IT will become us thankfully to acknowledge, the prudent and painful
endeavors of my Lords the Peers Comissioners, in treating with the Scots, in
mediating with the king: whereby (God assisting) we are how probably drawing
near to a blessed peace.

His Majesty in his wisdom and goodness, is graciously pleased to give his
Royal Assent to their Acts of Parliament, where in the articles of their
assembly are like wife included. Insomuch as their Religion, their Laws, their
liberties, are ratified and established. Besides, their grievances rehev'd and
redressed; for which we use to give the King money, and are still ready to do
it. This, although it be a large, yet it is not received as a full satisfaction.

Before they came into England, they published in a Remonstrance, that they
would take nothing of the English, but what they would pay for, or give
security: we have desray'd them hitherto, and are provided to do it longer.

They did well remember, that we assisted them in the time of their
Reformation; and it is not to be forgoten, that we did bear our own charges.

Concerning mutual restitution of Ships, and goods, my Lords the Comissioners
have very fairly and discreetly accomodated that parricular already.

As for inferenciall, consequenciall damages, such a representation would but
minister unacceptable matter of difference and contestation; which amongst
friends ought to be warily and wisely avoided.

We could allege, and truly too, that Northumberland, Newcastle, and the
Bishopric, will not recover their former state these twenty years. We have
heard it spoken in this House, by an understanding knowing member in the
particular, that the Coal-mmes of New castle will not be set right again for a
hundred thousand pound, besides the over price of coals, which all the while
it has and will cost this city, and other parts of the kingdom. A great deal
more of this nature might be rehearsed: but I delight not to press such
tenter-stretch'd arguments. Let us on both sides rather thank God by proceeding
in the way he has laid before us, and not wry his way to ours: time and his
blessing will repair all our implicit damages, with many prosperous explicit
advantages.

They say, that they do not make any formal demand, but they do make a sum to
appear of five hundred and fourteen thousand pounds, more then ever we gave
the king at once. A portentous apparition! which shows it self in a very dry
time, when the Kings revenue is totally exhausted, his debts excessively
multiplied, this kingdom generally impoverished by grievous burdens, and
disordered courts. All this supply is to be drawn out of us only, without the
least help from any of his Majesty's other dominions; which to my seeming, will
be an utter drayning of the people, unless England be Ruteus in-exhaustus, as
the Popes were wont to call it.

Notwithstanding, Sir, now that I have in part opened the state we are in,
though nothing so exactly as they have done theirs, I shall most willingly and
heartily afford the Scots, whatsoever is just, equitable, and honorable, even
to a convenient, considerable, round sum of money, toward their losses and
expenses, that we may go off with a friendly and a handsome loss. If they
reject it, we shall improve our cause.

It was never yet thought, Master Speaker, any great wisdom, over much to trust
a successful sword. A man that walks upon a rising ground, the further he
goes, the larger is his prospect. Success enlarges men's desires, extends their
ambition, it breeds thoughts in them they never thought before. This is
natural, and usual.

But the Scots being truly touched with Religion according to their profession,
that only is able to make them keep their word. For, Religion is stronger, and
wiser, then reason, or reason of slate.

Beyond all this Master Speaker, the remarkable traces of Gods wonderful
providence in this strange work, are so many, so apparent, as I cannot but
hope, almost to believe, that the same All governing merciful (...) will
conduct and lead us to a happy conclusion, will contract a closer, firmer
union between the two nations then any mere humane policy could ever have
effected, with inestimable benefits to both. In advancing the truth of
religion, in exalting the greatness of the King, in securing the peace of his
kingdoms, against all malicious, envious, ambitious opposites, to Religion, to
the king, to his kingdoms; wherein, I presume, all our desires, and prayers do
meet.

Concerning BISHOPS.
Master Speaker.
I do verily believe, that there are many of the Clergy in our Church, who do
think the simplicity of the Gospel too mean a vocation for them too serve
in. They must have a specious, pompous, sumptuous Religion, with additionalls
of Temporal Greatness, Authority. Negotiation; not withstanding they know
better then I, what Fathers Schoolmen, Counsels are against their mixing
themselves in secular affairs.

This Roman ambition, will at length bring in the Roman Religion, and at last
a haughty insolence even against supreme power it self, if it be not timely,
and wisely prevented.

They have amongst them and Apothegm of their own making, which is, No Miter,
no Scepter: when we know by dear experience, that if the Miter be once in
danger, they care not to throw the scepter after, to confound the whole
kingdom for their interest.

And histories will tell us, that whenever the Clergy went high, Monarchy
still went low: if they could not make the Monarch the Head of their own
faction, they would be sure to make him less; witness one example for all,
the Popes working the Emperor out of Italy.

Some of ours as soon as they are Bishops, Adepto fine, cessat motus, they will
preach no longer, their office then is to govern: but in my opinion they
govern worse then they preach though they preach not at all; for we see to what
pass their government has brought us.

In conformity to themselves, they silence others also, though Hierome in one
of his epistles says, that even a Bishop let him be of never, so blameless a
life, yet he does more hurt by his silence, then he can do good by his example.

Master Speaker, It now behooves us so to restrain the Bishops to the duties
of their function, as they may never more hanker after heterogenious
extravagant imploiments. Not be so absolute, so single and solitary in actions
of moment, as Excommunication, absolution, ordination, and the like: but to
join some of the Ministry with them, and further to regulate them according to
the usage of ancient Churches in the best times; that by a well tempered
government, they may not have power hereafter, to corrupt the church, to undo
the kingdom.

When they are thus circumscribed, and the public secured from their
eruptions, then shall not I grudge them a liberal, plentiful subsistence;
else I am sure they can never be given to hospitally.

Although the calling of the Clergy be all glorious within, yet if they have
not a large, considerable outward support, they cannot be freed from vulgar
contempt.

It will always be fit, that the flourishing of the church should hold
proportion with the flourishing of the Commonwealth wherein it is. If we dwell
in houses of Cedar, why should they dwell in skins. And I hope, I shall never
see a good Bishop left worse then a Parson, without a Gleabe.

Certainly Sir, the superintendencie of eminent men, Bishops over diverse
Churches, is the most primitive, the most spreading, the most lasting
government of the Church. Wherefore, whilst we are earnest to take away
Innovations, let us beware we bring not in the greatest Innovation that over
was in England.

I do very well know what very many do very servently desire; But let us well
bethink our selves, whether a popular, democraticall government of the Church
(though fit for other places) will be either suitable or acceptable to a Regal,
Monarchical government of the State.

Every man can say (it is so common and known a truch) that sudden and great
changes, both in natural and politic bodies, have dangerous operations? and
give me leave to say, that we cannot presently see to the end of such a
consequence, especially in so great a kingdom as this, and where Episcopacie is
so wrap dane involved in the Laws of it.

Wherefore, Master Speaker, my humble motion is, That we may punish the present
offenders, reduce and preserve the Calling for better men hereafter. Let us
remember with fresh thankfulness to God, those glorious Martyr. Bishops who
were burned for our Religion in the times of Popery, who by their learning,
zeal, and constancle, uphold and convay'd it down to us.

We have some good Bishops still, who do preach every Lords Day, and are
therefore worthy of double honor. They have suffered enough already in the
disease, I shall be forry we should make them suffer more in the remedy.

Concerning BISHOPS, DEANES, AND CHAPTERS: At a Committee of the whole House by
Sir Benjamin Rudyerd.
M. Hyde,
WE are now upon a very great business, so great indeed, as it requires our
soundest, our saddest consideration, our best judgment for the present, our
utmost foresight for the futuer.

But Sir, One thing does exceedingly trouble me, it turns me quite round, it
makes my whole reason vertiginous, which is, that so many do believe against
the wisdom of all ages, that now, there can he no reformation without
destruction, as if every sick body must presently be knocked in the head as
past hope of cure.

Religion was first and best planted in Cities. God did spread his net where
most might be caught. Cities had Bishops and Presbiters. Presbiters were the
Seminaries out of which were sent laborers by the Bishops to propagate and
cultivate the Gospel. The Clergy then lived wholly upon the
free-will-offerings and bounty of the people.

Afterward, when Kings and States grew to be Christians, the outward settlement
of the church grew up with them. They erected Bishoprics, founded Cathedral
churches, endowed them with large possessions. Land lords built parish
churches, gleabd them with some portion of land, for which they have still a
right of Presentation.

I do confess that some Bishops have had ambitious, dangerous aims, and have
so still. That in their government there are very great Enormities.
"Regeneration does neither destroy the man nor the faculties, but does rectify
and reform them: so the calling of Bishops may, etc.
But I am not of their opinion, who believe that there is an innate ill
quallity in Episcopacy, like a specificall property, which is a refuge, not a
reason. I hope there is no original sin in Episcopacie, and though there were,
yet may the "Calling be as well reformed, as the person regenerated. Bishops
have governed the church for fifteen hundred years without interruption and
no man will say, But that God has saved souls in all those times under their
government. Let them be reduced, according to the usage of ancient Churches in
the best times, so restrained, as they may not be able hereafter to shame the
calling. I love not those that hate to be reformed, and do therefore think
them worthy of the more strict, the more close reformation.

We have often complaind that Bishops are too absolute, too singular. Although
Cathedral, churches are now for the most part but receptacles of Droanes and
Non-residents, yet some good men may be found or placed there, to be Assessours
with the Bishops, to assist them in actions of moment, in causes of importance.
There is maintenance already provided for them. If either in Bishoprics or
Cathedral churches, there be too much, some may be pared off, to relieve them
that have to little. If yet more may be spared, it may be employed to the
setting up of a preaching ministry through the whole kingdom, and until this
be done, although we are Christians, yet are we not a Christian State. There
are some places in England, that are not in Christendom; the people are so
ignorant, they live so without God in the world; for which, Parliaments are to
answer both to God and man: let us look to it, for it lies like one of the
Burdens of the Prophet Esaias, heavy and flat upon Parliaments.

I have oftentimes seriously considered with my self, what strong concurrent
motives and causes did meet together in that time, when Abbeyes and Monasteryes
were overthrown. Certainly Gods hand was the greatest, for he was most
offended. The profane superstitions, the abominable Idolatryes, the filthy
nefandous wickedness of their life's, did stink in Gods nostriles, did call
down for vengeance, for reformation. A good party of Religious men were
zealous instruments in that great work. As likewise many covetous ambitious
Persons, gaping for fat morsells, did lustily drive it on.

But Master Hyde, there was a principal Parliamentary motive, which did
facillitate the rest. For it was propounded in Parliament, that the Accession
of Abbey lands would so in-rich the crown, as the people should never be put
to pay Subsidies again; this was plausable both to court and country besides
with the overplus, there should be mainteyned a standing army of forty thousand
men, for a perpetual defense of the kingdom; this was safety at home, terror
and honor abroad. The Parliament would make all sure.

Gods part, Religion by his blessing has been reasonably well preserved: but
it has been saved an by fire, for the rest is consumed and vanished. The
people have paid Subsidies ever since; and we are now in no very good case to
pay an Army.

Let us beware, Master Hyde, that we do not look with a worldly, carnal, evil
eye upon church lands. Let us clear our sight, search our hearts, that we may
have unmixt and sincere ends, without the least thought of saving our own
purses. Church lands will still be fittest to maintain church men, by a
proportionable and orderly distribution.

We are very strict and curious to uphold our own propriety, and there is great
reason for it: Are the Clergy only a sort of men who have no propriety at all
in that which is called theirs? I am sure they are Englishmen, they are
Subjects.

If we pull down Bishoprics, and pull down Cathedral churches, in a short
time we must be forced to pull down Colleges too: for scholars will live and
die there as in cells, if there be no considerable preferment to invite them
abroad, and the example we are making now, will be an easy temptation to the
less pressing necessities of future times.

This is the next way to bring in Barbarisine, to make the Clergy an unlearnd
contemptible vocation, not to be desired but by the basest of the people; and
then, where shall we find men able to convince an adversary?

A Clergy man ought to have a far greater proportion to live upon then any
other man of an equal condition. He is not bred to multiply Three-pences, it
becomes him not to live mechanically and sordidly. He must be given to
hospitality. I do know my self a Clergy man, nodignitary, whose books have
cost him a thousand pounds, which when he dies may be worth to his wife and
children, about some two hundred.

It will be a shameful reproach to so flourishing a kingdom as this, to have a
poor beggarly Clergy. For my part, I think nothing too much, nothing too good
for a good minister, a good Clergy man. They ought least to want, who best know
how to abound. Burning and shining lights, do well deserve to be set in good
candlesticks.

Master Hyde, I am as much for reformation, for purging and maintaining
Religion, as any man whatsoever: But I profess, I am not for Innovation,
Demolition, nor Abolition.

FINIS.

