A CHALENG SENT From Prince Rupert and THE LORD GRANDISON, TO SIR WILLIAM
BELFORD, AT WINDSOR, IANVARY, THE Eighteen, 1643* by a Trumpeter, not above
14. years of Age.

WHEREIN IS DECLARED, how PRINCE RVPERT, and the Lord GRANDISON does dare the
said Sir WILLIAM, to meet them at any place whatsoever, to fight a single
DVELL, or else to bring his troop of horse, to end the controversy. Likewise,
Sir. WILLIAM his answer to the said CHALENG.

Published by the entreaty of all the Officers and Commanders in his
Excelencies Army.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Green, 1643.

A Chalengc sent from Prince Rupert, AND THE Lord Grandison: TO SIR William
Belforde: at WINDSOR, January, 18. 1643.
Upon the 17. of this present month of January, There came a Trumpeter from
the Lord Grandison, who was formerly taken prisoner at Winchester, by Sir
William Belford* with a chaleng to the said Sir Willliam from Prince (...)
which Chale^^ was to this effect, and agreeing to these ensuing words.

Sir William Belford having thought the Lord Grandisons entreaty and earnest
desire, granted him his liberty to take his pleasure where his Lordship thought
fitting; the said Lord Grandison, promising upon his honor, to continue and
remain a prisoner to him, and at every 6. days end, to appear in person
before him* But proving false and treacherous in this his promise, Sir William
sense his coming to Windsor, sent one of his Trumpeters to the aforenamed
prisoner; with a Message, claiming him as his own, and according to his vow
and promise.

This Trumpeter was detained and kept there by the Lord Grandison and Prince
Rupert, and after 4. or 5. days present there, it was agreed and concluded of
by the said Prince RVPERT, and the Lord GRANDISON; that a Challeng should be
sent to Sir WILLIAM.

Which to give all good Christians and well affected people, that have a
helping hand in this cause of Christ, I thought fit and meet, to set it here
down in brief, in this following and real relation.

The Lord GRANDISON haing after some time spent in consultation upon the
Message sent be Sir WILLIAM, he made it known to Prince RVPERT; where they
both consulted together that these ensuing words would be sent to the party
that were the Author of the Message, and it was performed accordingly.

For a Trumpeter came from them, with a warrant under the hand of P. Rupert,
wherein was this Challenge.

Sir, I having received your Message, I could do no otherwise, but to send you
this chaleng, for the reputation and vindication of my honor, and fidility;
Wherein I do dare you (seeiug that you claim me as your prisoner) to meet at
any place where you shall think fitting, there to encounter with me at a
single Duel, or else to bring your Troop of Horse, and so to have a pitched
Battle to try the valor of us both, and our followers.

And I do promise, that there shall no man come with me, then you will appoint
to come with you.

Sir William having received this chaleng, he was not a little over joyed, but
immediately made his Excellency acquainted with the same; And sent this answer
by the Trumpeter that brought the challenge.

That as the Lord GRANDISON had sent such a Message to him, dareing to meet
him in any place where he did think fitting.

So he did send the like words to him; desiring and dareing the said Lord, or
Prince RVPERT; or any other person of Honor in His MAJESTY'S Army, either to
encounter with him at a single Duel or else with their Troops of Horse; And
that although the Lord promised to bring an equal number to Sir William.

He made answer, that he did not fear to meet him, if that he did bring five
to one; And for his promise, he did not value it at all.

Declaring, that he had stained his honor, and blemished his name, by proving
Treacherous, and deceitful.

This answer Sir William returned by the Trumpeter that brought the chaleng, a
youth not above fifteen years of age, who came first unto Maidenhead, and
there had a safe conduct to Windsor, where the Trumpeter was had before my Lord
General and after some examination of the youth, his Excelency gave him a
twenty shillings piece, for his good behavior before him; and upon Tuesday
last, the Trumpeter returned from Windsor, and came to Maidenhead, where he
was blindfolded out of the town, and is now gone to the Kings Army. By the
next post, you shall hear what will become of this Challeng.

FINIS.

