A SPEECH CONCERNING A WEST INDIE Association, at a Committee of the whole
house in the Parliament, 21. IACOBI. By Sir Benjamin Rudyerd.

Printed in the year 1641.

A SPEECH CONCERNING a WEST INDIE Association, at a Committee of the whole
House of Parliament.
Sir Dudley Digs,
I Do profess, that as my Affection, my Reason, and my Judgment, go
strongly with the scope and drift of this Proposition; so shall a good part of
my poor fortune, when it comes to execution.

For to my understanding, there was never propounded in Parliament, a design
more proper for this kingdom, nor of more pregnant advantage to it, whether we
consider the nature of our situation, or the quality of our Enemies Forces.

As we are an Island, it concerns our very being to have store of ships to
defend us, and also our well-being by their Trade to enrich us.

This association for the West Indies, when it shall be regulated and
established by act of Parliament, and thereby secured from the violence and
injury of any intruding hand, it will certainly give many men encouragement
and confidence, voluntarily to bring in large and liberal contributions,
toward so noble, so profitable an Enterprise. So that in short time, we shall
see many new ships built, many brave men employed, and enabled for the service
of their country, none of this money shall be carried out of the kingdom, but
laid out for shipping, which is the defense of it, and bestowed upon our own
men, who must be fed and maintained, though they stay at home. For this, we
shall reap the fruit of whatsoever benefit Plantation, Traffic, or Purchase
can procure us, besides honor and security.

Now, let us a little consider the Enemy we are to encounter, the King of
Spain. They are not his great territories which make him so powerful, and so
troublesome to all Christendom. For it is very well known, that Spain it
self is but weak in men, and barren of natural Commodities. As for his other
Territories, they lie divided and asunder, which is a weakness in its self;
besides, they are held by force, and maintained at an extraordinary charge.
Insomuch, as although he be a great King, yet is he like that great Giant, who
was said to have 100 hands, but he had 50 bellies to feed, so that ^atably, he
had no more hands then another man.

No Sir, they are his Mines in the West Indies, which minister fuel to feed
his vast ambitious desire of universal Monarchy: It is the money he has from
thence, which makes him able to levy, and pay soldiers in all places; and to
keep an army continually on foot, ready to invade and endanger his Neighbors.

So that we have no other way, but to endeavor to cut him up at root, and
seek to impeach, or to supplant him in the West Indies. By part of which
course, that famous Queen of most glorious memory, had heretofore almost
brought him on his knees. And this our undertaking (if it please God to bless
it) must needs effect it sooner and quicker: the whole body of the Kingdom
being united and concur^ing in a perpetual supply to this action, so that he
will have no free time given him to rest.

Moreover, this will be a means not only to save, but to fill His Majesty's
Coffers, enabling the people to give him liberally, and often; the Kings ships
will have little to do, but to guard the coasts, for the Sea-warre will
chiefly be made at the charge of the subject. Thus, (Sir Dudley Digs) I doubt
not but that in short time, both King and people shall be safe at home, and
feared abroad.

To conclude, I shall be very glad to hear any man make objections against
this Design, so that he do it with an intention to refine and perfect the
work; but if any shall speak against it with a mind to hinder and destroy it,
I must entreat him to pardon me, if I do scarce think him to be a good
Englishman.

FINIS.

