A WORTHY SPEECH Spoken in the Honorable House OF COMMONS, By Sir Benjamin
Rudyard.

This present July, 1642.

embellished Tudor rose

July 17. Printed for R. Thrale. 1642.

A Speech spoken in the House of Commons by Sir BENJAMIN RUDYARD. July 9. 1642.
Mr SPEAKER,
IN the way we are, we have gone as far as words can carry us: We have voted
our own Rights, and the Kings Duty: No doubt there is a Relative Duty between a
King and Subjects; Obedience from a Subject to a King, Protection from a King
to His People. The present unhappie distance between His Majesty and the
Parliament, makes the whole Kingdom stand amazed, in a fearful expectation of
dismal Calamities to fall upon it: It deeply and conscionably concerns this
House to compose and settle these threatening ruining distractions. M. Speaker,
I am touched, I am pier'd with an apprehension of the Honor of the House, and
success of this Parliament. The best way to give a stop to these desperate,
imminent mischiefs is, To make a fair way for the Kings return hither; It will
likewise give best satisfaction to the people, and will be our best
Justification. M. Speaker, That we may the better consider the condition we are
now in, let us set our selves three Years back: If any man then, could have
credibly told us, That within three Years the Queen shall be gone out of
England into the Low Countries, for any cause whatsoever. The King shall remove
from his Parliament, from London to York, declaring himself not to be safe
here, That there shall be a total Rebellion in Ireland, Such discords and
distempers both in Church and State here, as now we find; certainly we should
have trembled at the thought of it: Wherefore it is fit we should be sensible
now we are in it.

On the other side, If any man then, could have credibly told us, That within
three Years ye shall have a Parliament, it would have been good News; That
Ship-monie shall be taken away by an Act of Parliament, the Reasons and Grounds
of it so rooted out, as that neither it, nor any thing like it, can ever grow
up again; That Monopolies, The High Commission Court, The Star Chamber, The
Bishops Votes shall be taken away, The Council Table regulated and restrained,
The Forests bounded and limited; That ye shall have a Trienniall Parliament;
and more then that, A Perpetual Parliament, which none shall have power to
dissolve without your selves, we should have thought this a dream of
happiness; yet now we are in the real possession of it, we do not enjoy it,
although His Majesty has promised and published he will make all this good to
us: We stand chiefly upon further security; whereas, the very having of these
things, is a convenient, fair security, mutually securing one another: there
is more security offered, even in this last answer of the Kings, By removing
the personal Votes of Popish Lords, By the Better Education of Papists
children, By supplying the defects of Laws against Recusants, besides what else
may be enlarged and improved by a select Committee of both Houses, named for
that purpose. Wherefore, Sir, let us beware we do not contend for such a
hazardous unsafe security, as may endanger the loss of what we have already;
let us not think we have nothing, because we have not all we desire; and though
we had, yet we cannot make a Mathematical security; All humane Caution is
Susceptible of corruption and failing; Gods providence will not be bound,
success must be his: He that observes the wind and rain, shall neither sow nor
reap; if he do nothing till he can secure the weather, he will have but an ill
harvest.

M. Speaker, It now behooves us to call up all the wisdom we have about us,
for we are at the very brink of Combustion and confusion: If blood once begin
to touch blood, we shall presently fall into a certain misery, and must
attend an uncertain success, God knows when, and God knows what. Every man
here is bound in conscience to employ his uttermost endeavors to prevent the
effusion of blood; blood is a crying sin, it pollutes a Land; let us save our
Liberties and our Estates, as we may save our Souls too. Now I have clearly
delivered mine own conscience, I leave every man freely to his.

FINIS.

