ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT and SUBSCRIPTION, BETWEEN His Highness PRINCE RVPERT,
and diverse Noble and Honorable Persons, and others, Undertakers for working of
Mines Royal, In the Counties of CARDIGAN and MERIONETH, in the Principality of
WALES.

LONDON, Printed for William Phillips at the Black Raven in Chancery Lane. 1670.

An Agreement and Subscription made this Nineteenth day of April, Anno Dom.
1670. Annoque Regis Caroli Secundi, etc. vicesimo secundo, by his Highness
Prince Rupert, Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bavaria and Cumberland;
together with diverse Noble, Eminent, and worthy Persons, Joint Undertakers for
the working of certain Mines Royal, in the Counties of Cardigan, and Merioneth,
within the Principality of Wales.
WHereas the said Persons have jointly and unanimously agreed to work certain
Mines Royal, in the said Counties; and for the effectual doing of the same,
have agreed to advance the sum of four thousand pounds, according to the
Subscriptions hereafter mentioned; whereof one Moiety is already paid down.
And whereas the said Persons have already had diverse Meetings, for the reducing
the said Work, and the management of the same, into certain Rules, Order and
Method: It is now hereby Declared, Articled, and Agreed, by and between all the
said Parties, subscribing and sealing these presents; That the same shall be,
as hereafter in these presents is declared.

1. 40 Shares, and no more.
Imprimis, That the said Undertaking shall consist of forty whole shares and
parts, and no more; every of which shares shall be one hundred pounds. And it
is hereby Intended and Declared, That no Person whatsoever subscribing, his
Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, shall without his or their Consent, be any
way liable to be charged with any other or greater sum of money, for the
carrying on of the said Works, than is by him subscribed to these presents. And
that in the division of any profits, that shall or may arise from any of the
said Works, such profits shall be divided into forty equal parts. And every
Person so subscribing and paying in one whole share or part, shall receive one
full fortieth part of all such clear profits, so arising from the said Works.
And every Person subscribing and paying in two whole shares, shall receive two
fortieth parts, and so every person proportionably, according to his and their
Interest in the same.

2. Edw. Backwel Esquire Treasurer
2. That the one Moiety of the said four thousand pounds, which is already paid
in to Edward Backwell Esquire upon the account of the said Undertaking, shall
remain in the hands of the said Edward Backwell, as Treasurer to the said
Undertakers. And that all moneys paid in to the said Undertakers, or disbursed
for their use, shall be paid unto the said Edward Backwell, and disbursed by
him, (until further order be made to the contrary, according to the one and
twentieth Article following. How he shall issue money.
) And that the said Edward Backwell shall issue no moneys relating to the said
Stock, above the sum of twenty pounds at one time, without order under the
hands of five of the said Undertakers at the least, whereof three must be of
the standing Committee, in the sixteenth Article following expressed and
appointed. And the same order be confirmed, as in the one and twentieth Article
following is expressed. And that the said Edward Backwell do issue no moneys,
to the sum of twenty pounds or under, without order under the hands of five
or more of the said Undertakers, whereof three to be of the said standing
Committee, as aforesaid.

3. Second Moiety to be paid in upon 14. days notice.
3. That the other Moiety of the said four thousand pounds, which is yet
unpay'd, shall be paid in by the several Undertakers, their Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, according to their several subscriptions and
shares, at such time and place, and in such manner, as by any order made and
signed by five or more of the Undertakers, (whereof three at the least to be of
the standing Committee, in the sixteenth Article following expressed) shall be
appointed; and the said order be confirmed, as in the one and twentieth Article
is expressed. So that such person, his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns,
have notice of the said Order, fourteen days at least before such moneys due
on the second Moiety, be ordered to be paid, as aforesaid.

4. Every person failing to pay, to be excluded.
4. That if any person of the said Undertakers subscribing these presents, his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, upon notice of such Order so made, as in
the next precedent Article is declared, shall not pay in his or their second
Moiety, at such time, and in such manner, as by the said Order shall be ordered
and appointed; That then every person or persons so subscribing, his or their
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, omitting or refusing to pay in the
second Moiety as aforesaid, shall be and is hereby excluded, to have any
benefit or advantage by the said Undertaking, or ever after to have any Vote
amongst the said Undertakers. But the rest of the said Undertakers, or such
Quorum, (as in the one and twentieth Article following is expressed) shall and
may take in any other person into the said share and proportion, (subscribing
these presents, and paying the whole share with interest) or may let the same
sink in the common Stock. But may receive his first Moiety out of the first
clear profits.
But such person or persons so subscribing, and not paying in his or their
second Moiety, as aforesaid, his and their Executors, Administrators, or
Assigns, shall and may receive his first Moiety, already paid in, out of the
first clear profits, arising out of the said Mines and Undertaking, after
satisfaction first made to all persons who shall pay in their second Moiety, of
all Principal and Interest, out of the said clear profits.

5. Survivorship not to t^ke place, but to go to the Executors.
5. That for such person and persons, subscribing and paying in the said second
Moiety, as aforesaid, it is hereby Intended and Declared, That the share and
proportion of such person or persons, shall not by his or their death survive
to the remaining Undertakers. But the same together with all profits and
advantages, shall go to his and their Executors and Administrators so dying, as
aforesaid, only subject to such Rules and Orders, as in these presents are
contained, and not otherwise.

6. Liberty to assign; and in what manner.
6. That any person so subscribing, and paying in his second Moiety, as
aforesaid, may at his pleasure assign and transfer his Share or Shares to any
person, so as he first do acquaint the said Undertakers with the same: And that
the said person be allowed, by Order made by the said Undertakers, or any five
or more of them, (whereof three to be of the standing Committee, in the
sixteenth Article following expressed.) And so as that he do not assign less,
than one whole Share to one person.

7. Leases to be taken in Cardigan and Merioneth.
7. That the said Undertakers shall forthwith take from the Society of the Royal
Mines, one or more Lease or Leases, for one and forty years, in their own
names, or in the names of some others in trust for them, of all those Mines of
Comsymlock, Goginian, Combmarvin, and Tallibont, lying within the Parishes of
Lambatherne, Vaur, and Llanyhangell, alias Llanyhangell Castle Gwalter, in the
said County of Cardigan. And also of all those Mines near Bermouth, in the said
County of Merioneth; and of such other Mine or Mines within the Principality of
Wales, or elsewhere, as by the said Undertakers, or any five of them, (whereof
three at the least to be of the standing Committee, in the sixteenth Article
following expressed) shall be Ordered and Agreed upon. So that such Order be
confirmed, as in the one and twentieth Article is limited, at and upon such
Rents and Terms, as can with best advantage be procured from the said Society.
And that the said Undertakers shall likewise proceed to perfect one Agreement,
for the purchasing in of a Lease of certain smelting and refining Mills, with
the appurtenances, in Skybory Coed, in the Parish of Llanyhangell Generoglyn,
in the said County of Cardigan: And the Interest of the Mills.
The interest of which Mills, with the appurtenances, now is or late was in
William Dickenson, of the Middle Temple London Esquire or his Assigns. And for
which said Lease and Interest of the Mills, with the appurtenances, To the use
of the Undertakers.
the said Undertakers have contracted with the said William Dickens^n, for the
sum of eight hundred and seventy pounds; the interest, benefit, and
advantage, of all and every which Lease and Leases, as well of the said Mines
as Mills, shall be to and for the said Undertakers, their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, according to their several shares and proportions,
hereafter expressed, in the present Subscription.

8. The Min^s to be effectually wrought.
8. That the said Mines, or so many of them, as by the said Undertakers, (or
such a number and Quorum of them, as in the sixteenth Article following is
expressed) shall be thought fit and appointed, shall be forthwith effectually
wrought, at the charge and cost of the said Undertakers; and that such Adits
and Shafts be driven and sunk; and such Veins wrought within the said several
Mines, as to the chief Steward, or Conductor of the said Works, and other the
Officers and Workmen of the said Mines, shall be given in charge by the said
Undertakers, or such number and Quorum as aforesaid, at the costs and charge as
aforesaid. And that all charge of working the said Mines since Candlemas day
last past, be born. And all profits of Oar since the said time, are intended to
enure to the said Undertakers.

9. Chief Steward, and his Salary.
9. That Henry Rumsey Esquire be the chief Steward or Conductor of the said Mines
and Works, until farther order, as in the one and twentieth Article following
is expressed. And that for his pains and care therein, he shall have allowance
at present, until the said Mines shall be improved, to a full working thereof,
the sum of one hundred and sixty pounds per annum, for himself; and for a
Clerk, (to be chosen by the said Undertakers) for the keeping of the accounts
of the said Mines, out of which he is to allow the said Clerk thirty pounds per
annum. And that after the said Mines shall be improved to a full working of the
same, the said Henry Rumsey shall be allowed for his care and pains, the sum
of two hundred pounds per annum, over and above the sum of thirty pounds per
annum, to be allowed to be said Clerk. And that the said Salary shall commence
from Candlemas day last past. And that the said Henry Rumsey shall proceed
according to such order and instructions, as have already been sent unto him
from the said Undertakers; and upon such further order and instructions, as by
any five of the said Undertakers (whereof three to be of such standing
Committee, as in the sixteenth Article following is expressed) shall be
directed and appointed.

10. Master-Worker, and Refiner, and his Salary.
10. That Major Richard Hill be the Master-Worker and Refiner, until further
order, as in the one and twentieth Article following is expressed. And that for
his pains and care therein, he shall have allowance at present, the sum of
one hundred Marks per annum. And that the said Richard Hill shall proceed, as
in the preceding Article is declared.

11. Steward of the Mines, and his Salary.
11. That Edward Hacklett be the Steward of the Mines, until further Order, as
in the one and twentieth Article following is expressed. And that for his care
and pains therein, he shall have allowance the sum of thirty pounds per
annum. And the said Edward Hacklett to proceed, as in the ninth Article
precedent is declared.

12. Clerk of the M^nes.
12. That Mr. Meredith Lloyd be the Clerk of the Mines, until further Order, as
in the one and twentieth Article following is expressed. And that for his care
and pains therein, he have allowance at present the sum of thirty pounds per
annum, which for the first year is to be paid out of the Stewards allowance,
as in the ninth Article precedent is declared. And the said Meredith Lloyd is
to proceed, according to such Order and Directions as he shall from time to
time receive from the chief Steward or Conductor, except only where he shall
receive any particular Orders or Instructions to the contrary, from the said
Undertakers, or any five of them, whereof three to be of the said standing
Committee, in the sixteenth Article following expressed.

13. Register.
13. That Mr. Henry Kempe shall be the Clerk or Register to the said
Undertakers, until further Order, as in the one and twentieth Article
following is expressed. And that for his care and pains therein, he shall have
allowance at present the sum of twenty pounds per annum. And that he shall
make entries of all such Acts, Orders, and other things material, relating unto
the said Undertaking, as he shall be thereunto required and appointed.

14. Sergeant.
14. That Thomas Greenfield shall be the Sergeant attending the said
Undertakers, until further Order, as aforesaid. And to give notice and
summons, and do other things relating to the said Undertaking. And that for his
care and pains therein, he shall have allowance at present the sum of ten
pounds per annum.

15. That when the said Mines shall come to a full working, there shall be
likewise a Clerk of the Mills, Clerk of the Mills.
who shall be chosen, and have such allowance, as by the said Undertakers shall
be Ordered and Appointed, according to the one and twentieth Article following.

16. Standing Committee, and their power.
16. That there shall be a standing Committee of the said Undertakers,
consisting of the number of nine, and no more, unto whom the principal care and
management of all affairs relating to the said Undertaking, shall be and is
hereby committed. The said Committee to continue, and a new elected, as in the
eighteenth Article is expressed. And that the said Committee shall meet at the
Robes Chamber in Whitehall, every Tuesday in the afternoon, in Term time, and
during the actual sitting of any Parliament; and in the forenoon out of Term,
and the Parliament not sitting, until further order, as in the one and
twentieth Article following is expressed. At which time and place any other of
the said Undertakers may be present, and assist therein, and have equal Votes
with any of the said Committee, so always that three of the said Committee at
the least be present. And that there be in all at the least five of the said
Undertakers. And it is hereby Declared and Intended, That any five or more of
the said Undertakers, (whereof three at the least to be of the said Committee
as aforesaid) meeting at such time and place as aforesaid, and not otherwise,
shall be accounted a full Meeting of the said Undertakers. And shall have full
Power and Authority to do any Act, or make Orders, relating to the said
Undertaking, as fully as if the said Undertakers were all present. And that
whatsoever Orders shall be made by such number so meeting as aforesaid, or by
the major part of them, shall be good and effectual to all intents and
purposes, until the same shall be reversed by subsequent Order of the
Undertakers, as aforesaid; except always, that the Acts and Orders of such
number and Meeting, shall not be effectual and binding, in such cases as shall
be particularly named in the one and twentieth Article following. And it is
hereby Agreed, That Sr. Paul Neile, Present Committee.
Knight, Sr. Francis Cobb, Knight, Thomas Henshaw, Esquire Dr. Williams, James
Hayes, Esquire John Ball, Esquire John Wright, Esquire Edmond Warcupp Esquire and Mr. Henry
Kempe, shall be the present standing Committee, until a new one shall be
elected, as in the nineteenth and one and twentieth Articles following is
expressed.

17. Manner of Voting.
17. That in all cases where it shall come to a Vote, in any Meetings or
Committees relating to the said Undertaking, every person and persons
subscribing and paying in one hundred pounds, shall have one Vote; and likewise
subscribing and paying in two hundred pounds, shall have two Votes; and so for
the third hundred, three Votes. But that no person whatsoever shall have more
than three shares or proportions, or more than three Votes; nor shall any
person be admited to give more Votes than one, unless five of the said
Undertakers at the least shall be personally present, in such manner as in the
sixteenth Article precedent is expressed. And that no person whatsoever shall
have more Votes than one, in any case relating to the ordering or disbursing of
money, or sharing of profits, or stating and allowance of any Accounts, or
altering of these present Articles, or any of them.

18. Manner of Voting, in case a share fall into more hands than one; or in
case of a Feme or Infant.
18. That where in any case, by the death of any of the Undertakers, or
otherwise, the share and proportion of any such person or persons, shall happen
to fall into more hands than one, such share and proportion shall be accounted
but as one, in the said several hands; and that such persons into whose hands
the said share and proportion shall fall, shall have no Vote amongst the said
Undertakers, unless one of the said persons shall happen before to be one of
the Undertakers. But otherwise the said several persons shall make a Proxy of
one of the Undertakers, who shall and may give a Vote in the right of such a
share and proportion, so long as it shall so continue in several hands as
aforesaid; the same Rule to hold place where such share or proportion by death
or assignment, shall happen to come to any Woman or Infant, or to any other
person who shall not be allowed and approved by the said Undertakers, or any
five or more of them, (whereof three at the least to be of the standing
Committee, in the sixteenth Article expressed) according as by the sixth
Article precedent is Ordered and Appointed.

19. Last Tuesday in Mich. and Trinity Terms, a general Meeting.
19. That every last Tuesday, in the Terms of St. Michael, and the Holy Trinity,
yearly, shall be esteemed a general Meeting of the said Undertakers; on every
of which days, (at such time and place, as in the sixteenth Article precedent
is expressed) every of the said Undertakers shall be, and is hereby obliged, to
be present and assisting; Names to be called, and every person absent to
forfeit 20. s.
and the Names of every person then having any share, shall be called; and
every person that shall not be present at the said time, without sufficient
cause to be allowed, shall forfeit the sum of twenty shillings, such
penalties to be deducted, as in the next following Article. And it is hereby
Declared and Agreed, That on the said last Tuesday, Last Tuesday in Mich. Term,
Committee to be chosen.
in the Term of St. Michael, yearly choice shall be made of the standing
Committee, (in the sixteenth Article expressed) for the year from thence next
ensuing, who shall have such and the like power and authority, as by these
presents is given and appointed unto the said Committee. And that at the said
time and place, such and so many of the said Committee for the present year
shall be continued, and so many new elected, (to the number of nine, and no
more in all) as to the said Undertakers, or the major part of them then
present, acording to the twentieth Article following, shall seem good. But if
it should happen no Election to be made on the said day, that then the said
Committee for the year precedent, to have the same power and authority as
before, until a new Election be made, according to the said one and twentieth
Article.

20. Forfeitures to be deducted out of the profits:
20. That all such Penalties, Forfeitures, and Mulcts, as shall happen to be
made in any cases, relating to the said Undertaking, shall be deducted out of
the dividend and proportion, of the profits of such share and proportion, and
shall be paid to the Clerk, for such uses as by the standing Committee, or any
three of them, shall be appointed.

21. In what cases and in what manner Orders shall be binding.
21. That in all cases of making or discharging any Officer, relating to the
said Undertaking, or of taking any other Lease, or working any other Mine or
Mines, than in the seventh Article precedent is and are particularly mentioned;
or touching the admittance of any new Member or Adventurer, in the said
Undertaking, or the choice of any Member into the standing Committee, upon the
death or displacing of any of them; or touching and concerning the expending
and ordering out of any sum or sums of money, exceeding the sum of twenty
pounds at one time; or touching and concerning the allowance of any Accounts,
audited and stated; or touching the allowance of any division and sharing of
profits; or touching and concerning the increase or alteration of these present
Articles and Agreements, or any of them; no Order shall be effectual to bind
the said Undertakers, unless the same be made at such Meeting of the said
Undertakers, and such place, as in the sixteenth Article precedent is
expressed. And that the said Order so made, be ratified and confirmed by his
Highness Prince Rupert, and the Lord Ashley, or one of them, under his or their
hands, or by such person or persons, as at the yearly Election of the standing
Committee, (as the same by the nineteenth Article is limited) shall have such
power and authority given them, as by this present Article is given to his
Highness, and the Lord Ashley, as aforesaid; which Order so made and ratified
as aforesaid, shall be effectual and binding in all and every the cases
aforesaid. To the well and truly performing of all and every of which Articles
and Agreements, according to our several shares and proportions hereunto
subscribed; We the said Undertakers do mutually and reciprocally bind our
selves, our several and respective Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, by
these presents. Witness our Hands and Seals this said nineteenth day of April,
in the said two and twentieth year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord
Charles the Second, over England, etc. Annoque Dom. 1670.

FINIS.

