RULES FOR CONVERSATION, OR A Collection Of Moral Maxims and Reflections.

By a Roman Catholic.

LONDON, Printed for J. Eaglesfield, at the Marigold over against the
Globe-Tavern in Fleet Street. 1686.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
THere is newly published a Farce (as it has been Played before the King and
Queen) called The Devil of a Wife, or a Comical Transformation.

As also Rules for Conversation or a Collection of Moral Maxims and Reflections.

Likewise a new Book Entitled Latin Songs with their English, and Poems; (
Chevy-Chace turned into Latin by Order of the Bishop of London) By Henry Bold
formerly of N. Coll. in Oxon, afterward of the Examiners Office in Chancery.
These Printed for John Eaglesfield Bookseller at the Marigold near
Salisbury-Court in Fleetstreet.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Reader,
THE following Observations are most of them certain Rules and Axioms which
diverse great good Men have used in their Conversations to their no small
honor and advantage, and they may be of the same use to thee, if well digested
and with Prudence reduced to practice; They are true, and a small Experience
will tell you so; The more thoughts you spend on each particular, the better
will thou like them; for my own part, I fear no Censure of the Book or its
Author, since I am resolved not to be known, Judge as thou please, perhaps
thou may have Read several of them where I did, I think it no criminal theft
to write what has been written, though the Author be not Named, for that which
I approve is my own in such case, besides I make no claim, the greater Number
are a Collection as the Title speaks, however of this I am sure, they all are
or may be useful, some of them are Common and obvious, yet the advantage of
considering and using them, may never be the less, others may seem alike and to
the same purpose, but on Second thoughts they will yield different Precepts,
Others may seem contradictory, but if reduced to particulars for use they will
appear otherwise; There may be many more added and much more Material, but
nihil simul inceptum est and perfectum, and time perhaps may increase the
number of these, In the Interim take what follows, they being first Collected
for private use, are now Published for the Booksellers Benefitand Thine, which
if attained, I am Content.

A COLLECTION OF Moral Maxims and Reflections.
I. NO Man is ever so Happy or so Miserable, in this Life, as he does Imagine
himself to be.

II. The Happiness and Misery of Men, depends as much on their Humor and the
temper of their Mind, as on their Fortune and Condition in the World.

III. Always put more confidence in those who have obliged you, then in those
that you have obliged, for the former are more likely to do you a further
kindness, then the latter, to acknowledge or requite what they have received.

IV. The contempt of Riches in the Philosophers was only a secret to prevent
that contempt which attends Poverty.

V. He that councels others to be Virtuous, doubles his obligation to be so
Himself.

VI. By trifles are the qualities of Men as well discovered as by great
Actions, for in the latter they are many times strained, and in the former more
Natural.

VII. A Generous Man least regards Money, but when he has it not, he wants it
most.

VIII. In any great Action, he that will be his own Counceller, shall be sure
to have a Fool for his Clyent.

IX. Nothing is of more Importance in all a Man's Behavior, then to know how to
take an advantage when offered

X. He that Winks at his own Faults thinks all the World Blind.

XI. What you are to do, advise with many, what you are resolved to do
communicate but to few.

XII. No Man in Prudence will threaten when he has any thing to Desire.

XIII. When a Man is compelled to do an Act, it is most commonly best for him to
seem to do it Frankly and without Constraint.

XIV. He that will improve his Memory must not too much distrust it.

XV. To be a Judge of Neighbors Differences, is dangerous and always makes one
or both Eenemies.

XVI. The readiest way to be deceived is for a Man to believe himself more
subtle and clear sighted then other Men.

XVII. Fancy and Chance lift most to Employments.

XVIII. When Men Eminen and Worthy are preferred, their Fortune seems due and
no Man Envys the payment of a debt.

XIX. Valor is a Quality which he that has shall have least need of.

XX. A Bashful Man is not his own Master.

XXI. He that will be safe in troublesome times, must 1. Engage in no Faction,
and 2. Favor and relieve the lowest, for the first preserves kindness with the
present, and the second prepares against the Future.

XXII. Such as have respect only to a few things are easily misled.

XXIII. He that understands amiss, concludes worse.

XXIV He that will be truly Charitable, should give to poor Housekeepers as do
not receive Alms of the Parish, for to give to those, is only to save so much
Money to the Rich, who by Law are bound to relieve the Poor.

XXV. Many glorious Actions that make a noise in the World, as the Effects of a
wise Design, are produced only by Humor and Passion.

XXVI. We should not take delight in observing the faults of others, if we had
none of our own.

XXVII. We disparage Eavourites and Men advanced in the World, from Pride and
Love of Favor, and the contempt we testify against such preferments, serves
only to mitigate our own grief for not obtaining the like.

XXVIII. We have commonly more Strength then Will, and we imagine things
impossible as an excuse to our selves for our own Laziness.

XXIX. What passes for Sincerity in the World, is oftentimes but
dissimulation, to attract the Confidence of others.

XXX. Men blame the faults of others rather to persuade of their own Innocence
then with a real design of Reformation.

XXXI. Men discover an abhorrenge of Lying, very often with a design to gain
Credit to what they say themselves, and Render their own Testimony the more
Considerable.

XXXII. Prosperity makes us known to others, whether we are what we seem to be,
and Adversity makes others known to us, whether they are in reality what they
seem in Profession.

XXXIII. They who Addict themselves to little things with too much Application
are seldom capable of any grand undertaking.

XXXIV. He that begins an affair without Judgment and is hasty in the
prosecution, must not wonder if it want Success.

XXXV. He that is discouraged from a worthy design merely upon the account of
diffity has a mean Spirit.

XXXVI. Be Liberal to your Friends of your discourse and your purse, but beware
of being bound for more then you are willing to give, for he that is surely
know's not what he is worth.

XXXVII. He that sets his Mind and Affections on things supersluous, is
commonly reduced to want those which are necessary.

XXXVIII. On many occasions without scruple one may refuse to promise, but in
few or none without shame can he refuse to perform.

XXXIX. He that is unwilling to pay what he owes when he has it by him, shall
live to be willing and not be able.

XL. Philosophy can triumph over past and future Calamities, but is Conquered
by a present Evil.

XLI. The Refusal of Commendation, is oftentimes, with a desire to be Praised
Twice.

XLII. Few Men Praise others but with some exception, and ordinarily with a
design to be Praised themselves.

XLIII. No Man is so easily deceived and imposed upon, as when he thinks to
deceive others.

XLIV. He that talks more then comes to his share, and with Confidence and
Passion in disputable matters, may easily be observed to contradict himself,
and that is the only Method to shame and silence him.

XLV. Boldness and Confidence many times obtain that which cannot be compassed
by ordinary means.

XLVI. It Is not enough for a Man to have good qualities, but he must likewise
know how to use and manage them.

XLVII. That Noise and Show that proves a Man not to be Ingenious or Wise, is
oftentimes the cause of his reputation for being so.

XLVIII. Many who are excellent for one quality have not the Reputation of
being so, because they are excellent for another, as Caesar is believed to have
been as Eloquent as Cicero, and yet is Famous only as a Warrior.

XLIX. A great Reputation does rather abase then exalt those who know not how
to answer and sustein it.

L. We Judge of other Men's merit by their carriage toward us, our self-love
does either augment or lessen their good qualities in Proportion to the
Pleasure and Satisfaction we have by them.

LI. One Man is not more unlike another, then every Man is unlike himself
considered at different times.

LII. No Man is ever so ridiculous by the qualities he has, as by those which
he affects to have.

LIII. It Is ever reckoned more shameful to distrust ones Friends, then to be
deceived by them.

LIVE. All Men complain of their Memories, but no Man of his Judgment.

LV. No difguise can for any long time hide Love, where it is in reality, or
feigns it where it is not.

LVI. We please more in our conversations by our weaknesses and failings, then
by any of our good qualities.

LVII. A Man may know others by himself, for as in water face answers to
face, so does the heart of Man to Man.

LVIII. Folly attends us in every time of our Life, if any one appear wiser
then another, it is because his follies are more proportioned to his Age and
Fortune.

LIX. Many would discover greater Wisdom and Ability then they do, did they not
over earnestly desire and affect it.

LX. The wisest Men may be often at a loss in the company of Fools.

LXI. It Is more easy to be Wise for other Men then for himself, as it is to
give good Council then to follow it.

LXII. There are some Commendations which reproach a Man, and some reproaches
on the contrary which are rather to a Man's Praise.

LXIII. It Is as easy to deceive a Man's Self and not observe it, as it is
difficult to deceive others without being observed.

LXIV. Men commonly magnify the good qualities of others, not from an esteem
of their merit, but from a value for their own, and would attract Praise to
themselves by bestowing it on others.

LXV. No greater mark of an extraordinary merit then to hear a man praised by
those who do most Envy him.

LXVI. The reason why so few seem Rational and Agreeable in their Conversation,
is because most Men consider what they would speak themselves rather then what
they should answer to that is spoke.

LXVII. Try the Fidelity of a Friend in such a time and instance as you can
bear his refusal without great inconvenience, for he that would borrow when he
has not, must borrow when he has.

LXVIII. Resolve never to do that by another which you may do by your self, nor
do that to morrow which you may do to day, nor neglect or despise the least
thing.

LXIX. He that excuses a Fault by a Lie, thinks it better to be Guilty of two
Faults then to be thought Guilty of one.

LXX. Remember not the Favors you have done to others, and forget not those
which others have done to you.

LXXI. Many Wicked Persons would be less dangerous then they are, and do less
mischief, if they had not some goodness.

LXXII. The honor a Man has already acquired is caution for more and greater.

LXXIII.'It Is more difficult to know what not to say on any Subject then to
speak much.

LXXIV.'It Is much easier to appear worthy of those Employments which a Man has
not, then of those which he actually has.

LXXV. We many times confess little Faults with a design to persuade that we
have not great ones.

LXXVI. Most Men Love new acquaintance, not so much because they are weary of
the Old, or find Pleasure in change, as because they think they are not admired
enough by those who know them too well, and hope to be more so by those that
know them not so much.

LXXVII. What seems to be generosity is oftentimes but Ambition in disguise
which condemns little interests and designs to aspire at greater.

LXXVIII He that endeavors only to imitate other Men, does not take the way to
excel.

LXXIX. It Is some kind of ingratitude to be earnest and pressing to acquit our
selves of our obligations to another.

LXXX Little Passions are diminisht by absence, but great ones are augmented,
as the Wind Blows out a Candle but increases a Fire.

LXXXI. We magnify the Affection and tenderness which our Friends have for us,
rather to declare our own merit, then our gratitude.

LXXXII. Thankfulness for Favors is generally with a design to obtain more.

LXXXIII. Pride, which inspires us so much with Envy, does oftentimes seem to
moderate it, for we should more envy other Men, did we not extremely flatter
our selves.

LXXXIV. The Encouragement we give to those who are entering on the World and
beginning an Employ, proceeds oftentimes from a secret Envy we bear to some
already settled.

LXXXV. It Is more difficult for a Man to be Faithful to a Mistress when he is
favored, and happy, then when he is ill treated.

LXXXVI. There are such accidents sometimes fall out in the Life of a Man, that
be he never so wise, he must a little act the part of a Fool to extricate
himself.

LXXXVII. All Men have some time or other an Opportunity offered for their
advancement and happiness, which if they miss and do not improve, they seldom
meet with the like while they live.

LXXXVIII. All Men almost take Pleasure to repay little Obligations, but few or
none are thankful as they ought for great ones.

LXXXIX. We need only be jealous of those who are studiously careful to avoid
giving Jealousy.

XC. Jealousy is always born with Love, but oftentimes survives it.

XCI. Whence comes it to pass that we have Memory enough, to retain even the
smalest particulars of what happens to our selves, and yet forget that we have
ever repeated them more then once to the same Person.

XCII. What distrust soever we have of the Sincerity of those who tell us any
thing, yet we always believe they tell us more Truth then they do to others.

XCIII. Any one that Loves may know when another cease to Love him.

XCIV. That which renders the Pride of others insupportable, is because it
wounds our own.

XCV. A Man has few Faults less pardonable then the means he makes use of to
hide them.

XCVI. Whatsoever shame almost we have deserved, it is almost always in our
Power to Re-establish our Reputation.

XCVII. No Man can please for a long time who has but one kind of Humor or is
always in the same temper.

XCVIII We oftentimes appear greater then we are by an Employment beneath our
merit, but are diminisht by an undertaking above our Capacities.

XCIX. Novelty and long use or Custom do equally hinder us from taking notice
of the Faults of our Friend.

C. Those that Love will sooner pardon the greatest indiscretion then the least
unfaithfulness.

CI. What disposition soever the World has to Judge amiss, it is yet more
frequently kind to false merit then unjust to true.

CII. Our Enemies do commonly come nearer to the Truth in their Opinion of us,
then we do in Judgment of our selves.

CIII. The same Pride that makes us blame the Faults from which we think our
selves Free, causes us to despise the good qualities of others which we want
our selves.

CIV. That Steddiness of Temper which seems to resist Love, seems also to
render it violent and lasting after once it is admitted.

CV. Fearfulness and Cowardice are Faults whereof it is dangerous to reprove
those you would cure of them.

CVI The Calmness or discomposure of our Humor, depends not so much on the
most weighty and considerable accidents of our Life's, as on the disposition and
ordering of those little things which occur daily.

CVII No quarrel lasts long where but one side is in Fault.

CVIII. Though Error be blind, yet by dispute she produces knowledge.

CIX. Disputations about Evinced Certainties renders them many times uncertain
and doubtful.

CX. Vulgar Air is more easy got then kept, the Mobile ever desiring rather to
make a Man great than endure him when he is so.

CXI. Hasty honor is generally short lived, arising mostly from Expectation,
which if not seconded by a double performance turns to contempt, besides that a
sudden rise occasions a more strict enquiry.

CXII. Fame undeserved is a Silent invitaion to merit.

CXIII. Disoblige no one, for though he be not worthy to be a Friend he may be
able to be an Enemy.

CXIV. Quality makes the best Friends, there being no danger either of Envy or
Contempt, either of which when any way Predominant dissolves the Frame.

CXV. In dissimulation artis est celare artem.

CXVI. Great Persons stand for Imitation, lesser for Observation, from both may
be learned Experience.

CXVII. Company like Climates Alter Complexions, therefore be sure keep Company
with Persons above rather then beneath your selves.

CXVIII. Reputation is like a Glass, once cracked and always crazy.

CXIX. A Wise Man will once in an age come in Fashion.

CXX. No one can be merry that has more then one Woman in his Bed, more then
one Friend in his Bosom, and more then one Faith in his Heart.

CXXI. Extravagantly to commend another is an argument of arrogance, for he who
so Commends another would have him esteemed upon his own Judgment.

CXXII. Every Man's Fault should be every Man's Secret.

CXXIII. Every Man a little beyond himself is a Fool.

CXXIV. Envy knows what it will not confess, and yet an Envious Person never
attains any knowledge of himself but by report.

CXXV. All Controversies leave truth in the middle, and are false at both ends.

CXXVI To Obey well is as great action as to govern, and more men's duties.

CXXVII Nature has produced few persons strong, but Industry and Exercise
makes many.

CXXVIII He who understands his own and his Adversaries strength can hardly
ever miscarry.

CXXIX. Sudden Accidents are not easily prevented, but those that are foreseen
are prevented without difficulty.

CXXX. He that Encounters with a desperate Person runs a great Hazard of making
himself so.

CXXXI. He that is a Wise Man will prefer the public good before any private
Quarrel of his own.

CXXXII. He that would do any great thing by his own Authority, must first
extinguish Envy.

CXXXIII. A Man once disobliged is never after to be employed in any, matter of
great Importance.

CXXXIV. He is many times mistaken, that with Meekness and Humility expects to
work much upon a proud Person.

CXXXV. He that changes his Humor, or Demeanor, or Party, must not do it at
a leap, but by gradation, that before the Diversity of his deportment deprives
him of his old Friends, he may gain new ones, otherwise being discovered and
deserted he is certainly Ruined.

CXXXVI It is never advisable to put a Man's whole Fortune on the Hazard for any
Prospect whatsoever, considering the Instability of Humane Assairs.

CXXXVII. It is a quaere, whether an Envions Man Laughs more when ill betides
another or when good to himself.

CXXXVIII. What is good for the Hive is good for the Bee's.

CXXXIX. To Enrich a Man's self with another Loss is unnatural.

CXL. He whose Duty it is to defend others, ought not rashly to run himself in
danger, for more then one is Concerned.

CXLI. It Is more Wisdom to be reckoned miserable, which is an Imputation rather
Infamous then Odious, then be thought Liberal, and run your self into a
Necessity of being dishonest, which is infamous and Odious both.

CXLII. He that neglects what is done to follow what ought to be done, will
sooner learn how to Ruin then how to preserve himself.

CXLIII. Humane Frailty and Fortunes Instability are Arguments for Clemency.

CXLIV. There is nothing sooner dissolves Humane Society then the Vice of
ingratitude.

CLXV. An Honest Man's Word is as good as his Oath.

CXLVI. He that Permits a Crime when he ought and can hinder it, is Particeps
Criminis.

CXLVII. The reason why Men are Revengful, is because they think to assuage
their own grief by occasioning another Man's, but it is unnatural to do so.

CXLVIII. Love is always Venturous and conceives difficult things easier then
they are.

CXLIX. The reason why Men Study and Endeavor to Justify their Passion, is
Love of Ease, for though they Love the Corrupt Pleasure of Passion, yet they
Love not the Reflective part, besides Pride has no small share in the occasion.

CL. He that will advance an interest, must Study more how to oblige others
then how to Enrich himself.

CLI. It Is a good Rule in apparel to let your Wife go above your Estate, and
your Children according to your Estate, and your Self below it, so that you may
make all even at the Years end.

CLII. Old Men live more by Memory then by hope

CLIII. He is the safest Preserver of a Secret, whose Secrecy and Silence need
not be feared.

CLIV. Great deservers are generally either hated or feared or both by the
party obliged, and that either because of the Expectation of as great a return
or the Power to do as great a mischief.

CLV. He is a Fool that will adventure a Double Duckett for a single Penny.

CLVI. Hidden Music is nothing Worth.

CLVII. It is better to live where nothing is Lawful then where all things are
so.

CLVIII. They that pursue a design in the Common Road, shall be soon met
withal and opposed, for a design once known ceases to be such.

CLIX. It is only for great minds to prosecute their Intentions, though their
Actions be censured and controuled.

CLX. That Evil Words Corrupt good manners, is no less a true then Common
Speech.

CLXI. It Is business and employment which makes a Man as well as trys him.

CLXII. Absence is the best safeguard for a Man that has offended his
Superior.

CLXIII. The greatest Strength and Power of any Person consists in his
Reputation.

CLXIV. Most Men attribute that to a deficiency of Wisdom which is a mere want
of fortune, and some ascribe that to cunning which is the effect of pure chance.

CLXV. The reason why most are so unfortunate is because they feel more the
Present time then they Fear the Future.

CLXVI. It Is seldom Prudence to Endavour that by Force which you may obtain by
fair means, for the former certainly gets you an Enemy but renders the event
uncertain, whereas the latter gets the end more easily and when got is more
durable.

CLXVII. Self love is the most subtle and dangerous Flatterer in the World.

CLXVIII. He that speaks much and thinks himself Wise, is worse then a Fool and
more Incorrigible,

CLXIX. There is a prepetual Succession of Passions in the Heart of Man, so
that the Ruin of the one is almost always the Establishment of another, there
being an easy Transition from one to another, as from Love to Hatred or
Aversion.

CLXX. We should oftentimes be ashamed of our best Actions, if the World
understood the Motives that produced them.

CLXXI. The Lip of Truth shall be Established for ever, but a Lying Tongue is
but for a Moment.

CLXXII. The Love of Flattery has more or less infected all Mankind, and ought
to be watch't, against as the most dangerous Poison.

CLXXIII. Our readiness to advise others, unless an Intimate Friend, or
earnestly desired, is rather an Effect of Pride then Proof of Friendship.

CLXXIV. It Is much more difficult to behave our selve as we ought in Prosperity
then in Adversity.

CLXXV. Pride and Vainglory are always followed with contempt and hatred, but
to the meek Person all Men pay a respect.

CLXXVI. He that attempts any thing beyond his Strength, and above his
Capacity, should not think it strange if he meet with disappointment.

CLXXVII. He that delights in the Conversation of Vain and Wicked Persons,
cannot Relish the Company of Wise and good Men, or be pleased with Serious
discourse.

CLXXVIII. He that sets his Mind and Affections on things Superfluous is
Commonly reduced to want Necessaries.

CLXXIX. We think we have Strength enough to support the Miseries of others,
and yet are very impatient under less ones of our own.

CLXXX. A Prudent Man foreseeth the Evil, and hides himself, but the Simple
pass on and are punished.

CLXXXI. The Flatery of other Men could never do us mischief if we did not
slatter our Selves.

CLXXXII. There are some Vices which seem to enter into the composition of
virtues, as Poisons into that of the most useful Medicines.

CLXXXIII. He that makes too little an account of himself, is as far from true
Modesty as he that esteems himself far more then he ought.

CLXXXIV. Old Men love to give good Counsels to comfort themselves that they
are no longer in a condition to give Examples.

CLXXXV. A Man is happy by enjoying what he loves rather then that which most
others reckon Lovely, Felicity depending on our Taste and Relish of things more
then on the things themselves.

CLXXXVI. Most Men would have little or no Pleasure in this World, did they not
sometimes flatter themselves.

CLXXXVIII. Some Men and Things are better Judged of, when near at hand, and
others better at a distance.

CLXXXIX. We easily forget our own Faults, when they are only known to our
Selves.

CXC More betray the Secrets of their Friends, and prove unfaithful by weakness
and inconsideration then by design.

CXCI. We are so accustomed to disguise our selves to others, that at length it
comes to pass that we do the same to our selves.

CXCII. We are never pleased to be Cheated by our Enemies, or betrayed by our
Friends, but we commonly are very well Satisfied to be deceived by our selves.

CXCIII. Nothing is less Sincere then the usual way of asking and giving
Council, he that beggs Advise, seems to have a respectful Defference for the
Opinion of his Friend, though he designs only to gain an approbation of his
own, and he that gives Council, seems to reward his Confidence with an Ardent
and Disinterested Zeal, though oftentimes he Aims only at his own Interest or
Glory by the Advice he gives.

CXCIV. To hear with Attention, and Answer pertinently to what is said, is one
of the greatest Perfections in Conversation.

CXCV. As it is the Character of a great understanding to express much in a
little, so of a shallow one to say little or nothing in very many Words.

CXCVI. They that Love talking, will rather speak Evil of themselves, and
mention what they are concerned to Conceal, then hold their Peace.

CXCVII. That which has been is now; and that which is to be, has already
been, and there is no new thing under the Sun.

CXCVIII. Only by Pride comes Contention, but with the well Advised is Wisdom.

CXCIX. Never talk of what you know not, and speak but little of what you know,
and that not rashly without consideration.

CC. Do not put off to another time, that which you may do at present as well.

CCI. He that dispiseth his Old Friends in Prosperity or advancement, must
expect to meet with none when the Scales are turned.

CCII. He that cannot bear with the weaknesses of other Men, makes his own to
be insupportable.

CCIII. He that loves Pleasure shall be a Poor Man, and he that loves Wine
and Oil shall not be Rich, the Drunkard and the Glutton shall come to Poverty,
and Drousiness shall Cloth a Man with Rags.

CCIV. He that is not content with the middle Condition, between Poverty and
Riches, does commonly take a great deal of Pains to lessen his Fortune hy his
Endeav ours to Enerease it.

CCV. Be not curious to understand the Secrets of other Men's Affairs, and be
very careful to whom you impart your own.

CCVI. See thou a Man Diligent in his business, he shall stand before Kings
he shall not stand before Mean Men.

CCVII. Most Men owe their Integrity to their Ignorance of Vice rather then to
the knowledge of Virtue.

CCVIII. There is one inseparable reward of good Actions, viz. The Satisfaction
of having done them.

CCIX. Eloquence in speaking, depends as much almost on the Tone of the Voice,
the Eyes and Airs of the Person, as on the choice of Words.

CCX. A Prudent Man concealeth knowledge, but that which is in the midst of
Fools is made known.

CCXI. There are Persons of very great Merit who yet do not please, and there
are others who are very acceptable though they have many failings.

CCXII. A Man of ordinary Abilities that knows how to Husband and Improve them,
will have more esteem and Reputation in the World then another of 'twice as
much Merit who wants that Skill.

CCXIII. There are very many undertakings that seem very Absurd and Foolish
which are founded on very Wise and Solid Reasons.

CCXIV. While only Sloth and Fear keep us within the Bounds of our Duty, our
Virtue has oftentime the Honor of it.

CCXV. When Vices forsake us, we flatter our selves that we have left them.

CCXVI. The Love of Glory, the Fear of Shame, the design to raise a Fortune, or
the desire to abase others, are oftentimes the causes of that valor so
renowned amongst Men.

CCXVII. Our Repentance for the most part is not a Regret for the Evil we have
done, so much as a Fear of that Evil which may betide us for it.

CCXVIII. Envy is more irreconcilable then hatred.

CCXIX. A Man may believe that he hates flattery when he only hates the manner
of it.

CCXX. Constancy in Love, is a perpetual inconstancy, causing the Heart to fix
it self successively to all the qualities of the Person we Love, giving
sometimes the Preference to one and sometimes to the other, insomuch that
constancy is nothing else but inconstancy enclosed within one and the same
Subject.

CCXXI. Perseverance in Love is neither worthy of Praise or Blame, because it
is only the continuance of those Sentiments which a Man does neither give to
himself nor can deprive himself of.

CCXXII. Men of the least Merit are usually most content, and they complain
most of their Fortune and Condition in the World who have least reason to do so.

CCXXIII. When our Superiors entrust us with a Secret, or great Men put
Confidence in us, we regard it as the Fruit of our own merit, whereas it is
oftentimes the effect of their Vanity, and because they cannot keep Secrets.

CCXXIV. It Is ordinarily from Pride rather then from want of Light, that Men
oppose themselves with obstinacy to the most received Opinions, finding the
first Places already taken on the Right side, they are not content to have the
last.

CCXXV. It Is a Piece of Folly to be wise alone, and to affect Singularity from
the rest of the World in things indifferent.

CCXXVI. Hypocrisy is an homage which Vice renders to Virtue.

CCXXVII. The Valor of most Men, and the Virtue of most Women is from Pride or
Shame, or Bodily Temparament.

CCXXVIII. Flattery applied with Art does commonly receive the reward of Merit.

CCXXIX. Nothing is so contagious as Example, we never do any considerable good
or Evil but they produce the like, we imitate good Actions of others through
Emulation, and their Evil ones through the Malignity of our Natures which was
Restrained and held Prisoner by Shame, but is fet at Liberty by Example.

CCXXX. No Man can preserve those Sentiments which he ought to have for his
Friends and Benefactors, if he indulge himself too great a Liberty to talk
often of their Faults.

CCXXXI. It Is impossible to Love a Second time that which one has truly ceased
to Love.

CCXXXII. It Is difficult to love those who do not at all Esteem us, and it is
almost as difficult to Love them who Esteem us much more then we do our selves.

CCXXXIII. It Is the Artifice of Pride by a feigned Submission and Humility to
deceive, and it is never more likely to deceive then under that disguise.

CCXXXIV. The Accent of the Country where a Man was born, continues in the mind
as well as in the Language.

CCXXXV. It Is true of certain good qualitys, as it is of the senses, that those
who are altogether without them, cannot comprehend them.

CCXXXVI. If there be any Man who in no Action of his Life, and in none of his
qualitys did ever appear Ridiculous, it is because no Man was ever at the Pains
to search narrowly into him.

CCXXXVII. Some follies of other Men are as infectious as some diseases.

CCXXXVIII. That which for the most part hinders us from discovering the bottom
of our Hearts to our Friends, is not so much a distrust of them as of our
selves.

CCXXXIX. The Humors of our Bodies have an Ordinary and Regulated Course,
which moves and turns our Wills without being perceived, they Exercise
Successively a Secret Dominion over us, and have a considerable part in all our
Actions, though we do not know it.

CCXL. The Violences which others cause us, do oftentimes give us less trouble
then those which we cause to our selves.

CCXLI. Humility is the truest Evidence of all other Virtues, without that we
continue all our Faults, and they are only covered by Pride, which hides them
from others, and oftentimes from our selves.

CCXLII. Every own knows that he ought not to talk much of his nearest
Relations, but no Man knows Sufficiently that he ought much less to talk of
himself.

CCXLIII. There are some good qualities that are Faults when Natural, and
others that are never perfect when they are acquired, viz. Our reason must
teach us how to manage our Money, trust and Confidence, but goodness and courage
must be received from Nature.

CCXLIV. There are some kind of Tears whereby we our selves may be deceived,
after we have deceived others by them.

CCXLV. He is much mistaken that thinks he Loves a Mistress for her own sake.

CCXLVI. To force ones self to continue Faithful to one we Love is little
better then Infidelity.

CCXLVII. A Man may give good Councels but cannot inspire conduct in the
Observaion of them.

CCXLVIII. Few are more often mistaken then such as cannot suffer to be told of
their mistakes.

CCXLIX One is oftentimes less unhappy in being deceived by a Person we Love,
then to be undeceived.

CCL. He Preserves his first Love a long time indeed that has never a Second.

CCLI. The most dangerous Folly of Old Persons, who have been amiable, is to
forget that they are so no longer.

CCLII. The greatest Proof of Frindship is not to discover our failings and
imperfections to others but to make us see our own.

CCL III. We easily pardon those Faults in our Friends which do not respect our
selves.

CCLIV. It Is easier to know Man in general then any one Man in particular.

CCLV. We should desire very few things ardently, if we knew what it is we
desire.

CCLVI. In Frindship as in Love one is oftentimes more happy by those things he
is ignorant of then by those he knows.

CCLVII. Shame and Jealousy would not be so painful and troublesome but that
our Pride cannot assist us to support them.

CCLVIII.'Twould be more to our advantage to appear as we are then to Endavour
to appear otherwise.

CCLIX. We never desire very earnestly that which we desire only according to
reason.

CCLX. While the Heart is agitated by the remainders of any Passion, a Man is
more likely to receive a new one then when he is perfectly Cured.

CCLXI. Covetousness has oftentimes very contrary effects, Multitudes
Sacrifice their whole Estates to doubtful and distant hopes; and others despise
very great advantages that are in prospect for little interests that are
present.

CCLXII. All the Constanty of the Philosophers was caused by the Necessity of
dying.

CCLXIII. To say that a Man Lies, is as much as to say, that he is brave
toward God and a Coward toward Man.

CCLXIV. There is no Passion in an Humane mind that is so weak, but in some Men
it Mates and Masters the Fear of Death.

CCLXV. To be thought Secret inviteth discovery, as the more close Air Sucketh
in the more open.

CCLXVI. He that talks all that he knows will certainly talk somewhat which he
knows not.

CCLXVII. No Man can be secret unless he uses dissimulation, for a bare
Silence in some cases discovers as much as Speech.

CCLXIII. By dissimulation sometimes you may better discover another Man's mind,
for to him that seems open and free, will another be so.

CCLXIX. The Care of the public and of posterity is many times most in them
that have no posterity.

CCLXX. Wives are young Men's Mistresses, companions for middle Age, and Old
Men's Nurses.

CCLXXI. The reason why new Risers are Envied by Men in height, is because the
distance is altered, and like the deceit of the Eye, that when others come on,
they themselves go back.

CCLXXII. Persons of VVorth and Merit are most Envied when their Fortune
continues long, for by that time, though the Virtue be the same, it has not
the same Luster, Fresh-Men growing up that darken it.

CCLXXIII. Great Spirits and great Business keep out Love.

CCLXXIV. Love is always rewarded either with its reciproque or with an inward
and Secret Contempt.

CCLXXV. Great Men are the first that find their own Greifs, but the last that
find their own Faults.

CCLXXVI. The reason why boldness does such Feats is, because the greatest part
are shallow in Judgment or weak in courage and wise Men have their weak times.

CCLXXVII. The mind of Man is more cheared and refreshed by profiting in small
things then by standing at a Stay in great, for he that uses to go forward and
finds a Stop, falls out of his own Favor.

CCLXXVIII. More danger have deceived Men then forced them.

CCLXXIX. It is a Point of cunning to wait uopn him, with whom you speak, with
your Eye.

CCLXXX. When you have any thing to obtain of present dispatch, amuse the party
with some other discouse that he may not be too much awake to make objections,
or move it when the party is in have and cannot stay to consider advisedly of
what is moved.

CCLXXXI. If a Man would cross a Business, that he doubts some other would
handsomely and effectually move, let him pretend to wish it well, and move it
himself in such sort as may foyl it.

CCLXXXII. To mention a thing desired at parting, as almost forgot, or offer it
on a Question asked, which you may lay a bait for in your Discourse, is many
times a good piece of prudence.

CCLXXXIII. In Business, the keeping close to the matter, and not taking of it
too much at once, procures dispatch.

CCLXXXIV. He that will keep but of even hand, his ordinary expenses ought to
be but to the half of his Receipts, and if he think to wax Rich, but to the
Third part.

CCLXXXV. There is nothing makes a Man to suspect much, more than to know but
little.

CCLXXXVI. Honor has Three things in it, the vantage ground to do good, the
access to Kings and principal Persons, and the raising a Man's own Fortunes.

CCLXXXVII. If a Man that is not perfect be ever in Practice, he will practice
his Errors as well as his Abilities, and induce one habit of both, and it is to
be helped but by a seasonable intermission.

CCLXXXVIII. The Folly of one Man is the Fortune of another, for no Man
prospers so suddenly as by another Errors.

CCLXXXIX. A little of the Fool, and not too much of the Honest, are generally
two fortunate properties.

CCXC. It is many times better not to deal by Speech but by Letter, and by the
Mediation of a Third then by a Man's self.

CCXCI. Small matters win great Commendation, because are often in use and note.

CCXCII. It is a good precept in seconding another to add something of your
own, as if you agree with an opinion, let it be with a distinction; if you will
follow his motion, let it be on condition, if approve his Council, let it be
with alleging some farther reason.

CCXCIII. Too much magnifying of a Person or Thing does irritate contradiction
and procures envy and scorn.

CCXCIV. That which keeps a matter safe and entire is good, but that which is
destitute and unprovided of a retreat, is bad.

CCXCV. He that would not do a thing, if he thought it would not be known, does
not do it for truth or goodness, but for opinion sake.

CCXCVI. Good things never appear in their full Beauty till they turn their
back and are going away.

CCXCVII. That which a Man has procured by his own default, is a greater
mischief then what is laid on him by another, so that which a Man gets by his
own Industry, is a greater good then that which comes by another Man's courtesy
or the indulgence of Fortune.

CCXCVIII. He has his Work half done, who ere has well begun.

CCXCIX. Despair of Cure is worse than the Infirmity.

CCC. The more Perpendicular a danger hangs over our head, the less its shadow
grows.

CCCI. By diverse means Men come to a like end, as to appease one offended,
some do it by Submission, others by Courage and Resolution.

CCCII. A Thousand by ways miss the mark, one only hits the same.

CCCIII. A Man may discover himself more by Company, occasion and chance, then
he can do by a bare reflective Speech.

CCCIV. The reason why some Men choose rather to speak of any other Trade then
their own, is because they suppose it to be so much new Reputation gotten.

CCCV. That which makes timrousness so ill a quality, is because the Party many
times fears that which should help.

CCCVI. No Judgment to be made of a Merchants Estate till after his Death.

CCCVII. The greatest Scholars are not always the wisest Men, because their own
wit droops and diminishes to make room for others.

CCCVIII. Great Men have a Pre-eminence above us in every thing, even to a
breach of good manners, and their other good qualities are their license.

CCCIX. At the upper end of a Table, Trifles are so much discourst, of that
many a good discourse at the lower end is lost, by the Ceremony of being placed
highest.

CCCX. Glory and Curiosity are the Scourges of an Humane Soul.

CCCXI. Nothing too much, is a Rule as useful and as generally true as most.

CCCXII. In general conversation it may be advisable to love another as if you
should one day hate him again, and hate him as if you should Love him again.

CCCXIII. Fortune is oftentimes met withal in purfuite of Reason.

CCCXIV. There be such as advise to nothing but what they trust themselves can
imiate.

CCCXV. It seems a common fault, to be both more consident and more terrified
by things unseen, hidden, and unknown.

CCCXVI. No Wind makes for him, that has no intended Port to Sail unto.

CCCXVII. All actions more than ordinary and common, are subject to sinister
interpretations.

CCCXVIII. There is no recompense false unto virtue, how great soever it be, if
it once have passed into custom.

CCXIX. A word ill taken defaceth the merit of many years service.

CCCXX. Need and Want is much more unseemly, and much more hard to be endured
in Women then in Men.

CCCXXI. Virtue provoked adds much to it self.

CCCXXII. The very name of Virtue presupposes difficulty, and infers a
resistance, and cannot well be exercised without an Enemy.

CCCXXIII. Want of Apprehension and Stupidity do sometimes counterfeit virtuous
effects.

CCCXXIV. It is better to learn and know more than we need, then nothing at all.

CCCXXV. There is nothing can be spoken so absurdly which has not been so.

CCCXXVI. No Man in the World so cross and humoursom, but there is something he
delights in, whereby you may win him.

CCCXXVII. He who judges by apparences, judges by a thing different from the
Subject.

CCCXXVIII. Rareness and difficulty give an esteem to things, and increase Men's
desire after them.

CCCXXIX. Nothing in the World so popular and generally amiable, as goodness is.

CCCXXX. The finer headed and more subtle brained a Man is, the more he is
hated and suspected, if once the opinion of honesty be taken from him.

CCCXXXI. Of all the Pleasures and Goods we have, there is none exempted from
some evil and incommodity.

CCCXXXII. That which we often see we wonder not at, though we know not why it
is done, and we call that against nature, which is only against custom.

CCCXXXIII. An honest Man may have false opinions, and a wicked Person may
preach truths, yea such as he beleives not.

CCCXXXIV. So much are Men enamoured of this miserable Life, that no condition
is so poor but they will accept, so they may continue in the same.

CCCXXXV. He who will provide for every thing provides for nothing.

CCCXXXVI. Many Professions and Trades subsist and are grounded only upon
public abuses and popular errors.

CCCXXXVII. No Man living is free from speaking foolish things.

CCCXXXVIII. Who is unfaithful to himself, may be excused if he be faithless to
his Master.

CCCXXXIX. Malice sucks up the greatest part of her own Venom, and there with
impoysoneth her self.

CCCXL. The consequence of all designs consists in their seasons; for occasions
pass, and matters change incessantly.

CCCXLI. He may well walk a foot that leads his Horse by the Bridle.

CCCXLII. To divert a Man from importunate imaginations, and the insinuation of
particular conceits, there is no better way then to have recourse unto books.

CCCXLIII. No Man trusts a Drunkard with his Secrets, for he that cannot keep
his own will never conceal another.

CCCXLIV. A little thing will divert when a greater and of more weight will not.

CCCXLV. Wisdom has her excesses, and has no less need of moderation then
folly.

CCCXLVI. Profitable thoughts, the more full and solid they are, the more
cumbersome and heavy to the mind of Man.

CCCXLVII. No continuance of time, no favor of Prince, no Office, no Virtue,
nor any Wealth can make a Clown become a Gentleman.

CCCXLVIII. It is no longer time to wince what one has put on the Shackles.

CCCXLIX. The obligation of a benefit has wholly reference unto the will of
him that gives.

CCCL. It is against the nature of Love, not to be violent, and against the
condition of violence, to be constant.

CCCLI. He who has once been a very fool, shall at no time prove very wise.

CCCLII. Whosoever has his mind on taking, thinks no more of what he has
taken, Covetousness has nothing so proper as to be ungrateful.

CCCLIII. Most Men are better instructed by contrarlety then by similitude, and
more by escaping the bad then following the good; therefore Cato said, wise Men
have more to learn of fools, then fools of wise Men.

CCCLIV. It Is impossible for to Treat quickly and discourse in any order with a
Fool,

CCCLV. A judgment is not to be made of Council, or Advice by the Event.

CCCLVI. It is an ill seeming thing for Men in jest to Bite or in sport to
Strike one another.

CCCLVII. The measure of Money is limited, not by the Estimate of Wealth or
Place, but by the Furniture and manner of Living.

CCCLVIII. Many teach others to deceive, while they fear to be deceived, and
give them Just cause to offend by fuspecting them unjustly.

CCCLIX. Preparation gives more to hope, then it brings with it, and he that
would please, has nothing so great an Impediment, as expectation.

CCCLX. Nothing is so dear, as what is given, for the Will of the donee stands
highly indebted for fear of being ungrateful.

CCCLXI. It is certainly worth while, to change a bad Estate for an uncertain,
and there can be no loss by the bargain.

CCCLXII. To be always complaining, is the way never to be moaned and seldom
pitied, for he that makes himself seem dead while alive, is Subject to be
accounted alive when dying.

CCCLXIII. A generous and free minded confession does disable a reproach, and
disarmes an Injury

CCCLXIV. Sometimes it is good choice not to choose at all.

CCCLXV. Each custom has its reason.

CCCLXVI. There is nothing so good and beneficial that yields profit in a
glance, or being slightly passed over will do you much Service.

CCCLXVII. Pleasure it felf is Pain in its height.

CCCLXVIII. We must live in, and by the World, and such as we find it, so we
must use it.

CCCLXIX. He will endure a fall, that cannot bear the Starts on it, utter
disappointment Ruins that Man which little cross Accidents do Stagger.

CCCLXX. If we direct affairs at the begginning, we hold them at our Mercy, but
if once undertaken, they guide and transport us, and we follow them.

CCCLXXI. Such as by bashfulness are apt to grant whatsoever is demanded, are
as prone afterward to Recant and break their Word, it is better therefore to
attempt Coldly and pursue Hotly then e contra.

CCCLXXII. To be Proud of every profitable and Innocent Action is fit only for
Fools and Madmen to whom it is extraordinary and rare.

CCCLXXIII. Men generally give most Credit to things they understand not, and
the reason is because they would not be thought to have less Wit then the Party
who proposee it.

CCCLXXIV. An Injury (though the Damage be less) undoubtedly causes more grief
and sharpness then a loss.

CCCLXXV. He that keeps himself in his own Power, is the most Powerful of any.

CCCLXXVI. He greives more than he need, that grieves before that he needs.

CCCLXXVII. It is much easier to speak as Aristotle and live as Coesar, then
speak and live as Socrates.

CCCLXXVIII. We cannot err in following Nature

CCCLXXIX. Words reported again, as they have another sound, so generally they
have another sense.

CCCLXXX. There are more ways to the Wood then one, a balk in one track ought
not to discourage further and other attempts.

CCCLXXXI. That which makes Company so influencial, is because it is a kind of
reproach, not to do or not to dare, what one sees his Companions do or dare.

CCCLXXXII. Many times it is prudence gently to obey and endure the Laws of our
condition, struggling against that we cannot overcome makes it more painful and
troublesome.

CCCLXXXIII. The greatness of a Man's mind consists not so much in lofty
attempts as in knowing how to range direct and circumscribe it self.

CCCLXXXIV. He that Husbands his time best, will find very much of it employed
idely.

CCCLXXXV. He that walks upon Stilts must use his own Legs, and the greatest
helps signify nothing without a Man's own Prudence, and conduct to use them.

CCCLXXXVI. A Man may be known much by his Garment, by his Countenance, by his
Laughter, and by his Going.

CCCLXXXVII. He that keeps his Ignorance secret does much better than he that
hides his Wisdom.

CCCLXXXVIII. It Is folly to contradict an Inferior, for there always arises
more shame in being overcome by him, then Honor in a Victory.

CCCLXXXIX. Many Men complain when a House or Room is dark, when the fault is
only in their own Eyes.

CCCXC. No Drunkard would willingly have his Wife, Child, or Servant such.

CCCXCI. There Is nothing more odious and distasteful to most Men then to be
censured and reprehended; he therefore who does that least, does generally
oblige most.

CCXCII. He that will oblige all, must abase himself to those above him, submit
to his equals, and courteously equal himself to those beneath him.

CCCXCIII. He that speaks any thing untrue to his own advantage, shall be
accounted both vain and a liar; the lie renders him odious, and the vanity
rediculous.

CCCLXCIV. To be obstinate in any Argument which touches the Profession of him
you converse with, will certainly create a distaste, for by presuming your self
in the right, you make a reflection on him as ignorant, which is always
reckoned injurious.

CCCXCV. Dess and Carriage generally gains more respect, then Riches and Honor.

CCCXCVI. Fear sways more Men and Influences to more venturous exploits then
hope.

CCCXCVII. All Extrams are generally short lived.

CCCXCVIII. Invention is a solitary thing, and the result of one Man's thoughts,
as true Judgment is of many, therefore in all Companies let one Man propose,
and the rest judge.

CCCXCIX. Interest is generally stronger then love, and yet Friendship grounded
on Interest is little worth, for remove the advantage and your Friend is fled.

CCCC. To conclude, the precepts of Prudence may easier be put in writing then
in practice, hic labor hoc opus.

FINIS.

