SIR, Benjamin Rudyard HIS Learned Speech in Parliament on Wednesday, being the
twenty ninth day of December 1641. Concerning the Treaty with the Scottish
Commissioners, about the Irish affairs. With the Letts, and Impediments that
have hindered the Proceedings of the Parliament therein. As also the removeall
of the Papists from Court, and all Popish officers, from several places of
employment within this Kingdom.

Printed at London, for John Thomas. 1641.

SIR Benjamin Rudyard his Speech in Parliament, made on Wednesday the twenty
ninth day of December, concerning the treaty with the Scottish Commissioners
about the Irish affairs, and the Letts and impediments that have hindered the
proceedings of the Parliament therein.
Master Speaker,
THis day is appointed for our giveing our resolution in our request to the
Scottish Commissioners concerning their assistance of and for the Irish
affairs. I desire Sir to speak somewhat under favor concerning the same.

We see the danger and necessity of our aid they are in, and we have had
much hinderance in our expediting of our assistance for that service which I
intend to remember you off.

The first Let or impediment that has hindered our proceedings in that
business, is the disagreement between the two houses or the causes of their
disagreement, I persuade my self is the Bishops and such Lords as favor them,
and I conceive that unless they be speedily brought to trial, and by the
sword of Justice taken out of the way, those that shall be so Condemned by the
Parliament and the rest of them, with those Lords that favor them may be
removed from the presence of his Majesty (by whom he is mis-councelled, and
his mind somewhat averted from Complying so willingly with the Parliament as
otherwise it is conceaved he would be, this Statute cannon be secure from
great danger.

Secondly, a second Let is the dirision, and often disagreement amongst our
selves not known these many years in Parliament of former years.

Thirdly, the multiplicity of Petitions daily delivered to the House
irregularly taking up a great deal of time in answering.

Fourthly, the great danger this Kingdom is in through the practizes of
Priests and Jesuits, and all of the Popish Religion is a maine cause of the
slow proceedings in the Irish affairs. The Parliament Pollitiquely concerning
that it was most necessary to provide first for the security of this Kingdom,
whereof they be the chiefest, before allyances and in doing that they have
spent a great deal of time: and I wish our consultations, resolutions and
laws we make may be the firm setlement in good order all things that are
amiss both in Church and State.

Fifthly, the delay in execution of the Priests lately condemned hinders
somewhat our proceedings in that businesses.

Sixthly, the not removing of those popish officers in this state, that have
places of great trust and strength committed to their fidelity, as Towns,
Forts, Castles, Magazines, Colloneles, Captains, Livetennants, and other
officers of war, which puts this Kingdom in as much danger as Ireland, if
God in mercy do not defend it, giving such wisdom, and Courage to the wise
Council of the state, that they may by degrees remove such dangerous officers,
and place good Protestants in their room, which I wish withal my heart may be
done in time, for fear we have not cause to repent their enjoyments of such
places. But Master Speaker, it may be objected that many of the Popish religion
are very faithful and loyal to the Crown of England and his Majesty having
found their fidelity preferred them, and doubtless all of them are not
perfidious though many be refractory and willing to increase their number in
their religion, and likewise many officers in this Kingdom, that are not
Papists, but profess themselves Protestants, have been as treacherous to
their King, and Country as recusants, yet Neverlesse they confess that it is
necessary Papists be removed and Protestants entrusted with their places.

But Sir under favor I conceive it more then necessarily, of absolute
necessity to remove such as are not inclined toward the Protestants Religion,
for I could give you many instances, by woeful experience, of the treacherous
stratagems that have been attempted against, not only the persons of the
Princes of this Kingdom that have been Protestants, by Papists, and the
favorers of that part, but also against the whole State, to bring it to
confussion, and place themselves and their religion herein. The records of King
Henry the eight, King Edward the sixth, Queen Elizabeth, and in the reign of
our late peaceable Solomon of blessed memory King James do sufficiently
testify, whereas you find not one to twenty Protestants have done the like
besides, the present troubles in Ireland, altogether raised by the Papists, and
others in that Kingdom also raised by the practice of the Priests and Jesuits,
I could also instance many of their treacherous designs against the persons of
Peers, Noblemen, Barons, and Knights, also against several Parliaments in this
kingdom, and diverse particular members thereof which most of this House know
right-well. Therefore Master Speaker I could wish there might not be so many
suffered to inhabit this Kingdom as do put those that are not natives might
be banished if they refuse to be conformable to the Laws of this Land which
is my humble motion.

And now Master Speaker haueing given you a short touch of such Impediments as
have hitherto hindered our proceedings in these Irish Affairs which is our
business for this day I shall humbly desire noe longer time may be protracted
in our determination of the Scots propositions, being as I conceive reasonable
to be agreed unto, but that we may determine of the same, and send up to the
Lords for their Concurrence with us in the same fear our protraction of
further time herein may prove of such dangerous effect that we may not have
cause to repent the same and that then all our Endeavors prove of little
avail toward their releife and although the Gentlman that last spoke
concerning other Impediments of the unseasonable repair of tumultvous persons;
is a great hinderance to us in expediting the same.

Yet let them be noe further cause of our delay herein but having taken
order for their suppressing we Cheerfully proceed in prosecution of our
designs for the speedy settling of the most waightiest affaiers of this
Kingdom, in Church and Commonwealth.

FINIS.

