A WORTHY SPEECH, Spoken in the Honorable House of COMMONS:
By Sir BENJAMIN RUDYARD.
This present July, 1642. Master Speaker,
IN the Way We are, we have gone as far as Words can carry us: We have Voted
our own Rights, and the Kings Duty: No doubt there is a Relative Duty between a
King and Subjects; Obedience from a Subject to a King, Protection from a King
to His People. The present unhappy distance between His Majesty and the
Parliament, makes the Whole Kingdom stand amazed, in a fearful expectation
of dismal Calamities to fall upon it: It deeply and conscionably concerns this
House to compose and settle these threatening ruining distractions. Master
Speaker, I am touched, I am pierced with an Apprehension of the Honor of the
House, and success of this Parliament. The best way to give a stop to these
desperate imminent mischiefs is, To make a fair way for the Kings return
hither; It will likewise give best satisfaction to the People, and will be our
best Justification. Master Speaker, That we may the better consider the
condition we are now in, let us set our selves three Years back: If any Man
then, could have credibly told us, That within three Years the Queen should be
gone out of England into the Low Countries, for any cause whatsoever; The King
shall remove from His Parliament, from London to York, declaring himself not
to be safe here. That there shall be a total Rebellion in Ireland, Such
discords and distempers both in Church and State here, as now we find;
certainly we should have trembled at the thought of it: Wherefore it is fit we
should be sensible now we are in it.

On the other side, if any man then, could have credibly told us, That within
three Years Ye shall have a Parliament, it would have been good News; That
Ship-monie shall be taken away by an Act of Parliament, the Reasons and Grounds
of it so rooted out, as that neither it, nor any thing like it, can ever grow
up again; That Monopolies, The High Commission Court, the Star Chamber, The
Bishops Votes shall be taken away, The Council Table regulated and restrained,
The Forests bounded and limited, That ye shall have a Trienniall Parliament;
and more then that, A Perpetual Parliament, which none shall have power to
dissolve without your selves, we should have thought this a Dream of
Happiness; Yet now we are in the real possession of it, we do not enjoy
it, although His Majesty has promised and published He will make all this
good to us: We stand chiefly upon further security; whereas the very having
of these things, is a convenient, fair security, mutually securing one
another: there is more security offered, even in this last answer of the
Kings, By removing the personal Votes of Popish Lords, By the Better Education
of Papists Children, By supplying the defects of Laws against Recusants,
besides what else may be enlarged and improved by a select Committee of Both
Houses, named for that purpose. Wherefore, Sir, let us be ware we do not
contend for such a hazardous unsafe security, as may ^ndanger the loss of
what we have already; let us not think we have nothing, because we have not
all we desire; and though we had, yet we cannot make a Mathematical
security; All humance Caution is Susceptible of corruption and failing; Gods
providence will not be bound, success must be His: He that observes the Wind
and Rain, shall neither Sovv nor Reap; if he do nothing till he can secure the
Weather, he will have but an ill Harvest.

M. Speaker, It now behooves us to call up all the Wisdom we have about us,
for we are at the very brink of Combustion and confusion: If Blood once begin
to touch Blood, we shall presently fall into a certain misery, and must
attend an uncertain success; God knovvs when, and God knovvs what. Every Man
here is bound in Conscience to employ his uttermost endeavors to prevent the
effusion of blood; Blood is a crying sin, it pollutes a Land; let us save our
Liberties and our Estates, as we may save our Souls too. Now I have clearly
delivered mine own conscience, I leave every Man freely to his.

Printed at York by Stephen Bulkley, for Mark Foster, July 23. 1642.


