Organon Salutis. AN INSTRUMENT to cleanse the Stomach,

As also diverse new Experiments of the virtue of TOBACCO and COFFEE:

How much they conduce to preserve humane health.

By W. R. of Grays Inn, Esquire. Experto credo.



LONDON, Printed by R Hodgkinsonne, for D. Pakeman, living at the Rainbow in
Fleetstreet, near the Inner Temple Gate, 1657.

To the right honorable, HENRY, Lord Marquess of Dorchester, etc.
AS Apollo among the Planets, so, I may say, your Lordship is among Peers: In
the vast Firmament of Learning you out shine them all: And understanding that,
among other scientificall Speculations, your Lordship has been addicted to the
study of Physic (wherein you have made such an admired progress, that you
have attained, not only the Theory, but the practice thereof) I am bold to
dedicate this small piece to your Lordship; wherein there are diverse new
physical experiments, for the universal health of mankind: Therefore I
presume no discerning Reader will adjudge this address to be improper.

Moreover, there is another Reason that induced me hereunto, which was, That I
knew your Lordship to have been pleased to admit your self to Gray's Inn, and
make it your Musaeum, or place of retirement, (which I hold to be one of the
greatest honors that Society ever received) and being a Member thereof my
self, I adventured to make this Dedication; For which nevertheless I crave your
pardon, and rest,

My highly honored Lord, Your obedient, and most humble Servant, W^. RUMSEY.

TO My Worshipful and much Honored Friend, Sir HENRY BLOUNT Knight.
SIR,
MY miseries (in matter of my health) made me in my old age (being now seventy
two years old) to remember what I learned in my youth at School, in reading of
Tullies Office, (that is) after taking notice of my own body, to observe what
did do me good, or harm, before I should use the help of Physicians: this made
me to collect what I have written in this Book, for mine own private use. Many
of my friends urged me to leave the same to be printed for the benefit of
others; which I was loath to do, in respect it is a Novelty, not prescribed by
others, until I understood by you, that it was well accepted in foreign parts
by persons of great quality and knowledge, which came by the same Relations of
yours unto them. I lately understood that your discovery, in your excellent
Book of Travels, has brought the use of the Turks Physic, of Cophie in great
request in England, whereof I have made use, in another form than is used by
boiling of it in Turkey, and being less loathsome and troublesome; wherefore I
thought meet to send this Book to you, and to refer it to your Judgment,
whether it be fit to be published in print. If you let it to pass under your
protection, I little care what others speak of it, and rest

Sir, your loving Friend and Servant W^. Rumsey.

The Answer of Sir HENRY BLOUNT Knight, to the preceding Letter of his worthy
Friend Judge RUMSEY.
SIR,
I Present you with many thanks for your excellent Physic Treatise, and for
your favor in the direction of it to me; But for your printing of it, all
mankind is to give you thanks. For certainly all ages and Nations have ever
held a grateful memory of the inventors of any Devise or Engine, to the
public advantage of humane life: For, as it is the goodness of God that
gives us life; so, of all men, they are most subservient to that goodness, who
help to make that life long and comfortable; amongst whom this your Whalebone
Instrument will assuredly cause your name to stand. It has already (though
crept out by stealth) gained much credit abroad, in foreign Countries; where I
have known persons of eminent quality to hold it in great esteem. And besides
the undenyed reputation (where rightly used) it gains, in the experience and
practice thereof, it cannot in a rational discourse, but have much preeminence
above the usual way of Physic. For doubtless men's diseases arise from the
Stomach; whose impurities obstruct the passages of life, poisoning and
fermenting the whole moisture of man's body, till it becomes like a House which
having it Vaults and Sinks furred up and stopped, soon grows so full of
putrefaction and stink as cannot be endured: In which case Physicians are like
men who should advise to cast into such a house Mirrhe, Musk, Ambergris, or
other precious stuff, in hopes to amend the uucleannesse thereof: And to
magnify that course as rational, they make learned discourses of the Drugges
and the several degrees of heat or cold, with their specifique virtues, which
countenanced under strange names and Authors, prevail to be made trial of. But
at last, when the simple Master of the House (after much fruitless trouble and
expense) finds no effect, but that the corruption and stench is grown more
abominable: Then come you with this Engine, like some discreet Person, who
with a Broom and a little water, without charge, in half an hours time, makes a
cleaner House, than the others, with all their parade, cost, and trouble could
ever do: But as for the two remarkable Simples, which you most employ; that is
Tobacco and Cophie, a man may guess at their rare efficacy, who observes how
universally they take with mankind, and yet have not the advantage of any
pleasing taste wherewith to tempt and debauch our Palate, as Wine and other such
pernicious things have; for at the first-Tobacco is most horrid, and Cophie
insipid, yet do they both so general prevail, that Bread it self is not of so
universal use. The Tartars and Arabs, two great Nations, have little or no use
of Bread, yet they, the Turks, Persians, and most of the eastern World, have
hourly use of Tobacco and Cophie, but especially of Cophie: For, besides the
innumerable store of Cophie houses, there is not a private fire without it all
day long: They all acknowledge how it freeth them from crudities, caused by ill
diet, or moist lodging; insomuch as they, using Cophie morning and evening,
have no Consumptions, which ever come of moisture; no Lethargies in aged
people, or Rickets in Children; and but few qualmes in women with child; but
especially they hold it of singular prevention against Stone and Gout. When a
Turk is sick, he fasts and takes Cophie, and if that will not do, he makes his
will, and thinks of no other Physic. And as for your way of taking both Cophie
and Tobacco, the rarity of the invention consists in leaving the old way: For
the water of the one, and the smoke of the other may be of inconvenience to
many; but your way in both takes in the virtue of the Simples, without any
additionall mischief. And as for Tobacco, not in smoke, but swallowed down,
there is not observed a more sure or sudden remedy for a Cough or the Stone,
amongst all that men have found out. And whereas most medicinal Books are
usually but bare transcriptions from former Writers; and so nothing but hearsay
upon hear say, with monstrous addition of untruth upon untruth, till upon try
all not one receipt in an hundred makes good what it promises. Yours is all of
your own constant experience on your self and others; which in your personal
recovery, and healthful old age, gives a fair pledge to all who please to
follow so considerable an Example. Thus, Sir, with my best thanks I present you
the love and Service of him who is

Your affectionate Friend and Servant, HENRY BLOUNT.

To his highly esteemed Friend and Compatriot Judge Rumsey, upon his Provang,
or rare pectorall Instrument, and his rare experiments of Cophie, and Tobacco.
SIR,
SINCE I knew the World, I have known diverse sorts of Instruments: The first
that I was acquainted withal, was Aristotle's Organon, or Instrument at Oxford:
Another was the great happy Instrument at Munster: The third was the Instrument
which was made after the dissolution of the late long Parliament; That in
Oxford was Instrumentum Logicae, The Instrument of Logic; That in Munster was
Instrumentum Pacis, The Instrument of Peace; The last was Instrumentum
Politicum, the Instrument of Policy. Now your Instrument is most properly
called The Instrument of Health and may take place among the rest. Without
controversy it was an Invention very happily lighted upon, and obliges all
mankind to give you thanks: For he who finds out any thing conducing to
humane health, is the best Cosmopolite, the best among the Citizens of the
World; health heing the most precious jewel of Nature, without which we cannot
well discharge our duties to God or man. But indeed there is no perfection of
health in this life, where we converse with the Elements; the best is a
valetudinary kind of disposition; and this proceeds from the perpetual
conflict of the humors within us for predomination* which were they equally
balanced, and in peace, Methuselah's years would be but a short life among us.
Now this Combat, and malignity of the humors arises from the Stomach; which,
like a boiling pot on the fire, is still boiling within us, and has much
froth; whence, if the concoction be not very good, there are ilfavoured fumes,
and fuliginous evaporations that ascend into the head; where being distilled,
they descend in Catarrhes and defluxions sometimes upon the Optiques, and that
may be called the Gout in the Eyes; if they fall upon the Teeth, it may be
called the Gout in the Mouth; If into the Hands, it is Chiragra; if in the Hip,
Sciatica; if in the Knees, Gonagra; if in the Feet, Podagra. Now Sir, Your
Instrument serves to take away the grounds of these distempers, by rummaging
and scouring the Stomach, and make it expectorate that froth, or phlegmy stuff
which lodges there, and that in a more gentle manner than any Drugge. It Is
true that Rhubarbe is good against Choler, Agarick against Phlegm, and
Hellebore against Melancholy; but they use to stir the humors so violently by
their nauseousnesse, that their operation is a sickness of it self all the
while. Your Instrument causes no such thing, nor leaves any lurking dreggs
behind, as Drugges use to do.

Touching Coffee, I concur with them in opinion, who hold it to be that black
broth which was used of old in Lacedemon, whereof the Poets sing; Surely it
must needs be salutiferous, because so many sagacious, and the wittiest sort of
Nations use it so much; as they who have conversed with Shashes and Turbants
do well know. But besides the exsiccant quality it has to dry up the
crudities of the Stomach, as also to comfort the Brain, to fortify the sight
with its steem, and prevent Dropsies, Gouts, the Scurvie, together with the
Spleen, and Hypocondriacall winds (all which it does without any violence or
distemper at all) I say, besides all these qualities, it is found already, that
this Coffee drink has caused a greater sobriety among the Nations: For whereas
formerly Apprentices and Clerks with others, used to take their mornings
draught in Ale, Beer, or Wine, which by the dizziness they cause in the Brain,
make many unfit for business, they use now to play the Good-fellows in this
wakefull and civil drink: Therefore that worthy Gentleman, Mr. Mudiford, who
introduced the practice hereof first to London, deserves much respect of the
whole Nation*

Concerning Tobacco, which the Spaniards call la Yerva santa, the holy herb; in
regard of the sundry virtues it has: without doubt'tis also a wholesome vegetal,
if rightly applied, and seasonably taken, It helps concoction, makes one void
Rhume, break wind, and keeps the body open: A leaf or two steeped in white
Wine, or Beer over night, is a Vomit that never fayles; It is a good Companion
to sedentary men, and Students when they are stupefied by long reading or
writing, by dissipating those vapors which use to o're-cloud the Brain: The
smoke of it is passing good against all contagious aires; In so much that if
one takes two or three puffs in the morning, before he goes abroad* there is no
infectious air can fasten upon him; for it keeps out all other sents, according
to the Axiom, Intus existens prohibet alienum.

But Sir, I find that you have made other experiments of these two simples,
which though not so gustfull, conduce much to humane health: And touching your
Provang, or Whale-bone Instrument, let me tell you, that it has purchased much
repute abroad among Forreiners; In so much that some, in imitation of yours,
have found a way to make such an Instrument of ductible Gold, and you know what
a cordial Gold is. I have been told of another kind of new Instrument, that
will conveniently reach from the mouth, to let in the smoke of Tobacco at the
fundament, and it has done much good. Certainly there are in Natures Cabinet,
many boxes yet undiscovered; there are diverse Mysteries and Magnalia's yet
unknown; there be sundry effects which she would produce, but she wants the
hand of Art to cooperate, and help her, as it were by the way of Midwifery:
the world must needs confess that you have done her a great good Office herein.

So, with my hearty kind respects unto you, wishing that some happy occasion
were offered, whereby I might be Isntrumental unto you, I rest,

Worthy Sir, Your most affectionate Friend and Compatriot, JAMES HOWELL.

CHAP. I.
The miserable Case of Mankind.

I. WE cannot live without daily food; And from that food there arises not
only our nourishment, but also several superfluous matters following, which
are the principal Causes of all diseases which cannot be absolutely helped,
although much mitigated by any temperate diet.

II. In the Stomach undigested meat, Phlegm, and evil humors, from whence
proceed Choler and Melancholy, etc. and by consequence the Stone, Gout, and
many other Infirmities.

III. Also in the Stomach, Wind; from whence comes the Wind-Cholick, and
vapors, which disturb the Head, and breed Headaches, etc.

IV. In the Guts, Stoppages of wind, and of digested Excrements; which disturb
the whole body.

V. In the Uritory passages, Stoppages of wind, and all moist things* wherewith
we nourish nature; which breeds the Stone and Stranguries, etc.

VI. In the Veins and other parts of the body are corrupt humors, which nature
draws, with the Quintessence of our food, for maintenance of the several
parts of the body; from whence comes the Gout, and Infirmities in the Eyes,
and other parts of the body; which when strength of Nature cannot expel
outwardly, then the same returns upon the inward noble parts, to destroy man.

VII. Excessivenesse of Heat and Cold in several parts of the body; which
breeds Agues and Fevers: so that a man cannot easily help the one, without
offending the other.

VIII. When nature, by reason of Age, or some other accident, falls to expel
these evils, although Physic may do much to take away the enemies of Nature,
yet the same also takes away the vital Spirits, to the destruction of Man; so
that means must be found, otherwise to do the same.

That in the speaking of my opinion Note.
to all these points, I follow the Method of my profession in the Law, to open
and argue my conceit in every part of the Case, and cite Experiences like
Judgments thereupon, and leave others to argue the contrary at their pleasure,
without any reply, and leave the success to justify the truth of what I
publish,

CHAP. II.
Materials to be used as Remedies for several occasions following.

1.
A Whalebone Instrument, which may be made from two foot in length or more, to a
yard long, after this form, to be used for all Ages, according to the stature
of their bodies. It may be made after the form of a long Feather out of a Goose
wing, with a small Button of fine Linen, or Silk, to the bigness of a
Cherry-stone, fastened at the one end, which goes into the body, and with a
string fastened at the other end, that a man may use it, and draw it out at
pleasure. These are commonly sold in London, and especially at the long Shops
in Westminster Hall. If it be kept in water, it will be as gentle as may be
desired. It must be stirred gently, and always used after some meat and drink,
as any man likes best, and finds occasion for a Vomit.

2. Electuary of Cophy.
TAke equal quantity of Butter and Sallet-oyle, melt them well together, but
not boil them: Then stir them well that they may incorporate together: Then
melt therewith three times as much Honey, and stir it well together* Then add
thereunto Powder of Turkish Cophie, to make it a thick Electuary.

3. Infusion of Tobacco.
TAke a quarter of a pound of Tobacco, and a quart of Ale, Whitewine, or Sider,
and three or four spoonfulls of Honey, and two pennyworth of Mace; And infuse
these by a soft fire, in a close earthen pot, to the consumption of almost the
one half: Then strain it, and keep it in a close bottle. If it be kept long,
then once every week let it be warmed by the fire, to keep it from vinowing.

4. Cordials.
BAke a pot of Apples or Pears pared and cored, with household Bread: Then lay
a thin laying of Honey in the bottom of an earthen pot: Lay thereupon a laying
of the baked Apples, one inch thick: Lay thereupon a thin laying of the powder
of Enulacampane roots, and a little pounded Nutmeg, and Ginger: Lay thereupon*
several layings of Honey, baked Apples, and powders, as before, to fill the
pot. Cover the same with paste, and bake the same with household Bread: Quinces,
Orenges and Lemmon pills may be added thereunto, to bake. When the same is so
baked, if you mingle therewith Rosewater, and Sugar pounded, altogether, it
will be more pleasant.

5. Ointments.
INfuse in a close earthen pot by a soft fire, or boil in a S^illet, a quarter
of a pound of Tobacco in a pint of Sallet-oyle or fresh Butter, without Salt,
until the Tobacco grow so brittle, that it may be bruised with the finger:
Then strain it; then add thereunto pounded Nutmeg and Cloves, before it be
fully infused* to make it sweet: Then strain this and keep it for your use.
Note, That if it be afterward melted with Burgundie-pi^ch or Frankincense, it
may be made thicker at pleasure.

6. Suppositers.
TAke equal quantity of Frankincense and Rosin; melt them well together; then
add thereunto as much of the said Ointment, as shall leave it to be of a
sufficient consistence to be a Suppositer, which will quickly be seen by laying
it in cold water, and making it into Rolls: If it be too soft, melt it again
with more Frankincense and Rosin, and so it may be made softer, with adding
more of the said Ointment. Rosin only thus used will serve the turn.

7. Plasters.
MElt the said Suppositers made of Rosin and Frankincense, with like equal
quantities of Burgundy or Stone Pitch and Wax, which may then be cast into
cold water: Then work them in your hands, and make them up into Rolls, and use
it at your pleasure. You may make them softer or harder, as before.

8. Aliter.
ALso the same may be melted again, whereunto may be added Verdigrease to eat
dead flesh: also White-lead or Red-lead may be used to cool and heal, etc.
which I leave to the Compounders of Plasters; but I know by constant
experience, That this Ointment and Plasters do admirable things upon all
occasions, as well as any other Ointments or Plasters which are ordinarily
sold in the Shops.

9. Sinapismus.
THis Mustard Plaster is made after several forms, but for a plain way, Take
equal quantity of sharp Mustard and black ordinary Soap, with store of fine
pounded Pepper to make it thick: If it be in Summer you may ad thereunto the
pounded leaves of Spearwort, which grows in moorish grounds, and pound them
altogether, and apply it to the place grieved. The leaves of Spearwort pounded
will work the like effect: Also you may take six Cantharides flies, and pound
them very fine, and make them to a thick Paste with Vinegar and Leven of Bread;
but never use any of these to above the breadth of six pence.

Although these things be made after Note.
a rude and plain manner, yet the same are cheap, and without offense to be
used, which I leave to be made more curiously by the Apothecaries.

CHAP. III
We cannot live without daily food, 1. Point.
and from that food there arises not only our nourishment, but also several
superfluous matters, following, which are the principal causes of all
diseases; which cannot be absolutely helped, although much mitigated by any
temperate diet.

1. HOW necessary our food is, every man knows; How it is our Portion, and
Gods goodness in this life, see Ecclesiastes cap. 2. and cap. 5. And how
miserable a man's life is without a good stomach to his meat, see Ecclesiasticus
cap. 30.

2. That from the superfluities of that meat, after the concoction of it in our
stomachs, there remains certain superfluous matters, which are like barm upon
drink, and froth upon the best boiled meat, is the general opinion of
Physicians: And that the same are the principal causes of all diseases, which
is plainly set forth ^y Gratorolus in his Chapter of Exercises.

3. That the increase of these Superfluities may be much mitigated by temperate
Diet and Exercises, as the opinion of all honest and godly men, whereof a man
may see good directions in Ecclesiasticus, cap. 31. But how impossible it, is
for a man by a strickt diet, although he observes the Rules of Lesius, to help
this evil, a man may read at large in Doctor Primrose his book of vulgar
errors in Physic* lib. 3. cap. 3. etc. And many learned Physicians do
maintain, that there is less danger in a little over liberal, than in an over
sparing diet; whereof see Hippocrates Aphorisms, lib. 1. Aphor. 5. etc, and
Rantzovius, and many others maintain the same, and Lemnius de occultis in many
places maintains the same; in so much that he spends a whole Chapter to
maintain, that after a light Breakfast, a man shall be more able to eat a more
liberal Dinner; and there is good reason for it; for that when nature has no
food to feed upon, then it feeds upon the corrupt humors, which breeds
unrecoverable diseases and a general decay of nature, for want of sustenance.

I leave this to every man's age and experience; but I find it expedient for
all men, rather to eat often sparingly, than to eat much at usual meals, and
especially at supper.

CHAP. IV.
In the stomach undigested meat, 2. Point.
Fleagm and evil humors, from whence proceeds Choler and Melancholy, etc* and
by consequence the Stone, and many other Infirmities.

1. TThat after the disposition of the meat in the stomach, there remains part
of the meat undigested, it is too well known to moderate Surfeiters, and very
often to foul and weak stomachs, and to old age: As for the time when the
stomach has disposed of what it can digest, that is after sleep; so Heurinus
upon Hippocrates Aphorisms; and then a man must look to it, to remedy himself
or suffer great evils.

2. That superfluous matters do arise after the concoction and digestion of
our meat, has been showed before, cap. 3. That those matters are at first
Phlegm, which, being baked with the heat of the stomach, breed Choler, etc. and
by consequence the Stone, is the general opinion of learned Physicians; And
Vanthelmont (a rare late Writer) describes the same in many places, and
shows how the humors are not of such several natures, as they are ordinarily
distinguished, but originally are Phlegm, and then baked to higher degrees, and
get other names, as Choler, etc.

3. The seat of these humors are in the stomach, but principally in the mouth
of the stomach, which is the principal seat of life, which Vanthelmont
describes excellently; where he says, That in the stomach, but especially in
the mouth thereof, as in the very center point and root, is evidently settled
the beginning of life, of digestion of meat, and of the disposition thereof to
maintain life, what then soever the Philosophers (or Physicians) did talk or
think to be of great moment concerning the heart, whether they will or no, they
have made it common to the stomach.

4. Common experience shows this to be true in very many men, who can neither
eat or drink in the morning, but loath the same, and are troubled with waterish
humors, but cannot get away the same with all their fasting and physic.

5. How to avoid these superfluous humors, is our great labor, for otherwise
they are the occasions of diseases, as is said before; and besides that, while
they are in the body, they make our bodies like unseasonable Vessels, which
do spoil the good meat which we do put in our stomachs for our nourishments,
so that it cannot be well digested; which made Hippocrates to deliver the
Aphorisms, lib. 2. Aphor. 2. Corpora impura, etc. That the more sustenance is
taken into unpure bodies, the more mischief happens unto them. How far then do
they err, who having foul dodies, do endeavor to help themselves with
Caudles and Cordialls before their bodies be cleansed, and made fit to receive
the same?

6. Labor and Exercise have been accounted, and are the best ordinary means to
wear out these corrupt humors, and to help digestion thereof, for which purpose
Rantzovius cap. 9. and Grator in his Chapter of Exercise, have written much out
of many Authors; yet for all that it must be with this Limitation ( Dum vires,
etc.) while youth and strength of body does last, and before old age come, or
the body grows weak with Infirmities: And let a man be never so lusty and
strong, yet nevertheless excessivenesse of humors in the body do often kill
the strongest and most laborious men, whereof we have daily many fearful
examples, which made Rantzovius, cap. 18. say well, That the retaining of
corrupt meat in the stomach, is a strong destruction of the body; and cap. 50.
says, That the Plague it self cannot invade that man, who has not corrupt
humors. How far then do they err, who think to wear out these humors by
fasting and exercise, when it may be quickly done otherwise, with so little
labor and trouble as before, cap 2 n. 1. And hereafter, n. 8. etc. I leave it
to every man's judgment? and leave careless men to perish in their own
negligent ways.

7. Lemnius de occultis has written a whole Chapter of the rattle which men
have in their throats before they die, and ascribes it to the contractions of
the vital spirits, etc. and so it may be well enough; for that a man's breath
is stopped by phlegm and undigested humors, which come from the mouth of the
stomach into the throat, as well as an halter does stop it outwardly.

8. When all means are tried to Vomiting.
avoid both corrupt humors and corrupt meat in the stomach, vomiting of it up
is accounted the best means by Rantzovius and Heurinus, and many learned
Physicians commend it exceedingly, and say that the Egyptians and Caldeans used
it twice every month: And Fernelius says, that it purges not only the
stomach, but also all the other parts of the body, to the very heart. And
finally, That as all evil humors do come out of the stomach to disturb all
parts of the body, by certain secret passages: So if the stomach be made clean
by vomiting, the same corrupt humors return into the stomach again by the same
passages, to be avoided by the ordinary passages of nature, which otherwise
cannot be purged downwards; whereof a man may read it at large in Rantzovius,
cap. 18. and Fernelius there, lib. 3. cap. 3. and Parent his notable book of
Chyrurgery and Physic, and many others.

9. How dangerous it is to procure vomiting by the ordinary course of Physic,
I leave it until you come to the eighth following point cap 10. But how to
do it otherwise with little or no offense or disturbance unto nature, and
without observing of any curious diet, or hindrance to a man in his Vocations
or Journeys; that is my principal labor, for which purpose I shall show this
easy and safe way following.

10. Whether it be in time of health Remedy*
or sickness, whenever you find any evil Instrument.
disposition in the stomach, eat a convenient meal of what meat and drink you
please, then walk a little while after it: Then sit down with your body
bending, and thrust the said Whalebone Instrument into your stomach, stirring
it very gently, which will make you vomit; then drink a good draught of drink,
and so use the Instrument as often as you please, but never do this upon any
empty stomach.

11. To make the stomach more apt to vomit, and to prepare the humors thereunto
before you eat and drink, Take the bigness of a Nutmeg, or more of the said
Electuary of Cophie, etc. into your mouth; then take drink to drive it down;
then eat and drink, and walk, and use the Instrument as before. There may be
more or less of the said Electuary taken at any time before meat, as a man
finds it to be most agreeable to the constitution and strength of his body,
without any curious observance of diet or fire, or hindrance for a man to go
or travel about his business.

12. Some may think it strange to procure Vomit with this Instrument, rather
than by Physic; but look upon Rantzovius, cap. 18. and other books, and there
you shall find them, to direct, that if a Vomit will not work, you must help
the same with putting a feather into the throat; and many use a Rosemary
branch: but these things do not go into the bottom of the stomach to stir up
the humors (as the whalebone Instrument does) which I leave to every man's
experience.

13. Many objections have been made against this course, which nevertheless I
do not find by experience, that the same are of any weight, to alter what is
before directed.

14. As to that which Physic books say, That vomiting more often than twice a
month is dangerous, and may bring a man to an habit of vomiting, and so weaken
the stomach, whereunto I do agree, If it be done by Physic, whose opperations
are contrary to nature, as Fernelius says. But this way I prescribe is
natural, which may appear in little Children who are at Nurse, and are never
accounted healthy but when they vomit often. Also the Dog is taught by nature
to vomit, and all manner of Hawks cast their castings every morning, otherwise
they are not in health. And the Council in Ecclesiasticus, cap 31. does not
extend only unto superfluity of meat, but also to superfluity of humors* and
diverse old Commentators of that place affi^m it, to extend as a Council to help
and strengthen weak stomachs.

15. Others say, what good does the meat when it is vomited up again, and that
whosoever do use it, have not the benefit of nature downwards? Whereunto I
say, by experience, that all the meat does not come up, but part of it, which
is in the upper regiment of the stomach, and does carry with it the corrupt
humors of the stomach, which does swim upon the top of the meat, and nature
being eased of that burden, does work the residue of the meat more freely
downwards, which may be found by experience; and also nature draws quickly
the quintessence of the meat to the nourishment of the body, to avoid all
corrupt humors, so that the body and mind shall be more strong and free for
all occasions, and shall be with far less trouble, charge, and danger, than to
do the same by Physic.

16. In respect I have spoken so much of Vomiting, I will add the opinion of
learned Fernelius there, where he says, That if after a Vomit, the pulse being
full and strong, pleasant sleep comes easy, and free
breathing, a good appetite, and the rest of the body lighter; then the Vomit
is commendable, otherwise not, and very hurtful: I leave the experience hereof
to every man's judgment who uses it.

17. That although by vomiting, as aforesaid, a man shall avoid much thick
phlegm, yet by the often using of the said Electuary of Cophie, etc. Although a
man shall by ordinary coughing avoid great pieces of blew congealed fleagme,
which I could not see avoided by any other means. If a man will take a
spoonful of the said infusion of Tobacco in his mornings draught of Ale or
Beer, it will add much good for this purpose, without lothsomness or trouble to
the body.

18. Lastly, I have often found, that if a man takes from two spoonful to
twelve, according as a man finds by experience to be agreeable to his age and
constitution, of the said infusion of Tobacco, cap. 2. n. 4. and drink it in a
cup with Ale or Beer, the same is very good vomit: And diverse lately have made
the like Infusion in Posset drink; but I find no great difference in the
operation thereof. Observe when it does work to drink good store of Posset or
other drink after it.

CHAP. V.
In the stomach Wind, from whence 3. Point.
comes the Wind-collick and Vapors, which disturb the head, and breed
Headaches, etc.

1. THe principal cause of wind in the stomach is either undigested meat or
undigested humors. Clear the stomach with vomiting, as before, and then you
shall be clear from wind.

2. When a man is troubled with wind in the stomach, let him put the Instrument
into his stomach, as before, a man shall find great belching, and ease of the
wind; and especially if a man take a little of the said Electuary of Cophie, as
before, before you put in the Instrument, and then drink after it, as before,
and then use the Instrument without stirring of it to procure vomiting.

3. Afterward eat of the said Cordial made of Enulacampane, etc. cap. 2. n.
4. which is a plain cheap Cordial, and is admirable good to comfort the
stomach upon all occasions.

That any Cordial or powders may Note.
be added or mingled with this Electuary, with very good effect.

4. Because men cannot ordinarily have the said composition, I thought fit to
add one thing more, made with great ease, and of admirable use, as well for the
wind, as also to dissolve tough phlegm and humors in the stomach, as also to
comfort the stomach, that is, Take Enulacampane Roots dried, pounded, and
sifted, mingle therewith as much Sugar as shall please your taste, to take away
the bitterness of the roots: Then add thereunto a small quantity of pounded
Nutmeg and Ginger: Mingle all these together with a sufficient quantity of
Sallet-oyl, Honey, or other pleasant syrope, to the thickness of an Electuary.
Take into your mouth, from the bigness of a Nutmeg to the bigness of a Fig,
every morning or oftener at pleasure; then drink after it to wash it down, if
you please; but if you will not drink, then this Cordial will lie in the upper
part of the stomach, and much comfort the same; but herein I leave it to every
man's observation and experience, to observe what does best agree with his own
body.

5. I have also found good use of taking a spoonful of powders of Nutmeg and
Ginger, with a spoonful of hot Waters for that purpose.

CHAP. VI
In the Guts stoppages of wind, and 4. Point.
of digested excrements, which disturb the whole Body.

1. THe stoppage of Excrements in the Guts are the occasion of many evils.
Gratorolus* fol. 180. says, All Physicians do agree, that health is
principally preserved with, keeping the body conveniently loose: And let them
all say what they will, unless the fore door and the back door of the body be
kept open, as occasion serves, the body will be quickly destroyed, with much
reluctation and trouble. And how impossible it is to purge downwards, what is
not first digested in the stomach, all men know, and Authors agree.

2. This makes Physicians to be so ready upon all occasions, and sickness, to
give Pills Potions, and Glisters, etc. which are made of many and costly
compositions, and require much observances of diet, and air, etc. but in the
end breed infinite inconveniences, as may appear hereafter, cap. 10.

3. To spare all this cost and curiosity, whosoever will use the said
Electuary of Cophie: And then a man may keep himself conveniently loose at his
pleasure. But if a man be desirous for this Electuary to work stronger, then
one may add thereunto a small quantity of Sena Epithamum, or Rubarb (which
Physicians account to be safe Physic for old men, children, and women with
child.) And then if a man take a pipe of Tobacco in the morning, he shall find
good use thereof.

4. In respect diverse men are loath to take any Physic into their mouths, and
especially little children are not able, when they are sickly and very pale
with worms, the said Suppositers, cap 2. n. 6. being taken from the Roll, and
warmed in a man's hand, or by the fire, and used to what bigness a man pleases,
but ordinarily to the bigness of the fore joint of your little finger, and
cast it into could water to harden, and after anointed with the said oil of
Tobacco, and use it at your pleasure, with good success. Although it be not a
quick worker, yet the same brings no danger of the Piles of Ulcers in the
Fundament, by (...) using thereof, as other Suppositers do (but rather heal
the same* In the making of these Suppositers, ^e (...) and powder of Commin
seed, may be added to very good purpose for the wind.

5. If the same be used to little children, Note.
it will much conduce for their health, and to avoid worms, to have their
bellies well anointed by the fire with the said oil of Tobacco, when they use
these Suppositers.

6. If a man has not a convenient loose stool, then let him put in another
like Suppositer presently. This may be used every morning or at any other time,
as occasion serves.

7. As the Suppositers commonly used do bring the danger of the Piles and
Ulcers, so Glisters oftentimes prove very dangerous, by working upwards the
clean contrary way, which Doctor Primrose confefleth: And when a Glister will
not work, then they must have the help of a Suppositer, as Wecker confesses.

8. In respect I have spoken so much of the use of Tobacco, to work upwards and
downwards, let a man read Doctor Primrose, in his book of Vulgar Errors in
Physic, who maintains the same, and also where he maintains, That if a
Physician prescribes a Vomit or a Purge, which works contrary effects, he ought
to be blamed, by reason of some inward and unknown causes. And for the
admirable use of Tobacco taken inwardly, or used outwardly, a man may read many
excellent things in Wickers Antidotary, in so much as he calls it the
Panacea, or general remedy for all diseases and griefs, besides the excessive
taking of it in smoke, which I leave to the censure of Democritus junior:
Besides that, it does over heat the body, and bake the undigested humors in the
mouth of the stomach to the destruction of man.

CHAP. VII.
In the uritory passages, stoppages of 5. point.
wind, and all moist things, wherewith we nourish nature, which breeds the
Stone and the Strangurie. etc,

1. AS the Stone proceeds from the said corrupt humors, so the vomiting
thereof does much conduce to stay the growing thereof. Also if you make a Toste
of manchet bread, with Saletoyle, and then toste it again with honey, and eat
it, and drink a good draught of Beer or White Wind after it. The constant use
hereof is very good to preserve a man from the Stone, as I found by many
experiences.

2. I have spoken so much before concerning the means of vomiting and purging,
and how much the same do conduce to preserve a man from the Stone, that I need
not say any more thereof: Yet I must once again, upon certain evidence, say,
That the often using of the said Electuary of Cophie, and Tosts, does
exceedingly conduce to the help and cure of the Stone; together with a
temperate diet, but especially at Suppers.

3. I have heard lately from men of good credit, That there is an excellent
remedy for the Stone in the Kidneys, by drinking of the liquor in the Tanners
pits; and for the Stone in the Bladder, by using of the same liquor there with
a Syringe: which I leave to further Experience; and will not trouble my self
with it, while I may drink good Ale, etc. and help my self otherwise, as
aforesaid.

CHAP. VIII.
In the Veins, and other parts of the 6. Point.
body, are corrupt humors, which Nature draws, with the Quintessence of our
food for maintenance of the several parts of the body; from whence comes the
Gout, and Infirmities in the Eyes, and other parts of the body; which when
strength of nature cannot expel outwardly, then the same return upon the
inward noble parts to destroy Man.

1. THAT those humors come out of the Stomach to the several parts of the
body; and that those humors return to the Stomach again, to be avoided by the
ordinary passages of nature, and especially by vomit, does appear, by that
which is before spoken.

2. The Gout is the principal, and reputed unrecoverable Disease, which
comes from those humors, and runs up and down into several parts of the
body, to seek some vent to get out of the body: In which case, although I will
not presume to say, that the Gout can be absolutely cured, yet I dare say, that
it may be much eased, so that a man may live long, without much trouble of that
disease.

3. Although vomiting is the principal means to avoid the matter of the Gout,
as aforesaid; yet there be other outward means to draw the goutie humor which
remains in the Joints; which may stand well with Hippocrates his Aphorism,
where he says, that where Nature swells, and offers to vent it self, there
it is to be avoided in convenient places.

4. Many be the ways and means which are prescribed in physic books: But that
which, after many experiences, I found best, is, to apply a Sinapismus, or
Mustard plaster, as before; and that before and afterward to apply one of the
Dropaces, or pitch plaster, as cap. 2. numb. 7. which the learned Heurinus in
his Method does commend exceedingly; and does much condemn the neglect
thereof; which he thinks to be for no other cause, but because it is cheap.

5. It must be applied in convenient places, as I cited before out of
Hippocrates. Which places I found to be most convenient, and with less offense
(are these, that is) If the pain be in the Feet, between the great and little
Toes, where the Toes do part: If in the Heel or Ancle, to the sinews of both
sides of the Shinne bone, over against the lower part of the Calf of the Leg:
If in the Knee or Leg, a little below the Kneepanne, and, as before, by the
Calf of the Leg: If in the Fingers, upon the back of the Hand, between the
Forefinger, and Little-finger, where the Fingers part: If in the Wrist or
Arm, to the Inner part of the Wrist: If in the Neck, etc. then to the Nape, or
hinder part of the Neck.

6. This Mustard plaster is to be used in this manner First, a convenient
large Plaster made of Frankincense, Pitch etc. as before, is to be applied to
one of the said places for at least six hours; Then make a lesser Plaster of
about an Inch, and not above two Inches in breadth, of the said Mustard
Plaster; and apply it to one of the said places, as occasion shall require:
let the same stay there for about eight hours, until the place blister and grow
red: then take away the Mustard Plaster, and lay the other Plaster thereupon.
If the place do blister, prick the same, to let out the water. Take this
Plaster from the place applied, once every twelve hours, or oftener: W^pe the
place affected, and Plaster, and so continue the same until the place does
heal. Thus I have seen it often used, and never miss admirable effects; and
without this course I have found all to be labor in vain.

7. Although men generally conceive the Gout to be only a waterish humor, yet,
by the use of the means aforesaid, I have drawn out of the Feet and Hands,
humors of the thickness of white of Eggs; and when it had stood a quarter of
an hour, it grew to be a substance, like leather; so that I could scarce tear
it with the strength of both my hands: which I verily believe is the humor
which congeals in the hands, and makes crooked and knotty hands.

8. Although this will draw the waterish and salt humors out of the joints; yet
there is an easy convenient way to draw it out of the Stomach, to prevent it
from coming to the joints, (that is) Take about the bigness of a Nutmeg of the
said Electuary of Cophie, as before, every morning when a man is rising out of
his bed: Then take into your mouth about an Inch in length of the stalk of a
Tobacco leaf well dried, and a little Cinnamon, to take away the loathsome
taste thereof; which will draw the Rhume out of the mouth; and as it does
moisten, bite it; and sometimes a little of the juice of it may be let into the
Stomach; and then drink some drink to drive it down: This a man may do while
he is putting on of his clothes, and oftener, as a man finds it to agree with
his body, without offense. But Tobacco leaves, or the stalks thereof, undryed
are loathsome and troublesome, howsoever the same are prescribed by Wecker's
Antidotaries. I have known some being troubled with the Pox, have received
great benefit by often drawing of waterish humors with Tobacco, etc. as before:
But I leave them to Mother Cornelius Tub.

9. I do know that there are Infinite numbers of Bathes and Pultices
prescribed for the Gout; but I have often found, that boiled Turnips made to a
Pultice, and the water wherein they were boiled for a Bathe, will serve as well
as any others. Look more thereof chap. 11. numb. 20. the end thereof.

10. Also I have found a very good Pultice, by beating of the white of Eggs to
a froth; and then to mingle therewith ordinary Soap, and apply it to the
grieved place. But if any skin be broken it will burn, unless one of the
Pitch Plasters be laid on the place under the Pultice.

11. Also if there be any swelling or heat, after these Plasters, take green
Hemlock and Vinegar pounded to green sance, and bind it to the place, or lay
the leaves of Burres under the said Pitch Plaster, to the place grieved.

12. He that will not use these means Note.
to draw the humos out of the body, but repercussive means to drive the same
back into his body, may shorten his days, and breed many diseases, as I have
known it to happen often times.

13. Also the malignancy of these humors may be known by this; For by the said
application for the Gout I have often seen, That besides abundance of waterish
humors, and thick humors drawn out, as aforesaid, of several parts of the
body, but especially out of the Knees, there came out thence an excessive heat,
with much smoke, as if it were out of a boiling pot.

CHAP. IX.
Excessivenesse of heat and cold in 7. Point.
several parts of the body, which breeds Agues and Fevers; So that a man
cannot easily help the one, without offending of the other.

1. THIS is a strange thing, but commonly seen, as in Agues, when a man has
sometimes an hot fit, and sometimes a cold fit, with little intermission of
times. And men commonly complain that they have a hot Liver and a cold Stomach.
Doctor Primrose has handled this Question among the vulgar Errors in Physic;
and makes it plain, that although the Liver be always hot of it self, which
over heateth the bottom of the stomach; yet the stomach is cold by accident, by
reason of the noisome humors, like barm or froth, which come into the uppermost
part of the Stomach, by evil digestion.

2. There be many Julips and curious medicines prescribed by Physicians to
remedy this evil; and especially in burning Fevers; and these are of great
use. But to spare much trouble herein, In hot diseases, and upon surfeits, let
a man drink oftentimes great store of cold water, and eat a convenient quantity
of Broth, Bread, and Butter, and Cheese, and then vomit with the Whalebone
Instrument, as before. A man shall thereby avoid the corrupt humors in the
Stomach; and then a man shall quickly avoid these Infirmities, and bring the
body to a good temper; after which a man may drink strong drink, and wine, etc.
with little offense.

3. I have known so much good done to all men of all Ages, who would first in
the morning drink at least half a pint of cold water; whereunto Sugar may be
added, together with the juice of Oranges and Lemmons, to make it pleasant.
That I must say, that I never found any thing of more use for the health of
man; but I am afraid I labor in vain, in respect that most men do abhor it,
as present poison (as Doctor Primrose says,) yet he shows the excellency
thereof, by many experiences, and the authorities of many ancient and modern
learned Authors. For all this I have found many Doctors of Physic (with whom I
have conferred hereof) to speak much against it; whereat I do not much
marvail; for that, if that be practiced, which I have alleged in this Chapter,
there will be little use to be made of their Physic, and of the Shopps of the
Apothecaries.

4. I must add one thing more for the use of Good fellows, who use much
drinking, etc. Let them first drink cold water, as before, to cool their Liver,
and bottom of their Stomachs: Then the drinking of Strong drink, etc. will
comfort the upper part of their Stomachs; and much hinder the vapors, which
fume up to their heads, from the excessive heat of their Stomachs: And their
drinking of water after the taking of Tobacco is very good.

5. I have known diverse men do swallow small white pibble Stones, to cool the
heat of their Stomachs; which I conceive to be in imitation of long winged
Hawks: I have used the same my self, and they do pass thorough a man
downwards; but I found little benefit thereby.

6. I have known others that used to swallow small bullets of Lead; which
gives me occasion to report a strange history, which I know to be true. An old
Soldier, and a Commander in Queen Elizabeth's time, in the low Countries, was
drinking of healthes amongst his Companions, and at every health he did drink a
Pistol bullet, to the number of eighteen; which continued in his belly for
near the space of two years, with much pain and grief: He acquainted a
Physician with this case, who did hang the Soldier by the Heels, by a beam in
the Chamber; and then all the bullets dropped out of his mouth again; but the
same were somewhat worn in his Belly. This Soldier is yet living, and in good
health, and about fourscore and ten years of age.

7. I have spoken so much of the cooling of the Stomach, that it may be
expected I should write somewhat of warming of cold Stomachs: But I find every
man so ready to take Tobacco, and to drink Wines, and strong drinks, that I
need say no more thereof; But, as I have said before, so I say still, keep the
Stomach clean, with the said Whalebone Instrument, when you find any
disturbance or loathsomeness therein: And keep the lower parts conveniently
loose, with the said Suppositers: And draw out the humors which trouble the
outward parts, with the said Plasters, etc. And keep the body in a temperate
heat, as before; and avoid intemperancy in diet; then there will be little use
of Physic.

CHAP. X.
When Nature by reason of age, or 8. Point.
some other accident, fails to expel these evils, although Physic may do
much to take away the enemies of nature, yet the same also takes away the
vital spirits, to the destruction of Man; So that means must be found
otherwise to do the same.

1. I Know diverse have carpt exceedingly against all Physicians, and their
whole profession and Medicines, whereof a man may read much in Cornelius
Agrippa, de vanitate Scientiarum, and Democritus Junior, and many others cited
by him, and the late book of Mr. Biggs, entitled, The vanity of the Craft of
Physic. But I much honor and admire the skill and knowledge of such of them
as are honest and learned.

2. As for Emporiques, Mountebanks, Quacksalvers, and the like, every place is
too full of them, which will cure all diseases with one Antidote. Dr. Primrose
has well discovered the Errors of the People concerning them, etc.

3. That the common course of purgative Physic is dangerous, by reason of the
venomous qualities of the Medicines, appears by that which is said before,
and by the authority of Fernelius and Rantzovius, and all modest Physicians:
And the often use thereof is very inconvenient, as those Authors, and Doctor
Primrose ingeniously confess: And that when ordinary Physic fails, the best
way is to leave the patient to God and Nature.

4. What infinite number of Medicines, and what strange compositions are for
every disease, and with what costly materials the same are made, every man may
see in Weckerus his Antidotarium Basiliense, and diverse others dispensatories;
besides a great deal of curious observations must be used at the taking thereof.

5. What diversities of opinions there are about the compounding and
administering of these Medicines, and the ordering of the patient to use them,
whether they be natural things, after the form of the Galenists, or Chimicall,
after the prescripts of the Paracelsians; or mixed, as Doctor Primrose, and the
wiser sort conceived, there are as many controversies amongst them, as there
were ever between the Pope and Luther, about matters of Religion. Then what
shall the poor sick patient do, especially, if there be a College of such
Physicians called to consult about this desperate case, but stand quaking like
a poor condemned prisoner at the bar, expecting to have his final Judgment,
to be sent to the place of execution.

CHAP. XI.
Additions of several intervenient 9. Point.
Remedies for most parts of the body.

1. FOr Scabs and Lice Head.
in the Head, rub the scabby place with the said infusion of Tobacco.

2. For sore or Eyes.
decaying Eyes, take fine Linen clothes, and moisten them in the said infusion
of Tobacco, and bind them to your Eyes, as you are going to bed, for the space
of five or six nights, one after the other. I have known very many, who were
almost blind, cured in a short space by this means; and never any missed.

3. There happened a strange cure to a Servant of mine, who was stark blind
for three quarters of a year, which I thought meet to discover. As he was led
by his wife (a poor woman) wished her to breath often in the morning fasting in
both his eyes by turns, one after the other, which she did accordingly; this
made him to have a great itch in his eyes, which made him rub his eyes often,
and with his nails he drew some slime out of his eyes; so that at three days
end he began to see, and shortly after he perfectly recovered his eyesight.
This was about twenty years past, and he is now perfectly well and of 66. years
of age.

4. If a man will take a linen ragge, or Nose.
brown paper, and moisten it in the said infusion of Tobacco, and put it in his
nose, and draw his breath upwards, it will purge the head and eyes; and if
there be any Ulcers, in the Nose (as most men have, who are troubled with the
Pox) it will much help them.

5. If a man does bleed over much at the Nose, let a man stand behind the
party troubled, and with both his thumbs press hard both sides of the upper
part of the backbone upon the neck, it will presently stopp the blood. Ears.


6. For deafness and noise in the Ears, drop the said Oil of Tobacco cap. 2.
n. 7. into the Ears often, but especially at your going to bed: Stop them with
a Paste made of Figgs and Mustard*seed pounded, and sifted, and mingled with
the said Oil, which being used without the Oil will be troublesome; and be
sure to keep your Ears very warm with a Cap.

7. Although I do not know any Teeth.
present cure for the Toothache; yet I say, that whosoever will use the stalks
of Tobacco as before, it will do him much good, and be a great occasion to
fasten the Teeth: also if the said Sinapismus, and Pitch plaster be applied
behind the lower part of the Ear, it will do much good.

8. The Headache comes principally Headache.
from the fumes of the stomach, whosoever will clear the Stomach as before, but
especially use to drink water in the mornings, and before meals as before, it
will be a principal means to keep a man from the Headache.

9. He who will use to drink cold Throat.
water as before, it will preserve him from the Toad-evill, and especiallly
before drinking of Wine, etc. And then Wine and strong Drinks will be less
offensive to a man.

10. I know some that have lain sick of the Smallpox, and their breath almost
stopped; yet by the use of the Whalebone-Instrument, as before the blisters of
the Pox were broken in the Throat, and they vomitted and were cured.

11. One was in a deep Consumption, and when all Physic failed, by using the
Whalebone-Instrument as before, there was an Imposthume broken in the Stomach,
and the party perfectly cured, after many Physicians had given him over.

12. It often happens that men have great I che in Bones close by the Throat,
and in the* upper part of the Backbone by the Neck, and sometimes Lice come
out of the same, if the said Pitch-plaisters be applied thereunto, it will draw
much water therehence, and cure the same.

13. I have seen Wennes in the Throat, and the Kings-Evill often cured, with
the application of the said Pitch-plaister, mingled with Verdigrease without
breaking the skin.

14. I have known many Children Belly and Guts, etc.
very sick of the Worms, unto whom some of the infusion of Tobacco was given in
drink, and their bellyes were anointed with the said Oil of Tobacco, holding
them to the fire, and then using the said suppositers, whereby they avoided
great store of Worms and were perfectly cured.

15. For the Wind in the Stomach, Wind.
look before cap. 5. But for the Wind in the Guts, the said Suppositers
mingled with powdered Cummin-seed, is an admirable remedy for it.

16. It is a common evil to old age Knees and Legs.
to have weak Knees, especially when men do ride in cold weather: For remedy
whereof let a man have a Plaster made of the said Pitch-plaister, applied to
cover the Pans of both Knees, and continued, which will do very much good.

17. It is a common evil to have Legs.
Ulcers and Caukers in Legs, especially in old age, for remedy whereof, keep
the Stomach clean as before, and the using of the Tobacco stalks as before,
will do much good: But for outward applications, let linen cloth be made wet
in the said infusion of Tobacco, and apply it to the sore place: I have known
some have the Flesh consumed from the Bones, and the Bones scraped with a
Knife, and being very old, yet cured by this means, and the Flesh restored
again.

18. For the Gout in the Feet, I refer Feet.
it to what has been spoken before: But for a common pain which men have in
the bottom of their Feet, whether they have the Gout or no, let a man lay to
the sore place one of the said Pitchplaisters, and then put in his shoes the
warm water wherein powder Beef, or Cow-heels were boiled, or Tobacco and Ale or
Urine well boiled, and wherein store of Bay Salt is dissolved, and let him walk
as well as he can, he shall find very much good; so that the Shoes be big and
large: I have seen more by the using hereof; than by any Baths or Ointments, or
any other outward means, saving the drawing out of the humor as aforesaid. cap.
8.

19. Some may question, whether the having of the Gout, be a great means to
cure all diseases: I will not presume to decide the question, but say, that I
have found much benefit thereby, with little trouble, and leave every man to
his own sense; for whereas I had preserved my self from the Gout, for above one
year, partly by Repercussive Medicines in my Shoes, and partly by Attractive
Remedies in drawing the humors into my mouth as before: In the end I had a
great noise and deafness in my Ears, pains, and strange dreams in my sleep,
much disturbance in my Stomach, great heat and itching over all my Body, etc.
But when the Gout came again upon me, I was cleared from all these evils; so
that I might say, ( Silentia cuncta tranquilla sunt omnia) saving, that when I
had the Gout again, I did quickly and easily rid my self thereof, by drawing
out the humors as I have before declared, which makes me believe that these
humors were vented from all parts of the Body, as men do usually draine
Quagmires.

20. Lastly, seeing I have spoken so much of this disease of the Gout, to be a
general cure, for all other diseases, I think meet to add somewhat concerning
what diet a man should use, when he has the Gout. Before a man has the Gout,
a temperate diet is best to preserve a man from it, but especially* to avoid
the moderate use of strong sharp Drinks and Wines, hot Spices, salt Meats,
Tobacco, etc. But when a man has the Gout, and is desirous to be rid thereof
quickly, a man may make a more liberal use of these things, which will urge
nature to make more speedy vent, of the corrupt humors, from all parts of the
Body, into some outward part of the Body, to be drawn out by outward
applications as aforesaid, this may seem to be a Paradex but constant
experience has made me to presume to write so much: and then whether it be
better to endure a little pain and labor for a short time, which brings so
much good to all the Body, and as I conceive prolongeth health, or to leave the
Body to be continually troubled with languishing diseases, and to run up and
down to the Bathe, Physicians, and Apochecaries, to their great charge and
expense, I leave it to every man's judgment; and for a man's better satisfaction
herein, he may read the witty and eloquent Apology of learned Rilibaldus in
praise of the Gout.

Thus I have made an end, of showing Conclusion.
a great part of the miserable case of men's Bodies, which comes to them by
unavoydable course of nature, with showing my well wishes to remedy the same,
hoping that this may move some honest and learned Physicians to make more
additions of more Artificial Medicines thereunto, for relieving of men's
miseries in those cases: But I am afraid of another greater misery, spoken of
by the learned Physician in his Preface Gratorolus, wherein he does much lament
the miserable negligence of mankind, who never*thinks of the preserving of
health until it be too late, after the loss thereof: And for my part I shall
end with that honest wish ( Optandum est ut sit men's sana in corpore sano) that
in every man there may be an honest and sound Soul in a sound Body: And so we
shall all make a good end.

FINIS.

