A SPEECH Delivered in PARLIAMENT, BY Sir Benjamin Rudyard. Being none of those
already in print.

Printed, 1641. July 2.

A SPEECH delivered IN PARLIAMENT, BY Sir BENJAMIN RUDYARD.
M. Speaker,
THere is a great door opened unto us of doing good, if we take advantage
thereof: We are here met by the blessing of God and our King, Parliaments of
late daie^ become unfortunate, it is our duty, by our good temper and carriage
to show their ancient luster. There be some present who can remember the
breaking up of the last Parliament, a business certainly from which the
Papists are not exempted, who now by the discontinuance of Parliaments, are
come to that arrogance and boldness, that they contend with us who are the
better Subjects: their emulation I like, but their presumptuousnesse is not to
be born: I wish them no harm, but good; for I desire conversion, and the way to
do it, is to set up better lights, who have warmth in them, and are not luke
warm in Religion.

Surely they that quarrel betwixt preaching and praying, and would have them
contend, those never meant well to either, but both must have their due.

And yet I know not how it comes to pass, but it happens to us, which is in
no other Religion in the world, that a man may be two Religious; and many one,
by that scandal, is frighted into a deep dissimulation.

Heretofore the distemper of this House has been imputed to the Papists, but
the happy success of this Parliament seems to be in the general power of all,
and therefore it is wisdom in us to preserve temper and moderation.

Breaking of Parliaments, makes dangerous wounds in the Body politic; and if
these splinters be not pulled out with a gentle hand, we may hereafter despair
of cure.

In anno 14. E. 3. Subsidies were given to the King for expedition into France,
but the ill managing of his Treasure here, he was so low, that he was glad to
make Truce with the French King.

In anno 15 E. 3. he returned, and summoned a Parliament, wherein there were
nothing but jealousies and distempers.

In anno 17 E. 3. he called another Parliament, to procure an Atonement with
his subjects, which took good success, by their humble carriage to him, and
his willingness to ratify their liberties, whereby all breaches were then
made up.

A Parliament is the bed of reconciliation betwixt the King and People, and
therefore it is fit for us to lay aside all exasperations, and carry our selves
with humility.

Howbeit the Kings Prerogative may go far, yet if it be swayed with Equanimity,
it may be the better born. Princes are, and will be, as jealous of their power,
as people can be of their liberties, though both are then best, when they are
kept within their own several bounds.

Levying of monyes are a great disturbance to the Subjects, and so will be the
scarcity of the Kings Revenues, until they be supplied: And where the power of
a King, and necessity, meets in one hand, he will not long be disappointed. But
before the ending of this Parliament, the untimely breaking whereof would be
the breaking of us. I doubt not but his Majesty's Revenewes may be so settled,
that he may live plentifully at home and abroad, and without taking any thing
from his Majesty, save that which of it self would fall away, and which we
desire to restore.

Before the Parliament, we thought he would redress our grievances, and should
it be otherwise now? shall we think better of an imaginary than of a real
Parliament.

In former Parliaments, the carriage of some has been so haughty, as though a
Parliament should last always; And the carriage of other, as if there would
never be any again; And therefore a moderation (if we love our selves) is
requisite: The delays where of are so well known, how dangerous they are, both
to the Common wealth and Religion, seeing (during this vacation of Parliaments)
so many disorders have been committed, both by innovations of Religion,
violation of Laws, and intrenching upon our Liberties. But set all these things
arigh^, it is now our task. And if in in those tempting provocations we bear
temperate moderation, we shall not miss of our ends, but shall vindicate God
in his Religion, the King in his Honor, in its gasping extremity, if these
things be respected by us, beware of having the race of Parliaments rooted out.

Men and Brethren; what shall we do? If it were for my life, I would desire
nothing more than that we proceed with Moderation, that so we may have many
happy Parliaments, and that no dismal events may happen to any: For when
Parliaments are gone; then we are lost.

FINIS.

