RULES, ORDERS, AND BYLAWS; FOR THE GOOD GOVERNMENT OF THE CORPORATION OF THE
GOVERNOR and COMPANY OF THE BANK of ENGLAND.

RULES, ORDERS, AND BYLAWS; FOR THE Good Government of the Corporation of the
Governor and Company of the BANK of ENGLAND.
I. BY-LAW.
Elections, the Time, Manner, and Scrutiny.
1st Paragr. The Preamble.
WHEREAS it has been found by Experience, that many Incertainties and
Inconveniences have happened for want of a due and regular Method of
Proceedings at General Courts of Election, for Remedy whereof in Time to come,

2d Paragr. Votes to be delivered personally in Writing or Print.
It is hereby ordained and appointed, that at every General Court for any
Election, every Member qualified to Vote, and being present, shall deliver in
Writing or Print a Note or List, containing the Name or Names of such Person or
Persons, (Members of this Corporation respectively qualified, according to the
Tenor of the Charter,) as he thinks fit, to Serve and Execute the Office or
Employment, for which such Election is to be had or made, and that at every
General Election, each Elector shall deliver in Writing or Print only the Name
of One Person qualified for the Place of Governor, and only the Name of one
Person qualified for the Place of Deputy Governor, and no more: And for
Directors, a List of the Names of Four and Twenty Persons qualified for
Directors, and no more If more or less Names than the limited Number, the Vote
to be rejected.
nor less. And that in case any Person shall deliver in Writing or Print any
more than One Name for the Place of Governor; One Name for the Place of
Deputy Governor; or a List of any more or less than Four and Twenty Names of
Persons qualified for Directors, the same shall be Reputed and Deemed as no
Vote, and the said List and all the Names therein shall be totally Rejected.

3d Paragr. The Liist to be rejected wherein are above 16 of the last Year's
Directors.
And that in case at any General Court of Election of Directors, any Person
shall in such List insert the Names of any more than Sixteen of those persons,
who were chosen into, and ^id serve the Office of Directors, the then last
preceding Year, the same List shall in like manner be Rejected.

4th Paragr. If the Governor or Deputy be inserted in the List of Direct. it to
be rejected.
And that if in any List for Directors, there shall be inserted the Name either
of the Governor or Deputy Governor Elected for the ensuing Year, such List
shall be Rejected.

5th Paragr. If two Persons, qualified have an equal number of Votes, the
Choice to be determined by the Genesis Court.
And that in case it shall happen that upon making the Scrutiny for any
Election of Governor, Deputy Governor, or Directors; any two or more Persons
qualified for the Respective Office or Employment, for which he or they shall
be Named, shall have an equal Number of Votes, which shall, or may Entitle one,
or more of them, to such Office, or Employment; the Election in such Case,
shall be determined and settled by the General Court, in which such Scrutiny
shall be Reported.

6th Paragr. Undistinguished wrong or mistaken Names to be determined by the
Scrutineers, or in their Default, by the General Court.
And that if on taking the Scrutiny for any Election of Governor,
Deputy Governor, or Directors, it shall fall out that two or more Persons
qualified for the Office for which such Election shall be made, have the same
Christian and Sir Names, and are not distinguished by their Additions, or that
a wrong Christian Name in any Note, or List, is placed to a Sir Name, when but
one Person of that Sir Name is qualified for the respective Office, or that any
Literal Mistakes be made in Christian or Sir Names: In all and every the Cases
before mentioned, such Undistinguished wrong or mistaken Name or Names, shall
be kept, and not thrown aside, or rejected, but the rest of the List shall be
allowed: And the Persons appointed to take the Scrutiny at such Election, or so
many as shall be present, may determine the Person, or Persons intended by such
undistinguished wrong, or mistaken Name, or Names, provided they, or the major
part of them, shall agree in ascertaining the Person or Persons, so meant or
intended. But in default thereof, the same shall be determined and settled by
the General Court, in which such Scrutiny shall be Reported.

7th Paragr. No Vote to be received after the Glass is finally Sealed up.
And that no Note or List shall be received for any Election after the Glass is
finally Sealed up according to the Time prefixed for the doing thereof, but
such Note or List shall be Rejected.

8th Paragr. None to use or procure indirect Means to obtain Votes.
And that if any Member of this Corporation shall hereafter use, or procure to
be used, any indirect Means, to obtain any Vote, or Votes, for the Election of
himself, or any other, to be Governor, Deputy Governor, or Directors of this
Corporation; and be thereof declared guilty at a General Court to be called for
that purpose, such Person shall from thenceforth, for ever be Incapable of
being Elected to, or Holding any such Office or Place.

9th Paragr. Elections of Committees by a General Court to be in the same
manner.
And that in all Elections of Committees hereafter to be had or made by a
General Court, the same Orders, Rules, and Methods, (so near as the Case will
admit) shall be used, observed and kept, and under such Penalties and
Disabilities, as are herein before Prescribed, for or concerning the Election
of Governor, Deputy Governor, and Directors.

10th Paragr. If more than two thirds of the old Directors be Chosen, all above
that Number to be removed.
And in case, at any Annual General Court of Election, all the Twenty Four
Directors for the preceding Year, or more than two Thirds of them shall happen
to have the Majority of Votes, for being Directors for the ensuing Year, that
then the remaining one Third, or other less Number of the said Twenty Four,
(over and above two Thirds of them,) as shall happen to have the fewest Votes,
shall be removed, and such Eight, or other less Number of the other Members of
this Corporation, Qualified as aforesaid, who have the most Voices next to
those so removed, shall be, and be deemed and reputed to be Elected to Succeed
and Serve as Directors for the Succeeding Year, in the Stead and Place of those
so removed, and shall be Admitted and Sworn accordingly.

11th Paragr. Part of this By-Law to be Printed in the List for the Annual
Election.
And that the first, second, third, fourth, seventh, and eighth Paragraphs or
Clauses of this By-Law shall be Inserted at the end of every Printed List, that
shall be given out, at, or before the Annual Elections of Governor,
Deputy Governor, and Directors, to the end the Members of this Corporation
qualified to Vote, may be well informed and directed in the giving in their
Votes.

II. BY-LAW.
Voting by the Ballot, or by Lists, and choosing Officers.
1st Paragr. In all Questions relating to one Person or Thing, the Ballot (if
demanded by 9) to be allowed.
Item, It is Resolved and Ordained that in all General Courts, upon any
Election, or other Question to be made, or determined, concerning any one
Person, Matter or Thing only, the Ballot shall be allowed and used, in case the
same be demanded by any Nine, or more Members, then qualified to Elect and
Vote, and not otherwise.

2d Paragr. All Questions relating to more than one Person or Thing to be
determined by Notes in Writing, if demanded by 9.
And that in all General Courts upon any Election or Question, to be made or
determined, concerning more than one Person, Matter or Thing, such Election or
Question shall not be determined by the Ballot, but by Notes or Lists in
Writing, of the Members qualified to Vote, put into a Glass, in the same manner
as the Court of Directors have been hitherto Chosen; in case the said
Determination by Notes or Lists shall be demanded by any Nine or more Persons
qualified to Vote.

3d Paragr. The Servants to be chosen by the Ballot, within thirty Days after
the Annual Election.
And further, That from and after the Five and Twentieth Day of March, School,
and so Yearly, and every Year for ever, all and every the Officers, Ministers,
Agents, or Servants, Employed, or to be Employed by this Corporation, or by the
Governor, Deputy Governor, and Directors, or any of them in the Service of this
Corporation, shall be Elected by the Court of Directors, every Year, by the
Ballot, within Thirty Days after the General Court, for the Annual Election of
Governor, Deputy Governor, and Directors.

III. BY-LAW.
Custody of the Common Seal, and how to be used.
Item, It is Ordained, that the Seal of this Corporation shall be carefully
kept under three Locks, the three Keys whereof shall be severally kept by such
three of the Governor, Deputy Governor, and Directors for the Time being* as
the Court of Directors, from time to time shall Empower to keep the same. And
that the said Seal shall not be affixed or set to any Paper, or Parchment,
Writing, or Instrument whatsoever, but by an Order of the Court of Directors
for that purpose first had and obtained: And also in the Presence of three or
more of the Governor, Deputy Governor, and Directors for the Time being.

IV. BY-LAW.
Keeping the CASH.
All the Cash (except the Running Cash left in the Hands of the Cashiers) to be
kept under three Locks.
Item, It is Ordained, that the Cash of thy Corporation, (excepting such Sum
and Sumso Money, as shall by the Committee in waiting subject to such
Regulations as the Court of Directors shall appoint, be thought necessary to be
left in the Hands of One or more of the Cashiers, for Running Cash,) shall be
carefuly kept under three or more Locks, the Keys whereof shall be kept by such
three or more of the Governor, Deputy Governor, and Directors, as the said
Court of Directors, from time to time shall Empower to keep the same, each of
the said Persons keeping one of the said Keys.

V. BY-LAW.
The Meeting and Business of Courts of Directors, and their Sub-Committees.
A Court of Directors to be held once a Week at least.
Item, For the more easy and safe Dispatch of the Business of this Corporation,
to the Honor and Benefit thereof, It is Resolved and Ordained, that a Court of
Directors shall be held once in every Week at the least. And that such Court
may and shall from time to time (as Occasion shall require) appoint
Sub-Committees, and give all needful Directions to such Sub-Committees,
concerning what Securities shall be taken for Money to be Lent, and of what
Nature or Kind; and also in what Proportions, and touching and concerning all,
and every other thing, and things, requisite No Money to be lent but what, and
how, the Court of Directors shall order.
in that behalf. And it is hereby Ordained, that no Money shall be Lent upon
any other sort of Security, or in any other Proportion, or to any other Value,
or otherwise disposed of, than what, or as, shall be from time to time, first
directed by the said Court of Directors. Every Sub-Committee to lay their
Proceedings weekly before the Court of Directors.
And that every Sub-Committee shall weekly lay before the said Court of
Directors, so to be held as aforesaid, an Account of what Moneys are or shall
be then owing by this Corporation under their Common Seal, and what Securities
shall have been taken, or other Business Transacted or Negotiated by them,
touching this Corporation, during the then last preceding Week.

VI. BY-LAW.
Dealings of Governor, Deputy, and Directors, with the Corporation, not to be
concealed.
Item, For the Prevention of Fraud and Deceit in all and every the Transactions
of this Corporation, it is Resolved and Ordained, that in all Cases whatsoever,
where the Governor, Deputy Governor, and Directors of the Corporation, or any
of them, shall have any Dealing or Business with this Corporation, upon their
own Account, separately or in Conjunction with any others, for or in respect of
any Tallies, Bills of Exchange, Pawns, Pledges, or other Contract, or Bargain
whatsoever, by, or from, to, or with this Corporation, that then and in every
such Case, such Governor, Deputy Governor, and Director The Governor, Deputy,
and Directors, to Publish to the Sub-Committee their Dealings with the
Corporation, and all Circumstances thereof.
(so having any such Business with this Corporation, in manner as aforesaid)
shall at the Time of his or their Negotiating or Transacting the same, declare
and Publish to the Sub-Committee for the Time being, fully, fairly and clearly,
such his Share and Interest, whether sole or joint with others, in all and
every such Affair or Business by him or them so Negotiated or Transacted, as
aforesaid, and all the particular Circumstances thereof. And The Penalty.
if any such Governor, Deputy Governor, or Director, shall at any time
wittingly or willingly offend contrary to this Rule, Ordinance or By-Law, such
Person so offending, being first accused thereof in any General Court, and
summoned to answer the same, and afterward declared Guilty thereof by another
General Court, shall immediately become, and be Deemed and Reputed to be,
incapable for ever, either of holding or enjoying, or being chosen again into
the said Offices of Governor, Deputy Governor, Directors, or any of them.

VII. BY-LAW.
The Concerned in Debates to withdraw.
Item, It is Resolved and Ordained, that in all Cases, where any Question or
Debate shall at any time arise or be made, touching or concerning any Person or
Persons, (Members of this Corporation) or concerning any Matter or Thing
relating to any such Person or Persons, or wherein he or they shall be
concerned, such Person or Persons, touching or concerning whom such Question or
Debate is, or shall be had or made, shall have or give no Vote relating
thereto, but shall withdraw and be absent, during such Debate concerning
himself, or any Matter or Thing wherein he is concerned.

VIII. BY-LAW.
Borrowing on the Seal.
Governor, Deputy, and Directors not to borrow, or owe under the common Seal,
any Sums exceeding in the whole, at one time, 1200000l.
Item, It is hereby Ordained, that the Governor, Deputy Governor, and
Directors, or any of them, shall not at any time hereafter, without the Consent
and Direction of a General Court first had, wittingly or willingly borrow, owe,
or give Security under the Common Seal, for any Sum or Sums of Money, exceeding
in the whole, at any one Time, Twelve Hundred Thousand Pounds, or procure the
borrowing, owing, or giving Security for any such further Sum or Sums of Money,
by Bill, Bond, or other Covenant or Agreement, under the Common Seal of this
Corporation, as aforesaid; and The Penalty for so doing, or consenting
thereunto.
in case the Common Seal shall be set or affixed to any Bill, Bond, or other
Agreement for Money, contrary to this Ordinance or By-Law, that then each and
every the Governor, Deputy Governor, and Directors, or other Members of this
Corporation, who shall Order, Procure, Consent, Agree to, or wittingly approve
of the same, and be thereof lawfully Convicted, shall for every such Offense
severally forfeit to the said Governor and Company of the Bank of England, the
Sum of One Thousand Pounds of lawful English Money, and also all such further
and other Sum or Sums of Money as the said Governor and Company of the Bank of
England shall be damnified, for, or by reason thereof.

IX. BY-LAW.
Selling PAWNS.
Item, It is Resolved and Ordained, that all Jewels, Plate, Bullion, or other
Goods, Chattels or Merchandises whatsoever, which shall be Pawned unto this
Corporation, or left and Deposited therewith, as Pawns, or Pledges for Money to
be lent or advanced thereon, and not Redeemed at the Time agreed on, or within
three Months afterward, shall (whenever they are sold) be sold at a public
Sale by Inch of Candle, in manner as in such Cases is usual, upon three Days
Notice thereof, first given by Writing, on the Royal Exchange, or upon such
other public Notice as the Court of Directors shall think fit. And that no
Sale of any such Goods, Chattels or Merchandises (not Redeemed as aforesaid)
shall be had or made in any other manner.

X. BY-LAW.
For Transfers, and Registring Contracts, what to be Paid.
For Transfers.
Item, It is Ordained, that upon all Transfers to be made of any Share or
Interest in the Capital Stock or Fund of this Corporation, the Sum of Five
Shillings, and no more, shall be paid by the Party Transferring to, and for the
Use of the Corporation, for, and toward the bearing and defraying the Charge
of Books, Accomptants, Law-Duty, and other like Expenses. And that upon every
Promise, Contract, Bargain, For Registring Contracts.
Covenant or Agreement to be made for the Buying or Selling of any Share or
Interest, in the Capital Stock or Fund of this Corporation, or for Transferring
the Property thereof in Trust, or otherwise, which shall be brought to be
Registered in the Book or Books of the Bank, the Sum of Two Shillings, and no
more, shall be paid for such Registring, (by the Party desiring to Register the
same) to and for the Use of this Corporation.

XI. BY-LAW.
Against the Servants taking any Rewards.
Item, It is Ordained, that no Officer, Servant, or other Person whatsoever
Employed, or which shall hereafter be Employed by this Corporation, for or
about any Business of the same, shall presume directly or indirectly to receive
or take any Fee, Gratuity, or Reward of any sort, kind, or quality whatsoever,
for the doing or dispatching, or the not doing or delaying, any Business or
Affair belonging to this Corporation, or for any other Reason or Color, or
upon any account relating to his or their respective Employment, or otherwise
concerning this Corporation howsoever, from any Person or Persons whatsoever,
other than only from this Corporation, or by Order thereof, or of the Court The
Penalty.
of Directors. And that if any Person or Persons Employed or to be Employed, as
aforesaid, shall offend contrary to this Ordinance or By-Law, such Person shall
be for ever incapable of holding, or being chosen again into such his, their,
or any other Employment, in or under this Corporation.

XII. BY-LAW.
General Courts, for Dividends, half Yearly.
Item, It is Ordained, that twice in every Year a General Court shall be called
and held, for considering the general State and Condition of this Corporation,
and for the making of Dividends, out of all and singular the Produce and Profit
of the Capital Stock and Fund of this Corporation, and the Trade thereof;
amongst the several Owners and Proprietors therein, according to their several
Shares and Proportions: The one of which said Courts shall be held on some Day
between the Tenth and Twenty-Fifth Day of September, and the other on some Day
between the Tenth and Twenty-Fifth Day of March, Yearly.

XIII. BY-LAW.
Yearly Recompenses to the Governor, Deputy Governor, and Directors.
Item, It is Ordained, that the same Recompenses to the Governor,
Deputy Governor, and Twenty Four-Directors, which (Pursuan to an Order of the
General Court held the Twenty-Sixth of April, 1695) were Presented them for the
Year 1696, be Yearly continued to them respectively, until further Order of the
General Court shall be made therein.

XIV. BY-LAW.
Taking and Reading the Minutes of Courts.
Item, It is Ordained, that the Minutes of al Debates, Orders, Resolutions and
Transactions, had, made and agreed on, at every General Court and Court of
Directors, shall hereafter be taken and written down by the Secretary, or the
Person Chosen and Sworn to be his Assistant, in a Book to be kept for that
Purpose; and that before any such Courts shall be Adjourned or Dismissed, the
Minutes of that Court shall be Read over Audibly, by the Secretary, or by such
his Assistant, as afore*said.

FINIS.

