THE Royal Voyage. OR THE IRISH EXPEDITION: A Tragicomedy, Acted in the Years
1689 and 90.

-- Regis ad Exemplum

Claud. LONDON; Printed for Richard Baldwin, in the Old-Baley, A. D. 1690.

TO THE READER.
NOT to cheat thee with a Preface instead of a Book, nor make this Brat of my
own Brain such a Rickety Creature, as to have its Head bigger than all the rest
of the Body, both middle and the other end; I Will only dispatch a little necessary
business, and then Gentlemen step in and take your Places: Or to be a little
more Heroical, the Music has played the last time, the Candles are all
Snuffed, and the Curtain is just about to be drawn up. -- Know ye, first and
foremost, that the Name of this following Play relates to another part yet to
come, which will more signally fill the Title; though this has enough of the
Royal Voyage in it to make that good and proper in this, as well as the other.
The Conquest of Granada is only begun in the first part, nay, no more than the
Siege on it, yet the propriety of the Title none ever questioned to that part as
well as the other.

The next thing I Am to do you, to wit, is, that the End of this Play is chiefly
to expose the Perfidious, Base, Cowardly, Bloody Nature of the Irish, both in
this and all past Ages, especially to give as lively a Scheme as will consist
with what is past, so far of the worse than Heathenish Barbarities committed by
them on their Peaceable British Neighbors, in that Bloody and Detestable
Massacre and Rebellion of Forty One, which will make the Nation stink as long
as there is one Bog or Bog-trotter left in it.

Wherein, though every one knows this way of Writing allows great Liberty; I
protest 'twas impossible to invent more dreadful things than I found ready to
my Hand; nay scarce could a single circumstance be any where added to set their
Murders in a better Light, -- the Instances themselves, as History gives 'em,
being such glaring ones, that Hellfire itself could scarce make 'em brighter.
Nor even here have I taken any thing for granted, though there is so much
abundant Evidence of the truth of all here asserted, even from the
acknowledgment of some more ingenuous among 'em, Beling, Walsh, etc. of their
own Writers, and from the Pride and glory which others of them take in relating
what then happened, instead of those few Hundred Thousands Murdered, only
wishing that All had gone the same way; but dropping that advantage, have
confined my self even to the Chastness of an Historian, examining as the Reader
will find, all the material Objections those wicked People can make to our
Accusations, and all those thin Excuses wherewith they generally impose upon
the Ignorant, and in vain endeavor to palliate their unheard of Inhumanities.
I am confident I have herein done 'em Justice, and urged their Arguments as far
and as home, perhaps closer, than any of them could have done for themselves.
And if I have made one Exception from the general Rule, and introduced one
Irishman amongst 'em all, brave and honest (as far as his Cause would let him
be,) to foil the rest; if I have gone a little beyond the Pale, and left Truth
behind me, it is a pardonable fault, and the more easily, because perhaps it
may not be so common to err on the side of Goodnature. In his Character it is
indeed designed to show that there may possibly be some Individuals among 'em
better than the rest of the Nation. -- In that of all the rest, that if such a
thing happens, it is but a chance, and will not often be brought into Example by
the others. After all, let any Man take the pains but to read the Irish
Histories, Foreigners as well as others, nay their own too, if he has any
patience, into the bargain, and if he does not confess that I have not, nay
cannot misrepresent the Irish, when I speak any thing ill of 'em, I Will be
content to be sent over into that blessed Island, and live there 'till I Have
forgot my Mother Tongue, and grow as Irish as O Hanlan's, etc) as their
mannerly Proverb has it.)

Tho on the other side, so far is this piece from any Reflection on the British
there, that one main end thereof is to give 'em their due Encomiums, and just
Honor.

In order whereunto, the principal brave Actions performed by them at the
wonder of the World, and confusion of their Enemies, under all apparent
disadvantages imaginable, Treachery of some, Cowardice of others, want of
Necessaries, a numerous well-provided Army pressing against 'em, are not (as
many as could be handsomely brought in here) neglected, though the Historical
order, unnecessary here, perhaps not observed.

For the manner in which those actions are introduced, it is done the most
inoffensively that could be possibly contrived; -- it is out of choice that I
have named no Persons, unless of the Enemies side. -- As all shared in the
Danger, so let 'em all in the Glory, -- whatever parties there might then be,
or are since, there shall be none in this Play, but English and Irish.

That the desirable work of their entire Conquest may soon be accomplished,
which all Europe as well as England groans for, the Second part of this Drama
really acted, and our glorious King William there conquering all our Enemies, I
am sure every honest Man wishes as heartily as I do; -- for those who hope the
contrary, though their own Countries, Europe's, and Religion's implacable
Enemies, I Would wish 'em no greater plague, than possessed with all the Rage,
Malice, and defeated desperate Wickedness of an Irishman, to stand by and see
our great victorious Prince enter Triumphantly into his Royal City of Dublin,
-- which a few Weeks may in all fair probability produce, and a few more the
Second Part of the Royal Voyage, or Irish Expedition.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Tyrconnel, Primate, Archbishop of Cashel, Nugent, Neagle, Irish Lords,
Hamilton, Macarty, Talbot, Butler, Clancarty, Macdonald, Irish Soldiers,
Messengers, Officers, etc.
Governor of Inniskilling, Colonels, Soldiers, etc. Governor of Derry,
Colonels, Soldiers, English Captains with Relief to Derry, English General,
Soldiers, Officers, etc.
THE ROYAL VOYAGE: OR, THE Irish Expedition.
ACT I. SCENE I. DUBLIN- Castle.
[ Enter Tyrconnel, Nugent, Neagle, Mac-carty, Hamilton, the titula Archbishop
of Cashell, and Primate; Irish Lords. Tyrcon. THus far the CAUSE has with
Success been crowned;
And Great St. Patrick blessed his sacred Ground;
Has been his own loved Country-men's Defense,
And chased the English Toads and Serpents hence.
Again shall Ireland her old Name renew;
It Is now a Land of Saints and Heroes too;
The Asylum long before designed for those
Sent into Exile by their faithless Foes;
That safe, that happy Sanctuary, where
By our great Faith's Defenders pious Care,
The Church it self can now glad Refuge find,
Leaving her cheated desperate Foes behind.
Cash Like Arethusas's Stream, her Fountain clear
Dives under Earth, and Sea, and rises here:
But never shall we her fair Spring restore,
As pure and limpid as it was before,
Unless we hollow the polluted Flood,
And purge out Heretick-Stains with Heretics Blood.

Prim. The very thought does my chill Age renew,
And almost make Armagh a Soldier too.
O Portendown! that happy Day is past;
Grief stays too long, and Pleasure runs too fast:
I saw, and 'twas a wished, a welcome sight
As ever was shown: By Heavens bright burning Light,
I saw the wandering Flood new-blacken'd over,
And shoals of Bodies washed down the shore,
Whilst fresh Supplies still over the Breach were thrown,
'Till there at last was hardly room to drown.

Macar. And thinks your Grace this was a sight so proper,
For one whose Character should be Compassion,
Pity, and Love, all like our mighty Maker?
I, though long steeled in Camps, and drenched in War,
To Execution used, and Blood, and Carnage,
(Fatal Effects of necessary Cruelty)
I rather should have wished to have given the Lives
To all those Wretches, though at the expense
Even of my own.

Prim. -- Are you a Catholic?

Maccar. Yes, and will die one. -- But could I believe
That my Religion taught the same that you do,
I rather would turn Heretic, Turk, or Pagan,
Than be so one hour longer.

Prim. Scarce can the stupid Ignorance excuse you;
A Heretic himself could say no more.
Has not the sacred Lateran Council made it
An Article as needful to Salvation,
As any of the Creed, That this cursed Fry,
Rebels to Holy Church, should be destroyed
By Fire and Sword, or any other way,
Wherever they are found, like other Beasts of Prey?
While that of Constance makes this other easy,
And bids us keep no Faith with those that have none:
A pious, necessary, useful, comfortable Doctrine!
You are a Soldier -- It Is a Stratagem:
Those still in War are lawful -- And I Will tell you
Once more, If this you know not, Sir, you are guilty
Of Ignorance inexcusable --. Why it is
The very Cement of the CAUSE, the Blood, the Life
Of Holy Mother: (Yet you are to learn
Your Catechize.) -- It Is what her eldest Son
Has practiced many Years. See how he is blessed,
How all succeeds. and he speaks Fate in Europe.
If this you know, as how can you be ignorant
Of what each Catholic, especially
Each Irishman sucks with his first-drawn Milk.
(Whoever here of all your Countrymen,
Besides that false Apostate Wretch Clanrickard,
Was guilty known, of such an easy Meanness)
Repent, or else expect the Church's CURSE.
The heavy Doom that waits; for by her Laws
Your ipso facto Excommunicate.

Tyrcon. My Lord, it is not a time for these Discourses:
Though his weak Conscience cannot yet digest
Such manly Food, we know he is firm to the Cause;
Brave! and would freely lose a Life in the Quarrel:
Rather let us think, and, with united Councels,
Consider what we have done, and where we are.

Nug. Think? What have we to think of? First let us act;
It Is time enough to think when that is done:
It Is a plain Imposition on our Natives.
To fall on such unnecessary Work:
We have an Hundred Thousand Men in Arms;
None but the wretched Relies of Rebellion,
That dare withstand us here: Let Us over to England,
That golden Land, where Palms and Laurels wait us,
Delicious Murders, and sweet Massacres:
Hang, Drown, Stab, Burn, B^oil, Eat, Damn our proud Conquerors.

Neag. That will do well; it is excellently motion'd;
What brave Milesan would not stake his Soul
On the Design? But first let us clear our own,
Ere we attempt on others Lands. Those Relies
You talk of, are like Vipers Spawn, if not
Crushed speedily, in time they will grow too sturdy,
And send their Venom hissing over the Island:
First send fair Words, good Terms, sweet-honied Proffers,
(Which we know how to keep) clear once the North,
Derry, and Inniskilling, all is our own:
Give 'em what Articles they please themselves,
Promises cost not much; they may believe;
The English all are kind-believing FOOLS,
Or now had been our Masters: If this takes,
We have our Men, and vain Expense of Blood,
For better Purposes.

1. Irish Lord. Would that were over;
I Would be content, could we secure our own;
Nor ever much ambition'd Foreign Conquests:
The English sooner Cheated are, than Beaten;
We must expect a formidable Army
Shortly in our Bowels: Though their Hands
Are raising long, they generally fall heavy.

2. Lord. My Lord, I must entirely join with you;
We owe our Safety to their Easiness:
Had they not kindly thought we would come over,
And yield the Sword, entreating they would accept
That, and our Lives; we scarec had now been talking
How we should conquer them: And, to say truth,
That was a Masterpiece of Irish Cunning,
To drill 'em on with Promises and Oaths
Of free submission, when they would please to take it,
Till we were able to laugh at 'em, and
Despise their Threatenings. I own 'twas justly managed,
And very pleasantly was that fine Fool
Entrapt, who promised England such Success,
Such Mountains of Foreign Hopes from Secret Treaties,
The end too crowned the Work: When he perceived
We were not quite so good to keep our Words
The Generous Fool dispatched himself for Shame,
To be outwitted by an Irish Man:
And heartily I wish, as any here,
The Frolic would go round, till we possessed
Their Vacant Hives, without the toil of Firing
The Drones away; (though then we lost the Pleasure
Of Killing, and the Lechery of Murder;)
But Since they will not go on in a good Work,
We must take Care to keep secure, by force,
What we by Art have won; First, clear those Garrisons;
(Talked of, perhaps, more easily then done;)
Secure the Country next from Rapparees,
Who else will soon destroy the breed of Cattle,
And bring a Famine, spite of all our plenty,
That done, a Magazeen of Arms sufficient,
Provision too, against what casually
May happen, and that certain Desolation
Armies and War bring with 'em; then we may
Think on the other Projects.

Prim. A Curse on this Luke-warmness, in the Cause,
It ruins all; Was It not these Noble Lords,
These Valiant Heroes, who (in Council) pressed
To have the Prince Proclaimed?

1st. L. Yes, and we judged,
We then had Reason; had not first the King
Both quitted England, and obliged his Subjects,
Armies, Commanders, Officers and Garrisons,
To yield to Orange? Did not a sure Friend
(As some we still have there) send us a Packet,
Advising this, and his departure following,
We knew not where? Should all have been exposed
To a Headstrong, Wild, Ungovernable Rabble?

Tyrc. No more my Lords, the Case is altered since,
And we have Arms from France, whose generous Prince,
Delight of all Mankind, with pious Care,
Our Royal Refuge has welcomed there:
Strong Succors thence we wait, nor shall we fail,
The Catholic Cause, with them, must needs prevail;
The while, my Lords, we all must rest content,
The Fate of War there is nothing can prevent;
Disorders make the Soldiers brave and bold,
You break him if too close the Reins you hold;
Besides, our Troops on nothing else can live;
But what our vanquished Slaves Estates can give;
When they are humbled, and their stock brought low;
For theirs, we need not doubt, the first will go,
'Twill then, be time, my Lords! to think on you.
Be you, and your Estates, our chiefest Care,
On pain of Death they shall your Fields forbear;
But first, the Northern Rebels let us subdue,
At Derry, and at Inniskilling too;
The First your Lot [to Hamilt.] The Second fall to you, [to Mac.]

Hamilt. My Lord I doubt not, speedily to give
A better Account of them, then ere to England
Of my Wise Errand hither; nor was ought
Lost, by my not returning, but my Word,
A few loose Vows, perhap an Oath or Two,
And Airy Honor pawned; let 'em make much on it,
And seize those precious Pledges for my stay,
While with this Sword, I th'Obligation pay;
And hasten to my welcome Charge, away.

Exit Hamilton. Mac. I cannot promise much, our Troops are raw,
Have seen no Enemy, if Disciplined
For a few Months, yet grown by their late Freedom
Glaggard and Wild, Unruly, Careless, Vain;
The Enemy Desperate, Numerous, Firm and Hearty,
But what I can perform, in Act or Council,
Whether by Expedition or Surprise,
If they too heedless, as they often are;
Or by fair fighting, if they stand the Field;
Or formal Siege, if they still keep the Town,
I will attempt, and do, if Fate play fair,
Or leave my Life behind.

Tyrcon. We know you Sir,
Your Courage and your Conduct, take the best
Of all our Troops; proceed, success attend you,
While we go order your Dispatch, and send
Once more to the Rebels, if fair means avail,
And save our Troubles, and their own Destruction.

Exeunt Omnes. ACT. I. SCENE. II.
[ Enter Irish Rabble, Men, Woman and Children; the Men with Swords and Clubs,
the Women with Skenes, the Children with wooden Swords and Knives. A Piper
before 'em (as was their usual Custom) with a Prey of Black and small Cattle,
which they had robbed the English of.) [1st of the Rabble.] Rare times, by Saint
Patrick; the best that Ireland ever saw, by my Soul Joy; why who would be at
the Trouble to raise and breed Cattle of their own, when the Heretic Dogs can
do it to our Hands, without any pain?


2. -- Right Neighbor Teague; and besides they are all our Tenants, not we
Theirs; for I heard Father Dominick, our Priest, make a Swear, that this was
all our Country, Five Thousand Years before the New Mood was made, and the
English Thieves never came hither to rob us of our own till the next Year after
the Flood was over.


3. -- Well, See what it is to have Learning; they must talk what they will, but
if I know any thing, there is never a Clergy, in Christendom to compare with the
Irish; only the Truth is, they do lead a stray a Cheese, or a Flitch of Bacon,
now and then; and sometimes the Bottle of Vsquebagh straggles after it. But all
that is as easily forgiven as they do us, since they have so kindly proved the
Lawfulness and Necessity of our plundering the English, their Snacks always
reserved and reason good.


4. -- But to see how stubborn and impudent some of these Protestant Devils
are; I went to one of 'em that had been once my Master, (though now the Case is
altered), and bid him give me a Cow; the impudent Pascal denied it to my Face,
which so much provoked me, as well it might, I had stuck my Skene in his Guts,
had not some other of his Crew hindered me. who are all since fled together, to
the Northern Rebels, where I hope, shortly, to have the hanging of Two or Three
Dozen of 'em.


1. -- They are e'n too kindly used, that makes 'em so malepert, what would
they be Angels? Would they have more than their Lives? Unconscionable Dogs;
their Brains deserved to be knocked out if 'twere for no other Reason.


2 -- Ay, That Is the only way, after all. Ah Neighbors! had you seen, but what
I have seen; we have made some sport on it formerly, but now this Foolish pity
spoils all. If you had but heard how the Heretics yelp'd, when we burnt a
Hundred of them in a House together. Oh! I could have humored it to the Life
then; but now I grow hoarse, and have almost forgot it; I remember there was
one sprawling Brat, of a Year or Two Old, that the Mother on it, or some body,
had thrust out to save its Life; but how we all laughed when one of our Company
stuck it a top of his Pike, to see the little Bastard sprawl about with his
Legs and Arms, till he pitched it over again into the Fire, and made an end
on it.


3. -- What Is that to the Invention of my Old Grandmother, rest her Soul, tho
her Body was hanged for it: My Father had ripp'd up Two or Three fat Persons
Bellies, and the good saving Creature, finding they tallowed well, took out
their Grease, and made Candles of it: But never was a pleasanter sight, than to
see how it dripp'd in the Candle-stick, as if they had been sweating at it in
their Pulpit again.


5 -- That was nothing neither, to what work we made with one of 'em; we ripp'd
up his Belly, and tied one end of his small Guts to a Tree, driving him round
till he had pulled 'em all out, and then knocked him of the Head, and with our
common Farewell, though to good for 'em, sent his Soul to the Devil.


2. -- Ha, ha, ha! That was pretty well; but I think our Town was even with
you; we had killed about Twenty, or some such small Business, of English
Whores, and afterward finding one of their Brats, in a Cradle, bawling for
Meat, took it out, and put it to the Breast of the dead Jade his Mother,
bidding the young Bastard suck if it had any mind to it, and there left it for
the Dogs to eat them together.


4. -- All in good time, we may yet serve 'em the same sauce. In the mean
while, let us be revenged on any thing that belongs to their Country. Their
Lubberly Breed of Black-Cattle here, what shall we do with 'em all? We'll find
some way or other to torment, as well as get rid of 'em, and they will have
little Cause to complain, that are used as well as their Masters.


2. -- Let Us serve 'em as we did the Fellow, I told you of, Tie 'em to a Stake,
and cut off pieces of their Flesh alive; by this we shall have the double
Pleasure of tormenting 'em, and seeing how finely they will dance and roar to
make us Music.


1. -- By Saint Pautrick, but that be a very good way, Joy! Agreed; all Hands
to work here. What, Do these hang an Arse, and pretend to be Refractory, as
well as their Masters? There, -- this is fast enough: Come, -- First let us have
a Song, and then fall on, at the Word of Gommand.


[They Sing an Irish Song, Dancing round a fat English Ox, tied to a Stake; and
as soon as that was over, fall all together upon it, cutting out pieces of them
alive, and broiling it upon the Coals. In the mean while, a small Party of
English, surprise, and fall upon 'em; on which, all the Rabble set up the Irish
yell, and run away without striking a stroke.] 1. Englishman. A Soul-less heap
of Animals! that Nobler Beast
They here torment, has infinite more Valor,
Than all their Rascal Nation, piled together.

2. -- Are these the Champions, these the Stil-Cow Heroes,
Must Conquer England? Sure 'twould be a Problem
Well worth resolving; How many of 'em
Must go to killing one of us: I should
Be flattered to esteem my Self immortal,
Had I a Lease of Life, till they could take it.

3. -- Slaves! long-worn Slaves, and Ten times baffled Rebels,
Were one poor Englishman (designed by Fate,
By Courage, Earth, and Heaven it self their Master)
Tied to a Post, as this poor Beast before us,
Among a Thousand of those Cutthroat Monsters
Were but his Face uncovered, could they see him
See but their Master, sure they scarce dared stab him.
I questioned if the Cowards would not tremble,
Until their bloody Baggonets forsook
Their Guilty Hands.

4. -- No Sir, you are mistaken,
Then is their very time; or then or never;
Unless, when loaded with base Multitude;
And rather pressed to Death, than fairly killed.
They cannot so much as Murder one of ours.
O they are bold as Lions, rather Wolves,
When they on helpless Women light, or Children,
Or Men unarmed, helpless, and weak, as they.

2. -- But lest we meet, the Fate which often has happened
To our brave Countrymen, and fall a Prey,
Born down and trodden with inglorious Numbers;
Let Us cut our way to Derry, for this part
Of The Country's all their own; but there it is said
They stem the Fide, already shut the Gate
Against their Troops.

1. -- Fair Fortune still attend 'em,
And Crown their Courage with well purchased Laurels,
Whilst to their Succor, and our own we fly,
And bravely conquer, or as bravely die.

[Exeunt Omnes.] ACT I. SCENE III.
Enter Tyrconnel, the Primate, Cashel, Nugent, Neagle. Neag. How tame the
harmless Sheep conveyed himself
To a safe Prison! O 'twas a wise Message,
To ask leave to bestow so large a Kingdom,
Almost for less than asking. Thoughtless Mountjoy,
Whose Embassy, no doubt, is kindly taken;
Thy self for more Magnificence and Grandeur,
In highest State art lodged at the Bastile.

Tyrc. Chiefly to you we owe that piece of Policy,
Nor shall it fail Reward: He need not fear
A kind Reception, when so true a Friend
As Rice goes with him; but we must have News,
The Wind stands fair from Breast, and they must needs
Be long ere this arrived.

Cash. Sure the very Thoughts of our admired, adored, true Cath. K.
Thus honoring this loved Country, with his Presence,
Will make us all invincible.

Prim. Then shall the Rebels know what it is to affront him;
It Is their turn now. The English are the Rebels,
And we their Rightful, Loyal, conquering Masters.

Tyrc. And have a Title that is uncontroverted,
A Hundred Thousand Men besides the King;
And who dares call him Rebel that has either
Of these Two Glorious Helpers to his Cause?

Cash. The very Name of one so much beloved,
So long desired by all our Countrymen,
And justly, for as much he honors them
With his kind Thoughts, -- his single Name would do,
Without an Army, and inspire new Courage
If any wanted it -- 'twas he alone,
Who through the last false dangerous Trimming Reign,
Screen'd off the fury of the Rebels from us;
Got that proud Heretic, imperious Ormond,
Oftener than once removed. 'Twas he who found
The Treacherous Essex, who buoyed up the English,
And their decaying Interests against us.
He found him out at last, spite of his Policy,
And did reward him in due time and place.
-- But when kind Fate, or of her own accord;
Or jogged by some Officious Catholic Hand,
Broke Charles his Linsy-Woolsey Line of Life,
When our bright Star ascended his Meridian,
And shot his Beams from London to our Isle,
What Loyal Face was seen without a smile?
Scarce will our Joy, or Juster, be or more,
When with his Royal Feet, he treads our Shore.

Tyrc. Be it our Care, the while to amuse the People,
Persuade 'em he is arrived already her;
This will affright the English, if they would stir,
And raise the Courage of our Countrymen.
Were we not Politicians, things exempt
From the dull common road of Just and Right,
In which the World drudge on; yet our Religion
Permits, nay, does encourage such a Lie
As serves the Church, and that no doubt's wrapped up
Together, with our Cause, and stands or falls,
As we do here.

[Enter Servants.] A Courier wants Admittance to your Excellency. Tyrcon. Go
fetch him in.

Courier. These from Versailles, my Lord, some few days since.

[Delivers Letters.] From the King's Royal Hand I did receive 'em. Tyrcon. Say,
How was his Reception and Attendance
In that great Court?

Cour. Magnificent and Royal;
Should he return a Conqueror to London,
Scarce could the Pomp be greater. Guards were sent
To attend him on the Road; a fair Retinue
Of young Nobility soon found to wait him:
And when he came, we scarce knew which was King.

Cash. were any Preparations going forward
For his appearing here?

Cour. All that was possible;
And the Great LEWIS swore to all his Court,
If any would almost Oblige their Prince,
'Twou'd be by waiting on the ROYAL EXILE,
Vent'ring their Lives on one joint Stock with HIS.
A Squadron was equipped at Breast, as I
Came through the Harbor, all prepared, and ready
To attend him thither.

Tyrcon. His Letter speaks as much; Having read the Pacqu(...)
Ere this time he is embarked, the Wind stands fair;
And large Supplies of Money, and of Men,
Will with him soon be here, (if it were possible)
To inspire more Life into our vigorous Cause.

Nug. And shall we be too merciful and tender,
And ruin all again, as once before?

Prim. Then we deserve to fall unpitied too,
Pointed and laughed by each zealous Catholic,
The Scorn of every Heretic in Europe:
No; had good Counsel been but followed, when
We last appeared for the same noble Cause.
Had those who safely then advised Kill All.
Been hearkened to, we'd long ere this been Masters,
And Ireland full as Catholic as Spain.
But O this easy, foolish, cruel Pity!
This Ague of Mankind, far worse than Fear!
This Palsy of the Soul, which makes it tremble,
When ought that is Daring calls ir out to act!
Others there were, forsooth, for gentler Methods
For Speeding; none but such as die resist:
And thus the Matter hung, 'till 'twas resolved
All should be left at liberty; Or kill,
Or save alive, as Bravery or Weakness
Should prompt 'em; and we since have felt the Event;
We did Our Business by not doing Theirs:
The safer wiser, much more Catholic Way,
Had been on highest pain of Church's Thunder,
Incurring greater Excommunication
As after; though too late we did at James-Town,
And soon blew Mighty Ormond from the Kingdom;
Nor valued his Commission from his Master,
Since both were Heretics: On all the Pains
Of this and the other World, (for both do well together)
To have forbid all Quarter; Children, Women,
And all their cursed Brood one Sacrifice.
We now have one Throw more; if that we lose,
Farewell for ever.

Neag. Stay for the Bear's Skin;
Secure the Dam, or we never get the Cubs:
Derry and Inniskilling once our own,
All is so; then we may have all our Wishes.
(Enter Courier.) Here comes a Face of News; let us have it speedily.

Cour. The King is safely landed at Kingsale,
And comes directly hither: All the Country
Roll after him: We never could want Arms,
Had we none Listed.

Tyrcon. Ring the Bells; let Bonfires,
Illuminations, all the Expressions possible
Of Joy be made; the Conduit fill with Claret,
(Another Liquor, though of the same Color
Much nobler were) Draw up the the Guards in readiness;
Let the Aldermen be ready in their Robes.

Cour. It Is done already; all is freely done,
And more, as I came by and told the News:
For very Joy, the English Dogs are plundered
Of all they have; their Houses Bonfires made;
Well if they 'scape Themselves.

Prim. It Is rarely well -- O this dear pious Rabble!
Honest plain-hearted People! How I love 'em!
My very Soul seems of a piece with theirs:
Here Is no Dissimulation; that I hate;
No mincing over the Business; but plain-dealing,
Without the cursed Disguise of Policy,
The odious lukewarm Temper dresses in.

Cour. As he in highest Pomp past through Killkenny,
The Elegant Recorder made a Speech,
Which Tully could not mend; scarce equal it:
I have a Copy here.

Cash. Let Us see it immediately.

Cashel Reads. May it please Your most sacred Majesty,
If ever Rain was welcome to the thirsty Earth, the Sun to frozen Greenland, or
Bonny-clabber to the gaping Jaws of an hungry Irishman, your Majesty is
welcome, trebly welcome, to this your LOYAL Kingdom. 'Twould be time vainly
spent, to inform a Person so well read, so deeply skilled in Books and History,
as your Majesty, how many thousand thousand Years your Majesty's Royal
Ancestors have Swayed the Scepter of this Blessed Island. In the thirty three
thousandth Year, it was precisely of Plato's great Circle, when your
Progenitors first landed here, as we find attested in the most Authentic
Chronicles of this our ancient Nation: Nor was it many Thousands after, ere we
made a Descent into Scotland, routed the heretical Kirk there, planted by
Cain's great Grandson, and established the primitive Catholic Religion, which
has remained unto this day, among the civil Highlanders there, as well as in
this your no less Accomplished Kingdom. We must take leave to protest, We can
hardly be sorry that the rebellious Heretics of your Neighbour-Nation, have
given us so splendid an occasion of letting your Majesty see our Loyalty, and
they feel our our Valor. Now is the time, or very near is it approaching, when
your rebellious Exeter, your fanatical Bristol, your treacherous York, and your
ungrateful London, and all the other little Hamlets there, shall fly before the
conquering Arms of your Loyal Dublin, and ever-renowned Kilkenny, when in the
midst of the loud Acclamations of the heroical Irish, and Curses of your
grovling Rebels, we re-seat you in the ancient Throne, with as much Glory as
ever you left it.

Dixi. Prim. Who now dares say our Countrymen are Blockheads?
Here is a Speech almost worth Paradise.
Turning to Nugent. Scace that, my Lord, you spoke at Council- Table,
When one of our Ambassadors at London,
So highly admired, that as I often have heard,
The very Boys, though Spawn of Heretics,
Ran by your Coach, and clapped you as you went;
Scarce that could this exceed.

Nugent. My Lord I own it:
And more, he has himself outdone, as well
As we; and were it possible, done right
Unto the great Occasion.

Tyrcon. We Have now to time to spend in such Discourses;
The King himself in a few hours sees Dublin:
Each moment I expect a Post from the North;
And could we but present him with the News,
As I much hope, that those two stubborn Towns,
Are in our hands, 'twou'd be a grateful Welcome.

Nug. More grateful News that Messenger would tell,
Who brought Advice,
That they and all within 'em sunk to Hell.

ACT II. SCENE I. INNISKILLING.
Enter the Governor, two Colonels, Captains, etc. Governor. NOw for our
Honor, Country, and our Lives,
And more than all, the Protestant Religion.
All beckon out the brave -- this World and the other,
Courage and Nature, all that is dear and sacred,
Both warrant and oblige Resistance here.
Be Slaves to the Irish, such as have been ours,
Almost beyond the reach of Chronicle;
So long 'till it is at last as much their Nature,
As Falsehood, Cowardice and Cruelty!
So long, they dare not sure be otherwise;
And 'twas indeed their choice, their backs were made for it,
Their Souls just of a size and bore that spoke 'em
What they have spoke themselves -- yet when we found 'em,
(Called over by themselves under our Henry)
Bruitishly base as Nature made or Hell
Reformed 'em, sunk in sins too black to name,
Murders as common as Adulteries,
Incests or Rapes -- no sense of just or right,
No Law, no Faith, no Truth, no Manners left.
When thus we found 'em, only at first content
With some few Castles there, we those relieved,
Who begged our aid, and peaceably still lived,
'Till what so fair we bought they would have retain:
With Treachery, Perj^ry, Bloodshed, they began,
Nor have degenerated -- when our own Defense
Forced us to Arms, when Strong bow, Courcy, Lacy,
(Only two mighty Names) in the Chance of War,
Obtained whole Counties from 'em, or indeed
From Wolves and Bogs, and Fastnesses and Woods;
And our great Henry with a Royal Army
The Conquest perfected -- we found 'em savage,
But left 'em Men -- or would at least have done it,
Had they consented, as they feigned to do.
They flunk and ran, and truckled to their Conqu'ror,
They kneeled, and crouch'd, and fawned, and lickt his Feet.
He gave 'em Life, and more, he gave 'em Laws,
Redeemed 'em from themselves and one another,
Whose only rule before was Brutal Force,
And when they all had sworn perpetual Fealty,
Restored their Country better than before.

1. Coll. Often have we read the Story, often have wondered
At this repeated Treachery and Blood;
Until so often repeated, 'twas no wonder
They never injured us, but when we trusted
To their good Nature, Vows, or slight-spun Oaths,
Snapt easily as weak Arachne's thread.

2. Coll. It Is hard that these at last must be our Masters --
Nor shall they be, while we have Hands or Swords,
Nay, Teeth or Nails -- (weapons to fight with Beasts)
O it is transporting Pleasure thus to dye,
Rather than live Slaves to the insulting Irish.

Governor. Live Slaves to the Irish! if some Angel bid us,
I should make bold to question his Commission;
Whom by so many hundred Skirmishes,
So many Battles and almost new Conquests,
After their vain, their fruitless kind Rebellions,
By which their Title they so justly lost
To what remained -- whom we so often have broke,
And trod their stubborn necks so often in dust
At vast expense of English Coin and Blood,
Infinitely more than e're the Island's worth,
-- Yet still our fatal Goodness ruined all,
Forgiving faster than they could offend,
'Till now we feel our Kindness and their Gratitude,
Almost too late --

1 Coll. And yet it is not so strange for Brutes to act
As Nature prompts 'em, bite, and snarl, and struggle,
And gnaw their Chain -- but that a humane Creature,
A Man should Brutifie so much,
To learn their Manners, eat and drink like they,
And yell, and rove, and sport, nay couple with 'em,
Till they descend, and creep in the same manner;
It Is strange indeed -- Yet thus and worse do those
Who have so long bin conversant among 'em,
'Till what by Meetings, Intermarriages
And Gossippings, they grow as errand Irish,
Stark brutish, mad, wild things as ever howled
Over a dead Carcass -- For the Wolves and they
With the same Order, self-same Ceremony
And Note, and Tune, over the Dead lament.

Governor. What Death, what Punishment is equal to
This Sin, this Crime, this worse than bestiality?
-- But it is too soon or late for such a Question,
This one effort they make, and have pusht home,
To clear the land of their not wished Instructors,
And be as barbarous as they were before.
If this they gain not, they are lost for ever,
If this we gain, henceforth it is ours for ever.
It Is true, there is little left, but that is worth keeping.
England is still our own, and that brave Prince
Who holds the Crown with strong and rightful hand,
Will not forsake our Interest and his own.
Then happy they who bravely stem the Wave,
'Till he holds out his Hand our sinking Bark to save.

2. Coll. We shall have Storms -- the Sea works hard and loud,
The gathering Floods look big, and scowl along
Rolling far off -- from all hands we have advice
Macarty with the Flower of all their Forces
Approaches hither, and has vowed to lay
His Bones here, or subdue us.

Governor. That may be --
For he has Honor, and it is not unlikely,
He will do one or the other -- which o'th two
Lies yet in Fates dark womb -- Do Heaven its pleasure;
Let Us act like Men, and either live or dye so.

2. Coll. They say indeed that Gentleman you named
Is a mere Prodigy of an Irish man,
A stranger thing than Toad or Serpent were,
That he is both brave and honest in despite
Of his cursed Country, and as cursed Religion.
And his good natural temper has workt out
The Venom of 'em both -- In brief he wants
Only a better Cause and better Master:
Grant him but that and better Soldiers too,
I Would not desire a braver Enemy.

Captain. What e're he is, you will have him quickly here,
As over the Neighboring Hills I scowr'd this Morn,
We saw some Troops, which sure could be no other
Than advanced Guards to his Army.

Governor. When he please --
We would not willingly be unprepared
Of kind reception for so great a Stranger.
-- Go draw your Forces up under the Walls,
We'll meet, not wait 'em -- Captain! be it your care
With a smart flying Party to discover
Once more what Face they bear, and of what number;
(Tho that is the least, we'll fight 'em, tho a Million)
Beware of Ambushes, the Graves of the English,
Which there have buried ten times more than e're
They in fair Battle lost. -- Each Man to his Charge.

Exeunt Omnes ACT II. SCENE II. MACARTY's Camp.
Enter Macarty, Officers, Soldiers, -- Exercising. Macarty. ARe these the Men
designed to conquer Kingdoms?
The miserable Props of bleeding Ireland:
Simplicity and Cowardice mixed in
Such just proportion, none knows which surpasses.
Why must I blame my Contrymen, yet why
Do they deserve 't? -- Were any Cause besides
My King's concerned, I Would never trust my self
At the Head of 'em -- These the best, culled Men!
Sure they never handled Musket, Pike or Sword
Before this Expedition -- Let Us however
See what we must expect -- Sergeant, draw out
A File or two, and exercise 'em here.
The Officer draws 'em out, and after the other usual words of Command, bids
'em Face to the Right!

They all fall into Confusion, some facing one way, some the other. Macarty. O
stupid, worse than Beasts -- I Will teach my Horse
What is too high for them!
Officer sets 'em in order again, and then Commands. To the left!
They fall into the same Confusion they were in before.
Macarty. I never knew 'em constant but in Mischief,
And there they never fail --
Once more they are reduced, and the Word given. To the left about!
They all throw down their Arms and run quite away.
Macarty. There only did they not at all deceive
My Expectations -- Shall I rave or pity 'em?
Are these fit men to face well-ordered Troops,
Flesht with Success and a long Train of Victories?
Well Gentlemen, -- We must be Sacrificed,
And that is the worst -- We die for a good Master,
For such we ever ought to think our King;
But yet I cannot without regret resign
A Life which might with yours have done some Service,
If not Encumbered with a useless Rabble
Miscalled an Army.

1. Officer. It Was perhaps chance,
Those Raw, Rude-Fellows lately were drawn out,
The others sure are better, -- It Is impossible
They should be all so.

Macarty. One and all I fear,
However, order forth another Party,
And see what they will do.

The Officer draws out others -- Gives the words -- They do all well enough
till he bids 'em Fire, -- one half never does it at all, the other one after
another, and most of them wink, and shoot just in one another Faces, -- at
which concluding themselves killed, one part drops down, and the other runs away.
Macarty. The very Emblem of a Battle this!
And this I expect -- they n'ere shall cheat me more.

2. Officer. Though they are somewhat inexpert, my Lord,
They may be brave and faithful when they meet
The Enemy -- whom yet they never saw.
There stands a little Castle not far off,
Manned by some fifty Foot -- it is Old and Weak,
They Have little Ammunition -- If on this
We flesht 'em, t'wou'd do well, they would rowze their Courage,
Which yet has drowsy lain for want of Action.

Macarty. Though but too easily I guess the Event,
I Will not forebode -- and seeing fight we must,
As good begin -- Detach 500 Foot,
A Company of Granadeers may join 'em;
Sure those will carry't, or the Army will not.
Mean time the rest to Council to resolve,
How we must manage this unlucky business,
And where to most advantage aly our Bones.
Exeunt Omnes
ACT II. SCENE III.
Enter 3 or 4 Soldiers -- Mac-Shane, O Donnel, Teigue, etc. Teigue. BY my
Shoul now if ever poor Teigue saw the like in my Life. Why my Gossip tied a Red
Ribon about my left hand that I might be sure to know it from my right, -- and
the Ugly-Dog Rogue of an English Sergeant bid me turn to the Right, and put me
quite out.


Mac-Shane. But was n't mine Stranger than that too? -- may they maak haung
upon my Mothers Son if I did did not turn the same way both times, and yet the
Churl said I was right the first, and wrong the second time.


O Donnel. And when he bid us Face about, I thought t'had bin to charge the
Enemy -- so daring not be out of my Ranks at such a dangerous time, ran back
again to the main Body whence I was drawn.


Teigue. Upon my Shaulvaashion but so did we too -- but had the Rebels bin
coming in earnest -- we would have cut the pitiful Rascals all to pieces. -- So,
so, -- Teigue would have ripped up the Guts of the Heretics. --

Pulls out his Sword and Fences in the Air. So he would have out his Head off.
-- and just so, --

Clubs his Musket. Just so when he cry for mercy -- No English Dog you -- I Will
knock out your Brains.

While they are Vaporing and Laughing, Enter the Detachment that went to Storm
the Castle, beat in by the English, who Sallied upon 'em.]
Officer. They Fought like Devils, and Ours not like men;
Like Women, nay a Child, an English Boy
Might kill 'em had he but the strength, for they
Make no resistance -- once more if you're men
Stand and save all -- do but look back and see
Your Enemy. --

[ The English Enter. The Officer and several Soldiers fall. O Donnel tumbles
among the Slain, and pretends himself Dead. Mac Shane creeps into a Bush, and
Teigue being the nimblest Footman, runs away (the English following the Chase,)
and Reenters breathless at the Generals Tent. Enter Macarty, Officers, Teigue
looking fearfully over his Shoulder. -- Teigue. O Sir -- my Lord -- we are lost
-- St. Patrick save us!
The Army -- oh -- the English Army.

Macarty. What of them Coward? are they more than men?

Teigue. Than men Sir -- O yes Sir -- They have every one of 'em Eyes as big as
Sawcers, and spit Fire like Dragons -- twenty thousand, O they are here just at
the Door, and I Am Dead.


Macarty. What are they come Incognito? -- We must have seen or heard some
News what ever it is.


Captain. Go bid my Regiment advance.

Captain. They Are here -- and even just there is the Enemy.

Enter the English, beating in the Irish -- Macarty. Is this the dreadful Army?
one poor Company!
VVell-Charge 'em -- See if they are all immortal.

They Charge the English, who still Fighting retreat in good Order, till they
regain their Fort. Macarty. Farewell Temper! It Is beyond the Patience
Not only of a Soldier but a Saint
Patrick himself, of whom our holy Friars
Tell us such holy Lies, would swear to see it;
This half a-handfull to outbrave our Army!
Come on, go off, beat, kill, do what they please! --
O Fate -- thou'st cheated me -- sure I was mouldie,
To lead such men as those who Conquer mine,
Yes rather had I head one single Troop
Of such as they, than all this Soulless rout!
This Pageant of a War -- this Pastbord Army,
Scarce those in musty Arras wove look worse,
Or stand more patient to be cut in pieces:
No, there I wronged 'em first -- they will not stand,
So fast they run, that Death can scarce overtake 'em,
Almost outstrip a Bullet in his March,
With Fate and Vengeance winged and red Destruction.
Why must I bear so many thousand Deaths,
Before the last kind true one gives me Ease,
And sends this rage and shame a passage hence,
Quite crusted round my heart -- I Will stay no longer,
If there is a Purgatory sure it is here,
Quick, quick, I Will through it all and reach my Heaven,
To the Officers. Go bid the Army March, if they will obey you,
Mistake not wilfully and run away,
I Will be for Inniskilling or my Tomb;
-- Here call a Drummer, -- Speed him quickly thither,
Carry this Summons to the Governor,
Were not my Sovereigns Honor in it concerned,
Shame would not let me make a proposition
To such as those, to yield to such as ours.
This will, unless I much mistake his temper,
Quickly bring him, and Victory or Death,
Either of which would be so welcome now,
I scarce know which to choose.

As the Drummer is going out, Enter one from the Out-Guards. Soldier. My Lord,
we saw the Enemy advancing
On yonder Hill, -- and move so fast they must
Be very soon upon us.

Macarty. Labor saved --
I see there is men of Honor and Civility.
We Have yet as much advantage as we'd wish for,
There Is not a better spot of Ground in Europe
To cool their Courage, -- On this little rise
We'll place our Canon, and our last Reserve.
(Speaks to an Officer.) You Colonel, Take the Horse, and keep the Causway,
Between the Bogs -- And you the Foot dispose
(Speaks to another.) On either Wing, -- Thus planted if they will
But hold their Swords before 'em, it is impossible
To lose at least: -- And when their Troops are tired,
We may at pleasure fall upon and break 'em,
And once bid fair for Fame. --
[Exeunt Officers.] Though yet I hope not --
Not hope it, -- Yes, the man who bravely dies,
In the discharge of whatsoever Post
He Is fixed at, Fames his everlasting portion
What e're he lose, then lets be all -- Macarty.
-- My Soul my thinks expands its self, and greatens
With prospect of near Immortality.
Look down you Holy Forms! who reign above
Where no Contentions dwell, but those of Love.
You Saints, you Heroes all, of whom we are told
You flourished here, -- And might perhaps of old!
If 'ere Macarty did an act was base,
Dart all your Thunders in his perjured Face;
But if he Virtue and fair Fame pursued,
And Ill n'ere chose, unless in the shape of Good:
If never, unless deceived, his Sword was known
To own a Cause which you would blush to own;
Then either aid him with success to day,
Or take at once his Shame and Life away.
His Soul, a Stranger there, a place provide
Among those shining few who bravely died;
Open the Gates, and your kind arms prepare,
They come, they come, you soon will find him there.

Exit to the Battle. ACT II. SCENE IV.
Both Armies, the Irish as before, the English advancing up to the Causway --
the Canons play, Trumpets, Drums, Fifes sounding. Governor. There Is the Enemy!
--

Colonel. Enough -- there needs no Word --
The English fall on desperately at the Causway -- the Irish receive 'em, and a
warm dispute follows. Macarty from the Hill.
They stand! they stand! -- Nor yet -- nay then I Will hope --
And if they run not, now e'ne beg their Pardon,
And give my self the Lie -- There is no way for Foot,
Those Boggs are inaccessible -- Let Us bring
The Canon once to bear, the Day's our own.
Governor to his Soldiers.
How Gentlemen -- not Conquer? These are Irish,
All errand Irish -- whom as often yo've baffled
As seen -- I know you will beat, but what is the Reason
You stay so long? -- Charge home with the Pikes,
Now -- Now or Never --

The Foot receive all the Enemy's Fire, and pass the Boggs to meet 'em, who on
the Inniskilling Men's first Fire retreat in Disorder. Governor. St. George!
we have past the Boggs -- they run, they run,
And these too bend --

Macarty. A whole half-hour -- it is fair,
And more than I in Conscience could expect.

Colonel. I Will charge my self -- the Battle totters,
These may restor't --

To a Colonel and Officers about him. Coll. We wait you with our Lives -- if
not too late,
For the Horse break -- and see my Lord -- the Devils
Come rolling on in Smoke, and Fire, and Blood,
We yet may fly --

Macarty. When dead if I get off
That Is soon enough -- come follow you that Love
Your King or me --

They endeavor to rally the broken Army, the English come on, take the Cannon,
and turn it on the Irish; some throw themselves into the Bogg, and are knocked
on the Head there; others ask Quarter, and throw down their Arms, etc. Macarty.
Rally behind me -- once -- stand once -- but 'till
I Have met the Torrent -- and then run to Perdition --

Coll. It Is vain -- they are as deaf as fighting Winds,
A Drove of Sheep as soon will stop their running,
When one leaps first -- The Torrent bears us down,
And hurrys us too with 'em to the Wood.
All Is lost -- yet will your Lordship save your self?

Macarty. For what -- or where -- this Army was my Life,
My Spirits -- my Blood -- it is lost, and I Am dead with it,
Let Us turn and fall like what we have lived.

Coll. We cannot, --
Unless we over them or under pass;
And see -- already to the Wood we are born,
Driven with the edge of the Multitude
Out of the Tide of Death --

Macarty. Then let us return to it,
Now it is worth stemming -- I have lived too long
By half an hour.

Officers. We'll follow and dye with you.

They make up to a Party of the Inniskilling- men, at whom Macarty discharges
his Pistol, at which they all fire at him, and shoot him down; a Soldier comes
up, and Clubs his Musket to knock out his Brains. Macarty. They have done
kindly, but thou wilt yet do better,
Quick -- kill me Villain -- or I Will rise and kill thee.

Irish Officers. Macarty!

English Capt. Spare his Life! and it is a noble Prisoner!
Give him fair usage, tho you keep him safe.

Macarty. O cruel Wretches -- now I Will call you base
Cowards -- to take a shot and not return it.
Loose my Arm -- yet -- you shall have the other -- No
I need you not --

Drops into a swound with his Wounds, they carry him off, and the Scene closes.
ACT III. SCENE III. LONDONDERRY.
Enter Governor, three Colonels, Captains, etc. Governor. 'TWas a bold Act,
but just and necessary,
Which made us Masters of our Lives and Derry.
It Is now too late to shrink, and who would do it,
Tho twere not so? We yet are strong enough,
Although almost on every side betrayed,
Bandon, Dungannon, quitted all and lost,
Our Passes forced merely for want of fighting,
Relief refused, when half within our Walls.
The English Troops, Provision, Ammunition,
And all our most experienced Officers,
All gone, and little left but Walls and Hearts,
Yet hold they fast, and favor us kind Heaven,
We need not yet despair -- A happy riddance
Of some we have made, whose Presence if still with us
Had done more harm than good: We have Provisions,
And while the Countrey's clear may yet bring more;
A Garrison, strong, numerous, and vigorous;
We Have newly sent again for aid to England,
If we succeed, History will record
Our Actions louder than Ostend or Troy;
And if we fall, never a braver Cause,
Nor can it more be worth the while to dye.

1. Colonel. The Enemy apace are drawing hither,
Headed by Hamilton, who falsify'd
His Word and Trust with England -- they are numerous,
But yet all Irish, save some Officers
Sent over from France, both Nations we have conquered,
And may again -- unless by Famine pressed,
More than the Enemy -- which, to avoid,
Twere necessary every private House
Were searched immediately, and all things brought
To the general Magazine, thence given out
By just proportion as our number is.

Governor. You Counsel well -- about it instantly;
But what is of more concern, if possible,
Than that it self, -- Let Us all promote a Union
In different Parties here -- if that once break,
We Are lost inevitably, and become
The scorn and triumph of our Enemies.
What was it destroyed the famed Jerusalem,
But Faction within, more deadly and more fatal
Than all the Roman Army at the Gates?
And battered down their Walls with more success
Within, than did the Engines from abroad.

2. Coll. So well I hope our Interest is seen,
That tho their Heads being gone, most left behind
Seem little better than a Rabble now;
Yet even they can Feel as well as others,
Tho not much used to think -- Besides we have Officers
Remaining still behind, as brave as those
Who quitted Derry, and as signalized
In bold Defense of the English Interest here;
These have the Hearts of all the common sort,
And both would rather Dye, nay, Starve, than yield;
They Would make it Death to think as well as speak on it,
Could one as well as the other be discovered.

3. Coll. Already their Fidelity we have tried,
And quickly shall their Valor, tho oppressed
With numbers at the Fords, and wanting all
Was necessary for their own Defense:
But now they are satisfied their Leaders are
Firm as themselves, ready to share their danger.
In a few hours we easily shall guess
Their future Carriage, for the Enemy
Comes on a pace, already part encampt
Upon the neighboring Hills -- the whole consists
Of twenty-thousand men effectively;
The best of bad, culled out of all the rest,
Canon they have, and Bombs and Engineers,
We must expect smart Entertainment with 'em.

Governor. Let Us to the Walls, and see what Face they bear,
Though probaby we shortly may meet nearer.

Exeunt omnes. SCENE II. The Irish CAMP, -- and General's Tent.
Hamilton, Mamow, Pusignan, Clancarty, Butler, Fitzgerald, and other Officers.
Hamilton. WHat mean these sturdy Rebels, that they yet
Delay surrendering? Can they think to stand
Our Royal Army? will those ragged Walls
Which scarce will bear the shock of their own Canon,
How then of ours, secure 'em from our Arms?

Mamow. Begar me vill batter 'em down with 1, 2, 3, Potgun.
Vat the Diable do they mean? do they not know
My great Maistre send his Lieutenant General Mamow
To pull down all de Walls, and burn, kill, kill,
De Man, Woman, and shucking Shild dat fight vid his
Brother King of England?

Fitzgerald. They only kindly stay 'till we attack 'em,
That we may have the pleasure
Of Military Execution on 'em;
For it is impossible they should sustain
The least assault of such a puissant Army.

Butler. Perhaps they question if we are yet in earnest;
Were but a Battery raised, and some few Bombs
Thrown in, 'twou'd make 'em tremble and submit,
If not infatuated.

Hamilton. The Experiment is quickly tried upon 'em:
Call the Engineers, and let some shot be played
Against the Market-house -- perhaps 'twill stagger 'em,
To see the Stones rattle about their Ears.

Clancarty. A tedious way -- and were not far more brave
To scale it instantly, and put to the Sword
Whoever resist? I Would be the first should lead 'em.

Hamilton. My Lord, none e're could doubt Clancarty's Valor,
But the Kings Subjects must not be exposed
To causeless hazards -- time enough for that
If this succeed not -- as I Would hope it may;
-- For see -- already they set open the Gates,
And hurry in disorder hitherward;
Their wisest way, to yield upon Discretion.

Butler. They rather seem to bear the face of Men
Desperately bent to ruin -- see already
They charge our careless Out-Guards, and have beat 'em
Home to the Trenches.

Hamilton. They are Impudent --
But shall be cooler -- To your Charges strait;
Draw out a Party of Horse and face the Rebels;
Remember it is the first Attempt, on that
May very much of our Success depend.

Fitz-girald. They Have taken a long Sally from their Town,
Nor shall return in have --

Exeunt omnes. Enter a Party of the Derry men. Colonels, Captains, etc.
Colonel. So -- we begin to rouse 'em -- who would think
To see how briskly they at first advance;
They were resolved to play an Irish-trick,
And run away; but that it is the Beasts Nature,
Since one o'th two must run, he will be so civil
To save the other side the Labor.

Enter Irish, Mamow, Fitz girald, etc. Fitz-girald. Yield Rebels!

Colonel. Yes! --

Shoots him dead, the Parties join, the English beat the Irish off, and fight
behind the Scenes. SCENE III. Derry.
Enter Governor; to him a Captain from the Field. Captain, 'Twas a tough bout
--, the Irish cheated us
And fought awhile like men.

Governor. We from the Walls
Could not distinctly see what happened there.

Captain. From the brave Colonel I Am sent on purpose,
Who charged in the head of the Horse to give account
Of this days action --, who is now retired
Under the Walls where still he will face the Enemy.

Governor. Cure my impatience quick, and let me hear't.

Captain. He in two Squadrons first the Horse divides
The Enemy did the same; they met us briskly,
And head to head we fought, and breast to breast;
No way appeared but through, or over each other
Each close to his Friend, as close to his Enemy,
Two Iron Bodies hacking one another
As Smiths on Anvils beat -- while smoke and Fire
And sparks as thick as theirs flew from each Helmet,
Long thus we tugged till our impatient Colonel
Grown angry beyond suffrance when they grew
Unconscionably tedious e're they ran,
With his broad Sword clove one of the foremost down
Almost to the Girdle-sted, then should'ring in
Charged through the whole Brigade --, we followed him
And gleaned the Deaths behind him. Twice he met
And hand to hand grappled their bold Commander
The French Mamau, who fought and cursed as heartily
As possible --, as often again was sundred
By droves of either Party rushing in
Betwixt their lifted Swords -- the third wished time
They met, and Monsieur at the first Encounter
Fell dead, blaspheming on the dusty^ plain
And dying bit the ground --. His Brother came
Madder than he and swore a quick Revenge
Or else to follow him --, he had the last
From the same hand, who sent him grovelling after
On the same spot, so soon, their Souls and blood
Met as they parted, these upon the Sand,
And those in the airy regions --. All the rest
Were fairly following them --, till a new party
Came from the Camp, who with their very weight
Forced a Retreat --, they eagerly pressed on
And met their Fate behind, our Foot stood ready
Who all the Ditches lined, and gave 'em such
Warm Entertainment very few returned
To tell the News --. At least two hundred left
Upon the spot, their Standard we have won
And store of spoil, nor lost above some Ten
In all the Action.

Governor. Like true Britains done
-- And see they here return laden with spoils
And fairly purchase Laurels --. -- Welcome here
Enter from the Walls, the Colonel, Officers, Soldiers, etc. Thrice welcome to
my Breast! dread Sons of War
My Heart beats quick, and something feels abroad
Kin to its own --, 'twou'd fain get out and meet it
O how I envy you so great an Action
(Or were you any else should envy you)
You Have let 'em know what they must look for from Derry
What Edge your Courages and Swords do bear.

[ Embraces the Colonel, etc] Colonel. We Have bid 'm welcome -- somewhat heartily
And as they like it, let 'em come again
Though they will perhaps be wiser --.

Governor. No they will not
We certainly shall have 'em quickly with us
Rashness and Cowardice make up their Nature,
Prompt to attempt, mad, eager on destruction
Like other Beasts they will run on Sword and Fire.
The Bores will stake themselves, hold but the Spear
Direct against 'em --, but when once they feel
The warm blood trickle down and stain the Earth
Unlike a generous Beast, like Curs they whine
Clap up their Tails and run, nor will they stop
Till death reach them, or they some place of safety.
-- However we are prepared --, fresh men to the Walls
I Will speed away, and others to the works:
While all your honorable wounds are dress't,
And you from your long Toil and Labors rest.

Exeunt omnes. SCENE IV. The Irish Camp.
Enter Hamilton, Butler, Clancarty, Talbot, Nettervile, etc. Hamilton. Well --,
it is the chance of War -- always unequal,
Sometimes they must suffer --, but Revenge
Sweet dear Revenge will soon set all things right
And almost make 'em live again -- we must
Repay their visit, home and speedily.

Col. Talbot. If there be God or Devil, let both stand Neuter
Or side with Rebels now as often before
It Is the same thing --, I neither fear their Anger
Nor hope their Aid --, this sword and Arm's my God
I have and do Decree to Conquer them.

Hamilton. Still wicked Will! But yet he is resolute
And firm to the Cause --, small faults are soon passed over.
But we have no room for talk --, swift action calls
The English will be here with strong Relief
Unless we are speedy --, Let Us with Expedition
The Life of every noble Enterprise.
Begin the attaque upon their Lines, Works, Town.
Last time they met you unprovided, now
Prepared you come they never can think to stand.

Butler, What men can do, resolved to beat or dye
What Loyal Subjects against hated Rebels,
And Catholics against a faithless Crew
Of cursed Heretical Dogs, we promise, swear,
And Vow, never to return unless with Conquest.

Hamilton, Success attend you, equal to your valor.

Exeunt Omnes. SCENE. V. Derry. The Walls.
Governor, Several Captains, Officers, etc. Govern. I find I took em right,
the Camps in motion
And some great thing in hand, see, there they come
And swarm along as if they would cover us,
Three parties Horse, two other Foot appear.
Captain; I need not order you to your charges
Who are already eager to be there.

1 Capt. The Feasts so good there needs small invitation.
Wer'e gone --

Exeunt Omnes. Manent Governor and a Colonel. Govern. Hark -- from the Irish
Camp a dismal yell
Loud as the Midnight Wolves when met in Troops
To assault the Folds, their parties are come up,
The Horse have top'd our Line, with loud Huzza's
And Fagots all before 'em.

Col. Trust their welcome.
See, are our men behind hand in returns
They scorn to keep the Forts, but meet them fairly
Though theirs the disadvantage, on the Strand.
See how they mow 'em! Sure they are grown hoarse
We here no more Huzzah's. Pykes, Muskets, Scythes
Have spoiled their Music. -- Into the Lough they run,
And by one Death another vainly shun.

Governor. Who should that be that fights when all the rest
Are broke and shattered --; I could wish his Life
He is so brave

Colonel. Unless my Eyes mistake
As easily they may at such a distance
It Is young Montgarret --, see -- his Horse is killed
And he takes Quarter --, all his Party routed.

Gov. It Is well --, where are the rest --? ha -- at what distance,
How reverendly the Cowards gaze upon
Their Fellows Fate --, the other two bold Squadrons
Who with thick bellowings lately tore the Air
Stand still as Statues.

Colonel. But their Foot come on
And warmly too --, those Granadeers fight well
Ours bend a little --

Gov. Haste your Regiment
To their Relief.

Colonel. The work is done without it
They Have beat 'em off --, and fire still on their Rear.
-- Ha! are they immortal -- that none drop,
With all our Shot?

Gov. O! Pleasant Cowards --, see how witty Fear is!
As they go off they bear the dead behind 'em
Who do more service now than while alive
And guard the rest from all our shot secure.
-- But ours return, and almost every man
His Prisoner brings.

Enter the Derry Men, with Talbot, Nettervile, Butler, etc. Prisoners.
Governor. To the Prisoners.
Gentlemen -- it is the Fate of War --, we use not
What e're your Countrymen return us for it,
To violate our Word and Quarter given.
-- To the Captains,
See they are lodged as handsomely as our
Convenience and Security permits 'em.

Exeunt omnes. SCENE. VI. The Irish Camp.
Enter An Irish Funeral, of one of their Commanders killed in the last Action.
Tapers, Crosses, Dirges. Two fat Friars singing --, and praying for his Soul.
Song by the Priests.
1.
REst thy Soul in Bliss dear Friend!
Now beginning, n'ere to end:
At Purgatory be not scared
Its Flame shall never singe thy Beard.
Mount to rights to Heaven, nor stay
To call at the Half-way-house by the way.
2.
On thy Soul, while here below,
If some little spots did grow:
Murder, Perjury, or Rape
Or some such other small Escape:
By thy meritorious Fall
Thou have over atton'd 'em all.
3.
Innocent as Child unborn
On the golden wings of morn
Mount to bliss, and pray for those
Struggling with their faithless Foes:
Aid thy Friends who thee adore
As thou other Saints before.
[ They put him into the Grave, and the Irish kneel down by him, tear their
Hair, throw up the Dirt, and lament his death with unsufferable Howlings, as
their manner is, singing this Song over his Grave.]

Irish SONG.
AH Brother Teague! Why did thou go?
Whillilla lilla lilla lilla lilla lilla loo!
And leave thy Friends in grief and woe,
Aboo aboo aboo aboo aboo aboo aboo!
Had thou not store of Household Stuff
Whillilla etc.
Potates and Usquebagh enough
Aboo etc.
Three Sheep, one Garroon, and a Cow
Whillilla etc.
A Garden, Cabin and a Plough
Aboo etc.
Had thou not Bonny-clabbar store
Whillilla etc.
If not enough we would given thee more.
Aboo etc.
Why would thou Teague! Ah tell me why
Whillilla etc.
Thus play the Fool and maake a die
Aboo etc.
Why did thou touch the fatal shore
Whillilla etc.
Where we shall never see thee more
Aboo aboo aboo aboo aboo aboo aboo!
[While they are in the midst of their Harmony comes a Shot from the Town, and
kills the two Friars and several others --, all the rest start up and run
away.]

SCENE VII. Derry.
The Walls --, Captains, Soldiers, etc. 1 Sol. We Have spoiled their howling,
why 'twas more unsufferable
Then all their Canon --, there was a yell
Fearful enough to have frighted him almost
From his long sleep again.

2 Sol. But Oh! those holy Cheats --, those goodly Friars
How they both caper'd when the Chain-shot came
And Circumciz'd 'em just in the middle!
By this time if their Souls are not so gross
Pursy and unwieldy as their Carcasses,
They may have reached their Friend who went before 'em.

1. Capt. Never insult over an Enemy
Conquered or slain --, if either, that is enough
The rest is base --, It Is true over you they would
But even there overcome 'em as in Battle.
-- Come Captain --, Let Us to our Charge -- the Irish Prisoners
See how they brook confinement here.

2. Capt. Agreed --

[ They open a Door, and the Prisoners come forth --, Talbot, Macdonald, etc.
discontented and gloomy.] 1. Capt. to Talbot. You're Melancholy Colonel --, we
are come
To give you some diversion -- not insult you
What Is now your Fate, to morrow may be ours.

Talbot. Such Rebels merit not so good --.

2. Capt. We Scorn
The name and thing --, nor would, nor ever did
Yet take it in the Field --.

Macdonald. Can you deny it?
To reason calmly --, took you not up Arms
Against your Kings Lieutenant here at first,
And since even he himself in Person's come
Continue in your stubborn disobedience?

1. Capt. For our first taking Arms, 'twas on advice
Of Massacres intended --, and as some
Of you acknowledge, actually proposed
To the Deputy --. Those barbarous attempts
All Nations own it is lawful to repel
With utmost Force, since that is the only Law
Can either authorize or from 'em shield.
The last is not forgot --. For our remaining
In such a posture, it is for Englands King
And Ireland's too we fight --. This ever was
Since Conquered, a Dependant held inseparable
From the English Crown, when quitted, thrown away
And slighted by that Bigot Prince who wore it
Placed on two Royal Heads, the next in blood
And brightest pair in Europe --, those we own
Our rightful King and Queen, and you no better
Than that foul name with which you have branded us.

Talbot. The Massacre you talk of with such dread
Was no more real than that common place
Of cruelty --, the bloody Forty one --
When, after infinite insufferable
And odious provocations the poor Natives
Took for themselves and their Religion both
Just necessary Arms, Commissioned by
The King himself --. The Murders buzzed so loud
Were Executions which in War will ever
Be more or less --, and those you first begun
How many Thousands in the Isle Magee;
Before a stroke was struck by ours -- and then
We offered Murderers on either side
Should have fair Trial --, this you never accepted
Because you dared not.

2. Capt. Only there you're right.
We dared not be indeed such hardy Fools
To trust our Lives with Irish Consciences
Judges and Jury all your Countrymen
Who do notorious Justice when they meet us,
And before such you did propose a Trial
Of which there was no need, for all the Irish
Had been acquitted, all the English guilty.
That of Magee was a full year at least
After your horrid Massacre begun,
And only warm revenge for many Murders.
Which you began er'e any provocation
The hour, the day prefixed all over the Kingdom
Owned by your own, and not by you denied;
Who only say you were provoked to what
You did -- but how -- had you not your Estates,
Liberties, Lives, although a conquered Nation;
Were not your Lawyers, nay some Judges Irish,
Was it Religion then? But was not that
Which you call so, allowed more bare then ever,
Convents and Nunneries every where connived at,
No man molested, Mass in public said
All over the Kingdom, spite of all the Laws
Point Blank against it -- as for your Commissions
Your great Oneal himself, and Lord Mac-guire
Owned at their death 'twas all a Forgery.

Butler, Well Gentlemen, which ever part went wrong
Or this or that can never now recall it.
But one things certain, and you have treated us
So generously we cannot but in kindness
Advise you on it -- You see no succors yet
From England come, or if they are in vain
Kilmore is ours, and we a Boom have fastened
Across the Lough that it is impossible
By that way to relieve you; -- your Provisions
I see come short, you may have yet fair Terms;
If you stand out there is not a man escapes,
Yield then and let not such brave men be ruined.

1 Capt. Captain we thank you for your kind advice
But should the Soldiers hear you would not be safe
From worrying, nor should we propose it.
We Are one and all -- There Is not a private Sentinel
But willingly would eat the Flesh from one arm
And fight with the other, ere they would surrender,
-- Besides for yet a while we are richly stored
Tallow and Starch, -- why it is luxurious diet.
And when that fails, and all besides, the Garrison
Sir, we have heard them swear't, and do believe it
Will first eat you, and then themselves, e're yield.
Though every hour we expect releif
And know the English are in the Lough already.
And will be here --
(A shout without) But we must to our Charges. For business calls, we wish you
well to bear
What cannot he mended.

Exeunt Omnes. SCENE VIII. Derry-Walls
Enter Governor, Colonels, Captains. Govern. Too well appears the reason of
that shout
In The Irish Camp -- See in the Lough below
The English Ships attempting our relief,
The first is stranded, while the barbarous Enemy,
Runs down in Sholes to Fire, or kill, or take 'em,
While with insulting Flowts they call to our Guards,
And bid us send our Carpenters to help 'em.

1 Col. Some of their mirth is spoiled with that broadside,
Full in the midst of the Rabble -- nay the shock
Unless -- I see as many, what they wish.
Has floated her again.

2 Col. 'T has done it really
Not only in your fancy, now Salvation!
The Boom is broke, with Wind and Tide they come,
And scatter storms of Fire and Death about 'em
Till Kilmore rattles, and the bloody strand
Lies spread with Carcasses, and Legs and Arms,
Bodies and Heads and Men alive and dead,
Fly every where so fast as if they strove
Which should outrun the other.

Gov. They have reached the Key, relief and life comes with 'em.

Enter English Captains. Govern. Brave Countrymen there is little need to tell
you,
You're welcome here, for all that is left of Derry
Confesses it, those living Carcasses
You see remaining fain would smile, had they
But flesh enough to do it, not great Orange,
Our now great King was with more joy received,
In gasping England when he came to save it
From the same Enemy, then you are here.

Engl. C. Nor with less Joy we bring you this relief
Then we would our selves receive it, but what news
From the Enemies Camp, must we go visit them,
Or will not they be so civil to attend us.

Govern. They do what they were born to run away.
Fire all their very Tents and Huts, and worse,
The Country too least we should make advantage.
Whole waggon-loads of Arms thrown into the River.
Bursting their largest Guns, as too unweieldy
For their light March, O had we but some Horse
To give 'em one kind Farewell, it is so strange
For those who have been Neighbors now so long
To part abruptly.

Engl. Capt. We again shall find 'em,
For Schombergh speedily is here designed
With twenty thousand men to march for Dublin.
And end the War.

Governor, Impatiently we wait,
Till that wish day when we again may meet,
Those who so often grovelled at our Feet. Ex. Omn.

ACT. IV. SCENE. First. Dublin.
Tyrconnel, Rice, Nugent, etc. Neagle. Tyrc. Derry relieved, and Inniskilling
lost,
Sure destiny mistakes, or we do so.
Macarty Prisoner, Hamilton baffled, English landed
And more still coming! What will next be done.
Were all my Goods aboard, as once before
And I there too, I scarcely should look back
To be Lieutenant, Or indeed a something
Which bears some lesser name, (the King's scarce more

Aside. Nug. The glorious Cause we now are all embarkt in
Is firm enough to stand in spite of all
Th'attempts against it of weak Heretics,
What are two Towns? they yet have won no more
Nay only kept 'em, and for the disgrace
Incurred by missing them, there are excuses
Sound plausibly enough, which we will transmit
To our Friends in England, as our selves we will use 'em.
-- Alas, 'twas place, a little mean
And worthless Town, we only lay before it
For Recreation, might have taken it
When e're we pleased, at an hours warning had we
But strained our Forees there, it is true we would some,
Some few perhaps of note who died in the Army,
But there are many ways of death besides
The Sword and Cannon, several brought Diseases
That left 'em there, though lives and all went with 'em.
The usual chance of War, not to be avoided.
-- For what is to come we have still a numerous Army,
A noble body of Horse as are in Europe,
Ten Thousand with the least -- with these we will tug.
At least this Summer ore, the fickle English
By then perhaps will tired and weary grow
Of their new King, or France will be at leisure
To give their Arms a powerful diversion
And us assistance here. His Privateers
Will scowr our Seas, and pick each Vessel up
That peeps abroad, this will breed Discontents
In those enough inclined to it without Cause,
Besides we still have a strong party there
Desperate and Resolute --, they may produce
Something themselves that's not contemptible,
But come the worst, it is but to Fire the Country,
Kill all the Heretics, and run away
By the Light their Houses make.

Neagle, But still for Money
The Life oth' cause --, That must be got or all
Yet done or counseled will be lost and nothing.

Rice, We shall have shortly large supplies from France
Some we already have.

Neagle, All far too little
But our Invention must supply what is wanting,
Money there is in the Kingdom, and good store
This i will contrive, and speciously, to bring
Each Cob into the Exchequer.

Tyrconnel, That would half
Restore my hopes, but it is impossible.

Neagle, First hear it. I propose new pieces should
Be Coined, of Copper, or some pretty metal
That may look well, their value as we please
Let all be obliged to take this Royal money,
From Soldiers or the King; but when they pay
Custom or Subsidy, or ought beside
Be that in the old Coin --

Rice, The only fear
Is least they murmur at the imposition.

Tyrcon. How, murmur at their Prince, do you think they are Rebels
If he demands their their Throats, are they not his,
Their heads, all at his service, and should tumble
Themselves oth' floor for him to tread and spurn 'em,

Neagle, Not yet so high to run the supposition
The Natives never were much used to Money
To them it is all the same -- alas they are scarce
So subtle to distinguish one and to'ther
And they are in the right on it, every thing is worth
Its settled value, if this buys a Cow
And Silver did no more, it is the same thing.

Tyrconnel. To say but truth, the less we are engaged
To insulting France the better, they begin
To scorn, affront, abuse the Native Irish
Which we sure cannot bear.

Neagle, Nor need we long --
When once they'v done their business that they came for
We easily can turn 'em home again.
Mean while all may be fair, dissemble what
We cannot digest, nor can we er'e be greater
The King, good man, is old, and minds his Beads,
His Priests and Hounds share all his time between 'em.
Sometimes we will bring him out, and let him walk
A turn or two, as the Chinese their Emperors,
To let the people know he is still alive.
And make all preparation necessary
To oppose the English, if they should descend
On any part of the Island.

Enter Messenger with a Rope about his neck. Mess. Post from the North I bear
the dreadful news
The Sea's all covered with the English Fleet,
A thousand Sail I think, for there is no end,
And bore directly in for Bangor Bay.

Tyrc. -- It Is well enough, I doubted they would bid
For Dublin, we have time and ground and men,
Sufficient for 'em, come they when they will.

Enter another Messenger as the former. Messenger, The Enemies landed all in
Bangor Bay.
Belfast already's yielded, Carrick-fergus
Invested round, and gone by this, the Country
Roll in amain, the English drive along
And none or can or dare resist the Torrent.

Nugent, Time enough yet, they will be out of breath
And 'twill be our turns then to march and meet 'em.
Already we are rendevouzed betwixt
Dundalk and famed Tredagh, when they come thither
(But first they have the Newry to get through,
A Pass that none can force but bulls or Devils)
We may speak with 'em.

Tyrcon. When we know their numbers,
For Fame still greatens as it farther goes.
Till then lets take what measures now are needful,
We Have all the Arms already of the Heretics.
If there are any persons yet whose power
May injure us, let them too be secured,
And to amuse the people, set the Priests
To Prayer for good success.

Rice, If this blow over,
Or we but keep 'em there at a due distance
We Will have a Parliament to attaint the Estates
Of all that join the English, or absent,
And tare in pieces those faint Nun-spun Acts,
Made to the prejudice oth' Loyal Irish,
Unsettle and unhinge their Settlements,
Law or the Sword would do it, best by both;
Dominion to our Country we will restore,
And to proud Conquerers be Slaves no more.

Exeunt Omnes. Scene II. The Newry. Schombergs Army. The Inniskilling Men, etc.
General. Thus far we have only marched, not fought our way.
Here will be occasion for your Valor, if
They Have but a spark of Courage, and tough work
Must needs ensue. The Pass is strong, but must
Be won, or we stay here.

Captain. No, rather in our Graves; we only wait
Orders to charge, as they our doing that,
Unless they are strangely changed, to run away.

General. Go take a Party then and try the event.

The Irish appear posted advantagiously. The English throw themselves upon 'em,
who after two or three Fires, fling their Arms into the River, and shift for
themselves. General. Both sides I see are very expeditious.

Captain. Next for Dundalk.

Exeunt. Scene III. Dublin.
Tyrconnel, Nugent, Neagle, Irish Lords. To 'em a Messenger. Mess. The Newry's
lost; and on the Plain before
Dundalk I saw the English Troops advance
Er'e I came thence. By this they must be there.

Tyrcon. Sure they fly.

Nug. I doubt it is ours do so. But are our Army
Ready to meet 'em there?

Tyrcon. They Are all prepared.
We know their formidable Numbers too;
Some twenty thousand only at the most:
We thrice out-number 'em; and when they know
Our force, will sure retire faster than they
Marched forward -- but my Lords, I Will to the Army,
The King will do no hurt, what is yet left of him:
If he is there too, perhaps some of the Rebels
Will yield at his approach. Besides already
We Have many Friends in Schomberg's Camp, from whence
We nere shall want intelligence at least,
Perhaps do something more.

Neag. Success attend your Excellency thither.

Scene IV. Dundalk.
English Army, General, Council of War, Officers, etc. General. I know the
English Genius and their Fire,
My Countrymen have often felt 'em both.
And now, it is granted they will but fight their Slaves.
-- But then the disproportion is so huge,
Our Horse so few and weak, their's strong and numerous,
Their Foot four times at least more than the English,
'Twou'd be too great hazard to attempt;
Too great a price, even Victory to gain
By breaking all our Army, ere more Force
Arrive to join us, or advantage offers.
We Have here firm footing, whence they nere can beat us;
If they attempt, they fight at disadvantage;
And only come to meet prepared Destruction.

Officer. We must submit, tho it is a thing looks strange
To Englishmen thus coopt, to wait the Enemy,
Who always used to seek 'em, and die here
By sickness, closeness, and thick foggy Air,
Who bravely might for a good purchase sell
Our Lives, and get eternal Fame by losing 'em.

General. Which ever way they are lost; if in defense
It Is of your Country, and obedience to
So good a King, you never could fall braver.
-- But to that reason I before advance
Against Engagement, there is perhaps a greater,
A secret kept till now -- I have Intelligence
There Is a design formed to betray the Camp
To the Enemy -- We shall hear more on it speedily;
The Guards are doubled, and I wait each minute
Some false Deserters making to the Enemy,
Who are so strictly watched they cannot escape.
And here they come --

Enter Soldiers, with a Deserter, his Hands tied, etc. Deserter. Mercy, my
Lord, and I Will discover all.

Officer. We Have seized his Papers which have don't already,
A draught of all the Camp, and each weak place
Described that is in it -- A List of several Officers
And Soldiers, who design to join the Enemy,
When we engage; or when they are on the Guard:
Deliver up the Gates.

General. Now Gentlemen,
You see my Reason -- Go and hang him instantly,
As soon as his Confederates are seized:
Proclaim immediate Death to every Papist,
Who owns not his Religion publicly.
Guard well the Avenues. To night my self
I Will walk the Rounds to see you do your Duties,
And shall severely punish negligence.

Exeunt Omnes. Scene V. Irish Camp.
Enter Tyrconel, Hamilton, Clancarty, Monsieur de Rozen, etc. Tyrcon. Though our
designs are on their Camp discovered,
And that sly Fox their General, posts himself,
Where none can touch him -- it is full out as well;
Distempers will their business do, and save
Our Swords the Labor -- They already drop,
Provision comes but slowly, our thick Fogs
Please not their queasy Stomachs; they will begin
To wish for home. What if our own fall with 'em,
As hundreds do each week? -- It Is a fair change
And we can spare 'em. What Is a Subjects Life,
A hundreds, thousands, or a millions to
A great man's Interest? -- The next News we hear,
They leave Dundalk, and then -- beware their Rear.
Exeunt Omnes.
Scene VI. Dundalk, as before.
Most of the Soldiers sick, many dead, the rest pining. Enter a Colonel and
two Captains. 1. Capt. Ah Colonel! -- Was It for this we hither came,
To lay our bones in this accursed Country
Without a blow -- The Land of Want and Famine,
Sickness and Misery, and Grief and Death. --

2. Capt. Death Captain! and do you reckon that among the Grievances
And could you have the Conscience to ask more?
Had we but that, and honestly and fairly
Had these two Arms bin torn with Chain-shot from me,
Not pined away with dull dull lingering torments
It Would nere have made me sigh.

Collon. I own it is hard.
Nor have you only suffered, -- None can blame
Our prudent General, who moved at last,
With the Condition of this Skeleton,
Of what was once an Army, has gi'en Orders.
To quit this fatal place, and march again
Beyond the Newry, there to quarter till
Recruits and better Seasons call for Action.

Capt. Nay, then there is hope we yet may pay our Landlords;
And thank them for their courteous Entertainment.
Dundalk adieu: Had but the Traitors doom
Bin changed, we died, they guarded in our Room,
They Would had the worse, we the far better choice,
And should at such a wished exchange rejoice.
V^lleys of Curses be thy last Farewell,
Thou Map of Ireland, and thou Map of Hell.

Exeunt Omnes. ACT. V.
Scene I. Irish Army at Dundalk.
Tyrconnel, Lazune, Hamilton, Clancarty, etc. Tyrcon. ONce more we are here again
-- it is a kind Omen,
May all the rest return as does Dundalk.
Quick -- after with the Horse, cut off their Rear,
And drive the Rebels back into the Sea.
-- Nor shall that save 'em, thither and beyond
We'll follow --

Hamil. First discover in what order
They march, and where they stand -- it is probable
They Will keep the Newry-Pass and in that Country
Endeavor to secure their Winter Quarters.

Clanc. Then we must force it instantly, nor suffer
Their harbring there -- They Are on the run already,
And soon will quit it when our Troops approach,
Who so much Valor have already shown

Tire. Let it be done, and Ireland's all our own.

Exeunt Omnes. Scene II. The Newry.
A Party of Irish -- Officers, Soldiers, etc. Offic. March quick and close --
They take not yet the Alarm.
The Town's already ours -- The Prisoner whom
We lately took, informs there is scrarce a hundred
Yet left alive, and those half sick and languishing;
The rest or careless are or desperate,
Nor dream of that warm visit we shall make 'em.

The Centry discovers 'em, and fires three times, retiring. Officer. Discovered
-- But too late for their prevention;
In -- and we are Conquerers --

They enter the Town -- Several Officers come out in their shirts, and are
knocked oth' head. A Drummer beats an Alarm, and a few of the English gather in
the Streets. Eng. Offic. Ha -- are you come so far to hinder us
From dying now in quiet -- Fellow Soldiers,
You see 'em -- Rally here behind this Cart,
And give one Charge -- if they march not back
At their accustomed pace -- I Will e'ne run for 'em.

[The English charge -- The Irish run] Enter several English Soldiers crawling
upon their Hands and Feet with their Muskets in their Hands. Officer. Poor
Wretches -- What do you mean -- You Are fitter for
Your Beds or the Hospital, than War and Action.

1 Sold. Noble Captain -- Let me have but shot at 'em,
And then I Will die contented.

2. Sold. Now we are their Matches, 'twere not fair to fight 'em,
If strong and well as they.

They both get up to a Bank, fire their Pieces at the Irish, and fall dead
themselves. Offic. 'Twas done like Englishmen -- Their Courage did
Almost outlast their Breath -- but were too weak
To follow these -- who, lest again they rally
And come more numerous -- Soldiers, post away
For speedy Succor.

Exeunt Omnes. Scene III. Belfast.
General, Several Officers. Gener. Heaven smiles again -- The Sun has dressed the
Air
With fragrant blooms -- nor is the Earth less fair,
Supplies from England every day appear
And more -- the King himself will soon be here.
Who would not fight when such a General leads
Who in the Steps of Ancient Heroes treads,
Despises Danger, and himself can meet,
What would make meaner Souls dissolve to fee't?
Each hour we him expect, and when he comes;
Then for the Field and Fame, for Palms or Tombs.

Exeunt. Scene IV. The Royal Fleet at the Bay of Bangor -- The Mary Yacht with
the Standard -- All the Shore enlightened with Bonfires. Belfast.
The General, Officers, Messenger. Messeng. From Carick-sergus Garrison I bring
News of the safe Arrival of the King.
Five hundred Sail attend him -- such a sight
As glads the Shore more than each Festal Light
Kindled at his approach.

General. A joyful sound!
Go fire the Train, and send the News around:
Let all our Quarters the blessed Tidings hear,
And all the Bogs in Ireland quake for fear.
Their Fate is come -- The Pageant King must run;
And once again fly from the conscious Sun.
And in some Monastery hide his Head
Midst lonely Tombs, and the polluted Dead.
While that bright Hero who supplies his place,
Sways his strong Scepter with so great a Grace:
In trembling France shall give new wonders Birth,
And rend the witherd Lilies from the Earth.

Exeunt. The end of the First Part.

