A most worthy SPEECH Spoken in the Honorable House of COMMONS, By Sir BENIMIN
RVDYARD.

Desiring a happy union between the King and his Parliament without effusion
of blood, this present July 9th 1642.

London, Printed for N Allen, and are to be sold in the Old Baily. 1642.

A Speech spoken in the House of Commons by Sir Benjamin Rudiard, July 9. 1642.
Mr SPEAKER,
IN the way we are, we have gone as far as words can carry us: We have
voted our own Rights, and the Kings duty: No doubt there is a Relative Duty
between a King and Subjects; Obedience from a Subject to a King, Protection
from a King to his People. The present unhappy distance between His Majesty and
the Parliament, makes the whole Kingdom stand amazed in a fearful
expectation of dismal Calamities to fall upon it: It deeply and conscionably
concerns this House to compose and settle these threatening ruining
distractions. Mr. Speaker, I am touched, I am pierced with an apprehension of
the Honor of the House, and success of this Parliament. The best way to give
a stop to these desperate, imminent mischiefs is, To make a fair way for the
Kings return hither; It will likewise give best satisfaction to the people, and
will be our best Justification. M. Speaker, That we may the better consider
the condition we are now in, let us set our selves three years back: If any
man then, could have credibly told us That within three years the Queen shall
be gone out of England into the Low Countries, for any cause whatsoever. The
King shall remove from his Parliament, from London to York, declaring himself
not to be safe here That there shall be a total Rebellion in Ireland, Such
discords and distempers both in Church and State here, as now we find;
certainly we should have trembled at the thought of it: Wherefore it is fit we
should be sensible now we are in it.

On the other side, if any man then, could have credibly told us, That within
three years ye shall have a Parliament, it would have been good News; That
Ship-monie shall be taken away by an Act of Parliament, the Reasons and Grounds
of it so rooted out, as that neither it, nor any thing like it, can ever grow
up again; That Monopolies, the High Commission Court, The Star Chamber, The
Bishops Votes shall be taken away, The Counsel Table regulated and
restraiened, The Forests bounded and limited; That ye shall have a
Tryenniall Parliament; And more then that, A perpetual Parliament, which none
shall have power to dissolve without your selves, we should have thought this a
dream of happiness; yet now we are in the real possession of it, we do not
enjoy it, although His Majesty has promised and published he will make all
this good unto us: We stand chiefly upon further security; whereas, the very
having of these things, is a convenient, fair security, mutually securing one
another: there is more security offered, even in this last answer of the Kings,
by removing the personal Votes of Popish Lords, By the Better Education of
Papists children, by supplying the defects of Laws against Recusants, besides
what else may be enlarged and improved by a select Committee of both Houses,
named for that purpose. Wherefore, Sir, let us beware we do not contend for
such a hazardous unsafe security, as may endanger the loss of what we have
already; let us not think we have nothing, because we have not all we desire;
and though we had, yet we cannot make a Mathematical security; All humane
Caution is susceptible of corruption and failing, Gods providence will not be
bound, success must be his: He that observes the wind and rain, shall
neither sow nor reap; if he do nothing till he can secure the weather, he will
have but an ill harvest.

Mr. Speaker, It now behooves us to call up all the wisdom we have about us,
but we are at the very brinke of combustion and confusion: If blood once begin
to touch blood, we shall Presently fall into a certain misery, and must
attend an uncertain success, God knows when, and God knows what. Every man
here is bound in conscience to employ his uttermost endeavor, to prevent the
effusion of blood; blood is a crying sin, it pollutes a Land; let us save our
Liberties and our Estates, as we may save our souls too. Now I have clearly
delivered mine own conscience, I leave every man freely to his.

FINIS.

