THE ANABAPTISTS Printed Proposals, BEARING Date the 12th of October, 1674.

Subscribed by William Kiffin, Jeremy Ives, Thomas Plant, Thomas Hicks and
Daniel Dike.


Briefly Discussed: AND Jeremy Ives's late Daring Challenge to the Quakers,
Answered.

By a Lover of Truth, T. Rudyard.

Printed, 1674.

THE ANABAPTISTS printed Proposals Briefly Discussed: Bearing Date the Twelfth
of October, 1674.
HAd your Actions been Christian, or at least worthy of Men, you had not been
put to these mean Shifts to cover your Unworthiness: Why tell you the World of
your Desire, That those Particulars charged by us against Tho. Hicks might be
fully spoken to, when your Actions as well before, as since your Paper, give
ample Testimony to the contrary?

1st, At the Barbican-Meeting the 9th Instant, did not you and your
Confederates use your utmost Endeavors to avoid a Discussion of those palpable
Forgeries, Lies, Slanders, etc. charged upon T. H? You know it, and hundreds
there can witness it.

2dly, And how willing you are for the Trial or Disquisition of T. H. his
Actions, was further verified by your Behavior at Wheeler-Street-Meeting the
16th Instant (whence T. Hicks absenting himself) ye spent no less then five or
six Hours in Abusive Shuffles and Evasions, mixed with loud Outcries whenever we
attempted to read our Charge or Complaint against him (although we forbore till
J. Ives declared, he then personated him in his Absence.)

We are sensible T. H. and your late Actions will not endure a public
Disquisition, and ours seeks no Corners, which occasion so vast a Distance in
yours and our present Apprehensions of what is most suitable to attain our
respective Ends: You pretend, yours is To clear the Truth, and to Profit them
that hear; and so say we also: And what then? Shall we be Publicly Belyed,
Traduced and Abused, and Privately have Satisfaction? We could be content with
a Little rather then None at all: But could you call an Assembly of some
Thousands of People, to Debauch their Judgments, and Leven their Understandings
into Envy and Prejudice against us, and propose 50. or 60. excluding all others
to be Witnesses of your own, or our Guilt or Innocence in the Matter; Is this
the Way to clear the Truth and profit the Hearers? O abominable Deceit! O
horrid Partiality! Its too apparent your Ends are as black as your Beginnings,
and each designed to center in Abuse. I must tell you, however some Particulars
of you have espoused this Forger, etc. yet amongst you, there is not a few, who
heartily grieve and trouble, not only at his Forgery, etc. but your
Confederacy; and many more sober and judicious Persons are persuaded, that the
Way to clear your Innocence, will not be, to cover his Guilt, Fiat Justitia,
and pereat mundus.

As for your Proposals (being calculated for a private Cabal or Conventicle)
with small Amendments, may pass as fit Mediums for an orderly Dispute or
Disquisition of the Matter betwixt us; only to your 9th Proposition, I cannot
but particularly enquire into its Reason, or at least your, for the proposing
of it: It runs thus, viz.

And when your Paper is answered, that G. Whitehad and W. Penn be obliged to
give their Answers to such Charges as T. Hicks shall exhibit against them. To
this I say; Had you a Star-Chamber-Court, or the Ecclesiastics Oath, Ex
Officio to impose? Did your Authority comprehend those ministerial Offices of
Judges or Justices of the civil Peace, your Blind Proposition at first Sight,
might have passed as a tolerable Imposition upon us: But at this Season, when
the Laws (under which we live) have made us better Terms, then to be Self-
Assassinates; and Providence has so far suspended your Authority in Civils,
that you are incapacitated to recognizance us into your Obedience, I say, to be
obliged to give Answer, before they know whether T. Hicks's Charge will relate
to Civil or Religious Concerns, to Matter proper for their Debate, or Things
inquisitory inconsistent to their present Contests, is most unreasonable,
illegal, yea irreligious to impose: It is but a Taste of what Dissenters (had
you Power, which you want) must receive from your Hands; And whence, unless
from the Acts of England's late High Commission Court, you pikt up your
Proposition, it is not easily determinable.

But what is T. H's Conceit to provide so long aforehand, that (after our
Charge exhibited against him fr Forgery, etc. is answered) W. P. and C. W. be
obliged to Answer, etc? Is he afraid that two Years Dialoguing has not pumpt
him dry in his base Attempts, as well upon our Civil as Religious Rights? or
that he has yet more to vent? or rather, after all, that he must fly to the
Assistance of an Inquisition to make good his Charge against us; else to
forestall our Time to discuss the Consistency of his Sentiments with sound
Doctrine and pure Religion? W. Kiffin and J. Ives, you might do well to give us
the Reason induced you to be so peremptory upon us, with so unreasonable and
illegal a Proposition.

I cannot but remind you of your late Abuse, in expending so much Time about
the Title of a Book, and rather do it now, That if we meet hereafter we may be
excused the hearing such needless Cavils. Our first Charge against T. H. is
thus, viz.

A Dialogue betwixt a Christian and a Quaker (yet made by T. Hicks) viz.
Wherein (says he) is faithfully represented, etc.

1. I say, A Dialogue is nothing else then a Discourse betwixt two, three or
more, which a Stander by may write and publish for others Information.

2. But to acquaint my Reader I write Dialogue-wise, is to inform, that there
was not such real Discourse, but only my own Sentiments of the Persons or
Things I would Represent.

T. Hicks his Books were really his own Sentiments, yet he presents it to the
World, as a Real Discourse; and as a Real Dialogue, or Discourse, are they
frequently received, and brought as Proofs against us in the Parts where they
are spread abroad, as the Words of a Real Quaker.

This Point have we already debated, showing the Difference betwixt Catechisms
and Discourses by Way of Dialogue, and Real Dialogues, as T. H. presents his,
and therein sufficiently has manifested his Abuse. I call, as further Witness,
W. L's Letter to J. Ives: We saw him foiled (says W. L.) in his first Attempt
to prove his Way of Writing; for as Mr. Penn truly said, there is a vast
Difference betwixt a Dialogue composed for Information, and one for
Disputation: In the first I write my own Judgment; in the other an Adversary's.
And with your Learned Brother's Judgment, I leave this Particular, which is one
Part of that Charge.

The next thing therein considerable, after his Manner of Writing, is the
Matter, and that lay on our Parts to prove Fictitious: And whereas T. H. says,
In his Dialogue is faithfully represented the Quakers Opinions, We are ready to
make out, that he has most treacherously misrepresented us; and instead of
giving an Account of our Principles, he has feigned and forged Principles that
are not ours, for which we appealed, or called to the Anabaptists for Justice;
This is our Matter of Charge; this are we ready to prove, if you would stand
the Test; if you will abide to hear us.

But instead thereof, you delay us with Imposing your Reasons why you oppose
the Christian to the Quaker: To which I say, Your opposing them no ways
troubles us, but T. H's making a Counterfeit Christian and a false Quaker: This
is Matter of Fact, and we are ready to prove it against him; but that a Real
Christian opposes a Real Quaker, we deny.

But what is this Opposition to the Charge of Forgery, etc. against T. H?
Suppose a Dialogue had been made betwixt W. K. and J. Ives (who in Principles
(although now Confederates) differ more then a real Christian and Quaker) had
it been reasonable, if either Party had traduced the other, and the Person
wronged called for Justice, that the Malefactor should take up whole Days of
Discourse with his Reasons for opposing their two Names (a Thing not worth
Discourse) thereby diverting the Complainants Charge, and himself from being
called to Judgment? but this is their Dealing with us.

The Substance of our Complaint is for T. H's Fictions, Forgeries, Lies,
Slanders and Abuses; As for his opposing Christian to Quaker, is but a
Circumstance, and how suitable to his present Enterprise, will appear, when the
Anabaptist has cleared himself of the Forgeries, etc. charged upon him, or we
prove him guilty thereof: And when our Innocence or Guilt (by a full
Disquisition of the Matter in Controversy) is manifested, it will be easy to
determine which of us merits the Name of Christian, and which of the Name
Quaker; or whether the Anabaptist be the Counterfeit, or Quaker the Real
Christian.

But suppose we are not Christians in your Sense, or of your Dipping; are we
therefore none? But suppose, none at all, according to your present Sentiments
of us, but Jews, professed Turks or Heathens, as you would have us, shall not
your Brother answer for his Forgeries, Lies, and Slanders? Is it your Belief,
that an Heretic deserves no Law, no Justice, no Equity from or against Men of
your Cast? ye should do well to explain; for I assure you, it smells of your
Predecessors.

But if no Arguments will induce you to do us that common Right, that equal
Justice that a Heathen would not deny us; but you will still divert our Charge,
and interpose such Discourse, as may tire the Auditory, and cover your Infamous
Brother, and consequently his Abettors: If instead of hearing our Charge, and
answering our reasonable Demand, you would prove us No Christians, and bid us
take that for Answer; I propose, as necessary, in order thereto, That you tell
us what sort of Christian (yet mean) the Quaker is not: explain your selves to
the World, What and Who is a true Christian; and (you denying Inward Evidence
and Revelation) tell us, whether Faith and Works, or Principle and Practice, or
Pretended Faith and Principles without Works or Practice, make a Real
Christian; which may serve for a Looking-Glass, as well for your selves, as for
us: I speak particularly to you, who are many Heads confederated this day
against us, Each Sect claims the Name; but who has the Nature in your Sense?
Therefore answer plainly, without Equivocation or Evasion, what you mean by
Christian.

1. Do ye mean the Presbyterian (so called) with his Directory? 2. Or, do you
mean the Independent with his Savoy-Confession? 3. Or, do you mean the
Anabaptist with his several and various promulged Sistems of Faith? 4. Or, do
you mean those that tell us, We must DIP with them, as necessary to Salvation?
5. Or, do you mean Such that hold, Christ dyed not for all, nor was an
Universal Sacrifice for all Mankind? 6. Or, do ye mean Such that profess their
Faith, That Millions of People are Damned; or at least, left without Means of
Salvation by Eternal Decree, before they Knew or Acted Good or Evil? 7. Or, do
you mean Such that Deny the Divinity of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and
that he was not One with the Father in Glory before the World was?
It is not my Purpose to draw you out beyond the Bounds of the Faiths or
Beliefs of the present Confederacy; therefore I wave to mention such Sorts as
are termed, the Church of England or etc. All I desire or expect from you at
present, is, to be plain and particular, which of these forementioned, or what
others by Faith and Practice are the Real and True, and which, and how many of
these Impostors; or if all, declare it, that our Auditors upon your Attempts to
prove us No Real Christians, may be capable to judge, whether you Act like Real
Christians, or Stagers against Christianity; that we may see, whether, whilst
you are Unchristianing others, you heathenise not your Confederates or others
that merit the Name better then your selves: Let us have it under all your
Hands, that other Judicious and Indifferent Persons, as well as your selves,
may be capable to Judge betwixt you and us in this Matter of Controversy.

T. R.
London, the 24th of the 8th Month, 1674.
AN ANSWER TO Jeremy Ives's CHALLENGE.
THis prior Discourse was no sooner finished, then a Sheet of Jer. Ives
(tituled, A Sober Request to the Quakers) was crying about the Streets: And
although what I have here already writ, might serve as Answer; yet to avoid
Cause of Censure, that we disdain to (or cannot Answer) him, I have a few Lines
to Jeremy and his Paper.

But previous thereto I must tell thee, my Reader, J. Ives is neither the
Person with whom our public Contest is, nor one of the Juages that pretended
to answer our Appeal to the Anabaptists, for Justice against Thomas Hicks; but
a Person (as suited for such a Service) of late listed in, as an Auniliary to
defend T. H. or Oppose our Charge against Him; and as a suitable Medium
thereto, he would divert our Pursuit against T. H. by answering to his Allure.

But as to his Printed Piece, He or the Printer has termed it, A Sober Request;
and how correspondent the Name or Title is to the Nature or Kind thereof, it
self will best demonstrate.

. 1. If he means by Sober Request, that Expression of his, if you dare appoint
a Time and Place, etc. its past my Skill to find the Correspondency of the Body
of his Sheet to its Head or Title: But if Daring to Appoint, be the best Terms
the Anabaptist can invite us to a Religious Discourse, I must declare, his
Language is so far from being Scriptural, that it comes short of the common
Hectors or Swordmen of our Time, who for personal Affronts will challenge the
Field with much better and more modest Language.

. 2. But how Sober is his Request? Its but to appoint a Time or Place for him,
to prove us No Christians, and our Ministers, Impostors, etc. Very modest
Jeremy! in very good Time. Then it seems, for all thy large Boasts and high
Rants, its not yet done, but thou proposest to do it: and why a fresh or
particular Challenge for this? What! have thou already forgot the two several
Meetings that thy Impertinency has abused, and diverted from their particular
Occasions by pressing to this Discourse, and yet complains? Wast thou not heard
at Barbican the 9th Instant, not only what thou could say against us, but
till thou had fully catechized us, as to our Belief of Christ, etc? and being
answered to the Peoples Satisfaction (still failing in thy Attempt) left the
Pulpet and Assembly? Wast thou not, Jeremy, sufficiently heard at
Wheeler-Street, the 16th. Instant (the Auditory can witness for us) upon that
Subject? And was not the Sum or Close of thy proving us no Christians, a
pitiful Retreat, at last turning the Question upon us, to give thee an
Evidence of our being so (which not liking thee, thou approvedst as well as the
faithless Jews did, the Testimony of Christ and his Followers) when thou had
failed of thy Promise and Attempt there also, thou fairly turnedst thy Back
upon the Argument and Assembly together? In Case thy Memory be Treacherous
inquire of the Auditors, and the Relations already in Print, and they will help
thy Understanding.

But seeing the last Discourse betwixt thee and us upon this Subject (in some
measure) issued or broke off in the Different demonstrating or evidencing a
real and true Christian, 'twill be but reasonable J. I. W. K. T. P. T. H. etc.
the present Confederacy mutually in Writing demonstrate and figure out the real
and true Christian, and the sure and certain Evidence thereof, that the after
Contest may not be, What one is, or how to be demonstrated; but whether we are
such or no. And I must tell thee, if a holy Life, upright, honest and a
blameles Conversation among Men, be a Part, Member or Evidence of your
Christian, (as doubtless it is of a true one) I heartily give my Consent, that
J. Ives, being so capacitated (or as Joh. 8.7.) Cast the first Stone.

. 3. But from the Manner and Terms of thy Challenge ( Sober Request it is not)
viz. If you dare appoint a Time and Place for that Purpose; and then appoint
whom you will to dispute the Matter with me, provided none be admitted to speak
but us two -- That a certain Hour be agreed for the Beginning, and another for
the Ending -- and neither Party exceed the Limits. From these a Reasonable
Understanding may measure the Height, Depth and Breadth of thy End, and the
Zeal that led thee forth to this Enterprise. I must confess, such Language and
Articles as these, might well pass for a Bear-Garden-Prize, (though I have read
more modest Terms in their Bills) but to come from an Anabaptist-Preacher, who
pretends a more refined or Scriptural Rule for Discipline and Disputes, it
seems strange and most absurd: Where do thou find Jeremy, that any of the
Prophets of the Lord (in the Adulterous Generation they lived in) sent out such
Daring and singular Terms, to convert the misguided Jews, or convince their
Opposers? Or where did Christ or his Apostles send such Challenge with
Limitation to Persons, Time and Hours, in Order to propagate the Everlasting
Gospel, and answer Gainsayers? Or did ever the Quakers, when they first visited
your Assemblies make such Terms with you? Find, if thou can, such an Ensample
from primitive Christianity or Pattern in all the Holy Scriptures, except that
of the Uncir cumcised Philistine Goliath, defying the Army of Israel; it is
true, he cried out for a single Combatant, and dared such to meet him, and he
had his Reward accordingly.

I must tell thee, thy Actions and Paper bespeak thy Mind to be High and Lofty,
instead of Meek and Lowly, the true Christians Ornament; and intimates thee
rather a Stager against Religion, then a zealous Contender for true Religion:
And this is not my Mind only, but many, as well called by the Name of Baptists,
as other discreet and sober Men, that have not a little censured thy customary
Carriages, to stir up the People to Rudeness and Laughter at the late Disputes,
by the Sign of shaking thy Hand, or waving thy Hat over thy Head (call it what
thou will) People say, it smells of Ranter or Atheism; And doubt not, but that
thy thus treating us in Print, will rather confirm then shake their Opinions of
thee: But what shall I say, Men gather not Grapes of Thorns, nor Figs of
Thistles.

. 4. As to those confident Insinuations and base Assertions in thy printed
Challenge, viz.

1. That W. Penn 's Confession of Faith in Scripture Language, was a mere
Equivocation. 2. That our Former Opinions were Vile, Absurd and Non-sensical;
or that thou provedst to our Face, they make void all Rules of Christian Faith
and Practice. 3. Or, that by force of Argument thou had drawn us to that
Strait we could make no Reply. 4. Or, that former Books of Quakers declaredly
owned by us, contain in them Doctrines no ways reconcilable to Scripture-
Language or Christian Religion. 5. That our Behavior was Base and Insolent in
thy Absence.
These I justly charge upon thee as Abominable Falsehoods and Notorius
Untruths, which thou and all thy Confederates are not able to prove or maintain.

And know, that it is not thy Confident and Bold Assertions that are at this
day Proofs or Evidences against us; thou will reap no other Effect then the
Belching out of THY OWN SHAME; for our Innocence and Integrity is above the
Reach of thy Scurrility and Abuse: Nay, such Share has Jer. Ives in the Hearts
of sober Men, that I am bold to say, Thy very Name shall Clear our Innocence as
far as thy Tongue or Pen can Tradnce.

. 5. And since thy appearing in Confederacy with T. H. W. K. etc. against us,
the Question has been (not by a few, and that sober-minded and Considerable in
this City) Is this That Jer. Ives? Is this That Jer. Ives? Surely not, say
some. I meddle not with many That Is; but as pertinent to this present Religious
Controversy there yet remains a Doubt upon many, Whether thou be That Jer.
Ives, that upon a Religious Account, and for his Testimony against Swearing,
was cast into Newgate in the Year 1660. and after he had writ to his Brethren
a Sharp Letter, dated Jan. 14. 1670. against Swearing; to animate them, or to
rebuke them for it; in few Days after gave his Friends the Slip, and got out of
Prison by Swearing before Ric. Brown; and not only so, but soon after his
Liberty, printed a Plea for Swearing, to the Sorrow of his Brethren and
Straightning the Bonds of his Fellow Prisoners. This Jeremy remains upon the
Spirits of many sober Person in and about this City, for whose sake I intimate
this, that if thou be misrepresented, thy Innocence may be cleard; or if
thou art the Guilty Person, thou may Repent; and in this thou art desired to
give Satisfaction: and withal tell us, whether a Baptist-Minister, so
circumstantiated, be a true Gospel-Minister, or an Impostor, etc. if no
Impostor, give us the Reason wherefore? and if Such be True, who are False? be
pleased to explain; for it much concerns thee.

. 6. But that I may be clear of Jeremy and his Paper, in giving my Answer,
whether we accept of his Challenge, or disregard his Bravado; whether we go out
to this Senacherib, or commit our Cause to the Lord; according to my present
Apprehension of Jeremy and his proposed Attempt, I give my Answer.

1. If Jeremy Ives be yet in Confederacy with T. H. W. K. etc. (as doubtless he
is) to appear singly, as a Caperer, to divert, and oppose our present Pursuit
against T. Hicks for Forgcries, etc. is but a deceitful Shuffling of the
Confederates, and decoying us from our present Work; And under these
Circumstances, Jeremy's Barking is not worthy our Regard:

2. But if Jeremy, and his Brethren, and Confederats, are Real, and heartily
desire the Peoples Information, and not mere Caviling and Noise in open and
public Assemblies; Let them, as before proposed, give out in Writing, under
all their Hands, the full Characters and certain Evidences of a True and
Counterfeit Christian, as also of the True Minister and Impostor; and tell us
plainly Which and Who such are, proving the same by Holy Scripture; and then,

3. We pursuing our Charge of Forgeries, in plain Matter of Fact, against T. H.
etc. if Jeremy wants Employ, he may continue, as an Auxiliary to his Brother.

4. After our Charges against T. H. and against W. K. etc. for abetting and
countenancing his Forgeries, are heard and fully debated, I doubt not we shall
be very ready to hear Jeremy with his Brethren upon his proposed Subject; not
upon the Limit and Terms of a Bear-Garden Prize; but under such, as so solid a
Discourse calls for and requires, committing the Reasonablenes thereof to the
Consciences of the then Judicious Auditory; no ways doubting, but that in the
Strength of the Lord, we shall be capable to detect his Folly, and maintain our
Religion, as really Christian, against all the vain and Daring Attempts, and
Airy Rants of our malicious Opponents.

5. But if these Terms will not serve thee, but that still thou will appear as
a Privateer against us, thinking by thy bawling Outcries to still the Noise of
our Charge of Forgery, etc. exhibited against T. H. and stifle our just
Complaints against W. K. etc. by my Consent thou shall rail on, Rabshekahlike,
and boast as Goliath, till the just Hand of the Lord overtake thee; we no wise
doubting, but the Lord Jehovah, our Strength, will preserve us from the Strife
of Tongues and Envy of onreasonable Men, and will also in due time (maugre all
this Opposition) Clear our Innecency, and Uncover the Skirts of our Deceitful
and Abusive Adversaries.

T. R.
London, the 26th of the 8th Month, 1674.
THE END.

