RULES, ORDERS AND INSTRUCTIONS, Made and Published by the COMMISSIONERS OF
CUSTOMS and EXCIZE IN SCOTLAND, To be observed by the several Officers
conjunctly of both, in relation as well to Customs as Excize of Foreign Goods
upon Importation or Sale.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Harts-Close, over against the
Trone-Church, 1656.

BY THE COMMISSIONERS OF CUSTOMS and EXCIZE In SCOTLAND.
FOrasmuch as his Highness Council in Scotland for the Government thereof, have
been pleased for the most benefit and advantage of the Public ease and
commodity of Merchants, and other Traders and Dealers, to entrust the business
of Customs and Excize to the care and management of one and the same
Commissioners, with Power to collect, levy, receive and take both the said
Duties, according to the Rules of them respectively imposed and settled to be
received for th same in England, by Act, Ordinance, Order or Declaration, as
well of his Highness as of Parliament in that behalf. And forasmuch as the
said Rules are many and various, and which, (if neglected or omitted to be
practiced and put in execution) may prove very prejudicial to the Commonwealth,
as well in the matter of Customs and Excize, as by the Importing and Exporting
of Prohibited Goods and Merchandise. For Remedy whereof, and to the end the
several Collectors and other Officers employed in and about the same, may more
fully understand the respective Duties of their Places, and observe and keep an
Uniformity of Actings and Proceedings in the due and regular mannagement of
Affairs of the Customs and Excize respectively; And that none may pretend
ignorance, The present Commissioners of Customs and Excize in Scotland, as well
for the Reasons aforesaid, and out of their fervent desire faithfully to
discharge the great Trust incumbent on them, as the tender regard they have in
themselves of hindering any persons whatsoever ignorantly or unwittingly to
commit any Offenses in breach of the Laws, Have therefore, not only from the
several Laws now in force in England and Scotland, made, drawn, framed and
published such Instructions to the several Officers employed in the several
Ports, (as are most suitable to the juncture of things in this Nation; And
which therefore the several and respective Officers are hereby ordered and
required to observe, perform, fulfill and keep) but have also made collection
of the several Fines, Penalties and Forfeitures devised and made by the said
Laws, that so those whom their affection to their Country and the Commonwealth
cannot restrain from using indirect practices in prejudice of the Public
Revenue thereof, may be contained within due bounds, from the fence they may
have of the severity of the Law, which they will draw upon themselves if they
shall nevertheless continue wilfully to infringe and break the same.

Dated at LEITH the first day of September, One thousand six hundred and fifty
six. Ja. Mac-Dowal, Leo. Lytcot, Edm. Syler, Tho. Tucker.

INSTRUCTIONS, For the several COLLECTORS of CUSTOMS in the Ports of SCOTLAND,
as to Goods Inward and Outward, from, or for beyond the Seas.
Collectors duly to attend at the Head Port.
THE COLLECTORS of the several and respective Ports of this Nation, are duly
and constantly from time to time by themselves, or some other (for whom they
will be answerable, when, and as often as they shall have leave, or may
otherways be necessitated to absent themselves) to give their diligent and
constant attendance, at the hours, times and places appointed at the
Custom-House of the Chief or Head Port of his District. And because in many the
Member-Ports, the Merchants by reason of distance of Place, cannot possibly
make their Entries at the Chief or Head Port; The Collector is by Commission
under his Hand and Seal, To commission one of his Waiters in a Member Port
to appoint one of the Waiters of his Port (which he in his judgment shall
conceive to be most fit and apt for such a work, and for whom he shall be
responsible) to attend and officiate in such Member-Port of his District in
every thing, mutatis mutandis as a Collecto, but so far only, and no further
than the Collector shall by such Commission particularly direct and appoint,
and all as shall be for the most ease and dispatch of the Merchant, benefit and
advantage of the Public: And the Name of such Waiter as he shall appoint, he
is from time to time to transmit to the Commissioners.

His Cash or Day and Ship-Books.
Every Collector for the better carrying on and managing the affair wherein he
is entrusted, as to Subsidy and Customs, shall cause four several fair Books
to be prepared, One of which is to be employed and kept for a Cash or Day Book,
of all Moneys received for Customs Inwards or Outward, and two other of them
for Ship Books, Inwards and Outward.

Collectors to appoint Waiters to attend the landing of Goods.
Upon the arrival of any Ship in any Port, the Collector and chief Searcher in
such Ports where any such Searcher is appointed, or else the Collector alone is
to nominate and direct by Warrant under their or his hand, one or more of the
Watters (appointed to attend in that Fort, or any other Port or Place of his
Precinct or District) to take charge of such Ships, and to see the Goods and
Merchandises therein laden, cleared and discharged, according to such Warrant
as he or they shall receive from the Collector and Cheque jointly, of the said
Port where the same shall happen to be delivered and unladen: But the Master is
first to enter his Ship. and make report upon Oath.
But no such Warrant is to be granted or issued before such time as the Master
or Purser coming by way of Merchandise, or with Commodities from any Port,
shall not only enter openly in the Custom House, the name of the Ship, and of
the Master, the Burden, of whence, and from what Place she is fraighted; but
also deliver under his hand, and upon his Oath unto the Collector and Cheque, a
Bill of the Particulars and Contents of the whole Lading of the Ship, with the
Names of the several Merchants, and the Marks, Package, and outward form or
Bulk of the Goods and Merchandises according to his knowledge: And shall also
make Declaration upon Oath, that he has not broken Bulk since he came into the
Port, nor to any other Port of this Nation, otherwise than in the said Bill
shall be expressed, and shall answer to all such other Questions, concerning
the direct Quantity of Good (...) the said Ship, as shall be demanded of him by
the Collector and Cheque. And in case it shall happen, that he has broken
Bulk, either in that or in any other Port; then he shall also deliver upon his
Oath, the particulars of the said Goods so delivered in the Port or Ports where
he brake Bulk.

Which Ent y and Declaration made, as aforesaid, shall be entered in words at
length into the Ship-Book Inwards, The same to be entered in the Ship-Book.
after the Ships Entry, and afterward (having a Memorandum indorsed thereupon
of such Oath) shall be numbered and filed in its due place and order, and
together with the Ship-Book, (who is in like sort and manner to be numbered in
the Margent) shall be safely kept in the Custom-house for a Record thereof.

All Masters or Pursers of Ships, Masters and Pursers when to enter and unlade.
arriving from any foreign parts, shall within four days after their
arrival, make Entry of their Ship or Vessel, as aforesaid, and shall unlade
and discharge the same, or so much thereof as is intended to be unladen and
discharged with all convenient speed.

Merchants entering to give three Bills.
Every Merchant or other person entering Goods or Commodities Inwards, shall
make Entry of the same particularly, by delivering three Bills thereof at large
(two of which are to be signed by his own hand, or the hand of his Assigns) to
the Collector and Cheque, mentioning and expressing the Name of the Ship, and
of the Master, of whence, and from what place it was fraighted, with the Marks
and Numbers of the Fardells, Bulk and Package in the Margent, and the true
Quantities and Qualities of the Goods therein contained and expressed in words
at length, and not in Figures: As also, whether the Merchant be a Native, or a
Merchant Stranger, in manner and form following, viz.

Form of the Merchants Entry.
Leith Customs. In the Hopewel of Amsterd. Jo. Johnson Mr. from Middleb.
John Taylar Ind. or Alien, if the Master be a Stranger.

Five Barrells of Soap.

And the said Collector and Cheque, having distinctly and severally cast up,
The Customs to be cast up on the Bills.
with all convenient speed, the value of the Goods and Merchandise therein
mentioned, according to the Book of Rates (or otherwise if not therein rated,
as is by the said Book, or any other Act or Ordinance directed and appointed)
shall either of them upon one of the said Bills write the Custom and Subsidy
due thereupon, and having signed, numbered, and dated the same according to its
order and day of Entry, shall reciprocally deliver unto each other the
respective Bill (which each of them had respectively cast up, One of them to
remain with the Collector, the other with the Cheque.
signed and entered) to remain and lie, viz. The Collectors Bill with the
Cheque, and the Chequ's Bill with the Collector, for an original Bill, or
voucher of Entry; which shall presently, or at least some time the same day,
together with the Subsidy and Customs thereupon due and received, be entered
and charged by the Collector to Account in the Column of his Cash or Day Book,
appointed for Receipts of Customs, according to which the third Bill being
Subscribed both by the Collector and Cheque (and numbered and dated, And the
third to be the Waiters Warrant.
as the former) shall be sufficient warrant to the Waitors unto whom the same
shall presently be directed, to suffer and permit the Wares and Merchandises
therein mentioned to be landed and discharged accordingly.

Post-entries, when and how to be admitted.
In case of short Entry made of any Goods Inwards, wherein upon examination to
be taken before the Commissioners or Collectors for Customs, it shall appear
that the Merchant had no intention of fraud to the Commonwealth, and the Goods
un-entered shall not exceed twenty per centum in the quantity thereof in
proportion with the Goods mentioned in the Warrant, (whereof the Five per
centum is to be accounted part) the Merchant shall be admitted to mend his
Entry without Seizure; But this Liberty is not to extend,

1. To any Entries of Goods passing Outward in any case whatsoever.

2. Nor to any Goods entered Inwards, which shall be landed at unlawful time or
place, or in the absence of the Officer of the Customs properly concerned
therein.

3. Nor in any Cases where upon Examination, intention of fraud to the
Commonwealth shall be discovered, or the Goods landed, and not entered, shall
exceed the quantity above-written. For in all such Cases it is expected and
required, that Seizures be duly made and prosecuted according to the duties of
the Officers, and the Laws in that behalf established.

Goods at sight how to be entered and taken up.
All manner of Wares and Merchandise, that for some just cause or other (first
allowed of, and admitted by the Commissioners themselves in the Port of Leith,
and in all other Ports by the Collector and Cheque) any Merchant may happen to
enter at sight, shall be taken up by a Warrant for view, dated the day of the
Entry thereof, subscribed by the Commissioners themselves, or Collector and
Cheque, as aforesaid, and delivered unto the chief Searcher, or other Waiter or
Waiters (where there is no such Searcher) who shall see the same forthwith
brought unto the Custom House Key or VVharf, and give knowledge thereof unto
the Collector and Cheque, who shall presently cause the same to be searched,
viewed, weighed, measured, or otherwise as the nature of the Commodity shall
require in some convenient place. And the Owner or Proprietor shall forthwith
after that, make an Entry thereof particularly under his hand, or the hand of
his Assign, with the Collector and Cheque, and thereupon warrant to be made for
the clearing and passing the VVares and Merchandise, as aforesaid.

Bills of Store or Portage.
No Bills of Store or Portage shall be granted unto any Mariners or Seamen, at
their coming in, or going out, or any others for damage goods, Mis-Entries, or
Over-Entries, but by special Order from the Commissioners; which Bills so
granted, as well as Cocquets and other Warrants, shall be delivered to some
Waiter, and not the Person to whom granted, and the same to be void, unless
served on such day, or within so many days as shall be therein limited and
appointed; neither shall those Bills be served upon any Goods of any Person
whatsoever, other than the Person to whom they shall be granted; or out of, or
upon any other Ship or Ships, than what are, or shall be mentioned in the said
Bills, without the especial directions and appointment of the Commissioners
therein.

All Warrants to be passed openly in the Customhouse.
No Entry or agreement with any Merchant, or others, for Custom or Subsidy
Inwards or Outward, shall be made by the Collector, or other, nor any Cocquet,
Warrant, or Certificat sealed or subscribed, but openly in the Custom-house, by
the Collector and Cheque; And every Merchant shall paste his particular
Cocquet, Warrant or Certificat, the same day he enters his Goods.

Masters, Shippers and Pursers, entering Outward.
Every Master, Shipper, Purser, or other taking charge of a Voyage, that shall
lade any Goods or Merchandises for the Parts beyond the Seas, shall by Entry
under his hand, signify unto the Collector of the Port where he ladeth (that
he intends to lade, and to what place) before he receive or take into his
Ship, any Goods or Merchandise, and before his departure, shall give notice of
his whole Lading, To give a particular of his Lading, and answer upon his oath.
with the names of the Merchants, and other Persons that have laden Goods with
him, or in his Bottom; And further, truly shall answer upon Oath, to all such
questions as shall be demanded of him by the Collector and Cheque of the Port
where he shall so Lade.

Collector to appoint Waiters to the Ships.
After the Entry of any Ships, as aforesaid, the Collector and chief Searcher,
where such Searcher is appointed, and in all other Ports, the Collector alone
shall by Warrant under their or his hand, direct one or more Waiters of the
same Port, to take charge of such Ship, and see the Goods and Merchandise
therein, to be shipped, laden, and put on Board, according to such Warrant as
shall be given by the Collector and Cheque jointly for doing thereof. And when,
and as often as any Trade more than ordinary shall chance to happen in any Head
Port, or Member thereof, so as the Waiters appointed to attend in those places,
Incase of Trade more than ordinary, how to send for help.
cannot possibly be able to see unto the Lading or unlading of the Goods and
Merchandises which shall be shipped out, or brought in. Every Collector of such
Head Port (if the suddenness of the thing will not give him time or liberty to
advertise the Commissioners thereof, for some other or more Waiters to be sent
from Leith to his help or assistance) shall incase his Port lie Northerly, send
unto the Collector of the next Port lying Southerly, for one or more Waiters,
who shall thereupon send such unto him: and that Collector at the same time (if
the occasions of his Port require it) shall in like manner send to the next
Port adjoining Southerly of his Port; and so from Port to Port, until at
length the want or deficiency of Waiters in the last Port, may be supplied from
Leith. As for the Ports lying Westerly, they are to be supplied, as aforesaid,
by sending still unto the Collector of the next Port adjoining to them
Easterly; and so from Port to Port (if necessity require) as aforesaid. But if
the same may at any time be done and performed as well, and with less charge,
by entertainment of some faithful person, to officiate in extraordinary,
during the emergency of things, it is left to the discretion of the Collector
to entertain such person, or else to send for help, as aforesaid, according as
he in his judgment shall think fit.

Merchants Entryes Outward, how to be made.
Every Merchant, or other, that will transport or ship out any Goods by way of
Merchandise for foreign parts, shall make his Entry particularly thereof, with
the Collector and Cheque, by three Bills under his hand, or the hand of his
Assigns, with the Name of the Ship, the Master, the Burden, of whence, and to
what place it is fraighted, with the Marks and Numbers of the Packs, Cask,
Fardells, or other outward Form or Bulk, and the true quantity and quality of
the Goods therein contained, in words at length, which shall be signed and
entered, filed, Filed and kept.
and kept by the Collector and Cheque respectively, as in the case of Entries
Inwards, and the Moneys due, and received for Subsidy and Customs by the
Collector, charged unto Account in like manner accordingly.

All Goods and Merchandise to be entered by their true denominations, etc.
Especial care is to be had and taken, that all Goods, Wares and Merchandises
Inwards and Outward, be entered in their own true denomination, according to
their proper nature, quality, sortment, species and kind, by which they are
commonly and usually known and distinguished, and according to their several
terms and appellations given, and in such sort as the same are mentioned and
directed in the Book of Rates to pay, whether by Gross weight, Number, Measure,
Dozen, or otherways. Goods to be entered in the Merchants own name,
And further, that no manner of Goods or Merchandise, coming in, or going out,
be entered in any other Merchant or Merchants name, save in the name only of
the true Merchant, Owner or Proprietor of the same.

Goods entered in one Vessel, and shipped in another.
All Goods and Merchandise Customed Outward upon any Ship or Vessel, which
for some cause or other, cannot be laden on Board the same Ship, shall be
appointed to another Ship by Certificat, openly subscribed and delivered in the
Custom-house upon the Oaths of the chief Searcher (where such Searcher is
appointed) and the Waiter, or one of them, and of the Owners and Proprietors of
the said Goods and Merchandise openly taken, that the said Goods did not pass
according to the former Cocquet.

Goods allowed for Store and Portage, how to be entered.
All Goods and Merchandise allowed for Store, Portage, or other cause
whatsoever, shall duly and daily be entered in the Cash or Day-book, in the same
Order as they are passed; and although they pay neither Customs nor Subsidy,
shall nevertheless be valued and rated as they should have been, had they not
been passed by Stores; but shall and may be omitted to be drawn out; or put
into the Column for Receipt of Customs, or added up in the Account of the same.

No Officer whatsoever to take any Fees.
No Collector, Searcher, VVaiter, or other Officer whatsoever, employed in, or
about the business of the Customs, shall either directly or indirectly,
demand, take, or receive from the Merchant, or any other person whatsoever, any
Moneys by way of Fee or Gratuity, for, or in respect of any Certificat, Bill,
Cocquet, Transire, Ticket, Sufferance, Bond, or any other thing whatsoever,
Except for Skippers Reports, or Merchants Bills of Entryes.
to be by him or them done or performed as Collector, Searcher, or VVaiter. And
in case any of them shall at any time, at the instance and request of any
Skipper or Merchant, make or write any report or Bill of content of any Ship,
or Bills of Entry, Inwards or Outward, no Officer making such Bills, Report
1d. Each Bill of Entry ob.
shall demand, take, or receive more than one penny for writing the Skippers;
and no more than an half penny a Bill for writing Bills of Entryes for the
Merchant, upon pain of being dismissed from his or their employment, who shall
do contrary thereunto.

INSTRUCTIONS for the COLLECTORS as to the Coast-Businesse.
THe business of the Coast (which is to be understood only of Goods going, or
coming to, or from any the Ports of England or Scotland) being somewhat
different from the rest, and therefore to be kept in a different way and
manner, and distinctly by it self. The Collector is here, and in this Affair,
to make, The Coast-Book.
or cause a fair Book to be prepared and kept, by the name of the Coast Book;
In which all Coast Cocquets, Transires, and Certificates thereupon are from
time to time to be duly entered the same day, and in the same order as they are
presented and passed.

How Coast Goods are to be entered.
This Coast Book is to be ruled with a double Margent, the one to the right
hand, and the other to the left hand, on each side. On the left Page of this
Book all Cocquets and Transires Outward are to be entered, Outward.
placing the Name of the Port for which any Goods shall be shipped, in the
Margent on the left; and the date of the Certificate, or Return from the Port
where they were landed, on the right side of the said Page. Inwards.
On the right Page all Cocquets and Transires for Goods Inwards from the Coast,
are to be entered; and in the Margent of the left side, the Name of the Port
from whence the Goods came is to be expressed; and on the other side, the date
of the Collectors Certificate, or Return of the landing of the said Goods: But
in the middle of both Pages, between the Margents on either sides, the Quantity
and Quality of all Goods from the Coast, Outward or Inwards, respectively, is
to be most exactly entered, with the date of the respective Cocquets and
Transires, by which the same Goods have been passed, either Outward or
Inwards; The form of which Book, with the Coast Cocquet Certificate follows.

The Form of the Coast-Book.
OUTWARD. INVVARDS. 24. Nov. 1655 26. June, 1655 London James Ramsey Ind. five
hundred quarters of Oats in the Hannab of Leith, John Tailor Mr. Cert. 16.
June, 1656. New Castle. John Booth Ind. two hundred undrest Hides in the
Providence of Kirkaldy, Tho. White Mr. Dated 24. December, 1655 Cert. 29. June,
1656.

The Form of a Coast-Cocquet.
LEITH.
KNow ye that James Ramsey Ind. bath Laden in this Port five hundred Quarters
of Oats in the Hannah of Leith, John Tailor Master, for London, security being
given. Dated the four and twentieth day of November, 1655.

A. B. Collector. C. D. Cheque.

The Form of a Transire for the Coast.
LEITH.
KNow ye that Alexander Farquhar Ind. is permitted to pass forty Barrels of
Figs, qt. thirty hundred with. in the Hopewell of Brunt-Island, Patrick Angus
Master, for Newcastle. Dated the second of December, 1655.

The Form of a Certificate.
LEITH.
KNow ye that John Booth Ind. has discharged and put on shore in this Port two
hundred undrest Hides, out of the Providence of Kirkaldy, Tho. White Master,
from Newcastle. security being given, as per Cocquet, dated the five and
twentieth day of November last: Witness the Seal of our Office this (...) day
of March, 1656.

EVery Merchant, or other person, Merchants entering Goods for the Coast, to
give Bond.
intending to ship or carry any Goods or Merchandise (prohibited transportation
or carrying beyond the Seas) to discharge or unlade the same in any other Port
or place of Scotland or England, shall before the shipping thereof, declare and
manifest under his or their Hands, by Bill of Entry (as in all other Cases) to
the Collector and Cheque of the Customs in the Port where the same shall be
shipped, the Measure, Length, Number, and other Contents and Value of such
Goods, together with the Name of the Ship, and of the Master, the Place of
whence, and for which he is fraighted; and with the approbation of the said
Collector and Cheque, shall also make and enter into a sufficient Obligation,
according to the Law of Scotland, in which he shall be bound with sufficient
Sureties, or Cautioners, in such sums of Money as shall amount to double the
value of the Goods so declared and manifested, with Condition that the same
shall be discharged at some Port within England, Scotland, or Ireland (where
such Goods may be carried thither) and in no other place whatsoever.

To return Certificate within four months.
Every Person giving Bond and Security, as aforesaid, is within four months
(at furthest) after shipping of his Goods, to bring a true Certificate from the
Port or place where he or they shall discharge the said Goods, testifying the
said Goods so shipped, and the true Nature, Length, Weight, Number, and other
Contents or Value thereof, to be there discharged: Which Certificate, upon the
discharge of the Goods in any Port in Scotland, to be delivered to the party
delivering and discharging the same.

What security to be taken upon shipping woollen Yarn, Flocks, Woolfells, Earth
and Clay.
If any person or person shall ship out any woollen Yarn, woollen Flocks,
Wool-fels, Earth or Clay, the Collector shall take double Security (over and
above double the value) for three shillings for every pound thereof, with
Condition, That the same shall be landed in some Port of this Commonwealth, as
is directed by Law, and according to the tenor of the usual Coast Bonds.

All Bonds to be returned to the Commissioners.
All such, or any other Bonds already taken by any the Collectors, are with all
convenient speed, and all such other Bonds whatsoever in the future to be taken
by any the Collectors, are, and shall be monthly returned up and delivered to
the Commissioners at the Custom-house in Leith, that such process and other
proceedings may be had thereupon, as of right belongs.

No Goods to be shipped without suffrance, Cocquet or Transire,
The Collector in every Port is to take care that no Goods whatsoever be
shipped from Port to Port, before a Sufferance be passed for the same; nor any
Native Commodities or Manufactures made thereof be transported, before a
Cocquet be past, and good Security given for landing the same at some other
Port or place of this Nation, or of England, or else Ireland (if such Goods may
be shipped thither) as is provided by Law, nor any foreign Goods, before a
Transire be past for the same: And if any Goods shall be shipped contrary
hereunto, or that any Goods shall be brought in from one Port to another, or
shall be landed or found on board any Ship whether landed or not landed, for
which there is no Cocquet or Transire, or being more in quantity than is in the
Cocquet or Transire therein mentioned, If so, to be seized.
that in such cases, Seizure be made, and notice thereof given to the
Commissioners, and so to provide that the same, or any part thereof, be not
discharged, without order of the Commissioners first had and given therein.

Masters and Pursers how to enter for the Coast.
Before the going out of, or upon coming into Port of any Ship or Vessel, for,
unto, or from any other Port or place of Scotland or England, the Master or
Purser of every such Ship is to make Entry of his Ship, and the respective
Merchants, Proprietors and Owners, are to make Entry of their Goods,
Merchandise and Commodities, as is required to be made and done for all Ships,
Goods and Merchandise Outward or Inwards, for, or from any foreign Parts
beyond the Seas; How Merchants shall enter.
But any Merchant or other, intending to lade or ship, and so making Entry of
any Goods Outward for the Coast, the Collector and Cheque are thereupon to
make a Cocquet or Transire, at the nature of his Entry shall require; Their
Cocquets and Transires to remain in the custody of the Collector and Cheque.
Which Cocquet or Transire, is to remain in the joint Custody of the said
Collector and Cheque, until such time as the Merchant is, or shall be ready to
carry or ship his Goods on Board, and then upon notice given thereof, to be
delivered to the Waiter appointed to attend that Ship in which they are to be
laden, who shall forthwith see the same done. And if the Merchant have not
before, Till the Goods shall be shipped, and then to be delivered to the Waiter
to indorse.
he shall then give the Marks and Numbers of his Goods, which shall be indorsed
on the said Cocquet or Transire, and the Waiter also shall write his name
thereupon, with the time when he saw the same shipped, and presently after,
shall deliver the same back unto the chief Searcher, or else unto the
Collector, where there is no chief Searcher who shall keep the same by him,
till the Ship be fully laden, By him to the Searcher or Collector. Who after
full lading and oath given by the Master, and search made, Shall deliver the
same, or else one general Cocquet to such Master No Ships unlading, to be d
scharged before examination of Entries, and search of the same.
and then the Master or Purser thereof coming and making Declaration upon Oath,
that he has received no Goods on Board, but what have been laden by Cocquet,
Transire, or Sufferance; and the said Searcher or Collector, or some Waiter
appointed by him, going on Board to search, and finding no other, or more Goods
laden therein, then for which there was, or had been Cocquet, Transire, or
Sufferance granted for doing thereof, shall thereupon deliver the Cocquets and
Transires remaining in his custody, or else one general Cocquet for all, unto
the Master or Purser of the Ship, who is to be cleared and discharged, that She
may proceed upon Her Voyage accordingly.

No Ships Inwards from the Coast, are to be discharged, or suffered to depart
from the Key, or have any Goods de novo put on Board, before such time as the
chief Searcher, or Collector where there is no chief Searcher, shall first have
examined the particular Entryes with the Masters or Pursers Entry, and finding
the same to agree, shall afterward go on Board, and see that there are no
Goods left remaining on Board; but that the whole Lading has been really and
truly delivered and discharged; The same mutaris mutandis to be observed for,
and upon all Ships Inwards from beyond the Seas.

In passing of Goods from Port to Port, the Collectors and other Officers, What
to be understood by Goods Customable.
are to understand by Goods Customable, All Wares and Commodities growing,
wrought or manufactured within this Nation, and all foreign Commodities and
Merchandises which have been imported and remained in this Nation, (viz.) by an
Englishman above twelve Months, and by a Stranger above nine Months, and the
Property altered by the sale thereof made by the first Importer.

INSTRUCTIONS For the COLLECTORS, in levying of SUBSIDY and CUSTOMS.
Collector to receive according to the book of Rates, etc.
THe Collector in every Port, appointed for receiving of Subsidy and Customs
upon all Goods, Wares and Merchandise, Imported into, and Exported out of
Scotland, are faithfully to observe, do and perform the same, according to the
Articles, Rules and Directions of the present Book of Rates, and such others as
are directed to be received for, or concerning the payment of the Subsidy of
Tunnage and Poundage, or the Importation, or Exportation, or Transportation of
Goods prohibited by any Statute, Act or Ordnance of Parliament, Ordinance or
Order of his Highness the Lord Protector and his Council, now in force in
England, and become so in Scotland by the Union of both Nations; And to proceed
in all things belonging to the duty of his Place, according to the same, and
according to such Rules and Instructions as he shall from time to time receive
or have from the chief Commissioners in that behalf. What Wine are to be
accounted of the growth of the Levant. What natives and strangers shall pay.


The Collector is to take notice, That all Wines, except Rhenish and French
Wines, are to be accounted of the growth of the Levant, and to pay Customs
accordingly.

In levying the Subsidy of Poundage, the Collector is to collect, receive and
levy Five in the Hundred as a General Subsidy upon all Goods Inwards and
Outward, as well from the English and Scots Merchant, as from the
Merchant-Stranger, and the Petty Customs of Three pence in the Pound more from
all Strangers, so as the Merchant-Stranger, for every Twelve pence to be paid
by the English or Scots Merchants, upon every Pound or Twenty shillings
sterling, is to pay One shilling three pence, Subsidy and Customs.

What stranger shall pay for Native Commodities and Manufactures.
Upon Coal, Pladding, Salmon, and all manner of Native-Commodities or
Manufactures made thereof, to be carried or shipped Outward, he is to collect
from the Merchant-Stranger, Five in the Hundred, over and above the Five per
Cent. and Petry-Customs aforesaid; so as the Merchant-Stranger, for every
Twelve pence to be paid by the English or Scots-Merchant, is to pay Two
shillings three pence Subsidy and Customs: And the Merchant-Stranger for those
Commodities for which he is to pay double Subsidy, as Lead, Tin, Double
Subsidy, and double petty Customs.
Woollen-Cloath, and all, or any Manufactures made of Wool, or part Wool, is
also to pay double Petty-Customs, and upon Woollen-Cloath he is to pay more, an
old Custom of Fourteen pence upon every Cloth Exported, and proportionably
upon new Draperies, as they are reckoned for a Cloth in the Instructions
annexed to the Book of Rates.

Natives inhabiting beyond the seas.
All English or Scots inhabiting beyond the Seas, and sworn Subjects to
foreign Princes, are to pay Customs and other Duties as Strangers, so long as
they continue so.

Denizens to pay strangers Customs.
All Strangers made Denizens, are to pay all Customs and Subsidies as strangers.

All great and small Coal exported, being by Order of his Highness Council in
Scotland for the Government thereof, bearing date the First of November, Coal
to be computed by the Tun, not Chaldron.
1655. rated to pay a certain Rate upon each Chaldron, containing Twenty
hundred weight; Especial care therefore is to be had in levying thereof, That
the Collector do not receive or take the same according to the Scots Chaldron,
which is more or less in sundry places where such Coal are shipped and laden,
but according to the number of Tuns, or twenty hundred weights contained in
every such Chaldron.

Coals shipped in strangers Bottoms.
All Merchants English or Scots shipping out Coals for beyond the Seas in
strangers Bottoms, are to pay strangers Customs. In the shipping therefore of
the same, as also in all other cases of the like nature it is to be noted,

What Bottoms accounted such.
That all Ships wherein the moyetie or major part of the seamen are strangers,
are to be accounted strangers.

That all Ships belonging to strangers are to be accounted strangers Bottoms,
though English or Scots built.

That all Ships belonging to English or Scots Merchants, are to be accounted
English or Scots Bottoms, though Foreign built.

That all Ships of which any stranger is part Owner, are to be reckned
strangers Bottoms, though all the rest of the Owners be English or Scots.

What to be paid for Lead
All Lead exported whether by English or Scots, or by any Merchant stranger, is
to pay over and above the Subsidy and Customs, an old Custom of three pence in
the Sow, which is two shillings upon the Fodder or twenty hundred weight.

All Beer shipped out by any English or Scots, Beer.
besides the two shillings Subsidy mentioned in the Book of Rates, is to pay
eight shillings six pence more per Tun* by English or Scots, and ten shillings
by every stranger.

Tobaccoes of English Plantations.
One penny per pound is to be levied on all Tobaccoes of the English
Plantations beyond the Sea, and upon all other Tobaccoes of what Plantation
soever, six pence in the pound. And to the end every Collector may have true
Cognizance what is of English, and what of Foreign Plantations, How to be
tried from Foreign.
he is to take notice that he is to pass no Tobaccoes to be of the English
Plantations, but only such as by sufficient persons shall be attested upon Oath
so to be.

There being a great difference in the Customs of Tauton Cottons and Bays,
Bays,
and the latter of them being very often shipped in the name of the former, the
Collector is to have an especial care that for such as are Bays (in
whatsoever name the Merchant may enter them) Custom may be demanded and levied
as for Bays.

Horses, or live Cattle.
All Horses and live Cattle imported, are to pay Subsidy, notwithstanding the
exception of fresh Fish and Bestiall in the Act for Tunnage and Poundage; For
that by fresh Fish, is meant only Fish unsalted, and by Bestiall, fresh Flesh
for man's meat, killed or brought in unsalted.

Upon all Ships brought in as Prize, whether taken by the States Ships, Prize
Goods and Ships.
or other Private Men of War, after condemnation thereof, full Custom is not
only to be received for all Goods therein, as if they were imported by way of
Merchandise, but also for the Ship, Tackle, Ordnance, and other furniture
belonging to the same, after the Rate of five per Cent. as the same shall be
indifferently apprized. Ships bought beyond the seas.
As also the like Custom is to be received for all other Ships that are bought
beyond the Seas, as the proper Goods of any person or Merchant residing in
Scotland.

No allowance for damage of Prize Goods.
For all Goods brought in as Prize, no defalcation or allowance from the
quantity thereof, or out of the sum of money due for Custom and Subsidy by way
of abatement, for being bad, damaged, or defective, is to be made or granted.

All allowance to be made and given to Merchants for Wrappers upon shipping out
old or new Draperies, Wrappers.
are not to exceed the Directious and Instructions annexed to the Book of
Rates: and upon all Goods exported, no allowance of five per Cent. is at any
time to be given.

The allowance of twelve per Cent. is to be made for Leakage of Wines, Twelve
per Cent. for Leakage.
(excepting Wines brought in as Prize, to which neither this, nor any other
allowance is to be made) to Merchants, demanding the same by way of defalcation
where no Wines are filled up on Shipboard, and care therefore is to be taken
for preventing thereof. But in case any Merchant or other shall happen first to
fill up his, or their Wines, then no allowance at all is to be made or given:
And when and where it is, as aforesaid, of right to be made and granted, the
said twelve per Cent. is not to be taken or deducted out of the quantities of
Wines, but out of the Moneys to be paid and received for the Subsidy thereof.

Ships unladeing part, to pay for their whole lading.
If any Ship importing Foreign Goods or Merchandise into any Port of this
Nation, shall happen to unlade or discharge part of her Loading there, and
intend afterward to transport the rest over Sea; Entry is to be made of the
whole, and Custom paid accordingly.

Goods to be cleared according to the English Standard, of wright and measure.
All Merchants, and other Persons, clearing Goods at the Custom-house, are to
clear and pay their Custom both for weight and measure according to the English
Standard, which is that, mentioned and expressed in the Book of Rates; that is
to say, All Goods which pay by measure are to be cleared no otherwise then
according to the Bushel, which contains eight Gallons English, or eight Quarts
Scots; And to all other Goods paying Custom by the hundredth weight, that there
be allowed and accounted to the hundred subtle, but five score, and to the
hundred weight gross, five score and twelve pounds, and for other Goods by the
Tun weight, but twenty hundred weight of one hundred and twelve pounds to each
hundred; to the Tun of measure, but two hundred fifty two Gallons; and to the
measure of Else and Yards, but according to the English Standard of an Ell and
a Yard.

The contents of a Tun.
Only it is to be noted, That two Buts and Pipes, albeit two of them do not
exactly contain one Tun, are nevertheless to pay Custom for one Tun, in like
manner as four Hogsheds, three Puncheons, six Teirces, and eight quarter Casks,
of what sort soever, are to pass and pay for a Tun, although the Gage be not
so much.

But all Goods coming in uncertain and unusual Cask which are to pay by the
Tun, Hogshead, Pipe, or Barrel, Uncertain Casks to be gaged.
are to be reduced unto the aforesaid number of Gallons, to make a Tun And
where the Book of Rates directs any Commodity to pay by the Flemish or other
Outlandish measure, there only is the Custom to be collected accordingly; but
upon all other Commodities according to the respective weights and measures
aforesaid.

Where any Goods and Merchandise shall be imported or exported, Goods ad
valorem.
and the same not rated or valued in the Book of Rates, there and in such case,
the Collector is to set the value upon the Goods, in which he is to have regard
unto the benefit that shall accrue unto the Commonwealth, and accordingly to
set the Rate and value; but in no case to set the Rate and value of any Goods
below the intrinsecall value or worth thereof, nor any Manufacture imported, at
least then double the intrinsecall value thereof, whether the same be imported
by English, Scots Linen how to be rated.
Scots, or Stangers. But in the case of Scots Linen shipped out, the Collector
of the Port where any such Linen shall be exported, is to set down the true
value thereof; And if the Merchant be not content with such valuing thereof,
the Merchant is to take his Oath of the value thereof, and according to the
value deposed by the Merchant, the Collector is to receive the Customs at five
pound for each hundred pounds worth, according to an Order of his Highness
Council in Scotland for the Government thereof, bearing date the first of
November, 1655.

And because sundry Commodities of this nature have already been rated, and do
now pay in England, as is hereafter expressed, The Collector is therefore to
take care,

What to be paid for snowt Tow.
That Snowt Tow be rated at forty shillings per Cent. and pay Custom
accordingly.

That all Pan-tiles brought from Holland, or elsewhere, be rated, Pan-tiles.
and pay after the Rate of eighty pounds per Thousand.

That all Logwood, Log-wood.
alias Blockwood, or Campeachy Wood be rated, and pay after the rate of Eighty
pounds per Tun.

That Lead-oare be rated at the value of Six pounds thirteen shillings four
pence per Tun, Lead-Oare.
containing Twenty hundred weight, and paid after that rate by English and
Scots. And the same being a Native Commodity, Strangers therefore upon
Exportation are to pay double Subsidy, and double petty-Customs: That is to
say, Every Merchant stranger is to pay the duty for every Tun of the said
Lead-oare, after the rate or value of Thirteen pounds six shillings and eight
pence, besides double petty-Customs, which is Six pence upon every Twenty
shillings value, according to that rate.

Coleseed, and Coleseed Oils.
That all Coleseed Oils Imported, and Coleseed Exported, be rated, and pay as
Rapeseed Oils, and Rapeseed Outward.

Horses are to be permitted Exportation upon License from his Highness or
Council, Horses.
to any the English Plantations in America, upon payment of Twenty shillings
Custom for each Horse, according to an Ordinance of his Highness and Council,
dated the 30. of January, 1653.

Repayment of half-subsidy.
No Repayment of any half Subsidy upon the Exporting of Goods formerly
Imported, is to be made unto any Merchant whatsoever, without the express
Order and Direction of the Commissioners therein. Yet, forasmuch as some
difficulty may attend the doing thereof, by reason of the distance of the Port
where such Goods may happen to be Exported or shipped our, unless somewhat be
prepared and done upon the Place in order thereunto.

The Collector therefore of the Port where such Goods shall happen to be
Exported, and half Subsidy demanded, is to satisfy himself whether the Goods
upon which the said half-Subsidy is to be repaid (if exported by, or for a
Strangers Account) were Imported within Nine months; and (if by, and for an
English or Scots-man's Account) within Twelve months of no? The computation of
which Nine or Twelve months is to be made from the day of the Entry of the
Goods Inwards, whether by sight or perfect Warrant, to the day of the shipping
them on board Outward, and not the date of the Certificate: And then he is
together with the Cheque of the same Port, to make a Certificate under their
Hands, that such Goods were entered and paid Custom, and all other Duties upon
Importation thereof; In which Certificate is to be mentioned and expressed the
time when the same were Imported, by whom, the Quantity and Quality of the said
Goods, in words at length, and not in figures.

Upon the said Certificate, the Merchant, or some for him that can depose the
same, is to make Oath that the Goods which he intends to Export, are the same
mentioned in the Certificate, and for which the full Subsidy, and other Duties
due upon the Importation, were paid; as also whether the said Goods have been
contracted for, or sold, and to whom, and for whose account the same are to be
shipped and exported: But if upon such examination and enquiry (as he shall
think fit to make upon Oath in this matter) it shall appear unto him, that such
Goods have been fold unto, or in the possession of any Shopkeeper, or Retailor
of the same Commodity, or that the Property, Form or Nature of such Commodity
has in any wise been altered, mingled, amended, or confounded, then he is to
forbear proceeding any further; in respect that in all and every such case,
there is no half-Subsidy to be repaid, but the Merchant is to pay his Custom
Outward, unless in case of Goods to be Exported by the Importer thereof by
free Cocquet, according to the seventh Article annexed to the Book of Rates.
But where the repayment of the half-Subsidy shall truly and really appear to be
due and of right belonging, according to the several circumstances,
beforementioned, Then and there the Collector shall go on to make out unto the
Merchant a Cetrificate, Cocquet, and Debenter in manner and form following.

In the Rosemary-tree of Leith, Anthony Ball Mr. for Maligo. David Cuningham,
Ind.

Five Bails, containing twenty hundred Else Net Linen.

The Subsidy Inward for twenty hundred Else Net Linen was paid by David
Cuningham the eight and twentieth day of September last past. Certificate.


Written the (...) of December, 1655. A. B. Collector. C. D. Cheque.
Juravit David Cuningham, or E. F. his Servant. The Goods above mentioned in
this Certificate to be shipped out, are the same which paid Customs inwards,
and are to be transported and sent beyond the Seas, for the proper account of
the said David Cuningham, without any pre-contract for the same.



Form of the Cocquet.
KNow ye, That David Cuningham Ind. for five Bails (...) Cocques.
twenty hundred Else of Linen Cloth Net, late in this Port unladen, and now
to be shipped in the Rosemary-tree of Leith, Anthony Ball Master for Maligo,
paid all Duties at the first Discharge, the eight and twentieth day of
September last past. Dated the (...) of (...) 1655.

Form of the Debentur.
LEITH.
DAvid Cuningham did Enter with us the (...) day of (...) 1655. in the
Rosemary-tree of Leith, Debentur.
Anthony Ball Master, for Maligo, five Bails, containing twenty hundred Else of
Linen Cloth Net, the Subsiay whereof was paid Inwards by the said David
Cuningham Ind. the (...) day of (...) 1655. last past, as does appear by the
Certificate thereof; And for farther manifestation of his just dealing herein
he has also taken Oath before Us.

Custom-house Leith the (...) day of (...) 1655. A. B. Collector. C. D. Cheque.

Upon which Debenter afterward the Searcher or Waiter that shipped off the said
Goods, is to indorse or certify the time when, and the name of the Ship in
which they were shipped; And after the said Ships departure from the Coast of
Scotland, or arrival of the Goods in some Port beyond the Seas, the Merchant
himself, and no other person, is to bring in the Certificate of the Searcher or
Waiter, and Debenter aforesaid, unto the Commissioners, and making Oath before
them, That the Goods expressed in the Debenter and Certificate, aforesaid,
thereunto annexed, are really shipped out, both for quality and quantity, and
are not, nor any part thereof (since they were last shipped out) re-landed in
any Port or Creek in England, Wales, or Scotland, Then the Commissioners will
give Warrant unto the respective Collectors (from, or out of whose Port the
same was shipped) for re-payment back of the half-Subsidy. According to which
Order, such Collector within one month after, in case nothing shall or may in
that time appear which may justly impede or hinder the doing thereof, is to make
re payment of the same accordingly, taking the Receipts of the Merchant, or of
his known Factor or Agent, on the backside of the Debenter for so much as shall
be paid unto him.

By the seventh Article of Instructions annexed to the Book of Rates, Goods
imported, to be exported free of Customs.
it is directed, That if a Merchant having duly paid all Duties Inwards, And,
in regard of bad Sales, shall be enforced to keep the said Goods, or any part
thereof in his hands, without alteration of property, after the space of a year
be clapsed; in that case he is to be permitted to ship the same out for some
parts beyond the Seas (if he so think fit) without payment of any Subsidy for
the same Outward, upon due proof that the same was duly Entered, and Subsidy
paid Inwards: But before the Merchant have any free Cocquet to that purpose, a
Certificate is to be made out, and subscribed by the Collector, of the time
when such Goods were imported; as also that the Customs thereof were by him
received; And in the said Certificate is to be expressed, the Quantity and
Quality of Goods Imported, and desired to be Exported, as also upon the same
the Oath of the party that paid the Custom, affirming it to be paid and the
Oath of the Proprietors, and no other person is to be taken that the said Goods
are not sold and contracted for, nor altered in the Quality since they were
first imported, and that they shall (and are to) be Exporred upon his own
proper account; All which respectively being duly observed and performed in the
presence of the Cheque, the Collector and Cheque are then to give and grant a
free Cocquet for passing out such Goods as shall be desired; The Free Cocquet.
but notice is to be taken that no such free Cocquet is to be granted to any
Merchant stranger after his Goods have been Imported above nine months, that
being the time limited in the second Article annexed to the Book of Rates, to
the Merchant stranger for Exportation of his Goods. The Form of the Certificate
and Oath is to be in manner and form following: (VIZ.)

LEITH.
In the Samuel of Preston-Pans, G. Wilson Mr. for Campveer. Form of the
Certificate and Oath.
(...) Andro Henderson, Ind.

Two Bails containing ten hundred Else of Vittery-Canvas. The Subsidy Inwards
for ten hundred Else of Vittery Canvas was paid by Andro Henderson Ind. the
sixth of (...) 1654. Written the (...) of (...) 1655.

Juravit, Andro Henderson, The Goods abovementioned have paid full Custom
Inwards, and are to be transported on his own account, without alteration of
property, or contract for the same.

LEITH.
KNow ye, That Andrew Henderson for two Bails, The Form of the free Cocquet.
containing two hundred Else of Vittery Canvas Net, paid all Duties Inward the
(...) day of (...) 1654. and now to be shipped in the Samuel of Preston Pans,
George Wilson Master, for Campveer.

Dated the (...) day of 1655. A. B. Collector. C. D. Cheque.

What meant by Alteration of Quality and Property
By Alteration of Quality is to be understood, the altering the condition of it
from that it was in when it was Imported, whether by making it into any
Manufacture, Commodity, other form or quality whatsoever: As I lax and Hemp
Imported so, and afterward made, the first of them into Cloth, and the latter
into Yarn, Ropes or Twine. And so likewise Linen Cloth Imported, afterward
cut and made into Shirts, Sheets, or other necessaries. And in like manner all
Goods dyed, dressed, or further manufactured after their first Importation, are
all altered in their Quality. And Goods are then altered in their Property,
when the same have been either sold or contracted for.

Goods prohibited Exportation.
In passing of Goods, the Collectors and other Officers are to understand by
Goods prohibited to be Exported, Moneys, Bullion, Plate, Jewels, Woollen-Yarn,
and Cloth undressed, Horses, Mares, Geldings, Oxen, Kine, Sheep, Copper,
Brass, Bell-mettal, Pan-mettal, Gun-mettal, Shruffe, white Ashes, Butter,
Cheese, Wood, Corn (when it is above the Price limited by Statute.) As also
Leather, Hides, Tallow and all things made thereof, Skins of Sheep, Pelts, and
Skins of Stags, Hindes, Bucks, Does or Fawn, Goats or Kid, Wool, Worsted-Yarn,
Woollen-Flocks, Wool-Fells; Fullers-Earth and Clay of what kind soever.

What meant by Grocery and saltery Wares
It is further to be noted, That by Grocery and Saltery Wares are meant,
Foreign Commodities only, which have been formerly brought from beyond the
Seas, and the Duties paid inwards, and that no Merchandise or Manufacture of
England or Scotland are to pass under those general names.

INSTRUCTIONS, For the COLLECTORS or Sub-Commissioners for EXCIZE of Foreign
Goods upon Importation, or Sale, respectively.
Sub-Commissioners how to proceed in levying.
THe business of Excise this Nation being put under the management of one and
the same Persons; The Collectors in the several Ports are the same with the
Sub-Commissioners, and in like manner empowered for execution of their Trusts
accordingly: In the levying and collection of the duty of Excize, the several
Collectors, or Sub-Commissioners appointed for doing thereof, in the respective
Ports of this Nation, are to Demand, Receive, Gather, Levy, and Collect the
same, according to the several Rates mentioned and expressed in, and by an
Order and Declaration of His Highness the Lord Protector, and his Council;
Dated the Two and twentieth day of May, 1655. Entitled, An Order and
Declaration of his Highness, and his Council, for the Collecting of the
Excise in Scotland. And further to observe, according to the power given them
from the Commissioners, either by their respective Commissions, or these
present Instructions, and no further; all such Rules as are directed and
appointed in and by the Order and Declaration of his Highness and Council
aforesaid, or any other Act, Ordinance, Order, or Declaration, as well of his
Highness, as of Parliament, which were in force the second day of September,
1654. in England.

Custom house how to be fitted.
The Custom-house in every Port is so to be fitted and prepared, as that the
same may serve and be employed also for managing the business of Excize; and
for this cause and reason, shall upon all week days be kept open from eight of
the Clock in the Morning, till twelve at Noon, and from two of the Clock in the
Afternoon, How long kept open.
till six at Night, for the Entering and Registring the Goods, Wares, and
Merchandises, with the Names, and Sirnames, as well of the Importers, as of the
Sellers, and Buyers of the several Goods, Wares, and Commodities Excizable,
their quantities, and values, as for the receiving of all Moneys which shall be
due and payable thereupon, and for doing other things necessary to be done,
for, and concerning the same.

Upon the Arrival and after the Entry of any Ship with Goods Inwards,
Merchants Importers, entering Goods, to give three Bills as to Excize.
from any Parts beyond the Seas, every Merchant Importer, (if he be purely a
Merchant, and so not to pay any Excize until Sale) is in like manner, as for
the Customs, to deliver in to the Collector and Cheque three Bills of Entry,
under his own hand, (or the hand of such other Person, or Persons, as by Deed
or Writing under his hand and Seal shall be deputed thereunto) mentioning the
name of the Ship, and of the Master, whence, and from what place it was
Fraighted, with the Marks, Numbers, Fardels, Bulk, or Packings in the Margent,
and the true quantity and quality of the Goods therein contained, in words at
length, and not in Figures; two of which Bills, (as in the business of
Customs) shall be Signed by the Collector, and Cheque respectively, and
delivered afterward to each other to be numbered, filed, and kept as an
original Voucher for the Excize; And the third being Signed by them both,
shall be the Waiters warrant for the delivery of the same to the Merchant: This
is to be understood of the Merchant Importer only; Merchants paying Excize upon
Entry, how many.
for where Goods pay Excize as well as Customs upon Entry, one and the same
Bills (being three only in number) given for Customs, will serve also for
Excize.

Entries of Merchant Importers in what manner to be placed in the
Sub-Commissioners or Collectors Book.
If the Merchant Importer be purely a Merchant, then upon his Entry made, as
aforesaid, he is to be permitted to take up and receive his Goods forthwith,
without payment of any Excize: And the Collector shall not need for all Entries
of this kind, to make any Entries in his Cash, or day Book distinct from that
of the Customs, but only to draw a blank Line with pricks, or otherwise, from
the said Custom Entry through the Column of the said Book, which is appointed
and designed for the Receipts of Excize.

Merchant Retailer how to Enter and pay.
But if the Merchant Importer shall happen to be either a Shopkeeper, or
Retailer of the Commodities he Imports, the Collector and Cheque having upon
delivery in of his Bills of Entry cast up the sum, or sums unto which the
Excize of the Goods mentioned in the said Bills shall amount unto, and
delivered their Bills so cast, unto each other respectively, In what manner the
same shall be placed to account.
(as was directed before, as to Customs) the Collector shall presently receive
the Excize due thereupon, and make Entry of the same in his Cash or day Book,
not making a distinct Entry from the Customs, but having expressed the rate or
value of the Excize, different from the Custom, next and immediately below the
Entry of the same, as to Customs, shall draw out and place the total due, or
received for Excize in an equal Line with that of the Customs, but in the
Column of the Book aforesaid, appointed and designed for the Receipts of Excize.

Merchant stranger, or Planter entering.
But if it so fall out that the Merchant or Importer be some Person living
beyong the Seas, a Planter in the West- Indies, or Virgina, an unknown Person,
either having no certain habitation (that is to say) not known to be an able or
sufficient Merchant, or else having no constant Family in the Town or Port
where he shall Enter his Goods; such Merchant is either to pay down the Excize
of his Goods, or else to give Bond to the Collector, with sufficient Security,
To pay Excize, or give Bond.
or Caution for the payment of the Excize, before he be admitted to take up his
Goods, or receive any warrant for doing thereof.

Such Merchant being unable, or refusing to give Bond, or pay, his Goods are to
be taken up and landed.
If any Planter, or unknown person, as aforesaid, shall not be able, or shall
refuse to give Bond, or to pay Excize upon Entry, as aforesaid, then and in
such case, the Collector is to cause the Goods to be taken up and landed; And
after due notice taken of the Quantity and Quality of the Goods, in the
presence of the Owner, or some other appointed by him; or upon refusal of
himself, or any other for him to be present, in the presence of other two good
witnesses, to house and dispose of the same in some sitting Warehouse, until
either Bond be given, or Excize fully paid for the same, as aforesaid.

Shopkeeper to carry his Goods to his own house.
Especial care is to be had and taken, that the Shopkeeper upon Entry, and
clearing of his Goods Inwards, at the Importation of them, do carry his Goods
to his own Shop directly, and is not to be permitted to house and lay up the
same in any other House, Shop, Storehouse, or other place whatsoever, without
acquainting the Collector and Cheque therewith. In like manner, no Merchant who
is purely such, no Planter or unknown Merchant, No Merchant to lodge his Goods
with a Retailer.
is to be permitted to house or dispose of his Goods, Wares or Merchandises, in
the House, Shop, Warehouse, or any other place, of, or belonging to any
Retailer of the same Commodity, without first making the Collector and Cheque
in like manner acquainted therewith.

Goods sold, how to be entered.
When any Goods aforesaid, come to the consumption or sale, the Merchant (who
is purely a Merchant, and who was perimitted to land and take up his Goods
without payment of any Excize) shall (before he be permitted to deliver all or
any of the same) bring and deliver to the Collector and Cheque, two Bills of
Entry, signed under his own hand (or the hand of his Servant, or other person
whom he shall first authorize under his hand, to be filed in the Office of
Excize to that purpose, and for whose Act he shall be answerable) certifying
the Quantity, Weight and Measure of his Goods sold, and to whom, their several
species, sortments and kinds, and the price at which they are sold in case they
be goods, which pay Excize ad valorem; Upon each of which Bills, the Collector
and Cheque having cast up and written the Sum or Sums due and payable for
Excize of the said Goods, and given each other the respective Bills cast up by
either of them (as is directed in case of Entries, as to Customs, as aforesaid)
the Collector forthwith receiving the said Sum or Sums due thereupon, shall
afterward make Entry of the same in his Cash or Day-Book, by putting or
placing the Sum aforesaid, The Moneys received how placed to Account. What
warrant thereupon shall be made.
in the Column for Receipts of Excize, and drawing a blank line with pricks, or
other ways, through that of the Customs; And then the Collector and Cheque
shall jointly make and sign a particular Ticket or Warrant for delivery
thereof; Which Warrant is to contain the Quantity and Quality of the Goods
sold, with the name of the Buyer, and of his place of Residence or Habitation,
and to be only in force for that particular Parcel, and for that day only:
The same to be in manner and form following:

LEITH. (...) day (...) 1655.
Entry upon sale.
SOld unto C. D. of Edinburgh

A. B.

The Form of the Ticket or Warrant.
Excize-Office in Leith.
YOu may deliver unto C. B. of Edinburgh for which the duty of Excize is paid
this day, according to the Order and Declaration of his Highness the Lord
Protector, with the advice and consent of his Council, bearing date the two
and twentieth day of May, 1655. This Ticket to serve only for this day, and
this Parcel, or else to be void.

Dated the (...) day of (...) 1655. To A. B. Merchant. A. B. Collector. C. D.
Cheque.

Goods sold to several persons, how to be entered.
If the quantity of Goods sold, and certified to be so (as aforesaid) is to be
delivered unto more than one person Buyer thereof, the Collector and Cheque are
(although the same be but one and the same Parcel) to make and give as many
several Tickets, as there are persons unto whom the Goods are sold. And the
Merchant therefore is to make either particular Entryes of his Sales, or else
one general one, expressing the Goods sold, with the several Quantities or
Parcels thereof, which are to be delivered unto the respective Buyers of the
same.

Sufferance in what case to be granted.
If any Merchant or Importer, shall sell any Goods, whereof he cannot ascertain
the perfect weight and measure of the same, then a Bill of Sufferance shall be
granted, and an Officer is to be sent to deliver and take account of the
perfect weight and measure, and certify the same unto the Collector and
Cheque; Merchant to make his perfect Entry within 28. days, and the buyer pay
his Excize, Or else proceeded against
And the Merchant shall within 28. days following, make a perfect Entry, and
the Buyer pay the full Excize, or else both of them to be proceeded against, as
by the 21. Article of the Act of Parliament for Excize, of the 14. of August
1649. is directed and appointed; Which 21. Article, the Collector or
Sub-Commissioner is fully in every part thereof, to put, or cause to be put in
Execution, when, and as often as the same shall by them be thought fit and
requisite.

To whom sufferance shall be granted.
But care is to be had, that no sufferance be granted unto any persons, but such
as shall either deposire so much as the Excize may probably amount unto, or
else shall (or are known to be) persons responsible, and of ability to make
good the Duty which shall, or may be due for the same.

Goods having before paid Excize, how to be entered and passed.
If sale happen to be made of any Goods, which before had paid Excize either
upon the Importing, or else in England, or some other Port of this Nation, or
which shall be part of a greater Quantity or Parcel formerly cleared, Entry,
Ticker or Warrant is to be made, as aforesaid, in every particular, for Goods
liable to payment of Excize; Except that besides, there is no Money to be
received, and that the Entry in that case is not to be entered in the Cash or
Day-Book; but in a Waste-Book (which is therefore to be kept purposely for
Tickets granted for delivery of Goods, which before had paid Excize) the Seller
or Deliverer is to make Oath before the Collector and Cheque, that the Goods hy
him sold and intended to be delivered, are all of them such as had bond fide
paid Excize, and then the Warrant or Ticket for Delivery of the same (in which
always mention is to be made, when, or in what parcel, or at what place the
same paid Duty) is to be issued in manner and form following, (V I Z.)

Form of a Ticket for Goods cleared before.
Excize-Office, Leith.
You may deliver this day unto E.F. to be sent for (...) being then cleared, or
being part of a greater Parcel, cleared upon Account (such or juch a day) or
being entered Inwards, the (...) day of (...) or cleared at London, as per
Certificate dated (...) for which time and Parcel, this Ticket is only to
serve; or else to be sold, the duty of Excize being paid, according to the
Order and Declaration of his Highness the Lord Protector, with the advice of
his Council, bearing date the 22. day of May, 1655. Dated this (...) day of
(...) One thousand, etc.

To A. B. Merchant. A. B. Collector. C. D. Cheque.

No Goods to be romaged without Ticket.
As no Goods after they are sold, are to be permitted, to be delivered unto any
the buyers thereof, without Ticket or Warrant (which is to be valid no longer
time than that day only in which the said Ticket is taken out, as to the
delivery of the Goods) So all Goods unsold, or which the Duty of Excize has
before at any time been paid, are not to be romaged, removed or sent from one
House, Town, Part or Place to another, without a Ticket or Warrant for doing
thereof; and if so, to be seized and secured. But yet for accommodation of
Trade, it is thought fit, that the strictness of the Law in this particular be
relaxed.

Except Goods bought of shopkeepers, or where no fraud is intended;
Where any Shopkeepers, living in one and the same place, Town or Burgh, shall
buy Goods of one another; Or, where any Goods are bought in small Parcels from
any Shop keeper by any other, and where otherways upon Examination, no fraud
shall appear intended to have been practiced in prejudice of the Commonwealth;
And to this purpose therefore, and for the better evincing of the truth in this
particular, or in case of Goods hindered by wind, weather, or otherways beyond
the time mentioned in any Ticket that shall be given, Which the collector is
empowered to examine.
the Collector shall cause such persons to be summoned before him, as he shall
think or suppose to be any ways able to give testimony in the case; And them to
examine upon oath for the discovery of the whole and true matter of fact which
shall then fall under Question before him, as to Equity and Justice shall
appertain.

Any Merchant or Importer, making Entry of any Goods, in any Port Town, Goods
sent by land-carriage.
and afterward carrying the same by Landcarriage to any other Port or Place,
Town or Burgh of this Nation, shall have a particular Warrant or Ticket for
doing thereof, when, and according as his Goods shall be carried, whether in
greater or lesser Parcels; Which Ticket or Warrant is to continue for no longer
time than the Goods may reasonably be on the way from one place to another, and
accordingly to be expressed in the body thereof, at the discretion of the
Collectors, as aforesaid, in manner following;

The Form of a Ticket by Land carriage.
Excize-Office, Leith.
E. F. (...) is permitted to send by landcarriage, by (...) Carrier for (...)
being Entered, or being part of a Parcel here Extred by (...) the (...) day of
(...) And for which the Duty of Excize was paid at the value of (...) This
Ticket to be in force (...) days, and no longer.

Dated this (...) day of (...) in the year of our Lord, One thousand six
huudred and fifty A.B. Collector. C.D. Cheque.

No more than one Ticket given for one parcel.
The like form to be used, mutatis mutandis, for Goods sent by Land-carriage,
which had paid Excize either then, (when sent) or before upon sale; But
especially care is to be had, that no more but one Ticket be granted for one
parcel of Goods; and if the same should happen to be lost, no other, That
lost, a new one to be given.
nor new one is to be given, before Oath be first made thereof before the
Collector and Cheque, That the same is re vera lost indeed, or else, that no
use at all had been made thereof; and then, and not before, the Collector and
Cheque shall give a new Ticket, in which still signification shall be made that
there had already (and the time expressed when there had) a Ticket before been
given and granted for the same.

No Five per Cent. to be allowed as to Excize.
All Goods and Merchandises which pay Subsidy of Poundage, and upon which Five
per Cent. is usually allowed, by the Eighteenth Article annexed to the Book of
Rates for Customs, are to be posted to Account of the Merchant Importer, or
else to pay Excize respectively, according to their full contents, without any
such allowance at all, so as the Account of the Merchant Importer (who is
purely a Merchant) is to be charged with. And the Merchant Importer who is a
Retailer, or liable to pay this duty, upon Importation is to pay Excize for
Five per Cent. more than either of them paid Subsidy Inwards, there being no
Five per Cent. to be allowed as to Excize.

No allowance for damage or defects upon Importation, unless the Merchant
clear his whole parcel.
No Merchant Importer (though he be purely such) is to have any allowance made
for damage of his Tobacco, or defects of his Wines upon the Importation, but
sale of them, unless he shall clear and pay Excize down for the whole parcel
of Tobacco or Wines he shall have on his hands, or shall then import.

No Outs, or Twelve per Cent. allowed as to Excize.
Whenever any Wines or Oils shall be brought in upon Account of the Merchant
(who is purely such) the same are to be entered fully, according to the contents
of the Casks, although the same be not full, and so to be posted to his
Account: But if the Merchant Importer be one who is presently upon landing of
his Goods, to pay down the Excize of the same, then the Casks (which are not
full, nor yet wholly empty) are to be gaged, and Excize to be paid for so much
Wine or Oils, as the same shall be found to contain, there being neither Outs,
nor any Twelve per Cent. to be allowed as to Excize.

Goods paying Excize ad valorem.
The Five per Cent. payable upon all Goods and Merchandises Imported, or to be
Imported, meant oned in the Book of Rates for the Customs, but not specified in
the Rates of Excize, is to be levied, raised and received, not according to the
value any such Commodities are rated at in the said Book of Rates for the
Customs, but according to the value as they, or any of them shall be sold at a
price by the Merchant, to the first Bayer thereof, where there is a Buyer; but
where the same shall happen to pay presently upon the Importation, then
according to the highest price, the said Goods in their several species,
sortment and kind, were last sold at six months before, or that else the same
bears in the Market; the election whereof, as shall be most for the advantage
of the Commonwealth, is to be taken and received by the Collector or
Sub-Commissioner.

Damaged Tobaccoes, and
In making allowance for damaged Tobacco, or decayed Wines, notice is to be
had, that there is nothing to be abated upon Tobaccoes but for over weight by
sand, stones, dirt or water. Defective Wines.
And that all Wines being tasted, are to be returned, according to the several
qualities and conditions following, and the Excize thereupon to be rated and
paid as follows:

VIZ.

WINES Passable, Defective, Decayed, Fit only for the Sull,
To pay L. S. D. 6 00 00 5 10 00 5 00 00 3 10 00 per Tun.

And from this Rule none of the Collectors, or Sub-Commissioners are to vary at
any time, without special Order and Direction of the Commissioners themselves.

Damaged Tobaccoes, or Wines, to be delivered forthwith.
When any Tobaccoes or Wine, after sale, and before delivery thereof from the
Merchant, shall be viewed or tasted, the Officer or Officers to be appointed by
the Collector for doing thereof, shall take care and see the very same
Numerical Tobacco and Wines delivered unto the Buyer, and no other; nor that
any part or parcel of such damaged Tobacco, or decayed Wines be left in the
hands of the Merchant, and other delivered in stead or lieu thereof.

No allowance for goods once in the possession of the Buyer.
No allowance or defalcation of Excize is to be made upon any Goods, Wares or
Merchandise for Leakage, Waste, Damage, Defect or other accident whatsoever,
after the same has been once sold and in the possession and custody of the
Buyer thereof: Neither is such Buyer to be permitted to return any bad Wines
remaining on his hands, (which had formerly paid Excize) unto the Merchant or
Importer, and to receive from him or them new or fresh VVines in lieu of the
same, without payment of the duty of those new or fresh Wines, or so much
(according to the condition and rate set as aforesaid upon the returned Wines)
as the full Excize of the same Wine shall amount unto: No exchange to be made of
good for bad Wines, without payment of the duty of sound ones.
As suppose the Buyer make return of an Hogshead of Wine fit only to distill,
and receive a good one in stead thereof, in this case the rate of the bad
Hogshead being Seventeen shillings six pence, there will remain then to be paid
more Twelve shillings six pence, which compleats the sum of Thirty shillings,
the full rate of a good Hogshead of Wine.

Bills of Store and Portage to be charged to account, or else pay Excize.
All Goods passed by Bill of Store, Portage, or otherwise, as to the freeing
them of Customs, are nevertheless to be charged on account of the Merchant
Importer, or else pay Excize respectively, as in all other cases, as if the
same had not been passed by any such Bills, or otherwise at all, but then
imported.

INSTRUCTIONS To the COLLECTORLS, or SUB-COMMISSIONERS of EXCIZE, as to Goods
Outward for beyond the Seas.
Goods Outward to be entered.
EVery Merchant Retailer, Shopkeeper, or other, may when, and as often as he
shall desire, ship out any Goods, Wares, or Commodities excizable, unto any
Parts beyond the Seas, making Entry, and doing otherwise in all particulars as
is required in the business of the Customs for, and upon the shipping out of
any Goods or Merchandise.

No more then entered to be shipped on board.
But forasmuch as the Merchants Accounts are to have so much credit as there
shall be Goods at any time shipped out, or else that the Excize paid for these
Goods is to be re-paid, especial care is to be taken, That neither more nor
less Goods be permitted at any time to be shipped, or carried on board any
Ship or Vessel, than shall be mentioned and expressed in the particular Entry
Outward of the Exporter, and so in the Warrant of the Collector and Cheque
upon that Entry.

And Bond to be first given.
That before the shipping out of any Goods or Merchandises which have not paid
the duty of Excize, a sufficient Obligation in Law be entered into by the
Merchant or Exporter shipping out such Goods, wherein he shall be bound either
by himself, or else with sufficient Caution (as shall be thought fit and
approved of by the Collector) in such sum of Money as shall amount to double
the value of the said Goods, with condition, That the same shall be discharged
at some Port or Place beyond the Seas; And that he will by Oath or otherwise
make due proof thereof before the Commissioners, or any they shall appoint,
within such convenient space of time after, as shall be agreed upon by the
Merchant and Collector for doing thereof, the same to be inserted and mentioned
in the said Bond.

Repayment of Excize.
That no re-payment of Excize for Goods shipped out be made by any Collector,
without the special Order and Warrant of the Commissioners themselves: And
before such Order can be passed, the Collector, upon application made unto him
by the Merchant or Exporter, shall give a Certificate signed jointly by himself
and the Cheque, Upon certificate endorsed by the Searcher or Waiter;
expressing the time when the same were shipped out, and in what Parcel, the
quantity and quality of the said Goods, and when, and in what Parcel, and at
what rate Excize had been paid for the same; under which Certificate, as
aforesaid, the Searcher, or else the Waiter, who was present at the shipping of
the said Goods, shall certify his seeing the same done, and when, and in what
Ship they were shipped, their quantity and quality: And after notice had and
obtained that his Goods are landed or arrived in any Foreign Part or Place
beyond the Seas, the Merchant or Importer bringing the Certificate aforesaid,
and making due proof by Oath before the Commissioners, or such as they shall
appoint, And Oath of the Merchant.
of his Goods being re vera landed beyond the Seas, and that the Excize of the
same had been duly paid and satisfied, as was expressed in the Certificate,
shall thereupon have Order and Warrant for repayment thereof accordingly.

Goods Outward in what manner to be entered in the Collectors Books.
All Entries of Goods Outward for beyond the Seas, (either with, or else
without, having paid Excize) are to be Entered constantly by the Collector in
the Day-book, drawing in that case a Blank Line with pricks, or otherwise,
through the Columns for Receipts of Customs and Excize also.

INSTRUCTIONS for the COLLECTORS or Sub-Commissioners of Excize, as to Goods
sent to, or from the Coast.
Coast Goods how to be Entered.
ALL Goods coming in from, or going out by Land or by Sea to any Port or Place
of this Nation, or England, are in like manner to be entered and taken up, or
shipped out by the Merchant, as is directed for the Customs. But the Merchant
Importer, or Exporter, is to make Entry of the same by several and distinct
Bills from those he gives for the Customs, unless the Merchant Importer shall
bring in such Goods which had before paid, or else not having formerly paid
Excize, shall then happen to pay the same before landing, or that the Merchant
Exporter shall happen to ship out Goods for any part of Scotland which had
before paid Excize, for in these cases the same Bills may serve both for
Customs and Excize.

Bond to be given where Goods have not paid Excize.
Every Merchant shipping out Goods for the Coast which have not paid Excize, or
else sending such Goods by Land, is in like manner as for Goods shipped for
beyond the Seas, to give Bond or a sufficient Obligation in Law, with condition
that the Goods shipped out, shall bona fide be landed at some other Port or
place of this Nation, and there Entered with the Officer appointed for receiving
Excize; from whom he is to bring Certificate in due form and manner of his
doing thereof, To return Certificate.
or some other for him, according as by condition of his Bond is required;
Which Certificate is to be returned within such convenient space of time
afterward, as the Collector shall think reasonable for doing thereof; the same
to be mentioned and expressed in the said Bond, or Obligation.

Goods having paid Excize, to be shipped by Sufferance.
Any Shopkeeper, Retailer, or other shipping out Goods, which have already
paid Excize; The Collector after Entry thereof by such Shopkeeper, Retailer,
or other setting forth the quality of the Exporter, the name of the Ship, and
Master, of whence, and to what place bound, with the quantities and qualities
of his Goods, and when, and in what parcel cleared as to Excize, is to grant
or permit a Sufferance for shipping thereof, as follows.

The form of a Permit, or Sufferance.
LEITH Excize.
IN the Sarah of Brunt-Island, Anthony Lilburn Master, pro Invernesse,

Michael Craig Retailer,

Two Hogsheads of French Wines but not to be Exported without further order.

Dated the (...) day of (...) A. B. Collector. C. D. Cheque.

To be delivered to the Waiter, who is to see the goods brought from the
Exporters.
Which Sufferance is to be delivered to the hands of the Searcher or Waiter
appointed to attend the Ship, in which the said Goods shall be laden, who shall
presently go with the Exporter and see the same brought forth out of the Shop,
Celler, or Warehouse of such Exporter, and no other, and afterward laden and
shipped on board the Ship, or Vessel, to which they were designed. All which,
such Searcher or Waiter shall indorse or certify on the back side of such
Permit, or Sufferance, and afterward deliver the same back again unto the chief
Searcher, or where there is none, And upon cause of suspicion, to acquaint the
Collector therewith, who is to try the verity by Oath.
unto the Collector to be kept by him and the Cheque, until the Ship be fully
laden; But if the Goods shall be brought or delivered out of any other place
then aforesaid, whereby suspicion may be given of some fraud or collusion, the
Searcher or Waiter is to forbear shipping the Goods, and to inform the
Collector and Cheque of the Port therewith, who are thereupon to be fully
satisfied by the Oath of the Parties, or others, (which Oath the Collector is
therefore to administer to them) that the Goods have bona fide paid Excize,
before the same be permitted to be shipped in any Ship or Vessel whatsoever.

Bill of Contents to be made from the several Sufferances, etc.
When any Ship bound outward for the Coast is fully laden, the Collector or
chief Searcher where there is one, from the several Sufferances, Cocquets, and
Transires given and returned from the Waiter (for all Cocquets, Transires, and
Sufferances for shipping Goods Outward for the Coast, after the doing thereof,
are to be returned and delivered unto the chief Searcher or Collector, as
aforesaid, (where there is no such Searcher) shall make and (besides all
Cocquets and Transires granted as to the Coast relating to Customs) frame a
true Content of the whole Ships or Vessels Lading: which Content is to express
and mention the name of the Ship, or Vessel, with the Master thereof, the true
Denomination, Numbers, and Marks of the Bales, Packs, Casks, outward Bulk, or
Vessels in which any Commodities are contained, and the Names of the Persons to
whom consigned, the Net Weight, Measure, just Contents, and Values of the
several Commodities, expressed in words at length, and not in Figures, and
whether the duty of Excize be paid or no, and how much (where the same can be
ascertained) and when, and whether Bond be Entered into for delivery and due
Entry of the Goods in the Office of Excize in the Port whither the Goods are
designed and sent; which Content (made according to the qualifications
aforesaid) shall be signed by the Collector and Cheque jointly, Which after
search of the Vessel is to be delivered to the Master thereof.
and (after search made by the Collector, or chief Searcher, where there is
such a Searcher, whether there be not more, or other Goods laden on Board then
are specified and mentioned in the same) shall be delivered unto the Master of
such Ship or Vessel, to be by him afterward delivered, after his arrival in
Port, unto the Sub-Commissioners, Collectors, or other chief Officer for Excize
there.

Ships coming from the Coast and delivering but part; the Goods delivered, to
be endorsed on the Bill of Content.
Upon arrival of any Ship from the Coast, the Collector is to call for the
Masters Bill of Contents, which is to be kept and filed with the Entry of the
Ship: And when any Ship bound from one Port to another shall happen to deliver
any part of her Goods by the way, before she arrive at her last designed Port,
the Sub-Commissioner, or Collector of the said Port, is to call for the
Certificate of the Content, which was delivered unto the Master at the Port
where she was laden, and certify upon the back of the same, what Goods are
there delivered, as part of the said Certificate, what remaining in the Ship,
and what put on board at the Port, delivering back the said Content unto the
Master at his going thence; and keeping a Copy of his Endorsement of the said
Content by him, shall cause the same to be transcribed, and Entered, as all
other Tickets and Certificates in the Waste-Book.

Goods sent by Land carriage upon Bond.
All Goods, and Marchandizes, sent after Bond given, by Land Carriage unto any
other Port or place, are to be sent and passed by Ticket, in manner and form
following.

The form of a Land carriage Ticket.
LEITH.
A. B. is permitted upon Bond given, to send to the Burgh of (...) by C. D.
Carrier, being consigned unto E. F. of the said Town, or Burgh.

Dated, the (...) day of (...) 1655. A. B. Collector, C. D. Cheque.

To pay Excize, if consigned to a Retailer.
Which Ticket being received by the Collector of that place, he is in case the
Goods therein mentioned shall happen to be consigned to a Shopkeeper or
Retailer of the same Commodity, to demand and receive Excize presently for the
same; but if to a known Merchant (who is purely such,) then the same are to be
Entered, Charged, Or else charged to account of the Merchant, if to a Merchant.
and passed to his proper account, as if they had been then Imported by himself
from beyond the Seas; The like to be observed for all Goods shipped by Bond for
the Coast.

The nature of the Bond.
Forasmuch as Bond given in this case is not for payment of the duty, but for to
cause true landing or delivering the same at the Port, or Place to which they
are sent.

All Goods carried by Land, are to be carried by Ticket directly to the place
unto which they are intended; Goods going by Land or Water, or both, how to
pass.
but all Goods going by Sea, or Water, are to pass no further by Ticket or
Bill of Content, but to the next Port; and if to pass afterward up into the
Country, are to be first Entered with the Sub-Commissioner, or Collector in the
said Port where they are landed, and afterward to pass by Ticket from him and
the Cheque there unto the designed place of delivery.

Coast-Goods uncleared, or cleared, how to be Entered in the Books of the
Collectors.
All Entries both Inwards, and Outward, from and to the Coast, of Goods which
had not before paid Excize, are to be duly Entered in the same order in which
they are passed in the Cash or Day-book, drawing in this case, a blank line
through both Columns, as is directed for Goods for beyond the Seas. But the
Entries of all other Goods to or from the Coast, which had before paid Excize,
are to be Entered in the Coast-book at the end of the respective Custom-Entries
for the same Goods there, with signification, that Excize had been paid for the
same; the date of the Certificate signifying so much, and the place whence such
Certificate came.

A Ledger to be kept.
To the end all Merchants may be duly Accounted with, the Collector in every
Port is to prepare and keep a fair Book, or Ledger, by way of Debtor, and
Creditor, in which he shall give every particular known Merchant within his
District or Precinct a particular and distinct Account. On the Debtor or left
side of which Book, Manner of posting it.
he shall first post all Foreign Goods and Merchandises found upon the hands
of the particular and respective Merchants, at the time of the Search, and all
other Goods and Merchandises Imported at any time since the Twenty fourth day
of June last, whether with, or without Bond given upon their Entry, as to
Excize; And afterward, he shall constantly every day, or every other day at
furthest, from the Cash or Day-book, Post all Foreign Goods and Merchandises
which shall in like manner at any time be Imported, either from beyond the
Seas, or else from any other Port or Place of this Nation, or else from
England, any Port or Place thereof, without payment of the duty of Excize; And
on the Creditor or right side of the said Ledger shall Post all Goods Sold,
Transported, Exported, or sent by Transire into any other Head-port, or Member
thereof, upon the particular Account of the respective Merchants before Sale,
either from beyond the Seas, or from any Port or place of England, or Scotland.

INSTRUCTIONS to the COLLECTORS or Sub-Commissioners, as well for their
Accompting with Merchants, as otherwise, generally relating to the business of
Excize and Customs.
Merchants to be accounted with, every three months, or oftener.
EVery three Months constantly, or oftener, as shall be thought fit by the
Collector, the Importers, according to the 25th. Article of the Act of
Parliament of the 14th. August, 1649. are to be called upon and required to
give a particular Account of all Goods and Merchandises which shall be
remaining on their hands respectively to that day; and in case of failure, or
else after bringing in their Account, such further Proceedings are to be had
thereupon, as in the said 25th. Article is directed.

How far the Collector shall proceed in execution of the 25. Article.
And which the Collector in every particular is to pursue and execute, except to
Imprisonment of any Person, and in case of proceeding to that length, the
Collector (if such person is or shall be willing and able to give security for
his appearance before the Commissioners) shall cease from going any further,
and transmit the whole therefore to them who will take care to do therein as to
Equity and Justice shall appertain; But if such person is not able, or shall
refuse to give security as aforesaid, the Collector shall proceed on to
Imprisonment, (as in the before mentioned Article is directed and appointed) by
Warrant to the Jailer, or Keeper, as is usual, in which he shall always
mention at large his Process, and the Judgment, and his default, and the
default of Distress.

The Form of the Summons to Account.
Excize Office, LEITH.
IN pursuance of an Order and Declaration of his Highness the Lord Protector,
and his Council; Entitled, An Order and Declaration of his Highness, and
Council, for Collecting of the Excize in Scotland, dated the 22th. May, 1655.
And by virtue and according to the 25th. Article of an Act of Parliament,
passed the 14th. August, 1649. in England, and now in force in Scotland. You
are hereby required, to bring and deliver in writing, at the Excize Office in
Leith, upon the (...) day of (...) next ensuing the date hereof, a particular
Account of all Goods, or Merchandise this day remaining, or which shall remain
on your hand, the (...) day of (...) next ensuing the date hereof, in order to
the stating and clearing of your Account of Importations, from the (...) day of
(...) to the (...) day of (...) next ensuing the date hereof; And you are to
take notice, that if you shall refuse to give in such Account, or neglect to do
the same, for eight and twenty days after this Warning, you will be presently
liable to pay the whole Excize for all Goods that shall be found to stand
charged in the Excize Books on your Account, by your Entries at the
Custom-house, which have not otherwise been cleared by Sales, and deliveries,
for which Tickets have been given out of this Office, and will be accordingly
adjudged and warned to pay the same in, within fourteen days after, or in
default thereof on your part, Warrant, of Distress, will be issued against you
for double the value of all such Goods as upon your Account of Entries shall be
found remaining on your hands; or in default thereof, be further proceeded
against, as in and by the said Article is provided.

Dated the (...) day of (...) 1655. A. B. Sub-Commissioner.

To Master E. F. Merchant.
The Form of the Summons to pay Excize after neglect of bringing in Account.
Excize Office, LEITH.
WHereas in pursuance of an Order and Declaration of his Highness the Lord
Protector, and his Council; Entitled, An Order and Declaration of his
Highness, and Council, for Collecting the Excize in Scotland, dated the 22th.
of May, 1655. And by virtue, and according to the 25th. Article of an Act of
Parliament passed the 14th. of August, 1649. in England, and now in force in
Scotland: You were Summoned to bring and deliver in writing unto this Office, a
particular Account of all such Goods and Merchandises which were remaining on
your hands the (...) day of (...) which you have refused, or neglected to do.
And whereas upon adjusting therefore of your Accounts to that day, you stand
charged in this Office by your Entries at the Custom-house, which have not been
cleared by Sales, or delivery, for which Ticket have been given out of this
Office, with (...) the Excize of which Goods, amounts to the sum of (...) You
are therefore, hereby required to bring in, and pay the said sum within
fourteen days, or otherwise, there will be process issued out against you, as
by the said Act of Parliament is appointed, and directed.

Dated this (...) day of (...) 165^ A. B. Sub-Commissioner.

The Form of the Warrant of Distress upon failure of payment.
Whereas E. F. in pursuance of an Order and Declaration of his Highness the
Lord Protector, and his Council, Entitled, An Order and Declaration of his
Highness, and Council, for Collecting the Excize in Scotland; dated the 22th.
day of May, 1655. and by virtue, and according to the 25th. Article of an Act
of Parliament, passed the 14th. of August, 1649. in England, and now in force
in Scotland; was upon the (...) day of (...) summoned to bring and deliver in
writing unto this Office, a particular Account of all such Goods and
Merchandises which were remaining on his hands the (...) day of (...) And
forasmuch as upon his refusal, or neglect in doing thereof, the said E. F.
having his Account adjusted, was found to stand charged in this Office by his
Entries at the Custom-house, (which have not been cleared by Sales, or
deliveries, for which Tickets have been given out of this Office) with (...)
was upon the day of (...) required, and enjoined within fourteen days
following, to pay and satisfy the Excize of the said Goods, which does amount
to (...) And the said E F. having nevertheless failed in doing thereof; These
are therefore to Authorize you, and every of you, to repair unto the dwelling
house of the said E. F. and therein, or in any other place belonging to the
said E. F. to seize, distrain, and carry away so much of his Goods, and
Chattels, as may sufficiently satisfy the sum of (...) being double the value
of the Goods aforesaid, which he has forfeited, according to the 25th. Article
of the Act of Parliament before mentioned, for his neglect and refusal, as
aforesaid. And all Officers, as well Military as Civil, are hereby respectively
prayed and required to be aiding and assisting unto you in the due execution
hereof, according as is directed and appointed in that behalf. Dated the etc.

A. B. Sub-Commissioner.
And if Return be made, that no Distress can be found or had, the Collector is
then to proceed to certify the Commissioners, or otherways to do, as is
directed before.



All moneys to be received openly.
ALL moneys paid or received for Excize or Customs, shall be paid and received,
not privately, but openly in the Custom-house, or in the place appointed for
Receipts of the same, and that in the presence of the Cheque; And all moneys
are to be entered to account precisely upon the very day upon which it is
Received; And if not, And placed to account the same day it is received.
the same to be holden and reputed for Distinct Entryes and Payments, and to be
made good in Account as such, by the Collector and Sub-Commissioners.

No Books to be carried out of the Office.
All Business of: Excize and Customs, shall be openly and publicly transacted
and performed in the Public Office, and no Books of the same shall at any time
be kept or carried out of the same, for, or upon any occasion whatsoever,
without the special direction of the Commissioners, or the Surveyor General
in that behalf.

Entries of Excize how to be filed and kept.
All Entries relating to the Excize and Customs, shall be filed together in the
Order of their Dates and Passing, to be kept, duly numbered and bundled in
bundles; containing four months Entries, or Bills together, to begin from the
first of October, 1655. inclusive, and so for every four months following
successively to be kept; the Entries Inwards for Excize of Goods from beyond
the Seas by themselves; the Entries Outward from beyond the Seas by
themselves; The Entries Inwards for the Coast for Goods, which have not paid
Excize, by themselves; And those Outward to the Coast for like Goods, by
themselves; The Entryes Inwards and Outward, from and to the Coast, for Goods
which have paid the same, by themselves; The Bills of Content, and Bills of
Sale or Entryes of the same, distinct and apart by themselves, and the like to
be done by all Entries for Customs, All Bonds taken, to be sent to the
Commissioners forthwith. All Bonds to be taken, to be sent every three months.
Inwards and Outward.

All Bonds already taken, for, or by reason of, or relating to Excize either
Inwards or Outward, or for any other cause whatsoever, are forthwith to be
transmitted and sent unto the Commissioners at the Custom-house in Leith; And
all other hereafter to be entered into, and taken, shall every three Months in
like manner, or oftener, be sent unto them, to be afterward delivered up, or
transmitted unto the Exchequer, as to Equity and Justice shall appertain.

The Collector where there is no Searcher, is to officiate as such.
The Sub-Commissioners, or Collectors, respectively in every Port, where there
is no Chief Searcher, is, mutatis mutandis, to do all and every Act and Acts,
Thing and Things whatsoever, directed and appointed to be done, in and by his
the said Searcher his Instructions hereafter following.

INSTRUCTIONS For the Chief Searcher in the Port of Leith, etc.
He is to acquaint the Collector with all Ships coming in, and going out.
1. First, you are diligently to attend the Duties of your Trust, and upon
notice had of any Ship coming in with Goods and Merchandise, forthwith to
acquaint the Collector of Leith (or other Head-Port where you shall be, and
under which such Vessel shall lie, therewith) who is to appoint a Waiter to
attend on Board, whom you shall cause to enter on Board such Ship, and there to
remain until such time as such Ship shall be brought unto the Haven or Key,
and there delivered.

Take care no Goods be landed or shipped without warrant.
II. You are to take care, That no Goods, Wares or Merchandise be unladen out
of, or laden on Board any Ship, or other Vessel whatsoever, either Inwards or
Outward bound, without due Entry first made, both as to Customs and Excize,
and due Warrant obtained and granted from the Collector and Cheque for the
unlading or shipping off of the same.

III. You are, according to the best of your power, skill and knowledge,
Instruct the Waiters how to enter and indorse their Warrants.
to direct the several Waiters employed in the Port of Leith and Members
thereof, or any other the Ports respectively, within the Limits and Precincts
of your Commission; And to see that every Waiter respectively, do enter into a
Book, the day of the going out and coming in of every Ship, unto which he shall
be appointed to attend, with the name of the Ship and Master, and the date of
every man's Cocquet, Warrant or Certificate, as they in order of the days of
every Month shall fall out, the particular Quantities, Lengths, Weights,
Measures, Numbers and Marks of all and every the Goods, Wares or Merchandise,
which every or any such Waiter shall be appointed to see unladen or laden,
from, or on board any Ship or Vessel whatsoever, with the time when, and to,
and by whom the same were delivered or shipped out; And also to take care, that
the respective Waiters do likeways indorse the several particulars upon the
back of the respective Warrants, which they shall receive for landing or
lading of Goods, and return them so entered unto your self, before any Ship
Inwards and Outward be fully cleared, or permitted to go away and be
discharged.

Keep the Skippers books.
IV. You are in the Skippers Books, Inwards and Outward, enter every Ship,
coming in, and going out, by way of Merchandise, the Name of the Ship, and the
Master, her burden, or whence, Enter all Vessels therein, before lading or
unlading.
and to, or from what place she is come, or bound, and the name of the VVaiter
appointed to attend such Ship, before such Master be permitted to discharge, or
lade, or take in any Goods, VVares and Merchandise whatsoever.

Take the Masters Report
V. You are to demand and receive from the Master or Purser of every Ship
Inwards, a Report or Bill of Content of the particular Lading of every such
Vessel, with the Names of the several Merchants, and the Mark, Number,
Package, and Outward form of the Goods and Merchandise; which Bill of Contents
is to be verified by the Oath of such Master or Purser, And Examinations.
in presence of your self and Cheque, or else of the Collector and Cheque, who
is also to declare upon his said Oath, whether he has broke Bulk or no, since
he came into the Port, or any other the Ports of this Nation, otherways than in
the said Bill of Contents shall be mentioned and expressed; and if so, then
what and where such Goods were delivered, and to whom belonging or consigned;
And further, to make answer to all such Questions concerning Goods laden in the
said Ship, as shall be reasonably demanded of him; The like Mutatis Mutandis is
to be done and practiced with every Master of a Ship outward, before he be
suffered to depart out of Harbor, or receive his Cocquets, Transires, Bills of
Content, or other Tickets or Warrants, And enter them.
either as to Customs or Excize: And all Reports and Examinations taken as
aforesaid, are to be entered in the Skippers Books Inwards or Outward, unto
which they shall relate respectively.

VI. You are to be careful and see, Jerk.
that every Ship Inwards or Outward, be duly Jerked, by comparing the
Respective Bills of Contents of every Ship Inwards or Outward, with the
respective Warrants returned by the VVaiter or VVaiters for every such Ships,
unto the lading or unlading, whereof he or they were appointed: And if the same
agree, and that every such Ship be fully Entered, to suffer the same to be
discharged, or go. But you are first to go on board such Ship, and search, see
and survey, Search all Ships, and seize prohibited and uncustomed Goods.
whether there be no Goods yet left concealed on board, which have not been
Entered Inwards; or whether there have not any other or more Goods been shipped
on board any Ship Outward, then such only for which VVarrant or Sufferance
has been granted. And in case you find any Goods concealed, hid or shipped out,
as aforesaid, or being prohibited, or uncustomed Goods, you are to seize and
bring the same away unto the Public VVare-house of the Custom-houses, or some
other convenient place adjoining, where they may be most conveniently secured,
and forthwith to acquaint the Commissioners or Collectors therewith.

VII. You are after the Jerking of any Ship, to annex or file together the
VVaiters Bills, File the Masters Reports and Waiters Bills after examination of
them.
and the respective Bills of Contents formerly given in, as aforesaid, by any
Skipper or Purser, and numbering the VVaiters Bills in Order of their Dates, to
express the Number of the said Bills in words at length, at the bottom of the
Masters or Pursers Bill of Content, and afterward examining the same with the
Cash or Day-Book, and finding them to agree, to file them all together, and lay
them up in some convenient place, to be produced upon all occasions.

VIII. You shall be diligent and careful, to make stay, or cause to be made
stay, Make stay of all Goods brought in, shipped out, or delivered, contrary to
the Law of Custom or Excize.
of all Goods, Wares and Merchandise prohibited to be brought in, or carried
out and delivered, or intended to be carried in, or out of this Nation, or the
Dominions thereof, or delivered to any buyer of the same, contrary to any Act,
Ordinances, Orders or Declarations, as well of his Highness and Council, as
of Parliament, which are in force both touching Customs and Excize.

IX. You are at all times, and as often as you shall see cause, or have just
cause of suspicion, Go on board to search,
to go on board any Ship, or other Vessels riding in Harbor, or in any Road,
within the Precincts or Limits aforesaid, to see, survey and search for all
manner of Goods prohibited or uncustomed, which you are to seize or bring away,
as aforesaid: And further, with the consent and directions of the Collector,
And enter Waiters.
to put any Waiter he shall appoint, on board any Ship riding in the Road, who
is to remain there, and come in with there, until such Ship be cleared and
discharged.

X. You are to take care, See to the Waiters attendance,
that the several Waiters appointed to attend any Ships, or otherways, at
Leith or Edinburgh, do constantly and duly give their attendance accordingly.
And that such of them who shall have no particular charge at any time, do
constantly attend some at the Shore, and some at the Ports of Leith and
Edinburgh, for the making stay of all Goods, At shore and Ports.
which shall not be duly entered, or else delivered by the Merchant, to any the
buyers thereof, without any Ticket or Warrant, as to the Excize.

XI. And because in time of Trade, Cause them to watch.
much fraud is usually practiced and used, you are at any time, when you find
store of shipping in Harbor, to appoint one or more of the Waiters, by turns
each night, to watch along the shore of the Haven, and to seize any Goods
landed at unlawful hours.

Acquaint the Commissioners with their neglects.
XII. You are from time to time to acquaint the Commissioners with any the
Omissions, Neglects, or other failures of all, or any the Waiters.

XIII. You are to observe, pursue and follow in all things, the several Acts,
Ordinances, Orders and Declarations, And observe these and all other
Instructions given him.
as well of his Highness and Council, as of Parliament, touching Excize and
Customs. And in all things, honestly and faithfully to demean your self
according to your Commission, These and all other Instructions which you shall
receive from the Commissioners, or their Surveyor-Generall from time to time.

INSTRUCTIONS For the WAITERS.
I. YOu shall give your faithful and diligent attendance in the Port or Place
where you shall be appointed and directed to attend as Waiter, To attend
diligently.
and give notice to the Collector or chief Searcher (where there is such a
Searcher) of that Port with all convenient speed, Give notice of all Ships
coming in, or going out.
of every Ship that comes in, or goes out every Tide by way of Merchandise,
or with any Goods from, or to any Foreign Parts, or from, or to any Port of
this Nation, or of England.

II. You are forthwith upon warrant or other direction given from the Collector
and Searcher, Board or wait on Ships in lading.
to enter on board any Ship or Vessel, and there to remain until she be fully
discharged and delivered: And to see unto the shipping of all Goods Outward,
unto which you shall at any time in like manner be directed and appointed.

III. You shall not permit or suffer any Goods, Wares or Merchandise to be
unladen out, Suffer no Goods to be landed or shipped, without the Duties first
paid.
nor laden on board of any Ship or Vessel, either inwards or Outward, before
due Entry made of the same with the Collector of the Port in or out of which
any Goods shall be brought or shipped out, and all duties duly paid and
satisfied, as well of Customs as Excize, where Excize shall be due and payable.

IV. You are upon the unlading of any Goods, Nor more Goods than shall be
entered.
to take care that no more, or other Goods either for quantity or quality, be
unladen and delivered, then are mentioned in the Warrant you shall receive from
the Collector and Cheque; And where you shall find Goods short entered (if the
same exceed not Twenty per Cent. in which the Five per Cent. allowed unto the
Merchant, is to be included in the quantity thereof, in proportion with the
Goods mentioned in your Warrant) you are to make stay of, If so, or that the
Goods be landed at unlawful time or place, to seize them.
or bring the overplus unto the Warehouse of the Custom-house, there to remain
until the Merchant do make a Post-Entry of the same: But if the Goods exceed
the quantity aforesaid, or landed at unlawful time or place, or without the
privity of the Officer, properly concerned for the doing thereof, you are to
seize the same, and to acquaint the Collector and Cheque therewith.

V. You are not to permit or suffer any Ballast, Not to suffer Ballast, or any
thing whatsoever, to be shipped without Warrant.
Provision of Victuals, or any other Goods or Things whatsoever, although
paying no Duties, to be put on board any Ship whatsoever, without particular
Warrant from the Collector and Cheque for doing thereof. And upon the shipping
off of any Goods or Merchandise, you are to examine and see that all Goods
shipped off do agree in quantity, Nor more, or less than is contained in such
Warrant, without seizure, or acquainting the Collector or Searcher therewith.
quality, weight, number and measure, with the Warrant you shall receive, and
that neither more or less be laden on board than is therein mentioned and
expressed; and if more, you are to make seizure of the same; but if less, you
are to acquaint the Collector and Cheque, or Searcher therewith, before the
Ship on which such Goods shall be laden shall be permitted to go forth.

VI. You are upon the landing and shipping off of all Goods, to receive a
Warrant for doing thereof, To have Warrant as well relating to Excize as Customs.
as well relating to the Excize as Customs. And wherever Excize is due to be paid
upon the importing or landing any Goods, you are not to suffer the same to be
carried away, before the Excize, as well as Customs, be paid and satisfied.

VII. Whenever any Shopkeeper, To see al goods shipped out by Shopkeepers to
be brought immediately from their shops etc. and not elsewhere.
Retailer, or other person shall export any Goods, you are to see that the same
be brought from the known or common reputed House, Shop or Warehouse of such
Shop keeper, Retailer or other, and not from any other House or Place
whatsoever; And if so, you are not to suffer the same to be laden on board,
before you shall have first acquainted the Collector or chief Searcher
therewith, and received such further Order therein as the nature and occasion
of the affair shall require.

VIII. You are constantly in a Book, To keep a book and therein to enter all
goods taken up and shipped off by Warrant, etc
to be made and kept for that purpose, to enter the day of the coming in, and
going out of every Ship, unto the unlading, or lading whereof you shall be
appointed to attend, with the Name of the Ship or Master; and under each
respective Ship, as aforesaid, either coming in, or going out, you shall enter
the date of every Warrant, Cocquet, Transire, or Certificate (according to the
order of their dates) which you shall receive for the landing and taking on
shore, or shipping of any Goods, together with the quantities, qualities,
numbers, weights, measures, and marks of all and every the Wares, Goods and
Merchandise which shall be delivered on shore, or shipped upon any such
Warrant, Cocquet, Transire or Certificate, with the time when, and how much at
a time of the same was so landed or shipped out, and by whom the same were
taken up and shipped off, and to what place, or unto whose Cellar or Warehouse
(as near as possible you can find) Goods so taken up were carried and housed
after landing.

IX. You are after the execution of any Warrant, To endorse the Warrants, and
deliver them afterward to the Collector or Searcher.
Cocquet, Transire or Certificate either Inwards or Outward, to endorse (and
afterward subscribe your hand to) the several particulars beforementioned,
on the backside of the respective Warrants, by which any Goods were landed or
shipped, and presently thereupon to deliver back such Warrants into the hands
of the chief Searcher, (where there is such a one) or else of the Collector in
that Port to dispose thereof, according as they are directed and appointed.

X. You are to take notice of no Outs upon the Importation of any Wines, What
Outs shall be noted.
unless the same be shown unto you on shipboard, after plucking the same out
of the Hold, and before the laying the same on shore.

XI. You are upon just cause of suspicion, To search or seize Uncustomed or
prohibited Goods.
to enter on board any Ship or Vessel as well by night as by day, riding, lying
or being within any the several Ports, Havens, Creeks or other places; As also
in the daytime to go and enter into any House, Warehouse, or Cellar, or other
place whatsoever, and therein to see, survey and make search for any prohibited
or unacustomed Goods, and the same to seize, and bring, or cause to be brought
into the Public Warehouse of the Custom-house, there to remain until due
proceedings at Law may be had thereupon.

XII. Where any Goods, To seize all Goods delivered without Ticket.
Wares or Merchandise shall be delivered from any Merchant unto any Buyer
thereof, either without payment of Excize, Ticket or Warrant, or where more or
other Goods, either for quantity or quality, than what shall be mentioned and
expressed in any Ticket, or Bill of Sufferance, Or more then mentioned in any
Ticket.
or other Warrant for Excize shall be delivered by any Merchant, or other, unto
any other person whatsoever, you are to seize and secure the same.

XIII. All Goods, Wares and Merchandise excizable, either unsold, or sold; or
which have already paid the duty of Excize, To seize all Goods romaged without
Warrant,
which shall be removed, romaged, carried, or conveyed from one place to
another, without Ticket or Warrant for doing thereof; you are to seize and
cause to be brought into the Public Warehouse of the Custom-house, Except
bought from a Retailer.
unless the same shall appear to be either Goods bought in a small quantity,
and coming from the House or Shop of a Retailer thereof, or else Goods bought
by a Shopkeeper or Retailer, from another Shopkeeper or Retailer of the same
Burgh or Town, and passing to his House or Shop of the same Burgh or Town.

XIV. You shall seize, To seize and inform of all Goods any ways landed,
shipped or disposed of contrary to the Laws of Customs or Excize.
stay and secure all Goods, Wares, and Merchandise which you shall find to be
landed, shipped, carried, concealed, conveyed, removed, sold or delivered
respectively, contrary to any Act or Ordinance, as well of his Highness and
Council, as of Parliament, for, or touching either Customs or Excize, now in
force in Scotland; or upon notice or intelligence had or received of any Act,
or Acts, Thing, or Things, done, committed or acted contrary thereunto, shall
inform and give notice thereof, either unto the Commissioners, or the Collector
of the Port where you shall be appointed Waiter, that such course and order may
be taken therein, as of right belongs.

XV. You shall readily do and execute every Thing and Things, as the Collector
or chief Searcher (where there is one) shall appoint and direct, To observe all
Directions given by order of the Commissioners.
and diligently and faithfully to observe all such Rules and Instructions as
are already, or shall hereafter be given unto you by the Commissioners
themselves, the Surveyor-General, Collector, or any other by their Order and
Appointment: And further to do and officiate in all things, as the Collector
himself may or ought to do when, and in case you shall be sent to attend in any
Member-Port, where by reason of distance of place, the Merchant cannot possibly
enter with the Collector in the Head-Port of that District; But in this
particular, And to officiate as Collector in any Member-Port unto which he
shall happen to be commissioned.
you are to proceed no further than as the Collector shall direct and give
order unto you, by Commission under his Hand and Seal; to whom you are at all
times, and from time to time, to make, give, and render an Account of all your
actions and proceedings therein.

DIRECTIONS TOUCHING SEIZVRES or DEMISES, as to CUSTOMS and EXCIZE conjunctly.
EVery Officer who shall make any Seizure or Demise of any Goods, All Seizure
both of Customs and Excize, to be signified to the Commissioners and Register
of Seizures at Leith.
or Merchandise, as prohibited and uncustomed, or Imported, sold, delivered,
removed, or delivered contrary to the Laws of Excize, shall thereupon with all
possible speed acquaint the Commissioners of Customs, and Excize therewith, and
likewise certify the same to the Register of Seizures in the Port of Leith,
for the time being, that they may be by him duly entered, and recorded, and
brought to trial, either before the Judges of the Exchequer, or else the
Commissioners aforesaid, according as the nature and quality of the Seizure
shall require.

Such Officer is withal to certify unto the said Register, All circumstances
of the seizure to be certified.
together with the quantity, and quality of Goods seized, the time when, and
ground whereupon he seized or demised the same, with such other circumstances
as are fit to be known for exhibiting, and forming a due Information against
the same, either in the Exchequer, or before the Commissioners as aforesaid.

In case any Proprietor of any Goods seized, Goods (upon license to compound)
to be Apprized.
or demized, procure a License to compound for the same; the Officer before he
treat or compound thereupon, is to cause the said Goods to be apprized, by
virtue of a warrant of Apprizement, out of the Exchequer; which Writ, the
Solicitor shall procure at the request and charge of the said Officer, and send
the same to the said Officer with all speed; and the Officer thereupon having
caused the said Goods to be apprized, is forthwith to return the same Writ
(with the Indenture of Apprizement thereunto annexed) unto the Register, to be
by him registered, and afterward returned unto the Exchequer, in order to
further prosecution.

No composition to be less then one third of the value.
For the preventing of all fraud in Compositions, no Officer is by virtue of
any such License, to compound for his part, at any less rate, then the one
third part of the whole, according as the said Goods are apprized, unless the
said Commissioners (being first acquainted therewith) do give other directions
in the case.

The Seizour to certify and endorse bis composition.
After such Officer has made his Composition, he is forthwith to certify the
Collector of the Port whereunto he does belong, what he has, or is to receive
by way of Composition, for his part, for the Goods so siezed or demised as
aforesaid; and for any charge of Intelligence, or otherwise by him disbursed
about the same: And shall in the presence of the said Collector, endorse upon
the said License in words at length, and not in figures, what the same
amounts unto, in one entire sum, and subscribe his name thereunto.

And then return it to the Register.
Such Officer is forthwith to return the same License, so endorsed to the said
Register, to be by him registered and entered in the Exchequer, and then to be
kept by him, until some seasonable opportunity be offered, whereby the Officer
may take his Oath in a legal way, according to what is endorsed and subscribed
as aforesaid; and that the said Officer do then likewise return unto the said
Register the Money for charges expended in the Exchequer in that suit, With the
charges of suit.
upon intimation from him what the said charges are.

Goods seized not to be delivered till the States part, and Customs, and
Excize, shall be paid.
Such Officer having made his Composition, is not to deliver, nor suffer to be
delivered, such Goods out of custody, until the States part of such
Composition, as also the Customs (and Excize, where Excize shall be due for the
same) be paid to the Collector of the Port, for the use of the Commonwealth.

Security to be given for rating the Fine.
In all and every such cases, the Collector of the Port is to take good
security, or a greater sum of money then the charges of the Exchequer, in
rating the Fine, and suing out the Quietus est, will amount to of the
Proprietor before his Goods be delivered, with condition to procure his Fine to
be forthwith rated, that so all other proceedings thereupon may ensue; whereby
the Officer may be legally discharged of his Seizure upon Record, and in
default thereof, to leave the said sum deposited.

The Seizour to pay in the States movetie within Twenty days.
When any Goods seized, are, or shall be condemned in the Exchequer, the
Officer (to whom the benefit thereof does accrue) is within Twenty days after
such Condemnation enrolled in the Exchequer, and certified unto him by the said
Register, to pay unto the Collector, the moyetie due unto the State, according
as they are apprized, and forthwith certify the said Register of the payment
thereof; and is also to make return unto the said Register of the charges
expended in the Exchequer by reason of the said suit, being first made
acquainted by the said Register what the said charges are.

Goods seized, notwithstanding Writs of delivery, to be detained till all
duties be paid. Seizures where to be secured.
No Officer whatsoever is to deliver any Goods from under Seizure, by virtue of
any Writ of delivery, until the Customs and Excize (where Excize shall be due)
be paid to the Collector of such Port, for the same.

All Goods seized by any the Officers of the out-Ports, are to be brought in to
the States Warehouse, belonging to such Port, where there is any, and in case
there be none, then into such other place as the Collector shall appoint for
securing thereof, until they be condemned, or otherwise legally discharged.

The Collectors to take care Goods seized, be truly valued.
The Collectors of the several Ports are to take special care, that upon all
Apprizements made of Goods seized, the same be truly valued, and that they
receive Custom and Excize, in all cases of Composition of any Goods; And, upon
forfeiture of any Goods, if they shall see and judge it most for the
Commonwealths advantage, then, and in such case they may take the moyetie of
such Goods in kind, and forthwith acquaint the Commissioners therewith, to the
end they may receive direction therein, for the Sale thereof. And receive the
States part in kind, or otherwise, as he shall think fit.
And therefore, all persons making seizure before disposition be by them made
of any part of the Goods and Merchandise by them seized in the several Ports,
are to acquaint the Collector of that Port, where such seizure is, or shall be
made, therewith, to know whether they will take the Commonwealths moyetie, in
kind, or not.

INSTRUCTIONS To the COLLECTORS of Customs and Excize conjunctly, touching
their Moneys and Accounts.
BY the foregoing Instructions, the Work and Method of the Accounts to be
kept, made and done, Collectors Books, viz.
both for Customs and Excize, is very evident and plain; but yet for the more
Perspicuity and clearness of things, the Collector, as a Summary of the whole,
if to take notice that he is to frame and keep,

1. One Cash or Day-Book, which having two several Columns, the one for Moneys
received for Customs, The Cash, or Day book.
and the other of Moneys received for Excize, is for the making Entry therein
of All Goods Paying Customs Excise upon Inwards. Outward. Importation. Sale.

Going out for beyond the Seas, either before, or after payment of Excize.
Coming from England, or the Coast, before payment of the same.


With their respective Values and Rates, and the Product of them.

II. Two Books for Entry of Ships, Skippers Books.
and the Report of the Skippers Inwards and Outward.

III. One Book for entry, not only of all Certificats from, The Coast Book.
or to the Coast for Customs, but of all Goods likewise both Inwards and
Outward, from, or to England, or the Coast, which have paid Excize before such
their coming in, or going out.

IV. A Ledger, or Book of Account for Excize only, to be kept with all
Merchants and Importers, The Ledger.
making their Account Debtor for the Quantities, Weights and Measures of all
Goods imported (the same to be posted from the Day-Book, according to the
Custom Entries, with reference in the Ledger to the Folio of the said Day-Book,
and in the Day-Book to the Folio of the Ledger where the said Entry is posted)
And Creditor by Sales, Allowances, and Exports, to be posted in like manner
from the same Book respectively.

V. A Wast-Book to be kept for the Entering of all Tickets that shall be given
for all Goods which shall have paid Excize before their being sent unto any
Port, Burgh, The Waste-Book.
Town or Place from out of the Port or Place where the same had paid Excize, or
else were lying before the removal or carrying thence of the same.

VI. Two fair Books, first of which is, for the Entering (on the one side
thereof) all Bonds which shall be taken, The Bond Books.
as to Excize, upon the Importation or landing of any Goods and Merchandise;
and on the other, all Bonds given upon the shipping out of any Goods excizable
unto any Port of England or Scotland, or any Part beyond the Seas, in the order
of their dates and times in which they are taken from, or given by the
Merchants. And the second of them, for entering all Bonds taken in relation to
the Customs.

Collectors monthly to deliver Abstracts, Of Moneys received.
THE Collector in every Port is monthly to deliver in unto the Commissioners at
the Custom-house in Leith, the several Abstracts or Accounts following; Viz.

1. Of all Moneys which have been received for Customs and Excize in his
respective Port, and the Members thereof, the Month preceding, under the
several and distinct Heads, as follows, Viz.

Of Customs Excize upon Inwards. Outward.
Importation. Sale.


Of Ships coming in, or going out of Port.
II. Of what Ships or Vessels come in, or go out of his Port, or any the Members
thereof, with an Account of their respective Ladings, with the Names of the
said Ships or Vessels, their Masters, together with the Place from whence they
come, or whither bound or fraighted.

Of Goods shipped for England.
III. Of what Goods, Wares and Merchandise excizable, as have the Month
preceding been exported or shipped out of his Port, or any the Members thereof,
to any the Ports of England, and therein to express the Name of the Master,
Ship and Vessel in which the same were shipped, together with the Names of the
Persons entering the same Outward, with the quantity and quality of the Goods
so entered; and whether they were passed (as to Excize) upon Bond, or otherwise,
after payment of the same.

All Money to be entered to Account of the same day upon which they shall be
received.
All Moneys received for Customs or Excize, or both, are to be entered in his
Cash or day-Book precisely, upon the same day upon which the same was paid and
received: And in case Moneys received on one day shall happen to be entered or
accounted for on another day, the same is to be reputed and esteemed two
several Sums of Money, which the Collector is therefore to make good and pay
into the Commonwealth accordingly. The same course to be observed in Entry of
Goods.

No Collector is to give any trust or forbearance to any person or persons
whatsoever, for or in respect either of Customs, No trust or forbearance to be
given.
Excize, Seizure or Fines, but at their own perils; Except with License of the
Commissioners, or in cases of Sufferance, mentioned in the 21th Article of the
Act of Parliament of the 14th of August, 1649. Provided always, that the time
therein limited, be not exceeded without proceeding, as by the said Article,
and some of the preceding Instructions, is directed and appointed.

Collectors, or Sub-commissioners to account every four months.
At the end and expiration of every four Months, to be reckoned and begin from
the first of October, 1655, inclusive, every Collector or Sub-Commissioner is
to close and shut up his Account (and so for every four Months following) upon
the last day of the said four Months precisely, and what ever Money shall be
received after that day is to be brought to account in its proper place, and on
the same day on which it was received; and within ten days at furthest after
the term and expiration of every four Months, as aforesaid, he is to send and
deliver to the Commissioners a true, perfect and particular Account Of all
Subsidy and Custom Excize Paid and received for Goods Paid and received
Inwards. Paid and received Outward.
upon Importation. Sale.


Together with an Abstract of the said four Months, in the same manner and
form with that given before monthly; And at the end of all an Account current,
therein making himself Debtor for the Moneys received, and Creditor by all
such Moneys as he has paid into the Treasury, or else returned by Bill, that
so it may appear whether the whole be paid in, or how much thereof is remaining
unpaid.

To send up a Transcript of all Tickets received.
And together with the four Months Books of Account, aforesaid, the Collector
in every Port is to send up a Transcript of all Tickets received for any Goods
coming into his Port, or any the Members thereof, by Land or Water from any
other Port or Place either of this Nation, or else of England; And besides, to
keep and frame, and so send and deliver in monthly (and afterward every four
Months) an Account distinct and apart by it self, An account of all Fines and
Seizures.
of all Moneys and other Goods and things received, had, and taken for
Seizures, Fines, Forfeitures and Penalties, for, or relating either to Customs
or Excize, with an Account current thereof, how, and in what manner paid,
either into the Treasury, or else the Discoverers according to the Laws of
Excize in that behalf. The manner and form of all which Accounts, every
Collector, for his better Information, shall receive herewith, and therefore
will be left without excuse, in case any should fail of his, or their duties
herein.

Collectors and sub-Commissioners to return their Moneys monthly, and to clear
and pay every four Months Account at the time of delivering in of their
Accounts.
Neither will it be sufficient described before, should within ten days at the
furthest, after the end and expiration of every four Months, be delivered unto
the Commissioners at Leith; but it is likewise expected that the Collectors,
embracing all opportunity and convenience of making and paying in their Moneys
monthly (which they shall receive) unto Mr. Anthony Wilson Treasurer at Leith,
will and do not fail to have all such Moneys, as shall be due and payable at
the end of every four Months, upon their respective Accounts, either in a
readiness to be paid (or else actually paid) in, at, or before the giving in
of their Accounts respectively for the full ballancing and clearing of the
same, as he or they esteem the Repute of being accountd diligent and faithful,
and thereby avoid all such inconveniences, as well or may otherwise happen and
fall upon the Contraveners hereunto.

A COLLECTION Of the several Fines, Penalties and Forfeitures set and imposed,
in relation to Customs and Excize respectively, by the several and respective
Laws of SCOTLAND and ENGLAND, now also in force in SCOTLAND, by the Union of
both NATIONS.
By the Laws of SCOTLAND.
The pains of haueing out Gold, Silver, Balzeon.
IT is statute and ordained, That na man have out of the Realm, Gold, Silver,
nor Bulzeon, under the pain of escheateing thereof, the ane half thereof to
the tanitour and taker. J. 2. Par. 8. C. 34.

Of houseing Wool, Hide, Skyns.
It is statute and ordained, for causeing of the Customs to cum in hail, and
to eschew the defraudeing, that na man house Wool, Hide nor Skynes in Leith,
nor other places, out-with free Burrowes, under the pain of Escheit. J. 4.
Par. 6. C. 88.

Of carrying out Talloun.
It is statute and ordained, that na person nor persons take upon hand in time
to cum, to carry any Talloun forth of the Realm, under the pain of tinsell
of all their goods moveable, cumand in contrair hereof. All Customers to search
and seek all Schippes, and quhair any Talloun beis shipped, or brocht to the
Ships to be carried forth, to escheit the samin. V. J. Par. 5. C. 125.

Huddrouns, Kid-skins.
All Lieges quhatsumever, are inhibited and discharged of all transporting and
carryeing forth of Huddrounes and Kid-skinnes, under pain of confiscation of
the same. J. VI. Par. 12. C. 155.

Na person or persons is to take upon hand to transport or in-bring any
forbidden or uncustomed Goods, Of transporting or inbringing forbidden or
uncustomed guds.
under pain of tynsell of their Moveable goods, that shall happen to come in
the contrair thereof; That is to say, the said forbidden and uncustomed goods
that shall happen to be taken and apprehended, to be escheit, and the remanent
of the moveable goods and gear perteining to the Contraueniers, to be escheit
for their contempt. J. VI. Par. 16. C. 15.

Of receiueing forbidden or other guds then sall be contained in the Cocquet.
All Merchants and Skyppers at the receiving of their Cocquets in all Ports,
sall give their solemn eathes, that they have na forbidden guds, nor na uther
lawful guds or Merchandise, except that whilke is contained in their Cocquet
and Entrees, and that they sall take na uther guds in, all that Voyage, under
the pains of hauand the ship arreist, and all the guds contained therein. J.
VI. Par. 15. C. 257.

In the 15. Par. of James the VI. C. 251. full Power and Commission was given
to his Highness Council, to maike Ordinances necessaire for the ease of
Merchants, and suretye of his Highness Customs; And by Act of the Council
apud Edinb. the 25. Oct. 1611. It was statute and ordained;

Of packing guds in packs and trees of gads of contrair nature, or concealeing
the same ungiven up in entry.
That na Merchants are to take upon hand at any time to pack, or enclose within
Packs of Skins, or other Packs transported forth of this Realm, or within
Packs of Lint or Hemp, Trees of Carts, Cards, or Keames, or other Packs or
Trees, any other Gear or Merchandise of contrair nature, and conceal the same
ungiven up in Entry, in defraud of his Highness dew Customs, under pain of
escheating of the haill Pack swa found, wherein the same Gear sall be swa
found to be fraudfully packed.

Na Masters, Merchants, Awners; nor Skippers of Schips, Crears or other
Vessels, sall take upon hand to laiden or loss their Schips in haill or in
part, at any vnfree Port, or in any open Raids within the same, under the pain
of escheating of the haill Merchandise and gudes swa shipped or lossed; and of
the Schips, Crears and Vessels wherein the samine sall be shipped, and out of
the whilke the samine sall be lossed.

Of the Master refusand to make eath. That be hes na forbidden guds, nor na
other gear then whilke is contained in his Entry, etc.
The Master, before his goeing forth, is to make Entry of the Gudes and
Merchandise in his Schip, and subscryue the samen with his hand, and make eath,
and with all, solemnedly make faith and sweere, that he hes na forbidden gudes
nor gear, nor na other lawful Merchandise nor gudes within his said Schippe,
by and attour that whilke is contained in the said Entryes, subscryved with his
hand, nor that he knawes of nane to be brought within the said Schipp, nor sall
not receive thereafter any gudes or gear to be laidned within his said Schipp;
Whilke eath, gif it be refused to be made, It sall be lesome to the Customer,
to arreist the said Schipp, and all the gudes and gear being therein.

All persons receiuand guds or gear to be transported, after vpgiueing their
Entries.
Na Masters, Awners nor Skippers of any Schipp passing out, are to take upon
hand to receive within their said Schips and Vessels, any Merchandise, gudes
or gear to be transported out of the same, after that they have made and given
up their Entries to his Highness Customers, under pain of escheating the gudes
and gear sa shipped, and of the Schips, Crears and Vessels wherein the samine
sall be shipped.

Of lossing any guds till entry,
Na Master, Awners nor Skippers of Schips arriuering within this Realm, take
upon hand at any time hereafter, to loss any Wines, Merchandise, gudes and
gear, under whatsomever color or pretense, at any Port or Part, or convoy any
of the same away in defraude of the Customs, until sic time as entrye of
their Schips be made; Or landing guds vngiuen up.
and that they leave noe part of the said Wines, Merchandise, gudes and gear
ungiven up in the said Entry, nor conceal noe part thereof from the Customer,
under the pain of escheateing of the haill Wynes, Merchandise, gudes and gear
swa to be lossed out of the said Schips, and of the Schips, Crears and Vessels
out of the whilke the samine sall be lossed; As also under pain of escheateing
of the haill Merchandise, gudes and gear left out, vngiuen up in the said
Entry.

Of the Skipper refusand to make eath of his Entry, etc.
The Entry to be given be the Skipper or Master, subscriued with his hand, wha
sall be obleist solemnedly to make Faith, that the same is a just and true
Entry of the haill Merchandise and gudes shipped within his Schip at that
Voyage, and that he has lossed na part thereof, nor convoyed nane of the same
away, before the giving up of the said Entry; Whilke eath, gif it be refused
to be made, as said is, it sall be lesome to the said Customers, to arreist
the said Schip and haill gudes and Merchandise therein.

Apud Edinb. Oct. 25. 1611.
By the Laws of ENGLAND.
The penalties of shipping out Gold, Silver, Money, Bullion
NO Person is to carry out any Gold or Silver in Money, Bullion, Plate, or
Vessel, upon forfeiture of the sum carried or sent out. 4. R. 2.2.

Any Searcher finding Gold or Silver in Coin, or in Mass, in the keeping of
any that is passing, or upon his passage in any Ship or Vessel, to go out of
any Port, Haven, or Creek without License, all that Gold or Silver shall be
forfeit, his reasonable expenses excepted, which he shall discover presently,
being charged and warned so to do by the Searcher, or else all the money
concealed shall be forfeited. 2. H. 4.5. The Discoverer and Informer to have
the one fourth part of the forfeiture. 2 H. 6.6.

None shall carry or convey any Bullion, Plate, or Coin of Gold and Silver into
Ireland, above the sum of Six shillings eight pence, nor convey any such
Bullion, Plate, or Coin into any Ship, Boat, or other Vessels, upon pain to
forfeit the same, and to have Imprisonment, and make Fine and Ransom at
pleasure. 19. H. 7.5.

Brass, Copper, Latton, Bell-mettall, Pan-mettall, Gun-mettall Shraffe.
Every Person and Persons carrying or conveying, or shiping, to the intent to
carry or convey any Brass, Copper, Latton, Bell-metall, Pan-mettall,
Gun-mettall, or Shruffe-mettall, whether it be clear or mixed, (Tin, and Lead
only excepted) into any part beyond the Seas, forfeits double the value
thereof, and Forty pounds for every Thousand weight of the same. 33. H. 8.7.
3. Ed. 6.37.

Or carrying the same to any part of the Coast without Bond
Every person shipping or carrying any of the said Metals, to carry and
discharge the same in any Port of England, or Scotland, unless such person, or
persons before the shipping thereof, do declare and manifest to the Customer of
the Port where the same shall be shipped, the true weight thereof, and also
make a sufficient Obligation in Law, in which he will be bound in such sum as
shall amount unto the double value, and Forty pound for every Thousand weight
so declared or manifested, with Condition that the same should be discharged at
some Port accordingly, and in no other place, does forfeit as aforesaid. 3. Ed.
6.37.

Of the Customer taking Bonds without date, or making false Certificates.
Every Customer by covin or other undue means, who after shipping of any the
said Metals contrary hereunto, shall permit any person to make Obligation
without Dates, or making false Certificates for discharge of their Metal,
looses his Office, and the value of the Metal so shipped. 33. H. 8.7. 2. Ed.
6.37.

Of the Master, Owner, Purser, etc. permitting or not disclosing the shipping
such Metals.
Any Master, Owner, Purser, or Boatswain of any Ship, willingly permitting or
suffering any such Metals contrary hereunto, or else perceiving any such
Metal to be shipped who shall not disclose the same within three days after
knowledge had, to the Customer of the Port, forfeits double the value of the
same Metal. 2 Ed. 6.37.

Of the Customer suffering them to pass without seizing.
Every Customer suffering any the Metals aforesaid to be shipped contrary
hereunto, or else knowing thereof, and forbearing nevertheless to seize the
same, looses his Office, and double the value of the said Metals. 2. Ed. 6.37.

If any manner of person shall carry and transport by any Ship, Of shipping out
Wheat, Rye, Barley, Malt, Corn, Grain Butter, Cheese, Wood, without License.
or other Vessel, into any parts beyond the Seas, any Wheat, Rye, Barley, or
other Corn, or Grain growing in this Commonwealth, or any Malt made within the
same Butter, Cheese, or Wood, without License for doing thereof; The Owner, or
Owners of the said Ships and Vessels forfeit the same, with their apparel
thereunto belonging; The owners of the said Corn, Butter, Cheese, and Wood,
double the value of the same; And the Master and Mariners of every the said
Ships, for every such offense, forfeit all their Goods, and are to be
Imprisoned for one year without Bail or Mainprize. 1. and 2. P. and M. 5.

Of any carrying Corn, etc. to any Ship at Sea, or within Haven.
If any person or persons shall carry and convey by Boat, Crayer, or other
Vessel, any Corn or Grain, Butter, Cheese, or Wood, to any Ship or Vessel on
Sea, or within any Haven, Creek or other place, to be transported into any
Foreign parts; The owners of the Corn, Ships, Vessels, Boats-man and Mariners
respectively forfeit as aforesaid. 1. and 2. P. and M. 5.

Of such as shall ship more then they have License for.
Any person having License to transport Corn, Victual, or Wood, shall neither
himself, nor any other unto whom he may assign such his License, carry out more
then is contained in the said License upon pain of forfeiting triple the value
of what shall be transported without License, and being Imprisoned in the
Common Goal for one whole year, without Bail or Mainprize. 1. and 2. P. and M.
5.

Or more then at one place.
Any person having License to transport Corn; Victual, and Wood, shall not ship
or lade the same, or any part thereof at sundry, but at one certain place only,
upon forfeiture of the said Corn, Victual, and Wood, and all his Goods and
Chattels. 1. and 2. P. and M. 5. Notwithstanding all which Corn may be
transported to any parts not in enmity, When, nevertheless, Corn may be
transported.
when the Common price of Corn exceeds not at the place of shipping, as
follows, viz.

L. S. D. Wheat. 1. 12. 00 Rye. 1. 00 00 The Quarter. 3. Car. 4. Pease and
Beans. 00 16. 00 The Quarter. 3. Car. 4. Barley Malt. 00 16. 00 The Quarter. 3.
Car. 4.

And Victual for provision, for Ireland.
And any person may carry out Victual for the necessary victualling and
provision of his and their Ships. 1. and 2. P. M. 5. for Ireland, by Ord. of
Parl. 18. Aug. 1652.

Of shipping Yarn.
Every person or persons shipping, carrying, or conveying into any parts beyond
the Seas, any Yarn, called Wolstead Yarn, not made nor wrought in Cloth, and
spun in the Realm, forfeits Forty shillings for every pound thereof which
shall be so shipped, carried, or conveyed. 33. H 8.16. Ed. 6.6.

Woollen Yarn. Cloth not fully wrought.
Any person Denizen, or Stranger transporting woollen Yarn or Cloth, not fulled
nor fully wrought, or not barbed, rowed, and shorn, into any parts beyond the
Seas, forfeits the value of the said Yarn or Cloth. 7 Ed. 4.3.3. H. 7.11.

White woollen Clothes, sold for Four pounds and under, and colored Cloth
sold for Three pounds and under excepted. 27. H. 8.13.33. H. 8.19.

Suffolk, and Kentish Clothes, not to be transported unwrought, though with
License, upon forfeiture of Forty shillings for every Cloth. 8. El. 6.

Every person, or persons shipping, lading, carrying, or conveying any white
Ashes beyond the Seas, White Ashes.
forfeits Six shillings eight pence for every Bushel of Ashes so shipped,
laded, carried, or conveyed. 3. Ed. 6.36.

No manner of person shall transport any Horse, Gelding, or Mare without
License, Horse, Gelding, Mare, unless not exceeding Ten shillings price.
upon pain of forfeiture not only of every such Horse, Gelding, or Mare, but
also Forty pounds for every of the same which shall be so transported. 11 H.
7.13. Nevertheless, any one may carry and send beyond Sea any Mares, whereof
the price of any one Mare so to be carried, does not exceed Ten shillings, in
such and like manner as Mares, of the price of Six shillings eight pence were
permitted by the said Act of Parliament. 11 H. 7.13. Whereby it is required,
that such Mares be of the age of three years at least, and that the Seizure at
time of seizure give the Proprietor the price of Ten shillings. Or shall be
sent for Ireland, or any the English Plantations of America.
1. Ed. 6.5. The same may also nevertheless be sent for Ireland, by order of
Parliament, the 18. August, 1652. and for any the English Plantations in
America, with License of his Highness, or Council.

Any manner of persons bringing, delivering, sending, receiving, taking, or
procuring to be brought, delivered, sent, or received into any Ship, Of
shipping Rams, Sheep, or Lambs, alive.
or Bottom, any Rams, Sheep, or Lambs, or any manner of other kind of Sheep
being alive, to be carried into Foreign parts (except such as shall be sent to
Ireland) does for the first offense, together with his Aiders, Abettors,
Procurors, not only forfeit and loose all his Goods, but is to be Imprisoned
for the space of one year, without Bail or Mainprize, and at the expiration
thereof, to have his left hand cut off and nailed up in the open Market. 8. El.
3.

Leather, Tallow, Raw-hides.
Any person or persons shipping, lading, or carrying in any Vessel, or Ship,
any Leather, Tallow, or Raw-hides, with intent to transport the same beyond the
Seas; the owners of the same forfeits such Leather, Tallow, or Hides, and
triple their value; the owner of the Ships in which they are transported,
forfeits their Ships, with their whole apparel; Any Owner, Master, or
Mariner, discovering their transputing within three Months to be freed of any
penalty.
And the Masters, and Mariners knowing thereof, do forfeit all their Goods and
Chattels, and are to suffer a years Imprisonment, without Bail or Mainprize:
But if any Owner or Master of such Ship, shall within three Months next after
his knowledge thereof, or after his return from beyond the Seas, make discovery
of such Leather, Tallow, and Hides transported, with their quantity, and
quality, and by whom, where, and in what Ship, or Vessel, The same may be sent
to Ireland.
and justify and prove the same; then such Owner, Master, or Mariner to be
free from incurring any penalty. 18. El. 9. The same nevertheless may be sent
and transported for Ireland, Of a Merchant entering Goods of Strangers in the
name of Natives.
by Order of Parliament, of 18. August, 1652.

Every Merchant, or other Person, that shall Enter the Goods of a Stranger, in
the name of an English, or Scots man, forfeits, and looses the Goods so Entered,
and all his Goods personal. Of the shipping Wool, woolen Yarn, woollen Flox,
wool Fells, Fullers Earth, Clay, Tobacco-pipe Clay, or Fullers Earth.
2. Ed. 6.22.

Any person or persons, lading, or shipping in any Ship, Barge, Boat, Vessel,
or otherwise, any Wool, of the growth of this Commonwealth, any woollen Yarn,
woollen Flox, wool Fells, Fullers Earth, Clay, Tobacco-pipe Clay, or any other
Earth, or Clay, which may be used in the Art of Fulling, with intent to
transport the same beyond the Seas, or to carry the same to any Ship, or other
Vessel whatsoever, to be transported, forfeits all such Wools, woollen Yarn,
woollen Flox, wool-Fells, Earth, or Clay, Of the Owners shipping or knowing
thereof.
and Three shillings for every pound of the same. Ordinance 19. Jan. 1647.

The owner, or owners of the Faith or Clay, forfeits also Three shillings for
every pound; the owner of the Ships or Vessels, knowing of such offense,
forfeit all their Interest in the said Ships, or Vessels, with all their
apparel, or furniture, to them or any of them, belonging. Ibid.

Of the Master and Mariners knowing thereof.
The Master and Mariners knowing of such offense, forfeits all their Goods and
Chattels, and are to be Imprisoned for one whole year, without Bail, or
Mainprize. Ibid

Of the said Commodities laid in any place to transport.
Any Wool, woollen Yarn, woollen Flox, wool Fells, or any of the said Earth, or
Clay, laid in any place whatsoever, with intention to transport, or that the
same should be transported beyond Sea, or with intention to transport, or
convey, or that the same should be transported, or conveyed by Sea to any other
Port of this Commonwealth, without entering sufficient Obligation with the
Customer of the Port, for the true delivery thereof at some other place of this
Commonwealth: Then, and in such case, such Wools, woollen Yarn, woollen Flox,
wool Fells, Earth, Clay, and Three shillings for every pound weight, Of Goods
pro hibited transportation, shipped for the Coast, without Bond.
are forfeited by the owners of the same. Ibid.

The like penalty is upon all Goods prohibited transportation, which shall be
shipped, without Bond given, as aforesaid. Ordinance of Parl. 16. December. 1647.

Any owner of the Land where such Clay or Earth is dug, or gotten, Of the
owner of the Land, knowing of the shipping the Clay.
being privy unto, or knowing of such transportation, by any person, or
persons, and not discovering the same unto some Justice of the Peace, within
three Months after, forfeits for every such offense, Five hundred pounds
sterling. Ordinance of Parl. 19. January, 1647.

Of the Justices not certifying the same into the Exchequer.
Every Justice, to whom such discovery shall be made, failing to certify the
same to the Exchequer within three Months following, forfeits for every
offense, An hundred pounds sterling. Ibid.

Of Goods brought from Asia, Africa, or America, in Strangers Bottoms.
All Goods, of the production, growth, or Manufacture of Asia, Africa, or
America, Imported in any Ships not belonging to the People of this
Commonwealth, or Plantations thereof, or whereof the Master, or Mariners, are
not for the most part of them of the People of this Commonwealth, are
forfeited, together with the Ship, (with all her Tackle, Guns, and Apparel) in
which the said Goods or Commodities shall be brought in, or Imported. Of Goods
brought from any other then the place of their growth, Manufacture, or usual
place of shipping.
Act of Parl. 9. October. 1651.

No Goods are to be brought in any Vessels of this Comwealth from any other
place, then the place of their growth, production, or Manifacture, or from
those Ports where the said Goods or Commodities can only be, or are, or usually
have been first shipped for transportation, and from no other like places*
under like forfeiture. Ibid.

Of Cod-fish, Ling, Herring, Pilchard, salted Fish and Oil made and cured by
Scots, etc. and Imported in (...) Strangers Bottoms.
No Cod-fish, Ling, Herring, Pilchard, or any other kind of salted Fish,
usually fished for, and caught by the People of this Nation, nor any Oil made
of any kind of Fish whatsoever, nor any whole Fins, or Whale-bones, shall be
Imported into this Commonwealth, but only such as shall be caught in Vessels
belonging to, and the Fish cured, and Oil, made by the People of this
Commonwealth, under like forfeiture. Ibid.

Of Cod-fish, etc. shipped out in strauge Bottoms.
No sort of od, Ling, Herring, Pilchard, or any kind of salted Fish, caught and
cured by the People of this Nation, shall be exported in any other Vessels, but
such as belong to the People of this Commonwealth, and whereof the Master and
Mariners are for the most part of them, of the People of this Commonwealth,
Goods nevertheless of the Streights or Levant, may be brought from the usual
Places of lading: also East India Goods. And likeways any goods of the Spanish
and Portugaz Dominions, from any part of Spain or Portugal.
under the same Penalty and loss aforesaid, Ibid. Notwithstanding which, any
the Commodities of the Streights or Levant Sea, may be imported from the usual
Ports or Places of lading in the Streights or Levant Seas, although the
Commodities be not of the growth of the said Places. East- India Commodities
also may be brought from the usual places of lading, to the Southward or
Eastward of Cabo, Bona Esperanza, though places not of their growth. And
likewaves, the People of this Commonwealth, may, in Vessels to them belonging,
whereof the Master and Mariners are of the People of this Commonwealth, lade or
bring in from any Ports of Spain and Portugal, all sorts of Goods and
Commodities, that have come from, or any way belonged to the Plantations or
Dominions of any of them respectively; as also from Ostend, And all sort of
silk Wares bought with the product of English Commodities from Ostend, Newport,
Rotterdam, etc.
Newport, Rotterdam, Middleburgh, Amsterdam Silk or Silk Wares brought thither
by Land from Italy: Provided the same be the proceed of English Commodities,
without incurring any penalty or forfeiture, for, or by reason of the same.
Ibid.

All Fish, Victual, Wares, or things of what kind or nature soever, laden or
carried in any Bottom or Vessel, whereof any Stranger, or Stranger born
(unless such as be Denizens, or naturalized) shall be Owners, Part-Owners, or
Masters) from one Port or Creek, Of Goods carried to, and from the Coast in
strange Bottoms.
to other Port or Creek of this Commonwealth, are forfeited, together with the
Ship carrying the same. Ibid. Et 5. El. 5.

All Goods to be shipped and landed in the day light, And at some Key or Wharf
where there is a Customer resident.
No person shall lade, or cause to be laden into any Ship or Vessel, any
Goods, etc. to be transported, or discharge, or cause to be discharged out of
any Vessel, any Wares brought from beyond the Seas, but only in the day
light, viz. from the first of March, to the last of September, betwixt
Sunrising and Sunsetting; and thence to the first of March following, between
seven in the morning, and four in the afternoon, and upon some open Key or
Wharf, to be appointed where a Customer or Searcher is usually resident, upon
pain of forfeiture of all such Goods, or double the value, 1. El. 11.

The Master and Mariners to lade and discharge at no other then the times and
places aforesaid.
No manner of person shall receive or take into any Ship or Vessel, any Goods
or Merchandise to be transported beyond the Seas, nor shall discharge or lay on
Land, out of any Ship or Vessel, any Goods or Merchandise in any other place,
or at any other hours, then is before limited, upon pain that the Owners,
Master, or other Person taking charge, or guiding of any such Ship or Vessel
for that Voyage, shall loose and forfeit for every such offense. 100. l. 1. El.
11.

No Master, Shipper, Purser, or other person taking charge of a Voyage, No
Master or Skipper to lade before entry of his Ship.
shall receive or take into any Ship or other Vessel, any Goods or
Merchandise, etc. to be transported beyond the Seas, before he shall have
signified to the Customer of the Port where he ladeth, that he intends to lade,
and for what place; nor after lading, shall depart out of the Port where he
shall so lade, without signifying his lading, what Merchants, and other Persons
have lading with him, Nor depart after lading, before be signifies his lading,
and answer upon oath.
or in his Bottom; and further truly to answer upon Oath to such Questions as
shall be demanded of him by the Collector, or other Officer, upon pain to
forfeit for every default, not truly advertising, or answering, 100. l. 4. El.
11. 1. El. 1.11.

No person to land goods
No Owner, Master, Purser, or other person taking charge of any Ship, Crayer,
Vessel or Bottom, wherein any Goods or Wares, etc. shall be laden and brought
from beyond the Seas, shall discharge into any Lighter or Bottom, and lay on
Land, or procure, cause, or willingly suffer to be discharged into any Lighter
or Bottom, and to be laid on Land any Goods, VVares or Merchandise whatsoever,
before such Owner, Master, or other Person taking charge of the Ship, Bottom,
Vessel, or Merchants Goods for that Voyage, shall have signified and declared
to the Customer or other Officer of the Port, Haven or Creek where he arriveth,
Before the Master has made his Report, and answered upon oath.
the Names of every the Merchant or Laders, and shall have truly answered to
such Questions and Interrogatories touching such Goods and Merchandise, as
shall be then laden in any such Ship as shall be to him administered by such
Customer or other Officer, openly in the Custom house, upon his or their Oath,
if need so require, upon pain that every such Master or other person, shall
forfeit and loose for every such default, All goods to be entered in the names
of the Owners.
not truly advertizing nor answering, as is aforesaid, 100. l. 1. El. 11.

No person shall take upon him to enter, or cause to be entered any Goods or
Merchandise coming from, or going into any the parts beyond the Seas, in the
name or names of any other persons, then the very Owner or Owners of the same
Goods, being not sold, bargained or contracted for, to, or with any person or
persons before such Entry, or before the arrival of such Goods in the parts
beyond the Seas, upon forfeiture of the value of the Goods so entered, No
Wharsinger, Granekeeper, etc. to contal any offense.
1. El. 11.

Every Wharsinger, Crane keeper, Searcher, Lighterman, or other Officer
belonging to the Customs, who shall consent or know of any Offense, contrary to
the Act aforesaid, and do not within one Month after his knowledge thereof,
disclose the same to the chief Customer, or other Officer of the Port within
whose Office or Charge any such Offense shall be committed, shall for every
such concealment, forfeit and lose 100. l. 1. El. 11.

Goods uncustomed.
All Merchants, as well Denizens, as others, shipping or putting any Goods or
Merchandise into any Boat or Vessel, to the intent to be conveyed beyond the
Seas* or else bringing from the Parts beyond the Seas, into any Port or Place
of this Commonwealth, and unshipping the same, to be said on Land, the Customs
and other Duties not paid, forfeit all such Goods and Merchandise. Ordin. of
Parl, 21. Feb. 1644. 16. December. 1647.

Certificate to be given for Goods going to the Coast.
Every Merchant, as well Denizen as Stranger, bringing and entering Goods with
the Customers in any Port, and the Duties thereof paid, who will after that,
conveigh or carry away the same from thence, to any Port within the
Commonwealth, Himself, Factor or Attorney, shall bring from the Customer of the
Port where the Goods were so entered, a Certificate under the Customers Seal,
directed to the Customer of the Port whereto the same shall be conveyed or
carried of the natural color, length and value used to be measured with Eln
or Yard, as of the natural weight, content or value of all other Goods used to
be weighed or valued, to be delivered to the Customer before the said Goods be
discharged, upon pain of forfeiture of the same. 3. H. 7.7.

No Custom or Cheque to use trading.
No Customer, Comptroller, nor any their Cheques, Deputies, Servants or
Factors, shall have any Ships of their own, or shall buy or fell by way of
Merchandise, nor shall meddle with fraighting or shipping, or have or occupy
any Wharf or Key, or hold any Hostelry or Tavern, or shall be any Factor or
Attorney for any Merchant, nor shall be Host unto any Merchant, upon pain of
forfeiting Forty pounds, as often as they do the contrary 20. H. 6.5.

No Customer to be a Common Officer or Deputy of such.
No person shall take upon him to be Customer, Comptroller or Searcher in any
Port in any City, Borough or Town, where he is a common Officer, or Deputy to
any common Officer, upon forfeiture for every half year that he occupies the
said Offices, the sum of Four pounds 3. H. 7.

No Customer to conceal or consent to any thing in prejudice of the Customs.
Every Customer, Comptroller, or Searcher, shall from time to time, do his or
their diligent attendance, at the houses, times and places appointed, as well
in the Custom-house or elsewhere, as shall be most for the dispatch of the
Merchant, without concealment or consenting to any thing which may be to the
hurt or damage of his Highness, in the just answering of the Customs, upon pain
that every such Customer, Comptroller or Searcher, shall forfeit and loose for
every Offense, his or their several Offices, and an hundred pounds sterling. 1.
El. 11.

Customer making false Certificates of Leather.
Every Customer and Officer making false Certificate of the arrival of any
Leather in any Port or Creek, shall for every such Offense, forfeit one hundred
pounds. 1. Ja. 22.

Or knowing of Leather shipped, do not nevertheless seize or disclose the
same, forfeit 100l. No Officer to take any fee or gratuity.
Every Customer, Comptroller or Searcher, hearing or knowing of any Leather,
meant to be transported, and shall not do his best to seize it; or, being
transported, shall not disclose it, shall for his first offense, forfeit a
hundred pounds, and for the second, his Office. 1. Ja. 22.

Any Officer of the Customs, taking or receiving from the Merchant, or any
other person, any moneys by way of Fee or Gratuity, for any Certificate, Bill
or Cocquet, or any other thing whatsoever forfeits his Place. Collect. of
Ordinances as to Customs. fol 98.

By the LAWS made and ordained touching Excize, or New-Impost.
The penalty of Goods landed at unseasonable hours.
ALL Masters and Commanders of Ships delivering any Goods out of his or their
Vessels or Ships (not being in Wrack or Leak) at any other time but only in
daylight, that is to say, between Sunrising and Sunsetting, from the first of
March unto the last of September, and from the last of September to the first
of March following, between the hours of Seven in the morning, and Five in the
afternoon; Or else suffering or permitting any Goods to be put on board any
Lighter, Or put into any Boat, without consent of the Waiter on board.
Hoy, Boat or other Vessels, without the consent or knowledge of the Waiter on
board, forfeits One hundred Pounds. Collection of Acts and Ordinances of
Parliament for Excize. Folio 48.

Every Boat carrying goods from the Ship, to have a Note from the Officer on
board,
All persons into whose Boat or Vessel any Goods paying Excize or Custom
imported into any Road, Harbor or Harbors, shall be delivered to carry the
same on shore, is to take from the Officer on board the Ship, out of which the
Goods shall be delivered, a Note specifying the Name of the Person having
charge of such Boat or Vessel, with the Marks and Numbers of every Hogshead,
Cask, Hogshead-Park, Fardel, Trusse, Bail, Seron, Bag, Potacco, Ballet, Roll,
Bundel, or outward form or bulk of any Parcel or Piece-Goods to be delivered to
the Waiter on shore, To be delivered to the Waiter on shore.
appointed to receive the same, Upon Forfeiture of his Boat or Vessel, and of
the Goods also, if the Owner of the same be found guilty of any fraudulent or
indirect practice. Ibid. fol. 49.50.

No Planter or unknown person to take up goods without payment of the Excize,
or Bond given.
No persons living beyond the Seas, nor Planters in the West Indies or
Verginia, or unknown persons having no certain habitation in the Port where any
Goods shall be entered inwards, are to take up, or receive Warrant for taking up
his or their Goods, before payment, or Bond given for payment of the Excize of
the same, upon pain of Forfeiture of double the value of the said Goods. Ibid.
fol. 52.

Or enter goods in any other than the owners name.
Any such person entering Goods in other than the Owners Name, or making use of
the Name of any known Merchant to color his Goods, forfeits double the value
thereof. Ibid. fol. 52.53.

Nor deliver them to his security, if be be a Retailer.
Any such person taking up his Goods by Bond, and delivering them unto his
Security (who is a Retailer of the same Commodity) incurs the like Forfeiture;
As also does the Security receiving any part of them. Ibid. fol. 53.

No Shopkeeper or Retailer to take up Goods without payment of Excize.
Any Shopkeeper or Retailer, importing any Commodities or Wares of his own
Trade, taking and carrying the same away without, or before payment of full
Excize of the said Goods, or entering or taking up his Goods in any other
persons Name than his own, forfeits double the value; As does also any person
entering or taking up any Goods for such Shopkeeper or Retailer. Nor in any
others name but his own.
Ibid. fol. 54.55.

Any Shopkeeper or Retailor, taking up Goods at sight, and corrupting the
Officer unto whose veiw or examination such Goods shall be committed, Penalty
of a shopkeeper corrupting an Officer, And of the Officer corrupted.
for obtaining favor in report of his Goods viewed, forfeits double the value
of all such Goods; And the Officer suffering himself to be corrupted, or taking
any Reward or sum of Money, in execution of his Trust, whereby the Commonwealth
may be prejudiced, either in Customs or Excize, forfeits One hundred Pounds,
and is to be dismissed from his Employment. Ibid. fol. 55.

The shopkeeper is after clearing his goods to carry them directly to his own
house, and not remove the^ again without Ticket.
Every Shop keeper or Retailer after entry and clearing of his Goods is to
carry the same to his own Shop directly, and is not to house the same in any
other Shop, Celler or Warehouse, or other place, without first acquainting the
Commissioners, Sub-Commissioners, or Collectors therewith; Nor again remove the
same (except only from his usual or known Shop) without a Ticket or Warrant,
upon penalty of forfeiture of double the value. Ibid. fol. 56.

Goods unduly entered.
All Goods which, upon opening or search, shall be found unduly or fraudulently
entered, either for quantity or quality, are forfeited to the Commonwealth. Ibid.

Penalty of a Wharfinger, etc. taking up or leting down any Goods, but in the
presence of an Officer of the Customs. No Goods to be landed without entry.
Any Wharfinger, or Keeper of any Wharf, Crane, or any Porter taking up, or
letting down, or otherwise permitting to be brought on shore, or shipped off
any Goods, but in the presence of an Officer of the Customs, forfeits Five
Pounds. Ibid. fol. 57.

Any Merchant or Importer, landing, or causing any Goods to be landed upon the
shore, before due entry of the same, forfeits double the value of those Goods.
Ibid.

Any Merchant entering Goods in any Port, and afterward carrying them by
Land-carriage to any other Port, Goods going by Land carriage to have Ticket.
is not to dispose of such Goods from the Wagon or other Carriage, without
first delivering his Ticket, or Copy of his first Entry, upon pain of
forfeiting in like manner, as aforesaid. Ibid. fol. 58.

No Merchant to romage without ticket.
The Importer of any foreign Commodities, removing or romaging the same from
any place where they were once housed, without a Ticket or Officer, forfeits
double the value of the Goods romaged or removed. Ibid.

Goods cleared or unsold, not to be romaged without ticket,
Every person removing, romaging or carrying from one house to another, any
Goods or Commodities whatsoever excizable, though unsold, or that the Excize be
already paid, without a Ticket or Officer, forfeits double the value thereof.
Ibid. fol. 33. Which Ticket is to express the very quantity of the Goods,
Expressing the Deliverer and Receiver.
the names of the Deliverer and Receiver, and therefore to be reputed no
Warrant or Ticket for Goods to be delivered from, or received by any other then
shall be nominated and designed therein. No Merchant to lodge Goods with a
Retailer, nor in any other than in his own house, celler or warehouse.


Every Importer, after clearing his Goods at the Customhouse, housing or
disposing of the same in the House, Celler, Warehouse, Storehouse, or Shop of
any person who is a Retailer of the same Commodity, Or housing or disposing of
the same in any other Celler, Warehouse, or Storehouse, except in his own House
or Celler, or Warehouse thereof, without acquainting the Officers of Excize
therewith, forfeits Twenty Pounds. Ibid. fol. 58.

No Goods sold to be delivered without ticket
Every Merchant, after entering and housing of his Goods, who shall sell and
deliver any of his Goods, without receiving a Ticket or Warrant for doing
thereof from the Office under which he lives, forfeits double the value of the
said Goods; and every Buyer or other person receiving such Goods, incurs like
forfeiture. Ibid. fol. 58.59.

The Merchant to clear his sufferance, and the Buyer to pay his Excize within
twenty eight days.
Any Merchant who cannot ascertain the quantity of his Commodity at the time of
the Sale, having obtained a Bill of Sufferance for delivery thereof, is, before
the end of Twenty eight days, to certify the perfect weight and measure of
his Goods sold, or else forfeits double the value: And the Buyer neglecting to
pay and fully clear the Excize of those Goods within that time, incurs the like
forfeiture. Ibid. fol. 59.

Goods imported for private use to pay Excize.
Every person importing Commodities excizable for his own private use, or for
any other purpose then to sell again, is to pay Excize as if the same were
sold, or else to forfeit double their value. Ibid. fol. 61.

Penalty of the Merchant neglecting to account and pay what be stands charged
with.
Every Merchant summoned to account, and after neglect in doing thereof, being
warned to pay in the Excize of all such Goods for which he stands charged by
Entries at the Custom house, failing or refusing to do the same within fourteen
days, forfeits the double value of the said Goods. Ibid. fol. 61.

Penalty of any person refusing an Officer to search.
Any person refusing to permit any Officer, especially authorized thereunto, to
enter any Cellers, Warehouses, Storehouses, or other places, Of the Merchant
corrupting the Officer, who shall taste or view his Tobaccoes: And also of the
Officer. Of persons neglecting to appear, or refusing to give testimony.
to search and take account of any imported Commodities, forfeits Fifty Pounds
for every such refusal. Ibid. fol. 62.

Any Merchant Importer, or Buyer of any Wines, or Tobaccoes, which shall
corrupt any Officer appointed to Taste or View any such Wines or Tobaccoes,
forfeits double the value of such Wines and Tobaccoes; And the Officer who
tasted or viewed the same, One years Salary. Ibid fol. 63.

Any person summoned to give Testimony on the behalf of the Commonwealth,
neglecting to appear, or else appearing, and refusing to take Oath, forfeits
Five Pounds. Ibid. fol. 75.

Of the Sheriff, or Goalor not receiving, or letting a Prisoner escape.
Any Sheriff, Goalor, or other person refusing to receive into his or their
Custody any Persons committed to them by the Commissioners, their
Sub-Commissioners, or Collectors, or else suffering them to escape or go out of
Prison, without Warrant from those by whom they were committed, forfeits double
the value of every sum of Money for which such Person was committed. Ibid. fol.
77.

Of negligent or remiss Officers.
Any Officer wilfully negligent, remiss, or refractory, is to be punished at
pleasure of the Commissioners, by Fine, not exceeding double the value of his
yearly Wages, to be levied, as all other Forfeitures, by Distress, or else
Imprisonment of his Person. Ibid. fol. 78.

The several Officers employed in the business of Customs and Excize,
Disposition of Fines.
are to take notice, That of all Fines and Forfeitures touching or concerning
both, or either of them (except where any special provision is made otherwise)
the one moyetie, or half part, is allowed, and of right belongs unto the
Seizor, Discoverer, or other, who seizes, makes or brings Information of the
breach of any the Laws of Customs or Excize; and the other moyetie, or half
part, unto the Commonwealth.

FINIS.

