THE LIBELLER Uncharacterized By his own Hand.

IN ANSWER TO A Scurrilous Pamphlet, Entitled, The Character of a Quaker, etc.

Nulla fides, Pietasque viris, qui Castra sequuntur
Venalesque manus: ibi fas, ubi maxima merces.
Printed in the Year, 1671.

THE LIBELLER Uncharacterized By his own Hand, etc.
HE Is an entire lover of his Party, for whose sake he Stigmatizes all but his
own Cast, prefers Gentile Hectors Damming Oaths before the Plain Christian Yea
and Nay of his Neighbor.

To the first, he dedicates his Pains: To the second, his Hatred. His Malice
is so bent against all Sobriety, that he fears its least appearance more than
Hell; and to Reform is such a Task, that he hates the very Word. So dismal is a
Modest Dress to his Luxurious Eye, that he takes it for a Monster in Nature;
and inconsistent, with what he calls Religion, to be Virtuous.

He knows not whence that Devotion should have its Rise, that teaches how to
deny self, since his has ever been to answer the debauched Ends of a seared
Conscience; and to thwart his Interest, terms it, A Composition of
Contradiction.

He knows of no Honor but what is required by a proud Hamond, or a cursed
Herod; the first thirsted for the Knee, the second for Tytles of Honor, yet
neither failed of their due Reward.

But have they ever made themselves such tall Horns by their own strength, or
procured so many triumphant Trophies by their own Arm, that any now should
boast or turn Incendiaries?

To preach Christ the Light, is to his understanding insignificant babble. Not
to Swear with him, is to Lie; because he believes Oaths a great ingredient to
make a Gentleman; and Plain-dealing at a word, is so much an Enemy to him, that
he calls it a mere Cheat.

Jesuit and Pope being amongst some, words of Reproach, he will Stigmatize with
them, but will have the Churches Compass as absolute as the Popes
Infallability. In general, where he has nothing against Religious Principles,
he will belly them, affirming absolute salcities.

He Is so much a Temporizer, that he counts the demand of Civil Liberty, or a
Trial by the Law, absolute Contention; and speaking true English to a single
person, an affront of Justice. So much an admirer of the Decrees, or sic volo's
of every private Cabal, that its Treason to enquire into the Reason of their
illegal Results. He takes a measure of others Chastity by his own Courtship,
obscenly prating like one of those, who, to be in the fashon, keep Concubines
at home, so charging others with guilt, would palliate their own.

He envyes the Worship of God, therefore Devonshire-House sticks in his
Stomach, and to be knocked down in the Streets, and haled to Goal, he terms
keeping from breaking the Law. He counts no Lawful Wedlock, but where the
Priest has a Fee; although from Genesis to the Revelations he has neither such
Precept nor Example; and glories in the Extravagancy of a distracted Whimsyst,
or exalted Diotrephes, whose Actions were owned of none, publicly condemned of
many.

Baby-Sprinkling is one of his chiefest Infallibles, by which he marks out a
Christian, although he be as Debauched and Luxurious as the Gomorrhean; and
where his Party wants strength of Argument, the Libeller assists with Dirt;
concluding peaceable People a formidable Party, and dangerous to the State,
with which he would incense the Magistrate to severe Usages, fecthing his
Policy from the Spanish Inquisitors, who Cloth the Innocent Protestants with
dismal Hellish dresses, before they deliver them unto the Civil Power, in order
to receive the Fire and Faggot.

He scoffs at a Resurrection from sin, like an irreligious Miscreant and
sin-lover, who neither ownes the true God, not the Souls Immortality. He hates
Religious Meetings, counting them a Breach of Law. Whorish Nurseries suiting
more the debauched minds of such Athiests, whose incensed madness is kindled
against all opposers of their Debaucheries. His work bewrayes his Whorish
effeminacy (by which he falsely measures others) whilst he hints his skill in
tokens of Letchery.

He hates the Prosperity of an industrious People, while such as himself are
devouring and wasting upon their Lusts.

The Unity of Affection amongst Quakers offends such bloody minded Discrepants,
who instigate to a National Division and Ruin, while they aim at the
violation and spoil of the Peoples just Interests. He abuses the Quakers for
their Charitable Collections, while he, and such Conformable Sons of the
Church, can without any pity, suffer their fellow members to lie roaring in
the Streets for want. He wishes an industrious pious People embarked for
Terra incognita, that such Extravagants as himself may have all to devour upon
their unsatiable Lusts. His Conscience is so broad, and his Throat such an open
Sepulcher, that he will make no bones to devour and swallow down all his
Neighbors Proprieties and fruits of their Industry.

His own work is that of a Canting Gypsy, exposing to Sale his Rapsody of
Lies, Piece of Cant, and beggarly Scurrility, which he pretends for to supply,
provided you his Libel buy; whose Name would be as Infamous as his Work
Scurrillous, had he the Confidence to discover the one, as he had Impudence to
belch out the other. And to Conclude, His own Work is his best Character.

T. R.

THE END.

