Vae Vae Vae Vae Vae Vae Vae mihi Vae Vae.

THE RUMP DESPARING, OR The Rumps Proverbs, AND Lamentations.

Published to promote the Repentance of such as have been, and to deter all
others from ever proving Rebels to their Prince and Country.

LONDON; Printed in the Year, 1660.

The Rump despairing, etc.
Sir Henry Vane. HOW now my Friends, what in your dumps, the Proverb says, It
is a merry World when Knaves meet, and I am sure that there is none of us here,
but has either a Fool in his sleeve, or a Knave in his Doublet, come why
should we grieve thus, a pound of sorrow will never pay penny of Debt, you know
that all we have came from others, and will now go to others, and let it e'ne
go and be hanged.


Sir Arthur, Oh Sir Henry, sorrow has quite besotted me, I was meditating on
that Proverb, A Wall without a Cross, and a Knight without money is abused by
every one. I have been a grand cause of the first, but now I shall I fear pay
shot and lot too, would it not grieve a Man that has had his choice of all the
fat of the Land, to fear his being brought to powdered Beef without mustard,
Oh the very thoughts of this would make a wiser Man then I mad. My high spirit
has all this while fed upon the revenues of other Men's wealth, but must now I
fear be contented with less then that I might before my villainies call my
own, and you know Pride and Poverty make a double affliction.


Sir H. We may ene thank our selves for it, a pitiful Mother makes a scab'd
Daughter, as we have brewed so we must bake, and most now expect to be paid in
our own coin.


Tichb. What means Sir Harry by this miscellany of Proverbs, this truly is a
new way of discourse which I never learned either from my Master Oliver, or in
the Committee of Safety, but since you will Dialogue, I am content, and I think
my fools bolt will be soon enough shot.


Sir Hen. V. Then away with it quoth Washington, But what think you Harry
Martin of our present condition.


H. Martin. Truly I think we are all as fitting for the Devil, as a pudding
for a Friars mouth, and to him I make no question we shall shortly go.


Lord Monson. Good wits jump, I am of the same opinion, for I believe we shall
shortly be as sure to be found in Hell, as a Gentleman's Gray-hound, and a salt
box by the fire side.


Walton. They have a Proverb in Spain, that every House in Malagon has a
Thief of its own, but if ever House contained so many Thiefes together as the
Parliament House whilst we were all there, I will loose my ears; but what talk
I of loosing my ears, my Head is satisfaction too little for my Roguery; we
use to say, He that kills a Man when he is drunk shall be hanged when he is
sober, and we that were so damnably drunk with the Poison of Rebellion, that we
killed our Lord and King, must expect a Halter for our just doom and reward.


Corbet. They say that Proverbs are true and witty sentences, but he was a very
idiot that made this, Black will not change its hew, for though I am almost as
black as the Devil, yet I am sure I am in a blew condition.


Desbrow. I am of your opinion too my Lord, and think no otherwise of this. A
handful of money is better then a bushel of learning, for had I but been
contented to have lived at home the very smell of learned Cambridge, would have
preserved me better then all the money I have gotten by my Roguery.


H. Nevill. But I am sure Sir I remember a Proverb which is very true, the
civil Wars of France made a Million of Atheists, and 30000 Witches, and I
mistake, if we have not here in England trebled the number, and I think my
self no small fool amongst them.


Peter's. You said true Mr. Nevill, for I were no body else. All who come into a
Church say not their Prayers. And though I was good at a long prayer, I am sure
my grace was short enough.


Lambert. It Is a true Proverb, what is got over Devils back must be lost under
his Belly. By successful rebellion against my Prince I got good store of Land
and Lordships, and would it not greive a stone, that I should loose all by my
unfortunate making head against my fellow Traitors. But Gentlemen, you have no
reason now to persecute or laugh at me, now the game is almost ended, I wonder
which of us shall be winners.


H. Martin. Why should you be thus sullen Sir, what though you are imprisoned,
must that break your heart? Yet I confess there is some reason. For a
Jackanapes cannot be merry when a clog is at his heels. For had you not been
so Apish as to imitate your Predecessor Oliver, both you and we might have
still been in a better condition.


Lambert. You need not meddle with the mote in my eye, you have a beam in your
own to look after, you have been the cause of your own ruin, you must cause
the Monk to destroy me, but I think the Monk is turned Fox now, and has
devoured you all like Geese as you are, you are here brisk with your Proverbs.


Gentlemen, But methinks you might have remembered, and you above all others Mr.
Nevill, that Proverb of the Italians, that you must always keep your self,
dal dinanzi delle done, dal dietro delle mule, and da tutti i lati de'i frati,
from the belly of a Woman, the tail of a Mule, and from every side of a Monk;
but I think you have smarted for your foolery sufficiently.


Henry Martin. I do confess our error in the last good Sir, and do conclude
Monks to be dangerous persons, but I cannot but look in your Proverb as idle
in the first clause, which disswades us from coming into Paradise it self,
and from touching at that most pleasant cape of good hope, my own experience
can confute you Sir in this, I have now lying in at Chelsey loving Madamozell,
and have been before and behind her, and yet never found any prejudice by it.


Monson. Gramercy brother Harry, you and I are both of a mind, only Ladies are
sometimes dangerous persons, if you come before them when they have a Ladle in
their hands, which I am sure my Codshead can make affidavit to.


Sir Arthur. I wonder Sirs you can thus trifle in your miseries, but I confess
you may well enough be content, for you have but your deserts. for scaled
Horses are good enough for two such scab'd Serving-men as you are. But though
we are all Knaves, yet let us not be all Fools, but now we are in the mire,
consider which way to get out, for my part I am resolved never to be quiet till
I have got my will, and when that will be the devil knows; there is a Proverb.
Give a woman what she would have, and what she would have, and she will be
quiet. But though I had my desire ten thousand times fulfilled, yet I should
still be unsatisfied, for I was born to be content with nothing; a hal^er was
my destiny, and that I will have before I dye.


Desborough. Oh hold Sir you are too desperate, I have been as furious as you,
as male content, turbulent, and frantic, but yet am not so much in love with
that thing called hanging, as to venture my neck I know not how; I know I have
been esteemed a fool, but Sir after wit is every bodies wit, and so I may
claim something in it, and for my part I conceive it better to withdraw my
self, and return to the place of my first habitation, for I must now confess
I am good for nothing else, and business of State is no fitter for me then a
saddle for a Sowes back.


Henry Martin. You say very true Sir. Better a louse in the pot then no flesh
at all; I will even to the Kings Bench again, and there get me my loving Wh^re
at Chelsey, and seek in the sweet embraces of her to forget all State affairs,
and I hope the State will forget me too.


Lord Monson. As one Cock crows, so the other follows. We have been fellow
Prisoners, and fellow Whoremasters a long time, and I am resolved we will not
part now.


Peter's. Well Gentlemen if you are for the Kings Bench and your Whores, then I
am for White-Chappell and my Butchers wife, oh she is a delicate soft piece of
flesh, as tender as young Lamb, and as sweet as a Surloyne of roast Beef stuck
with Rosemary, and truly Brethren if you intend any of you to escape hanging,
the only way is to be quiet, and take these few instructions and Apothegmes
before we part, for I fear we shall not meet again till we come to Hell, and
what sweet Morsells shall all we be for our Master the Devil, methinks when I
look on Corbet, we are like so many rashers of Bacon ready broiled for Lucifers
breakfast, but I must depart, only as I said before, let me entreat you all to
remember these few things which I shall give you to take notice of to each one.

To you Sir Arthur. Evil gotten goods never prove well, and therefore it were
better for you to get down into the Country, and look that your Bishopric of
Durham run not away, for it was always true, male parta cito dilabuntur.

To you Collonell Walton. An old man is unfit for a young woman, and old fool
for making a new state.

To Desbrow. A Carrion Kite will never be good Hawke, nor an ignorant Plowman
make a good Counselor of State.

To my Lord Monson. A Scepter is one thing, and a Ladle is another, and though
his Wife can tell how to use the one, yet he is not fit to hold the other.

To Henry Nevill. He must needs go whom the Devil drives, the Devil has for
a long time set him awork, and now let him contentedly receive his wages.

To Sir Henry Vane. A little wind kindles much, puts out a fire, he has so
whimsicall and capricious a brain that his designs still overthrow both
himself and them, and therefore he and all of us had better resolve to sit
still and be patient, and perhaps the Nation may be more merciful then we
deserve, and so farewell.


FINIS.

