PRAETERITA, ORA SUMMARY Of several SERMONS: The greater part preached many
years past, in several places, and upon sundry Occasions.

By JOHN RAMSEY, Minister of East-Rudham in the County of Norfolk.

In Templo Dei offert unusquisque quod potest. Hieronym. in Prolog^. Galeato.
(...). Gregor. Nazianzen. Oratione 20. in Laudem Basilii. LONDON, Printed by
Tho. Creake, for Will. Rands, over against the Bear Tavern in Fleetstreet, 1659.

EMMANUEL Collegium Emmanuelis Cantabrigiae
bookplate of Emmanuel College Cambridge

TO HIS Right Worthy and Learned Friend, Mr. JAMES DVPORT, Bachelor of
Divinity, one of the Senior Fellows, and Vice-Master of Trinity College in
Cambridge.
SIR,
IT was forbidden by the Attick Law, to the Orators of that Commonwealth, to
make use of any long Praeludium and Praeface, thereby to insinuate and wind
themselves in a sly and secret stealth, into the Ears and Hearts of their
Judges; and to repose more strength and stress upon the force of their
Rhetoric, then upon the weight and worth of the Cause and Argument. And yet
that Lawyer was of another judgment, who accounted it not a Soloecisme only,
but a Nefas videri in foro causas dicentibus, nulla praesatione facta, Judici
rem exponunt. Caius
Crime, for public pleaders to jump and leap into their matter, and not to
walk toward it in a slow and sure pace; by a just Narrative, and Expository
Praeface, touching the several grounds and reasons of their undertaking. If
then any question be moved and made about those renewed and reiterated Addresses
to your self, rather then to some of another Orb, Stars of a far greater
magnitude, who by their propitious Aspect, and benign Influence, were more
like to afford light and life to these dead labors; This may be alleged and
advertized in the general, That diverse of that rank and number (for I speak not
of all, nor of the greater part) are none of the firmest and fastest Friends of
our Tribe and Order; whereof many, very many have had late and lamentable
experience in these tumultuary and calamitous times; and may fitly and
feelingly take up that sad complaint of Gregory Nazianzen, concerning great
Saint Basil. Gregor. Naz, Basilio Epist. 31.
(...). This has been the only benefit and advantage they have made of their
Friendship, not to trust friends hereafter. Add hereunto, that Applications and
Dedications of this nature, should hold some suitable conformity and
correspondence with the Genius and Disposition of the parties; lest otherwise
they seem to patronage and privilege that with their Names, which they disown
and deny in their principles or practice. And it was sage advice, of that great
Master of Morality in this case and kind; Not to dishonor or disoblige
Friends, by incongruous, or Vtique cavebimus, ne inunera supervacua mittamus:
ut foeminae aut sine arina venatoria, aut Rustico libros, aut studiis ac
literis dedito, retia. Seneca de Benef. l. 1. c. 11.
superfluous presents. In all which respects I know none so fit and proper to
interest and entitle to these ensuing Sermons, as your self. None, in whose
proved and approved Friendship, select and solid Judgment, unswaied and
unbiassed Integrity, I may more securely and safely confide.

The poor Widow in the Gospel threw in her two Mites into the Treasury, which
make a Farthing. And whereas other rich and wealthy persons poured out of their
abundance, she devoutly dropped out of her pure poverty; (...), even all her
living, Mark 12.42, 43. I have herein personated this poor Widow, and cast in a
second Mite into the Churches Treasury; the common Gazophylacium of the Press:
and so far presumed, as to make you the Receiver of Both. Be pleased to afford
them as favorable acceptance, (though every way as unworthy of you, as in
themselves) as they are freely tendered by the Hand of

Your most Assured, and Respective Friend, JOHN RAMSEY

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
AN ancient and honorable name, imposed by the A postles, in a renowned and
famous City: And the Disciples were called Christians first in Antioch, Acts
11.26. And it is the Christian Reader, which is the only Saint, at whose
shrine this oblation is made, and to whom these ensuing Sermons are dedicated
and devoted. But as for all other discriminating and distinguishing Characters,
of any particular profession or persuasion: All denominations and dependencies
borrowed from the persons or parts of men which were rise and rank in the
Church of Corinth. And every one of them said, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo,
and I of Cephas, 1 Cor. 1.12. Each of these Epiphan. Har. 42. and 70.
is (...), as Epiphanius justly styles it: Titles not of Faith but of Faction:
Names of Non Petrianos non Paulinos vocare nos oportet, sed Christianos.
Nazianz. Orat. 30. Christiani esse desierunt qui Christi nomine omisso, humana
and externa vocabula induerunt. Lactan^. Justit. lib. 4 c. 30.
Sects and Schisms: No other then By-names, and Nicknames, and not once to be
Oblivisceamur suisse unquam in rerum natura (quantum ad Sectae quidem ullius
denotationem) Lutherum, Philippum, Zuinglium, Calvinum, Arminium, etc. Columba
Noae, page 46.
named among Saints.

Two things there are that I have to impart and acquaint the Christian Reader.
The one by way of Advertisement and advice touching the Title, Praeterita, The
Inscription of these Se^m^ns. The other by way of satisfaction and resolution,
for the end of the publishing.

A Title taken up by the Learned Drusius, applied to his Annotations on the New
Testament, and by him Christened with the name of Nam ideo Praeterita inscripsi
quia duntaxat ea netavi quae ab aliis praeterita fuerunt. Quod si est, ut
revera est, quid aliud ^^ihi relictum est, praeter spicas aliquot post
luculentam messem, aut (...) (...) ^^ss insign^m vinden iam? Drusius Epist.
Lec^o^i, page 4.
Praeterita, touching only upon those things which were baulked and passed over
by those that went before: Gleaning in the Field of others, as Ruth did in that
of Boaz, and gathering up some of those handfuls, which were left by the
Reaper, Ruth. 2.6. and plucking the grapes after the Vintage. It is the
confession of Drufius, and that well near in his own words.

And yet that is not the reason, why I make use of the name Praeterita, as if I
might take up with Archimedes, (...) but only in reference to the Time; as
being so many scattered pieces, preached many years since, antedating those
signal alterations, which afterward happened both in Church and State: and are
now published Terminis terminantibus, as they were then Pulpited, without
making use of the Sponge or Pancil ^ Either taking from, or adding to them,
lest that the putting in a piece of new cloth into an old garment, should talk
from the garment, and the rent be made worse, Matthew. 9.16. and the same Fate
should abide these Sermons which besell Theseus Ship, that was so often trimmed
and dockt, that very few of the first planks were left behind. And it might be
said of them, as Lipsius sometimes spoke of his Politiques, Lips. Polit.
Praefat.
Omnia nestra and (...), there is all new, and nothing old in them.

But as for the publishing these Sermons (and that is the second thing
premised) which were at first cut out only for private use, with Antoninus his
Title in the front, (...), and dedicated to no other then my self: that which
beckned them abroad into the World, and invited them, In Diaslyminis oras;
which might still have lain hid (in Si omnino huic labori supersedissem, optime
fecissem, and juxta illud Flacci; In sylvam ne ligna feras: Aut enim eadem
diceremus ex superfluo, aut si nova voluerimus dicere, clarissimo ingenie
occupata sunt meltora. Hieron. Adv. Pelag. lib. 3.
St. Hior^ms judgment,) was some probable presumptions and persuasions, that
there was somewhat of Ancient truth in them, Those old Paths, where is the good
way, commended by the Prophet Jeremy, c. 6. v. 16. and being seconded with
walking therein, men may find rest to their souls.

All good is of a diffusive and spreading nature, and communicative of it self;
and it is so much the better, by how much it is more common. And whereas the
good of a single person is (...). Arist. Ethic. l. 1. c. 1.
(...), lovely and desirable of it self; that of a City or Nation (...) (says
the Philosopher) is of a more beautiful and divine nature. And in a matter of
common concernment, where the good of others may be any way interessed and
engaged, I would not be thought over-nice and squeamish. Nor treat my Mother
the Church, as the supercilious and superstititious Pharisees dealt most
unnaturally with their natural Mother: It is Corban, that is to say a Gift, by
whatsoever thou may be profited by me, Mark 7.11. A gift formerly
consecrated to privacy and obscurity; And so not to do ought for my Mother,
ver. 12. in a public manner.

The great A postle St. Peter was very conscientious in the case, and held
himself obliged to premote the Churches welfare both by Word and Writing, 2
Epist. Pet. 1.13, 15. I think it meet as long as I am in this Tabernacle to
stir you up, by putting you in remembrance. Moreover I will endeavor that you
may be able after my decease, to have things always in remembrance. As if he
had conceived the Triple Pasce, given in charge by his Lord and Master, John
21.15, 16, 17. to import this Threefold duty, Pasce verbo, Pasce exemplo, Pasce
scripto; Feed by word, Feed by Example, Feed by Writing.

For though the Habet nescio quid latentis euergiae viva vox. Hieron. Epist. ad
Paul.
lively voice has a secret energy and efficacy; And a great part of the Sermon
is wanting when it is only read and not heard, as it was said of the Magna pars
Demosthenis abest, quod legitur potius quam auditur. Valor. Maxi. lib. 8. cap.
10.
Orations of Demosthenes; Yet nevertheless, Writing has the advantage and
peculiar privilege in the duration and continuance. The lively voice is as the
refreshing influences of the rain and dew, which soak and sink deep, and both
moisten and fat the Farth with their sorcible hear and warmth; but Writing is
as a Flight of Snow, which though it (...) much colder, yet it lies longer upon
the ground. The Word preached reaches only to a few, and edifies the Hearers
of the present Age; but the Word printed is more extensive, and enlarges and
dilates it self to posterity. And in that respect, The Preacher (says Gregor.
in Ezekiel. Hom. 3.
Gregory) should be as the Smiths iron, which not only heateth those that are
near, but casts sparkles a far off. No sparkles of strife and contention, no
wild fire of Sedition, to set on fire the Beacons in the Country, or to cause
a combustion in the City; but only to afford light and heat to others. Not
commanding Fire to come down from Heaven, to consume men, as the Disciples of
Christ transported with a Fiery zeal, called for, upon the heads of the
Samaritans after Elias example, Luke 9.54. but heaping coals of Fire upon men's
heads in St. Paul 's sense, Rom: 12.20. To soften and melt them into contrition
and conversion. And of such a kind of Fire that speech of our Savior may be
understood, Luke 12.49. I am come to send fire upon the earth, and what will I,
if it be already kindled. That is the fire which these Sormons bring along with
them, to enlighten knowledge and to inflame zeal; and to borrow Saint Paul's
Metaphor, 2 Timothy 1.6. (...). To blow up those dying sparkles, that lay covered
and raked up under the Embers of security.

And I shall send them into the World with the same charge wherewith Joseph
dismissed his Brethren, into the Land of Canaan, Genesis 45.24. See that ye fall
not out by the way. And with the Commission of Christ to his Disciples, Luke
10.5.6. Into what house soever ye enter, first say, peace be to this house: And
if the Son of peace be there, it shall rest upon it: If not it shall turn to
you again. And it is my earnest desire these Sermons may meet with such
peaceable affections and dispositions in their reception and entertainment, as
may answer the candor and calmness of spirit, wherewith they were composed and
written.

I conclude all with that savory and sweet Prayer of St. Augustine, wherewith
he concludes that great work of his, touching the Mystery of the Trinity;
August. de Trini^. lib. 15. cap. 28.
Domine Deus, quaecunque di^^ de ^uo, agnoscant and Tui: Si quae de ^^eo, and
ta ignosee, and Tui. O Lord God, whatsoever I have written that is thine, let
those who are thine acknowledge it: If any thing of mine own, let thou and
Thine be pleased to pardon it. So he prays, who remains

Thine in our common Savior, JOHN RAMSEY.

SYLLABVS CONCIONVM, OR A List of the Texts and Titles.
1. THe Growth of Tares, Matthew. 13.30. Let both grow together until the
Harvest. 2. Lapis Lydius, Or the Trial of Spirits, 1 John 4.1. Beloved, believe
not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they be of God: Because many
false Prophets are gone out into the world. 3. Agrippa, Or the Semi-Christian.
Acts 26.28. Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou perswadest me to be a
Christian. 4. The Inner Temple. 1 Cor. 3.17. For the Temple of God is Holy,
which ye are. 5. St. Paul's Tacticks. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. Now we beseech you
brethren, Warn them that are unruly, or disorderly. 6. The Politic
Reformation. Isa. 1.26. And I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy
Counselors as at the beginning. 7. The Usurpation of the Priesthood, Or the
scourge of Sacrilege. Numb. 16.38. The censers of these sinners against their
own souls, let them make them broad plates for a covering of the Altar: for
they offered them before the Lord, therefore they are hallowed. And they shall
be a sign unto the children of Israel. 8. The Christian Man's Task. Phil. 2.12.
Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. 9. Vnum Necessarium, Or
Charity is All in All. 1 Cor. 16.14. Let all your things be done with Charity.
THE GROWTH OF TARES.

A SERMON Preached at Kings Lynne in the County of Norfolk, in the Lecture
course.

Non propter malos boni deserendi, sed propter bonos mali tolerandi sunt.
August. Epist. 48. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creake. 1659.

THE GROWTH OF TARES.
MATTHEW. 13. v. 30. Let both grow together until the harvest.
THese words are a conclusion and close of a Parable (...). Suidas. Aenigma est
obscura Farabola, quae difficile intelligitur August. in Psalm. 46.
an aenigmatical and involved kind of speech, The Introduction.
and that borrowed and taken up from sensible and earthy things; which are more
connacural to the soul in the present state, being united and joined unto the
Body; wherein it conceives and receives nothing, but by the means and
subservient ministry of the outward Senses. Like unto shadows in Painting that
are tempered of obscure and dark colors; And yet add no less beauty and
brightness to the Picture, then those that are most fresh and orient: Or as
stars in the Firmament, that are the more condensed part of the Orb, and yet
the most proper seat and subject of the greatest light.

There is a double ground or reason of the use of Parables. A Double Use of
Parables.


1. First in respect of the wicked.
The one in resect of the wicked, to whom they are represented as the Pillar of
cloud, which was a cloud and darkness to the Egyptians. Therefore speak I to
them in Parables: Because they seeing, see not, and hearing, they hear not:
neither do they understand, Matthew. 13.13. Christ hereby excludes and shuts them
out as with bars and bolts, lest otherwise then should co^^mit a spiritual kind
of Burglary, by breaking into the knowledge of divine Mysteries. And so holds
them forth unto the world, as the Philosopher set forth his Books of
Acroamaticks; which were (...) Aristot.
Published in such a manner, that they were suppressed, and concealed.

2. Secondly in respect of the codly.
Another Use of Parables is in respect of the faithful, to whom they appear as
a Pillar of Fire, which gave light by night to the Israelites. The Explication
whereof opens the window to let in the light, breaks the shell that we may
eat the kerhel, removes the Cover of the Well, that we may come, by Water; and
puts aside the Curtain, that we may look into the holy Place.

Christ the eternal word of God, and essential wisdom of the Father, was very
frequent and familiarly conversant in a Parabolical instruction. Therein
verifying and fulfilling that of the Prophet, Matthew. 13.35. I will open my
mouth in parables. Nor shall we need to renew or take up St. Austines wish
touching the Parable in the Text, Vtinam qui os suum operuit in Parabolis ipsus
etiam Parabolas aperiret. August.
Would to God that he who opened his mouth in Parables, would be pleased to
open the Parables themselves. This is already done by Christ; who first lays
down, the Protasis, and then gives in the Apodosis; Propounding the parable
from the 24. ver. to the 31. And afterward expounding it from the 38. to the
43. verse.

The Words contain in them Christ's command and counsel to the servants of the
householder, who being astonished and amazed at the sight of the Tares, Sir
did thou not sow good seed in the Field? Ver. 27.
From whence then has it Tares? And being inflamed with a zealous and ardent
desire of purging and clensing the field of the Lord. Will thou then that we
go, and gather them? v. 28. Christ hints them a caveat and a countermand, Nay,
Quia separatio sine exterminio fieri non potest, ne dum evellitur quod opus non
est conculcetu^ quod opus est. Optat. lib. ^. (...), (...). Varinus. (...).
Suidas in (...).
lest while ye gather up the Tares, ye root up also the Wheat with them, v. 29.
And here in the Text commends unto them this general Rule of Advise, thereby to
inform and instruct, to curb and check them in their precipitate and headlong
courses, Let both grow together until the harvest.

There is not any word in the Text that stands in need of opening or clearing,
but only that of (...) or Tares The Etymology whereof some would fetch from
the love of the corn: Others draw it from the hurt of the corn, (...), as
Suidas has it, The corruption of the good seed. And so many are the
conjectures and guesses at the reason of the word, that we may well propound
the self same question, touching the derivation, which was moved by the
servants concerning the cause of their growth unde hoec zizanta. From whence
are these Tares?

And whereas our English Translation, expresses the original Zizania by the
name of Tares and Fitches; which are a formal seed and distinct grain of it
self, that are presently descried and pulled up, and may fitly signify the
condition of professed Schismatics and open Heretics. The word should rather
be rendered Evil seed, that which we called blasted corn, or Deaf Ears;
whereunto carnal-Gospellers and outside Hypocrites are assimilated and
resembled; which cannot be discerned or distinguished, much less severed or
separated from the good Corn; But according to our Saviors counsel to the
Servants in the Text: Both must grow together until the Harvest.

The Parts of the Text are Two.

1. The Subjects in the Word (...), Both, That is, The Division of the Text.
Wheat and Tares.

2. The Adjunct, And that is Threefold.

1. The first Motus, in the verb (...), They both grow. 2. The second Locus, in
the Preposition (...), They both grow together. 3. The third Tempus, The Time
of their growth (...), until the Harvest.
But I shall cast the words into another mould and model, Six Propositions
considerable in the Text.
and anal, se and resolve the whole bulk and Body of the Text, into six general
Propositions.

1. The different nature of the godly and wicked, resembled by Wheat and Tares.
2. The impurity and imperfection of the visible Church, consisting of good and
bad, as the same field contains wheat and Tares. 3. The confused mixture and
cohabitation of good and bad in the visible Church, They are both together. 4.
The Temporal prosper ty and felicity of good and bad, They both grow alike. 5
The Time and Term of the flourishing estate of the wicked. It is but until the
Harvest. And this until, is both a Note of Determination, and Termination: Till
then; It does not end before: Till then, it does not continue after. 6. The
true and proper reason of the being, growth, and continuance of the Wicked; And
that is Christ's sufferance and toleration. (...), Suffer both to grow together
until the harvest.
I shall take them up as they lay in order. And first, of the first.

1. The first Proposition.
The different nature of good and bad resembled by Wheat and Tares.

The purblind world judges all things amiss and observes no inequality or
disparity among the sons of men. Homo homini quid praestat? stulto intelligens
quid interest say they, with him in the comedy? What difference in point of
excellency, betwixt one man and another? But if we consult with the Oracle of
God, that resolves us to the contrary. The righteous is more Excellent then his
neighbor, Prove. 12.26.

And i^ there be any creature of greater transcendency then the rest, it seems
to illustrate their dignity by way of similitude and comparison. As being the
Lilly among Flower. The Dove among Fowls. Gold among Me^tals. And wheat among
grain, both for the worth and weight of it

A fit Emblem of the Faithful, who are the chief and choice of men, even as
Wheat bears the greatest price and value among grain.

And the worth of the faithful appears in their weight, in in regard of their
stedfastness and stability, their constancy and continuance, which are no way
moved, much less removed with the gusts and blasts of temptation. Even as Wheat
which is a ponderous and a heavy substance, is not carried away with the force
and violence of the wind: Cyprian de unit. Eccles. Sect. 8.
Nemo putet bonos, de Ecclesia posse discedere. Triticum non rap t ventus,
says St. Cyprian. But as for the ungodly, they are as Tares, or blasted Ears;
Tares for their emptiness, whose heart is utterly destitute of grace and
goodness; even as blasted Ears have no inward pith nor substance, no food nor
foison in them: and Tares be for their lightness Avole^t quantum volent Paleae
levis fidei, quocunque afflatu tentationum, eo purior massa frumenti, in horrea
domini reponetur. Tertul. de Praeser. adver. Haeret. Inanes Paleae. Cypr. ibid.
Paleae levis fidei, as Tertullian styles them, and so subject to fly away,
being hurried to and fro with every puff of wind. The Southern wind of favor
and preferment, which blows upon them with a gentle and pleasing blast, and
though in it self it be but an evil wind, yet in their opinion it blows them to
good. The blustering and boisterous North winds, of trial and persecution: Each
of these winds, whether it blows from the North or South, does easily carry
away these light and empty Tares out of the Church. And those our Savior he
sets forth under the similitude of Tares, or blasted Ears in the Parable of
the Text. And that in opposition to the Wheat, thereby importing their
unprofitable and worthless nature. Such is the difference betwixt good and bad,
as betwixt Wheat and Tares.

2. The impurity and imperfection of the visible Church, The second Proposition.
consisting of good and bad, even as the same field contains both Wheat and
Tares.

The name of the Church is no univocal word, wherein there is an agreement both
of Name and Nature; but an aequivocal voice, where things of a most different
nature communicate in the same name. I speak not this of the Jesuits, who in
respect of their execrable doctrine of their mental reservations and
aequivocations are fitly styled aequivocal, Christians: But of the external
members of the visible Church, the greater part whereof are only commended by
the titular profession of Christianity, as an empty sign and shadow, and yet
want the thing signified, and are utterly destitute of the substance. And as
the name of the Church is no univocal, but aequivocal voice, so the Church it
self is no Homogeneal, but an Heterogeneal body: not like unto the similar
parts of men, Blood, Spirits, or the like, each portion whereof is suitable,
and agreeable to the whole: But resembling the organical parts, as a Leg or
Arm, which consists of Skin, Flesh, Bones and Marrow, And these far different
from each other. There are three several places in the world, Heaven, Hell, and
Earth. In Heaven above there are none but perfectly good, the blessed society
of Saints and Angels. In Hell beneath, none but irrecoverably wicked, the
cursed crew of damned spirits. But the visible Church upon Earth is a middle
place and state betwixt both; a confused mixture and medley both of good and
bad; like unto Noah's Ark, wherein were cooped up both clean and unclean beasts:
A wide drag-net that closes not only profitable fish, but worthless weeds and
beggary. A common Inn (...), a receptacle for all comers. A great House which
affords vessels of gold and silver, and some other of wood and earth, 2 Timothy
2.20. A Barn or threshing Floor where corn and chaff lie covered in the same
heap, Mot. 3.12. And here in the Text, A vast and open Field, that brings forth
Wheat and Tares. And as it was said of Hantbals Army, Colluvies omnium gentium:
So is the visible Church a promiscuous Company, and Congregation; a rabble and
a rapsody of all sorts; corrupt Heretics, who deprave the verity of the faith;
supercilious and factious Schismatics, that deprive and destr^y the unity of
the Church; disguised and masked Hypocrites: mere Scepticks in their opinion;
Hybrides in their profession; Amphibia in their conversation, like unto those
flying fishes in America, that live sometimes in the water, and sometimes in
the air, and are ill accepted in both places; the ravenous fishes being ready
to devour them below, and the Sea fowls continually beating them above. And
last of all, men openly profane and vicious, (...) Ignat, Epist. ad Magnes,
(...) Ignat ibid.
Ignatius reduces the several sorts of men in the visible Church to two Heads;
and observes the same difference among men, that is to be found in coin, (...);
whereof some is true and sound, such as can endure the Touch; the other is
false and counterfeit: Holy men are God's coin that bear his image and
superscrip ion; But as for pro^^ne and wicked men they are adulterate deceitful
and corrupt ^oyn, that are minted and stamped by the Devil. It is St.
Chryso^^omes observation upon the 23. of Saint Matth^w that there is somewhat
bred and born in every creature that wastes and consumes the substance. The
soundest Timber engenders worms; the finest Garments give life to Moths: The
most wholesome Herbs bring forth small flies, that fret them in pieces. Neither
fares it otherwise with the Church of God upon Earth, that conceives and
carries in her womb full sore against her will Pharisaical and formal
Hypocrites, licentious and lewd livers, and at last brings them forth viper like
to the destruction of the mother. This cannot seem strange to any that
intentively considers the frame and fashion of the In omni condition optimis
miara sunt pessima. Hieron. ad Rust.
world. There is a refuse generation, an Heterogencal company, an unequal and
unsound mixture even in the Church, and cannot be avoided Nazianz. Orat 21. in
Laud. Athanas.
(...) says ^reg. Nazianzen. The Church is God's yineyard and pleasant plant,
yet it has some briars and brambles that grow upon it. A cursed Came in Noah's
posterity. A scoffing Ishmael in Abraham's family. And Judas the Traitor, a
Devil, as our Savior styles him. A Devil incarnate as it was said of John the
22. and that not in Hell which is his proper place; but in Heaven upon Earth
the Church of God the School of Christ's disciples. For though the Church be
(...) a company of men called out of the world, yet is this calling different
in the nature, and diversified in the effects.

There are some that are called both outwardly and inwardly by the Ministry of
the word, and by the attractive power and energie of the Spirit which dra^s men
that they may run after it as the Spouse pruyeth, Cant. 1.3. And there are
others that are eah'd outwardly only by the sound of the Gospel, which though
it is the power of God unto salvation, yet it does borrow his force and
efficacy from the concomitance and assistance of the Spirit.

The former of these are not only invited to the participation of God's saving
grace, but convicted and persuaded in their judgments, and inclined to
obedience. Whom when God prevents with his gracious tall, Seek ye my face, they
forthwith Ecca back again his voice, thy face Lord will I seek, Psalm. 27.8. The
latter are indeed invited on God's part to come unto the Heavenly Marriage; yet
do they not answer it in an obediential manner, but pretend and plead excuses
with them in the Gospel, and will not come at his call. If their it be the call
of God that affords both name and nature to the Church, which being a divine
action, works differently according to the different disposition of the
receivers: no marvel there is such a diversity and contrariety among the
members.

There is not a Pomegrunate, wherein there are not some rotten grains, Nor a
Church here on Earth which is not in some part putrified and corrupted. Nullum
corpus sine suis excrementis. It is the censure of Gretser the Jesuit, of his
order, Never was there a Body without his Excrements. Nor is it more true of
the Natural, Grets. de stud. Jesuit, abstrac, cap. 5.
then of the Body of Christianity. And in vain did the Donarists of old, with
the Anabaptists and Brownists of later Times project this Platform to
themselves, An airy a speculative, a Notional, and not a National Church; which
as it was devised by the strength of fancy and mere imagination, so it never
had any other being and existence; but in their own Brains.

A Platonical kind of Church, like unto Plato's Commonwealth, wherein Plato
alone was said to live: A Church like unto Xenophon's Cyrus; described not as
he was, but as he should be. A Church that is pure and sound in all the parts,
where there are no notorious offenders, no dissolute or disordered persons
within the pale. What is this but to dream of impossibilities? to expect a
perfection in the place of imperfection? To hope for Heaven here upon Earth? To
look for a field without tares? and to take away the (...), the very subject of
the Text? Numquid in agro dici^^^^st. quid pa^^is ad t^^ticum quaudo e^ them
radice pertantur? numquid in area, ubi pariter triturantur? sed utique in
Horreo, quid paleis ad Triticum? August. co ^^. Epist. Parmen. Lib. 13. cap. 3.
The Third Proposition.
It is the privilege of Heaven as of God s Granary to receive whent only
without chaff: In the Field they grow together: In the Floor they are threshed
together, and the separation is not made till they come to the Granary; which
leads me to the third and next point in order.

The confused mixture and cohabitation of good and bad in the visible Church;
They are both together.

The Church and people of God as it is a soclety that is called out of the
world in respect of the Spiritual state and condition: so is it resident and
abiding in the world in regard of the natural place. And Christ prayed not for
the translation but the proservation of his disciples. I pray not that thou
should take them out of the world, but that thou keep them from evil, John
17.15. The world is in the Church; and the Church is in the world; which is
both a fragrant Rose with sharp prickles for the inward corruption of its own
nature: August. in Psalm. 99.
And a beautiful Li^ie among the Thorns, for the outward and circumstant
wickedness of the place. Like a li^ie among thorns, so is my love among the
daughters, Cant. 2.2. Non dixit in medio alienarum, sed in medio Piliarum,
says Saint Augustine. Christ's love dwells not in the midst of strangers, but
amongst the daughters. And the f^rce and reason of the resemblance consists in
these three particulars. First, the Church of Christ which is his love is a
Li^ie for the excellency both of sweetness and comeliness, in the color and
figure of it.

2. The Daughters are children of the same Mother the Church, though they have
not the same God for their Father; They are as Thorns.

1. For their malignity whose property is to prick and draw blood

2. Thorns for their sterility and larrenness bearing no fruit of worth and
hindering fruit in others.

3. And Thor^^s too for their end to be cast into the fire.

3. And as the Lilly grows among thorns, so is Christ's love, his Church seated
amidst these daughters, counterfeit and false professors. That speech of God,
call it a promise or a threatening (as you please) as it was merely temporal in
respect of the Israelires, so it is eternal and immutable as it concerns the
universal Church the Israel of God. Wherefore I said also, I will not cast them
out before you, but they shall be as Thorns in your sides, Judge. 2.3. God
permits and suffers his Lilly the Church to be environed and Hemmed in with
Thorns.

First for the exercise of their faith and patience, the quickening of their
obedience, provoking and pricking them on to good works; even as the Jews wore
Thorns in their phylacteries and fringes of their garments to admonish them of
the custody and keeping of the Law.

And Secondly for the reformation and conversion of the wicked, that the
Canaanite may become an Israelite, Thorns turned into lillies, and Tares made
good corn.

We may then observe from hence a double Corollarie or conclusion. A Double
Corollarie or conclusion. The First Corollarie.


First, the condition of God's people in this present world.

Secondly, the grievous misery and calamity of this their condition.

First, we may take notice of the condition of the people of God in this
present world. To be promiscuously blended with wicked men and unequally yoaked
with Infidels; Much like unto the state of the Church of France because of the
dinersity of religion; the dispersion of Papists and Hugonites throughout the
whole Kingdom is fitly compared to A Panthers or Leopards skin which is full of
all kind of spots. Such a speckled Beast is the visible Church upon Earth. For
though there be no communion betwixt light and darkness in theniselves; yet is
the light of saving truth, and the darkness of error, and superstition,
confounded in the firmament of the Church, as light and darkness are mixed in
the Air.

Though no fellowship be betwixt righteousness and unrighteousness in their
nature, yet is there a society in place, we may and must separate from the
fornicators of the world, covetous, extortioners and Idolaters, both in
affection and action: yet can we not separate and quit our selves of the place,
unless we should follow Saint Paul's direction and go out of the world, 1 Cor. 5
10. Let then the giddy Separatists who first run out of their wits, and then
out of the Church; let these I say travel into the remotest parts of the world
and beyond the course of the Sun; ultra Garamantas and Indos: to find out such
a Church as is without spot or wrinkle: wrinkle in doctrine: spot in manners,
which Christ indeed purchased with his death, August. lib. 1. Retract. ca. 19.
and lib. 2. cap. 18.
non quod jam sit talis, sed quod praeparetur ut sit talis: As Austin glosses
upon the place, Ephesians. 5.27. yet unless they can fly from themselves, as well
as they abandon the company of others, they shall never be free of sinners. And
they must have a special heed lest while they mutter any thing secretly with
themselves, they talk not with a wicked person. And if there be any like unto
Saint Paul's Mariners who in a tempestuous storm go about to fly out of the
ship of the Church, and let down a Boat into the Sea under a colorable
pretense of casting Anchor, whereby the Ship should be more steadfast, and so
sail into foreign parts. I will only advise them in Saint Paul's words to the
centurion and the soldiers; Except these abide in the Ship ye cannot be safe,
Acts 27.30, 31. Yet let no man think I limit salvation to any Topical or
particular Church, or have any oblique glance or gird at any of our Brethren,
who out of a religious intention of enlargement and propagation of the Gospel,
and conversion of poor pagan Insidels, have changed their Church and Climate: I
rather accompany them with my most affectionate and hearty prayers; yea, with
David's wishes for Jerusalem, Psalm. 122.7, 8, 9. Peace be within thy walls and
prosperity within thy palaces. For my Brethren and companions sake I will now
say pence be within thee, because of the House of the Lord our God, I will
procure thy wealth. My speech only aims and drives at new fangled Separatists,
who out of a dislike if not a detestation of the present Church, as if the case
thereof was not only deplorate but desperate: casting away the whole apple
with the Hermits friend, for some few specks of rottenness. Or out of an
ungrounded hope of devising or finding ready molded to their hand such a
Church as is free from errors and enormities: schismatically divide and cut
themselves off from the unity of that Body whereof they were late members.

These are the men to whom I recommend more Christian charity and Spiritual
wisdom: And turn them over to the preposition ^^ in the words of the Text for
information and conviction both at once. Suffer them both to grow tegether.

Secondly, The Second Corollary.
we may from hence collect the matchless miseries of God's people in this
present world, whose souls are among it Lions as the Psalmist sometimes
complained, Psalm. 57.4. Like unto Daniel in the Lions Den; who are necessitated
to converse and to have at least a civil commerce and intercourse with the Sons
of Belial: And have just cause to bewail and bemoan their case in the words of
David, Psalm. 120.5. Woe is me that I remain in Meshech, and dwell in the Tents
of Kedar: A double woe of God's people in this world.
And there is a double woe that attends and waits upon God's Servants here
beneath.

First, The inward corruption of their own nature, being as a Rose that grows
up with sharp prickles, That there were Roses without prickles in Paradise was
the conceit of great St. Basil: Sure I am, there is no Rose of grace without
the prickles of corruption.

Secondly, The outward and concomitant wickedness of others, in that they are
as a Lilly among Thorns.

The Prophet Isaiah displays them both; and so may every child of God lament
them after his Example; Woe is me for I am undone, because I am a man of
polluted lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of polluted lips, Isa, 6.5.

They are not only polluted in their own persons but are circled and
encompassed with pollution on every side: And who is there that can refrain
from breaking forth into that pathetical and melting speech in this respect:
Woe is me for I am undone. Needs must it be as a deep taint and a fretting
corrosive to the hearts and spirits of God's people that there should be so
many outside Hypocrites in the Church, no better then Stage Players in
religion, and like unto that silly Stage Player who pronounced (...) with his
tongue and pointed unto the Earth with his finger: And so did (...), commit a
kind of Solaecisme and absurdity with his hand. And as it was said of one that
painted his Hair with a false color that he wore a lie in his head and was
guilty of Sophistery in his locks: So are there too too many of such deceitful
Sophisters even in the profession of godliness it self, who by their painting
and false colors, carry a lie not in their head but in their heart, being
inwardly nothing less then what they outwardly appear: Thereby starting and
staggering the judgments of those that are wavering and unstable, who are ready
hereupon to pass a peremptory and downright censure. Linacre on the 5.6.^.
cap. of Matthew.
Aut hoc non est Evangelium, aut isti non sunt Evangelici; Either this is not
the Gospel, or these are not true Gospellers. And opening the mouths of other,
to speak evil of the way of the Lord; to jest and gape and thrust out their
Tongues against profession and purity it self. And because all is not gold that
glisters, they from hence take occasion to reject and condemn the most orient
and shining color of the purest gold; Needs must it be as a racking pain and
torture, yea as the torments of Hell to God's faithful Servants. The word
signifies no less, and so it proved unto just Lot. (...), 2 Pet. 2 8, He racked
and tortured and tormented his righteous soul in Sodom, as if he had been in
Hell it self, in seeing and hearing their unlawful deeds. And where shall we
find a Lot either without his Sodom or without racking the joints of his soul
with inward grief and sorrow: To hear the blasphemy of the common multitude in
every street which makes their ears to tingle, who by their cursed oaths in
each Fair and Market crucify the Lord of life the second time, open his
wounds, cause his blood to stream forth a fresh; yea, rend and tear asunder his
sacred Body? Like unto a company of Bloodhounds or Hellhounds rather having
seized upon a poor Hare, which they soon dispatch, and pull one joint from
another. That the lascivious and lustful livers should defile the Temples of
the Holy Spirit, and make the members of Christ the members of an Harlot. That
the voluptuous and sensual Glutton, the swinish Drunkard, should ordinarily
abuse the good creatures of God to riot and excess, making their bodies no
other then Cribra ciborum and potuum. Senec.
Colanders and strainers for meats and drinks, mere graves to bury both the
creatures and themselves alive, and even dig their Graves with their Teeth. And
who is there among the people of God that does seriously consider and lay to
heart their calamity that they are even constrained not only to breath in the
same open air, but to abide in the same Church with such men or beasts rather,
and renews not this sad and mournful complaint of David, Woe is me that I
remain in Meshech and have my habitation in the Tents of Kedar? How should this
inflame the hearts of the faithful with an uncessant and unsatisfied desire of
removing out of this world; of exchanging the company of wicked and ungodly for
the Spirits of just and perfect men, the Society of Saints and Angels! How
should this provoke and excite them to a vehement and earnest longing of being
Members in the Church Triumphant, and of sharing in the accomplishment of that
promise, Cant 4.8. Come with me from Lebanon (my spouse) even with me from
Lebanon, and look from the Top of Amana, from the Top of Shenir and Hermon,
from the Dens of the Lions, and from the mountains of the Leopards. A threefold
promise that Christ passes unto his Church.

1. Of Delivery. 2. Of Victory. 3. Of Safety.
1. A promise of delivery out of the world: Lebanon which is a part of it being
put for the whole.

2. A promise of victory whereby the Church shall be exalted upon the Tops of
the highest Hills and shall triumphantly look upon her vanquished enemies, that
shall be trodden under feet.

3. A promise of safety from Lions and Leopards cruel and blood-thirsty men,
and from dissembling and colored Hypocrites that have as many contrary forms
and guises as a Leopards skin has spots. Saint Austin reports of his mother
Monica, that having discoursed and reasoned together of the joys of Heaven, she
being ravished with the consideration of them, sent forth this ejaculation as a
Harbinger to Heaven before her, August. Conf. lib. 9. cap. 10.
Fili quantum ad me attinet, nulia jam re delector in hac vita. Quid hic faciam
adhuc? and cur hic sim nescio? I am delighted with nothing of this life. And
what do I? and why am I here? Hieron. Epist.
And Saint Hierom relates of the Monks in Egypt, that when they heard any
mention of the Kingdom of Christ and of the glory of the life to come, they all
stole a secret sigh, and lifting up their eyes to Heaven, repeated the words of
the Psalmist, Psalm. 55.6. Quis dabit mihi pennas sicut columbae? O that I had
the wings of a Dove, then would I flee away, and be at rest. And why should not
the meditation of this worlds misery, in regard of the association of the godly
with the wicked, beget in us the same desire, that the apprehension of the
glory of Heaven wrought in them? why should it not move us to fly to Heaven?
not with the wings of a Dove, but with our ardent wishes and devout affections,
which are the wings of the Soul: Why should we not long after the end of the
world, when Christ will gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and
them that do iniquity. When he will pluck up these Tares by the roots which
till then must of necessity grow together. And this is the fourth point that
falls in course.

4. The Temporal prosperity and felicity of good and bad; They both grow alike.
The Fourth Proposition.
The things of this life are neither morally good nor evil, but of an
indifferent and middle nature, and indifferently dispensed to all sorts of men:
Vt nec mala turpiter evitentur, That neither the crosses thereof should be
abhorred as sins, wherein thebest of God's Servants have their greatest share
and portion: Nec bona cup^dius appetantur. Nor the comforts thereof too too
eagerly desired and coveted; whereof the most profane and wicked are
proprietaries and possessors. Sometimes God pours forth with a liberal hand,
and heaps those external blessings in an abundant incasure upon the heads of
the righteous, as he did upon Constantinum Imperatorem tantis teirenis implevit
muneribus, quanta optare nullus auderet. August. de Civ. Dei, lib. 5. c. 25.
Constantine the great; so that it is the height of boldness and presumption
for any man to pray for the like. It is the expression of St. Austin. And yet
for the most part, the men of the world who have their portion in this life (as
the Psalmist describes them) surpass and outstrip the godly in this respect.
The Tares stand boult-upright with an high and a lofty Top; when as the good
corn hangs down the head, and is bowed to the ground: I have seen the wicked
strong and spreading himself like a green Bay Tree. It is David's observation,
Psalm. 37.35. Tanquam arbor indigena virens, as Junius renders it out of the
original. As a Tree that grows out of the soil of the earth of its own accord,
whereof the earth is the natural mother, and so more indulgent in affording it
plenty of juice and moisture, Then unto those whereof she is an hard or unkind
stepmother, and planted by the hand of another. This resemblance we find in
nature, and we need not seek far for the like in the course of the world; even
as in the structure of a house, the chimney is designed to the meanest office,
the conveiance of the smoke; And yet it is the highest part of the building and
overtops the whole frame. And as a Feather is a light substance and of little
or no worth, save only in estimation, and yet placed above the head: Just so
the most wicked and unworthy amongst men, are exalted and advanced to the
highest pitch of earthly dignity; Minut. Foelix Octavius, pa. 15.
ut in pluribus nescias utrum sit corumi detestanda pravitas, an optanda
foelicitas said Minutius Foelix. That it is hard to say for the greater part
whether a man should rather detest their impiety or envy their felicity. There
is a double Abyssus or unfadomable depth in religion:

1. The depths of predestination, or God's eternal decrees and counsels.

2. And the depths of his temporal providence in the administration of the
world, whereof this is one, the growth of these Tares, the outward prosperity
of the wicked; And may justly move us to take the Apostles exclamation (...) O
the depth. And if we will give credit to St. Austin, Revera nullum mare tam
profundum est quam est cogitatio rei, ut mali floreant and boni laborent. Nihil
tam altum, ubi nauf^agat omnis insidelis, Aug. in Psalm. 91.
there is no se a so deep as to dive into the serious consideration of the
flourishing state of sinners, and the calamitous condition of the Saints. And
in this sea every unbeliever makes ship wrack. This was it that caused many to
turn downright Atheists and to say in their hearts there is no God; Others to
prove gross Idolaters, and to imagine a plurality and a multiplicity of Gods; A
good and a bad. And that the Book of Exodus was no part of Canonical Writ, nor
inspired by a good God; for that it makes report of the misery of the
Israelites in the wilderness. (...). Leontius, de Sanctis.
It is not the part and property of a good God, to bring his people out of
Egypt, and to afflict, and correct them, after their deliverance. Yea, this was
it, that well near tript up the heels of David, though a strong and a stout
Saint: And so far nonplu'st and posed holy Jeremy, that he was very earnest to
enter the lists of disputation with God himself Wherefore does the way of the
wicked prosper? why are all they in wealth that rebelliously transgress? Jer.
12.1. Here the Israelites make the Bricks, and the Egyptians dwell in the
Houses. David is in want, and Nabal abounds. Sion is Babylons Captive: what
has God nothing in fore for Joseph but the sticks? for Isaiah but a saw? will
not Elish adorn the Chariot better then the Juniper Tree? will not John
B^^tists Head become a Crown as well as a platter? But mull his head be needs
tript often with Herodias heels? what may we inser from hence, but the positive
conclusion of the Psalmist, Psalm. 58.11. Vveril there is a reward for the
righteous in the life to come, when God will render them good measure, pressed
down, shaken together and running over into their bosom, Luke 6.38. (...),
good measure for the nature of the reward (...) pressed down for the matter
like unto corn in a Bushel, (...) shaken together for the manner of it, even as
corn which couches so much the closer for the shaking, whereof Husbandmen are
very careful in the delivery of their corn; (...) running over for the measure,
as a vessel that is brim full runs over; (...) into their bosom, that so they
shall be experimentally sensible in their own hearts of God's bounty in their
retribution. What other inference can any man draw out of the former premises,
But that there is such a reward for the righteous: And that the present
prosperity and felicity of the wicked as it is temporal for the nature, so it
is but temporary for duration. Though the Tares grow, yea overgrow the good
corn, yet it is but until the Harvest. And that is the fifth point that
naturally and necessarily follows, and treads upon the heels of the former.

5. The Fifth Proposition.
The time and term of the flourishing estate of the wicked: until the harvest;
which is both a note of determination and termination, Till then; it does not
end before: Till then it does not continue after. What this Harvest is, our
blessed Savior the best Expositor of his own Text, resolves us in the Sequel
of the Chapter. The Harvest is the end of the world, verse 39. which is here
compared to a Harvest, and that in Three respects.

1. Propter Segetis desectionem. 2. Propter Segetis collectionem. 3. Propter
Segetis Trituram. 1. For the cutting down of the corn. 2. For the gathering in
of the corn. 3. For the threshing out of the corn.
And this threefold resemblance betwixt the Harvest and the end of the world
sets forth unto us a double and different estate of the godly and the wicked. A
double state of the godly and wicked.


1. The one of utter ruin and destruction of the wicked. under the similitude
of the cutting down and threshing out of corn: who shall then be cut down with
a sharp sickle of his just vengeance, and beaten in pieces (as corn that is
threshed) by the instruments of indignation.

2. The other of quiet repose and rest; the safety and security of the godly,
under the Parable of gathering in of corn: who in this Harvest, shall be
gathered out of the world, and gathered into their Fathers House, the
repository of Heaven wherein there are many mansions; even as corn in the time
of Harvest is gathered into the Barn.

As therefore there is a confused mixture, a cohabitation an equal or rather an
unequal growth of Tares and wheat in the field of the world; So shall there be
a general Harvest of good and bad at the end of it. That law which God
established with Noah after the flood as an unchangeable and a perpetual
ordinance in the course of nature; Seed time and Harvest shall not cease so
long as the earth remains, Genesis 8.22. The very self-same law has God enacted
with the sons of men touching the dispensation of his justice, in the
distribution of rewards and punishments. There shall be a Harvest for both, and
that proportionable to the different nature and quality of the seed; wherein
whatsoever a man sows that shall he also reap. He that sows to the flesh shall
of the flesh reap corruption. And he that sows to the spirit shall of the
spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6.7 Hail then ye servants of the Lord, cheer
up your drooping and dismayed spirits, lift up your hands that hang down and
your weak knees ye that now eat bread of affliction and drink the water of
affliction with Micaiah; that eat ashes for bread and mingle your drink with
weeping, after the manner of David. Ye that now sow in tears shall reap in joy;
ye that now go forth weeping (and it matters not though the seed time be
somewhat moist, so the Harvest prove dry) and carry precious seed shall return
with joy and bring your sheaves with you, Psalm 126.5.6. What though the light
of God shines bright and clear upon the forehead and about the Tabernacle of
the wicked, while ye in the mean time are hanged up like Bottles in the smoke,
and cast into bycorners like the shreds of a a broken pot. They sing to the
Lute and see their children dance before them; whereas your hearts are heavy in
your bodies as lead, your sighs beat as thick as a swift pulse; and water your
couch with your tears. They wash their paths in butter, and their Tables are
full furnished day by day: But earth and ashes are your bread; yet comfort your
selves ye seed of the righteous with the settled expectation of a Harvest,
wherein ye shall rejoice according to the joy of Harvest; as the Prophet Isaiah
speaks, yea, comfort ye, comfort ye your hearts against the Fret of the
ungodly, the present prosperity of the wicked: Learn to laugh them to scorn
(after the example of the most high) for that you see that their day is coming,
Psalm. 37.13. when it shall be verified of them which the Prophet affirms of
Babylon, Jer. 51.33. The daughter of Babel is like a threshing floor. The time
of her threshing is come: yet a little while and the time of her Harvest shall
come. It is Gregory's speech in his morals upon Job, occasioned by an elegant
and exact description of the happiness of the ungodly, Job 21. from the 6. to
the 13. verse, Greg. in Job.
O Job been enumer asti vitam impiorum, dic finem quaeso? Thou have set forth
to the life the life of the wicked, Tell us I pray thee what is their end? And
he supplies and furnishes himself with an answer out of the next words. They
spend their days in wealth, and suddenly they go down into the Grave, v. 13. If
any propound and move the like question that have hitherto heard of the growth
of these Tares, and are pensive and disconsolate at the hearing of it; dic
finem quaeso, what is the end of these Tares? and what abides them in time of
Harvest? let such take their answer from the mouth of Christ in the words after
the Text. And in time of Harvest I will say to the reapers; Gather ye f^r^ the
Tares, and bind them in sheaves to burn them. This is their end. An end without
end; and so I am fallen upon the Sixth and last point.

6. The Sixth Proposition.
The true and proper reason of the being, growth, and continuance of the
wicked; and that is Christ's rance and toleration; Suffer both to grow together.

This (...) or suffer, has a double reference. (...) or suffer, has a double
reference.


First to Christ, the Householder or owner of the field, who utters the words,
Suffer, and therein presents himself, as a precedent and pattern for their
imitation.

Secondly the servants of the Householder, who complained of the springing up of
the Tares; Master, sowed ^ thou not good seed in thy field? from whence then
has it Tares? ver. 23. And so it serves as a rule of instruction, to suffer
them after his example.

First this (...) or suffer, has reference to Christ the Householder, First, to
Christ the Householder.
or owner of the field.

The will of God is as single and simple as his nature; yet is it expressed and
signified by general signs: as both Lombard, and Aquinas teach.

1. His precept, council, and operation in respect of good.

2. His prohibition, and permission of Evil; So that sufferance is an act of
God's will concerning sin, which he neither commands, nor counsels, nor brings
to pass. But prohibits, and yet gives way to both at once.

Of all the mysteries of Religion, Praecipit, ac prohibet, permittit, consulit,
implet.
there is none more intricate and involved; There is not a more vexed question
and disquisition, than that which respects Gods concourse in sinful actions;
wherein there is equal danger of running into each extreme, either by laying an
attainder upon divine justice, who is purity and holiness it self, and is not a
God that loves wickedness, as David speaks, Psalm. 5.4. as if he were any way
guilty, or accessory to our sins: or by charging and challenging of Gods
providence, as if he were a bare spectator and over-seer, who by his All-seeing
Eye did only foresee things to come; but by any active power did no way
interpose and intermeddle in our affairs. And the reconciling of both these
together, the clearing Gods Justice and Providence, in this particular, is a
point of no less difficulty than importance. And this one word in the Text,
(...), or suffer, does compromise the difference, and as an indifferent Vmpire,
or Moderator, equally determines and states the question for both attributes.

For, first, Christ suffers these Tares, not involuntarily or against his will,
which would argue either ignorance or impotency, and want of power; but in a
voluntary and willing manner: concurring as an universal cause to the
sustentation of the creature; to the natural being of their sinful actions,
though not to the moral defect and sinfulness. And yet ordering their sins to
his own ends, the manifestation of his glory, both of his Justice and Mercy, by
his overruling and all-disposing providence.

Secondly, though Christ suffers, yet he only suffers the children of the
wicked; he does not inwardly excite and move them unto sin; not outwardly
prescribe and command it in his word; not operatively effect or work; nor
approve and allow it being once committed. All which are so many arguments of
the holiness of his nature, and the exquisiteness of his Justice. Christ
suffers the Tares willingly, and therein gives testimony to his Providence; but
he only suffers, he is not the Author, that shows his Justice.

If then we desire and seek resolution in the point, touching the proper and
direct cause of evil, we shall not find it like unto the River Nilus, the head
whereof could not be discovered. Nor need we rack and torture our thoughts with
Saint Austin in a busy and too too curious inquisition, which moved him to
turn Manichee. But we may resolve it into the liberty of man's will, as the only
impulsive and effcient cause of his own sin; void indeed of any inward
principle of corcuption, and endowed with sufficiency of gifts and abilities to
resist temptation, and yet mutable in his state and condition: into the wily
subtilty and spiteful malice of the Devil, as the procatartical and moving
cause, outwardly inviting and inveagling him with his suggestions; And into the
free pormission of the will of God, leaving man in the hand of his own council,
and to the managing of his inbred liberty, either in the election of good or
evil; and so suffering it to come to pass.

And by this sufferance of God it is, as a just reason of the being, though not
from it as a procuring and producing cause, that sin entered at the first, and
as yet continues in the world. Christ lets the Tares spring and grow, in that
he does not let them; for though God evermore hinders sin by his Justice, and
opposes a spiritual impediment thereunto; the prohibitions and communications
of his word; like unto the Angel that appeared unto Balaam with a drawn sword
in his hand to cross him in his way; yet God does not always hinder sin by his
power, and make use of a natural impediment in denying the assistance of his
Providence, or in restraining and cutting them short in the act of sin: as when
he contracted and shrunk the sinews of Jerobeams Arm, which being once
stretched forth to lay violent hands upon the Prophet, he was utterly disabled
from pulling it in again. Neither need we make search for any other reason of
Gods proceedings than the short and modest answer of the School. In particular
administration, a provident Ruler prevents (what lies in him) all
inconveniences; but in the universal government of the world, it seemed best
to divine wisdom to suffer some evil, not for want of power to hinder it, but
out of his abundant goodness.

Miro and ineffabili modo non fit praeter Dei voluntatem, quod etiam contra
ejus voluntatem sit. Quia nec fieret nisi sineret, nec utique nolens: Nec
sineret bonus fieri male, nisi etiam omnipotnes de malo facere possit been.
Augustine. Enchirid ad Laurentium.
And God who is infinite both in goodness and power, has thought it more
expedient, and conducing to the illustration of his glory to bring good out of
evil, then not to permit or suffer it to be at all. And as he suffers it to
enter, so to continue in the world till the men of corrupt minds dispute
against his providence, quarrel his justice, blasphemously gainsay the truth
of the Divinity, and conclude with David's Fool, There is no God. Tertul. de
Patient. cap. 2.
Plures Dominum idcirco non credunt quia tamdiu saeculo iratum nesciunt, says
Tertullian; This tamdiu or length of time extends and reaches unto the end of
the world: Sin and the world are of an age for their birth and beginning; and
they have the self same end and period. And as our Savior informs us in the
words of the Text; Let both grow together until the Harvest. Christ suffers the
Tares so long; and therein presents himself in his own person as a pattern for
our imitation.

Secondly, Secondly, to the servants of the Householder.
this (...) or suffer has reference to the servants of the Householder, who
complained of the springing up of the Tares: being directed unto them as a rule
of direction in the case, to suffer them by his example. And so it may be
considered in a double manner. And so considered in a double manner.


First, as a rational counsel and advice touching Tares in the generality.

Secondly, as a peremptory and strict command in respect of particular Tares
and offenses.

First, First, as a Rational counsel touching tares in the general.
this word (suffer) may be conceived is a counsel to the Servants to permit,
though not allow those evil and enormities, errors in doctrine, corruption in
manners, which they can no way reform and remedy. Christ indeed suffers them
willingly, and out of the fullness of his power, which he might as easily
prevent as rectify: But as for the servants of Christ, they are constrained to
suffer them against their will, in regard of their impotency and disability,
both in the withstanding and removal of them. As for particular mischiefs and
grievances they are not, they ought not to be once endured.

There must be no toleration of several Religions and Professions in the same
State and Kingdom, which though a Politic Machiavilian may well approve as
useful and advantageous: And a Turkish Sultan account this diversity as
pleasing a sight and spectacie in the eye of his indifferent and neutral
judgment, as variety of flowers being pricked in the same Nosegay which make it
more sweet and beautiful; yet in this to plow with an Ox and an Ass, to sow
God's field with Meslain, and apparel the body of the Church with a Linsey
wolsey garment in a spiritual sense, and was therein especially forbidden unto
the Jows: yea, this is to endeavor a communion with light and darkness, and
accord with Christ and Belial; and with the silly Hermit of old, to mediate a
peace betwixt God and the Devil. There must be no toleration of Stews and
Brothel-Houses, Cages of unclean Birds in a Christian Commonwealth; which are
not only publicly professed and licensed in the Church and City of Rome by
the Popes Holiness, and under his nose; but are solemnly defended and
maintained Watson, lib. 2. Quodl. 4. Artic. page 31.
cum approbatione as lawful as any Citizen, Magistrate, order of Religion, or
the Pope himself, which Watson the Priest avoucheth to be the Tenet of no mean
Jesuit.

And this is one difference among many other, betwixt the Church of Christ, and
the Antichristian Synagogue of Satan; wherein vices are not only perpetrated
and committed, but privileged by authority, and observed with a kind of
religious reverence, Cypr. Epist. 2. cap. 3.
Fiunt miseris religiosa Delicta, as Saint Cyprian speaks of the Heathen;
whereas in the Church of Christ though the self sum vices are by some
entertained, yet do they not find either Patrons or Proctours to plend for
them; no Magistrate either supreme or subordinate, to establish them by a
royal Decree, or support them by their power; I say there is not any
particular evil that must in any case be tolerated: yet considering the
deplorable condition of this present world, which even lies in wickedness, 1
John 5.19. (...) it is under the power and dominion of the Devil as the word
imports. So that though superintendent Governors be never so vigilant by their
inspection and circumspection, never so active and zealous in execution; though
those Hydras heads of that Monster, sin, be never so often out off, yet new heads
arise fresh in the room, and many for one. There is an indispensable and
unavoidable necessity of an involuntary toleration of sin in the general, which
they cannot redress; and of suffering the Tares of iniquity (according to our
Saviors council) which they cannot with any possibility extirpate or root up.
Toleramus quae tollere non possumus; sed qui tolorat non amat, etsi tolerare
amat, says Saint Austin. They must tolerate what they cannot take away. And
albeit no man loves what he suffers, yet he loves for to suffer.

Secondly, Secondly as a peremptory command for particular Tares.
This word suffer as it has relation to the servants of the Householder, may be
considered as a peremptory and strict command to weed out and pluck up each
particular Tare to the utmost of their ability. And so it respects four sorts
of men.
And so it respects and reflects upon four sorts of men.

1. The civil Magistrate. 2. The ecclesiastical Judge. 3. The public
Minister. 4. The private Christian. 1. By the right managing of the sword of
Justice. 2. By the orderly use of the spiritual Keys, the just censures of the
Church. 3. By the religious ministration of the Word and Sacraments. 4. By
their devout Prayers and Tears.
First, First, the civil Magistrate; two manner of ways.
the civil Magistrate must do his best endeavor to weed out every Tare by the
right managing of the sword of Justice. And that two manner of ways.

First, by coaction and impulsion to the unity of the faith, having to deal
with refractory and pertinacious persons, and such as are obstinate, and
obdurate in their impiety.

Secondly, by inflicting capital punishment, upon those that are desperate and
incorrigible.

First, First by compelling men to the unity of the faith.
obstinate and obdurate sinners are to be compelled to the unity of the faith,
by the sword of the civil Magistrate.

Man indeed is a reasonable creature, and the Lord of his own actions. God had
not made us men, unless he had made us free. And this freedom shows it self
nowhere more then in point of Religion, Nihil est tam voluntarium quam religio,
In qua si animus sacrificantis aversus est; ^am sublata iam nulla est. Last. l.
5. c. 20.
Nihil est tam voluntarium quam religio, says Laciantius. And faith is not to
be enforced by violence, but persuaded by force of argument. And yet that of
Tertullian against the Gnostics, is most true on the other side; Ad efficium
H^retieos compelli, non inlici dignum est, duritia vincenda est, non suadenda.
Tertul. Sco piac adve^s. Gnosticos. cap 2.
Obstinacy is not to be allured or entreated only, but subdued and conquered
with a high hand: Qui imponit praeceptum, extorquet obsequium. And he that
imposes a precept, will both expect and exact obedience; Intrare posse hominem
in Ecclesiam nolentem, acc^dere ad altar posse nolentem, accipere sacrament
posse nolentem; credere non posse, nisi volentem, August in Joan Tract. 26.
For though a man cannot believe without the elicite act and express consent of
his own will, yet he may be constrained to profession, which is the exterior
act of it. To frequent the assembly of Saints in the Temple, to communicate in
divine Rites and Mysteries; the participation of the Word and Sacraments, even
against his inclination. Howsoever the will of a Recusant cannot be compelled
to reform his Religion, and turn Protestant; yet may compulsion be offered to
his outward man. To his estate by urging pecuniary mulcts, and the penalties of
the law upon his purse; and to his Body by Incarceration and imprisonment. This
is the duty of the civil Magistrate, highly commended in good Josiah, who
compelled all that were found in Israel to serve the Lord 2 Chro. 34.33. And
commanded by our blessed Savior to the servants in the parable, Luke 24.23.
compel them to come in. Though not unto faith, yet, to the means of faith, the
hearing of the Word, and to the receiving of the Sacraments, as St. Austin well
expounds it. And this he retracts as an oversight Haec mea primitus sententia
erat, neminem ad unitatem Christi esse cogendum, verbo esse agendum,
disputatione pugnandum. Sed haec opinio mea non contradicentium verbis, sed
demonstrantium superatur exemplis. August. Epist. 48. ad Vincentium.
in his 48 Epistle to Vincentius.

This was once my opinion that no man ought to be forced to Christian unity,
but that we should deal by persuading, strive by disputing, conquer by
reasoning. But this judgment of mine is confuted not so much by words of
contradiction as demonstrative example to the contrary. And many there are who
have so thriven and profited by the Terror of the law that they have thereby
been enabled to an ingenious confession. Gratias ago Domino qui vincula nostra
dirupit. I give God thanks who has broken my bonds in sunder. Secondly, by
inflicting capital punishment upon such as are incorrigible.


Secondly, the civil Magistrate must weed out Tares by inflicting capital
puishments upon such as are desperate and incorrigible.

The brainsick Illis hominibus solenne est, (...) formale Para bolarum Christi
negligere, and to materiale urgere. Camer. Myret. page 17.
Anabaptists would strain and squeaze this inference from our Savior's answer
to the demand of the servants in the parable; will thou then that we go and
gather them up? But he said unto them, nay, lest while ye go about to gather
the Tares, ye pluck also with them the wheat, Matthew. 13.28, 29. That it is
altogether unlawful for the civil Magistrate to execute judgment upon evil
doers; whereas they themselves make use of most direful and dreadful
excommunication (as Cameron observes.) And our late Socinians, Ostorodius,
Smalcius, and the rest of that litter, plow with the Anabaptists Heifer in this
point, and under pretense of Christian charity, they take away the power of the
Sword from the Christian Magistrate, so far as it concerns capital punishments
and the effusion of blood unto death. Quis non impudentissime nitatur; aliquid
in Allegoria positum pro se interpretari, nisi habeat and manisesta testimonia,
quorum lumine illustrentur obscura. August. Epist. 49. (...). Clemens
Alexandrines.


This they seem to ground upon that Ancient law, Thou shall not kill; which is
not repealed, abrogated, or any way altered (say they) in the New Testament;
whereas God only interdicts in that royal law of his, private revenge, and
unjust murder, not the just effusion of blood by the lawful hand of a
Magistrate; who is a public person and the Minister of God that bears not
the sword in vain; but to take vengeance on him that does evil, Romans 13.4. And
is in that respect non Homicida sed malecida: He slays not the man but his
mischief. That very God who speaks thus unto the private Man; Thou shall not
kill: says likewise unto the public Magistrate, Thou shall kill. And were
there not an occides to authorize the one in the inflicting of deserved
punishment, Cui convenit illud scholasticorum placitum: Theologia Symholica,
non est argumentativa Thomae Opuscula. 70.
there would not be a non occides to restrain the insolency and the outrages of
the other. This was the exemplary practice of the Jews under the policy of the
old law; of the primitive Church in the New; And of all Christian States and
Kingdoms: Confirmed by the joint attestation of the Heathen, and ratified by
the clear evidence of natural reason. That a gangrened and incurable member
must be cut off: and that it is far Melius est ut pereat unus, quam unitas,
Bern. Epist. ^02.
better and safer for one man to perish then unity it self.

Yet herein a difference must be observed betwixt those that offend against the
first, or second Table, whether Infidels, Heretics, Unbelievers, or
Misbelievers; Infidels and unbelievers, such as Turks and Jews, deserve rather
pity then punishment. And though they may be banished out of our Dominions, yet
are they not to be deprived of their Lives for a negative Infidelity. Neither
are Heretical misbelievers in Fundamental matters or in accessory Points of
Faith, to be adjudged and doomed to death, merely for Defendenda est religio
non occidendo sed monendo: non saevitia, sed patientia: non scelere, sed side:
illa enim malorum sunt, haec bonorum Lact. lib. 5. cap. 20.
Error in Religion. And it was a strange mistake of that silly Papist, who in
reading the Text it may be of set purpose, Titus 3.10. made two words of one,
and turned the verb into a noun Haereticum, post unam dut alteram admonitionem
devita. Supplet Toll; that is their supplement and addition.

There is no remedy but an Heretic must be put to death And the execrable
crueltys of the Church of Rome have served as a Commentary upon the corruption
of this Text; who as they brand and stigmatize the reformed party with the note
of Heretics, so they forthwith add Devita: And their language has been no
other against them then the outcries of the Jews against Christ. Toll, Away
with them. Away with them; Occide trucida, vivat missa, vivat missa; Kill,
burn, kill, burn, it matters not, so the mass may take place. And were we
guilty either of blasphemy against God, or any treasonable practice against the
State, there might be some colorable equity in their Sentence, and to make it
justice and not Long diversa sunt carnificina and pietat: nec potest aut
veritas cum vi, aut justitia cum crudelitate conjungi. Lact. lib. 5. cap. 20.
cruelty. For in this double case only, it is lawful to bring Heretics to the
Faggot.

1. It is possible to see a Campian at Tyburn or a Garnets head upon a pole:
Treasonable practices not mere Religion are guilty of those executions. But
howsoever our Church is thus favorable in the case of those Heresies which are
either simple, or secondary and consequential: yet in the cases of heretical
blasphemy, her holy zeal has not feared to shed blood. Witness the flames of
Ket and Let at, and some other Arrians in our memory. Bish. Hall, Christ.
Moderation, page 143.144.
Blasphemy.

2. Treason, When either one or the other is intwined and interweaved with the
cause of religion and marked under the disguise of a false belief, which is the
just Apology of the Church of England against the unjust challenges and
criminations of the scarlet whore; upbraiding her cruelties and casting in her
face the blood of some Popish shamelings, Garnet, Campian, and some few other
Tyburn Martyrs, Martyrs of treason and not of religion. Never was their any
haltered or Gybbeted here in England, Causa religionis merae, sed mixtae, (That
is the profession of our Church) being first Fugitives out of the land, then
sent home as Spies and Emissaries, Seducers, and Seminaries to sow Tares, like
unto the Devil in the Text. Assassinates of Kings, Incendiaries of States, and
powder-pioners to undermine and blow up the House of Parliament. It were indeed
much to be wished that gentleness and clemency might reclaim this stubborn
Generation, and each Christian Prince should be of the Emperor Severus mind
Tertul. Apol. cap. 4. Vtinam errorem, non ^^tain deposui^^^t, Augu^tini votum,
sib. 2. contra Gaudent, cap. 12 cui affine i^ad Hicron. V ^^^^ sili^s (...) ^^m
(...) qui (...) niss (...) spiritualibus Hicron. ^^ ^es l 5. c. 14.
suffundere maluit Hominis sanguinem, quam effundere; Rather to keep their
blood within their veins, then to det, or pour it out: And to second good
Theodosius in his desire, Vtina ^ mortuos ab inforis possem revocare; That they
could bring men from the dead. But seeing that mildness and moderation does for
the most part eneourage and animate offenders, and (as it is not more commonly
then truly said) Too much pity spoils the City, and Country both. And the
Futhers of the Country, have just cause to complain with the Father in the
Comedy; Nimis male docuit te mea facilitas multa S^ut est aliquan so mijeric^^.
dia puntens; ita and crudelicas parcens. August. ad Macedonium, Epist 5^.
They must in this respect, unsheath and draw out the sword of justice, set an
odge upon it, to make it sharp and keen, and taking up David's Heroical
resolution, Cut off all the workers of iniquity from the City of the Lord,
Psalm. 101.8. I read of the Landgrave of Hesse a sweet and a gracious Prince,
whose clemency was much abused; that being cast by adventure upon a Smiths
Forge, overheard what the Smith said, all the while he was striking his iron;
Duresce, duresoe inquam, utinam Langravius durescat. I forbear to make any
further application of the story, then to join with the Smith in his utinam;
would to God that Christian Kings and Magistrates those especially the candor
of whose disposition inclines them to a uimium of lenity and compassion, would
hearten their zeal, and harden their courage, against the brazen brows and iron
sinews, and steeled hearts of the sons of Belial. That they would pluck up
these Tares of wickedness by the roots; and since they will not grow better,
(...)
they may not grow at all.

Secondly, Secondly, the Ecclefiastical Judge.
The Ecclesiastical Judge must employ and improve his power to weed out Tares
by the orderly use of the spiritual keys, the just censures of the Church. The
power of the keys is merely spiritually exercised upon the soul and conscience
as the proper object, which as it is a more transcendent and sovereign
authority, than God has delegated unto Sovereigns upon earth, or the glorious
Angels themselves: So the punishments thereby inflicted, are of all other the
most dreadful; as being a cutting off from the mystical body of Christ, a
shutting out of the Kingdom of Heaven: Et summum extremi judicii praejudicium,
an anticipation or prevention of the latter judgment. And they who are
entrusted with the custody of the keys, had need be in this respect the most
accomplished among men, for extraordinary qualifications and endowments;
perfection of wisdom, excess of charity, unswayed integrity, abundance of
caution and circumspection in the use of the keys. That they turn them not the
wrong way, either opening when they should shut, or shutting when they should
open; absolving the wicked, and excommunicating, and condemning the righteous,
both which says Solomon, are an abomination unto the Lord, and should be
likewise unto his faithful Deputies. And it is an useful caveat, and profitable
direction for spiritual Governors, which is given by Gerson and Erasmus: Ne
teutere vibrent fulmen excommunication is: That they throw not about the
thunderbolt of their censures rashly and at random: Wherein if they would weed
out Tares aright, A threefold error to be avoided in Church censures.
they must take heed of a threefold error and extremity.

1. Frequency and too much commonness. 2. Immoderate and undue rigor. 3.
Temporal and by respects.
First, Frequency and too much commonness.
There must not be frequency and too much commonness in Church censures, lest
they thereby forfeit their estimation, and abate their force and efficacy: For
even as purging Physic, if ordinarily and familiarly received, has little or
no operation upon the body whereunto it is accustomed, and loosing both name
and nature, it becomes nonrishment in stead of physic, (...), says the
Philosopher, for the constant and continual use. In like manner this Spiritnal
Physic, I mean the censures, Ecclesiastical, which is Saint Cyprians
resemblance, Non deest censura quae increper, nec medecina quae sanet. I say
these censures, if threatened and urged upon all occasions, they lose their
power and strength, they are neglected and slighted at all hands, and work not
at all unless it be contempt; and at length are (as it were) east out into the
draught.

Secondly, Immoderate and undue rigor.
There must not be immoderate and undue rigor in Church censures. A course
much like the practice of unskilful Physicians, who for the most part purge,
Vsque ad habitum corporis, the utmost strength and ability of the body, and
thereby endanger the life of the patient. The Tent must not be made too big for
the Wound, nor the Plaster too broad for the Sore: For every petty and small
offense in comparison, an eight penny matter, default of payment, a Proctors
fee, want of appearance, or the like; to be threatened excommunicatione majori.
It is all one, says Parisiensis, as if a man that perceives a fly in his
neighbors forehead, should forthwith club him to death, killing the man, that
he may kill the fly, and dash out his brains. And though it be not so much the
quality of the offense, as the contumacy of the offender that necessitates them
thereunto; (which they usually allege) yet whether this contumacy is of so
high a nature as to promerit the most dreadful censure under Heaven, yea the
loss of Heaven it self, I submit unto better judgments.

Thirdly, There must be no temporal, Temporal and by respects.
nor by respects in the exercise of Church cexsures. That power which is purely
spiritual in the nature, must not be made temporal in the end.

These keys are not tempered of gold or silver, nor must they be used, or
abused rather, to the unlocking of men's chests or cossers.

The enriching of a corrupt Judge, or a sharking and a prouling Officer, what
is this but to imitate the lothsoni wickedness of Elie's sonss and to make the
sentence of exdommunication like unto their three toothed flesh, hook, which
they thrust into the kettle, cauldron, or pot, and whatsoever it brought up
they took it to themselves, 1 Samuel 2.13. But that I may not seem to inveigh and
complain without cause, or without countenance of just authority, give me leave
to express what I intend to deliver in the point, in the strain of a late
Reverend Bishop of our own, and that Andrews by name: They are the words of
the wise, which are as goads and nails fastened by one of the Masters of our
Assemblies. Omnium abusuum medecira, abusus ipsa est censura scilicet
Ecclesiastica. Opuscul. Posth. page 41.
Quae ad scelera profliganda data s^^t, flagellum Christi, and clavis Petri,
solum jam crumenam pulsant: Our Saviors scourge strung with small cords, and
Saint Peter's keys, which were first ordained for the exterminating of sin,
they now only vex the purse. It is commonly said, that it is but lost labor to
present offenders to your Commissaries or Officials, who when they have had
their Fee, is forthwith dismissed unpunished, and then revels as insolently, as
securely, as before; but if they have no money at hand to satisfy the Court,
the sword of authority is then brandished against them, and no more ado, but
with one stroke are cut off from the Church, given over unto Satan, and
denounced public Ethnicks and Anathemaes. Add because they see these censures
fly abroad in light matters, and that against the best of men no less
frequently than unadvisedly, Quasi bruta fulmina and soli metuenda crumenae
contemnere didicerunt; They have learned to contemn them as empty
Thunderbolts, torrible only to the purse.

And there is a groat deal of Analogy and agreement in, the terms of the
comparison; For as the thunder and lightning that comes down from above, melts
the money in the purse, but consumes not, or any way burts the purse it self.
Even so this spiritual lightning seizes only upon the substance, and wastes
the hard Metal that makes resistance, but passes through, passes over the
person who is more yiedling, and leaves him untoucht. This is not the orderly
use of the spiritual keys, nor this the direct way for the Ecclesiastical
Judge, to weed Tares out of the Church.

3. Thirdly, the public Ministry.
The public Minister must put to his helping hand to gather out Tares by the
religious ministration of the Word and Sacraments. Behold this day have I set
thee over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms, to pluck up, and to root out, and
to destroy, and throw down, and to build, and to plant, says God to the
Prophet Jer. 1.10. This speech the Bishop of Rome ingrosses and appropriates as
personal to himself, grounding thereupon his unlimited Jurisdiction, and
Ecumenical power in Temporalities, to depose Kings, and dispose of their
Kingdoms; whereas the Text equally and indifferently concerns all even the
meanest Ministers of the Gospel. The Spirit of God therein assimilating the
pains of their profession to the toil and sweat of the natural Husbandman,
Disce, sarculo non seep^^o epus est, ut sacias opus prophetae Bernard. ad
Engenium, De considera^^one, Lib. ^.
Rusticani sudoris schemate quodam, spiritualis iste labor expressus est, as
devout Bernard expounds and applies the place to Pope Eugenius, whose office
and duty it is to pluck up, and root out these Tares in the public Ministry.
And if there be any Tare of wickedness that pesters the field of the Lord,
spreads the roots far and near, advances the head higher, and grows more rank
and rife than the rest; be it gross idolatry, customary swearing, prodigious
blasphemy, open profanation of the Sabbath, the filthiness of whoredom, or any
other; these are the Tares which they principally endeavor with all their
might, not only to top or crop (as the Heathen King stroke off the tops of the
Poppies) but pluck them up by th roots. What though they meet with difficulties
and discouragements of all sorts and reap no other guerdon of assiduity, and
faithfulness in their calling, but enmity and opposition: yet must they make
their face hard against their faces, and their forehead hard against their
foreheads: Cry aloud and spare not, lift up their voice like a Trumpet. Preach
the word: be instant in season and out of season: improve, rebuke, exhort with
all longsuffering and doctrine.

I will close up the Point with a story of Luther, who when he began first to
appear in public against Popish indulgences, a friend of his rounded him in
the ear with more safe then sound advise. As good hold your tongue, the custom
is so strong, you will do no good: go into your study and pray; Domine miserere
nostri; And get you no anger. This is the distressed and entangled condition of
poor Ministers in the Gospel, If they plead for their due maintenance, they are
barred with legal customs and prescriptions. If they preach in the Name of the
Lord against the crying abominations of the time, they are affronted in the
same manner with customary and common practices; So that one way or other the
custom is always too hard for us. And though it be a matter of as great
difficulty and slender hopes to cry down the customs of sin, as of Tithes and
payments in the vulgar, being armed and fenced with prescription in both; Yet
this must not daunt or damp our spirits, nor quell or quail our courage, no
more then it dismayed the Heroical resolution of stout-spirited Luther; much
less must it move us to grow feeble and fainthearted, and utterly to desist
with disconsolate Jeremiah: Then I said I will not make mention of him nor
speak any more in his name, Jer. 20.9. But notwithstanding the strength of
custom, the public Minister must do his best to weed out these Tares of
wickedness by the religious ministration of the Word and Sacraments.

Fourthly, The private Christian must bend his strength, Fourthly, the private
Christian.
and b^ckle to the task of gathering out of Tares by devout prayers and Tears.
Acts of authority and jurisdiction are confined and limited to public offices.
But duties of common piety and pity fall within the verge and compass of the
meanest Christian. It were presumption and usurpation for every one to lay
hands upon the civil sword. To arrogate and assume the power of the keys; to
sit in Moses chair, and teach authoritatively in the Church; yet is there none
no not of the lowest rank but may pour forth his soul unto God in prayer, and
pour out his inward grief, in sad and mournful tears. Arma ecclesiae sunt
preces and lachrymae, Prayers and tears are the spiritual weapons of the
Church, and the offensive and defensive arms of the private Christian. How much
better do these become them then to repine and whine in a malecontented humor
which is the natural language of the multitude, to defame the persons, censure
the actions of superiors, to look upon Government with an oblique eye, and
cast dirt in the face of authority. How may we solace and recreate our selves,
in the most exulcerate and calamitous times; even in a holy Soliloquy with God,
and a pathetical lamentation of our own miseries. And memorable is that example
of Gerson in this kind, that famous Chancellor of Paris, who being exulsed the
university by the Sorbonists, and in his old age deprived of all his dignities,
he betook himself to the profession of a Schoolmaster and caused all his
Scholars being but little children to join with him daily in this short
prayer, Illyric. Cat. Test. Tom. 2. page 805.
My God my Maker have mercy upon thy miserable servant Gerson. Thus may every
Christian address himself unto God, in sending up a pithy ejaculation unto
Heaven (My God, my Maker have mercy upon thy miserable Servant) for the redress
of particular grievances, the pardon of Epidemical evils, and the prevention of
universal vengeance, when as impiety and iniquity domineers and overrules with
an high hand: the judgments of God hang over our heads and threaten us with
destruction, when as the times are most intricate and perplexed, (...); and
there are fightings without and fears within. This, this is the fittest season
for each private Christian to call upon the Name of God, and to stir up
themselves to take hold on him. The supine neglect whereof God severely faults
and taxes, Isa. 64.7. This necessity should be their opportunity, that when
they are at their wits end, driven to the straitest pinch and exigent, and find
neither hope nor help in the sons of men; To appeal unto God for succor, and
after holy David's example to excite and awaken him by their prayers; up Lord
let not man prevail, Psalm. 9.19. Help Lord for there is not a godly man left,
Psalm. 12.1. Tunc votorum locus praecipuus quum spei nullus. Then is the
chiefest place for request, up Lord and help Lord, when there is no place left
for hope: but if ever Christians mourned and cried in the bitterness of their
spirits for the abominations of the Time; If ever they cried mightily unto the
Lord; now, now is the time to pluck up and root out these Tares of wickedness,
by their devout Prayers and Tears.

The End of the first Sermon.
Lapis Lydius, OR THE TRIAL OF SPIRITS.

A SERMON Preached at the Cathedral in the City of Norwich.

Prove all things, hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. cap. 5. ver. 21.
LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Will. Rands at Fleetbridge. 1659.

THE TRIAL OF SPIRITS.
1 JOHN 4.1. Dearly Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits,
whether they are of God, for many false Prophets are gone out into the World.
THis Text is the Watchword, The Preface.
or Warn-word of the great Apostle Saint John, and that not bound up with any
particularities of time, place, or person, but of universal extent and
concernment, applyable, and applied by him to all ages, and may well be
conceived, as the Prophecy of the latter times.

This was the peculiar privilege and pre-eminence of Saint John that he was an
Evangelist, Prophet, and Apostle; An Evangelist in the penning of his Gospel. A
Prophet in his revelation. A. Apostle in his Epistles. A Divine Trismegistus,
or thrice excellent; yea, he shows himself a Prophet in his Epistles, and that
in these words of the Text, wherein he foretells the Epidemical disease of the
latter times, and withal prescribes and applies the remedy.

We, This Sermon was preached during the distraction of the late Civil Wars.
are now fallen upon times of war and bloodshed, haec fundi nostri calamitas;
and one principal cause of the defeat and overthrow, that has been given unto
both parties, has been the neglect of Sconts and Emissaries to discover and
descry the approach of the enemies. Give me leave therefore at this time to
take upon me the office of a Church Scout, to give timely notice and
intelligence of an enemy, and that not upon the frontires or borders, but
Hanibal ad portas, that knocks at the gates for entrance. One that has made an
invasion and inroad into the heart of the Kingdom, and subdued a great part of
it; who are here indigitated and pointed out by Saint John, and branded with
the title of false Prophets: For false Prophets are gone out into the world.

I shall likewise furnish you with sundry weapons out of Saint John's Armory,
for the better encounter with this enemy. Weapons defensive; Believe not every
spirit: Slowness of belief is a defensive weapon against the assaults of a sly
seducer

Weapons offensive; Try the spirits whether they be of God. And lest that my
discovery seem unpleasant, or prove unwelcom unto any of you, I shall borrow
and take up Saint John's Preface for my just Apology: (Dearly Beloved) and
apply it to every one here present. I will speak the words of truth and
oberness. (a Paul told Festus) yea and love too, without any gall of
bitterness. And so I come to the Text.

The General parts whereof are two. The division of the Text.


1. A compellation, Dearly beloved. 2. And a command in the sequel.
In the command we have two specialities, or particular circumstances.

1. The Matter.

2. The Motive.

1. the matter is partly disswasive, or monitory; Believe not every spirit.

2. Partly persuasive, or injunctive; Try the spirits, whether they be of God.

2. The second speciality of the Command, is the motive unto the matter, or the
ground and reason of it. And that is couched in the close, or latter part of
the verse, For money false Prophets are gone out, etc.

I begin with the compellation; Dearly beloved.

1. There were two great Apostles of our blessed Savior, The first parr. The
compellation.
Saint Peter and Saint John. Saint Peter was a man of an hot temper, and a
fiery metal, the freest and forwardest of his order; one that was ready to vent
and put forth himself at every turn, and to ply Christ with replies and answers
upon each occasion: who like unto the foreman of a Jury, was commonly the mouth
of all the rest. To say with Aquinas, that Christ loved Saint Peter above the
rest of the Apostles, in ordine ad Ecclesiam; savours strong and sour of the
Leaven of the Pharisees, the Doctrine of the Church of Rome.

For Christ loved his Disciples alike, with an even and uniform love in
reference to his Church, yet did Christ advance Saint John above the rest of
his brethren in ordine ad personam, in reference unto his person, (as the same
Aquinas affirms) as being the natural and near kinsman of Christ, and in that
respect, the more affected and indeared to him.

And as Saint John was the beloved, so the most loving Disciple of his Lord and
Master.

Magnes amoris amor, the love of Christ to him, was as an attractive Loadstone
of his heart to the love of Christ; and to draw Christians to the mutual love
of one another. His soul was a full volume of charity, and every leaf of this
volume, each leaf in his Epistles, each Chapter, and well near verse and line
in those Chapters, contain sundry invitations and inducements unto charity. And
as it was said of Homers Iliads, Justin. Martyr. Orat. ad Graecos.
(...), That, it was carnal and sensual love that was the beginning and end of
his writings; so may it be much more truly affirmed of Saint John's works,
(...), Divine and spiritual love, that was the beginning and end, yea, and the
middle too of his Epistles. This was his constant practice in his declining
time, and extremity of old age, that being carried into the Temple upon the
shoulders of his Disciples, and being unable to preach to them, in regard of
his weakness, and infirmity, he would then inculcate and press upon them this
short and pithy exhortation, which was in effect a very powerful and persuasive
Sermon; Filioli diligite vosmet invicom, little children, love one another; For
as Saint Paul was an Apostle of faith, constantissimus gratiae praedicator (as
Austin styles him) a most constant Preacher of the free grace of God in Christ.
As Saint James was an Apostle of works, which he vehemently urges against loose
Libertines and carnal Gospellers. So this was the special excellency of S.
John, that he was an Apostle of love, which he expresses and evidences in the
Compellation here in the Text, A double duty:
Dearly beloved. And implies and intimates a double duty.

1. The one of the pastor.
The duty of the Pastor to love his people, to love them affectionately,
tenderly, from the very heart-root, and bowels yea, in the bowels of Christ.
For God is my record how I long after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ. It
is Saint Paul's profession to the Philippians, Phil. 1.8.

2. The other of the people.
The duty of people to be thoroughly assured and persuaded of the love of their
Pastor, and to embrace his instructions, admonitions, and his severest
reprehensions, as so many love tokens and arguments of his affection. And if
the peoples hearts be once possessed and taken up with this belief, it will be
as an Harbinger to make way for the entertainment of their doctrine; it will
welcome their Message and their Ministry, and make their sharpest reproofs not
only saving but sweet; and cause them to pray in the words of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 101.5. Let the righteous smite me for that is a benefit: and let them
reprove me, and it shall be a precious oil that shall not break my head.

And let this suffice to have spoken of the compellation, Dearly beloved; For I
must not stay in the porch or entry, which though it be both useful and
necessary in a Building, yet it is only to lead us into the inward rooms,
whereunto I now come.

2. The Command. The second Part. The command which contains in it the Matter.


The second general part of the Text, where the matter and the motive present
themselves unto us. And in the matter, first of the dissuasive or monitory
part, believe not every spirit. And then of the persuasive or munitive; Try the
spirits whether they be of God. I will take them up as they lie in order.

1. Believe not every spirit. The dissuasive or monitory part.
That is St. John's disswasion or admonition. There are spirits in their
nature, spiritual and immaterial substances, and those either uncreated as God
himself, God is a Spirit, John 4.24. or else created; as Angels and the Souls
of men.

And there are spirits in their function and office, Believe not every spirit.
that are assigned and deputed to a spiritual service and employment. Thus a
Prophet and a spiritual man are Synonymous, and signify one and the same
thing. The Prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad, Hosea 9.7. If any man
thinks himself a Prophet or spiritual, 1 Cor. 14.37. In both which places a
Prophet and a spiritual man are linked together, and go hand in hand. And in
this sense is the word here used in the Text, and the name of spirit is taken
by way of Metonymy, for such an one as boasts and brags of the gift of the
spirit for the discharge of a Prophets duty. Calv. in Lecum.
Nomen spiritus Metonymice accipitur pro eo qui spiritus done se praeditum esse
jacrat ad obeundum Prophetae munus, ( as Calvin well observes upon the place.)
And if we take a full view of the Text, we shall then find that they who are
termed Spirits in the beginning, and the middle, are styled false prophets in
the latter end of the Verse, so that these spirits are no other then false
prophets. And herein we may take notice of a concession and a caution of the
Apostle.

1. A Concession.
A concession, in that he grants them the honor of their name, the dignity of
their high place and calling, the excellency of their parts and gifts: All
which are but airy and empty vanities, husks without grain, shells without
kernels, unless they be stufft with realities and substance of inward holiness.
Nomine illuditur cui res nomini subjecta negatur, says Tortullian. An
honorable name and a glorious calling is but a goodly mockery, where the truth
of the name is wanting.

This is St. John's concession in that he gives them their due style and title,
Tertul. adv. Marcion, lib. 1.
and freely affords them the name of spirits; yet believe them not; this is his
caution or admonition.

2. A Caution.
But is it not the great and weighty work of the Spirit of God to persuade men
unto faith? Does he not use all possible arguments and inducements to incline
and move the assent of the will to believe?

And would St. John have us to be Infidels? Believe not. What must we mere
Scepticks and Academicks in religion? and hold nothing positively and
dogmatically, as an established and grounded certainty? what must we be such
neuters in the Church, as the Roman Orator in the commonwealth, when he thus
proclaimed his indifferency? Quem fugiam scio, quem sequar nescio. Must we know
what to deny, and not know what to believe?

This is the unstable state of many, too many great Clerks and Scholars, who
having run out their lives in the study of Controversies and School Divinity in
canvasing of doubts and questions, and in (...). Nazian. Orat. 21. in laudem.
^^banas.
fighting with those School-weapons pro and con, they are far better at the con
then at the pro. and as Hierom speaks of Lactautius, (d) Vtinam tam nostra
confirmare potuisset quam facile aliena destruit. So are they more able to
confute others, then to resolve or satisfy their own consciences.

This is not the scope and purpose of St. John's caution, (...) only to
interdict a double fault or error.

^. Inconsideration.

^. Inconstancy of judgment.

1. Lightness and giddiness. 2. Vnsteadiness and fickleness of belief.
1. The first error St. John prohibits is inconsideration of judgment,
lightness and giddiness of belief. Try all things, hold fast that which is
good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.

To try all things is a point of spiritual wisdom and discretion. To hold fast
that which is good, Vtinam tam facile vera invenire possem quam falsa
convincere.
is the property of Christian constancy and perseverance. And it is St. Paul's
method and order first to try, and then to trust: whereas such is the
preposterous course of many that they begin at the wrong end of St. Paul's
precept, whosuddenly take up an hold-fast opinion, without any previous trial,
or examination.

It was a notable piece of folly of them in the Gospel: (...). Athenag. de
Resurcarnis.
I have bought a Farm and I must needs go out and see it. I have bought five
yoke of Oxen and I go to prove them, Luke 14.18, 19. who by the rule of
ordinary prudence should first have seen and proved, ere they had concluded,
and struck up the bargain. Such is the spiritual folly of the greater part who
lay out their judgment (as they suppose) in buying the truth, A double error
interdicted in the Ca^tion.
and then make search and enquiry after it.

1. Inconsideration, or giddiness of belief.
But as it was the high commendation of the Heathen Emperor August. in
observing the rules of friendship; Rarus ad meundas amicitias, ad retinendas
constantissimus: that he was hardly drawn to enter the league of friendship,
but was most punctual and constant in the keeping of it. Such should be the
praise of an advised and wary Christian, to be slow-paced in assent to those
doctrines, that are propounded; but being once convinced of the truth, he
should not be more slow then sure, and every way steadfast and immovable in
their maintenance and just defense.

2. A Second error that Saint John forbids in these words (believe not every
spirit,) Inconstancy and unsetledness.
is inconstancy of judgment: unsteadinesse and fickleness of belief, when men
are mere whirlegigs in religion; like unto Fanes and Weathercocks that are
fastened to the tops and pinacles of the Temple, and carried about with every
wind, That is St. Paul's metaphor, Ephesians. 4.14. wavering and carried about with
every wind of doctrine: when men are now off, and then on, in their opinion;
now of this mind, and forth with of another; flust believing this spirit, and
soon after another: And so ever: spirit successively and in their turns. Like
unto the old Arrians, who changed their faith every year and month, Eo
processum est, ut neque penes nos, neque penes quenquam ante nos, sanctum.
exinde aliquid atque invi, labile perseveret. Hill. cont. Auxent.
Annuas and menstruas de Deo fides decorn it is, (as St. Hilary tells them)
they took up a new faith, every now your, and every new Moon brought forth a
new faith.

Their faith sometimes in the bull, some (...) in the Wane; one while
increasing, another decreating; and like the Moon in perpetual changes.

I cannot betten resemble these men th^^ to the Halcyon, or Kings Fisher, a
Bird called by that name; whose dead body being hung up in the house it
flickers, and moves to and fro, and turns with the wind into every quarter.

Such Kings Fishers are there too too many in religion who are wheeled and
hurried with every wind; The wind of Soveraighty and Authority; the wind of
Honor and Presferment. The wind of the present time and season Optat. cont.
Parmen. Don. lib. 1.
Omnia pro tempore nihil pro veritate. They are all for the time, nothing at
all for the truth: As Optatus sometimes of the Donatists.

This is the double error that St. John censitres upon a threefold ground and
reason. A threefold ground of St. John's Inter dict.


1. The folly. 2. The impiety. 3. The danger.
First, It is folly to believe every spirit. For man is a rational creature,
The Folly.
both in the inward principle, and outward actions. And it is the ordenly
course of reason finst to consult, afterward to conclude, to deliberate, ere
it do determine.

There is not a surer argument of sound wisdom then tardity or slowness of
belief; which occasioned that moral precept of the Heathen Epitharmu, (...)
Take heed that thou be distrustful. These are the slnews and joints of
wisdom. And for men to be sudden and overhasty of belief, it is the character
and cognizance of a Fool 5 A Fool believes every thing, Prove. 14.15.

Secondly, The Implety.
It Is impiety to believe every spirit. The implicit says and blind obedtence
of the Papists are worthily exploded and hist out of the Schools. And to be
precipitate and headlong in the sirst embracing of an opinion, and as
headstrong in the after defense of it, (as they that are rash and head long,
are peremptory and headstrong for the most part) what is this but to agree and
jump with the Papists in their implicit faith, by folding and wrapping it up,
in the authority and wisdom of their Leaders, and to afford them a blind
obedience.

True it is that Christ exe^^cises the faith of his people by seducers and
false prophets; yet has he not left them unfurnished of helps, wherewith to
withstand their suggestions, the suspending and withholding their belief.

Then, if any shall say unto you, lo, here is Christ, or there, belaeve it
not. Wherefore if they shall say unto you, behold, he is in the desert, go not
forth. Bobold, he is in the secret places, believe it not, Matthew. 24.23, 26.
(...), that is the word in the original. In penetralibus in the inward rooms;
as the vulgar translates it. In conclavtbus, In the close closets, or privy
chambers, as Beza renders it. If that the Church of Rome bear us in hand, that
Christ is in conclavibus, in the conclaves of the Popes and Cardinals, That he
is in the pix or box wherein (as they conceive) they carry about their breaden
god: Our Savior forewarns us of our duty; Believe it not. If that others
affirm as considently, that Christ is only in their Congregational Churches,
which yet are but (...), close closets, strait narrow chambers; yea, but little
Boxes, in comparison of a Church: That there, and only there is that platform
of Discipline and Churchgovernment, which Christ has instituted and ordained;
our Savior admonishes us what to do in the case; Believe it not.

Thirdly, It is danger to believe every spirit. The Danger.


The sadness and heaviness of some men's tempers and the dullness of their
naturals, is an excellent preservative, against imposture and deceit.

Such was the constitution of the old Thessalians, who were so sottish and
blockish, that they could not be circurrented or overreached by any. The like
may be observed of our neighboring Netherlanders, whose dullness is a notable
furtherance and advantage to their negotiation; and what other Nations effect
and bring to pass out of their quickness and nimbleness of their parts, That
they compass by reason of their dullness; which requires a longer time for
deliberation and dispatch, and redoubles their watchfulness and circumspection.

Even so, the slowness of belief is an useful and profitable help to the common
sort of Christians; which makes them more apprehensive and jealous of their own
simplicity; and more shie and wary of the wiles of others; For even as in War,
there is use both of a Sword and Shield: And they that want a sword therewith
to offend the Enemy, must defend themselves with a Shield and Buckler. Even so,
strength of reason, pregnancy of parts is a sword, which God vouchsafes to some
above others to contend and fight with the common Enemy: But tardity and
wariness of belief, that is as a shield which God puts into the hand of the
weaker and simpler sort of people; thereby to receive and repel those envenomed
Arrows, and fiery Darts of Fiery spirits, that would otherwise wound them unto
death.

And so I pass from the Dissuasion or Admonition to the persuasion or
Injunction. Try the spirits whether they be of God.

2. The persuasive or injunctive Part.
The word in the original is (...). A word of frequent use in Scripture, and
that figurative and Metaphorical. A Metaphor borrowed and taken up from
Metalists or Goldsmiths, who for the better discovery of the truth and
soundness of their Metals are wont to bring them to the Touchstone and what
will not abide the Test, is cast away, as false and counterfeit. Try the
spirits whether they be of God.


And hereunto the Spirit of God alludes, Jer. 6.30. They shall call them
reprobate silver; for the Lord has rejected them; that is reprobate silver,
which will not endure the Touchstone, and thereby becomes (...), and is
ruprobated, and rejected.

Such is the trial of spirits enjoined by St. John, like unto that of gold,
silver, or precious stones; Therein are four specialties.
wherein we may take notice of these four Particulars.

1. The Metal. The Spirits. 2. The Touchstone. 3. The Touch. 4. The Metalists
or Lapidaries. First the Metal. The spirits: which may be said to be of God in
two respects.
All which are inaplied in the verb (...). Try.
1. I begin with the Metal. The Spirits. These Spirits are said to be of God
in two respects.

1. Respectu originis. 2. Respeciu finis.
First, First in respect of the Author of the 1. Inward.
in respect of the beginning or Author both of their inward and outward
calling. There is an inward calling which consists in zeal to God's glory,
forwardness and faithfulness in his service; a sufficiency or at least a
competency of parts and abilities whereby they are gifted and qualified for the
office. For God who disdained a blind and lame sacrifice, under the Law, does
not employ and make use of a blind and lame Priest, who must of necessity offer
a blind and a lame sacrifice.

He that sends a message by the hand of a fool, cutteth off the feet, says
the wise man, Prove. 26.6. And God never sends a fool of his Errand. He does not
command him to run, and cut off his feet, or deny him legs. Christ the eterual
word of God has nothing to do with their tongues that cannot speak the word.
That are not (...), which is St. Paul's Character of a lawful Minister, 1 Timothy
3.2. Both able and apt to teach.

Secondly, But besides this, there is an outward calling, 2. And ourward
Calling.
which is from God; for it is his Ordinance, but by man; The imposition of
hands, The Ordination of the Church, as the ordinary means and instruments. And
though the outward calling may not compare with the inward either in peint of
excellency, or necessity: yet in a constituted and a settled Church, and in an
ordinary way, this outward calling is of simple and absolute necessity. No men
takes this honor unto himself but he that is called of God, as was Aarou,
Heb. 5.4. and that is by man's Ministry. And not to wave the comparison of my
Text, As in Metal, there is both the Bullion as it lies in the mass and bulk;
And there is the Coin after it has once passed the mould, and Mint, and
received the stamp and impress and supersoription of the Prince. Even so the
inward calling is as the Bullion of Gold and Silver, which shows the intrinsic
worth and value, and is the very nature and substance of it. But the outward
calling is as the coining and minting of this Bullion in ordination, which sets
upon it the stamp of Church autharits, and makes it current and passable among
men.

Secondly, Secondly, in respect of the End.
These spirits are said to be of God in respect of the End.

For as in nature the efficient and final cause is one and the same; so is it
every way as true in Divinity. God is alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
end of all. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things, Romans 11.36.
And those Spirits are of God that are for God, that intend God, that tend to
God as to their ultimate and lastend.

When us Luther first began to appear in Germany, and his Doctrine passed
sundry censures and constructions according to the variety of men's
apprehensions, and their particular interests and engagements, Dr. Stanpitius
professed for his part that he was the better satisfied with it, and the more
thoroughly confirmed in the belief of it, Hoc mihi placet quod haec doctrina
quam praedicat, gloriam and omnia soli Den tribuit hominibus nihil Lut her.
loc. Com. Quar. Glass. cap. 30.
Quod omnia in solidum Deo ascribebat: That it did entirely ascribe all to the
praise of Gods grace and glory. And certainly those Spirits are of God, that do
most abase and depress the aspiring pride, and haughtiness of man's heart; That
do vilify, yea nullify the spiritual impotency and disability of man's
decayed, wounded, and dead nature; that do extol and magnify the free grace of
God in Christ; that inhance and advance his glory. These, these are the
Spirits, who as they are for God, so they likewise are of God,

2. The Touchstone, and that double. The false or counterfeit which is five
fold.
The second thing considerable in the trial next after the metal, is the
Touchstone, and that is either

1. I alse and counter suit, 2. On Ise right and true.
The false and counterfeit Touchstones are these five in member.

1. Preten ed Revelation. 2. Lying Nti^^aeles. 3. Rucollancy of Burts and
Abrtitues. 4. Fl^^^^ess of Life. 5. Succes, or truth of Eveuts.
The first false and counterfeit Touchstone is Pretended Revelations. The
first, pretended Bevelations.


These our Dicunt paracsetum plura in Montano dixisse, quam Christum in Evan,
lium protulisse. Nec tantum plura sed etiam meliora, atque majora. Tertul.
Prescr. adv. Haeret. c. 152. Fanatici spiritus hodie quicquid somniant, volunt
esse spiritum sanctum. Luther Tom. 4. fol. 5 11. (...) Basilius.
Inth ^srast, and Anahaptists, the Dreanters if our lanentimes, as Saint Jade
fitly styles them, boast and brag of, and prattle much to little purpose of
their secret inllincts and inspirations. So did Suenck feildius, a whelp of
that litter; who, as if he had been a Prophet dropped from Heaven, or fullen out
of the Clouds, did amaze and inoltant men's minds with those high flown terms,
Illumination, Revelation, Deification of the interior and spiritual men; words
misapplied and perverted by him, and grossly understood by the common multitude.
And that I may extricate and wind my self out of ambiguities all at once. True
it is that God does enlighten the minds of his children in the knowledge of
spiritual and saving mysteries, and inwardly reveal unto them the sense and
feeling of Gods love in Christ; so that they taste and see how gractous the
Loed is, as the Psalnist has it, Psalm. 34.8, abounding more and more in
Knowledge, (...), and in all judgment, as Saint Paul prays for the the
Philippians, Phil. 1.19. yet this affords no ground, or sooting for any new
Bevelation, by way of Supplement or Addition to the written word, either
against or besides the Seripturea.

Though we or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, than that
we have preached unto you, let him, be accursed, Gal. 1.8. Though we, Saint
Paul himself, who was rapt into the third Heaven, or an Angel from Heaven
preach any other Gospel (...), non solum contrarium sed diversum. Not only
that which is directly contrary, but any way different: Let him be accounted
execrable and abominable; that is Saint Paul's doom upon himself and others.

For the Doctrine of Salvation touching faith and manners, whatsoever is
necessary to be believed or observed, is revealed from Heaven already; and they
that expect and look for any new revelations, may go out and seek for them, as
the children of the Prophets did for Elias body after it was taken up into
Heaven, 2 King. 2.17. but shall be sure to return without it.

1. Optat. lib. 5. Si fuerit inter fratres contentio orta, non itur ad tumulum
sed quaeritur Testamentum^ sit qui (...) lo quiescit, tacitis de tabulis
loquitur. ibidem. Nobis curiositate opus non est post christum, nec
inquisitione post Evangelium. Cum credimus, nihil desideramus ultra credere.
Hoc enim prius credimus, non esse quod ultra credere debeamus, Tert. Presc.
cap. 8.
Quid pulsamus ad coelum cum habeamus in Evangelio Testamentum, (says Optatus
excellently.) To what end should we knock at Heaven gates for Revelations, when
as we have Christ's last Will and Testament in the Gospel. There may be indeed a
Codicill or Schedule annexed to the Will of a dying man, as long as he is
alive. And the same may be as authentic and forcible as the original Will, if
it has his hand and seal to speak for it, and be ratified by the testimony of
others. But Christ is deceased long ago, his Will is consigned and sealed up,
and proved in the High Court of Heaven: and in that regard there can be no
Codicil or Schedule of new Revelation affixed, or added to the word revealed.

2. The second lying Miracles
A second false Touchstone is Lying Miracles, which are so far from the
discovery of the true, that they are rather a sign of counterfeit metal, and a
mark of false Prophets. Contra istos (ut sic loquar) nirabiliarios cautum me
fecit Deus meus, dicens: In novissimis temporibus exurgent pseudoprophetae
facientes signa and prodigia: ut seducant si fieri potest etiam electos.
August. in Evangel. secund. Johan. Tractat. 13.
1. There shall arise false Prophets and shall show great sign^ and wonders,
Matthew. 24.24. The coming of Antichrist the man of sin, is with all power, and
signs, and lying wonders: (...), wonders of lies; on usual Hebraism in
Scripture, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. And those unclean spirits that came out of the mouth
of the Dragon, are not to seek for miracles; For they are the spirits of Devils
working miracles, Rev. 16.14. The spirits of Devils, and yet working miracles.
And these miracles are either August. de Donato and Pontio, miracula
operantibus. De unit. Eccles. cap. 16. Daemones nonnulla faciunt sanctis
Angelis similia; non veritate sed specie, non sapientia, sed plaene fallacia.
August. Epist. 49. The third excellency of parts and abilities.
portenta fallacium spirituum, aut figmenta mendacium hominum, as St. Austin
states the question. The prodigies of lying spirits, or else the imposture and
Legerdemain of juggling Mountebancks.

There are false Prophets as well as Poets, who tell of strange wonders, but
such as are not to be believed. Miracanunt, sed non credeuda Poetae. And this
we may lay down for a sure conclusion, That false Prophets may make show of
false Miracles, their natural and base children every way like unto their
parents.

3. A third false Touchstone for the trial of Spirits, is, excellency of parts
and abilities, pregnancy of wit, prosoundness of judgment, a high strain of
eloquence and eloquution, a voluble insinuative and persuasive tongue, the
excellent, knowledge of Arts and Sciences, variety of tongues and languages.
All these are but common gifts, and it oft-times so falls out, that there are
many of Gods gifts and graces in wicked men without God himself. Nihil prodest
Donorum largitas, ubi aliquod spiritus donum habetur, and spiritus ipse non
habetur, as Fulgentius elegantly; Though there be never so liberal a Largess of
the gifts of the spirit, it is of no avail; where the spirit of grace it self
is not possessed, and retained.

4. The fourth false Touchstone is Holiness of life. The fourth holiness of
life.
This is a strong attractiue of every ingenuous and honest heart. And it
wrought upon the affections of Christ, who cast his eyes upon the young man in
the Gospel and loved him, Mark 10.21.

There is not a more powerful argument to persuade and prevail with men, than
the show of holiness; which the Devil knows well enough, who when he cannot
work his ends as long as he is clad in black, he puts on his white apparel,
and transforms himself into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11.14. A Fiend of
darkness may appear as an Angel of light. And here may be the truth of
Holiness, at least in some degrees, even in false Prophets: as there was in
Swenk feldius before mentioned, one who did pour out most fervent prayers unto
God day by day, and led a chaste and sober life; so that a great Chronologer of
his time, Bucholcerus, passed this censure on him, Swenkfeldio non defuisse cor
bonum, Spanhem. Dintr. Histor. de Sect. Anabap.
sed caput regulatum, Swenkfeldius wanted not a good heart, but a regulated,
and well ordered head. For these two must concur to the integrity of a true
Prophet: A sound brain, and a siucere heart. And though a sincere heart is to
be preferred beforea sound brain, yet where this sound brain is wanting, it may
make a man a false Prophet.

The fifth and last counterfeit Touchstone, The fifth, success, or truth of
events.
is success or truth of events.

If there arise among you a Prophet, or a Dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a
sign or a wonder, and the sign or the wonder come to pass, Dent. 13.1, 2.
Implying that a sign or wonder may come to pass foretold by a Dreamer, and yet
the party be a false Prophet.

We must not judge of things by the event or issue; and it is just with God to
deny them success, who make sirccesse the rule of their judgment, or the
Touchstone of their trial.

These are the false and counterfeit touchstones:

But besides these there is a true and a right touchstone. The true Touchstone.
That same Lydius Lapis, the sword of the spirit, like unto that of Golrah,
none to this: the supreme Judge of Controversles, the Adaequate rule of says,
the infallible Canon and Index both of its own streightness, and the crooked-no
se of all things else.

Sint castae deliciae meae Scripturae tuae, nec fallar in eis, nec fallam
exeis. Aug. vot. Conf. l. 11. c. 2. Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem. Scriptum
esse doceat Hermegenis officina. Si non est scriptum time at vae illud,
adjicientibus aut detrahentibus destinatum. Tertul. Adv. Hermog. c. 22.
The written word, the Book of the Scriptures, and whatsoever will not abide the
trial of this touchstone; it may be, it ought to be refused and rejected with
the same facility that it is asserced and maintained. To the Law, To the
Testimonies, Isa. 8.20.

This is Gods rule of direction to the people, to have recourse unto the Law,
the straight, and even, and inflexible rule of the Law. If they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. That is the
best means of conviction of false Prophets, to bring them to the Law, though
full sore against their wills.

The Ministers of the Gospel are spiritual soldiers, and they must as
soldiers upon their watch, both know and give the word: and it is the peoples
duty to demand and require the word of them; If they speak not according to
this word, there is no light in them.

3. The third thing considerable in this Trial, The touch which shows it self
in five properties.
is the Touch, or the application of the metals unto the Touchstone, and shows
it self in the discovery of a five-fold property.

1. Holiness in respect of God. 2. Peaceableness in the Church and State. 3.
Obedience to Authority. 4. Charity to our brethren. 5. Humility in our own
persons.
1 First there must be a touch of holiness in respect of God. A touch of
Holiness in respect of God.
The wisdom that is from above is first pure, Jam. 3.17. And what Saint James
speaks of Divine Wisdom, may as truly be affirmed of the Spirits that are of
God. They are pure in the first place.

Holiuess becomes thy house for ever, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 83.5. And if
holiness becomes the material Temple, then much more the mystical. And if the
mystical Temple, then chiefly the Priests and Ministers of the Temple. Be ye
clean that bear the vessels of the Lord, Isa. 52.11. Yea above all other the
High Priest under the Law had this Motto engraven upon his Mitre, Holmess unto
the Lord. And certainly the Ministers of the Gospel are every way as much bound
to make good this impress and inscription. Not ike unto the high Priest and
Bishop of Rome, who hears no less than His. Holiness in the abstract; he being
in the mean time as S. Paul justly styles him, (...), that stigmatical Outlaw
and man of sin. And if we must needs grant him the Livery of Holiness, let him
be accounted holy as An ad priorem partem nominis Hildebrandini, alluserit
Petrus Damiani, cum Hildebrandum. Virgam Assure, Sanctum suum satanam appellat
equidem nescio: quod ad posteriorem attinet, ipsa res clamat, fuisse illum
furialem mundi incendiarium; adeoque ipsum Acheronta movisse, ut ad (...),
demum perduceretur tyrannis Antichristi. Vsserius de Christ. Eccles. succes
cap. 5. page 112.
Pope Hildebrand, one of his own rank and order, sed Sanctus Satanus. It is the
holy Epithet that is given him by Damianus. And let them be for ever honored
and magnisied in their royal Title to all posterity Sanctos Cinaedos, sanctos
adulteros sanccos proditores, and parricidas, sanctes Apostatas, sanctos
Atheos, sanctos Diabolos. Defens. Eccles. Anglic. Cracanth. cap. 2.
As holy Sodomites and Adulterers, at the best, holy Traitors, holy Apostates,
holy Atheists, and holy Devils.

If the words sound something harsh, I speak them not without authority: they
are not mine, but one of the Worthies of our Church.

These are the men that are at league with Hell, and exorcise the Devils by
consent, or else as by a Writ De ejectione Firma, cast them out of their
Churches at their pleasure; but can in no case dislodge, or conjure them out of
their own consciences: whose very Relics, their Ashes, Salt, Candles, Oil,
Wafers, are all holy in the highest degree; yea, their Bells are baptized by
them, while they in the mean time remain impure wretches, and their inward
parts are very filthiness. But far be it from us to resemble them in their
wickedness, or to he holy with their holiness.

Let it not be thought enough for the Ministers of the Gospel to be men in holy
orders and of impure and unholy lives: to be clad in black, a color of
gravity, and to be light in their carriage and behavior. Nor let it seem
sufficient to be mere outsides and formalists in religion, like unto an empty
superficies without bulk or body, ringing out that solemn peal of the Jews, The
Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, And yet these Templars, This order
of the Templars, for the most part have but little regard to the Lord of the
Temple, and as small care to maintain the honor of the mystical.

Let us not confine all holiness to the public place of Gods worship, but
reserve some part of it at least, and assign it to the time. And if we maintain
out of judgment the calling of Bishops, the duty of Tithes of Divine right, let
the Lords day obtain as much favor at our hands, let Christ be thought the
Author of it, whose name it bears, and not pass for an Ecclesiastical
constitution.

Let not those spirits that are of God, be holy in this manner; but as he that
has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet.
1.15.

2. Secondly, A touch of peaceableness in respect of the Church and State.
there must be a touch of peaceableness in respect of the Church and State. The
wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, Jam. 3.17.

Even so the spirits that are from above, are pure in the first place, and
peaceable in the second.

The fruit of righteousness, is sown in peace, verse 18. Peace is the seed of
righteousness; This is a duty that concerns Christians in the generality. Seek
peace and pursue it, Psalm. 34.14. but especially the Ministers of the Gospel,
who are Ambassadors of Christ the Prince of peace, whose office it is to bring
good tidings, to publish peace, to preach peace, to pray for peace, and to
endeavor by all lawful means to procure a true and sound peace: For although
the civil and secular Jurisdiction of the Clergy be lately abrogated and
annulled, and Ministers remain no longer Justices of peace; yet they are and
must for ever continue Ministri pacis, Ministers of peace.

And that which should encourage and provoke them thereunto, is the present
fense and woeful experience of the calamities of a civil war.

The old Athenians never consulted about peace, until they were clad in their
mourning gowns. How has this whole Kingdom been clad in black, the Livery of
sorrow and lamentation, as if we were now solemnizing the funeral Exequies of
our Nation. The disconsolate Widow bemoaning the loss of her dearest Husband,
Parents bewailing the fruit of their own Womb; Rachel weeping for her children,
refused to be coniforted, because they were not. How has the High and
Honorable Person, the Great and Grave Counselor, been snatched away by an
untimely death. And is it not high time to advise of peace?

Heu quantum potuit terrae pelagique Lucan Bell. Pharsal.
parari
Hoc quem civiles hauserunt sangume dextrae!
And had there been half so much English blood hazarded and adventured, as has
been already shed in this civil war, we might have made a vehement impression
upon the common enemy; redeemed and ransomed the Palatinate out of the hands of
Popery and cruelty, whereunto it has been morgaged for many years. We might
have subdued and conquered the Irish Rebels long ago; those barbarous and
blood thirsty Rebels, not once to be mentioned or thought of, without just
horror and execration; Who now roar in the midst of the Congregations, and set
up their Ensigns for signs. They have said in their hearts, let us destroy them
together, They have burnt up all the houses of God in the land, Psalm. 74.4, 8.
Yea they have burnt up not the material houses of God alone, but well near all
the mystical Temples of God with the fiery flames of a civil war.

3. A touch of obedience to Authority.
Thirdly, there must be a touch Mallem obedire quam mi acula facere, ctiamsi
possem. It was Luthers answer to the Bishop of Brandenbourg diss: ading him
from the present publishing of his Propositions. Tom. 1. Epist. Luth. Epist. 32.
of obedience to Anthorities; For though humane laws do not bind the conscience
directly, and by an immediate power and virtue of their own; yet have they a
binding power indirectly, and at the second hand.

The Commands of God are authoritative for their own sake.

The Ordinances of man so far forth, as they are agreeable to the law of God,
and the law of the Land.

Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. Romans 13.1. And how has this
Text been strained and squeezed of late? And as the wringing of the nose
brings forth blood, says the wise man, Prove. 30.33. So some, and those not a
few, by a violent wringing of this Text of the Apostle, have forced blood out
of it: and yet I find the result of the place to be no other than this; The
absolute necessity of a regular and orderly subjection: (...), that is Saint
Paul's word, which is bred in the wars, and taken up from the exercise of
martial discipline; where the common soldier is subject to his Captain, the
Captain to his Colonel, the Colonel to the Chieftain, or General, according to
the order of war: but if either General, Colonel, or Captain command any thing
that is contrary to the rules of military discipline, if they break their
ranks, or run over into the camp of the enemy; the common soldier is not
herein bound to observe their commands, or follow their example.

And that which order and discipline is in an Army, the same are aws and
statutes in an established State. And this is all that may be clearly collected
out of S. Paul's (...), a legal and orderly subjection. And as for those higher
powers whereof he speaks, they are sundry forms and kinds of government, or the
several degrees of the same government. There is a Monarchy where a King
commands in chief; an Aristocrocy that is swayed and ruled by select States and
Senutors; a Democracy where the power of government is vested and lodged in the
common people. And they that are members of any of these, must conform
themselves to the law of the whole, and testify their subjection: and as to
the several forms, so to the different degrees of the same government; to every
degree of superiority, supreme and subordinate, even to the meanest and lowest
Officer, a petty and a parish Constable. And that Text of Saint Peter may well
serve for a Commentary upon Saint Paul, 1 Pet. 3.2.21.14. Submit your selves to
every ordinance of man for the Lords sake; whether it be to the King as
supreme, or unto governors, as unto those that are sent by him. Which is all
one, as if Saint Peter had expressed himself more particularly, and come home
to the present case of the Kingdom, To the King as to the Supreme, or to the
Parliament as to the Governors that are sent by him. For the King and
Parliament as they are joined together in the civil polity and constitution of
our Kingdom, so most they be conjoined in our subjection. And it is an
undeniable principle in reason; subordinata non pugnant. The supreme and
subordinate do not fight in their nature, or in action and outward opposition;
Howsoever the vulgar sort conceive and misjudge the contrary; and they that go
about to make them fight against each other, or endeavor to divide betwixt
them, they show themselves the disciples of the Florent ne, and well versed in
his politiques, Divide and impera: That so by dividing betwixt both, they may
rule alone.

Fourthly, A Touch of charity to our Christian Brethren.
There must be a Touch of charity to our Christian Brethren. God is love says
St. John, 1 John 4.8. not only causally, as the efficient and the author, but
formally and in his own nature. And there is not any spiritual or supernatural
quality whereby we approach and draw nearer unto God; and more perfectly
communicate in the divine nature, then the grace of love. Beloved, let us love
one another; for love is of God; and every one that loves is born of God and
knows God, 1 John 4.7. and if God is love, and love comes of God, then sure
those spirits that are of God, must needs have this Touch of charity.

And yet if we bring the greater part of the Metal to the true Touchstone,
Three Characters of the Donatists.
they manifestly bewray the want of it. I will only acquaint you with some of
the Marks and Characters of the old Donatists as I find them alleged by
Optatus, and exemplisie them in the Donatists of the last stamp. And they are
Three in number.

First, was the engrossing and as it were monopolizing of the name of the
Church, The engrossing the name of the Church.
as if they alone had the Patent for it. Optat. lib. 2.
Vultis vos solos esse totum, qui in omni toto non estis. says Optatus of
them. And how fitly does this Character agree to the Church of Rome, Babylon of
the West, who prides her self with Babylon in the East, and speaks in her
Ancient language, Isa. 47.8. I am and none else besides me, assuming and
usurping the style and Title of the Catholic Church, which is the confusion
of a particular with an universal, and withal implies a gross and evident
contradiction. For if it be the Roman, it is not Catholic; and if the
Catholic Church, it is no longer Roman.

Secondly, The disclaiming of Brotherly communion.
Optat. lib. 1.
Nolunt se Fratres dici, says Optatus. They thought it a disparagement to be
known for their Brethren.

And herein the Church of Rome offends as in the former, who deny unto the
Protestant party all right and title unto the Church as their common Mother,
will in no wise acknowledge them for their Brethren; Brand them with the odious
name of Heretics, and accurse them unto death.

Thirdly, a third Character of the Donatists, Opprobrious and reproachful
speeches.
who having made choice of Scripture for their Text, they were wont to Comment
upon it with shameless railings and revilings. Nullus vestrum est qui non
convitia nostra suis tractatibus misceat. Lectiones dominicas incipitis, and
tractatus vest os ad uostras injurias explicatis. Optaet. lib. 4.
Profertis Evangelium and facitis absonti fratri convitium, as Optatus relates
it.

Not to speak of the open Enemy of Religion; those railing Rabshakehs of
Priests and Jesuits: are there not a great part even of professing Protestants
that are guilty of this sin? and may not that of the Psalmist be sitly applied
to many of them? Psalm. 50.20. Thou sit and speak against thy brother:
Thou slanderest thine own mothers son. What else mean those paultry Pamphlets,
lying Libels, defamatory Declarations, bitter Sarcasms and invectives? So that
there is just cause to renew St. Hilaries complaint of old, Hilar. ad Constant.
l. 2.
Cum alter coepit esse Anathema alteri; prope jam nemo est Christi. When one
Christian bespatters and besprinkles another with scurrilous and scandalous
reports, what is now become of hristianity? Is not Christ well near lost among
us? O how are we fallen from the Primitive piety, purity and charity of the
ancient Christians for which they were so renowned in the eves of God and Men!
insomuch that it was taken up as an usual byword of commendation, and that
from the mouths of the Heathen, Tertul. Apolog.
Vide ut invicem se diligunt. See how these Christians love one another. And
may not the contrary be charged home upon us. See how these Christians hate and
spleen, yea see, see not without a just passion of shame and grief, how they
malice and malign each other.

Fifthly, A Touch of Humility in respect of themselves.
There must be a Touch of humility in respect of themselves. God is the high
and losty that dwells in the high and holy place, with him also that is of an
humble and contrite spirit. So he speaks of himself, Isa. 57.15. There are but
two places where God dwells. The High, and the Low. The highest Heaven. And the
lowest heart.

There is nothing more opposite to the nature of God then humility, as being
the most high: And yet nothing more suitable to his affection and desire.

The spirits that are of God must be spirits of humility. Two manner of ways.
And yet both

1. In their inward Temper and constitution. 2. In their outward carriage and
behavior.
First, they must be spirits of humility in their inward temper and
constitution. 1. In their inward temper and constitution.
Such a one was St. Paul, reporting himself the least of Saints, and yet the
greatest of all sinners. Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners
whereof I am chief, 1 Timothy 1.15. There St. Paul was the chief of sinners. Unto
me who am less then the least of all Samts, is the grace given, Ephesians. 3.8.
Here we find him the least of all Saints, (...), less then the least; which if
it were Emphatically and thoroughly translated, should be rendered minimissimo; a
degree above the superlative, wherein St. Paul dstracts as much from himself as
he adds unto the word. Even so the spirits that are of God must have a mean
conceit of their own excellency, a weak apprehension of their own strength, a
low prised opinion of the sublimity of their gifts and graces.

Secondly, 2. In their outward carriaye and behavior.
the spirits that are of God must be spirits of hvmility in their outward
carriage and behavior. The Kings of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them;
and they that exercise authority upon them are called Benefactors. Vos autem
non sic. But it shall not be so among you, Luke 22.25, 26. where our Savior
lays down a direct and a Diametral opposition betwixt the rule of the
Gentiles, and the power and authority of his Disciples.

And if it be excepted that Christ only forbids a Tyrannical Government, Let
them consult with the Original in St. Luke, and they shall not find it (...)
but (...), which notes the orderly Exercise and Administration of it.

And in case our Savior cashiers not the jurisdiction and Lordship of the
Clergy, yet doubtless he condemns the Domineering and Lording of the Clergy.
And Saint Peter is most express and punctual in the point, Not as Lords over
God's Heritage, 1 Pet. 5.3. Away with the Domineering and Lording over men's
consciences or persons; away with that supercilious and stately carriage to
others; or those of their own rank and order, bearing thunder and lightning in
their countenances: Brow beating and looking a skue upon men, as if they were
unworthy of a full eyed glance, or a fair aspect. These, these are not the
things that honor them, though never so honorable and reverend in themselves.
But casiuess of access, affability, meekness, and gentleness, and in the height
of dignity, the lowliness of humility.

And it was sovereign council of a holy and wise man to the British Bishops
and Monks of Bangor, summoned by Austin the Monk to convene him in a Synod;
That if he were humble and lowly in his carriage, They should then give him the
right hand of fellowship, and agree with him as the servant of God. The spirits
that are of God, must be spirtis of humility.

Fourthly, the fourth and last thing observable in this trial, Metalists,
lapidaries, The Metalists or Lapidaries of two sorts.
or the parties that must make this Trial. And they are of two sorts.

1. Private Christians. 2. Public Officers.
1. Private Christians.
The first sort of Metalists that must have a hand in the Trial of spirits, are
private Christians.

The Church of Rome does many ways usurp over the rights and liberties of the
common people, denying them the knowledge of the Scriptures, thereby to
blindfold and hoodwink them in ignorance; that so being hooded like unto Hawks,
they may fist them as they list, and carry them about at pleasure: And as they
bereave them of the reading of the Scriptures in a known tongue, so do they
abridge them of all power, of trial and examination.

And yet this is a duty which St. Paul presses with a great deal of
earnestness, Botrum carpe, spinam cave: Cathedra Mosis vitis erat: Phariseorum
mores spinae erant. Botrum inter spinas caute lege; ne dum quaeris fructum,
laceres manum. Et cum audis bona dicentem, ne imiteris mala sacientem, Quae
dicunt facite, legite uvas: quae autem faciunt, facere nosite. cavete spinas.
August. Tract. 46. in Evang. secund. Johan. Grandis est prudentiae, aurum in
lvto quae eye Hiero. Epist. ad Laetam.
Try all things, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. (...) the very self same word that is used in
the Text. And the Exhortation is directed not to the Pastor alone, but to the
Common people.

And it is recorded to the perpetual commendation of the noble Beraeans, Acts
17.11. That they searched the Scriptures with all readiness whether those
things were so. (...). They discerned and judged of them. And what is it that
debarrs the people from, or hinders them in the doing of it, who are rational
men as well as others, endued with the faculty and use of reason?

I speak as to wise men, judge ye what Isay, so Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Cor.
10.15. And many of them are not only rational but spiritual, inwardly
enlightened with the spirit: And he that is spiritual judges all things, says
the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.15. not indisinitely and simply all things: not all
the mysteries of Art or Nature, not all the secrets of Reason and Religion; but
all things that fall within the latitude and compass of the proper object. As
the Eye sees all things; that is, all sorts of colors: and the Ear hears
all things; that is, the differences of all sounds: even so the spiritual man
judges all things that are essentially and absolutely necessary to his
Salvation; not that he is qualified with that extraordinary gift of discerning
of spirits, which was peculiar to the first age of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 12.10.
not that he has the judgment of Definition to mint any new Articles of faith,
and Magisterially to determine the Rules of belief and manners: yet has he the
judgment of discretion, inabling him out of an inward spiritual light to judge
of things according to the written word, and no otherwise. I say to judge
according to rule, as well as others.

For not only the Church of God in the general, but each private and particular
person may truly and confidently affirm of himself, and say with the Spouse in
the Canticles, Cant. 2.4. Introduxit me in cellam vinartam, Christ has led me
into his wine celler: that is, (as Bernard in Cant.
Bernard sweetly applies it) He has revealed to me, even unto me, though a
private Christian, the knowledge of heavenly mysteries.

2. Public Officers and those two.
A second sort of Metalists that must have a hand in the trial of Spirits, are
public officers: and they are of two sorts.

1. The Magistrate. 2. the Minister.
1. First the Magistrate, the Supreme Magistrate, The Magistrate.
the King or Prince must try the spirits by re-enacting religious and politic
Laws, by making use of the Civil Sword, and by a coactive and coercive power
compel men to obedience.

For if ordinary Justices by a derived authority challenge this power and
privilege as inherent and inseparable from their places, to bind men to the
peace, and to the good behavior; then much more the Supreme Justice may, must
bind men to the peace of the State; and bind them to their good behavior in
the Church, to worship God in this or that manner, as they shall establish;
provided always that all their Decrees and Constitutions be agreeable to the
general rules of Church Government, (...) Decency Order, Edification; and
thereof not every private person, but the King with the great Council of the
Land must be the Supreme and Sovereign Judge. How else is the King their
Sovereign? how is it the Supreme Court of Parliament?

2. Secondly, the Minister must try the spirits, The Minister.
and that either as solitary and single by himself apart, or gathered together
in Synods, Councils, Provincial, National, General. By teaching publicly in
the Congregation, therein informing men of their duty; by laying hold of the
Keys of the Church, and by denouncing sometimes the censure of Excommunication
against those that are obstinate and incorrigible.

And unless there be this Trial of Spirits by the public Magistrate and
Minister; Kingdoms will estsoone degenerate into the Cyclops Commonwealth,
(...) wherein no man will hear or obey another.

All things will grow into a confusion, yea into a combustion both in Church
and State. The public worship of God will be as a peal of Changes without tune
or order: and not only the Bells in the Steeple, but the Ministers in the
Pulpit will ring Awke (as in times of combustion) the Treble, the Tenor, the
Little, the Great Bell will jar, Hieron. advers. Lucif.
and strike against each other: Tot erint Schismata quot Sace^dotes (as Hierom
tells the Luciferians) There will be as many Schisms as Ministers.

The Independency of Churches will breed (as may justly be feared) an
Independency of Pastors; and the Independency of Pastors will end in the
Independency of the people. Every man will be a Law to himself.

Two things there are which are the bane and ruin of a Church.

1. Dependency. 2. Independency.
A slavish dependency upon the opinions, humors, and practices of men in place
of eminency.

A Royal independency in respect of lawful and just authority: We have surfered
much of late by Dependency on the one hand, God grant we suffer not as much by
Independency on the other.

And so I pass from the Matter to the Motive, The second part of the Text. The
Motive Therein a threesold circumstance.
the last part of the Text, as it lies couched in these words: For many false
Prophets are gone out into the world. Wherein we may take notice of a threefold
circumstance.

1. Their Nature; False Prophets. 2. Their Number; Many. 3. Their active
diligence and restless endeavors, or their manifestation and discovery; They
are gone out into the world.
1. First they are described from their name and nature, First their Name and
Nature: False Prophets.
False Prophets. There are (...), and (...). False Christians of private rank
and quality, and false Prophets of public office and employment. And that
which makes them such is not any defect or want in their profession. Beware of
false Prophets which come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are
ravening wolves, Mat. 7.15. Quaenam sunt istae pelles ovium nisi nominis
Christiani extrinsocus superficies, says Tertul. de Prescript. adv. Haerot. c.
4.
Tertullian: what is this sheeps clothing but the outward superficies of
Christianity. Ravening wolves are clad in sheeps clothing; and false Prophets
are outside professors, and wear the livery of the true Religion.

Neither is it the impurity of their lives that denominates them to be such:
For truth and falsehood relate to the understanding, as the proper object of it.
But the habits of good and evil are placed in the Will, as in the subject: and
it is not the pravity of the Will, but the error of the Judgment that gives
them this style and title; It is corruption of manners that argues a bad
Christian; but erroneous Doctrine that makes a false Prophet.

The Aposte Saint Paul lays down a threefold badge or cognizance of them in
his farewell Sermon at Ephesus, A threesold badge of false Prophets.
Act. 20.29, 30.

For I know this that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among
you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking
perverse things, to draw Disciples after them.

1. The first badge of false Prophets is spiritual cruelty; Spiritual cruelty.
Not sparing the flock. And no marvel, as being ravening wolves. So far shall
they be from sparing it, that they shall disperse and scatter it abroad, devour
and worry it, rend and tear it in pieces, with Church distractions and
divisions.

2. Prodigious and portentuous Doctrine.
A second badge of false Prophets is prodigious and and portentuous Doctrine;
misbegotten Monsters of strange opinions: Speaking perverse things, (...), They
shall draw the Word the wrong way, and cause convulsions in Religion.

3. The third badge of false Prophets, An itch of Pride and vainglory.
is an itch of pride and vain glory, To draw Disciples after them. For pride,
as it is the Mother of all Heretics, so it slews it self in nothing more than
inveigling and intangling others with their opinions. Numquam erat haereticus
quisuas non habuerit. Philumenas Pam. de Apell. in Presc. adv. baeret. Totus
adulter, and praedicationis, and carnis It is Tertullians character of
Hermogenes, that he did not only adulterate the Word of God, but was likewise
guilty of corporal adultery and uncleanness. Tertul. advers. Hermog cap. 1.


This is the aspiring ambition of false Prophets, to be the ringleaders of a
Faction; to be the Captains of a Troop, or Company; Colonels of a Regiment; to
carry four hundred men after them, with Theudas in the Acts; and to be followed
by a multitude: and their Army for the most part consists of (u) Women; which
lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts; as Saint
Paul sets them forth, 2 Timothy 3.6. (...), little women (as the word imports)
silly women; as the last Translation renders it, vicious and sinful women,
laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts.

2. Their Number; Many.
The second circumstance in the description of false Prophets, is their Number;
Many.

Behold a company, as Leah spoke at the birth of Gad. And they may fitly answer
with the Fiend in the Gospel, Our name is Legion, for we are many.

To rehearse and reckon up the false Prophets that have pestered and plagued
the Church of God, were not only impossible, but unprofitable. This were to
recall those ancient Heretics out of their graves, and to breath the spirit of
life into their Heresies, which are dead and rotten long ago: and let them
never rise again, no not in the mention or confutation of them.

It is well observed of our blessed Savior, that he did willingly prete^m^,
and pass over many capital and heinous sins; that he never let fly an arrow at
Idolatry in the New Testament, which is so severely interdicted and mentioned
in the Old. Yet did he every where take to task the Formality and Hypocrisy of
the Scribes and Pharisees, as being the sin of the present time and age.

And I shall herein follow our Saviors example, and purposely baulk and wave
the false Prophets of former times, and only point out some few that have
infected and infested the Church of late, and endanger our Church and State at
present: and they are four in number.

1. The Papist. 2. The Secinian. Four sorts of false prophets.
3. The Arminian. 4. The Antinomian.
1. The first sort of false Prophets is the Papist. The Papists.
This is the proper name of the Pope, who is styled the false Prophet, (...),
in the superlative degree of excellency. -- And I saw three unclean spirits
like Frogs come out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the
Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet, Rev. 16.13. The Dragon is the
Devil; The Beast, the Roman Empire; The false Prophet, the Pope. That is the
common exposition. And out of the mouth of these three came three spirits: And
they are Monks and Friars, Priests and Jesuits.

Like Frogs 1. for their impurity; unclean spirits they are termed in the Text;
even as Frogs for the most part live in morish and mirie places.

2. Frogs for their numberless number, and infinite multitude.

3. And Frogs Quae est ista secunda plaga, Ran^ in abundantia? In Ranis
haeretici intelliguntur atque Philosophi. Habes^ congruenter signatam
haereticorum pravitatem, si censideres randr^m loquacitatem. Aug. de cenve. 10.
praec. and 10. plag. cap. 2.
for their obstreperous voice, and loud outcries, whose croakings are nothing
else but only the self same confused clamor of their Holy Father the Pope, and
their Holy Mother the Church: They have no other tone besides.

These are the spirits of Devils, Rev. 16.14. An expression of an high nature,
such as the Scripture scarce affords a parallel; not men of a divelish strain
or temper alone; not the Incubi or Succubi, or imps of the Devil; not Devils
incarnats, as it is said of John the 22. but the spirits of Devils. The Devil
is a spirit himself, and these are the spirits of that spirit; the very
Extract, the Elixar, and quint-essence of the Devil. And as the Pope is the
false Prophet, so Popery is a pack of falsehood, and a Congeries, and a Mass of
errors. God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a ly, 2
These. 2.11. (...), a Lie in the Singular Number, to show that popery is nothing
else but a prodigious and a horrible lie.

2. The Socinian.
A second kind of false Prophets are the Socinians.

A Hydra, a monster of many heads. I will only touch one or two of them.

His blasphemy against the word of God.

1. The written word of the Scriptures. 2. The essential and eternal word of
Christ himself.
Such are his blasphemies against the written word, that he submits it to the
Tribunal and Judgment seat of Reason, which if it be pure and sound, it is
able to discern and judge of it, even before the illumination of the spirit.

Neither does he further allow it, or credit the authority, then it is
consonant and agreeable to the rules of reason. And this is it that causes him
to reject the Like unto the Heathen Romans in Tertullian, Apolog. cap. 5. Apud
vos divinitas de bumano arbitratu pensitatur; nisi homini Deus placuerit, Deus
non erit. Homo jam Deo pre ^itius esse debe^.
Divinity of Christ, for that it crosses and thwarts the apprehension of humane
reason, and makes Christian Religion a laughing flock to Turks and Jews, and a
stu^^bling block to other ^^^idels. And herein appears his Blasphemy against
the essential word Christ, in that he denies His nature as the eternal Son of
God; His office as a Priest to offer himself in sacrifice as an All-suffieient
satisfaction to Gods justice, and to expiate our sins in his blood. All that he
will acknowledge of Christ, is, that he was a great Prophet, whose errand it
was to enlighten the world with his heavenly Doctrine. That he was the
Interpreter of Gods mind and will: and in this sense only he owns him for a
Mediator, (...), There is one Mediator, even the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5.
That is, as he expounds it, one Interpreter; thus wresting Scripture to his own
destruction. But as for the Priesthood of Christ he does utterly void it, and
make it of none effect.

3. A third sort of false Prophets are the Arminians. The Arminian.
Those enemies of grace, as St. Austin styles Pelagius. And if we take a survey
of their several Tenets; their conditional election out of foreseen Faith;
their universal Redemption, wherein Christ has done as much for Judas and
Simon Magus, as for Simon Peter, in respect of the solution of the price, and
the impetration of the benenofit. The manner of conversion only by moral
swasions and minitations whereby Christ stands at the door and knocks, and
leaves the will to its inbred liberty to elicite its ownact to let Christ in,
or to bar and boult him out at pleasure,

The total and final Apostasy of the Saints. In all which they show themselves
profissed enemies to the riches of Gods grace and mercy. God I thank thee I am
not as other men are; It was a kind of humble confession of the proud Pharisee,
Luke 18.11. Gratias agit Deo quod non sit sicut, caeteri homines, (as Hierom
speaks of him.) And yet herein the Arminian outstrips the Pharisee, who will
not acknowledge himself beholding to the grace of God, nor let fall by way of
complement, God I thank thee I am not as other men. And if we put them (...) on
Saint Paul's question, Who makes thee differ from another? 1 Cor. 4.7. That
bubble of froth and bladder of air and wind Quod potai id Dei miserentis est,
quod tantum volui, cum possim nolle; id meaepotcstatis. Grevin. adv. Ames. page
253. Periculum est ne hic vermicuus stantopere insletur, ut crepet. Molin.
Anat. Armin. page 233.
Grevinthonius will return that peremptory and presumptuous answer, Ego memet
ipsum discerno, It is I, even I, that make my self to differ from another; in
direct opposition to the Apostle, and in open desiance of the grace of God.

The fourth and last kind of false Paophets are the Antinomian, The Antinomian.
or Lawless Christian. A Sect which was first sprung in the Egg, and the Bird
hatched in Germany, in the year 1538. Sleydan. Li. 12.
Sleydan reports in his Commentary, a Sect that cried down the preaching of
repentance, of the Decalogue, and did stiflly and strenuously maintain, that
though a Christians life was never so impure and filthy, yet was he justified
and approved in the sight of God, so long as he believed the promises of the
Gospel. These were Antinomians of the first Edition: but besides these, there
are other of a later Impression, yet little corrected or amended; who take away
the directive and regulating power of the Law under the Gospel; as if the free
grace of God in Christ were a Supersedeas, or a Writ of Ease to the moral Law,
so far forth as it respects a true convert and a sound Christian. And strange
it is that such a thought should ever fasten or settle in a Christian; That the
moral Law which was engraven in the heart of man at the first, and given unto
Adam as a rule in the state of Innocence; That Law which Christ came not to
destroy but fulfill; That Law which is indispensable in its own nature; That Law
which is an express copy of the original purity and perfection that is in God;
and as some conceive shall be inviolably observed in the highest Heaven; That
that Law should receive the consummation with the consummatum est; and breath
out the last spirit with Christ upon the Cross.

And as there are Antinomians in Religion, This Sermon was preached before any
alteration happened in Church or State.
so are there lawless. Christians in Church or State, who either deny obedience
to things legally established or withdraw their obedience before they be
orderly reversed and repealed. And no marvel that they which make light of the
Decalogue, should make little or no account of a Statute: and that they who
dispense with the Commandments of God, should break the Commandments of men,
and that without a Disp^nsation. True it is that as all created truth is
subject unto error, so is all created goodness liable to several defects and
imperfections. The Laws of men are not like to those of the Medes and Persians
that changed not; but a they are provisionally made and in reference to the
time, so are they alterable upon good grounds.

There is not any Order, Rite, Ceremony, but may be displaced, annulled, and
pulled down; by the self same hand that first founded and set it up. And yet
methinks a Law, as long as it is in being, should be in force, and have an
obligatory power, though not over the inward, yet over the outward man, to
exterior conformity and obedience. And for private men to become Reformers,
and attempt an innovation in Church or State, is a strange prolepsis of
disobedience: an anticipation and a high disparagement to the Authority of the
Highest, and brings men within the compass of Antinomians, or lawless
Christians.

3. The third and last circumstance of the Text, They active diligence. They
are gone out into the World.
concerns the active diligence and restless endeavors of these false Prophets.
They are gone out into the world. The Devil is a professed Peripatetick, a
constant walker. From whence come thou? from going to and fro in the earth,
and from walking in it. That is the Devils answer to Gods demand, Job 2.2. The
Pharisees of old learned this trick of the Devils trade, and compassed sea and
land to make a proselyte, Mat. 23.15. And our upstart and late born Pharisees
of Rome: the Priests and Jesuits are compassers likewise of sea and land, that
so they may compass their own ends; and may justly say with him in the Poet,
Quae Regio in terris nostri non plena laboris. There is not any Land or Nation
under Heaven that may not testify their unwearied pains and travel, to make
men proselytes to Rome, convert them not to Christ, but to the Pope; and when
they are made, they are tenfold more the Children of Hell than they were at the
first.

2. Or else secondly, Their manifestation. Apair. in (...)
this going out into the world imports the manifestation and discovery of false
Prophets, Exierunt; qui prius latebant manifesti sunt (as Aquinas glosses upon
the place.) They that before shrouded themselves, and walked in a disguise, are
now uncased and bare faced and laid open to every eye. It was a sad complaint
of reverend Calvin in his time, Calv. (...) Loc.
I loc nostrum saeculum horrenda quaedam sectarum portenta protulit. They are
his own Commentary upon the Text. And may not this complaint of his be renewed,
and as pertinently applied to our Church and Age, Hoc nostrum saeculum horrenda
quaedam sectarum portenta protulit. How do those spirits of Devils those three
unclean spirits like Frogs cover our land, as the Frogs did the land of Egypt?
How do these Frogs, Papists, Priests and Jesuits creep, and crawl, and croake
in every corner from one end unto the other. And which is most to be lamented,
How do these presumptuous Frogs come up into the Kings house, and into his
bedchamber; As they did into the house of Pharaoh, Exodus 8.2. How do the
Socinians, Arminians, Antinomians cover the face of our Kingdom, as the Locusts
covered the face of the earth in Egypt: so that the land is darkened, the light
of the Gospel is grown both dim and dark in many places? How do these Locusts
eat the herb of the land, the fruit of the trees, and every green thing, as
they did in Egypt. Exodus 10.15. And whereas the Locusts in the Revelation were
strictly prohibited to hurt the grass of the earth, or any green thing, Rev.
9.4. Yet these spiritual Locusts, Socinians, Arminians, and Antinomians attempt
and endeavor it: and so strong and powerful are their delusions, that if it
were possible they would deceive the very elect, Mat. 24.24. What should we do
in this case, but follow Saint John's counsel, Believe not every spirit. Take
heed of inconsideration and precipitancy of judgment; a lightness and
giddiness of belief, Try all things, beware of inconstancy in judgment, an
unsteadiness and sickleness of belief; let us not be carried about with every
wind of Doctrine. This is flat folly, gross impiety, and extreme danger to
believe every spirit.

And in the second place we must Try the spirits; whether they are of God, in
respect of the beginning and Author both of their inward and outward calling.
Whether they are for God, his free grace and glory, as their ultimate and last
end.

And try them we must, not by any counterfeit or false Touchstone, pretended
Revelations, lying Miracles, excellency of Parts and Abilities, holiness of
Life, success and truth of Events: But by the right and true Touchstone; the
strait and inflexible rule of the written word; to the Law and to the
Testimonies: And as we must try them by the true Touchstone, so likewise by the
true Touch; Holiness in respect of God; Peaceableness in respect of the Church
and State; Obedience to Authority, supreme and subordinate; Charity toward our
brethren; Humility in their own persons. Try we false Prophets in their nature,
by a threefold badge and cognizance; Spiritual Cruelty, Prodigious Doctrine,
theitch of pride and vainglory. Try we them in their number, in their several
sorts and kinds, The Papist, Socinian, Arminian, Antinomian. And this duty of
Trial reflects upon the private Christian, The public Officer, the Magistrate,
the Minister.

And as we must try these spirits, so God by these spirits tries us, the
stability and stedfastness of our Faith, the sincerity and soundness of our
love; our love to the truth, and the truth of our love. There must be Heresies
among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest among you, 1 Cor.
11.19. (...) says Saint John in the Text; (...), says Saint Paul here; that
so by our trial of them, a^^ (...) trial of us by them; we may be proved and
approved in his light, (...) de pr^scrip. adv. Haeret cap 1.
Vt fides habendo tentatioon^^ (...) ctiam probationem (as Tertullian has it)
(...) our Faith being tried may be purified and resined. Many shall be
purified, made white and tried. That is Daniels prophecy of the latter times,
Dan. 12.10. And these are the times wherein this prophecy of his is ace
mplished and fulfilled. These are bleaching times wherein God lays out the
faith and love of his Saints a whiting, and that by means of this ^ery trial:
that so being tried and purified, they may be made white. I conclude all with
the pronouncing of a blessing, which is the last duty of the Minister in the
Pulpit; and shall be the close of my Sermon. The great Apostle Saint James
shall give it, Jam. 1.12. Blessed is the man that endures temptation; That
tries the spirits: That is tried by the spirits; For when he is tried he shall
receive the Crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him.

Soli Deo Gloria.
AGRIPPA: OR THE SEMI-CHRISTIAN.

A SERMON Preached at Fakenham in Norfolk, in the Lecture course.

The children are come to the birth, and there is no strength to bring forth,
Isa. 37.3. LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Will. Rands at Fleetbridge. 1659.

AGRIPPA, OR, THE SEMI-CHRISTIAN.
ACTS 26.28. Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou perswadest me to be a
Christian.
THe threefold Wish of St. Augustine, The Introduction.
wherewith he was not only affected, but even transported in his desire, is
not unknown; yea, far better known to many of you, then to my self. That he
might see Rome in her flower and beauty; Christ in the flesh; And St. Paul in
the Pulpit.

To this threefold Wish of St. Augustin's, St Chrysostom annexes and adds a
Fourth; Mallem e carcere. That if so great a happiness had been afforded him as
to have been St. Paul 's Auditor, he might have heard him out of the Prison.
And what these two great Lights and Stars of the Church, stars of the first
magnitude importunately desired, is after a sort presented, and held forth unto
us in this Chapter. St. Paul in the Pulpit; St. Paul in the Prison: Pleading
and reasoning the cause of Christ and Christianity, as a prisoner at the Bar.
And as it is observed of the good Thief upon the Cross, that he preached a
very excellent Sermon, though he had none of the best Pulpits. Even so the
Apostle St. Paul, had no other Pulpit then the Bar, which must needs be
acknowledged to be none of the best; and yet he made a rare and choice Sermon.
Rare for the hearers, Festus the Governor; but above all King Agrippa, which
St. Paul reckons no small part of his happiness: I think my self happy King
Agrippa, because I shall answer for my self this day before thee Acts 26.2.
These were St. Paul's hearers, a select and a Royal auditory; and yet the
Sermon was more choice for the preacher, St. Paul; of whom it is most true in
the second place, and next to his Lord and Master, Never man spoke like this
man, John 7.46.

One in whom the (...).
Goddess of persuasion Pitho herself, took up her Quarters in his lips: Even as
a swarm of Bees are said to have lighted in the mouth of another: One, who left
(...). Pericles Atheniensis.
a prick, a sting behind in the hearts of his Hearers, as Bees are sometimes
wonted to do; and is reported of the Heathen Orator. One, who insinuating and
winding himself into the conscience of King Agrippa in a penetrating and
piercing interrogation King Agrippa, believe thou the Prophets? I know that
thou believe, ver. 27. Being after a sort overpowered and overcome with the
energy and efficacy of St. Paul's Sermon; he breaks forth by way of admiration
and astonishment in the words of the Text. Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost
thou perswadest me to be a Christian.

The Text then as you see is a Part, and that the Conclusion and Close of St.
Paul's Sermon; preached not so much before, as to King Agrippa, and consisting
of these Four particulars.

1. The end of our Conversion, The Parts of the Text.
(...), To be a Christian. 2. The manner of our Conversion, (...), Perswadest.
3. The means of our Conversion. Thou St. Paul, a Preacher of righteousness in
the public Ministry. 4. The impediment or hindrance of the means; Almost,
(...) It was but a little or half persuasion, not thoroughly, or altogether.
1. In the End there is Excellency, incomparable and matchless, excellency It
is an excellent thing, and every way most desirable, to be a Christian. 2. In
the manner, and that by way of persuasion, there is a great deal of sweetness,
and gentleness. 3. In the means, there is a wonderful, yea, an infinite power
and efficacy. 4. In the impediment or hindrance, ineffectualness in regard of
the indisposition and averseness of the person.
I begin with the end of our Conversion. To be a Christian: The first Part of
the Text: The end of our conversion. To be a Christian.
Which is first in Intention though last in Execution; and must be first in
handling, yet last mentioned in course and order of the words.

The name of Christian, denotes our communion with Christ our Head; as that of
Catholic points out the fellowship with our fellow members; which occasioned
that speech of Pacianus of old, Christianus mihi nomen est, Catholicus vero
cognomen. Pacianus ad Simpron, Ep. 1.
Christian is my name and Catholic my surname. And as the head is more
excellent then the members: so the name of Christian is to be preferred before
the surname of Catholic. A high and honorable name, that had the City of
Antioch for the mother of it. And the disciples were called Christians first in
Antioch, Acts 11.26. A name wherein they gloried and boasted as then chiefest
privilege. Insomuch that Sanctus the Martyr being demanded his name, City,
Country, returned this as a Catholic answer to all their interogatories, I am
a Christians. And Blandina being upon the Rack cried out in the midst of her
Torments. Christiana fum; and was forthwith refreshed with new comfort. And it
was the general shout and acclamation of the Armies at the Coronation of
Jovinian, who would not accept of their choice to be Emperor, but upon this
condition; (...). We are all here Christians.

There are two sorts of Christians. Two sorts of Christians.


1. A Dogmatical, or Doctrinal. 2. A Regenerate, or renewed Christian.
First, A dogmatical or doctrinal Christian.
and exemplifies and expounds the Truth of his Belief in an outward profession
of Religion, as the best Comment upon the Text.

And hereof there were two degrees or steps, in the Ancient Church.

1. Catechumeni. 2. Fideles.
An alius est intinctis Christus, alius Audientibus? Tertul. de ^oenit. cap. 6.
1. Audientes. 2. Intincti.
The former of these was but as the setting of the Plant; The latter as the
watering of it: and so some gloss and sense that Text of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 3.6.
de Vagano Catechumenum seci; Ille baptisavir: Optatus cont. Parm. lib^^. Sic.
alba lana regalem transit in purpuram; quo modo Catechumenus in side^em. Opt.
l. 5.
I have planted; of a Pagan I have made him a Catechist or a Hearer; Apollo
watered; He it was that baptized: For even as white wool being dipped in a
crimson or searlet Dye, is turned into purple, and so changes the name and
color: In like manner the Catechist or Hearer of the Word being drenched in
the water of Baptism as the Laver of Regeneration, passes into the number of
Believers; and thereby acquires and gets the name of a Doctrinal, or professing
Christian.

Secondly, A Regenerate or renewed Christian.
who has put on the new man which after God is created in righteousness and
true holiness: and is renewed in the spirit of his mind, as the Apostle
describes him, Ephesians. 4.23, 24.

This name of Christian may be considered in a double manner.

1. As a Derivative, from Christ the Primitive. 2. As a Diminutive, in respect
of Christ.
First, A Derivative name from Christ.
which signifies nothing else but an Anointed. And it is most true of the name
(...), what the Spouse of Christ a firmes of her Welbeloved, Cant, 1.3. Thy
name is as ointment poured forth. Nor was this ointment poured only upon
Christ but upon us. Like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down
upon the beard, even Aarons beard: that went down to the skirts of his garment,
Psalm. 1.33.2. And as he was Christ or anointed, so we Christed from him, and
christened with the name of Christians.

Secondly, A Diminutive name in respect of Christ.
The name of Christians, is a Diminutive in respect of Christ, who was not
only Christus Domini, The Lord's anointed; but Christus Dominus, The Lord
anointed. With the oil of gladness above his Fellows, Psalm 45.6.1. Intensive.
2. Extensive. Both in the Intension and Extension of his gifts and graces. And
it was notably prefigured and shadowed forth by the different anointing of Saul
and David; Saul with a vial of oil, 1 Samuel 10.1. which is but a little vessel
and contains a small portion and quantity. But David with a Horn filled with
oil, 1 Samuel 16.1. which is an Emblem of plenty and abundance; And
hieroglyphically sets forth unto us, the fullness that was in Christ, as
Antitype unto David; Full of grace and truth, and of his fullness we have all
received, grace for grace, John 1.14.16.

The people of God then are styled Christians from Christ, and are (as the word
imports) the Lord's anointed; Christians not anointed with any material oil.
and yet not with any material oil, which was of great use and estimation with
Antiquity even unto Chrisma est oleum in nomine Christi consectum, quod cutem
conscientiae emollit, eaclusa duritie peccatorum; Isedem spiritui sancto parat,
ut invitatus, asperitate illa fugata, libenter inhabitare dignetur. Optatus.
superstition. And as for those of the Church of Rome they ascribe such a
sovereign virtue and efficacy unto it; that they have made Extreme unction one
of their seven Sacramenst. And by this craft they have their wealth, as
Demetrius the Silversmith pleaded the cause of the great Goddess Diana: Acts
19.25. And it is truly observed of these Popish shavelings; Non tam ungunt quam
emungunt. They do not so much bring oil to the sick as they take it away from
them. And it shall go hard with them, if they lose their oil and labor.

And seeing it is not any material oil, But with an oil of another nature; of
three several sorts and kinds.
wherewith Christians are anointed, it must needs be of another, of a diviner
nature; and that of these three sorts and kinds.

First, The Oil of spiritual Illumination.
Oleo spiritualis Illuminationis. The oil of spiritual Illumination. For oil
was commonly poured upon the Head: My head with oil did thou not anoint, Luke
7.46. And may symbolically point out unto us the gifts of the understanding
which are seated in the Brain. And the chief use of oil was for Lamps and
lights, and fitly denotes the Illumination of the mind. This is that anointing
commended by St. John, 1 Epist. cap. 2. v. 27. But the anointing which ye have
received of him, abides in you: and ye need not that any man teach you.

Perperam pharatici homines testimonium arripiunt, ut ab Ecclesia usum externi
ministerii excludant. Calvin. in Locum.
A Text much perverted and wrested by the giddy Anabaptists, to exclude and shut
out the public Ministry out of the Church, as Calvin well observes upon the
place. And yet all that the Apostle intends, amounts to no more then this; That
the Disciples of Christ being taught Magisterially by the Spirit of God, as the
great Doctor of the Chair, were already instructed in those Truths, which St.
John inculcates and presses in the course of his Ministry: so that there was
no need of teaching them, as of things altogether unknown, or as those that
were rude and ignorant. For the Scripture sometimes seems to deny things simply
and absolutely, which must be understood only by way of comparison. An
instance whereof we have in that of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 1.19. For Christ sent me
not to baptize but to preach the Gospel. That is, not to baptize in the first
place; or not so much to baptize as to preach the Gospel. And parallel here
unto is this Text of St. John, Ye need not that any man teach you: but as the
same anointing teaches you of all things; where the Apostle does not dispute
the necessity of man's teaching, much less samply deny it; but preferrs the
teaching of the Spirit in a comparative sense; as being Nisi revelet ille qui
intus est, quid dico, aut. juid loquor. Exterior, cultor arboris, interior
creator. Qui plantat and rigat extrinseous operatur: Hoc facimus nos. Aug. in
Joh. Tract. 26.
Intimus Magister, (as he calls it) that same inward Schoolmaster and Teacher
of the inward man. Let no man think says August. Tract. 4. Expos. in Epist.
Joan.
Augustine, That any man can learn any thing of man: If there be not one to
teach from within, Inanis noster strepitus est. All that we say is but a
beating of the Air, in vain, as a sounding Braesse, or a tinkling cymbal.

Secondly, Christians are anointed, Oleo-salutis Gratiae, The oil of saving
Grace.
For as Oil was applied unto the Head, so it served likewise to anoint the
Priest. And the oil of grace must not only enlighten the mind, but renew and
change the Heart. This is that oil which supples the conscience, makes smooth
the soul, and prepares an habitation for the spirit. All which are the proper
effects of it, and were erroneously, not to say idolatrously attributed by some
of the Ancients, to their Chrisme, or material Oy.

Thirdly, Christians are anointed, Oleo novae obedientiae, The oil of new
obedience.
For there were certain Officers known by the name of Alyptae among the
Heathen, and by them appointed to anoint Runners in a Race; and champions and
fellow-combatants, on their several sports and games. There being a double use
of oil with them.

1. Ad cursum. For running in a Race. 2. Ad certamen. For fight and skirmish.
And in both those consists, the new obedience of a Christian.

1. In a spiritual motion, running the way of God's commandments after David 's
example, Psalm. 119.33. So running that they may obtain according to St. Paul's
prescript, 1 Cor. 9.24. And that in doing and suffering the will of God, in
suffering death in Christ's quarrel. That is a Christians Race; Fox Martyr.
as () Mappalicus told the Proconsul the day before his death: To morrow (says
he) you shall see me Run for a wager. That of St. Paul's, Phil. 3.14. The price
of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

2. In a spiritual conflict and Fight, which St. Paul commends unto Timothy, as
a good soldier of Jesus Christ; Fight the good fight of Faith, 1 Timothy 6.12.
And whereof he triumphs in his own person, I have fought a good fight, 2 Timothy
4.7.

Thus have you seen in part, the end of our conversion, so far forth as may be
collected and gathered from the Etymology and signification of the name of
Christian; and affords unto us, a double instruction. A Double instruction from
the name of Christian.


1. First, as a Derivative from Christ, so it teaches us conformity and
resemblance. 2. Secondly, as a Diminutive in respect of Christ, so it shows a
disparity and disproportion.
First, As a Derivative name from Christ, it teaches conformity unto Christ.
teaches conformity and imitation of Christ's example. He that says he abides
in him, ought himself also to walk even as he walked, John 1 Epist. c. 2. v. 6.
(Even as he) for the quality though not for the equality of our walking. We
must tread in the same path, albeit we cannot take (...). Nazian. Orat. in
laud. Basil.
the same steps and strides, and follow him in the strictest and most proper
sense; That is, we must come after him. As St. Peter followed Christ into the
high Priests hall, (...) a far off, Matthew. 26.58. This is a Christians
definition, or description as it is rendered by (...). Basilius.
St. Basil. A Christian is a Resemblance of God according to the utmost of his
ability. And as we are called by the name of Christians, so we must not be
Christians by calling, and no more. The empty name without the nature, is but a
deaf Nut, a dead Fly, a mere mockery and cozenage, Reatus impii est pium
nomen. Salvianus, lib. 4.
A boly name is the guilt of an unholy person. As therefore it was sometime
said of Beatus Rhenanus Beatus Rhenanus nomine beatus, re vero beatissimus.
That he was blessed in his name, but more blessed in his nature. Even so they
that are Christians in style and title, should be much more Christians in Deed.
And as the Christian Emperors of Constantinople, were anointed with these words
uttered at that solemnity, Curopoclates.
(...). Be holy, be worthy. So Christians should make good their unction by
walking worthy of the vocation wherewith they are called. And approve
themselves to be the Lords anointed by being holy as he is holy; Christians
must be like unto oil in two respects.
and by being like unto oil in two particulars.

1. The nature of Oil. 2. The property of Oil.
First, In the nature of Oil. like unto St. Basil, to whom Nazianzen gives this
Elegy, (...). His words were thunder, and his life lightning. Nazian. in Epitap.
In the Parable of the Trees, the Olive makes boast of her fatness, Judges 9.9.
shall I leave my fatness? wherewith they honor God and men. This is the high
commendation of her oil. And Lamps that have oil for their matter, consume and
wast themselves to give light unto others. Such lamps should Christians be,
Burning and shining lights, like John the Baptist, shining in their Lives,
burning in their Deaths, yea and after their deaths too; like unto those
primitive Christians, who were condemned to the Faggot through Neroes cruelty,
and served as Beacons and Bonfires to give In usum noctmrni luminis. Tacitus.
light in the night season. A good man is a common Good, a public Treasure.
There is none so useful and profitable as the true Christian. (...). And when
the name of Christian was abusively turned into Cum perperam Chrestianus
pronunciatur a vobis de suavitate and benignitate compositum est. Tertul.
Apolog.
Chrestian in an Jrony and bitter Sarcasme; it was compounded and made up of
nothing else but sweetness and bounty; as Tertullian tells the Heathen, who
objected it, by way of contempt and scorn.

Secondly, Christians must be like unto oil in the properties, In the
properties of oil. Three properties of oil.


1. Simplicity and purity. 2. Gladness and cheerfulness. 3. Constancy and
continuance.
1. The first property of oil simplicity and purity.
but swims above other liquors. And herein Christians should assimilate oil,
And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5.11. For
what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness what communion has
light with darkness? 2 Cor. 6.14. What fellowship? Surely none at all. No more
then there is communion betwixt light and darkness. And yet St. Paul's
prohibition, (Have no fellowship) must not indefinitely and universally be
understood, but must be limited and bounded with a distinction, of the several
parts and branches of it.

1. There is a natural fellowship of breathing in the same air, of treading on
the same earth, and of performing those mutual offices whereunto we stand
obliged by the common interest of humanity. Such a fellowship as this, is
merely natural and so no way sinful, and impossible to be avoided. And if we
would utterly rid and free our selves of the society and company of wicked men,
we must follow St. Paul's advice, and needs go out of the world, 1 Cor. 5.10.
And yet herein the Worthies of former Times have been somewhat scrupulous and
suspicious. And the great Apostle St. John makes have and Fugiamus ne and
Balneum corruat, in quo est Cerinthus veritatis bostis: Eusebius. Histor. Eccles.
lib. 3. cap. 25.
leaps out of the Bath as soon as he casts his eye upon that Arch-Heretick
Cerinthus, as fearing a downfall of that place that had given entertainment to
the common enemy of Christianity.

Secondly, Jekoshaphat, for which he falls under just reproof, 2 Chronicles 19.2.
Should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord; therefore is
wrath upon thee from before the Lord.

Thirdly,

1. The one in the means of Grace, The Word, Sacraments, Prayer, which are pure
to the pure, as St. Paul umpiers the case, Tit. 1.15. and it is not another
sin that can defile my conscience, or pollute Gods ordinances.

2. The other in the works of sin and wickedness those unfruitful works of
darkness, as the Apostle calls them; which is absolutely interdicted and
forbidden. Herein we must be like unto oil that will not incorporate or mingle
with other liquors.

The second property of oil is gladness and cheerfulness. The oil of gladness,
The second property of oil, gladness and che erfulness.
Psalm. 45.7. And it is oil that makes the face to shine, Psalm. 104.15. This is
the natural effect of it. Christians must be like unto oil for their
cheerfulness. Their head must lack no ointment as the wise man's counsels Eccle.
9.8. there are none that have greater cause and matter of joy, and none that
are more excited and provoked to that duty. They are the men to whom St. Paul
sends those summons, Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say
rejoice. And it is a part of his charge else where, Phil. 4.20. (...). And
grieve not the holy Spirit of God, and how is that done, but by our immoderate
grief and sorrow. The Spirit of God is grieved by our grief, and sadded with
our sorrow; in so much that it was grown into a Proverbial speech among the
ancient Hebrews Spiritus sanctus non residet super beminem maestum Drusus
Fraeter Proesat. page 4.
That the Spirit of God rests not upon a man in heaviness. As being wholly
repugnant to the nature of it, a spirit of joy and gladness. The happy man is
the only merry man, and takes his name of happiness, from the greatness of his
(...).
Joy and Gladness.

The third property of oil is constancy and continuance, the Olive tree is
ever green and flourishing; a fit Emblem of perseverance. And hereunto the
Prophet David alludes in his own Person, Psalm. 52.8. I am like a green Olive
Tree in the House of God. And colors that are laid in oil will not wash off in
a storm, or tempest, The third property of oil. Constancy and continuance.
And without this they cannot avouch and justify themselves to be Christians
in the judgment of Tertullian Nemo christianus nisi qui ad sinem
perseveraverit. Tertul Praeser. adv. Haeret. Thomson.
There is no man that is to be ranked in the number of Christians, unless he
persevere and hold out unto the end. And therefore that distinction which is
fancied and fained by Diatrib. page 6. 7.
some, truth of being: and truth of duration: is fond and frivolous. Then may a
thing be said to be true for the substance and subsistence of the nature, when
it is permanent, and abiding for the time.

That only is true, that persevers, John 8.32. If ye continue in my word, then
are ye my Disciples (...), indeed and in truth. For howsoever that which is
false and Nemo personam diu sustinere potest: cito in raturam suam recidu ^^
quibus veritas non subest Seneca.
counterfeit alters and changes at every turn; yet Truth is uniform and like it
self, or rather like unto him whose name is I am, Exodus 3.14. I am the Lord,
and change not. Mal. 3.6. And may fitly apply and take up the Motto of that
Renowned Queen Semper eadem; as being one and the same for ever.

Secondly, The name of Christian as a diminutive in respect of Christ shows a
disparity.
shows a disparitiy betwixt Christ and Christians For though therebe a
conformity and resemblance, yet is it not a similitude of equality but of
proportion, and that joined with an infinite disparity and disproportion in
three respects.

1. A threesold disparity betwixt Christ and Christians
A Disparity of Nature. 2. A Disparity of Power. 3. A Disparity of Grace.
First, A disparity of nature.
But as for the highest and best of Christians he is but (...) a mere and bare
man. The Popes Parasites indeed hold him forth unto the world as a Petty God, a
mortal, or rather an immortal God: (...). And whereas Christ is God manifested
in the flesh, God and Man making up the same Hypostasy; the Pope is Nec Deus
nec homo Papa. Gratian.
neither God nor Man in the Canon Law, and so a professed Antichrist in his
nature.

Secondly, A disparity of power.
All power is given unto me in Heaven and Earth, Matthew. 28.18. there is no
mortal man may assume the like without blasphemous arrogance and presumption.
And yet he who has the name of Blasphemy written in his forehead, and exalts
himself not only above all that is called God, but above God himself; He it
is, who wears a threefold crown, and challenges a threefold power unto
himself, in Heaven, Earth, and Purgatory, where Christ has no Authority.

Thirdly, Disparity of grace.
Christ was full of Grace. 1 John 1.14. Christians are full too, but with a
vast and wide difference; the fullness of Christ is Plenitudo Fontis the
fullness of a Fountain; that is both Repletive and filling of his own person,
and is known by the name of Plentifulness. And diffusive and communicative of
it self to us, and passes under the name of bountifulness: Of whose fullness we
all receive grace for grace, Joh. 1.16. The fullness of a Christian is Plenitudo
vasis, The fullness of a scant and narrow vessel; Christ had the spirit dealt
out unto him, Not by measure, Joh. 3.34. A Christian likewise has it dealt out
unto him, but it is only (...) A measure of Faith, Romans 12.3.

In all which there is an infinite disparity and disproportion betwixt Christ
and Christians; insomuch as John the Baptist, who had not a greater born of
women, was very shie and jealous of usurping his name, who will not give his
glory unto another. And he confessed and denied not, but confessed, I am not
the Christ, Joh. 1.20.

And doubtless the Jesuits have a great deal to answer for their grand
Sacrilege and robbery in this respect; who not content with the common name of
Christians, style themselves Jesuits from Jesus by way of eminency and
perfection, as if they meant to make him but dimidiatum Mediatorem, a half
Mediator; and themselves coparceners, and parcel Saviors in the work of our
redemption; but they who love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, must take heed and
beware of the Jesuits.

Qui cum Jesu itis, non itis cum Jesuitis. The second general part of the Text
concerns the manner of our conversion, and that by way of persuasion: Agrippa
bespeaks Saint Paul, (...). Thou perswadest. The second part of the Text.


There are two strong Forts and Holds in man's nature, The manner of our
conversion. Persuades. Two strong holds in man's nature.
and those reared and raised up in the prime powers and faculties.

1. In the mind and understanding. 2. In the will and affections.
First in the mind there are (...), imaginations and thoughts, In the mind and
understanding.
and these are cast down by the conviction of the judgment.

Secondly, In the Will and Affections
and God casts down, and casts out these by the persuasion of the heart. God
persuades men to become Christians, he does not necessitate and compel them
whether they will or no. No man can come unto me, unless the Father draw him,
Joh. 6.44. And yet this atraction to Christ is not by force and violence, as a
Bear is drawn to the stake, but as a sheep is drawn to a green bough, allured
by delight and pleasure. This is a kind of drawing, Trahit sna quemque
voluptas, Those whom Christ draws, he draws (...). Chrysostom. Si Poetae dicere
licuit: trahit sua quemque voluptas; non necessitas, sed voluptas; non
obligatio, sed delectatio; quanto fortius nos dicere debemus, trahi hominem ad
Christum. Ramum viridem ostendis ovi, and trahis illam; Nuces puero
demonstrantur and trahitur, and quod currit trahitur. Amando trahitur, sine
laesione corporis trahitur; cordis vinculo trahitur. August. Tract. 26. in
Evang. secund. Johan.
willingly with cords of a man, and bonds of love, Hos. 11.4. Christ breaks not
into the heart by a spiritual Burglary, but he opens the doors of the heart, as
he did the doors of the house where his Disciples were assembled after his
Resurrection. He comes into the heart as he did to the house, (...), Joh.
20.19. Which being shut before, he caused them to fly open. He speaks to these
doors of the heart in a powerful and effectual manner. Lift up your heads O ye
gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come
in, Psalm. 24.7.

The conversion of a sinner is not only facilitated, but effected by persuasion
of the heart; God persuades Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Shem, Genesis 9.27.
God allures his Church, and speaks comfortably to her, Hos. 2.14. He beseeches
men in the mouth of his Ministers, 2 Cor. 5.20. This is most connatural unto
the will, which is far more easily led then drawn. Apud Reges etiam quae pro
sunt ita tamen ut delectent suadend a sunt. Seneca.
And it is verified of it what the Heathen man has observed concerning the
treating and dealing with Princes. Things profitable must be represented to the
heart of man rather with the face of delight, then of necessity.

And yet nevertheless this persuasion is not only a moral, but a physical cause
of man's conversion; not barely propounding the object as lovely and desirable,
but inclining and determining the Will, and eliciting the Act of it; August.
adv. Pelag. l. 1. c. 24.
wherein God does suadere and persuadere, working, Et veras revelationes, and
bonas voluntates, true revelations in the Mind, and good affections and desires
in the Will.

And as the same St. Augustine sweetly, Deus omnipotentissima facilitate
convertit, and ex nolentibus volentes facit. There is the facility of
persuasion, and an omnipotent kind of working, an invincible and irresistible
producing the effect, that sweetly concur and go together in man's conversion.

The third part of the Text is the means of our conversion. (Thou) Saint Paul's
preaching of the Word in the public Ministry. The third, part. The means of
our conversion, Thou.


The word preached has a pre-eminence and privilege above the word read, and
the lively voice a secret energy more then the dead Letter, which is dull and
flat in comparison of the other: But herein especially appears the efficacy of
the Ministry, that God has selected and made choice of it as his prime and
principal ordinance, that he has destinated and appointed to effectuate man's
conversion. The walls of Jericho were overturned by a blast of Rams-horns, and
those blown by the Priests, Josh. 6.5. And the Midianites discomfited by the
(...). As is moralized by Theodoret, in Librum Judicum.
sound of Trumpets, and breaking of Pitchers of Gideons soldiers, which more
forcible means could not effect. Judge. 7.22. Thus does God cast down those
strong holds in the soul, (...), that Saint Paul speaks of, by the breath of
man, whose breath is in his nostrills.

This efficacy of the word of God shows it self in these three particulars. The
efficacy of the word in these particulars.


First, in the discovery and manifestation of the conscience; For the word of
God is lively and mighty in operation, and sharper then a two edged sword, and
enters through, First in the discovery of the conscience.
even to the dividing asunder of the soul, and of the spirit, and of the
joints, and of the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts, and of the
intents of the heart. Neither is there any creature which is not manifest in
his sight, (which some expound of the creature of the heart.) But all things
are manifest and open in his eyes, with whom we have to deal, Heb. 4.12, 13.
(...), A Metaphor borrowed from brute Beasts that are unridged and cut down by
the back. An example whereof we have in a simple and illiterate Christian, who
at the Council of Nice convinced a great Philosopher with that plain, but
powerful speech, In nomine Jesus Christi, audi Philosophe quae vera sunt.
Ruffi^^. 1. c. 3.
Thus does the word make an Anatomy and Dissection of the Soul; and the inmost
motions and imaginations are made as evident and apparent, as the entrails of a
beast that is flayed and opened, and thereby exposed to public view.

Secondly, Secondly, in the consternation and shaking of the soul.
For as it manifests the secrets of men's hearts, so it makes men fall upon
their faces and worship God, and say plainly, That God is in his Ministers
indeed, 1 Cor. 14.25. It is mighty through God to cast down strong holds,
imaginations. and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of
God, and brings into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2
Cor. 10.4, 5. (...). What can be more said to set forth the infinite and
irresistible power of the word of God. When Paul disputed, A man made up of
lust and cruelty. Per omnem saevitiam and libidinem jus regium exercuit. Tacit.
Foelix trembled, Acts 24.26. The most wicked men are shaken by the word of
God; yet like unto sturdy Oaks, whose lofty tops veil, and as it were, strike
their sails before the force and fury of the wind, but their roots are firmly
fixed, and immovable in the same place.

Thirdly, Thirdly, in the renewing and changing of the heart.
this is the proper effect of it. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting
the soul, Psalm. 19.7. Give me a man (says Lactantias) that is unbridled and
intractable in his anger, bring him to the word of God, and it will forthwith
make him as mild and gentle as a lamb. Give me a man that is covetous,
closefisted, greedy and griping, the word of God shall cause him presently to
become liberal and open handed. Give me a man that is as lascivious as a Goat,
a professed fornicator and adulterer. Let but the word of God take him to task,
and you shall see him sober, chaste, and continent. Pauea Dei praecepta sic
totum hominem immutant et expolito vetere novum reddunt, ut non cognoscos
eundem esse. Lactantius Instit. Lib. 3. Cap. 26. sententia cerum ut plurimum
efficiat, non exscindit vitia sed abscondit. Lactant. ibidem.
And herein the word of God is far more energetical and operative then the
moral precepts and institutions of Philosophers; Who when they have done their
best do only Palliate and cloak men's vices, they do not fell them by the
Ground, nor stub them up by the Roots.

1. And yet this energy of the word proceeds not from any qualifications and
endowments of the messengers. For Who is Paul and who is Apollo, but Ministers
by whom ye believed? 1 Cor. c. 3. v. 5. Ministers, not Authors of of our
Faith, Cui creditur ipse dat quod creditur, non per quem creditur Optatus. Lib.
5.
He alone works faith, in whom, not by whom we do believe; as Optatus
excellently. And as it is said in the cure of the Kings Evil: Tangit te Rex,
sanat te Deus. So it is the Minister that only touches the heart, but the
taking away the Evil, the gift of healing comes from God, as the Author.

2. Nor does the efficacy of the word depend upon any vital force or inherent
virtue in the word it self. For though the grace of God be not only a moral but
a Physical cause of our conversion: yet the word of God is no Physical
instrument that works by its own power and strength. And albeit it be sharper
then a two edged sword yet it is not like to a material sword that cuts
naturally of it self; but as every instrument works by the motion and
impression of the principal Agent; And a sword cuts not but as it is acted by
the hand of him that holds it; even, so the sword of the spirit, which is the
word of God produces rare and admirable effects; but the force and vigor is
derived from that out stretched and revealed Arm of the Lord, and this is his
Spirit. Hugo de Sacram. Lib. cap. 3.
And what is observed of the Sacraments, Non tribuunt quod per ista tribuitur,
is most true of the word, it works not that which is wrought by it. And
howsoever the instructions and admonitions of the word be outward helps and
furtherances in the public Ministry: yet he who teaches the heart has his
chair Cathedram coelo habet qui cordae docet August in Epist. Joan.
in Heaven, and that is none but God.

The fourth part of the Text is the Impediment and Hindrance of the means: The
fourth part. The impediment or hindrance of the means Almost.
or ineffectualness in regard of the indisposition of the subject. (...),
Almost, not altogether.

The name of Agrippa was common among the Romans, and was significantly imposed
upon some from their praeposterous birth; who came not with their head but
their feet forward into the world. And whether King Agrippa in my Text was such
or no, I know not, sure I am he was an Agrippa in Religion, and came the wrong
way to Christianity. To whom that of the Prophet may fitly be applied, Isa.
37.3. The children are come to the birth, but there is no strength to bring
forth. Who when he should have been born again, struck betwixt the knees in a
spiritual sense: and like an abortive and untimely birth, was but almost
persuaded to be a Christian

Three sorts of Men there are, that are Enemies to Christianity.

1. Three sorts of enemies to Christianity.
Neuters. 2. Ambodexters. 3. Halvers.
The First are Neuters, The first Neuters.
men of an indifferent and middle temper; whose judgment hangs in aequilibrio
et aquipondio, Impostor Mahomet, The second Ambodexters such a one Erasmus
seemed to be in that speech. Certe apud me tantum valet Ecclesiae authoritas,
ut cum Arianis et Pelagianis sentire possum si probasset ecclesia, quod isti
docuerunt. Eras. Epist. illust. Bilibaldio.
betwixt two load-stones in the great Temple of Mecha, or as a pair of scales
and balances that incline to neither side. Their souls are a rude Chaos and
first matter, a mere Tohu and Bohu, without form and void; empty of all forms,
and fit to receive any.

The Second sort are our Ambodexters, Hermaphrodite or mungrel Christians; who
wear Linsey Wolsey garments, plow with an Ox and an Ass; sow all sorts of grain
in the field of their hearts, and are made up of all Religions like unto the
Idolatrous Israelites they fear the Lord, but serve their Idols, 2 Kin. 17.33.
they swear by the Lord and Malcha, with them in the Prophet Zephany 1.5. Just,
Augustin's Amphibions. Qui dum volunt esse judaei et Christiani neque sunt
judaei, nec Christiani. () While they would be Jews and Christians, Arrians,
Pelagians, Papists, Protestants; they become Neuters and Nihils, men of all
Religions, and so of no Religion at all.

The Third sort are our Halvers, faint hearted and lukewarm professors; The
third Halvers.
A cake not turned with Ephraim in the Prophet, Hos. 7.8. who it may be have
some velleities, hankerings, and imperfectwishes to entertain and embrace
Religion: but want the strength of resolution to bring them to maturity, and
perfection. And these are every way as opposite to Christianity as the former;
for as in some cases the half may be more then the whole; even so this halting
in Religion is worse then no Religion. And as the refined Semipelagian did
every way derogate as much from the grace of God as the gross Pelagian; Just so
our Agrippa's (...), half or almost Christians, are cosen Germans once
removed and next of the blood of Christians: and that which is but (...)
Basilius, 2. de Baptis.
almost done, is not done at all.

There is a double cause of this Almost, or half Christianity. A double cause
of this Almost in Christianity.


1. Amor male inflammans. Or inordinate love. 2. Timor male humelians. Or
immoderate fear.
This inordinate love is three fold

1. Of natural consanguinity and Relations. 2. Worldly promotion and
preferment. 3. Vicious and sinful lusts. A Dalilah a Drusilla, First,
inordinate love three fold.

The First cause of this Almost in Christianity is the inordinate love of
natural Relation when we prefer Father or Mother, Wife or Children before
Christ himself: Of natural consanguinity or relations.
and Nature to mount on Horseback and ride in the saddle: making a Sarah of an
Hagar, and an Hagar of a Sarah. While that Hagar the bondmaid becomes malapert
and Wanton and sits at the table; and dame Sarah is thrust into a lower place,
and attends and waits upon her. For though we be bound by the law of nature to
respect and reverence nature; yet must not our affection, either begin or
terminate it self in it. Though we may love somewhat in and with Christ, yet
nothing Minus te diligit, O Domine, qui praeter te aliquid diligit; quod
propter te non diligit. August. Soliloq Minus te amat, qui tecum aliquid amat
quod non propter te amat. Confess. lib. 10. cap. 29.
before or above him, Nay we must be content to hate it too, by way of
comparison; and in case of opposition. That is our Saviors injunction, Luke
14.26. If any man come to me, and hate not his father and mother, and wife and
children, and brethren and sisters; yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my
Disciple. And the hatred there spoken of, is an inferior and lower love. For a
Diminutive love is a kind or at least a degree of hatred. And then especially
must we exercise our hatred toward them, and say unto them as Christ unto St.
Peter, Get thee behind me Satan; when they are an offense unto us, Matthew.
16.23. A rub or stumbling block in the way to Christianity.

Excellent is the advice of St. Hierom to this purpose, in his first Epistle to
Heliodorus, Hieron. ad Heliod. Epis. 1. Licet parvulus ex collo pendeat nepos,
licet sparso crine and scissis vestibus, ubera quibus te nutri erat matter
ostendat: Licet in limine Pater jaceat; Percalcato prope Patre sic cis oculis
ad vexillum crucis evola. Solum pietatis genus est, in hac re esse crudelem.
Non est crudelitas pro Deo pietas. Hieron. ad Riparium.
If that thy tender Infant should hang weeping and wailing about thy neck; If
that thy dearest mother with her hair disheveld, and her torn garments should
show the womb that bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck; If that thy
aged and hoary-headed Father should lie in the threshold to detain thee in a
course of wickedness, or hinder thy passage unto Christ: In such a case as
this, Cast down thy Infant, run over thy mother, tread and trample thy father
under feet: And with dry eyes run, yea fly to the Banner of Christ's cross.
It is the only piety, to be accounted even cruel for Christ's sake; and the
highest strain and pitch of natural affection to prove unnatural in the cause
of Christianity.

The second cause of this Almost in Christianity, Worldly promotions and
preferments.
when men make the world their standing mark, and do only rove at God: when
they do uti frnendis and frui utendis, Make use of God only, (who should be
enjoyed) to serve their own turn; and enjoy the world, (which should be but
barely used,) and that as though we used it not. It was the world that made
Demas a Renegado and a Revolter from his profession: Demas has forsaken me,
and embraced this present world; so St. Paul complains of him, 2 Timothy 4.10. And
it is the love of the world that is as Amor rerum temporalium est viscus alarm
spiritualium. August. Baldwino, ferventi Monacho ac Abbati calido, Episcopo
tepido, frigido Archiepiscopo. Pope Vrbans Letter to him. Gerald. Camb.
Itinerar.
Birdlime to the wings of the foul, that keeps it from soaring and mounting
upward unto God, and from seeking those things that are above. It was the
downright confession of Theodorus a Jew; That it was neither ignorance nor
hatred of the true Religion that captivated him in his errors; but only his
pre-eminence, and temporal dignities in his own Country, that dissuaded him
from the embracing of Christianity. And it may be this was it that prevailed
with Agrippa in my Text; who eame and Bernice with him, (...), with a great
deal of pomp and outside bravery, Acts 25.23. And it is like enough, that this
vain show and fancy of earthly glory, so bleared, and misted, and cast such a
Dust in the eye of his judgment, that he could not find the right Way to
Christianity.

The third cause of this Almost in Christianity, Of vicious and sinful lusts.
Non faciunt bonos vel malos mores, nisi boni, vel mali amores. August. Epist.
52.
a Dalilah and darling sin. What though Herod do many things and hear John
Baptist gladly; yet if his Herodias come in the way, she will soon take off the
edge of his Devotion. And howsoever Foelix trembled, being hammered upon the
Anvil of St. Paul's ministry; yet his Drusilla his bosom sin of lasciviousness
and incontinency marrs all. This is the reason of our Saviors counsel, To
pluck out the right Eye, and to cut off the right Hand, Mattli. 5.29, 30. For
if this right eye or right hand be left behind, an Herodias or Drusilla, That
which Divines style, Peccatum in deliciis, a delicate and dainty lust; a tender
and beloved corruption: This will so entangle and enveigle the Heart and make
another Agrippa of it, That it shall be but Almost persuaded to be a Christian.

The second cause of this Almost in Christianity, A second cause of this Almost
in Christianity. Immoderate fear.
is immoderate Fear. The terror of the cross, the amazement of trial and
temptation, and the frightful Bugbears of Persecution; These are the main
matters that stave men off from coming unto Christ. The slothful man says, a
Lion is in the way; a Lion is in the streets, Prove. 26.13. Such is the
spiritual sluggishness and faint-hearted-cowardize of our natures, who
preoccupate and forestall our hearts with superfluous fears, and speak in the
language of the sluggard; a Lion is in the way of Christianity, Si coelum
stetit, si terra movit, si fames, si lues, statim Christianos ad Leonem.
Tertul. Apol. cap. 40.
Christianos ad Leonem, which was the outrageous outery of the Heathen. There
is nothing to be found there, but death and destruction; Insomuch that when
Christ began to instruct his Disciples of his going up to Jerusalem, of his
suffering many things of the Elders, and of being slain the third day; they all
lent a deaf Ear unto it: and St. Peter who was forwarder then the rest, began
to rebuke him, saying: Master, This shall not be unto thee, Matthew. 16.21, 22.
Men cannot endure to hear of suffering; and they that would fain reign with
Christ, will in no case be brought in the mind to suffer with him. They will
not accept of Christ for their spiritual Husband upon the just conditions of
marriage, for better for worse, for richer for poorer, in sickness and in
health. They fancy not a poor neglected, despised, and persecuted Redeemer. Nor
can they be allured and invited to accompany their Savior in reproach and
ignominy, in poverty and nakedness, in imprisonment and banishment, and to die
with him upon mount Calvary. Non est in Deum delicata and secura confessio; Qui
in me credit, debet sanguinem suum fundere Hieronym.
It is no delicate or secure thing to confess Christ; that man which believes
in him, must so cast up his account and reckoning; as to be ready to lay down
his life, and to shed his blood for him. This is it that makes men look a skue
upon Christ as a mere stranger, as if with St. Peter they knew not the man, and
to follow him a far of after his example and that for dread of their own
danger. This is it that makes so many Agrippa's in times of temptation, who
upon this very ground and reason are but almost persuaded to become Christians.

Seeing then Agrippa brake of as it were in the middle of a sentence, and slopt
as at a full point, where he should have made a comma or a colon, and yet
remained but a Semi-Christian, and that after the hearing of another Apollo St.
Paul, mighty in the Scriptures; who preached a penetrating, and a peircing
Sermon, and with a deep tent, and keen lancet searched his conscience to the
quick; we may from hence observe the truth of that Divine Aphorism and
Theological Maxim. The first Corollary.


That there is not a It is given to you to know the mysteries of the Kingdom
of Heaven, but to them it is not given, Matthew. 13.11. Fides inchoata and
perfecta donum Dei est, and hoc donum quibusdam dari and quibusdam non dari,
omnino non dubitet, qui non vult manifestissimis sacris literis repugnare.
August, de Praedest. sanct. cap. 9. Quidam sic opinantur, quasi Deus recesse
habeat praestare etiam indignis quod spospondit, and liberalitatem ejus faciunt
servitutem; Sed Deus Thesauro suo providet, nec sinit obrepere indignos.
Tertul. de Foenitent. cap. 6.
sufficient Grace dispensed and dealt out unto all men, for their salvation.
There may be indeed a sufficiency of outward means, but not of inward grace.
And there may be a sufficiency of grace to render them inexcusable, but not to
effectuate their conversion. And therefore that School distinction of Gratia
sufficiens and Efficax, seems not every way accurate enough. The several
members whereof (which in a just division should be opposite) are coincident
with each other; and that grace which is of it self sufficient, must needs be
of force and efficacy. For as it is a part of the sufficiency of God, that he
is entire and every way absolute in his nature and altogether independent in
his Actions upon the creature; so it cannot but be essential to sufficient
grace, not to borrow of any other, and to want nothing for the accomplishment
of the effect: I deny not, but that there may be a sufficiency in nature, which
is not ever attended and accompanied with force and efficacy. Thus a sovereign
plaster may be sufficient to cure a putrid and rotten sore. And a medicinal
Potion may be sufficient to recover a desperate disease. And yet the
indisposition, frowardness and impatience of the Patient, in plucking off the
plaster, as soon as it is applied; or his peremptory refusal to drink of it may
frustrate and void the virtue of it. But where there is a sufficiency of grace,
there must of necessity be a concurring efficacy in removing all obstacles and
impediments out of the way, in mastering and overcoming the contumacy and
obstinacy of the tough heart of man in making opposition and resistance. For if
it be in the power It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but
of God that shows mercy. Romans 9.16. Non potest effectus misericordiae Dei
esse in hominis potestate, ut frustra illius misereatur, si homo nosit, Aug. l
1. ad Simpl. Quest. 11.
and liberty of the will, either to embrace, or reject those offers and tenders
of grace as it pleases; Then that grace is not sufficient of it self, which for
the compassing of its own act, is wholly dependent and beholding to another.

For sufficient grace may be considered either in regard of 1. Efficacy. 2. Or
the Effect. The sufficiency and efficacy of grace are inseparable companions;
yet that grace which is sufficient of it self, does not always take effect.
And in this sense Christ died sufficiently, but not effectually for all men, in
that they are not redeemed and ransomed from the cruel bondage of sin and
Satan, and actually partake not of the benefit: If then grace both sufficient
and efficacious be afforded unto all; if to Pagans and Insidels, much more to
those that live in the bosom of the Church, and enjoy the public Ministry: How
comes it to pass that Agrippa S. Paul's Auditor, Who taught as one having
authority, whose word was lively and mighty in operation? What is the reason,
that Agrippa who was so sufficiently and efficaciously instructed, was not
converted by it? but mangre this sufficient and effectual grace, which they so
earnestly plead for, is still drawn aside with the bias of his corrupt lusts,
and makes open profession in the Text, Almost thou perswadest me to be a
Christian.

Secondly, The second Corollary.
we may from Agrippa's example deduce this corollary and conclusion; That the
conversion of Agrippa's, Princes, and Potentates of the earth, the Great and
Mighty men of the world, who are advanced to the highest pitch of remporal
felicity, is exceeding hard and difficult. Why else should our blessed Savior
express himself in so high a strain of a vehement asseveration, and lay it down
for a dogmatical and a positive Truth, Mat. 19.23. Verily I say unto you, That
rich men shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Not that the salvation
of great ones is impossible, or altogether desperate; For even a Lazarus,
August. Epist. 89. ^. 4.
a poor man sat in Abraham's bosom, who was rich; (as an Ancient observes out
of the Parable.) Rich and poor have both access to Heaven alike. And yet
nevertheless that of Saint Paul is an undoubted truth, 1. Cor. 1.26. Not many
wise men after the flosh, not many mighty, not many noble are called. Men of
this rank and quality are great strangers, rare guests in Gods Kingdom,
wonderful dainties and delicates; and as old Bishop Latimer was wont to term
them, They are Venison at Gods Table. And hence it was that Luther dropped down
that speech, upon occasion of the death of Elizabeth Queen of Denmark, a
religious and gracious Princess. Scilicet Christus etiam aliquando voluit
Reginam in coelum vebere. Lutherus de Elizabetha Regina Dan. Tom. 2. Epist.
page 311.
True indeed, and so it is, That Christ will sometimes take up a Queen into his
Heavenly Kingdom: Sometimes, but very seldom. This may be the reason of that
resolute and definitive speech of Pope Marcellus, the second of that name, Non
video quomodo qui locum hunc altissimum tenent, salvari possint. Onophr. in
Marcel. A double reason why the salvation of A grippa's, proves so hard and
difficult.
I see not how many that sit in the Popish Chair can be saved. And that which
he spoke of the Popedom, may after a sort be verified of all earthly Dignities
and Promotious. This is a cragged and a thorny way to Heaven, more beset with
difficulties then that of others.

There is a double cause and reason of it.

1. The painted face of worldly glory. 2. The ugly vizard of worldly shame.
First, worldly glory is a Siren, a Circe, a common Strumpet, which with her
painted face and whorish looks, catches men by the eyelids, The painted face
of worldly glory.
And so far does it prevail in the seducing of them, that unless Religion comes
accompanied with a large Retinue of respect and reputation, honors and
preferments, as so many Handmaids to attend upon her, and to bear up her
Train, they conceive it no meet match or mate for them, and altogether unworthy
their choice and acceptance: witness the wavering example of that Heathen
Consul, of whom Saint Hierom makes mention, who in private and pleasant
conference, was wont to impart his mind to Pope Damasus, Facito me Romanae
urbis Episcopum, and ero protinus Christianus. Hieron. Epist. 1.
Do but make me Bishop of Rome, and I will forthwith turn Christian. That which
he chiefly respected was the outside pomp and glory of Religion; and unless he
might be assured to better his state by the exchange, he was at a point for his
resolution, To live and die a Heathen.

Secondly, Remora to men's conversion, The ugly vizard of worldly shame.
as the painted face of worldly glory, and affrights and scares them out of the
profession of Christianity; as conceiving by this means they shall soon become
vile and contemptible, and forfeit their reputation to ignomy and reproach. For
that which Salvian observes of the Humor of his Times, is most true of ours; Si
quis ex nobilibus ad Deum converti caeperit statim honore^ nobilitatis amittit.
Statim enim ut quis melior esse tentaverit, deterioris abjectione calcatur; Ac
per hoc on nes quodammodo mali esse coguntur, ne viles habeantur. Salvian. de
Gubern. Dei lib. 4. page 113.
If any of the Nobility chances to be converted unto God, forthwith he degrades
himself, and loses the honor of his Nobility. Quantus in Christiano populo
honor Christi, ubi Religio ignobilem facit. O how great is the honor of Christ
even in the people of Christ, where Religion renders men ignoble, and betrays
them to contempt and scorn! And this is the fear of many great ones, of the
Nobility and Gentry both, that if they be truly zealous of Gods glory,
resolute, downright, and thorow-pac'd in in his cause and quarrel: If they set
their faces toward Jerusalem with Christ and his Disciples, and approve
themselves not Agrippaes, (...), Almost, but altogether Christians: This will
stain their Gentry, taint their highborn blood, eclipse their credit, and
cloud their preferment. This will open wide the black mouth of calumny and
detiaction, to stigmatize and brand them for brainsick Puritans, and formal
Hypocrites. This will burden them, yea and break their backs with the weight of
their heavy censures. They are none of Caesar's friends, Incendiaries and common
Boutefeus, the very pests and plagues of the Commonwealth. And for the better
prevention of soul-mouthed Obloquie and disgrace, they make use of this device
and shift, which they account of as a neat and quaint piece of State Policy, to
contain themselves within the narrow bounds and lists of Mediocrity and
Moderation: To be merely indifferent and neutral in their carriage, and to side
with neither party. They will not in any case be just overmuch, which is the
sage counsel of the wise man, Eccles. 7.18. They cannot endure to be noted for
hot-spurs, furious Jehu's, that drive as if they were mad, to over-lash and
switch on too fast in Religion. And indeed their main fear is to be true and
sound Christians.

Christianity is a Race, as Saint Paul resembles it, 1 Cor. 9.24. So run that
ye may obtain, whereunto is required agility of body, strength and length of
wind, lest otherwise we tire and give over. And as it is in other Races, so
likewise in this of Christianity, wherein there are many purfie and
short-winded Christians, who set out with the foremost, and run well for a
while (as S. Paul speaks of the Galatians) but soon run themselves off their
legs, or out of breath. And as that which causes this shortness of wind, is
either the corpulency and fatness of a soggy body, or debility and faintness of
spirits; even so fat Livings and preferments, A massy Corpse belonging to an
Ecclesiastical Dignity, or else an over-timorous and feeble disposition make so
many short-winded Christians, who faint and fail ere they come to the goal and
mark, The price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. So that it is one
of the two, either the painted face of worldly glory, inflaming the heart with
inordinate love; or the ugly vizard of worldly shame, producing and causing in
it immoderate fear: That makes the conversion of great men to prove exceeding
hard and difficult. And when the most forcible means are attempted and applied
for the effecting of it; they still remain in Agrippa's temper, their pulse
beats in the same manner: and out of the abundance of their heart their mouth
speaks, and breaths out the same words, Almost you persuade us to be Christians.

THE INNER TEMPLE.

A SERMON Preached at Fakenham in Norfolk, in the Lecture course.

Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells
in you? 1 Cor. 3.16. LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Will. Rands at Fleetbridge.
1659.

THE INNER TEMPLE.
1 COR. 3.17. For the Temple of God is holy, which ye are.
WE are now (Blessed be God) presented and met together in the Temple; The
Preface.
And here is a Temple that presents it self and meets us in the Text. And what
more proper and accommodate, then to treat of the Temple, in the Temple; where
both Text and place, seem to comment upon each other. The place whereon we
stand is holy ground, and Holiness becomes this House for ever, Psalm. 93.5.
Such is the Temple in the Text. For the Temple of the Lord is holy. And yet
lest some illiterate and literal Hearer should misapply the words to the
material Temple, (as the ignorant Jews perverted our Saviors meaning, John
2.19. Destroy this Temple: Which our Savior precisely affirms of the Temple of
his Body. Ver. 21. But he spoke of the Temple of his Body.) St. Paul the best
Expositour and Interpreter of himself, puts the matter out of question, and
delivers himself in plain and positive Terms; Which ye are.

The Parts of the Text are Two.

1. A Thesis. The Division of the Text.
2. An Hypothesis.
1. The Shrine. 2. And the Saint.
1. Holy one of Israel. A Saint and more then a Saint, The Saint.
as Christ spoke of John the Baptist; A Prophet and more then a Prophet, Matthew.
11.9. To whom the glorious Seraphims sing that (...). Holy, Holy, Holy is the
Lord of Hosts, Isa. 6.3.

2. The Shrine.
the society and company of true Believers.

So that the sum of the words amounts to a double Observation. A double
observation.


1. Sanctitas Templi. For the Temple of God is Holy. 2. Templum Sancti. Which
ye are.
Each of these agreeable to the several names (...), and (...), whereby the
Temple is expressed in the original. The material Temple is (...) the mystical
(...), Both Holy. But the first shall be last, and the last first, and by way
of (...), I shall begin with the latter.

1. Templum Sancti. The Church is God's Temple. There is not any creature but
is of a limited and a finite nature, The first Observation.
and confined to a definite place. Bodily substances circumscriptive, by way of
circumscription. Spiritual Essences, as Angels and the souls of Men, Definitive
and per Assignationem; And are so restrained to a certain space, that they
neither are nor can be elsewhere present in the same Article of Time: But God
who is a divine and heavenly circle, whose center is everywhere and
circumference no where, is everywhere Repletive; By way of diffusion and
repletion. Thus says the Lord, The Heaven is my Throne, and the earth is my
footstool, Isa. 65.1. And therefore it was advisedly and religiously answered
by a profound Christian to an inquisitive and busy-headed Philosopher, who
overcuriously demanded touching the place of the Godhead: Dic tu prius O
Philosophe ubi non sit. Tell us first O Philosopher where God is not. Such was
his resolution; This the purblind Heathen discerned by the glimmering and dim
light of nature. And Heraclitus one of that rank, thus invited his friends that
came to visit him in his Stove, with this assurance and persuasion, Arist de
Histor. Arimal.
(...). And the Historian reports of the Ancient Germans, that they consecrated
to their false and fained Gods Tacit. Hist.
Lucos and nemora, Groves and shady places; As supposing they could not be
comprehended and included within the precincts and compass of any Habitation.
And yet God who is all center without circumference, and knows no limitation of
his nature, power, or presence; makes choice nevertheless by way of
appropriation to himself (My House) of a peculiar place and dwelling. God
challenges a house.


1. Tabernacle for a time, which was ambulatory in the Wilderness, and
unsettled in the land of Canaan. The Tabernacle.


2. Temple afterward which was sixed at Jerusalem: There kept he his fire and
chimney, as Ezekiel phraseth it: The Temple at Jerusalem.
And dwelt as a Honsholder in his Mansion or proper Tenement. And hereunto was
annexed that solemn promise, Psalm. 132.14. This is my rest for ever. That is,
for many successions and generations. There being Aeternitas Absoluta and
Periodica: And Aevum oftimes passes in Scripture language for Eternity; which
determined and expired with the coming of Christ, who laid the foundation of
another world, by the publishing of the Gospel. And thus was the Temple God's
rest for ever. Here did he dwell; for he had a delight therein.

3. Our Temples and Churches.
yet with a difference and distinction.

The Temple at Jerusalem, was not Locus ut locus, The difference between them
A bare and naked place: But Locus ut sic, A place in such a respect, as the
Schoolmen speak. As being Medium divini cultus, Scotus: in Senten.
The place that God had chosen above all other to put his name there,
particularly allotted and appointed for divine Worship, and honored with many
choice privileges, and special promises, of audience and benediction:
whereunto they were to direct and turn their faces, though far distant and
removed from it, in a foreign and strange Country, even in their private
devotions and supplications. This was a lively Type and representation of the
Body of Christ, as himself is pleased to style it, Destroy this Temple, John
2.19. In all which respects the Jewish Temple, was God's House (...), so called
by way of Excellency. But as for our Christian Temples and Churches, they are
consecrated to God's sacred worship and service; and so made holy, though not
with an inherent holiness (as Bellarmine presses it too far;) For how should
timber and stones be capable, not only of a spiritual quality but of saving
grace, which like unto the Leprosy must needs cleave unto the Walls? yet do
they partake of an adherent and relative holiness in regard of their use and
end, so long as they continue dedicate; and must not at any time be perverted
to profane and common Offices, no not when the Assembly is dissolved; which
nevertheless can no way match and parallel either in outward glory, or inward
dignity and pre-eminence, but must of necessity give place to that same special
place, Locus ut sic, The Temple at Jerusalem. For whereas the Temple
sanctified the Congregation and meeting to the Jews; our Temples are sanctified
by virtue of the Assembly and Congregation. Neither is the promise simply
entailed to the place, but to the persons and performances; The joint
participation of the Word and Sacraments; the united devotion of the People;
the force of whose prayers prove like a great thunderclap, as Saint Hierom
resembles it: Or, as the roaring of the enraged Sea; so Saint Basil phraseth
it: To these I say does the promise appertain, Matthew. 18.20. Where two or three
are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. Which
occasioned that common by word among the Jews, D^usius Apotheg. p. 20.
Vbi duo sunt qui de Lege colloquuntur, ibi Divinitas est inter eos; as the
Learned Drusius relates it. So then, both the Jewish Temple and the Christian
Churches are but material Temples: And God dwells not in Temples made with
hands, Acts 7.48. Both which I must pass over as Samuel did the seven Sons of
Ishai, These are not they which the Lord has chosen. It is the mystical and
living Temple which God prefers as he did sometimes little David, and wherein
he principally resides. The mystical and living Temple.


And it is well observed by judicious Cameron that the word Ecclesia hic non
locum in quo convenitur, sed caetum significat Came. in 1. ad Carincap. 11.18,
et 22.
(...), is never taken Topically, nor does the Church signify throughout the
New Testament any certain place: but either an Ecclesiastical assembly and
meeting, or the spiritual society of the faithful, The Church of the living
God. And to them alone St. Paul applies the words in the text. For the Temple
of God is Holy: which ye are. And he speaks not to stones but men.

These, These are Gods Temples, not only in their spiritual and better part
their soul, that same Divinae particula aurae (...). A sprig and branch of the
Divinity it self, plucked of as it were from the tree of Life: But even in the
outward frame and constitution of their Bodies: St. Paul affirms no less, 1
Cor. 6.19. Know ye not that your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is
in you. Which bodies of ours, though far different from the material Temples,
as being of a more excellent and Divine nature; yet do they represent and
resemble them by way of Analogy and proportion: For as Salomons Temple was
severed and parted, in Atrium populi the tabernacle of the Congregation, the
Sanctuary, and the Sanctum sanctorum, the Holy of Holies: whereunto the Prophet
Jeremiah alludes (as some conceive) in a threesold rehearsal and repetition,
The Temple of the Lord the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, Jer.
7.4. In an apish imitation whereof the Heathenish Temples consisted of a (...),
and a (...) or (...), A Porch, A Body, and a Quire. Even so the outward parts
of the Bodies of the Saints, the hands and arms are the Court and Porch of this
Temple. The legs are so many Marble Pillars that support and bear it up, the
eyes in the forehead the supreme and highest place, like windows that transmit
and convey light. And as for the inward cells of the Brain and Heart, they are
as the Sanctuary, and Body of the Temple. But the soul with the several powers
and faculties, the understanding, Will, Affections; this is the Sanctum
Sanctorum, the most Holy of all other.

For as there is, and ought to be a correspondence betwixt the nature of God
and the manner of his service; so must there be likewise an agreement betwixt
it and the place. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him
in Spirit and in Truth, John. 4.24. And as he is worshipped in Spirit for the
manner, so will he also be worshipped in spirit the for the place: in the
spirits and souls of Believers. Though God dwells in the Body, yet chiefly in
the Soul; this is (...) and by way of excellency Gods Temple.

And thus are we at last come into Gods Temple by many degrees and steps; as
they ascended into that of Solomon: Or as they climb up some long ladder by
several staves which rise each higher then the other, and like unto Jacobs
ladder, the foot whereof stood upon the ground: so does the material Temple,
but the top thereof which is the mystical reaches unto Heaven.

Ingrediturque solo, et caput inter nubila condit. That is the spirit and soul
of man Arist. de. Anima. Lib. 1.
(...), as the Philosopher teaches, Jerusalem which is (...), above, the
mother of us all. The Congregation of the first born, whose names are written
in Heaven.

And in two respects is the Church assimilated and compared to a Temple. The
Church a Temple in two respects.


1. Ratione structurae et aedificationis. 2. Ratione usus et inhabitationis.
First, Ratione structurae et aedificationis.
For every house is built of some man, but he that builds all things is God,
Heb. 3.4. God who is (...), the Architect of heaven and earth: he likewise
frames and fashions his Church, which is as it were a Heaven here on Earth. And
as the soul in the Body does Fabricare sibi domiclium, so God who is the soul
of the Church, prepares and forms his own dwelling. Nor shall we need
over-curiously to enquire touching the manner of the workmanship: Qui vectes
quae ferramenta? What tools and instruments God had to effect it; which were
the several Queries of the Epicure in Tully concerning the Creation of the
world: For as in the Creation Dixit, et fact a sunt, He spoke the word and it
was done, he commanded and it was created. So God does but speak the word in
the mouth of his Ministers, there is but a Dixit on Gods part and forthwith
there follows a factum est without more ado. There is neither noise of axe
nor sound of hammer to be heard in the building of this Temple, no more nay far
less then in that sumptuous and stately Temple of Jerusalem.

The foundation of which Temple is not the Church, The foundation of this
Temple. Not the Church.
that being the Temple it self. This were to confound the building with the
foundation, and how should the Church be accounted the Pillar and ground of
faith which relies and rests upon it? or if the text seems to favor it, and
imports as much in express terms (...), 1 Timothy 3.15 yet is it only Columna
forensis like unto the Pillars of of the Heathen whereunto their solemn Laws
and constitutions were publicly affixed, and so made manifest and legible to
the people. It is not Columna architectonica, that supports and bears up the
weight of the frame. Not St. Peter.


Nor is St. Peter the Pillar of the Church which he no more sustaines then ever
St. Christopher carried Christ: whom nevertheless the Romish faction
injuriously honor, as the great Atlas of the universal. Church firmly leaning
upon the strength of his shoulders; and though St. Peter bestiled a pillar, yet
is that title given in common to the rest, Galations the second Chapter, and
the nine verse. And when James, Cophas, and John, who seemed to be pillars. And
it as worth the observing, that St. Paul purposely inverts the order, James,
Cophas, and John, placeing James and not Cophas in the forefront, least he
should have seemed thereby to have conferred the Primacy upon him, and made
Peter Metropolitan over his Brethren. Nor does he join the Sons of Zebedee hand
in hand, who were surnamed Bonaerges, and accompanied Christ in his
transfiguration; but ranks Saint Peter in the midst, that he might no way be
suspected to ascribe unto them the like authority and jurisdiction.

Let Peter then continue his name, yet is he Petrus, non Petra, the chief
corner Stone, and Rock of our Salvation. Christ builds not upon Saint Peter,
but builds Saint Peter upon himself; August. in Mat. 16.18.
Super me aedifieabo te, non me super te; as Augustine upon the place. And let
him for ever enjoy his title of Cephas, and be deservedly honored as a choice
stone; yet is he not the chief co^ner stone, or the foundation of the building:
But Christ is the foundation of the Church two ways.
For other foundations can no man lay then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ,
1 Cor. 3.11.

A Doctrinal Foundation, Respectu doct^inae reve^atae, The supernatural and
divine Truth of the Scriptures, wherewith he inspired the Church in all Ages,
by the ministry of his messengers; Respectu doctrinae revelatae
immediately in his own Person, as being the Eternal Wisdom, and Essential Word
of God, (...). Who was sent from the bosom of the Father.

1. A personal foundation, Respectu gratiae salutiferae; which by the
satisfaction and merits, Respectu gratiae salutiserae.
whereby he trod the winepress alone, he has effectually purchased and
procured. And herein it far exceeds, and altogether differs from earthy
foundations, which are in imo, laid low and deep within the ground; but Christ
is Fundamentum in summo, the uppermost part of that new Jerusalem which
comes down from Heaven.

2. Descend we therefore from the foundation to the walls, the society and
company of the faithful; The people of God are the walls of the Temple.
all of them disposed and couched together, as so many lively stones in a
mystical and spiritual Temple. This is that elegant strain and metaphos,
wherewith Saint Peter seems to be much affected and delighted, to whom ye come
as unto a living stone disallowed of by men, but chosen of God, and precious.
And ye as lively stones be made spiritual houses, 1 Pet. 2.3, 4. He whom the
Prophet Daniel compares to a stone cut out of the mountain without hands,
either in regard of his eternal generation of the Father, or his temporal birth
of his Mother. He whom David foretold to be the head stone of the corner, being
highly exalted by his Resurrection and Ascension: Him does Saint Peter term an
elect, and precious, and living stone, having life in his own person, even as
the Father has life in himself, John 5.26. And the Church of God lively
stones, as being quickened by ^^s spirit.

Stones not by propriety of nature, such as sabulous Antiquity dreamed of, that
Pyrrha by casting of stones changed them into men. Behold here a more strange
Metamorphosis, yet far unlike that of Medusa, so famous among the Poets, men
turned into stones.

Nor yet stones, for their inbred folly and senselesness of disposition, such
as the Philosopher styles, (...), Likened to stones in a double propriety.
one stone upon another. But by a borrowed similitude and resemblance, both in
regard of their absolute and relative property.

1. The absolute property which is the solidity and firmness of their faith. 2.
The relative property, and that is their aptness and appliableness unto
building.
And or such materials does God make up a spiritual house, and out of these
stones he raises up children unto Abraham.

First, stones are a hard and tough, Their absolute property.
to be (...), steadfast and immovable, and though their outward man is but weak
and feeble, neither is their strength the strength of stones, as holy Job too
too passionately complains, Job 6.12. yet has their inward man the strength of
flinty stones, and is so far from yielding to the surious strokes of temptation
and affliction, that it forcibly resists these Hammers, and beats them back
with violence. For God who promises to take away the stony heart out of the
midst of his people, Ezekiel. 36.26. bestows upon them in stead thereof, (...),
as Saint Paul styles it, Col. 2.5. A firm, solid, and stony faith. And
howsoever it may and will be fierc^ly assaulted, yet it shall not be fully
foiled and vanquished, pressed, but not oppressed; Concuti potest, non excuti.
Tertul.
shaken, and yet not shaken off. What though the most pompous and stately
Temples are turned topsie turvy, and laid level on the ground, with the sudden
blast of a terrible earthquake, and their place knows them, no more; yet shall
these spiritual Temples be as mount Sion, which cannot be moved, but stands
fast for ever, Psalm. 125.1. Let stones fall out of the building, and moulder
away into rottenness, as being subject to a kind of mortality and corruption,
Mors etiam saxis, nominibusque venit. Yet as for these living stones, Whosoever
lives and believes in me shall never die. It is our Saviors determinate
assertion, and peremptory promise, John 11.26. Thus are the faithful stones in
the absolute property, their stedfastness and continuance.

Secondly, Their relative property.
their usefulness and appliableness unto Building, Ex quovis ligno non fit
Mercurius. Temples are not framed of beggarly stuff, and rude materials;
neither are common pebbles and unhewen stones (as are all natural and carnal
men) meet to join with Christ the chief corner stone, in whom all the building
coupled together, grows to a holy Temple in the Lord, Ephesians. 2.21. This Temple
consists only of choice and precious stones; so is Christ entitled by Saint
Peter. And such are all believers, who have obtained (...), the like precious
faith, whereof Saint Peter speaks. There is not the meanest Christian but after
a sort shares in Saint Peter's privilege, and is placed as another Peter in
this edifice, wherewith, though not whereupon Christ builds his Church, and the
gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, Mat. 16.18. Not the power and
policy of the Devil, symbolically set forth by the gates of a City, which was
anciently the seat of Counsel and Judgment in the time of peace, and has been
always the place of strength and fortifications in the time of war. Yet
neither shall the cunning straingems, or stoutest opposition of these gates of
Hell, nor the gates of Vox (...) Nusquam in sc riptura, (unicus modo lecus
excipiatur) insernum significat, sed sepulchrum vel hominis vita functi statum,
and conditionem. Camer. Myr. Evang. in Mat. 16.18.
Death, as Cameron expounds the place) the domineering Tyranny of the Grave,
which deraint our bodies as close prisouers for a time under the earthen bars
of rottenness and corruption; and so some what avails, but shall not be able to
prevail against it, (...), as he descants upon the place. So sure and permanent
is this building, that it is stronger then death it self, so indissoluble is
the conjunction, so entire the union of the several stones with the foundation,
that the very name of Christ is applied and communicated to his Church: (...),
says Saint Paul in the Apodosis of the similitude, 1 Cor. 12.12. The bond and
ligament of which union is the spirit of God on his part, and faith the means
on ours; which in regard of the office of being instrumental in joining us to
Christ the foundation; it is sometimes honored with the name of a Foundation.
Faith is as the foundation (says Saint Chrysostom) other graces are as the
upper part of the building. (...). Chrysostom.
And as Faith is the bond of our union with Christ, so is Charity of our
communion and fellowship with our brethren; For Hard with bard, stone with
stone, will never make good wall, as it is in the Italian proverb. But Charity
must come betwixt, and as a spiritual kind of mortar, both join and bind them
fast together. And as in a building, each Vnusquisque lapis portat alterum and
portatur ab altero. Luther. in Galat.
stone supports and bears up another: So must we bear up one another burden,
as Saint Paul advises in the case, Gal. 6.2. who are lively stones of the same
mystical Temple. Thus have we taken a survey of the several parts of the
foundation, and the walls of this structure; and had a cursory and short view
of the means, both of the framing, and of the coupling and conjunction. In all
which appears the formality of the Comparison, Ratione edificationis, the
Church is Gods Temple, in regard of the building.

So is it likewise in the second place, Ratione inhabitationis, the proper use
and habitation; Ratione usus, and in habitati onis. God has a threefold
Temple.
For God has a threefold Temple, or place of residence, whereof the Church is
one, though every way inferior to the former.

The first Temple of God is his glorious Majesty, altogether infinite and
incomprehensihle; who as he is void of all bounds and limits in his nature, His
glorious Majesty.
Thus God dwelt in himself from all eternity. In se and apud se habitabat, It
was the answer of an Ancient to those smattering Questionists, Et apud se est
Dens. Pet. Lomb. did. 17. ere August.
and curious Inquisitors, who would needs pry into the place of Gods abode, ere
this visible world was created.

The second Temple of God is the humane nature of Christ, The humane nature of
Christ.
which being hypostatically united to the Godhead, it was the seat of the
Deity, in a most peculiar manner; Being replenished with Divine Grace from his
first conception, as Solomon's Temple was filled with a cloud at the dedication;
and that far above the capacity of the creature. Full of Grace and Truth says
Saint John 1 John 14. Of Truth, which is the perfection of the understanding.
Of Grace, which is the excellency and beauty of the Will. Nor was he only full
of habitual grace, but of the Divinity it self; For in him dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. There is not a word in the Text, but
is dogmatically full, and very significant and emphatical, (...), The very
fullness of the Godhead in the utmost latitude, dwelt in Christ, as in a sacred
Temple. And that personally and essentially, not only in regard of the inward
gifts and endowments which are imparted and dealt out unto us in measure and
proportion. This was not only Templum Domini, but Templum Dominus, as August in
Evang. John.
Augustine distinguished of old betwixt Panem Domini, and Panem Dominum, Christ
was both the Temple of the Lord, and the Lord of the Temple.

The third Temple of God is the Church, The Church.
and from hence it takes its name, (...), because of Gods habitation; for
though God be every where per divinitatis praesentiam, and the whole world be
his great presence chamber, yet is the Church his privy chamber, his
withdrawing room, where he most frequently converseth, Walking in the midst of
the golden candlesticks, as Christ describes himself, Revelations 2.1. abiding
only in the faithful, per inhabitationis gratiam, as in the place of his
habitation. And albeit every good creature be in God, as in the conserving
cause, In whom we live, and move, and have our being, which is nothing else
then a Id ipsum quod sumus nihil aliud est, quam in uno Deo subsistentia.
Calvin. Just. l. 1.
subsistence in God, and our preservation is but one continued Quamdiu creatura
est tamdiu creatur. Durand. in Senten.
Creation; yet nevertheless God is not in every creature (though every creature
be in God) as in the proper seat and mansion. This Christ appropriates to his
Disciples by special promise. John 14.16. And I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, (...),
which is of singular force, and denotes Mir^^r, in scriptura singularem babet
significationem; notat enim constantiam and penitissimam adhaesionem ejus rei
quae dicitur mancre. Camer. Myr. Evang. in Joh. 14.16.
constancy and continuance. In which respect the Jews of old called the spirit
of God by the name Shechina, that is, a Mansion, or an habitation. This is an
inseparable privilege of the Temple, as Saint Paul quotes the Text, 2 Cor.
6.11. For ye are the Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell
among them, and walk there; and if we stick not to credit the testimony of
Antiquity, God dwells no less virtually in the Church, then in the Throne of the
highest Heaven; a devout soul is another heaven upon earth: even that heaven
which is mentioned in the Preface of the Lords Prayer, Our Father which art in
Heaven, that is, in the Saints. And herein consists the difference betwixt
Physical places, Anima beata est eaelum. Bernard. Pater Noster qui est in
coelis, id est, in Sanctis. August.
and this which is Metaphorical; those contain and preserve the body: but here
the inhabitant includes and upholds the dwelling. And as other Temples prove
Sanctuaries to such as repair for refuge; so is God an Asylum to his Church,
and a Sanctuary to his Temple. And so have we completely dispatched and
finished the several branches of the Allegory, and the doctrinal part of the
Proposition. Which being thus premised, we may from hence infer a threefold
Corollary and Conclusion. A threefold Corollary.


1. The Dignity. Of the Church. 2. The Duty. Of the Church. 3. The Danger. Of
the Church.
All arising from the consideration of a Temple.

First, The Churches Dignity, in a double consideration.


1. Simply and absolutely in it self, as being the Temple, the mystical Temple
of God. 2. Comparatively and relatively, in reference to the material.
First, Simply and absolutely in it self.
as being Gods Temple. For if as the Heathen Philosopher Menedemus some time
spoke, Those stones were happier then the rest, which served for their Altars.
Surely these Stones in this go far beyond them, who are deputed to a higher
employment; to be the receptacle and habitation of the Spirit. The
entertainment of some Worthy and Noble Guest, does as it were enhaunce the
honor of the dwelling. Yea the presence of a dead Corpse, whose Ashes and
Memory are for ever sacred and precious, does after a sort honor the Urne, and
dignifies the Grave that contains it.

O te beatum cespitem tanto Hospite! Calvini Epitaphium. Beza.

O cui invidere cuncta possint marmora!
As Beza warbled it most sweetly in a funeral Elegy, and Epitaph of renowned
Calvin. What is it then for a poor Christian to harbor the living God, not as
a stranger, or sojourner, but a perpetual Residentiary; Not to receive Angels
into his house with righteous Lot; But the holy spirit into his heart: There to
enjoy the constant presence in the powerful motions and excitations, the
sovereign and happy effects. 1. As an Instructor. This is the way, walk ye in
it, Isa. 30.21. 2. As a Guide, As many as are led by the spirit, Romans 8.14. 3.
As a Coadj^tor and Fellow-helper, Likewise the spirit helps our infirmities.
Rom 8.26. 4. As a Comforter, But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, he
will teach you all things, John 14.26. The Comforter by way of Excellency,
above all other. The Comforter by way of Propriety, in opposition to all other.
And to have the Spirit of God thus present, is an Excellency without match, or
parallel; A Praeludium of the joys of Heaven; and a fore-taste of future
Happiness: Like to that White Stone with a new Name engraven, which to man
knows, but he that receives it, Revel. 2.17. And as it is observed of the
City of Venice, that none can imagine the surpassing beauty of the place, but
the native Citizens and Inhabitants: no more can they conceive the ineffable
happiness and comfort of a Christian in this respect, who have not sensibly
found it by experience, nor shall a stranger meddle with it.

This is one of that 1 Deus and Homo. 2. Matter and Virgo. 3. Fides and cor
Humanum. Bernard. in Vigil. Nativit.
triple Union and Conjunction, all which are, singulariter mirabilia and
mirabiliter singularia, Singularly wonderful, and wonderfully singular in the
judgment of Saint Bernard. 1. God become Man. 2. A Virgin, and yet a Mother.
3. Faith and Man's Heart incorporated into each other. And it is not the least
of the the three, that the spirit of man should be, as it were, espoused and
married to the Spirit of God. That our blessed Savior, the High Priest of our
profession, should dwell in the Soul as in his Temple. Such honor have all his
Saints.

Secondly, Relatively in reference to the material.
For Respublica non est in parietibus: As he sometime spoke. Nor does the
Church consist in the outward frame and walls of the Temple. And as great a
difference there is betwixt the Church, and the Church in point of excellency;
as betwixt senseless and living stones. A Mason, and a Minister; the Mason
builds the one, but the Minister of God as a wise master builder is the
Architect of the other. Let there be granted to the material Temple, that it is
a consecrate place, Holy ground, yea the Beauty of holiness, as the Psalmist
calls it and a Sanctuary; yet if that be the sanctuary which was the middle
part of the temple; the Church, the saints are the Sanctum sanctorum the more
inward part and most holy of all other. And if we herewith compare Solomon's
temple, which was the perfection of beauty, and the glory of the whole world;
whereat the Devil pointed (as some conjecture) in that temptation: And he showed
him all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, Mat. 4.8. that is the
Temple of Jerusalem; yet shall we find verified of the place which our Savior
affirms of the person; A greater then Solomon's Temple is here in my text. And
in all the royalty it was not cleathed like unto one of these living Temples.
For as it was not the Gold that sanctified the Temple under the Law: but the
Temple that sanctified the Gold; so we read in the Gospel: no more is it the
outward pomp and bravery of the place that sanctifies the person; but the
inward sanctity of the person, that sanctifies the comely beauty, and decent
apparel of the place. And as Cornelia the Mother of the Roman Gracchi, spoke
of her children: so may our Mother Church of her natural children in the faith;
Hi sunt ornamenta mea, These are my chiefest ornaments. As for their rich
attire and costly furniture, I mean in the extremity and excess; they were in a
manner peculiar to the infancy of the Jewish Church, being trained up under,
the Paedagogie and beggarly Rudiments of the ceremonial law: which nevertheless
were then made authentical by Gods ordinance both strict and punctual in their
behalf, and were typical in part. Or else the blind devotion of succeding and
declining age, cast them into the Churches Treasury with a liberal hand in the
time of the Gospel: and that in the palpable darkness of Popish ignorance and
prevailing superstition. Which escaped not the prudent observation and grave
reproof of some of their own party, Witness that speech of Calicibus contenta
ligneis sacerdotibus ecclesia fruebatur aureis Walafrid. Strab. de reb.
ecclesiae page 2^.
Boniface Archbishop of Mentz. That in the Golden age of the Church, there were
Wooden Chalices and Golden Priests, but Golden Chalices were afterward
transubstantiated into wooden Priests and empty sconces, were graced with
precious mytres. So that it formerly passed for a proverbial form in Bavaria
and other parts of Germany; Gum templa obsoura, erant lucida corda: tum lueida
templa, obscura. corda. Aventin.
dark Temples were enlightened, with bright and clear ^^uning Hearts: and light
Temples were obscured with dark hearts.

I speak not this to derogate in the least measure, either from the right
ornament or due respect of Churches. Which I shall always esteem and magnify
as Jacob did his Bethel, Genesis 28.17. Quam reverendus est hic locus, How fearful
is this place? this is no other then the house of God, this is the gates of
Heaven. Chrysostom.
(...); as sweetly St. Chrysostom. So that heaven and the Temple seem to
interchange names and are put promiscuously for each other, Psalm. 11.^. The
Lord is in his Holy Temple, the Lords throne is in heaven.

And certainly, this is one of the Epidemical diseases of the Nation, Malum
quod semper vit abitur et somper retinebitur. Yea the opprobry and shame of our
Religion; that Temples are now ruinated and laid wast in many places, and nor
one stone left upon another: or else they are converted into Barnes and
Stables: and the lay Patron like a greedy Harpy, having seized the tiths to his
own use, and swallowed up Gods demaines and portion; He contrives and
transformes the Church into a Barn as the fittest place An holy place for holy
things to harbor and receive them.

Questionless these men are not eaten up with the zeal of Gods House as David
was: but rather cat it up, as if the stones of the Temple at the request of the
Devil were turned into bread. These men (I say) are not of David's stamp and
strain, and yet they pray in David's form, Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired
of the Lord, de praeterite for the time past: And that I will seek after, de
futuro, for Time to come. And what is that not to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to vifit his Temple: with David: But to dwell in the house of the
Lord all the days of their life. To dwell in a literal sense, and to leave it
as a Farm or manner House to their posterity. This puts the difference betwixt
the primitive devotion of our forefathers, and the unheard of sacrilege of
this latter age. (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 14. Hom. 36.
the time was when houses were dedicated into Churches: but now churches are
profaned into houses yea worse then houses; which was the just complaint of
St. Chrysostom. Now are they made Dovecoats, and cages of unclean birds. And
as of old the Jewish Merchants sold Doves, so do they now House-Doves in the
Temple. Yea the sparrow has found her an house and the swallow a nest where
she may lay her young, even by thine Altars O Lord. So David of his time, Psalm.
84.3. And now if ever may our Saviors expostulation be justified of ours? The
Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man, God
and his sacred worship in many places, have not where to lay their head. Shall
then both Birds and Beasts find mansion and yet God be shut out of his own
dwelling? Shall we dwell in sieled houses, and his house lay wast? And if
either cost or comeliness be added to it; shall they that carry the bag
complain with Judas, Quorsum haec perditio? to what purpose is all this wast:
or disdain fully insult with scoffing Julian after he had pilled and robbed the
Church, Ecee quam pretiosis vasis mi^istratur Mariae Filio. Theoder. Hist.
Lecles l. 3. c. 11.
Are such goodly vessels fit for the Son of Mary? let such give ear to the wife
man's caveat, Prove. 3.9. Honor the Lord with thy substance, and that not only
in the due maintenane of the Ministry, but in repairing and beautifying of his
Temple, the place where his honor dwells.

And yet know we must these are not the weightier matters of the Law, nor the
great mystery of godliness. Not the form but the formality of Religion; or if
the form, the outward and accidental, not the inward and essential form that
gives it being and distinction. For the Kings daughter is all glorious within,
Psalm. 45.13. Glorious without too, there is no question; so it follow, Her
clothing is of wrought gold yet all glorious within; The chiefest, yea all the
Churches glory, arises from her inward Beauty. Neither is any thing more
unbecoming the spouse of Christ, Clemens Alexandr. Padagog.
(...); says Clemens Alexandrinus. To be decked and set forth with stately and
strange attire, especially where the inside is not suitable. That the walls of
the Church Fulget in parictibus luget in pauperibut Bernard.
should shine and glister, and the Church it self carry a forlorn and duskie
countenance: This was the vanity of vanities, that Bernard justly faulted in
his time, that the outward Temples should be specious and gorgeous to the Eye,
and the living Temples have neither form nor comeliness. The Temple of Solomon
far surpassed the glory of the second Temple; yet of this does God pronounce
that solemn benediction. The glory of the last house shall be greater then the
first, Hag. 2.10. As being honored and graced with the birth of Christ. Even
so the birth of Christ in the heart of the meanest Christian does highly
advance it above the most pompous and stately Temple, were it parallel with
that of Solomon. As therefore it is the credit of our Nation to be stored with
sumptuous Auglia. mons, pons, ecclesia, etc.
Churches and adorned with goodly Temples, that is one of our prime
Excellencies; so should it be a testimony of far greater commendation to be
replenished with these spiritual mystical Temples. So shall we be an holy
Nation, a chosen generation, a Royal Priesthood, and the Temple of the living
God.

Secondly, If the Church be God's Temple, The second corollary. The Churches
duty.
which St. Paul enforces and presses upon this consideration; (...), 2 Cor.
6.14, 16. Be not unequally yoked with Infidels. For to join these two together,
by way of communication in sacred Rites and Mysteries; This is (...) the
drawing in an uneven yoke, the plowing with an Ox and Ass; which by positive
law was interdicted to the Jews: and why so? Does God take care for Oxen? As
St. Paul questions elsewhere. Or says he it not altogether for our sakes? For
our sake no doubt it is written: As appears by the illation and inference. For
what concord has Christ with Belial? or what part has the believer with the
Infidel? And as it comes home to the purport and phrase of my Text. And what
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? (...)? what harmony or consent?
what consistence or standing of the Ark and Dagon in the same Temple? Surely
none at all. And St. Paul's interrogation implies a vehement and peremptory
denial: there being no sin more Diametrally cross and opposite to the infinite
nature, truth, and unity of the Godhead: which is both Ens, unum, and verum;
all which are convertible with each other: then the portraicture and
representation of it in an image or similitude, be it only by way of Analogy
and mystical signification. No sin more directly adversative to the rule of
religion, then Idolatry. Insomuch that Lactantius lays it down for a truth no
less evident then infallible, Non est dubium quin religio nulla sit, ubicunque
fimulachr^ est. Non religio in fimulachris sed mimus religionis est. Lactan.
lib. 2. cap. 10.
That Religion and Imagery cannot staend together: For what a greement has the
Temple of God with Idols? Neither is the impiety of the sin greater then the
ridiculous folly and simplicity; which so far abaseth the nature of man, the
Express and lively Image of God, to incline and bow both soul and body to dead
and senseless images. And had they either sense or motion they would of their
own accord worship men, by whom they were polished and fashioned into form and
figure, or else had for ever remained stocks and stones, rude and unhewen
matter. But as Belshazzar and his fellow ^^evellers when they carroused in the
golden and silver vessels of the Temple; They drank wine says the Text, Dan.
5.4. And praised the gods of gold and silver, of brass and iron, of wood, and
of stone; whereupon Saint Hierom passes this grave censure, Quantae erat
stultitia in vasis aure^s et argenteis bibextes, deos ligne^s et lapidens
laudare. Hi^rem.
What folly was it for them that quassed in vessels of gold and silver to
praise gods of wood and stone? Such yea far greater is the sottish stupidity of
Idolatry, if not in prai^ing yet in praying to the gods of wood and stone,
whereunto they are far superior; not being redeemed or made of corruptible
things, as gold and silver, but of higher and divine Principles. So that if the
Church of Rome had not long ago, expunged and razed out the second Commandment
out of the Decalogue; And of late devised some wire drawn distinctions, of
Imago and Idolum objectum motivum et terminativum and the like, they had long
since wanted coloring to paint and varnish over the prodigious profanness and
palpable grosness of their Idolatry.

And yet nevertheless how many are there even amongst us that would fain put
forth their helping Hand to reconcile the Temple of God with Idols? like unto
that silly Hermit, that seriously mediated a firm League of Friendship betwixt
God and the Devil. Promiscuously blending both Religions together, Like unto
bastard feathers imped in with the royal feathers of the Eagle; Metuendum est
in postrema mundi aetate hunc errorem grassaturum quod ant nihil sunt
religiones aut differant tantum vocabulis Melanet. ^ostil. de Baptism Christi.
Extenuating and mincing the differences of both sides, as if they were, (...),
a needless question of words and names, as Gallio spoke of the Jewish: yea, a
brainsick quarrel betwixt stomach and discretion. Ask you these men their
judgment in the controverted points, They will tell you out of St. Paul,
Idolum nihil est, The Idolatry of the Church of Rome is little or none at all.
Transubstantiation is now become a question onel^ de modo. It is not faith that
justifies alone but works; Nor is the Pope any longer that stigmatical
Antichrist, pointed out as it were with the singer. And were it not for the
absolute supremacy and jurisdiction of the Pope over Princes, the asserting and
maintaining whereof is crimen laesae Majestatis, High treason no less then
capital: Who could bring a Quare impedit against these aequi vivocal
Protestants, for proving downright and professed Catholic^s? These are the men
that would set up a Bridge betwixt Rome and England for the passage of each to
other. A Bridge over the Sea as Xerxes once assayed in the Hellespont. But all
in vain; For as Abraham replied upon the request of the rich man in the
Parable, Luke 16.26. so may it be answered the Romish party; Besides all this,
betwixt you and us, there is (...), a great gulf set, so that they that would
go from hence to you cannot; neither can they come from thence to us. And
whether we regard No peace with Rome B. Hall. Sect. 2.
the indisposition of the parties, the difficulty of the means, or the quality
of the controversies; this reconciliation and atonement of both sides together,
is an attempt impossible. And if either Authority or Learning may bear sway,
then let the judgment of a late Reverend Bishop determine and umpire the
question; King on Jonas Lect. 7. page 101.
It has been a favorable compromission of men more partial then wise; that
the questions betwixt Rome and the Reformed Churches might easily be accorded;
I find it not. And I will be bold to say, as Tully sometimes of the Stoics and
Academicks Non de terminei sed de tota possessio ne contentio. Acad. quest.
(...). Nazianz. vita.
that the contention betwixt us is not for bounds, but for the whole possession
and inheritance. Whether God or Man, Grace or Nature, the blood of Christ or
the merits of Saints; written verities or unwritten vanities shall take place;
We have Altar against Altar, Lyturgy against Lyturgy, prayers against prayers,
doctrine against doctrine, potentate against potentate, Pope against Prince,
religion against religion, subjection against subjection, faith against faith
so diametrally opposed: As the Northern and Southern Poles, shall sooner meet
together; then our opinions (standing as they do) can be reconciled. Thus far
that worthy Bishop. How long then halt we betwixt two opinions? If the Lord be
God, let us follow him: If Baal be God, follow him, was Elias counsel to the
neutral Israelites, 1 Kings 18.21. Are we happily rescued and set at liberty
from that Egyptian thraldom, whereof Reverend Grosthead prophesied a little
before his Death, Non liberabitur Ecclesia ab Aegyptiaca servitute nisi in ore
gladii cruentandi. Grostheadus Episc. Line.
That the Church should not be redeemed out of the Egyptian bondage, but by the
mouth of the bloody sword; Then let us not turn back again, no not in heart and
affection, to the fleshpots of Egypt any more; but as God enjoineth the Prophet
Jeremy, Jer. 15.19. Let them return to thee, but do not thou return to them.
Are the walls of Jerico battered down in this Kingdom, by the strong hand of
two puissant and mighty Princes? then cursed be they that go about with
untempered mortar to build them up.

It has been the complaint of old: In nomine Domini incipit omne malum. And it
is still censoriously observed by some, that there seldom happens any notable
alteration in Religion, but some of the Clergy are the Antesignani, the very
Ensign-bearers and chiefest leaders. So that the Church may now complain with
the Tree in the Fable, that she has been torn asunder with those wedges that
were hewn out of her own bowels.

-- Pudet haes opprobria dici,
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
Let not us above all other leave our station and fly from our colors; the
open badge of a coward or a Traitor. Let not us be carried about with every
wind of doctrine, like fans and weathercocks; nor shift our sayls after the
example of the common Mariner; That is, change our Tenets altogether, or refine
and pare away our opinions, as the inconstant wind turns and flickers, the wind
of authority, countenance and preferment. Far be it from us to give place to
the common Adversary by subjection for an hour: Or to make merchandise of the
least iota or tittle of the truth of the Gospel; which as Luther gathers from
these words, Matthew. 5.18. Vnus apex plus valet quam coelum and terra. Luther.
Is of more worth then Heaven or Earth. Each drop whereof we must esteem more
precious, then a drop of blood: Ever remembering and imitating that generous
resolution of that stout Champion of Christ Saint Basil: who when he was
solicited by the Deputy of Valens the Emperor to turn Arrian, the difference
consisting only in a Letter, (...) and (...): returned unto him that
courageous Answer, (...). Basil. apud Theodor. lib. 4. cap. 19.
That they who were nourished up with the word of God, would not exchange, or
bate so much as a syllable, or letter of that Faith, wherewith Christ had
entrusted them.

It were indeed earnestly to be wished, That the Apostles Rule might pass for
current among all Nations, (...). Such another Pillar of the Christian faith
was Gregory Nazianz. who when he offered to leave the City of Constantinople
all the People cried out as one man. (...). Nazianz. vit^
Ephesians. 4.5. So should we willingly embrace and easily observe the foregoing
Precept, ver. 3. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit, (...), in the
bond of peace. Peace is like the bond of the Faggot, which preserves it entire,
and whole: But where the unity of the Spirit is divided and rent in two, how
can the bond of peace be kept inviolate. For as Jehu answered King Jehoram
inquiring after peace: So may it be said to the Advocates and Proctors of the
Church of Rome, that thus vehemently plead for it. What peace while the
whoredoms of thy mother Jezabel? The Spiritual whoredoms of the mother of
fornications, and her witchcrafts are yet in great number, 2 Kings 9.22.

And as long as these continue, (...), let us continue where we are: yea let us
not stick to maintain and wage that same holy (...). Nazianz. Virgilius.
War, wherein whosoever dies Fighting the good fight of faith, shall
undoubtedly obtain (says Gregory Nazianzen) of the chiefest Bishop of our
Souls, a plenary indulgence for his sins. And as in situation and site of
place, this nation is divided from the main continent: so let it for ever
continue divided in opinion and affection to their heresies from the whole
Antichristian world; that so it may be said of it in this respect as well as in
the other.

Et penitus toto divisos orb Britannos. As therefore the heathen man promised
to full fill the law of friendship (...). Pericles apud Gellium, l. 1. c. 3.
(...), So let us profess our selves unfeigned welwillers to the Church of Rome,
and heartily desirous of a solid union, (...), till we come to the Altars. But
if they seek to bring over their Altars unto us or us unto their Altars; then
let us stand at staves end, and stiffly endeavor to prove as opposite unto
them, as is the purity of Divine worship to humane superstition: the true
Church and Temple of God to the congregation of Idolaters, and what agreement
has the Temple of God with Idols.

Thirdly, The third Corollary. The Churches danger. And that threefold.


1. Impropriation. 2. Dilapidations. 3. Sacrilege.
After the manner of the material Temple,

1. Impropriation.
This hazard has it run in every age, never was there wanting an adulterous
generation; yet never more rife and rank then in these days of ours; whereof
David complained in his, Psalm. 83.12. Who said, let us take to our selves the
Houses of God in possession. And which they barely projected and resolved on,
they have now effected and brought to pass. The Ark of God is long since taken
prisoner, and detained as forcibly, as unjustly, I say not by the Philistines,
but profane and lay hands. And the house of God, whereon Christ's sets a special
accent and emphasis, and imprints as it were his own marks (my House) is now by
prescription become a Den of thieves. Thus does it fall out with the Church the
spiritual house and Temple of God, which is openly exposed as a naked prey to
the greedy desire and malicious designs of a double impropriator. A double
Impropriator.


1. The Devil. 2. And the Pope. I join them both together.
1. The Devil.
The first and the chiefest impropriator of the Church is the Devil who being
fallen irrecoverably from the state of happiness Solatium perditionis suae
perdendis hominibus operatur. Lactant. l. 2.15.
he solaces his own misery by drawing and booking others into the same pitfal
of destruction. Laboring nothing more then to make of a Saint a sinner, and a
firebrand of Hell of an Heir of Heaven, and as this is Gods royalty to rule in
the midst of his enemies: maugre their most furious rage and fierce opposition,
raising up unto himself a holy seed even where Satan's throne is, such was the
seat of the Church of Pergamus, Rev. 2.13. The Devil who is the God of this
world, and the Ape of God as well in this as in other matters, affects and
studies a resemblance. That subtle serpent who slyly crept into the
terrestrial Paradise, and there seduced our first Parents, who were then the
Representative Body of the Universal Church, does still insinuate, and
cunningly convey himself into the spiritual Paradise, the visible society of
the faithful: some whereof he sollicits and effectually draws unto his own
party, and would (if it were possible) deceive the elect. So that it has been
commonly and truly said: where God has his Church, there the Devil has his
Chapel. This is the first and great Impropriator.

2. Rome, (...), The Pope.
That man of sin: As if his entire frame and composition were nothing else.
(...), That professed Adversary, that sits as God, in the Temple of God,
showing himself that he is God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. yet is he not a foreign or open
Adversary; for his trade is the mystery of iniquity, ver. 7. And though he
speak like the Dragon, he has two horns like the lamb, Rev. 13.11. But an
intestine and homebred Enemy that sits in the Temple. Not in Solomon's Temple
at Jerusalem, (as Bellarmin trifles) for that is not his Sea and Seat; And yet
St. Augustine moves an Vtrum in illa ruina Templi quod a Solomone constructum
est, an vera in Ecclesia ut Deus sessurus sit, incertum est. August. de Civit.
Dei lib. 20. cap. 19.
utrum concerning it, and passes it over as uncertain: but in the mystical
Temple of the visible Church, yea in the invisible Temple of the heart and
conscience, as some expound it. In this inward Temple does he sit, and that not
only (...), but (...), as it is in the original. Not so much in as upon the
Temple, treading and trampling upon it as his footstool; riding as it were in
respect of his Tyrannical government upon men's consciences, as he is usually
mounted and carried in public upon men's shoulders. Sic volo sic jubeo, is his
known Motto; And his imperious slile the same with the Ancient Donatists,
Augustinus verba illa (...), non in Templo sed adversus Templum interpretatus
est. De Civit. Dei lib. 20. cap. 19. Epist. 48. ad Vincentium.
Quod volumus sanctum est, His lust must be observed as a Law, and that de
necessitate salutis: as having all Laws both divine and humane cooped up in his
own Breast, unwritten and unjust Traditions, Ecclesiastical definitions and
constitutions, pari pietatis affectu and reverentia; ( to use the words of the
Council of Trent.) ought to be entertained with no less reverent affection and
devotion then the written Word of God; and by their own force and virtue,
directly, and immediately, oblige and fetter the conscience.

And whilst the Ista (...) (uti appellat Basilius, Epist. 10.) adeo ei dis
^licuit: ut de Romans Ecclesia dixerit: odi sastum illius Ecclesiae. Baron.
Annal. Tom. 4. An. 327. S. 32.
Pope thus sits in and upon the Temple, and exercises an absolute Sovereignty
and Dominion over the conscience which is proper only unto God, he is justly
argued and convinced, as an impropriator of the Temple.

The second danger of the Church is the dilapidations and ruins of it: The
second danger of the Church. Dilapidations.
a danger no less common to the mystical, then to the material Temple. And as
the negligent Person though otherwise a wise master builder, by his profession
does often times let fall the one: so does the bloody persecutor demolish and
make havoc of the other. And if we take but a general survey of the state of
the Church in Germany, we cannot but give evidence to that truth, whereof they
long had and still have too too sensible and most lamentable experience: Whose
sons and daughters, This Sermon was preached in the time of the German wars,
soon after the death of the King of Sweden at the battle of Lutzen.
within these few years were as the polished corners of the Temple! and are now
broken down not with Axes and Hammers; but with the swords and spears of
blood-thirsty soldiers, crying out in the fierce Dialect of War, the c^uel
language of the children of Edom, Down with them, down with them, even to the
ground. And as heretofore it might have been spoken even of this Temple, not
without admiration and wonderment, which Christ's Disciples affirmed of the
other; (...) See what manner of stones, and what buildings are here. So is our
Saviors Prophecy verified, to the uttermost of both a like; (...), There is
not now left one stone upon another, that has not been thrown down: yea, that
choice and precious stone, that victorious and ever renowned King of Sweden, of
late a worthy member of the Church Militant, now a glorious member of the
Church Triumphant, yea always Triumphant while he was yet Militant, Whose
sword, like that of Saul, never returned empty from the blood of the slain, and
from the fat of the mighty: Of whose loss I may safely say, in respect of the
Church, as the Historian sometime spoke of Cornelia in the loss of her loving
Husband, Valor. lib. 4. cap. 6.
Corneliam nescio an faeliciorem dixerim, quod talem virum habuerit, an
insaeliciorem quod amiserit; It is hard to say whether the Church of God were
happier in the enjoiment, or more unhappy in the loss of so great a personage:
Yet this precious stone which was worth ten thousand other, as David's Subjects
valued the life of their Sovereign; This Princely stone, graven after the
similitude of a Palace, is fallen likewise out of this spiritual building, and
the fall thereof was great. These are the ruins and dilapidations of the
Temple.

The third danger of the Church is Sacrilege, The third danger of the Church
Sacrilege.
not the pilfering and purloyning of the Vestments, and outward Ornaments; not
the stealing of the Bible out of the Church by the common Thief; but the
stealing of the public preaching, and the interpretation of the Bible from the
common people, by the careless and idle Minister. Loath I am to parallel
Brethren with professed Adversaries of the Church of Rome; yet are they as
parallel lines that go together and cannot well be sundred. And as the sin of
Sacrilege is no less heinous then Idolatry; yea the Apostle seems to argue a
minore ad majus, and to grant it the precedence, (...), Thou that abhorrest
Idols. do thou commit Sacrilege? Romans 2.22. So is their Sacrilege well near
as heinous in the degree, as is the Sacrilege of these Idolaters. The Popish
Idol-monger robs the Church of the Letter of the Scripture, by reading it in an
unknown tongue; And though a Roman he speaks in the language of a Barbarian.
The Idol Shepherd, as Zachary fitly styles him, the idle and non-curing Curate
robs the Church too, as well as the former; and that not of the Letter, but of
the Sense, by bare reading of the words, without retriving the scope and
meaning of the Text, or clearing the doubts and difficulties. Shall then the
Pastor justly complain of the sacrilegious people, in the cause and name of
God: Will a man rob his Gods? but ye have robbed me in Tithes and Offerings,
Mal. 3.8. And shall not the people as justly complain of the lazy Pastor, and
that in the name of God, Will a man rob his Gods? but ye have robbed me in the
dispensation of the word, and the work of the Ministry.

I close up this point with an Historical Narration of a notorious and famous
Church Robber: The Story reports him to be Celsus, who one day hearing that
Text of Isaiah read; We to them that join house to house, that lay field to
field, till there be no place, that they may be placed alone in the earth, Isa.
5.8. cried out immediately, Gregor. Tur. n. l 2. c. 24.
Vae mihi and Filiis meis, VVo be to me and my children. And if there be any
such spiritual Church-robber here present, let me put them in mind of Saint
Paul's Vae, and each of them apply it in particular, Vae mihisi non
Evangelizavero. And woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16. Yea
let me remembrance them of a second woe of Saint Augustine Vae tacentibus de te
Domine cum ipsi loquaces muti sint, August.
VVo be to them that are tongue-tied and hold their peace, when they that speak
most frequently and plentifully of thee (O Lord) are found to be dumb and
silent. And let such as are mindful of the Lord not keep silence, Isa. 62.6.
Thus have I at length concluded the threefold conclusion, The Dignity, the
Duty, the Danger of the Church. A threefold danger, Impropriation,
Dilapidations, Sacrilege. And so dismiss the first general Proposition.
Templum Sancti, the Church is Gods Temple.

The second follows, which I must only point at afar of, The second Proposition.
as Moses discovered upon mount Nebo the borders of the land of Canaan.
Sanctitas Templi, For the Temple of God is Holy, and that in a threefold
respect, after the manner of the material. Temple.

1. In the separation. The Church holy, in three respects.
2. In the consecration. 3. In the practical use and exercise.
First the Church is holy by separation, By separation.
even as the threshing floor of Araunah, when it was severed from common
ground, and destinated to an Altar. And that three manner of ways

1. In the eternal decree of Gods Election. Three manner of ways.
2. In the meritorious efficac, of Christ's Redemption. 3. In the actual
vocation and conversion.
First the Church is separate and set apart from the confused and corrupt mass
of mankind, In the eternal decree of Gods election.
whereof that likewise is a portion, by the eternal decree of Gods election:
and choice being only Aliquorum, it can neither consist, nor yet be conceived
or imagined without a refusal: That same negative Act of Praeterition, or
Reprobation, God freely denying grace, and justly passing over the remainder.
Thus Saint Paul restraines to a definitive number, Romans 8.30. (...), whom be
predestinate, them also he called. Quos praescivit, says the Apostle, so that
it is Electio personarum non qualitatum. An absolute, no respective decree,
either grounded or occasioned by any motive condition in the object of foreseen
faith, and perseverance. Nor is it an universal or general election, which is
quite repugnant to the nature. Quos praescivit, says the Text, Hos non alios,
those alone, and no other, as Augustine touches upon the place.

Secondly, In the meritorious Efficacy of Christ's Redemption.
the Church is separated unto holiness in the meritorious Efficacy of Christ's
Redemption, who though he gave himself, (...), a ransom for all men, 1 Timothy
2.6. A propitiation for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.2. if we take an
estimate of the greatness of the price and sufficiency of his death and
passion; Yet does he lay down his life for his sheep, and has purchased the
Church with his own blood, Acts 20.28. in respect of the force and efficacy of
his death, and the property of redemption. Poculum immortalitatis habet equidem
in se ut prosit omnibus, sed si non bibit non proficit, says Prosper
excellently, And did all men drink of the blood of Christ, then should they
have eternal life, John 6.5.

Thirdly, In the actual vocation and conversion.
for though God embraced and clasped it in the arms of his mercy from all
Eternity; And loved it with an everlasting love, Jer. 3.3. by way of
benevolence: Yet neither does the purpose of Election, which is an immanent act
in God, confer ought upon the party that is predestinate; nor the virtues of
Christ's Redemption avail any whit to the justification and acceptance of the
person.

Nor does God respect and tender the Church with the love of complacency and
contentment, until he be pleased actually to call it out of the power of
darkness, into his mavelous light. And hereby it becomes (...), populus
evocatus, a people called out from amidst the sons of men by the powerful
attraction and energy of the spirit: and by the subordinate ministry of the
Word and Sacraments. In all these respects the Church is Holy by Separation.

Secondly, Consecration, In the Consecration.
being dedicate to God by baptism, which though it be no Physical instrument,
that conveies grace by any natural force and efficacy; yet is it signum and
figillum and both by representation and assurance does establish and confirm
it; And as many as are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. And
from hence arose that ancient custom in the Primitive Church of clothing the
baptized with white apparel, Fulgentes animas vestis quoque candida signat.
Lactantius
Who were therefore styled Candidati and the Sunday after Easter, whereon this
Sacrament of Baptism was solemnly administr'd for the whole year, took the
denomination of Dominica in albis, and was termed White Sunday; that so both
the name of the day, and the bright color of their garments, might clearly
signify and set forth the unspotted innocence of their profession, and the
spiritual purity of their conversation. Thus is the Church holy by consecration.

Thirdly, it is holy in the practical use and exercise. In the Practical use
and exercise.
The reverent hearing of the Word; the devout administration of the blessed
Sacraments; And above all, affectionate and fervent Prayer. This is the service
of God, (...), whereunto his house is assigned and dedicated in a special
manner. My house shall be called the House of Prayer for all people, Isa. 56.7.
And this is it which Christens the public places of God's worship; and gives
the name unto Temples; Not Concionatoria, nor Sacramentaria, but Oratoria,
houses of request and prayer. As being a primary action, which by an elegant
Synecdoche, compriseth all other religious duties, that are ordered to it, and
derive and borrow from it a plentiful increase. Thus is the Temple, the Church
of God in the general, and each private Christian in particular, the house of
Prayer: who prays not only openly in the outward Temple, but secretly in the
Vis in Temple orare de scendi in reipsum. August.
inward Temple of his own heart. And as the consecration of Temples is evermore
solemnized with prayer; so is every living Temple hereby dedicate unto God. It
was so with Saul upon the point of his conversion; For behold he prays, faith
God to Ananias, Act. 9.10. To ascertain him of the truth. It is so with all
others, whose invocation and calling upon the name of God, immediately follows
God's vocation and effectual calling of them. This is the threefold holiness of
the Temple. The separation. The consecration. The practical use and exercise;
These are the several limbs and members of the point, like unto those dry bones
in Ezekiels vision, which though they are knit together by their several
Sinews, yet are they not covered with flesh and skin, as otherwise they might,
if the time would permit. And least these dry bones should be utterly void of
life, give me leave but once more to prophecy unto them, and breath a little
upon them by the spirit of Application.

And is the Temple of God holy? The Application.
away then with the vainglorious vaunt of Corah and his accomplices: All the
congregation of the Lord is holy every one of them, and the Lord is among them,
Numb. 16.2. These indeed are the presumptuous speeches of the sons of Corah (I
mean) some of our own Tribe: there is no distinction betwixt Elect and
Reprobate. Tros, Tyriusque, illis nullo discrimine habentur. There is no
certainty of grace, no assurance of salvation. Nemo ante obitum foelix, Believe
them who list, As is the good, so is the sinner. And yet says the text
expressly, The Temple of God is holy.

But who is this holy Temple? Quod vos estis; so it follows in the Text, ye of
the Clergy in a peculiar manner who serve at Gods Altar, Be ye clean that
carry the vessel of the Lord, Isa. 52.11. Ye are not only the Temple, but the
Priests of the Temple, and should have engraven, as it were, upon your
foreheads with the High Priest under the Law, Holiness unto the Lord. And as he
that has called you, and that not only ad salutem, but officium; as he is
holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15.

2. The Temple of God is holy; quod vos estis; Ye of the Laity, ye are the
Temple and house of God: and holiness becomes thy house for ever: ye are Saints
by calling, 1 Cor. 1.2. Be not so by calling only, your bodies are the Temples
of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19. Defile not these Temples with uncleanness or
drunkenness; neither carouse nor quaff in these vessels of your bodies, as
Belshazzar sometimes did in the consecrated vessels of the Temple. Preserve
ever more in these Temples the laver of Repentance, for the washing away of
sin. The Altar of burnt offering, for the mortifying and sacrificing of it,
kindled with the heavenly fire of fervent zeal, and devout love The Altar of
incense for the sending up, and breathing forth the sweet perfume of your daily
Prayers with the candle of faith, always burning and giving light in the
Sanctuary.

That so the holy Spirit of God may be pleased to dwell in us, as in his Temple
upon earth, and we hereafter dwell with him in the new Jerusalem, where there
is no Temple, Rev. 21.22. But the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the
Temple of it. To which Lord God Almighty be Glory and Honor, Adoration and
Thanksgiving, now and for ever, Amen.

St. PAVL'S TACKTICKS.

A SERMON Preached at Fakenham in Norfolk, at a Visitation.

For we hear that there are some which walk among you disorderly, 2 Thessalonians.
3.11. LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Will. Rands at Fleetbridge. 1659.

St. PAUL'S TACTICKS.
1 THESSALONIANS. 5.14. Now we beseech you Brethren, warn them that are unruly.
TO encounter the common abuses and general corruptions of the time by a
seasonable reprehension, The Preface.
cannot but be acknowledged a work as profitable, as necessary; yet will it
hardly find any other then hard and harsh entertainment with the most, blinded
either out of ignorance, or self love. Neither is there any undertaking more
subject to censure, then censure and just reproof; there is no man almost but
affects a liberty of life and action; but how few that dislike and disdain not
utterly the liberty of speech in others, though it be to control and
countermand their licontiousness. We are all wise and liberal to afford and
deal out (...). Euripides.
admonition, yet, as he characters out his young man, monitoribus asper; we are
withal so squeazy stomackt that we cannot digest rebuke though never so well
tempered and seasoned with the salt of discretion, without murmuring and
complaint, and if but taxed in the mildest manner, we are forthwith in the gall
of bitterness.

The delicious and darling sins of many might, they have their desire, should
be as the forbidden tree, and as the flaming Mount, which none may touch, nor
draw near unto, no not Moses himself; and as God forbad the people concerning
his Prophets; Touch not mine anointed, do my Prophets no harm: So do they
forewarn even the Prophets in effect, not once to Touch their beloved sins, nor
harm their iniquity: Only in this they must be merciful (as Naaman requested
Elisha,) and be as men in whose mouth are no reproofs.

A strong presumption and more then probable conjecture, that a Text of this
stamp or strain, that carries rebuke in the forehead of it, and levels point
blank at scandals and offenses: (that such a Text as this I say) treating of
admonition and disorder, will scarce comply with the misguided affections of
some partial hearers; or seem appliable to the occasion, in their too shallow
apprehensions. How proper and pertinent is the choice, I list not, I need not
to exemplify, as the Blind man's parents spoke of their Son, Joh. 9.23. so may
I affirm of the Text, Aetatem habet, it is of Age, ask it, and let it answer
for it self. Sure I am if any except and quarrel with the matter and so Kick
against the Pricks, they are those unruly mates here pointed at in my Text, and
such must be admonished; and if there seem overmuch rigor and severity in the
Apostolical injunction, observe a little how he qualifies and candies over the
tartness of his advice, with the Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci.
sweetness of obsecration We beseech you brethren; this is St. Paul's
condescension and meekness of spirit, who though he might command that which is
convenient and not be bold with them: yet for loves sake he does rather entreat
as he speaks to Philemon. And for mine own part, I thought it most suitable and
agreeable to the insufficiency of the speaker to stir you up by putting you in
remembrance, as St. Peter has it. Endeavoring rather to add some hear, and
fervency to your affections, by the earnestness of admonition, then any way to
inlighten and clear your judgments by precepts of instruction. For who knows
not that hardy soldiers, and stiff wrestlers Athletae etenim suis
incitatoribus fortiores sunt et tamen monet debilior ut pugnet isle qui fortior
est. Hieron ad Julianum.
(to borrow St. Hierom comparison) are far more stout and resolute, then such
as animate and encourage them, and yet ofttimes the weaker abilities quicken
the spirit of prowess and valor in the stronger combatants, by their
hortatives and persuasion. I will use no other Apology for pitching upon this
argument, then the argument of the Text, for the discharge and exercise of the
duty. (We beseech you brethren) suffer then the words of exhortation, as the
Apostle elsewhere inferrs upon the same premises, and think not ye suffer when
ye hear them.

The Text will not bear any accurate division as every piece of timber is not
fit matter for (...) Arist. Eth. 1. cap. 1. The division of the Text.
curious workmanship, and it were but a trifling vanity, to attempt it.

The words of their own accord spread themselves into these two Branches.

1. An attestation to the misdemeanors of some particular persons in the Church
of Thessalonica, That were unrulie.

2. An obtestation for the redress of the malady, by the application of the
remedy We beseech you Brethren.

1. An Excitation. 2. An Exhortation.
1. The Motive. 2. The Matter: Wherein there are three remarkable specialties.
1. The Act or duty enjoined, Admonish. 2. The subject, or the parties whom it
concerns, The Brethren. 3. The object of the Act and that is, The disordered or
unruly.
This General Assembly whose proper end agreeable to the first institution is
to rectify and reform abuses, might furnish any reasonable Logician were he
not a mere Lay Preacher, at least with a competency of Art, for the resolution
of the Text.

First, To take notice of the delinquents or offenders, such as are here termed
unruly.

Secondly, The censure or sentence pronounced by Saint Paul upon these
offenders, who must be Admonished.

Thirdly, The Censors or persons nominated, to whom the cognizance of the cause
is committed, not by virtue of any special office, and obligation, but out of a
more general respect and interest in the common state of Christianity. And
these are the brethren.

Not to baulk the Metaphor in the Text, which lays close couched in the word
(...) and is borrowed and taken up from the course of War, that directs and
points out unto us a threefold Analogy or resemblance.

The First betwixt dissolute Christians and extravagant and straggling
soldiers, both these are (...), without rank and station unru y or disordered.

The Second betwixt the exercise of brotherly admonition and martial discipline
(...) says the Text, restore and put their mind in order by admonition.

The Third betwixt private Christians and fellow soldiers, whose duty it is to
correct each roving companion that will not know his place or colors, and to
reduce them into order. The words are three in number (...). I will take and
pick them out one by one like so many kernels of a Pomegranate, without
quartering or dividing of the skin; marvel not that I give the first place of
handling to that which is last; and begin with those who had need to be first
dealt with, and these are (...) the unruly.

A double Quaery, A double Quaere
or inquiry may be moved, concerning the subject of the Text.

An sit?

Quid sit?

1. An sit.
Were it not a taking away of the subject to make proposition of the first, and
a calling of that in question which which is no way questionable or
controversal? St. Paul here argues ex suppositis et concessis, and it had been
utterly superfluous to enforce and press the duty of admonition, had there not
been some guilty and obnoxious unto censure, certainly had St. Paul erected a
holy inquisition, and set Officers a work to make an exact search and scrutiny
into the manners of Thessalonians, they would have give in a verdict like unto
Ezekiols roll written without and within; as full of corruptions and offenses,
as that was full of Lamentations and woes, at least they would have returned,
some disordered; I may say of them, as Christ advertised his Disciples
concerning the poor, these dissolute and unruly persons, ye have them and shall
have them always with you. There must be such and that (...) (as St. Paul
tells the Corinthians) even in the visible Church of Christ that being vox
aequivoca, and totum heterogeneum, an equivocal word, and heterogeneal body,
whose name though common to all, yet are the several parts every way different
in the nature, Many are in the Church that are not of the Church, as corrupt
humors in the body, that are no formal members: and it is not local Non
Hierosolymis fuisse sed Hierosolymisbene vixisse laudandum est. Hieronym.
residence nor outward conformity, but the vital participation of inward
sanctity that ranks men in the number of sound Christians. And being such they
are not absolutely priviledg'd and exempted from Ataxy or disorder: Be the
choice never so good there will be some rascal Deer within the pale of the
Church. And though it be Acies ordinata, an uniform and well marshalled army,
there cannot want (...), such as are unruly and disordered. So then the
question An sit, is out of question, and taking leave of that, we pass to the
Quid sit, and search more narrowly into the property of their nature.

2. Quid sit.
Disorder is a defect or privation, and privations are best differenced and
discerned in reference to their proper forms and habits; (...) Aristot.
Straightness is Index sui and obliqui; and such is the friendship even among
contraries, though at formal enmity and opposition in their nature, that they
afford a more distinct and evident knowledge mutually to each other, if
compared and ranked together. Order in the full extent and latitude, contains
these two Branches.

First, Order contains in it two Things.
The public Discipline and Government of the Church, wherein there are several
(...), sundry steps and stays above each other, a diversity of degrees and
functions. There is nothing more unequal in Ecclesiastical Polity, then parity
and equality. That being the breader of (...). Aristot.
confusion; and not of order, which is made up of parity and imparity; wisely
allotting and appointing the power of jurisdiction and correction to (...) such
as command in chief and sit at the Helm; and regular obedience to inferiors:
and they that are refractory in this kind, are branded by Saint Paul with the
black character of, (...). This is his injunction to the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. To withdraw themselves from every brother that walks
inordinately, and not after the Instructions which ye have received of us. Both
these are connected and coupled together, and the latter is an Exegesis or
explication of the former; so that to despise government or wilfully to reject
the just commands of Authority, must needs argue a man inordinate.

There are Praecepta Patris, and Decreta Matris, Divine Precepts and
Ecclesiastical constitutions. The Pharisaical Papists make the Word of God of
no effect through their Traditions. And as if they were an illegitimate and
spurious issue, bastards and no sons, acknowledge none but their Mother. The
giddy Novelists on the other side, so seem to reverence the self-sufficiency of
the Scriptures, that withal they cry down the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church, though no whit repugnant thereunto. And while they vainly boast (as the
Jews of old) that they have one God for their Father; they no way observe and
respect the Church, as their natural and lawful Mother. But as Paul speaks in
another case, 1 Cor. 11.11. Neither is the man without the woman, nor the woman
without the man in the Lord; No more is the Father without the Mother, nor the
Mother without the Father: God and the Church are both essentially required to
the generation, and must be reverently and religiously regarded, though in a
far different manner of such as are true born Christians. And as Saint Cyprian
has long since determined. Non potest Deum habere patrem, qui Ecclesiam non
habet matrem. Cyprianus de unit. Eccles.
They cannot have God for their Father in Heaven, who will not receive the
Church for their Mother here in Earth.

Secondly, and integrity of life, where men of a vicious disposition and a lewd
behavior, are justly styled (...), as passing all bounds of order.

Not to stray beyond the proper signification of the word which is ofttimes the
best Interpreter, Nomina notamina: names being so many lively expressions and
notations, yea compendious Definitions of the several natures thereby
deciphered and included in them, as the shell contains the kernel. Order though
a branch of our Latin Tongue, yet is it a sprig that sprouts from a Greek Root,
(...) of (...), that is Scaligers Etymology. And thus spoke the Tribunes to
their soldiers, hitherto you shaladvance your march there make a stand and
begin a retrait, this is the order of martial discipline: sure I am that (...)
of (...), in the original is a military word, and bred in the war, implying and
noting out the several ranks and places that are allotted to every private
soldier; and it is figuratively applied to represent and shadow forth the
comely order of the Church which as our Savior renders the similitude Cant.
6.3. is terrible as an army with banners. That which a peculiar office in the
service of war is to each common soldier, the same is a particular calling to
private Christians, whereunto they stand limited and confined: and as in an
army, such loose companions as want a station or straggle or wander from it, or
encroach upon another liberty, or are notoriously debosht and riotous; are all
arranged upon the File (...), and annumbred amongst disordered.

So are there four sorts of men in the Church. Four sorts of disordered persons
in the the Church.


1. The lawless loyterer. 2. The careless rover. 3. The busy intruder. 4. The
licentious libertine.
Upon all which St. Paul sets his mark (...) as God did a mark upon Cain,
indigitating and pointing them out to be the self same persons, that must be
admonished.

1. The lawless loyterer.
The first of these and the ringleader of the rest is the lawless loyterer,
men privileged and as it were protected from all other calling then that which
is so falsely called and a strain of their own invention, to whom it is as
great a punishment to be condemned to a settled course of life, and bounded
within the compass of an honest and laudable vocation, as for Evil spirits to
be conjured into a circle beyond which they must not pass. As if the first man
was justly exiled and banished out of Paradise, and yet his posterity might
take liberty to make themselves another Paradise, thorough pleasure and
delight, and live without employment. The peevish Anabaptists have sweat hard
to fetch up our Ministers within that number, for that they labor not with
their hands, and they that work not must not eat. That is St. Paul's order
touching those that are inordinate, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. But had these men brains to
discern and judge of others they would soon find in themselves that the ever
working and contriving brains of our painful Ministers drop more then their fat
Brows: and might have learned this difference in the schools of the Heathen
(...). Arist. Ethic. lib. 1. c. 1.
That there are inward and immanent operations of the mind, wholly terminated
within itself, as well as transient actions and manuary works, that leave an
impression in the outward matter: yea had they plowed with St. Paul's Heyfer
they might then find out this riddle; it may be they can plow indeed and do
nothing else; yet know not what belongs to the spiritual tillage, to Gods
Husbandry, as St. Paul terms the Corinthians, and as our famous Bishop
Grosthead sometimes answered an undeserving suitor for a benifice; That if
their plow was broken it were great pity, but they should have a new one, but
as for a cure of souls they are unfit, and altogether unworthy, Ne edentium
dentibus edentult invideant. Nec oc^los caprarum Talpae contemnant. Hieron.
Epist. ad Romans
let not them then that want teeth envy those that eat therewith: nor contemn
the eyes of goats, if themselves be Wants and Moles: as Hierom admonisht
Calphurnius. How much better might these curious and prying spies that come to
oversee the weakness of the Land, have spent their busy search elsewhere, and
found fit matter for their observation. And least it should be thought that
this lawless loyterer were as rare among us, as a needy beggar in Israel: and
that our Country were as well cleansed of these wild creatures, as long since
freed of Wolves; two kinds of men here cross my way which I cannot but take
notice of and these as different in their profession as near a kin in their
condition, both which may be justly challenged.

1. The lazy Monk. Two sorts of lawless Loyterers.
2. The sensual Gallant.
The Papists must needs own the one, and I know not well how the Protestant
should wash their hand of the other.

1. I begin with the lazy Monk and sluggish Friar, The lazy Monk.
into whom the souls of the ancient Cretians seem to have reentred having left
their first habitation; as if St. Paul had prophesied of the one in the
description of the other: (...), it being very difficult to conceive how he
should pencil, and draw a picture in every joint and limb so like themselves,
and yet never mind the pattern. Their bellies indeed may be thought nimble at
their meat and are alone exercised with labor, when the rest of the members
take their ease, and be they never so slow they are most sure and fail not to
do their work. And to those four devouring creatures rehearsed by Solomon,
Prove. 30.16. The Grave, and the barren womb, the earth that is not filled with
water, and the fire that says not, it is enough: A fifth may be added, as
insatiable a cormorant as any of the former, and that is the belly of the Monk,
and this above all other is quick of hearing: and cannot endure to be spoken
against, or have the copy once questioned: which was one of the grand and
capital faults committed by Luther at the first; Dresserus, An. ^al. Scul. page
45.
that he presumed to lift at the Popes triple Crown and to pinch the Monks
belly; as Erasmus some what pleasantly answered the Duke of Saxony. These,
these are the abbey lubbers, and stalled bulls of Bashan that live mued up in
their private cells and cloisters as Bears in a frank, and sit hooded all the
day as so many birds of prey. And all this they do under the foulded coule of
piety and devotion, and the most sad pretense of stern mortification: observing
fat fasts, and lean prayers, as Ientilet complained of old, pining themselves
into lard, and beating down their Bodies, till their girdle crack. And in the
midst of their gourmandising they thus cry out Heu quanta patimur pro amore
Christi! O what great matters do we suffer for the name of Christ. And were
they such as they fondly profess themselves, men wholly sequestered from the
world by an over rigorous and austere course of life, and utterly devoted to
religious contemplation; they were no way justifiable or excusable: for who
has required them at your hands? nor can they be warranted in this kind, whose
thoughts are so swallowed up in the general consideration of Christianity and
profession, that in the mean time they quite forget their personal relations of
Husbands, Parents, Mlasters, and Members of the Commonwealth: spending their
whole time in continual Pilgrimage from one Church and Saint to another, and
that with the extreme neglect of their private calling, and a total
impoverishing of their estate. But as the civil Courts of Justice must not
clash or justle, no more must the exercises of religion strike and enterfere,
the care of the general and particular charge must meet together; Holiness and
Righteousness must kiss each other.

The Jews have an excellent parable to this purpose whereof Gamaliel was the
Author Pulchium est studium legis cum via terrae, opificio aliquo conjunctum.
Drus. Apot. page 15.
The study of the Law is rare and commendable, so that it be cum via Terrae,
and we join therewith some profitable employment; Such was the Monkery of
ancient times, and the original institution of their order, who were not so
enamoured of their delightful and self-pleasing contemplation: (which though
like Rachel it be exceeding fair and beautiful, yet is it for the most part
barren) as to set at naught industrious labor. Nor did they so content
themselves with an Avery life soaring and mounting aloft upon the wings of
their meditations, as the Fouls of the Firmament; but they descended downwards
to the ground, and got their living upon the Earth, as the birds of the Air do:
and by their ordinary craft and trade procured some benefit to society. This
was the wonted custom of the Aegyptio rum monasteria hunc morem habent ut nem
inem absque opereis labor su scipiant Hieron. Epist.
Egyptian monasteries, who received none into their covents, that did not busy
themselves in labor. And the primitve Church has not only condemned the lazy
monk, as an unprofitable burden, but manacled and chained him with a Monach us
qui non laborat manibus, similis est pradoni. Socrat. Hist.
Thief; that Monk which labors not with his hands, is no better then a
thief. St. Paul implies and intimates as much in his Apostolical Canons
touching the idle and inordinate, 2 Thessalonians. 3.11, 12. We command and exhort by
our Lord Jesus Christ, that they work with quietness and eat their own bread,
as if it were not their own but the bread of deceit and thieft, unless they
earned it with the sweat of their Brows, and purchased it with their lawful
labor. Let then the Monkish crew who receive honor one of another, style
themselves by the name of Regulars, and call their covents and fraternities
after them several orders St. Francis, Dominick, and the rest; yet does my Text
indict them for irregular and disordered persons and that in a high degree as
being lawless loyterers.

2. The sensual Gallant.
Next unto these is the sensual gallant whose frolic spirit is so heated and
over warmed with a plethory of generous and high born Blood that fills and swells
his veins, or else are so cherished and flesh't with an overweening opinion and
unshaken confidence in their ample possessions and revenues; that they think it
a kind of disparagement and abasement to stoop to any office and employment
though never so honorable in the cause of God or their country, and cannot
endure to be enclosed within the Boundaries of a calling, albeit they
themselves join House to House and lay Field to Field, and so would enclose
all: these are the men that squander and lavish out their precious time, in
Eating, Drinking, Snorting, Sporting, (to say no worse.) And with the wanton
Israelites of old they sit down to eat, and rise up to play. Whose life is a
perpetual Holiday, a profane Sabbath dedicate to the Devil, An exchange of
pleasures and recreations; a garment patched together, and yet woven with a
kind of Curiosity of several threads of vanity; the warp and groundwork being
luxury and lasciviousness, and the woof loose pastimes and delights. As if they
were born into the world to no other end, then with the wild Ass colt to snuff
up the wind in the wilderness, or with the great Leviathan to take the pastime
in the waters, and though they be spruce and trim as the Lillies of the field,
Solomon in all his royalty was not clothed like unto one of them: yet they
neither sow, nor reap, nor carry into their Barns; they neither labor, nor
spin, nor do any work of merit beneficial to themselves or others. And are no
other then Lawless loyterers.

2. The careless Rover.
A second sort of (...) in my Text is the careless Rover and unlimited
stragler; professed Peripateticks, and mere Vbiquitaries not in opinion, but
action; that are every where and yet no where resident: who like unto unruly
beasts overtop the highest hedge, and break down the strongest fence, or if
tied up they will stray beyond the tedder: too many I find herein faulty and
that in our own tribe. And I must not forfeit the truth by concealing it from
any; nor you think much, if I point out some spots and plots ( as St. Peter
styles them) and these in our Priestly garments. The substance of the cloth is
exceeding fine, our calling pure and precious; but the black color is not so
in grain, that it cannot change, nor prove subject unto stain.

I will instance only in two Particulars. Two sorts of Bovers.


1. The first, have a center but no circumference. 2. The second, neither
center nor circumference, and both as you shall hear, Disordered.
1. The first have a center without a circumference.
Some Ministers there be that have a center, but no circumference, that want
not a charge or cure, but are wanting in their care and presence: like unto
moist bodies that are easily contained within another bounds, but hardly in
the terms of their own substance. And as if no Prophet could be sufficiently
honored in his own Country, they range abroad at large, with Noah's Raven it
may be to seize upon the prey, whilst the innocent Dove contains it self
within the Ark of his own Parish: Who out of an itching humor or an aspiring
desire to climb higher with the spider, or to publish their good parts unto the
world, for the most part hover and dance attendance at the court or else put
themselves into commons at Gentlemen's Tables, and there live as their Domestic
Chaplains, yea as some of their household servants, of whom it may be demanded
in the mean time as Eliab inquired of David, 1 Samuel 17.28. Why art thou come
down hither? and with whom have thou left those few sheep in the wilderness?
which for the most part are as sheep scattered without a shepherd. St. Jude
sitly styles them wandering stars, v. 13. Stars they are indeed, fixed in a
Church as in an Orb; and many of them shine as stars in the Firmament, with an
inbred and proper luster; and have not only a borrowed light from the
brightness of others labors: but yet stars though they be, they are wandering
stars and planets, now ascending then descending and forthwith retrograde:
whose perfection as they account it, does not only consist in motion, as that
of the Heavens, but in moving without their circles, forgetting that sure rule
of the heathen: Id unumquemque decet maxim, quod unius cujusque est maxim.
that chiefly concerns every man, that most properly belongs to him. A
Ministers charity must begin at home: and to speak in the words of Luther he
should be nailed to his own Pulpit.

2. A second sort of wanderers there are, The second sort have neither center
nor circumference.
I cannot call them star or lights, as Christ testifies of John the Baptist,
(...), That he was a burning and a shining light, placed in the Jewish Church
as in a candlestick; But as if they were light without a socket, lights in the
abstract, (...), and that of the world in general, as Apostolical men whose
commission is as large as the whole earth; they have neither center nor
circumference. These are our vagrant curriers, itinerant and erroncous Clergy
men, who never leave compassing the earth to and fro, and yet not to make a
Proselyte with the Pharisees; traveling from place to place with a little
pocket learning as with a lawful pass: and seldom out of their way, though
as seldom in it, after the manner of common beggars. Begging it may be on the
Sabbath day for a gratuity and free benevolence in the pulpit, and lashing out
most licentiously the week following in an Alchouse. St. Paul earnestly the
requests the prayers of the Thessalonians in his own behalf and
fellow laborers.; That we may be delivered, (...), from unreasonable and evil
men, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. this he specifies as the end of his desire. And they if any
other are not only (...), but (...), and that in the proper sense and
signification; men without mansion or dwelling place, and we have great cause
to second Saint Paul's desires, and Pastor and people to join in prayer with
the Thessalonians, that we may be delivered from them.

3. The busy Intruder.
The third species of this disordered and outlawed company is the busy
encroacher and intruder, and that either by

1. Speculative curiosity. 2. Or Actual usurpation.
1. By speculative curiosity.
There is a stickling and a stingling generation of quicksilver spirits and
pragmatical dispositions, Curiosi ad inquirendam vitam alienam, incuriosi ad
corrigendam suam. August.
Not more curious in another man's matters then incurious in their own, (...) as
St. Peter rightly characters them, 1 Pet. 4.15. most diligent and uncessant
Visitours in a strange diocese, thrusting their sharp sickles into the hearvest
of each man's affairs, and stirring their restless Oar in every Boat that
passes; as if they were Inquisitors General, and had the privilege and faculty
of that house to examine and make search at pleasure, or were retained as
private confessors, that might plumb and sound the bottom of men's hearts, and
dive into the secrets of all estates by their prying curiosity: these of all
other are the most lazy Droans, and the greatest enemies to all honest labor;
as appears by St. Paul's opposition, 2 Thessalonians. 3.11. (...): They work not at
all, but are busy bodies: so that busy bodies work not all, and their
business causes them to omit and neglect their business (...). Agatho^ apud
Athicaum, li. 5.
their (...) are their (...) their affected and idle medlings prove their most
painful exercise, and while with Martha they are troubled about many things
they attend not that one thing which is necessary.

2. By actual usurpation.
But besides the busy intruder there is an actual and unjust usurper of
another place and sunction far more dangerous then the former, who cast off
their ordinary trade of life as familiarly as a wast garment; and shift
themselves out of one calling into another as a Mariner shifts his sayls as the
flickering wind turns and chops out of one quarter into another, the wind of
necessity, advantage and advancement, ubicunque flat ventus, exin velum
vortitur. By what right and warranty Civilians now turn Divines, and own their
livings whose livery they scorn to wear, I list not to dispute: And yet me
thinks they seem to entrench upon the Apostles Canon, 1 Cor. 7.24. (...). Let
him therein abide with God: this above all other seems to me a strange wonder
in this our Israel. Is Saul also among the Prophets? and lay men in holy
orders? as if every blew Apron might turn professor of Divinity, and each
unlearned tradseman accustomed only to his yardward, toss Theological questions
in the Pulpit, which he understands not, as if they were to be measured by the
Ell! O confidence shall I call it, or insolent presumption! not only to touch
the tottering Ark with unhallowed hands as Vzzah did, who was stricken with
sudden death, but to make the living Ark the Church of God, to reel and stagger
by laying hands upon it. The heathen Philosopher shall confute them who has
laid down this for a grounded Maxim in the school of natural Religion.
Aristot. 7. Polit. cap. 3.
(...), let no Husbandman or handicraft person be a Priest; for it greatly
imports the good of all men that God be reverenced, with whose honor it
stands not, that they who live of base and manuary trades should be publicly
employed in his service. Nor does it suit with the decent order, or benefit of
Gods Church and people.

4. The licentions Libertine.
The fourth and last sort of disordered persons is the licentious libertine
these are the parties, I cannot call them men, that St. Paul fought with at
Ephesus; Here only lies the difference; they were Beasts after the manner of
men; these men after the manner of beasts. (...) (as he speaks) whose life is a
continual pampering and fatting for the day of slaughter: And as Saint Peter
describes them to the life, 2 Pet. 2.12. (...) Brute beasts led with sensuality
made to be taken and destroyed (...) and shall perish through their own
corruption. Such are the common swearer and sacrilegious Sa bath-breaker, men
utterly void of all inward sense of God, and reverent observation of his
religious worship; I speak this to your shame. Such are the lascivious and
unclean livers in what kind soever; the sottish and more then swinish drunkards
who thus revive and cheer up their drenched and drowned spirits, sauced as it
were in their liquor in the Epicures song or sonnet, Let us eat and drink for
to morrow we shall die. As if Ebrii and ructantes intrarent in Paradisum.
Hieronym.
reeling and belching they should stumble upon Heaven in their way, or size and
fall unawares into Paradise.

Expect not I should run Division upon them as in the former, and give in a
list of the several branches. For behold a company, as Leah spoke at the birth
of her son Gad; And well may their name be called Legion, as the Devils
confessed in the Gospe, for they are many. Sufficient it is barely to have
mentioned them, the very naming of them being (as the Philosopher speaks of
some (...) Aris. Ethi. lib. 2. c. 6.
vild affections) conjoined with a secret filthiness And hard it is (I say not
impossible) to reprove such onormous sins, and not to incur and commit sin in
the mere reproof; or to stir, much more to rake in such a noisome puddle, and
not to raise an odious stench and savor.

And thus I am quit at length of the (...) these unruly ones in my Text in
speaking whereof marvel not if my Method has been somewhat perplexed and
confused, as my matter was disorder; nor that I have been so copious in the
handling, as having thrust in my Beast into so wide a Field, wherein there was
no hedge, (as the Jewish Proverb runs.) And treated of such an argument, as
wanted all bounds and limits.

2. I now pass from the object to the act, The Act or duty iujoined. Admonish.
from the offenders to the censure of their fault, comprised in this one word
(...) admonish those that are unruly.

Wherein we may take notice of a threefold observation.

1. Ordo. 2. Modus. 3. Ratio.
1. Ordo, the order of the duty, admonish in the first place.

Secondly, Modus, the manner of the duty, not rebuke or reproach with
bitterness, but lovingly, Admonish.

Thirdly, Ratio, the reason or necessity of the duty, admonish them for
reformation and amendment: there is indeed a nice difference betwixt corripere
at corrigere correptio being only intentio emendandi; correctio emendatio cum
effeciu: as the schoolmen teach and gather out of St. Austin: yet for the most
part correction necessarily follows upon correption, especially if it meet
with a gracious disposition, and as the wise man verifies it, Prove. 6.23.
Correction for instruction is the way of life.

1. I begin with the order of the duty, First, the order of the Duty.


There are Three terms in Scripture exactly expressing and deciphering the
nature of the duty.

1. (...). 2. (...). 3. (...). Each of these exceeding the other in the degrees
and measure of it.
1. (...), That is a kind of striking and forcible beating of another as the
word imports with vehemence and carnestness of reproof, from which the gravity
of some men's persons and the dignity of their places exempt and proves a
supersedeas (...) Rebuke not an Elder, So St. Paul instructs Timothy, 1 Timothy
5.1.

2. (...), is a more mild and gentle kind of reprehension, yet joined for the
most part with some acrimony and sharpness of speech, and exemplary punshment
inflicted upon the offender, (...), It is sufficient to the same man that he
was rebuked of many, 2 Cor. 2.6. that is the Apostles determination in the case
of the incestuous Corinthian.

3. (...), is a bare minding and remembrancing, a putting of the mind in order
by advertisement and admonition. This of all the rest is the most fair and
favorable course, freest from all manner of sharpness, and smartness, and in
that regard must primarily and principally be attempted. To what purpose serve
extremities, but in case of extremity: in vain it were to enterprise and
endeavor the effecting of any design, per plura, which may be compassed per
pauciora, By more direct and gentle means; if single admonition will serve the
turn, what mean the thundering of the Popes bolts and cracks, the roaring of
his ^ulls to the amazement of the world. What need the sending forth and
scattering of Excommunications at the first dash; as if the giving men over
into the power of Satan, were but a matter of sport and pastime, who might be
reclaimed in a far more easier and speedy way. Quorsum haec perditio? To what
end is all this wast?

Great is the a^finitie betwixt soul and body, both in the disease, and the
remedies: that which Physic is unto the one, the same is correction unto the
other. And there must be observed the same rule and method in the application
of the means of cure.

There are three parts of Physic.

1. (...). 2. (...). 3. (...).
And so many ways there are to help the natural diseases of an ill affected
body.

1. By Diet. 2. By Potions. 3. By Surgery.
All which we find by way of Analogy and proportion in curing the spiritual
malady of the soul, and are excellently compared together by Clemens
Alexandrinus. (...).
The Diet of the soul is admonition, forbidding that which is simply hurtful in
it self or contrary to the disposition of the patient, and affording strong and
wholesome nonrishment.

(...).
Reproof though mild and moderate is as a medicinal potion that has always a
tang of bitterness; that dissolves those sinful passions which are grown hard
and tough, that purges out the inward corruptions of an unclean life: that
brings down the swellings of pride and arrogance, and restores the inward man
to sound and perfect health.

(...) Clem. Alex. Paedag. lib. 1.
Rebuke if sharp and keen is as the spiritual surgery of the soul, which does
not only cut to the life and quick, but quite cut of the dead works of sin as
members that are incurable.

As therefore potions are no way necessary or expedient, nor must be
administered to the languishing and feeble patient, who only by a regular
abstinence, or by a physical kind of Diet may in due time be recovered; nor
must those parts be utterly divided from the unity of the body for some wounds
and ulcers, that may otherwise be closed and healed up; no more must the faults
of men in a kind of self-pleasing cruelty be openly lanced and ripped up (as if
they meant to read a lecture of Anatomy) by cutting rebukes and menaces: nor
too too strongly wrought upon, usque ad habitum corporis, to the utmost ability
of their patient, (a fault very rife and common among many unskilful empericks
in Religion) by the purging potion of reprehension; which may first of all be
cured by the spare Diet of Admonition.

St. Paul seems to enforce and press the duty, and that by way of allusion to
the former Metaphor; if any man be fallen upon occasion (...) by way of
Prolepsis or anticipation, being suddenly surprised and unawares, ye which are
spiritual restore him with the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6.1. (...), says the
original, after the manner of skilful Chyrurgions, who are not wont to break a
bone that is only dislocated and out of joint; but with a dexterous and nimble
hand are wont to remove it into the proper socket and carefully bind it up. For
many there are as carefully affected to the impostume of their vices, as the
King of Egypts daughter to the impostum in her Breast, which she could not
endure to have once touched with a lancing instrument, and had it at length
opened with a penknise, secretly enclosed and covered over with a water sponge
prepared for that purpose. And they that cannot abide the sharp lancet of
reproof, must be warily handled with the soft and smooth sponge of gentle
admonition, especially in the first place. That is the order of the duty.

Secondly, Modus, the manner of the duty, Secondly, The manner of the duty.
it is but a (...) not corripite, but monete, amissam mentem reponite; as Beza
with the Greek scholiast fitly render the signification of the word. No way
importing any severe chastisement and correction, but only a brotherly
admonition, fashioned and shaped as it were in the tender bowels of an
affectionate charity and compassion. Our Savior confirms and warrants the
Modus by his own rule and precept, Mat. 8.15. If thy brother trespass against
thee, go and tell him his fault betwixt him and thee alone; Non dicit accusa
nec increpa nec vindictam expete; (as an ancient glosses upon the place) but
(...) only argue him as guilty and put him in remembrance; and that between
him and thee alone, who as he has sinned (In te) so must he be admonished
(Inter to) the censure must be as private as the sault, which if committed in
secret and published upon the house top, it is not the part of a Non
correctores, sed Proditor. August.
reprover but of a most dangerous traitor in the judgment of St. Austin.

Shall I come unto you, says Saint Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.21. With
the rod, in love, and in the spirit of meekness. Shall I come? he demurrs and
makes a pause? which of the two were most behoofeful and convenient for himself
and them, and that not without cause: for actions of this nature must be
squared by a double rule, 1. (...). 2. (...). Their necessity, and their
decency and fitness: Amendment being the and intended in admonition, which
cannot always be procured by the rod, but by the spirit of meekness. Ferrum de
manubrio prosilit, cum de correptione sermo durior excidit. Gregor. Cur. part.
2. cap. 10.
Too harsh an increpation (says Gregory) is like an Axe that flies from the
handle, and kills our Brother on a sudden, which should only cut down the
Briars and Brambles of his corruptions. And it is in reproving the faults of
others, as in the snuffing of a Candle, which if rightly done, it makes it
burn more bright and clear; but if too much of the week be taken off, it quite
extinguisheth and puts it out. Yet herein not an Arithmetical, but a
Geometrical proportion must be observed, and respect had to the nature and
quality of the sin, and to the proper inclination of the offender; even as a
prudent Father corrects his tender child with an easy touch of the hand, or a
small and tender twig: but if grown up to maturity of years and parts, he makes
use of a staff and cudgel (...). Epi ph.
therein applying himself to their several ages and coustitutions.

Some men are of a sullen and churlish disposition, and somewhat resemble the
nature of that Vngentem pungit pungentem ungit.
plant, which if lightly touched it pricks and stings; but if roughly handled,
it appears soft and smooth; like unto the goats of the mount Oeta, which never
gave any milk, till the shepherds had (...). Arist. lib. 3. de Hist. Animal.
ca. 20.
rubbed their teats with nettles, and so made them smart.

There are obstinate and stiff necked sinners whose brows are made of brass,
and their heart as hard as the Adamant: Such must be rebuked (...) in a
piercing and cutting manner: so Paul prescribes Titus to deal with the stubborn
Cretians Tit. 1.13. the disease that is habitual and inveterate cannot be
removed with a gentle and easy Dosis which does rather stir and anger, then
purge out the corrupt humors. So fares it with customary and common sins, a
mild reproof does but animate and encourage them, and makes them seem as light
as the reprehension. And as our Savior speaks of some sort of devils, so may
be said of some kind of evils: this generation is not cast out without prayer
and fasting; such means as are strong and powerful. Nevertheless if it be
possible and as much as lies in us, there must be only a (...), we must
admonish those that are unruly, and that in the spirit of meekness. A threefold
caution in the manner of our admonition.


In the exercise whereof a threefold caution and condition must be observed,
all noted from the word (...)

First, David's president, who said unto the foolish, be not so foolish, and to
the wicked lift not up your Horns, Psalm. 25.4. nor fear to tell the Popes
holiness, as St. Paul withstood St. Peter to his face, Domine cur^ita facis?
though we therein cross the Canon law, (which excepts him from censure should
he seduce many thousands to destruction:) as that crosses the canon of sacred
Scripture.

Secondly, N^than to David, thou art the man: for it is (...) in the plural and
not in the singular number. This was the gravity and discretion of ancient
times, St. Austin relating his practice in this kind Auresomnium pulso, sed
conscientias quorundam convenio. August.
I say not thou Adulterer correct thy self, but whosoever art infected with
that vice in this people, do thy best to rectify and reform it. And it is St.
Hieroms profession to his friend Rusticus Ego neminem nominabo, nec veteris
Comaediae licentia certas personas eligam atque perstringam. Hieron. Epi. ad
Rustic.
I will name no man, nor bring men's persons upon the stage in a licentious
manner, as they did of old in their comedies. Such should our admonitions be,
especially if publicly delivered in the Pulpit: like unto a field without
coming home to any: least otherwise by dealing too roundly and punctually with
men's persons, by turning Sermons into Satyrs, into Philippicks and open
invectives; we do not only expose their names to reproach and infamy, but
confirm and harden them in their Impiety. We resemble Mice in the property of
their nature, in nibbling and biting at men's reputation, in cropping their
credit; as Tertulian was wont to style Marcion, Tertul. adv. Marc.
Mus Ponticus, the Mouse of Pontus. And show our selves in the judgment of
Bernard, Corrosores potius quam correctores. Bern. Epist. 178
rather Corroders, then Correctors.

Thirdly, our Admonition, Gregory tells Venantius, Ego sic personam diligo ut
vitia tua corrigam; et sic vitia tua corrigo ut personam diligam. Gregor. ad
Venantium.
I so correct thy faults, that withal love thy person; and I so love thy
person, that I likewise correct thy faults; Even so though we tender men's
persons with due respect and reverence, yet must we not shoot at Rovers, or
beat the Air in an empty discourse, that breaks forth violently like a flash of
lightning, and seizes upon no particular subject; but come close and home to
the matter in hand, and effectually admonish men of their disorder. This is the
Modus, and the manner of the duty.

Thirdly, Ratio, the reason or necessity of the duty, Admonish them that are
disordered. And why? Thirdly, the reason of the Duty.
to reduce them into order; that being forewarned they may be forearmed against
the danger of the next encounter. Correct thy Son and he will give thee rest,
and will give pleasure to thy soul, says the wise man, Prove. 29.17. Aurum eget
percussione et Puer verberatione. Ber. Syra. apud. Drus.
Gold stands in need of beating, and children of another kind of beating. The
beating of the one gives beauty and luster to the Gold, and works it into any
form and fashion: and the beating of the other makes them more tractable and
ingenuous. Neither is correction more necessary for children, then admonition
for perfect men. Our Savior could not prescribe a more soverein remedy for sin
committed, Mat. 18.15. If thy brother trespass against thee, (...), argue and
admonish him: If he hear thee, (...). Thou have gained thy Brother. He has not
so much gained himself, as thou have made a private benefit and advantage; who
thereby becomes our letter of commendation, our joy our Et per salutem
alterius, nobis acquiritur Salus. Hier. in loc.
crown of rejoicing. So that admonition in the issue proves as profitable to
the Monitor and Adviser, as necessary and healthful to the Offender, and that
upon a double ground or reason.

1. A double ground of Admonition.
The one, Debitum Justitiae. 2. The other, Actus Charitatis.
First, Debitum justitiae; Thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, Levit.
19.17. Thou shall; a powerful and a peremptory command. The silly Ass
challenges our helping hand by Gods appointment, and must be lifted up, that
lies groaning under the burden; yea, though it be our enemies. And does God
take care of Oxen or Asses? it is the Apostles Question. Surely, yes, yet has
he a far greater care of collapsed sinners; They are of more value then many
Asses. Cadit Asina, and est qui relevet, perit Anima and non est qui recogitet.
Bern.
The Ass falls down, and is raised up; but a Soul perishes, and there is none
that takes notice of it: was the pathetical complaint of devout Bernard.

Secondly, Actus charitatis, which consists of a Soul as well as a Body, and
exercises it self both in corporal and spiritual Duties.

Visito, poto, cibo, redimo, tego, colligo, condo.
Instrue, castiga, jejuna, solare, fer, ora.
These are the works of charity, all comprised in that old Distich after the
Poetry of the Schoolmen. So that Castiga, is an inward act of charity, and a
spiritual kind of Almos, relieving the sinful Soul in her necessity: And more
properly belongs to the true nature of Charity, then any outward expressions of
liberality. Ad charitatem magis pertinet Remotio peccati, quam remotio
exterioris damni, aut corporalis nocumenti; it is the sound conclusion of
Aqumas. And this Remotio peccati, is procured by admonition, and that in two
respects.

First it removes the guilt of sin from the committer, putting a Bridle in his
Mouth, and a Hook in his Nostrils to restrain and curb the violence of his
desire; or else chastising him with the lashes of shame and sorrow, by
remembrancing him of the fact. This is the reason of the connection, Levit.
19.17. Thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer him to sin.
Rebuke, it does not suffer sin, but brings a Quare impedit against it, and
overrules it perforce. And the want hereof takes away remorse and apprehension,
Non putat peccare qui a nemine corripitur.
That man will never be sensible of his fault, much less eschew it, who is not
first admonished.

Secondly, In omnibus peccantibus pecco, quando eos quos scio peccasse,
crudelis quodam animi malignitate non increpo. Prosper.
not to forbid, is to command: not to control, is to countenance and to allow:
Even as it is all one in matter of Theft, to hold the sack, or to fill it. To
abstain from a free and just admonition for fear of offense and displeasure, is
a most cruel kind of mercy to the party whom we thus fondly seem to respect and
tender: as if being in present danger of drowning, we should not dare to catch
them by the hair of the head, lest they should lose some few hairs. And it is
no less cruelty unto our selves oft-times involving both the one and other in
the same common vengeance: as it did the Quia eorum peccatis damnabilibus
parcunt, dum eos in suis licet levibus and venialibus metuunt, jure cum eis
temporaliter, flagellantur; quamvis in aeternum minime puniantur. August de
Civitate Dei.
Christians with the Pagans, who also tasted of the violence of the Goths and
Vandals, for not being Monitors to them to amend their Idolatry. And this with
the former shows the reason and the necessity of the Duty; from which I now
pass, to the third branch of the Text, The circumstance of the persons to whom
the exercise of the Duty is delegated and referred. And these are the Brethren.

Might the Brethren of the Separation, unnatural brethren indeed, and such as
will not dwell together in unity; The third part of the Text. The subject or
the parties whom the duty concerns. The Brethren.
might these expound and comment upon the Text, they would from hence infer,
as from a most evident and pregnant proof, the undeniable power and authority
of Lay Elders here charactered to the life, under the name of Brethren; to
interpose and intermeddle in Church Censures, though without all ground and
warrant, either of Text or Truth. And why may they not as well challenge the
privilege to preach the Word, and to administer the Sacraments, as rudely hang
the Churches Keys at their own Girdles, and usurp spiritual Jurisdiction. This
is an opinion of Fancy rather, which though it were sound and orthodox in it
self, yet malam caudam trahit, It carries with it a bad tail, and draws after
it disorder and confusion; And God is not the Author of confusion, but of
peace, as in the Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. 14.33. yea proves extremely
pernicious and dangerous, not only to the unity and decency of the Church, but
to the state and being of it: For, as the blood in the natural body, if it
falls extra vasa, does soon corrupt and putrify; So does Ecclesiastical power,
when it comes into Lay men's hands, being then Extra vasa, the proper vessels of
the Clergy. And let me speak to these Sectaries and their abettors, as freely
as plainly in the words of Moses to Corah and his confederates; Ye take too
much upon you ye sons of Levi, (or rather ye sons of Lay men) God has taken
thee to him, and all thy Brethren the sons of Levi with thee; and seek ye the
office of the Priesthood likewise? Number. 16.7, 10

A second sort there are professedly opposite unto the former, trampling upon
the necks of the common people, with the supercilious Pharisee, in the proud
style of Populus Terrae, as men of no account and reckoning; who because they
must not presumptuously shuffle themselves into the office of the Clergy,
condemn it as a piece of spiritual Sacrilege in Lay Christians, to meddle at
all in matters of Religion. Yea, to make Piety the subject of their discourse
in ordinary conference, and to reprove a notorious sinner to his face in
private; is most unjustly conceived by some, an infallible mark of a precise
and pragmatical follow, and a high strain of singularity. Both these are
dangerous extremities.

There are two kinds of Admonition.

1. Juridical. 2. Fraternal.
1. Of Ecclesiastical Authority. Two kinds of Admonition.
2. Of private Love and Duty.
There is a Corripe inter te and illum; and a Dic Ecclesiae; The one
appropriate and intayled unto Churchmen. The other in general appertaining to
Christians in common. And these alone are the Brethren here specified in my
Text. Give me leave nevertheless, though not to stretch and strain it, yet at
least to amplify and enlarge it in the Application, to four sorts of men.

1. The People. Four sorts of Monitors.
2. The Pastor. 3. The Ecclesiastical Judge. 4. The Town Officer.
All which must admonish those that are unruly.

First, the people must mutually admonish one another, Numquid ego sum custos
fratris mei? First the people.
was the word of Cain, a speech as wicked as the person. The faithful are
stamped and sealed with another mark in their forehead, Then spoke they that
feared the Lord, every one to his neighbor, Mal. 3.16. And when God denounces
the fierceness of his wrath, against the horrible provocations of his people,
he adds this punishment among the rest; Yet let none rebuke nor reprove
another, Hos. 4.4. And certainly it is the defect and default of the people, in
the negligent omission of this duty, that makes the Ministers task so hard and
difficult: They laying this heavy burden of Admonition upon the Ministers
shoulders, and in the mean time refuse, as the Pharisees of old, to touch it so
much as with one of their fingers. It is not for them to become Priests or
Clerks; (so they think and speak) no nor religious men in the largest sense;
And they say in effect of the sins of others, as the High Priest spoke of that
of Judas; What is that to us? look thou to that: Bewraying an immoderate and
selfe-respecting love, not only in the things of this life, but in point of
Religion, in the great and weighty business of men's Salvation. I beseech you
then brethren of the common people, Admonish them that are unruly.

Secondly, Secondly, the Pastor.
if he corrects him not by reproof that lives amiss; so shall he be punished
for another sin, were he innocent in his own person. Son of man, I have made
thee a watchman to the house of Israel, says God to the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel.
3.17. And what is the office of a watchman? Therefore hear the word of my
mouth, and give them warning from me. And if thou give him not warning, nor
speak to the wicked, to admonish him of his wicked way, that he may live;
The same wicked man shall die in his iniquity, But his blood will I require at
thy hands. Who Quis roge tam saxei pectoris, quis tam ferreus erit, quem
sententia ista non terreat. Prosper. in locum.
is there of such a flinty heart, and iron sinews, whom this speech of God to
the Prophet, does not affright and terrify? says Prosper upon the place. All
other men must answer personally for themselves, but the Minister stands
charged with the souls of his people, as Judah was pledge for Benjamin: which
made Saint Chrysostom wish, and that in a strange manner, that there was no
day of Judgment. Great cause we have frequently and seriously to ponder Saint
Paul's charge to Timothy, and that with fear and trembling. I charge thee before
God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead
at his appearanee, and in his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 1, 2. How could he adjure him in
a more solemn and dreadful manner? and to what end? Preach the word of God;
bare reading will not serve the turn; monthly, or quarterly preaching is not
sufficient: Be instant, (...), insist and dwell upon it: In season and out of
season. This is never out of season, as other creatures are, unless it be in
respect of the indisposition of the Hearers. Improve, rebuke, exhort, with all
long suffering and doctrine. And to Saint Paul's charge to Timothy, let me add
the observation of my Text, I beseech you brethren of the Clergy, Admonish them
that are unruly.

Thirdly, The Ecclesiastical Judge must admonish likewise, Thirdly, the
Ecclesiastical Judge.
which are often times weak and feeble for want of assistance; (as Aaron and Hur
supported those of Moses) by the sinews of his authority. And would he have
his censures like goads and nails fastened, he must begin In proprio Lare, in
his own court and consistory; So David resolves and vows, Psalm. 101.3, 8. I
will walk in the uprightness of mine heart in the midst of my house, in the
first place; and what follows in the next? Betimes will I destroy all the
wicked out of the land. And it is our Saviors counsel to the critical and
censorious Hypocrite, Matthew. 7.5. Primum ejice trabem ex oculo tuo, then shall
thou see clearly the mote that is in thy brothers eye. St. Paul expostulates
with the outside Jew, not without admiration, Romans 2.21, 22. Thou that teach
another, teach thou not thy self? Thou that say a man should not commit
adultery, yea and punishes it in another, do thou commit adultery? And there
is none of us to learn what that means, Turpe est Doctori, cum culpa redurguat
ipsum.

The Snuffers of the Temple were made of the purest Gold; so they who are by
their place appointed to correct the corrupt manners of a sinful generation,
had need be among men as Gold among Metals the chiefest for weight and worth:
These mystical snuffers if soul within, will hardly by snuffing others, make
their own light shine the brighter. If any demand with John Baptists Hearers,
And what shall we do? I will return no other advise, then is by him afforded
to the soldiers, Luke 3.14. Do violence to no man, accuse no man falsely, be
content with our wages. Admonish indifferently and impartially without respect
of persons, not trucking and bartering with the sins of men after the manner of
Merchants: and to speak in your own language not commuting a penance into a
payment, which (if I be not deceived) is no part of commutative justice.
Admonish conscientiously and in singleness of heart, out of a fervent zeal of
God's glory, the Churches reformation, the faithful discharge of your private
interest, and not for filthy lucre sake. Let it never be said of this Court,
which was commonly voiced of the Court of Rome; Plus nituntur pecunias
colligere, quam culpas corrigere; That they endeavored rather to collect the
peoples moneys, then any way to correct their manners. And I beseech you
Brethren of this Court and place. Admonish them that are unruly.

Fourthly, Fourthly, The Town-officer.
they also must admonish by way of Certificate and Presentment; For as the
Eunuch complained to Philip in another case, How can I understand without an
Interpreter? Acts 8.31. so may the Ecclesiastical Judge in this; How can I
admonish without a Monitor and Informer. Inform then they must, and not give in
a blank verdict, or return an Omnia been, like unto that Athenian Traveller,
whereof Plutarch mentions, who being asked at his coming home how matters
were at Athens, forthwith passed this smooth and ready answer to the question;
Omnia pulchra, All there was well and good: Ironically insinuating, Omnia
pulchra putari, Nihil turpe, That all things were there accounted good, and
nothing wicked or dishonest. You cannot be ignorant of the Rights of your
Office, the strictness of your Oath, the enormity of the sins committed in your
several parishes; yea, may not most of you give in evidence out of your own
experience, and affirm as David did, I have seen cruelty and strife in the
City; I have seen secure sleeping in the Church, brutish drunkenness in an
Alehouse, and do you hold your peace? Do you know them your selves and not
cause the Authors likewise to know their abominations? Lay your hands upon the
heads of these beasts, as the offenders did under the Law; cast the first stone
at these malefactors, not to kill them, but to give them life; what though you
cannot reform and rectify disorders? as the Emperor spoke of Galbaes crooked
back, Ego monere possum, corrigere non possum; yet may you certify and
admonish: nor shall your labor be in vain in the Lord; I will only give you
your charge in St. Paul 's words inverted, Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever things are
sinful, whatsoever things are dishonest and profane, offensive to God,
scandalous to his Church; If there be any vice or wickedness think on these
things. And I beseech you Brethren, Churchwardens, with the rest of
Town-officers, Admonish them that are unruly.

2. The second part of the Text. The motive we beseech
St Paul's Motive or Excitation to the duty, (...), We beseech you: Where we
might take notice of these two Particulars.

1. St. Paul's Earnestness. 2. St. Paul's Gentleness.
1. He does not barely exhort them in a soft and easy strain, after a calm and
cool manner; but earnestly beseeches them, with veheniency and importunity.

2. Nor does he express himself by way of command, Sic volo, sic jubeo; Fiat,
Fiat; which is the formal tenor of the Popes Edicts, though Pope Zachary
somewhat mistook the style, and changed it into a Fiatur. For knowing that man
is a reasonable creature that must rather be led then drawn, and that Faith is
to be persuaded and not enforced, Saint Paul beseeches them with meekness of
spirit, and tenderness of Affection.

1. Some there are as soft and smooth in their instruction, as Jacob in his
Body. The words of their mouth are softer then butter, and as sweet as soft;
saying, Peace peace, where there is no peace: I hope better things of you, and
such as accompany salvation; Then which what more ordinary; though indeed
unless they hope as Abraham did above hope, there can be no hope at all. These
come not in the spirit and power of Elias with John the Baptist. They want the
spirit of Phineas, which had need be prayed for in the words of Ambrose Veni
Phinees Ambros. Sermon. 18. in 118. Psalm.
Come Phinees, take the sword of the Spirit, smite Heresy, strike idolatry,
cut the iron sinew of contempt and obstinacy, wound the hairy scalp of such as
go on in their wickedness.

2. Others there are, all rough and rugged like Esau, men of a sierce and fiery
temper, and know not of what spirit they are made, as Christ told his
Disciples, All their Sermons like the Element of Fire, are Excessus fervoris,
the extremity and excess of heat. And the pulpit while they are in it, proves
like Mount Sinai at the giving of the law all in a flaming fire, sending forth
only the terrible thunders and lightnings of the Law, and nothing is to be
heard from thence, but the shrill sound of judgment, and of damnation.

As therefore Moses and Elias, Elias the hottest man alive, who sucked fire
from his Mothers breasts, as St. Basil symbolically describes his zeal: And
Moses the meekest man upon earth appeared together with Christ when he was
transfigured upon the Mount; So must the fervent spirit of Elias, and the mild
spirit of Moses, meet together in the pulpit; As here they did in Saint Paul,
and are both joined together, Earnestness, and Gentleness, in this one word; We
beseech you.

And so the beginning of my Text, has brought me to the end of my Sermon: And
where, or how shall we end better, then with terms of Supplication.

Now we beseech you earnestly, we beseech you gently and meekly; Laity, Clergy,
Ecclesiastical and Temporal Officers, Brethren of all sorts, Admonish them that
are unruly.

The End of this Sermon.
THE POLITIC REFORMATION.

A SERMON Preached before the Judges, at the general Assizes, holden at
Thetford, for the County of Norfolk.

And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take
away all thy Tin, Isa. 1.25. LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Will. Rands at
Fleet-bridge. 1659.

THE POLITIC REFORMATION.
ISAIAH. 1.26. And I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy
Counselors as at the beginning.
I Read of a Priest in Germany, The Preface. (a) Vos libenter me non auditis
and ego libenter non concionor ideo diu vos non tenebo. In vita Melancth.
who for want of better Apology thus prefaced to his Sermon: Neither do I
preach willingly nor you hear, and therefore I will not hold you long. Far be
it from me, as far as it is from the ingenuity of Christian Charity, so to
derogate from the honor of your devotion, as to entertain the least jealousy
of your unwillingness, much less to betray mine own in not offering a free will
offering; so that I shall not need to capitulate, or condition for a favorable
attention by the promise of expedition. My Text happily does not a little
startle and awaken at the first rehearsal and bare sound of the words, and may
seem to carry rebuke in the forehead; then which what more requisite in the
Speaker? what more behoveful for the Hearers? especially in these ill affected
times, that are less impatient of their Malady, then of their Remedy. And yet
conceive not out of forestalled prejudice, that I intend to imitate the Wasp or
Hornet, whose property it is to sting; or delight to play the busy Fly,
lighting only upon parts exulcerate, the sores and ulcers of the Commonwealth.
How easy it is (I am not ignorant) to come within compass of an error,
oft-times the greater, and that in a just, but intemperate reproof: whereof
Luther was not free in the judgment of Erasmus, Mu'ta quidem praeclare monet
sed utinam civilius admonuisset. Erajm. Epist. lib. 12. ad Rect. Acad. Ersurt.
That his admonitions were no less excellent then necessary; but it had been
well if he bad seasoned them with more civility. Herein he did amiss, and
respect must be had to the Poets rule, Quid verum quidque decet; which was
warily observed by Saint Paul as a notable pattern and example, Acts 26.25. I
speak the words of truth and soberness. And this will we do if God permit.

The Method of the Prophecy is like the manner of Gods appearing to Eliah upon
mount Horeb: first in a boisterous and blustering wind, and then in a soft and
still voice. He begins by way of astonishment, with a vehement reprehension of
the unheard of abominations of his people the more monstrous because theirs;
And solemnly denounces his sierce wrath against the heads of the committers:
and these were the head, the prime and chief among them. Thy Princes are
rebellious and companions of thieves, verse. 23. yea, head and tail were both
alike: Every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards. All sorts of men
had corrupted their ways, and it was then verified of Jerusalem, which
Salvian afterward applied to the City of Plena turbis and turpitudinibus. t
Salv. de Carthag.
Carthage, that it was as full of sin as of people. Thus is the first part
spent in sharp menaces and terms of objurgation; God descends in the sequel, in
a calm and gentle strain from matter of terror to the means of their recovery.
My Text borders betwixt both, and partakes jointly of a promise and threatening.
A promise it is, if we respect the general good thence accruing to the Nation;
but a severe threatening of the persons in particular.

Call it, if you please, The Politic Reformation, wherein there are these four
parts remarkable.

1. The Author, or Reformer, The Parts of the Text.
[I] 2. The nature of the Reformation, and that by way of restoring, [I will
restore] 3. The object of Reformation, or Delinquents, [The Judges, and the
Counsellors]. 4. The Rule or Means of Reformation, [As at the first, as at the
beginnning.]
(...). And first of the Author, or Reformer, [I.]

Ejus est reficere cujus est facere. Reformer as the first former of them. The
first part, The Author of the Reformation, [I]
It is a sure principle in nature, causes constitutive, are also conservative;
and preservation is nothing else but a continued creation. And it holds true
likewise in Divinity, The powers that be are ordained of God, Romans 13.1. all
civil honor and authority is from the Prince within the precincts and limits
of his Dominion: and God who ordained them at the first, still maintains and
bears them up with the word of his power, or else reduces them to their first
estate, being collapsed and decayed.

Four specialities are necessarily requisite in a Reformer. Four specialities
required in a Reformer.


1. Personal Integrity. 2. Perfection of Wisdom. 3. A lawful Warrant. 4. The
Sinews of power and strength.
All which appertain to God in the highest degree of excellency.

1. The first, Personal integrity.
and so they that go about to correct the crooked manners of others, had need
be among men, as gold among metals, the chiefest for weight and worth. It is
not without cause, that the Heathen man defines his Orator Vir bonus dicendi
peritus. Quintil. Orat. Instit. (...) Nazian. Orat, page 7.
A good man in the first place: For he shall never persuade others, that does
not first amend himself. Lucians Apothecary is worthily laughed at, for giving
remedies for a Cough, and yet was always molested with it. This is the disgrace
of the Art, and just cause of contempt and scorn to the professors. And every
one in stead of requiring their advice, or following their prescriptions, will
be ready to give them a bitter Pill, and admonish them in the tartest manner;
Physician heal thy self, Luke 4.23. Such Physicians are they who are very
zealous in curing the sores of the Commonwealth, and yet themselves are the
foulest Ulcers, and have most need of launcing to let out their corruption: but
as Saint Paul speaks of the office of a Bishop, so may I of a Reformer; If any
man desire it, he desires a worthy work. Yet is it required in either (as the
same Apostle adds) That he be (...), without reproof or blame. 1 Timothy 3.2. The
Reformer must not be liable to an Informer, or a Promoter; but a rare pattern
and paragon of virtue, and teach not so much by precept as by example. Such a
one is God, even by the confession of the Heathen. (...). Clem. Alexan.
God is not, he cannot be unjust, but the most righteous of all other; and is
therefore styled the Holy of Holies in Scripture, as the Highest Heaven, the
Heaven of Heavens, that incloses the inferior Orbs in the vast compass of the
body: And so does God include in the purity of his nature, the utmost
perfection of the creature. And as he is holy in himself, and his Will the
exact rule of righteousness; not willing things because they are just, but are
therefore just because they are willed of him; So is he holy in all his ways,
and just in all his works, Psalm. 145.17. For shall not the Judge of all the
world do righteousness? as Abraham pleads with God, Genesis 18.25. How else could
he judge and reform others?

Secondly, The second. Perfection of Wisdom.
To discern and judge a right, and to be able to put a difference. The Eye is a
precious and a choice part; yet is not every unskilful hand fit to tamper with
the blemishes; which in stead of curing the weak and dimmer sight, may soon
blind and put it out. There are corruptions in manners, both odious and
enormous, which must immediately be redressed; but lesser inconveniences may
be tolerated for a time. Remisness and rigor will do equal harm. The potion
may be altogether unpleasant in the taste, and too operative for the state of
the patient. Such a draught did Luthor give the World, Pharmacum violentum and
amarum, as Brashius censures it. And the right discerning the quality of the
disease, with the application of fit remedies, requires abilities of Wisdom
and Discretion. (...), says the Ethic. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Philosopher. And it is the part of a wise man to distinguish in a case of
likelihood: and who so fit to be a reformer in this respect as God, in whom are
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; who cun exquisitly determine
of matter, manner, circumstance, as well as substance, and cannot be deceived
with fair semblances and pretensions. It is Machiavels maxim in his
institution of Princes, that they above all others should rest contented
Machia. Princ. cap. 18.
specie et color pietatis and that upon this persuasion: nam videndi facultas
omnes atting it, attrectandi vero paucos duntaxat, as if they had men only, not
God for their overseer, or God were like unto blind Isaac that could not
discern without handling: whereas he sees and touches both at once, thus is the
council of Achitophel turned into foolishness.

Thirdly, The Third. A lawful Warrant.
A lawful warranty is absolutely necessary in a Reformer; and no man takes this
honor upon him, but he who is called as was Aaron, Heb. 5.5. For St. Paul's
Rule is general, (...), not in Church alone but in Commonwealth. To the truth
whereof the very Heathen have subscribed, That good is not good unless it be
done well. (...).
The Israelites by God's Commandment were to overthrow the Altars and pull down
the Images when they were brought into the Land of Canaan. First, they must be
possessed of the Land, which should authorize, and as it were legitimate the
reformation, and then demolish and subvert their Idols, as Augustine well
observes upon the place. And Gregory commends Serenus for his apprehensive
suspicion and tender jealously of Idolatry, but faults the rashness of the fact
in the violent displacing and removal of the Images; and gravely wishes and
advises him Vtinam zelum tuum discretione condisses. Indict. 4. Epist. 9.
to season the rankness of his zeal with the salt of discretion. An excellent
Caveat for the vulgar sort and plebeians of our Time, whose inbred property it
is, (...), who looking upon their Superiors with an envious eye, are forward
in declaming liberally against their abuses, oft-times merely supposed and
imaginary; and out of a giddy zeal would fain be tampering in redressing of
them: and so cause a greater Nullo potest a schismaticis tanta fieri correptio,
quanta est schismatis pernicies. Tertul. Praesc. cap. 60.
confusion by a disordered and ungrounded enterprise. Shall I show you their
lively portraicture behold it in a story Joseph Bell. Judal. Lib. 6. cap. 1.2.
Josephus is the Reporter. There were in Jerusalem in Nero's time, who flocked
and herded together by troops and multitudes, in defense as they pretended of
Religion and the Temple, surnaming themselves Zelots by way of distinction; yet
these were the men that peremptorily refused the conditions of peace offered by
Vespasion, and the first that cast fire upon the Temple, which they were
engaged to preserve; And were not these true Zelots? and their zeal as hot as
fire? and yet without light. These never walked in the light of Christ's
example, who would not Umpire in a Law case, though requested, as being without
the compass of his Office; Who made me a Judge? This was his allegation. Nor
did he permit the Devils to take his name into their unhallowed mouth for want
of a calling. God therefore, who is the ultimate object against whom offenses
of what kind soever are committed, whose unlimited power justly intitles him
over all persons and in all causes Supreme Head and Governor, has a general
influence into every matter, and may out of his high prerogative, interpose and
reform at pleasure

Fourthly, The fourth. Sinews of power and strength.
There had need be the sinnews of power, where reformation is attempted;
thereby inabling the undertakers to pass over difficulties, and even to wade
through a Sea of dangers. (...).
Great adventures require suitable abilities in him that manages them. And
Philosophy teaches Omnis Actio est a viciaria; unless the active and opposing
power exceed the force of the resisting there can be no victory. And who sees
not that the best cause is oft-times crushed and trodden under foot, not being
backed and seconded with the strength of authority, which exposes the enterprise
to bitter derision and contempt. And each one that considers, will be ready to
let fly their taunting censure; This man began to build but was not able to
finish it. Such a one Sanballat and Tobiah accounted Nehemiah, when he went
about to repair the Temple; What do these weak Jews? will they fortify
themselves? will they finish it in a day? will they make the stones whole again
out of the heaps of dust, seeing they are burnt? And though they build, yet if
a Fox go up, he shall even break down their stone wall, Nehem. 4.2, 3. Thus did
they discourage them from the work. And Albertus Crantzius seriously
endeavored to take off the edge of Luther's eagerness, when he first
adventured to cry down the Popes Indulgences, Chytraeus. Chronico Sax. Lib. 2.
Frater vade in cellam, and dic Domine miserere nostri: This was his council to
him, as if to effect it had been impossible. And his friend Faber told him,
that though he was fortified with the whole armor of God, yet he should be
encountered with other weapons, sword, spear, and shield, out of Goliah's
armory; while he came out against them in the Name of the Lord of Hosts: But
God is the Lord of Hosts, This is his Name, and his memorial throughout all
Ages. The Prophet describes him like a man of War, Isa. 59.17. He put on
righteousness as an Habergeon, and a Helmet of salvation upon his Head. And he
put on the garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal as a
cloak. And when any strange work is foretold or promised, this is usually
prefixed to assure the accomplishment, The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will
perform it. And such is his invincible power, and the strength of his right
hand, That when he begins to reform, (as himself speaks of Eli's house) he will
also make an end.

2. The second part of the Text, is the nature of the reformation, The second
part. The nature of the reformation by way of restoring I will restore
and that by way of restoring [I will restore]. It is not a forming but a
reforming, an innovation but a renovation, a framing, but a lash^^^ing: God
deals not as a Creator as at the first, when he made all things new of no
praeexistent matter; but as a wise Physician, he cures the ancient maladies and
diseases of the same body. God does not abolish, but restore, which Act of God,
has a double reference.

1. To their Places. A double
2. To their Persons.
First, First, to their places.
not abrogate their place and function and dissolve their profession; all
innovations are dangerous and warily to be attempted, especially when they
carry along with them any show of violence and extremity; then are they utterly
to be declined and abandoned: non est movendum quod sine sanguine moveri
nequit. And it is far safer for the Bodies health (in the judgment of those
whom we are bound to believe in their own Art) to abide in a corrupt and foggy
Air, then remove to a pure; to continue an inveterate custom, though somewhat
obnoxious in it self then admit of an alteration: and it may in some times and
cases, prove as safe for the body Politic: And of this mind were the Thebans,
who caused him to come with a halter to the Tribunal who proposed a new law;
yet when there is a sufficient cause that does necessitate a change, it must
warily be attempted and by degrees; it is the Naturalists rule Omnis transitus
ab extremo ad extremum fit per medium.
that there is no passage from one extreme to another, but by a mean; and it is
natures course converting fire into air, and air into water, which agree in
some symbolical and common quality; not turning one contrary into another: and
it ought likewise to be observed as a Policy of state.

Let no man think I plead for a toleration of corruption, as some have done
under that pretense: witness that frigid excuse of Pope Adrian in his
instructions to his Legate, that he could not suddenly reform all enormities of
the Church, and he would have no man wonder at it: for that the disease was
habituate, and every mutation liable to extreme peril; et qui nimis mungit,
elicit sanguinem. Thus wresting Scriptures to his own destruction. I drive not
the same project, nor speak in favor of the disease, but only censure the
preposterous application of the remedy.

Some spirits there are over jealous and fantastical, who would cast a
Commonwealth into a new platform all at once; and utterly abandon on a sudden,
whatsoever has been perverted to abuse: Herein resembling those weak-spirited
soldiers that will not venture upon a stratageme that has formerly been
practiced by an adversary, and are so terrible afraid of being found in the
trenches of the enemy, that they out run their own camp.

I may not unfitly parallel their ridiculous courses, with the folly of that
painter, in the Reign of Queen Mary; who having drawn the picture of King Henry
the eight, against her coming through the City in triumph, with a Bible in his
hand, and being checked by a great counselor of State, and wished to wipe it
out: because he would make sure to leave none of the Bible, he wipes out book,
and hand withal.

There must be a distinction made betwixt these things themselves, and the
corruption inherent or adherent: that fault which proceeds out of the Thom.
Par. 1. quest. 41. Art. 6.
nature of the fact it self, being simply evil: and that which arises from the
abuse of what is good in its own kind, and yet becomes evil only by accident.
Lycurgus the wise lawgiver, in this showed himself none of the wisest, in
destroying all the vines of Sparta; for that men were made drunk and mad with
the wine: who should rather have dug Insanum Deum alio sobrio repressum,
castigare.
wells and fountains near unto them, and so have taken away the abuse by mixing
some quantity of water with it; the Roman Cotta bewraied little knowledge in
the condemning of it, for that it oft-times proves (...) armed wickedness, and
so enabled to be the instrument of greater mischief: and devout Bernard justly
complains of many in his time, who cried down reading and diversity of study:
and that because Prolixa lectio memoriam legentis obliterat. Bern. de inter.
domo. cap. 50.
overmuch reading debilitates and oppresses the memory of the reader.

For in In multisnon usus rerum sed libido utentis in culpa est. August. de
Doct. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 13.
many things not the use but the disorder of him that uses them must be
blamed: and good must not be removed or laid aside, for adjoining and bordering
upon evil, as he proves at large against the Donatists: and our upstart
Anabapist^s as whelps of the same litter, those Dreamers foretold by Sr. Jude
v. 8. that despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities Non debere inter
Christian^s esse praetoria, leges, juditia aut jus gladii. Calv. Inst. lib. 4.
the Law, Magistracy, judgment, the power of the sword are not to be received
or exercised among Christians: it is their own tenet, and it may be occasioned
and furthered from the defaults and defects of the Ministers, and their opinion
well accords and suites with their practice, one while choosing Knipperdoling
for their Consul, and not long after advancing him to the high office of a
Hangman.

But as tyranny which is an extremity of government is far better then an
headless Anarchy; Even so it is to be preferred of the two, Praestat illie
esse ubi omnia licent quam ubi nihil.
to live under irregular rulers, then utterly to be destitute: God himself
determines it by his own testimony: I gave them a King in mine anger, but took
him away in my wrath, Hos. 13.11. a wicked King such as Saul was, may be given
in Gods anger but is taken away in his wrath, which is the fierceness and fury
of it; and it is a greater judgment to be without a Governor, then to have one
that is ungodly and unworthy. Two means of reformation


Two ways there are to redress errors, and rectify abuses.

1. By a total abolition.
The one by a total abolition not only of the corruption, but of the thing it
self; thus Moses stamped the molten ^alf, and Hezekiah brake the brazen Serpent
and did grind it into powder; taking away all mention and memorial.

2. By separation
as in the cleansing of the leprous houses which were scraped and pared, and
some stones if need required were pulled out, yet the Pile and frame continued
entire, and undemolisht. This is the most sovereign means, as being freest from
violence and disorder: and needs must it be so, when God himself is pleased to
make choice of it, thy silver is become dross; so he tells the Jews v. 22.
the places of their Governors were as pure as silver, but the unequal managing
and execution impure dross: and will God consume and melt both promiscuously
in the fiery trial as if there were no difference? no his word which is as
silver fined seven times in the furnace affirms the contrary, I will purely
take away thy dross and purge out all thy tin, v. 25. and then as the wise man
speaks, take away the dross from the silver and there shall come forth a
vessel for the finer, Prove. 25.4. The Emperor Domitian therefore took a wrong
course in banishing all promoters out of Italy, and Pope Nicholas the third,
erred for all his infallibility, in thrusting all practisers at law out of
Rome, for that (as he said) they lived upon the blood of the poor people: who
were soon recalled by Pope Martin his successor, because they brought grist to
his Mill. Since then as St. Paul speaks of the law, so it may be said of the
profession; the law is good, if a man use it lawfully, 1 Timothy 1.8. and as Bodin
well reasons the case, there are no other means to decide controversies, Bodin,
de Republ.
Se^ Lege aut Armis: and the sound of the Laws cannot be heard amidst the
clashing of Arms, and neighing of Horses: The calling it self must still be
retained and maintained in due honor. And if at any time there be need of
censure, it must not be a rigid removal, or an utter extirpation, but only (as
God here promises in the Text,) A restoring the Judges as at the first, and the
Counselors as at the beginning.

Secondly, The second reference to their persons.
by a just displacing, or degrading them from the dignity of their office,
which with such indignity they had administered; or at least correct them with
some milder chastisement, not utterly consume or destroy their persons: Extrema
primo nemo tentavit loco, they are only desperate diseases that must have
desperate cures. He were an unskilful Physician and cruel Chyrurgion, that
cared not to deprive the body of life, being only ulcevous and diseased, or
delighted in applying corrosives and causticks, when gentle lenitives would
serve the turn; in bruising or breaking bones being dislocated and out of
joint, which he should rather (...), (a word borrowed from the practice of that
Art) set them in their place and socket, and as St. Paul renders it, Gal. 6.1.
Restore them in the spirit of meekness.

It is Colum. de re Rustic.
Columella's advice touching Landlords, not to exact forfeitures, and to warn
their Tenants out for every lesser breach of Covenant; for that Summum jus, est
summa crix, and the extremity of the Law is a lawless extremity. A good caveat
for greater Lords then they, that they enforce not matters in the strictest
rigor, and cause not the Law to be written in blood, like unto those of Draco,
and were therefore surnamed, (...).
Not the Laws of men, but of Draco. And are there not many like that Athenian
Lawgiver, that draw the very life blood from those Laws, that were first
written in ink. And whilst they press the breasts of the Laws too hard, (as
Volusian complains touching the Scriptures) they bring forth blood that
strangles, in stead of milk that nourishes, and so make the Law a killing
Letter.

God forbade his people to eat the blood of brute beasts, for that vita in
sanguine, The life is in the blood. How much more heinous, yea barbarous is it
for men in place to glut and gorge their cruelty with their own flesh and
blood, after the manner of the Horse-leech. The Heathen man cries out against
his Rulers, for that they were (...), devourers of rewards; What would he have
said and done, had they been (...), and fed upon their own kind. It is Saint
Gregory's observation, from the benediction of God upon Noah and his posterity:
The fear and dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and every
foul of the heaven, and upon all that moves upon the earth, and upon all the
fishes of the sea, Genesis 9.2. Gregor. in loc.
That at first men were Governors of beasts alone, and not of men; but now is
the order quite inverted, they are Governors of men, and not of beasts: and
must not convert the dreadful seat of Justice into a Shambles, or a
Slaughterhouse; For man is a noble creature, his life dear and precious, be
their manners never so debaucht and dissolute, their crime heinous and
horrible, yet still they continue men, and call and claim some pity and
compassion, for the common interest of humanity. And there must be a reflection
from the Magistrate, of the eye of pity and compassion upon the offender,
whilst he darts forth the flaming eye of jealousy and fierce indignation upon
the danger of the example.

Physicians will not take away a few drops of blood from the body natural, but
at certain seasons, and in case of necessity: nor must they that are Physicians
of the Country be prodigal of their blood, or spend it, much less spill it
without just cause. For as Physicians may be murderers as well as others; even
so may Judges and Justices as well as Physicians, not only in action, but in
affection, if they execute judgment libidine vindictae, non amore justitiae,
(as the Schools speak) Rather out of revengeful lust, then a zealous desire of
equity.

The ancient Law of the (...) Plutar. de sera numin vindict.
Egyptians, in reprieving the condemned woman that is found with child, till
after the time of her delivery, which is also the law of Nations, is favorable
to the Delinquent, and commendable in it self: Yet herein the offspring of the
soul is chiefly to be respected above that of the body; if there appear but
some imperfect conceptions, and Embrio's of goodness in the soul, yea a
probable hope and presumption of it, great pity it were if the course of
Justice were not interrupted, or infringed by the connivence, that it should
ever prove as the untimely fruit of a woman.

Shall I move you to emulation by the example of the Heathen? The Charge of
that Roman General Pompey to his outrageous soldiers, Parce civibus, Spare, O
spare the Citizens, may serve as a fit Impress for all Judges. The profession
of Antoninus Pius was as holy as his name, That he had rather lose a member
then a Citizen. But above all that memorable speech of our Renowned and ever
Happy Queen Elizabeth, deserves to be written with a pen of Iron, and with the
point of a Diamond, That next the Scripture, she know no book did her so much
good as the frequent reading of seneca de Clementin.

To leave till Arguments besides the Text, God honors judges with his name,
Judges must be Gods in two respects.
and they should strive also to bono^^ themselves by a resemblance of his
nature. I have said ye are Gods, Psalm. 82.6. Gods by Deputation, Gods by
repraesentation, and must be Gods also in the Administration of their office.

First in the traversing of the cause by patient hearing, First in the
traversing of the cause.
The outward position of their bodies in sitting to judge the people, a phrase
very ordinary and obvious in the Scripture, should at the least admonish them
of the settled composedness of their affections, and deliberate proceeding unto
judgment. This well agrees with the sublimity of their places, who should be
like the Stars of the Firmament, which as they are higher in situation, so they
move with a slower pace, and absolve their courses in a longer time. This is
Gods order, walking in the Garden in the cool of the day, Genesis 3.8. When God
comes to arraign Adam, he walks, and runs not. I will go down and see, so God
speaks of the sins of Sodom, Genesis 18.21. First taking diligent notice of the
Crime, ere he rains down a shower of Brimstone.

Secondly, Secondly in pronouncing and passing. sentence.
Judges must be Gods in pronouncing and passing sentence; visiting only with
the rods of men, punishing but in measure, and tempering the bitter Aloes of
justice and judgment with the candid sweetness of gentleness and moderation.
For thus does God also, he stirs not up all his wrath, but in the midst of
judgment he remembers mercy, Habak. 3.2. And here, he destroves not the
Judges, nor quite overthrows the Counselors, but only restores them as at the
first, and rectifies them as at the beginning.

The third part of the Text concerns the Object, The third part. The object or
parties to be reformed.
or Persons to be reformed. The Judges and the Counselors.

I will restore, says God in the Text: and the promise of this restoration
implies and argues their desections and declinings, for as the Emperor Charles
the fifth told his Shavelings, and massing (...), Si vos sacrisiculi pii es
setis, non indiguissetis n^orum censore Luthero. Pet. Matthew. lib. 4.2. Narrat.
ad finem.
If ye had been innocent and blameless, ye should have stood in no need of
Luthers, censure; So had the Judges persisted in the integrity of their
Predecessors, or answered their first institution, why should they be thus
poured out from vessel to vessel, as God speaks of Moab: If there had not been
sound in them some Errata, and those very palpable, they should not need a new
Impression.

The ^greatness of place is no sufficient protection or privilege against
transgression, but rather an outward occasion of exorbitancy and aggravation of
the heinousness; They that are advanced above others, must needs have a
pre-eminence in their faults; men of high degree sin with a high hand; and
where the train is long, it is not possible but it should gather the more soil:
their errors are suitable to the quality of their persons, yea, to the crimson
color of their robe, crimson and scarlet sins, twice dipped and of a double
tincture. The Book indeed is not capable of stain, a lively Emblem of their
purity that should wear it; Yet if the garment chance to be spotted with the
flesh, then as Gregory Nazianzen ^peaks, (...). Nazianzen.
The more glorious the garment is, the stain is far more conspicuous and
ho^orious. King Vzziah was stricken with a Leprosy on his forehead, for
intruding into the Priests office; Upon no other place but his forehead, and
thus rendered by Saint Chrysostom, (...). Chrysostom.
(...), God as it were denoting and pointing out the height and heinousness of
his si^, by the high and visible place whereupon it was inflicted. And Aquinas
his observation is pregnant and pertinent to this purpose, The greater the
fault was Aquin. 2. Quaest. 102. Art. 3.
Tau^^ vilior erat species animalis, the meaner and basor was the sacrifice
which the Law enjoined. A Calls for the ^rou^ of the Priest, and a Goat for the
ignorance of the Ruler; It may be to set forth the vildness of their offenses
above others: which caused devout Ezra to rend his clothes, and pluck his hair,
and to sit down aftonied, when he he once heard that the hands of the Rulers
and of the Princes had been chief in the Trespass, Ezra, chap. 9. verse. 3.

This then is the only effectual course in effecting a reformation, to select
and cull out the prime and capital Delinquents, as Tarquinius struck off the
heads of the highest Poppies, and so to descend unto the rest. It was the
accustomed policy of Scanderbeg in all his military encounters, to begin his
war with the defeat of the chiefest, and his advised counsel in all such
attempts and enterprises: That the head should be first cut off, and then the
rest of the body will fall alone. And that he knew no living creature that
could live, the head being taken off. For as Physicians speak of the body
natural, Caput malum caput malorum. Theorema Medicorum.
That an evil head is the head of evil; so is it likewise in the body politic.
And the Commonwealth is herein like unto a Fish or Beast, which for the most
part begins to Piscis a capite incipit putiescere. Corpus caput sequitur.
putrify from the head. And it is in reforming others as in the flaying of a
Beast, which seldom or never sticks, or then most when it comes to the head.
And this was faulted in the Emperor Sigismund's proceedings, That being very
zealous to correct the abuses of the Clergy, he meddled only with the Minorites,
an Order of Friars so called, but left the Majorites untouched, whom he should
first have took to task. The conceit is quaint and pretty, but the ground
substantial, and the truth unquestionable.

An attempt I confess full of difficulty and danger, obnoxious to envy,
censure, frowns, and what not? suspected, dreaded and opposed by the guilty; as
he observes concerning the Pope Papam non minus concilium, quam Iliacam
passi^nem horrere. Georg. Hiemb. in su^ Appel.
that he abhors a Council as the most intolerable disease, which is the best,
if not the only means to cure his distempers, and to bring him into order.

God himself is pleased to commend it by his own example, who begins his
Reformation in the Text, with the chiefest in place and transgression. The
Judges and the Counselors.

I will speak of each distinctly. I will restore the Judges.


Well might St. Paul affirm, those that rule well are worthy of double honor:
it being (as he justly styles it) (...). Nazian. Apol. Orat. 1 a.
an art of arts, a science of sciences, to command and govern the people.

There are three labors that are found to be most difficult, Melch. Adam. in
vit. Melan.
in the judgment of Melaanchton.

1. Regentis. The Ruler. 2. Docentis. The Teacher. 3. Parturientis. The
Travailing Woman.
And among these three, he gives the first place to the ruler.

This difficulty has many causes, I will not enter into a particular enquiry,
or survey, but point out some few instead of many, that are most connatural to
the Text, the grand vices that are incident and appendant; to those great
places, yea as it were intailed to their callings. I shall instance only in
Two, and we shall find any one of them more then enough; the one in Affection,
the other in Action. The Judges charged by God, with a double Fault.


1. Partiality in Affection. 2. Bribery in Action.
In both which Hierusalems Judges were exceedingly culpable by God's own
Testimony and conviction. They judge not the fatherless, nor does the widows
cause come before them, Isa. 1.23. this was their Partiality in Affection. Thy
Princes are rebellious and companions of Thieves. Every one loves gifts and
follows after rewards, ver. 23. that was their Bribery in Action. So that the
Magistrates which should have been speaking Laws, were become as Bells without
Clappers, void of speech and sound; or else spoke quite contrary. Like unto the
Roman Gracchus that poured forth a long discourse in behalf of the Treasury,
whereof he was the Robber: and they who by the rule of their order were
appointed (...) The Guardians and Keepers of the Law, they chiefly wanted
(...). Arist.
a law themselves to restrain their injustice. And being such it was high time
for God to uncover his own Arm in the vindicating and asserting of his quarrel,
and to make re^^^ution; to restore them unto themselves, being thus degenerate
and perverted; and that which they had fra^dulently purloined ((...) cannot
call it theirs,) to the lawful and proper owner: In both these respects they
stood in need of God's restoring. And first of their Bribery in ^ction.

1. Bribery in Action.
Every one; the disease was Epidemical a common evil, and in that regard the
worse; yet nor for the community alone, but for the inordinate coveting and
affecting them. For in the In gravitate culpae magis attenditur insensio
voluntatis, quam effectus operis. Aqui. 2da. 2dae Qu. 13. Art. 3.
greatness of a fault it is not the effect of the work that is so much
regardable, as the ^^hement affection and inclination of the will; as Aquinas
rightly. They did not only take gifts but love them; yea, follow after them
with a hot pursuit as if they would not come fast enough; pressing hard unto
the Tribunal for the price of the high calling, in as bad a sense as Paul spoke
it in a good: and thrusting their sickle into the Magistracy, Tanquam in auream
messem with Stratocles in Plutarch, thereby to reap the golden Harvest of
commodity and advantage. The Wise man complains of it as a grievous sickness,
Ecclos. 3.16. I have seen under the Sun: And great pity indeed it was that so
deformed a sin should ever see the Sun, or the Sun it, and not rather hide his
head, and suffer a voluntary Eclipse. But he saw it only under the Sun, not
above it, where God sits in the Throne that judges right; Whilst men sit down
in the place of judgment where is wickedness, and in the seat of justice where
is iniquity. The place of justice is hallowed and holy ground, no poisonous
Serpent should enter this terrestrial Paradise, much less the Cockatrice eggs,
be hatched therein. Holiness becomes this house for ever. That famous Distich
written over the judgment Seat in Zant, in Golden Characters, Sandys Travels.
Hic locus odit, amat, punit, conservat, honorat,
Nequitiam, Pacem, crimina, jura, probos.
may fitly serve as a golden Motto for all other, How ill then does judgment
and wickedness agree? and what communion can there: be betwixt the seat of
justice and iniquity? surely this was not the fault of the place but of the
persons; God himself taxes them elsewhere, The Rulers love to say with shame,
bring ye, Hos. 4.18. Such was their insatiable greediness and undaunted
impudence, that they became earnest Solicitours for their hire, exacting
injuries as Duty; expecting recompense in the nature of a gratuity, and yet
extorting it by compulsion. Like unto Eli's sons that by forcible violence
seized on the oblations of the people; It was not the weight of reason and
religious equity that swaied the unequal balances of their proceedings, but
unjust gain, which could not but incline and lean to that side, where most was
cast in: Thus deceitful were these sons of men upon the weights, and lighter
then vanity. Nor were their Ears but Hands Judges of men's causes, as old Isaac
distinguished his sons by feeling; and to them the people came for judgment. As
Bernard describes the vicious practice of his Time: Pauci ad os Judicis, ad
ma^us omnes recipient Bernar. ad Eugen.
There are few that regard the mouth of the Judge all look to his Hands. And if
they brought not somewhat beside the innocence of the matter to them that loved
to say with shame ^ive ye; They were sure to carry nothing back but a shameful
repulse and overthrow. So Nescio quo pa^^ rara est in hominibus manus clausa
and aperta justitia. Cassied lib. 9 Var. Lect.
rare and hard a thing it is to find an hand close shut against rewards, and
yet open to do justice. This was the state of Judahs Judges, a state unstable,
and next unto ruin.

St. Hierom has entered a comparison betwixt Britanny and Jerusalem, in point
of De Britannia non minus quam de Hicrose ymis patet aula coele^^is. Hyer. ad
Paul.
excellency, shall parallel them in their corruption; and from thence argue a
necessity of restoring: comparisons (they say) are odious: I abstain from
particulars.

But since it ever has been permitted and accounted lawful Licuit semperque
licebit, Parcere persouis dicere de vitiis.
to spare the persons and to strike at the vices give leave to a free and just
invective against a sin so execrable and piacular, and that occasionally from
my Text.

Bribery an ancient and flourishing evil which grows with a losty top, and
spreads the branches far and near in the declining age of the world; a sin
which shall always be Semper vetabitur and semper retinebitur. Tacitus de
Mathem.
interdicted and cried down: and yet supported like Nebuchadnezzers idol, by
the illegal profanation of authority: corruption is the vulgar name whereby it
is commonly known, and this in ordinary form of speech so appropriate unto it,
that it has as it were ingrost the style of corruption as well as the
substance of the Commonwealth; then which what is there more diametrally
opposite to the impartial execution of justice, which gives to every man his
own, and makes not a salary or a merchandise, For equity is the common right of
every suitor, ordained (...).
for the benefit of others! and can there be a greater extremity of injury,
then to sell a man his own inheritance? Nor is it only a personal or a private
damage but an universal ataxy and confusion that thence ensues: The silencing
at least eluding the force of the laws, the patronage of the most desperate
wickedness and rankest kind of injustice: neither is there scarce any
punishment so surely intailed to a capital offender, but may be cut of by a
fine of recovery should bribery sit as judge. And it is notthe least consequent
of danger, the impoverishing of the state, this being the sponge that sucks up
all the juice, the moth and canker that frets and gnaws the heart of it in
pieces: and as the blood in the body natural being stopped in the course and
passage abounds in some parts beyond measure so causing in them a Plethory, but
being defective and wanting in the rest, brings leanness and consumption to the
fellow members; so is it likewise in the body politic, when the wealth which
is the life blood of it, is unequally distributed and dispersed: All following
in a full stream to the highest part, by means of the eversucking veins of
excessive exaction and oppression, while the lower in the mean time are ready
to faint and starve, and grow crazie and infeebled for want of vital
nourishment. Which so ill digesting of wealth in the body, is the chiefest
cause why Italy incomparably the richest Nation in Christendom, abounds with
poverty and beggary: so that is truly said Relat. of Relig. S. E. Sandys.
The rich men of Italy are the richest, and the poor the poorest creatures that
any country can afford: For they that fill and defile their (...). Nazianz.
Orat. 19 p. 290.
hands though not so many as Briareus to scrue and lock themselves into high
places, (like unto Jeroboams Priests, who if they would but fill their hands,
might offer the oblations of the people, though, the ^ worthiest of that ^ank)
may well plead the Vendere jure potest, emerat ille prius.
Popes, privilege of seling what they formerly bought; and they will be sure
to sell dear by Retail what they formerly bought in Gross: so that the best
causes, and worst offenses (as in Rome it self) shall pass either as venial or
venal: And what a general loss and detriment, a self respecting officer may
bring to the weal public, the Historian shows by the example of Quintil us
Varus, a pilling and pouling officer; of whom he gives this testimony Syriam
cui praesuerat pauper ingressus est divitem, dives reliquit pauperem. Vel.
Pater. lib. 2.
that being poor he entered upon a rich province, and so good use did he make
of his time which was but short, that Varus was no longer Varus nor Syria
Syria, but each converted into other; all the treasure of the conntrey was
cunningly conveyed into Varus his coffers and poor Syria utterly exhausted. It
was not therefore without the weight of reason, that the thrice noble Emperor
and wise lawgiver Justiman, enacted this among the rest Auth. de Judic. (...).
Nazianz. de Patre Orat. 19.
that Magistrates should show clean hands to God, the King and the Law, both in
the first entering and the after managing of their jurisdiction.

There is a sin too too infamous in it self, St. Peter, styles it not (...) but
(...) Act. 8.23. a very bundle of iniquity yet it is aggravated by harsh
censure; I am long ere I name it, and would God it had neither name nor
existence in nature, I mean the Simony of the Clergy: howsoever let our
Saviors vae, light upon the immediate author, and woe be to him by whom the
offense comes: for mine own part I cannot in the judgment of charity arbitrate
the sin as voluntary in the buyer, but enforced by the seller, for who would
purchase this freedom with a great sum of money (as the chief Captain spoke of
his) might he obtain it a free gift. And sure I am the ancient Church has
involved and wrapped up both in the same degree of sin and Dantem and accipiente^
damnatio Symonis involvit. Gelaes. Epist. 1. cap. 23. Anathema danti, anathema
accipienti. Gregor.
punishment. There is cirse to the Giver, and a curse to the Receiver: It is
the uniform judgment of the Fathers.

Let those then that are so forward in passing their rigid verdict against the
Symonie of the Clergy, whereof they ost times are the cause, reflect at least
the indifferent eye of their observation, upon the sale of Offices of Justice,
yea of Time it self among the Laity; which may well match the former, both for
the rankness and heinousness of the fault; For as it is better to give then to
receive in the Act of liberality; so is it worse to receive then give, in the
exercise of injustice, by how much it is more voluntary. And to judge
impartially betwixt them, without giving the right hand of pre-eminence to
either, they are both devouring Harpies: the one has a long time preyed upon
the Church, and the other still feeds upon the garbage of the Commonwealth. I
subscribe to Aquinas judgment touching both alike, who being demanded by the
Duchess of Lorraine, whether it was lawful to sell offices, positively
returned this Negative Answer, That poor men who were most fit, were least able
to pay the price; the Rich who were most able, less fit, and did it only for
ambition and oppression: And those that were fit and able, rich and good,
neither needed nor respected such advancement. And therefore neither the sale
of Benefices or Offices, Symony or Bribery is in any case to be tolerated. For
this God threatens to restore the Judges in the Text; yet not for this alone,
their Bribery in Action was seconded with Partiality in Affection.

They judge not the fatherless, nor does the widows cause come before them,
Partiality in affection.
Verse 23. who wanting the importunate intercession of powerful Friends, and
being no way able to oblige them by any respects and courtesies of their own,
whatsoever the innocence of their cause was, it was utterly prejudiced and
impeached by the neglected and despised condition of their persons: so that
Truth was fallen in the streets, as God complains by the Prophet, Isa. 59.14.
(Not in the desolate wilderness, there it had been no matter of astonishment,
but amidst the concourse of the people, where none would interpose to lift it
up.) and equity could not enter.

There is nothing more erroneous or corrupt then a forestalled judgment, and
an inclining and a propending will: That first brought Heresy in Doctrine into
the Church: and this gave being to injustice in the State, The Heresy of life.

They that will deliberate and conclude rightly, though private men, must quit
themselves of the command of affections, especially such as are in place of
Judicature; whereof some of the Heathen were not ignorant, who upon their first
investiture in the place of Government, disclaimed all special intimation and
inward amity with their entirest Friends, as a thing incompatible with their
charge. And the Emperor Adrian meeting with his deadly enemy in former times,
gave him a Go-by, with an Evasisti, refusing to condescend and stoop so low, as
to revive and revenge the quarrel of his private life, being then in the Throne
of Sovereignty. It is both scandalous and pernicious for Magistrates to become
Partiaries, inserting and interlacing their personal interests and relations in
the discharge of their public Duty, Sic faclitando probatis vos plenitudinem
habere potestatis, sed non justitiae. Bern. ad Eugenium.
Making no other use of their Authority, then as an advantage, or commanding
ground for discouraging their opposites, and crushing their adversaries in
pieces; or else for the lawless protection of known offenders, and the high
advancing of the creatures of their own breeding, their worthless and
undeserving Favorites.

Four ways there are, and that in the judgment of a Lawyer, whereby Judgment
may be turned into Wormwood, and lose its sweet relish. Alexand. nb Alexand.
Genial. Dier.


1. Odio. 2. Gratia. 3. Timore. 4. Pretio. 1. Hatred. 2. Favor. 3. Fear. 4.
Reward.
The former as well as the latter quite blind the eyes of the Wise, and pervert
the understanding of the Prudent.

For as in nature (...). Aristot. de Anima. l. 3. c. 1.
the Receiver must be denuded and freed of the nature of the thing received,
and having once taken possession, it hinders the admission and entrance of
another; The Aguish Palate savours the most pleasant meat in the taste of the
vicious humor; And the Eye that is ill affected with the laundice, or looks
through the colored medium of blew or green glass, has all manner of
objects, though never so different in appearance, represented under that
species or similitude; So is it likewise in Civil Government and
Administration: The Judge that is prepossessed and taken up with a strong
affection either of love or hatred, apprehends and orders matters according to
their impression and instigation, and is wholly overruled by them both in
judgment and action: the information of Council, deposition of Witnesses,
construction of Evidence, and pressing of Circumstances, whatsoever he
conceives or hears, all seem to comply and suit with his affection, and sound
either in favor or opposition of the party.

God in himself is free from the nature of affections, and if he inclines to
any in special, they are those that were most vilified by the Judges in my
Text, Oculi Domini in taupere^ recipient; (...). Palpebrae aute^ ejus
interrogant filies hominum. (...). Nazianz. Orat. 16. de Pauperum amore.
The poor and the fatherless: Thou have heard the desire of the poor, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 10.17. And in thee the fatherless find mercy; It is the
confession of the faithful, Hos. 14.6. and it is likewise requisite in his
Vicegerents. Affections in God should they properly be ascribed, would imply
imperfections; But in them whom he has honored with his own name, they are
arguments of injustice. The Poets fiction had a grave moral; Astraea the
Goddess of Justice unto them, had her head wrapped within the clouds, and her
eyes turned upwards, so was she pourtrayed and deciphered: And so should
Justice and Justices reflect only upon God on High. whose image and
pourtraicture they bear, without respect of persons. The silent Statues of
Magistrates among the Thebans, spoke so much by their want of hands and eyes:
The Areopagites never decided causes, either Criminal or Capital, but in the
gloomy night, that they might not judge after the sight of their eyes: And it
was precisely forbidden by the Attick Law, to use any insinuatiue proaemium or
praeludium, thereby to stir or steal affection, nor repose a greater considence
in their persuasive Oratory, and compassion of the Judge, then in the equity of
their Plea. Honorable is that commendation which Gregory Nazianzen has left
recorded of Great Athanasius, (...). Naz. in Laud. Ath. Orat. 21.
That he was as the Loadstone in Prosperity, and an Adamant in Adversity. And
it ought to agree to those whose high calling styles them Honorable: In the
plausible integrity of their carriage, and composed gravity of their behavior
they should be Loadstones, winning, yea drawing by a magnetic and attractive
virtue, not the substance, but the hearts and affections of the people; but in
the stiff maintaining the Royalty of their Sovereign; the resolute asserting
the fundamental Laws of the Nation; the entire preserving the Rights of their
Place; the unswayed and peremptory execution of justice to all complainants; In
all these respects they should be as hard as the Adamant, immovable through
fear or favor, and inflexible by menaces or rewards.

Such did Jethro commend to choice, Men of courage in the first place, Exodus
18.21. Which was Hierogly phically resembled by Solomon's Throne, supported and
born up by Lions. Magistrates must be as Lions, not to devour and seize upon
the prey; these (...), were justly plainted by the Heathen; but as bold and
stout as Lions, striking terror and amazement into guilty consciences; (for
they bear not the sword in vain;) And procuring an awful reverence of their
Dignity, by observing meet distance and decorum, even in all: yet still must
they be Lions couchant under the Throne, (for so were those of Solomon,) not
daring to prove rampant by way of opposition,, or to give an affront or
check-mate to supreme authority. Rare was the example of a Lord Chief Justice
of our own so famous in our Chronicle^, who ventured far in com, mitting the
Prince to prison, for smiting him on the face; and yet King Henry the fourth
his Father thanked God at the tidings of it; That he had both a Son of that
obedience, and a Judge of such irrespective and undaunted courage. The Judges
in my Text were clean of another stamp, and came as far behind in their
exemplary virtue, as they went before in time. Partiality was their reproach
and stain, and this with their Bribery the motive cause of Gods restoring; and
yet not of the Judges only, but of the Counselors. So it follows in the Text,
The Judges and the Counselors.

God descends from the Judges to the Counselors, and my speech must descend
likewise with the order of the words. Betwixt these two there is a near
conjunction, and are here linked in the same censure, after the manner of
Malefactors, and seldom do they transgress alone. They may not unfitly be
assimilated to the Liver and the Heart in the body natural; the Liver first
concocts the meat, and converts the nourishment into blood, so transmitting it
to the Heart, which animates it by the inward heat, and changes it into vital
spirits. Thus the Counselor as the Liver prepares the matter for the Judge,
who like the Heart by his proper power, does umpire and determine it. And as
the Liver sometimes corrupts the Heart by conveighing crude and indigested
humors, and the Heart impoysons the Liver with pestilential vapors and
distempers; So often the Counselor perverts the sentence of the Judge by
misinformation, and the Judge crosses the suggestions of the Counselor by a
sinister construction.

What were the particular faults of Judahs Counselors is not punctually set
down in the Context; nor will I be over curious in the inquiry, but only
probably conjecture, in touching those that are nearest allied with their
profession, and most ordinary in practice.

Some there are that have vented both their spleen and solly, in speaking
contumeliously of their calling: Pope Pius his comparison of the Field, the
Fowl, and the Net is well known; and who were the Fowlers, but Advocates and
Atturneys. Let me not be thought bold, though I tax his Holiness. Not to
mention the resolution of the question by the Duke of Milan, touching the
precedence of the Lawyer and Physician, it being scurrious and invective. That
common Proverb is as uncharitable, as witty; The Physician seldom lives well,
and the Lawyer dies well; The former being often intemperate in their Diet: the
latter injurious in their Courses. For mine own part, I cannot but think as
reverently of the Counselors profession as of the name; so honorable in it
self that it is attributed by way of excellency to our blessed Savior; And he
shall call his Name Counselor, Isa. 9.6. yet is this no privilege of
exemption or supersedeas to the professors why they may not prove guilty of
miscarriage, or lay open to reproof, Why else should they stand in need of
God's restoring?

As he spoke in praise of Tully; He that would commend Cicero, must be another
Cicero, for the strength and sinnews of his Oratory; So it were a task more
meet for a Lawyer then a Divine to acquaint you with the tith of their abuses:
I should weary your patience, and mine own infirmity, (as they many of their
Clients,) to insist upon their lingering and tedious delays, Involution of
practice, Labyrinths of suits and controversies, cross motions, as fitly so
styled, as Grammarians derive montes a movendo: motion without motion:
Contentions springing up like Hydra's Heads, following fast and thick, as one
wave upon the neck of another, and as one circle begets many. So true is that
of Solomon, The beginning of strife is as the opening of the waters.

Our Edward the first complained of this evil in his Time, (so that it has
Antiquity to plead for it;) That his Lawyers were long advising, but never
advised. And another passed his judgment of them long before; Pay them; and
they will delay you: Pay them not, and they will deceive you. To omit these and
many more, (for I must not be infinite,) and the taste of the least drop of
water in the Sea, will make sufficient proof of the brackishness. Give me leave
to point out in a word or two, Two foul enormities, and excessive grievances.

1. The perverting of the Laws, A double Fault of Counselors.
by a corrupt interpretation. 2. The disturbing and troubling the State with
needless and endless altercations.
Both which may in some measure be imputed to the Counselors, as the Authors.

1. The pervorting of the Laws.
and confined within certain rules and precepts whose Truth is Eternal: yet is
it founded upon the evidence of Reason, which though it be differently observed
in several Nations, and is appliable to the emergent necessities and occasions
of the same Kingdom; nevertheless it must not be made a nose of wax to turn and
writhe every way: a skippers Hofe to stretch out, and girt up at pleasure, a
Lesbian Rule to serve the present Time, or resemble the Polypus in the
property, that receives the shape and color from the body it cleaves too, and
the next adjoining substance. How could there be more piety, discretion,
circumspection, and moderation used in the framing and enacting of the Laws?
and the Lawyers themselves who are the Guardians of this Orphan, ought to be as
the Priests in Malac. cap. 2.7. The people should seek the Law at their mouth.
And yet for all this, as the Heathen man observes of the Athenians, That they
found out the use both of Corn and Laws (...). Aristot.
but made use of Corn and not of the Laws; So are wholesome Laws neglected by
the Authors and Contrivers; and laid aside by such as should quicken them in
the execution. And many there are that study the Law for no other end, then to
find out quirks and tricks, to pervert and distort it, at least in appearances;
as the straightest staff seems crooked in the water. And constant experience
testifies the truth of that common Proverb; Leges in calamo virgins in Foro
meretrices.
Laws which are Virgins in the penning, become Strumpets in the pleading: being
too much prostituted by vendible Tongues, or wrested from their natural sense
by a forced exposition.

2. The disturbance of the Common. wealth.
is the disturbance of the Commonwealth with jangling suits and contentions.
Bees are but little, yet very ingenious creatures, and maintain in their
society, a kind of well ordered Polity in imitation of mankind: Herein only
lies the difference, Reipubl. gerend. praec. Plutarch.
Those Hives are in best case where the Bees make most noise: but that
Commonwealth fares best where there is least sound and Tumult. For as a
multitude of plasters and patches in a Face, covering the secret blains and
botches, is an open and an outward sign of a corrupt constitution; so is the
multiplicity of suits and Trials a palpable discovery of an unquiet and unsound
State. And as the increase of the Spleen in the body natural, is the decay of
the rest of the members, and hastens the destruction of the whole; of like
effect is the increase of spleen, rancour and divisions whether secret or open,
in the body Politic: which being thus dangerous in the issue, we may not
unfitly demand St. James's question, James 4.1. From whence are wars and
contentions among you? shall we ascribe them to the general temperature of the
Climate, and the nature of the soil?

Gallia dat vites, sic d t Britannia lites. France does not more abound with
vines, then England with suits and quarrels, as some have observed. And our
famous Annalist severely charge the inhabitants of this Si nikil sit litium
lites tamen ex juris apicitus severe callent. Camden. Brittann. Norfolc.
Country in particular; That in case they want a Title in Law, they have a
singular faculty in striving about Tittles. And how many wrangling mates are
there among us, to whom revenge is as sweet as honey, and feed upon contention
as the Ox upon Hay: professed and open enemies unto peace, who cannot endure
the sound of the name, and for petty and paltry matters ^ir up strife all the
day long. And certainly there are a generation of men who foment and foster
this malignant humor by the abetting and instigation of those who repair to
them, which by their seasonable advice and counsel, they should labor to cure
and remedy. They are near a kin to Chrysippus the Stoic, who boasted in
earnest, that he sometimes wanted opinions, never arguments to defend them. And
the Historian characters them to the life, Quibus quieta movere magna merces.
Salust.
that it is their work and wages both to move and remove that which is at rest.
All their defire and delight is to fish in troubled waters; to embroil others
in the fire of contention wherein they live like Salamanders; yea, they
themselves set all on fire as Nero did, to warm them with the heat. Physicians
they say are then in soundest health, when all men else are sick. Bloody war
the dreadful spectacle of universal misery, is the soldiers peace, the
sweetest peace they pray for. And the unquiet jarrs and unkind discords among
Brethren, are the only harmony and consent which some Lawyers will persuade.

But let us with David make the precepts of God our Counselors, though others
should suggest the contrary. Attend we St. Paul's counsel whom Habent Causidici
suum Paulum dictantem jura litigantium, Habemus nos quoque Paulum, dictantem
pacis jura non litis. Augustine.
St. Austin styles Juris divini consultum; A Counselor of God's Law. A
counselor of Peace. For so he advises, Romans 12.18. If it be possible and as
much as lies in you, have peace with all men. And with these two conditions,
(...). If there be a possibility in effecting it, and may be a yielding
disposition in a secure admitting of terms of agreement, We must seek peace and
ensue it.

4. The fourth Part. The Rule or means of reformation. As at the first as at
the beginning.
The fourth and last part of the Text, is the rule of reformation (as at the
first, as at the beginning) reducing the Judges and the Counselors to the
original Institution. This order God observes and thereby commends unto us a
double instruction; the one implieitly, the other explicitly, and expressly.

First,

Secondly, amiss; to have recourse to the first foundation:

1. scandals and St. Paul in case of heresy, they must come and will come, and
it is in some sort necessary and behoovful, since the most excellent laws
receive their birth and life from the most dissolute and deadly manners: even
as the ashes of the most poisonous viper prove medicinal. God is pleased to be
styled Hierusalems King, and he showed his care in drawing them a platform of
government, and prescribing them Laws for direction even in the smallest
matters; yet how unthankfully did they slight his goodness? how shamefully
deprave his wisdom? And as himself complains of Israel, Exodus 32.8. They have
turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them. So that in a short
tract of time, all the foundations of the earth, I mean of Judah 's Civil and
Ecclesiastical state were out of course. The Judges and Counselors in my
Text, were all gone out of the way. I forbear to add the ensuing words; There
is none that does good, us not one.

The works of God were all complete and perfect at the first creation, yet were
they strangely defaced and blemished being left to man's enjoying; So those
Commonwealths that were fairly planted and settled in a square course by grave
and worthy founders, and committed to men of conscientious equity for the first
management; yet are they turned quite topsie turvy and become altogether unlike
themselves by a degenerating generation; who occupy their rooms oft-times as
intruders and usurpers, but constantly abhor the imitation of their virtues.

It is with the disposition of men as with the succession of Times, whereof
Damnosa quid non imminuit dies? Aetas parentum peior avis tulit nos nequiores,
mox daturos prageniem vitiosiorem. Horat. Carmin. lib. 3. Ode. 6.
the last commonly prove the worst. And Clemens Alexandrinus the better to ill
strate how corruption of doctrine (a Case not much unlike that of manners)
followed presently after the Apostles times and as it were trod upon the
heels; alleges that familiar Proverb: (...). Clem. Alexan. lib. 1. Stromat.
(...). Homerus. (...). Acetum potest esse filius vini purissimi. Hebraeorum
Adagium.
there are few sons like their fathers. The clearest water that issues from a
pure spring, does oft-times run foul and muddy, being far removed from the
fountain. The clearest grain that is winnowed from the dust and so sown in the
earth, brings forth an imprositable increase of that light matter that was
severed and taken from it: The purest metal gathers dimness and sullage by
long use, and passing through diverse hands: upon one entire stalk, grows the
sweet Rose, and the sharp prickle: Even so in a continued and as it were a
lineal descent of men in the same seat and place, there often appears a manifest
dissimilitude of manners, unsuitableness of carriage, disagreement in action:
and seldom do posterity answer the harmless innocence of their predecessors.
The Wise man makes it the sum of divine learning Eccles. 7.31. Only lo this
have I found, that God made man righteous, but he has sought out many
inventions: And it is the sum of this observation; The Judges and Counselors
in my Text were constituted and ordained holy by him who is the Holy of holies,
and such do men institute and substitute at the first; yet did they then seek,
and still find out strange inventions, and are utterly perverted from their
primitive integrity, with cunning quirks and new devices.

Secondly, God restores the Judges as at the first, and the Counselors as at
the beginning, therein propounding his practice as exemplary unto us in the
reformation of abuses. It was God's command to Moses, Exodus 25.40. Look thou
make all things after their pattern that was showed thee in the Mount: And so
must we have respect and reference to the Prototype or first pattern in the
just regulating and ordering of our Actions, as being a sufficient evidence of
it self, and of the contrary.

The Position of Machiavel is as sound as Politic, and not to be disallowed
for the Author. The securest and sa est means for the establishing and settling
of government is to reduce things to their Original and first Principles; For
as that is true which is most Id dominicum and verum quod prius, id autem
extraneum and falsum quod posterius Tertulitanus de Praescrip. adv. Haeret.
cap. 31. Justinus Marty. Graecis objecit, Quod non haberent. (...). Justin.
Mart. coh^^at. ad Grae^os. p. ^^
ancient, so is it usually the most excellent; I say usually, but not
perpetually: For there is an Antiquity without Truth, which is naught else but
the rottenness of error: And the Antiquity of the Church of Rome (were that
^ranted) shows not the strength or soundness of it, but that it has more need
of mending. It is excellently said by the Prophet, Jer. 6.16. Stand ye in the
ways, and see, and ask for the old Paths where is the good way, and walk
therein. He says not stand in the old ways, and walk therein; but see, and ask
for the old Paths: For though with all moderate and judicious persons This was
laid to Origens charge, that laying aside the judgment of Antiquity, he leaned
too much to his own. Origines, ingenium suum secit Ecclesiae Sacramenta.
Hierony n. Yrolog. in s. Comment Esai.
Antiquity obteins that reverence of being a sufficient motive to pause and
stand a while, in making a further survey and discovery; yet it is no
infallible Guide to conduct and direct them: A just ground (I say) it is, to
deliberate, not to determine: And continuance of Time is not available to plead
prescription in a Writ of Error, be it in doctrine, or manners.

True it is, and cannot be denied, That the world has highly advanced it self
in these later Times in point of Knowledge and Learning, abounding with rare
discoveries of hidden mysteries, and admirable enlargements of Arts and
Sciences, and that beyond comparison. In which respect, Time has been thought
to be the wisest creature for that it finds out all things: And the (...).
Pindar.
Later days are the soundest and surest Witnesses: yet as one of our own
observes rightly, Age does profit rather in the powers of the understanding,
then in the virtues of the will and affections. And every man is able to
justify out of his own experience, That the world is grown wicked as well as
witty; and the practice of sin increased with the knowledge. The disease of our
For futhers was ignorance, ours impiety; they were crazy in the head, we sick
at the heart; they blind, but after their manner devout; we skilful and
profane: the had much conscience with a small measure of science; we their
unnatural os-spring, have much science, with little or no conselence. It is
with the declining of men's persons, as with the nature of wine or any other
liquor, where the purer parts and the very quintessence of the spirits
evaporate and fly upwards; but the corrupt lees and dregs setle in the bottom.
And Time resembles in the property, the current of a mighty River, wherein
light and frothy matter float and swim above, as cork and foame, but solid and
massy substances sink down immediately, and are buried in the waters: And as
in the scouring of a channel, the further it is driven downwards, the more
filth abounds; so are the lower Ages the common sinck and sewer of former
defilements and uncleanness. The Judges and Counselors at the first, were as
Absalom in his body without spot and blemish: But how is the faithful city
become an harlot? It was full of judgment, justice lodged therein, but now
murderers, v. 21. That is the reason of the Inference in the Text, I will
restore the Judges as at the first, and the Counselors, as at the beginning.

Thus have I set before you the condition of Judah's Judges and her
Counselors, The Conclusion.
as they were; not as they should be as Xenophon described his Cyrus. I hope
there is none here present of Corah's gainsayers who will be ready to
Expostulate in their Dialect, You take too much upon you Moses and Aaron; or
once imagine that I have been a busy stickler in a strange Diocese, and
overcurious in the affairs of the Commonwealth. And let me speak unto you
(Right Honorable) in the words of Gregory Nazianzen to the Governor of
Constantinople, (...). Nazianz. Orat. 16.
The law of God has in some respect subjected the Benoh unto the Pulpit; and
even the Judges themselves must seek the law at the Priests mouth. But if there
be any of such sinister apprehensions, taking that with the left hand which was
reached them with the right; as if my reproof carried point blank and came home
to particulars: To them I must excuse my self as Zuinglius was wont to do in
the heat of his reprehensions, Probe vir hoc nihil ad te. Mycon. in vit. Zuingl.
Honest man, this no way concerns thee: or ruther in St. Paul's language; I
have injured, I have wronged no man. To close and wind up all, Let me turn the
promise of God to Judah into an earnest prayer in our own behalf. Lord restore
the Judges as at the first, and the Counselors, as at the beginning.

THE USURPATION OF THE PRIESTHOOD, Or the Scourge of SACRILEGE.

A SERMON Preached at Trinity Church in Cambridge, in the Lecture Course.

To be a memorial to the children of Israel, that no stranger, which is not of
the seed of Aaron come near to offer incense before the Lord, that he be not as
Corah and his company, Numb. 16.40. Communi jure gentium sancitum est, ut ne
mortales quod deorum immortalium cultui consecratum est, usucapere poslint,
Cicero. LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Will. Rands at Fleetbridge. 1659.

THE USURPATION Of the PRIESTHOOD, Or the Scourge of SACRILEGE.
NUMB. 6.38. The censers of these sinners against their own souls, let them
make them broad plates for a covering of the Altar: for they offered them
before the Lord, therefore they are hallowed, and they shall be a sign unto the
children of Israel.
IT is the Divine Aphorism of the great Apostle Saint Paul, Romans 15.4. The
Introduction.
Whatsoever things were written before time, were written for our learning. And
this whatsoever, is a very large and comprehensive word, and relates not only
to dogmatical and doctrinal truths, but to practical examples, to matters of
Fact as well as Faith: all which are recorded and siled up in Holy Writ, and
serve as patterns for our imitation or instruction, to make us the more
cautinate and wary in the steering of our course from the shipwreck of others,
that we split not our selves upon those rocks, nor be swallowed up of those
quicksands, wherein they have perished. This is the use we are to make of
examples, that we our selves be not made examples; and we are diligently to
observe and peruse History, that we become not a Story to posterity. The Text
is part of a Story, and History is a relation of things past, the sayings and
doings of our Ancestors. And if we look back a little to the beginning of the
Chapter, we may from thence take the rise of these words, and retrive the
occasion of the History: there we find mention of Corahs rebellion, as the
ringleader and chief actor in it; together with Dathan and Abiram, and two
hundred and fifty men as his accomplices and confederates in his conspiracy. All
these combined and headed together in an open affront offered to the public
authority of Moses and Aaron, the Prince and Priest of the people.

2. These they charged and challenged in an high strain of insolent intrusion
into that place and office, unto which they were not designed of God; and for
domineering and lording it over their brethren. And they gathered themselves
together against Moses and Aaron and said unto them, Ye take too much upon you,
seeing all the congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is
amongst them; wherefore then lift ye up your selves above the congregation of
the Lord? Number. 16.3. Nor was it enough for them to word it by way of
contestation, and to beard them to their face, unless they commented upon their
mutinous speeches, by the like presumptuous attempts and undertakings; For the
two hundred and fifty men took every man his censer, and put fire in them, and
laid incense thereon, verse 18. which of right belonged to the Priest; whereas
Corah and his crew were but the sons of Levi at the best, and Dathan and Abiram
of the Tribe of Reuben; neither of which had any authority at all to
intermeddle with the Priesthood. And albeit they agreed and joined together in
the same common sin, yet were they differenced and distinguished in the
punishment. As for Corah and his rebellious rout, they were removed and swept
away with a strange and unheard of miracle; The earth cleving asunder under the
unsupportable weight of so unprofitable a burden, opening her devouring jaws to
swallow them up, who went down quick into the pit, verse 31, 32, 33. But as for
the two hundred and fifty that offered incense, they did thereby incense the
fierce wrath of God, and it fared with them as with Nadab and Abihu, who
offered strange fire, and perished by fire in as strange a manner. And there
came out a fire from the Lord, and consumed the two hundred and fifty men that
offered incense, verse 35. And lest that so signal and exemplary a punishment
should be buried in oblivion with the sufferers, God takes a special care and
order that the memory thereof should be commended and transmitted to posterity:
And whereas the punishment seized but upon few, the example should reach unto
all; and this is the reason of the strict command and charge of God to Moses,
and of Moses to Eleazer the son of Aaron the Priest, in the words of the Text,
The censers of these sinners, etc.

In which portion of Scripture we may consider these three specialities. The
division of the Text.


1. A description, and that double; The one general of the persons here spoken
of, (sinners against their own souls.) The other special of the sin of these
persons, who presumed to offer incense, and took the honor unto them, and yet
were not called as was Aaron.

2. A direction of God himself, touching the disposing of these censers, the
instruments of their sins, Let them make them broad plates for the covering of
the Altar.

3. The reason of the direction, and that threefold.

1. The oblation of them, For they offered them before the Lord.

2. The Consecration which followed upon the oblation; there fore they are
hallowed.

3. The commemoration of the use and benefit of the example to posterity; And
they shall be a sign to the children of Israel.

I shall cast the whole bulk and body of the Text into a fourfold proposition,
Four doctrinal conclusions.
or so many doctrinal conclusions.

1. Presumptuous and peremptory offenders are sinners against their own souls.

2. The usurpation of the Priesthood under the Law, or the office of the
Ministry under the Gospel, (for both these agree in their substance, though
differing in some formal Rites, and in several modes and administrations;) I
say the usurpation of the Ministry is a sin against a man's own soul.

3. Those things that are separated and set apart to public worship, and
thereby consecrated unto God, must not be alienated in the property, and
perverted to a profane and common use.

4. The sins and punishments of our Ancestors should serve as so many signs and
examples unto succeeding generations.

1. The first conclusion. Sinners against their own souls.
Presumptuous and peremptory transgressors are sinners against their own souls.

But how can this be (may some men say) seeing every sin is committed against
God, as the proper object; it being nothing else then (...), a transgression of
the Divine Law, which is hereby injured and offended. This is no Gordian knot
that stands in need of the sword of Alexander to cut asunder; The doubt is
easily assoyled and wiped away with a wet finger, for all sin is against God,
as the object, against the soul of the sinner as the subject of it: Against God
for the dishonor, the sinner for the danger; against God as an offense, the
sinner for the guilt and punishment

Three manner of ways there are whereby men may be said to sin against their
own souls. Three manner of ways.


1. The purity of the soul. 2. The peace of the soul. 3 The safety of the soul.
First, men sin against the purity of the soul, Macula a spot or stains not
only adherent, The purity of the soul.
but inhering also in the nature; it makes an impression of a blot and blemish
upon the conscience, and after the manner of the Snaile, leaves a slime behind
it, whereby it may be discovered and traced out. There is not any noysomness or
nastiness of nature that may compare with that of sin, which is joined hand in
hand with uncleanness.

There shall be a fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness, Zach. 13.1. And
goes under the name of (...), 2 Pet. 2.20. pollutions, or filthinesses, in the
plural number: Hence is it compared to the loathsome vomit, not of a man, but
dog; to the durty mire and puddle, wherein the unclean swine delights to wallow
and welter it self. The Dog is returned to his vomit, and the Sow to her
wallowing in the mire. 2. Pet. 2.22. Sometimes we find it resembled by the
unsavory and poisonous damp which rotten carcasses exhale and breath forth
from the open graves, Romans 3.13. elsewhere it is likened to the dirt and filth
that is gathered under the nails, the stinking sweat of the body, the very
excrements themselves which nature severs from the purer nourishment, and casts
forth into the draught. Saint James implies and intends as much in his (...)
and (...), wherefore lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness,
James 1.21.

Secondly, Men sin against the peace of their souls, grand incendiary that sets
all on fire, The peace of the soul.
and raises combustion both in the greater and lesser world; the great
makebate and peace-breaker, that divides betwixt God and the Soul; Your
iniquities have separated betwixt you and your God, Isa. 59.2. that divides
betwixt the soul and it self, as being the chiefest enemy to its own peace and
comfort, Vbi peccatum ibi procella, Where sin goes before, there a storm and
tempest follow after; no sooner was Jonah embarked for Tarshish, whether he
fled through disobedience, but forthwith God dispatched after him a blustering,
and a boisterous wind, as a Pursevant purposely sent to arrest and attach him.
There is no peace (says my God) to the wicked, Isa. 57.21.

Thirdly, Men sin against the safety of their souls. The temporal and eternal
safety, For the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. The first, The safety of the
soul.
the second death, (...), as Nazianzen speaks of it, and that by way of (...),
being every way as due unto it, as wages to the common Soldier. There is not a
presumptuous sinner but is a felo de se, that in a most unnatural and desperate
manner lays violent hands upon himself; and is not only accessory to his own
ruin, but the chief Actor and Author of it, O Israel thou have destroyed thy
self. Hos. 13.9. Thou, not I as is made good by the Antithesis, But in me is
thy help. This is the true ground and reason of that passionate and melting
wish of God in the behalf of his people, Ezekiel. 33.11 As I live, says the Lord
God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn
from his way and live; Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye
die O house of Israel? That God who cannot die himself, wills not the death of
the wicked; Tertul. de Paenit. cap.
so he says and swears (as I live) O faelices nos quorum causa jurat Dexs, O
miserrimos si nec juranti credimus, how happy men are we for whom God is
pleased to swear! how extremely wretched must we needs be, if we will not
believe him upon his oath. Seek not death in the error of your lives, and pull
not destruction upon your heads by the works of your own hands. It is the wise
man's counsel, Wisd. 1.12. what do wicked men but seek their own death in the
error of their lives? What else do they but pull destruction upon their own
heads, by the works of their own hands? What do they but perish wilfully and
willingly through their own default? for they are not inevitably compelled to
sin by any outward force and violence; nor are they any way necessitated by any
fatal decree and destiny. There is no predestination of men to sin, but
punishment; no predetermining or preordaining to offend God by sin, but to
suffer for it, as a just reward and recompense, Illius rei Deus ultor est,
cujus author non est. Fulg. ad Monim. lib. 1.
Neq, euim ipsa justitia justa dicetur, si puniendum reum non invenisse sed
focisse dicatur, Justice it self should be unjust if God should be the avenger
of that evil whereof he is the first Author, should he make them guilty by his
decree and then punish them for their guiltiness. And as for those that
maintain and hold that men are Council. Arausic. 2. Can. 25. Prosp. page 902.
predestined to sin by an overruling and Almighty power, if there be any that
believe so great an evil, non solum non credimus, sed cum omni detestatione
anathema illis dicimus, We are so far from believing it our selves that we
denounce the severest anathema and curse against such, with all horror and
detestation. It is the Canon of the second Arausioan counsel, and is reported
by Prosper at the latter end of his Book.

2. I come to the second proposition, The second Conclusion
the usurpation of the Priest bood under the law, and the office of the
Ministry under the Gospel is a sin against the soul: (...), who is there that
will mistake, or miss the door, and stumble at the very threshold? ^et some
such I meet with upon the first entrance into the point, who take away the
subject of the proposition, and deny all usurpation? me thinks I hear them
buzzing and whispering in my ear, yea rather lift up their voice like a
Trumpet, and ring it out aloud in the words of Corah, ye take too much upon you
ye Ministers of the Gospel, seeing all the Congregation of the Lord are holy:
every one of them, and the Lord is amongst them, ver. 3. And although it may
suffice by way of answer, to such a bold exception, that it is the language of
rebellion; and just cause of fear there is that while men speak in the words of
Corah, they perish in the gainsaying of Corah, as St. Jude has it: and
although I might retort and return their words into their own mouths, v. 7. ye
take too much upon you ye sons of Levi, ye sons of Lay men: but to ^^g and
grapple with the objection, hand to hand, and to try the strength and the
sinews of it? let that be granted as true, that all the Congregation are holy
every one of them with an external and faederal holiness, and some in that
number with habitual and saving grace; yet notwithstanding the holiness of a
general and Christian, they want the holiness of a particular and special
calling, that goes under the name of ordination and holy orders, that intitles
them to the Ministry, and gives them though not (...), and inables them by way
of authority to the offices, and the duties of it. See it in the example of
Barnabas and Saul, Acts. 13 23. the holy Ghost said, separate me Barnabas and
Saul for the work whereunto I have called them, and when they h^^d fasted and
prayed, and laid their hands upon them they sent them away. Herein consists the
holiness of the Ministry in separating and setting men apart to that service
in conferring of the holy Ghost, that is a spiritual and Ghostly power, which
is given and received by the imposition of hands and that by means of
ordination. And should men from their general and Christian callings infer that
they are Priests, who are styled by St. Peter a royal Priesthood and an holy
Nation, 1 Pet. 2.9. they might as rationally conclude themselves to be Kings,
both which are joined together by St. John; And alike true in the same sense,
and has made us Kings and Priests unto God, Rev. 1.6. and yet as men may not
invade the royalties of the Kingdom; so neither can they justly assume and
arrogate the dignity of the Priesthood.

And if we take a cursory survey and view of all times and ages. we cannot but
observe the distinction of Priest and people; the people are as those that
strive with the Priest, Hos. 4.4. and this striving of the people with the
Priest, does fully evince the distinction of each from otherd: or else they
should be said to strive with themselves, the Priests lips should keep
knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth, Mal. 2.7. He and They; He
as the Lords messenger, whose lips are the storehouse, treasury, and hive of
knowledge; They as the Bees that are to suck honey out of his combs. Pass we
from the old to the new Testament, there we meet with Pastors and with their
flocks: take heed to your selves and to all the flock, to feed the Church of
God, Acts. 20.28. nor is it more strange and dangerous for a flock to want a
shepheatd then to be nothing else then shepherds and no flock at all. Let him
that is taught in the word communicate into him that teaches, Gal. 6.6. there
were in St. Paul's time (...) some as Catechists others as Catechumeni, that
were instructed, and taught by them. And if we descend and fall down to the age
of Tertullian, we shall find that the whole Church was sorted into these two
ranks and companies Tertul. Apolog.
ordinem and plebem: such as were in orders, and the common people. This
necessary distinction is grounded upon the general and Apostolic Canon of St.
Paul, 1 Cor. 14.40. Est allusio ad oeconomiam in qua haec duo requiruntur.
Pareus in Locum. (...) Chrysostom. in Loc.
let all things be done (...) decently and in order: and how can things be done
in order, unless orders be maintained and kept up. For order is nothing else
(as St. Austine defines it) August. de Civit. Dei, lib. 19. cap. 13.
but parium impariumque sua cuique loca tribuens dispositio, a right disposing
and changing of things equal and unequal, assigning unto each their proper rank
and station: and where there is not a due observing and keeping of their
several standings in a just parity and imparity there can be neither natural,
civil, military, Four kinds of Order.
or Ecclesiastical order.

1. 1. Natural.
There is a natural order of the several members in the same body, and these
distinct in nature and office, in dignity and in duty if the whole body were an
eye where were the hearing? 1 Cor. 12.17 and is it not alike true if the whole
body were a tongue what should become of the ear? if all were Preachers; we
should be to seek and at a loss for want of hearers.

2. 2. Politic.
There is a politic and civil order of Prince and people, sovereign and
subjects, some rulers, and governers, others that are ruled and governed by
them.

3. 3. Military.
There is a military or wartial order in an Army consisting of several Officers
and Offices, General, Colonels, Captains, Common Soldiers; all these are
observable in an Army, unless it be that of Alcibiades, wherein every man would
be a guide and leader, none guided or lead by others. Ecclesiastical.


4. There is an Ecclesiastical or Church order, wherein God has set First,
Apostles. Secondly, Prophets, Thirdly, Teachers. Are all Apostles? are all
Prophets? are all Teachers? the Apostles interrogation is every way equivalent,
and carries with it the sonce of a peremptory negation: and so much is there
intimated and implied; that all are not teachers, or at leastwise ought not to
be so, who wanting both the extraordinary and immediate call of Prophets, and
Apostles, together with that Such a one was Petrus Waldo, the father and
founder of the Waldenses, that took their name from him: whom Alanus characters
in this manner, if he may be believed. Qui suo spiritu ductus, non a Deo missus
no vam sectam invenit, ut sine alicujus Praelati autoritate, sine divina,
inspiratione, sine conscientia, sine litera praedicare praesumeret: sine
ratione Philosophus, sine visione Propheta, sine missione Apostolus, sine
instructione Didascalus. Alanus contra Valdens. lib. 20 cap 10.
ordinary and ministerial call of common Pastors and Teachers, are not to
intrude and thrust themselves into the Ministry. No man takes the honor to
himself but he that is called of God as was Aaron, Heb. 5.4. lo here is an
universal negative, no man, which is exclusive of all, takes this honor to
himself that is in a fair and legal way, as that which is offered and held
forth unto him; but rather catches and snatcheth at it, and herein deals with
the Ministry, as Elies son with the fat of the sacrifices, who in case the
people would not give it upon the first motion, they would take it by force.

It is against the nature of any creature to elevate and raise it self above
the nature of it Aquin in 5. tum cap. ad Heb. v. 4.
sieut aer non facit s^^psum i^ nem, sed fit ^ supertore, even as the air is
not made fire of it self but is converted and turned into it by a superior and
an higher canse (as Aquinas notes upon the place;) even so in Church Polity men
must not make themselves Ministers (as Novatus was said to consecrate himself a
Bishop) but must be ordained by superiors. It is a general observation of
Pareus on those words Pareus in loc. Potest alius quivis nobis divinae gratiae
esse testis, sed Paulus hane functionem docet specialiter ministris esse
injunctam. Calvinus in Epist. 2. ad Corint. cap. 5.18.
bine liquet cur nec princeps ipse nec priuatus quisquam sibi ministerii parts
sumere potest: neither Prince nor private person of what rank soever can justly
challenge the office of the Ministry, God has not made them the disposers of
his secrets, nor dispensers of his Sacraments, he has not entrusted them with
the power of absolution, nor hung St. Peter's keys at their girdle: let them
produce their warrant out of the word of God, that Christ's patent unto St.
Peter Tibi dabo Claves regni coelorum, Mat. 16.19. is a part of their
commission, let them make it good upon proof that they are able Ministers of
the New Testament: and that Ministers not only of the peace, but of the quorum
too: quorum remiseritis peccata, John. 20.23. whose sins ye remit they are
remitted, and whose sins ye rem in they are retained. But what do I speak of
private persons or the King himself to be made Minister, seeing Christ the
Prince of peace did not attempt or endeavor it; Christ glorified not himself
to be made an high Priest, but he that said unto him thou art my son this day
have I begotten thoe, Heb. 5.5. and as he did it not in his own person, so
neither would he tolerate and endure it in others: for when the Devil himself
would needs turn Preacher, though he delivered very orthodox and sound
doctrine, and afforded a notable testimony to Christ's Divinity, I know thee who
thou art, the holy one of God, Mar. 1.24. yet Christ stops his mouth, and puts
him to silence, quia extra vocationem, as wanting the warrant of a lawful
calling. Let me but add one instance more, that the Devil would not be
commanded and adjured by the sons of Sheva the Jew who professed themselves
Exorcists and played the Conjurers, Josus I know, and Paul I know, but who are
ye, Acts. 19 15. that was the reason alleged by them, their wanting power and
authority for the doing of it. A double evil of usurpation of the ministry


There is a double evil that follows upon the usurpation of the Ministry.

1. The removing of Gods boundaries.

2. A general Ataxy and disorder.

1. The first a removing of Gods bounds, The removing of Gods boundaries.
a sin of an high and heinous nature, insomuch that when God would exaggerate
and aggravate the fin of his people, he describes it in this manner, Hos. 5.10.
The Princes of Judah were like them that removed the bounds; that is the reason
of that strict command, Den. 19.14. thou shall not remove thy neighbors land
mark which they of old time or thy fathers have set in thy inheritance. And
shall we then remove the bounds that are fixed by God himself? the antiart of
days (...), the father of fathers, as Justine Martyr calls him; these bounds
are set forth by God in the distinction of offices and callings, with the
appropriation unto, several persons; let every man abide in the same calling,
wherein (...) was called, 1 Co^. 7.20. Let every man wherein be in called,
therein abide with God, ver. 24. there is not a word but has its (...) and
full weight; A general Ataxy and disorder.
(...) Yet very man ti^its a general (...) and admits of no exception (...) let
him continue or settle in it (...) in the ^^^ne and not it another, (...) it is
Gods ordinance and has his warrant in the expectation and assurance of his
presened and protection. And in case men desert their station, and
proveirenegadoes and runaways from their callings, they full under the guilt of
Judah's sin, and are like unto them that remove their bounds.

2. The second (...) that follows upon this usurpation, is a general At^xy and
disorder, the transforming the Church into a deform and misshapen monster, cui
lumen ademptum; a Polephemus without an eye, a Cyclopical kind of (...) wherein
no m^n hears of understands each other, a Cor. 14.33. God is not the Author of
confusion, but of peace^^^ in all Churches of the Saints. In case then that
party that claim and clepe themselves the Churches of the Saints, bring in
confusion instead of peace into the Church of God, therein inverting St. Pituls
rille, yea perverting the hanne of God himself, in making him who is the God of
peace, to be the God of consusion; they therein forfeit the honor of their
denomination, and (to say no more) cease to be the Churches of the Saints. And
hereby it comes to pass (as he speaks proveniunt onatores novi^^ dolescentuli;
we have such a strange swarm and fry of new and (...) That learn the Potters
Art at the Wheel; As Nazianzen alludes in the Proverb. Orat. prim. page 20.
(...) as he phrases it elsewhere. Orat. 29. Yesterday Dolts, to day Doctors;
And may fitly take up that of Bildad, Job. 8.9. We are but of yesterday, and
know not, or know nothing. (h) Nimium multi sunt, qui imperitorum fiunt
magistri, priusquam suerint Doctorum discipuli. Hierun. Epist. 8.
young Orators, that teach before they have learned, and are the masters of the
unlearned, before they have been the Disciples of the learned; as Hierom
complains in his Time.

Hence it is, that Divine and Heavenly mysteries are handled with unwashed
hands; and men of all sorts have entered into the Illotis pedilus sanctuarisim
Domini ingressi surt. Reynol. Collat. cum Ilart. c. 2.
sanctuary with foul and dirty feet: hereby it comes to pass, that the word of
truth is not orthotomized or divided aright, but rather broken in pieces by the
many: And the bread of life not dealt out in a (...) to every one his
demensure, or just portion, but scattered abroad at random and cast away
amongst the people. Hence it is that ignorance and irreverence is advanced, and
cried up; and the gravity of religion and learning decried, and despised. The
necessary. helps and handmaids of Arts and Sciences, Tongues, and Languages,
are thought by some to be the mark of the beast; and to name the Universities,
sive (...) sive joeo (which was the decree of Paul the third) accounted the
brand and badge of heresy. But though Israel play the harlot, yet let not
Judah sin: though ignorance be canonized as a Popish Saint in the Romish
Rubric and Calendar; though ignorance be adored and worshipped as the mother
of their devotion, and her children ask her blessing; yet let wisdom be
justified of her children: let as many as pretend to sobriety of mind and
ingenuity, and modesty of spirit, account learning and the nurseries of
learning (I mean the Universities) as worthy of double honor. And let me
herein applaud and magnify the happiness of their condition to whom I now
speak, who are all Prophets, or Prophets sons, and live here as in another
Naioth, the school of the Prophets: yea let me freely bespeak you in the word
of Christ to his disciples, Mat. 13.16, 17. Blessed are your eyes for they see,
and your ears for they hear: For verily I say unto you that many Prophets and
righteous men have desired to see those things which you see, and have not seen
them, and to hear those things which you hear and have not heard them.

And so I pass to the third Proposition.

3. The third Conclusion.
Those things that are separate and set apart to public worship, and thereby
consecrated to God, they must not be alieuated in the property, and perverted
to profane and common use.

There were several things that had the shamp and print of holiness under the
law, Holiness stamped upon sundry things under the law
like unto the high Priests Mitre with this inscription, Holiness unto the
Lord.

1. The holy plaee.
There was an holy place, when ye shall see the abomination of desolation
stand. the holy place, Mat. 24.15. it is the sanctuary, or Holy of Holies.

2. An holy time.
There was an holy time, if thou turn away thy foot from doing thy pleasure on
my holy day Isa. 58.13. and that was the Sabbath.

3. An holy person.
There was an holy person, let thy Thummim and thy Vrim be with thy holy one,
Deuteronomy. 33.8. and that was the Priest.

4. An holy part or portion.
There was an holy part or portion, which was separated and set apart as the
maintenance of the holy person, which passes under the name of the hallowed
things, Deuteronomy. 26.13.

The time will no way permit and suffer me to glance at all these, I shall only
touch upon the Churches patrimony, the Ministers portion, which God himself is
pleased to phrase, A double ground of the holiness.
Tithes and Offerings.

There is a double ground or reason of their holiness.

1. Humane donation or dedication. 2. Divine claim and challenge.
1. 1. Humane donation or dedication.
The first ground of their holiness is Humane Donation or Dedication, of men
devout and pious in their generations who bequeathed them to God by way of
legacy or inheritance in their last will and Testament; and certainly it was as
lawful for them to make God their Heir or Legatee, as any of the sons of men;
and being such, he is not to be defeated of his legacy, or disseissed of his
inheritance.

For as the Apostle tells us, Gal. 3.15. though it be but a man's testament, yet
if it be confirmed (...) no man disanuls or adds thereunto; and if he adds not
noi^^^oz then can he take it quite away.

(...) second ground for the holiness of the Churches patrimony is divine claim
and challenge, whereby he separates and reserves it to his own worship and
service. For God is the high and mighty possessor of Heaven and Earth, the Lord
Paramount of the whole world; who as he commands the seventh part of our time,
so does he require the tenth of our substance as his own peculiar, all the
tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the land, or of the fruit of the tree
is the Lords, it is holy unto the Lord, Levit. 27.30. and being such is not to
be alimated, invito domino, without the consent of the owner. And if the
question be here moved whether a thing that is dedicated through ignorance or
superstition, may not be altered in the use and converted to another and that a
better end, the example here in the Text may serve as an answer to this query.
For the Censers of Korah and Dathan even by Gods appointment must be employed
for a covering of the Altar, and that because, though erroneously, yet they
offered them before the Lord, therefore they are hallowed. Add hereunto the
joint attestation of the heathen and that drawn from those common principles
and apprehensions, which like unto so many seeds and sparkles are naturally
sown and raked up in the hands of children Plato Philib Semel deo dicatum non
est ad usus humanos ulterius transferendum. 6. Decret. de Regul. juris. Si
facta ades sit, licet collapsa sit jam religio tamen ejus occupavit solum.
Plin. 2. Epist. Lib. 10. Epist. 74.75.
Nos dicimus (quod pueri solent) quae recte data sunt eripere non licet, says
the Heathen Plato: Do but ask children and they will acknowledge this much, and
subscribe unto it as an undeniable and undoubted truth. Those things that are
well given, are not to be devoyed into another hand, or diverted from their
main end: For though there may be an alienation from the particular end and
intention of the Donors, wherein through ignorance they erred; yet from the
general and ultimate end, and that is the maintenance of God's worship, they
may not, they must not be alienated.

And herein a special Caution is to be had that we transfer them not to our
proper use, or translate them to our private benefit and advantage, flying upon
the spoil after Saul 's example, and too too nimbly fingering the wedge of
gold, and Babylonish garment, which was the sin of Achan. The reason is
rendered by great Saint Augustine, August. Epist. 154. ad Publicol.
Vt appareat nos pietate ista desstruere, non avaritia; That it may be evident
and apparent unto all, that we have altered the property out of zeal to God and
his glory, not for filthy lucre sake, and the love of Bulaam 's wages, the
wages of iniquity; That we have not acted his part, and pleaded the cause of
religion, as he did the cause of the poor. Quorsum haec perditio? to what
purpose is all this wast? why was not the ointment sold for three hundred pence
and given to the poor. This he said not that he cared for the poor, but because
he was a Thief, and had the bag and bare what was put therein, John 12.56.

There are many pretending and professing Christians, that care as little for
religion as Judas did for the poor, yet would be thought affectionate
well-willers and fast friends unto it. Nor is it much to be wondered at, seeing
whatsoever they say and do is for the bags sake whereof they are the Keepers;
Which occasioned that great and sad complaint of Calvin upon the alienation of
the Church Lands at the reformation in Geneva; I well see (says he) we have
taken away Judas his purse, and given it to the Devil. And yet nevertheless
things formerly dedicated and devoted to a false, may justly be consecrated to
the honor of the true God, and that by the special warrant and express command
of God himself. Thus the silver and gold, the vessels of brass, of iron, of the
city of Jericho must be brought into the treasury of God, Josh. 6.19. And the
wood of Baal's grove cut down by Gideon, must serve as fuel for Gideon 's
sacrifice, Judges 6.26. And when things formerly abused to Idolatry are
afterward converted to God's worship and service, August Epist. 154. ad Public.
Hoc de istis fit, quod de ipsis hominibus cum ex sacrilegis and impiis in
veram religionem mutantur, says Saint Augustine excellently in his hundred
fifty fourth Epistle to Publicola. Herein it happens with the things thus
converted, as to the persons of men converted and changed themselves, when of
sacrilegious and impious wretches they become devout and holy Christians. This
is not the perversion but conversion of the things; Like unto the paring of the
nails, and the shaving of the hair of the Heathenish captive, whereby the woman
was made a perfect proselyte and true Israelite.

And if it be demanded and asked in the second place, whether it be not in the
power of the State, to alienate the Churches portion, and to dispose of it to
civil and common uses: Though I hold it neither prudential nor safe to reason
the power of States; and it was but a piece of discretion in that Philosopher
who would not dispute it with the Emperor Adrian, modestly excusing himself in
that manner; That it was but reason to yield to him, that commanded thirty
Legions: Yet so much may be truly and piously affirmed in the cause of God, and
his Church; That as the rule of justice binds men to a suum cuique to give
every man his own; so the Rule of Religion obliges much more strongly to
afford God his dues and rights, and that his part and portion should be held as
sacred and inviolable. Give unto Caesar the things which are Casar 's; and unto
God, the things which are God's, Matthew. 22.21. There are quae Caesaris and quae
Dei; and these must necessarily be distinguished from each other. And though
the Power of States may reach to a meum and tuum, mine and thine, yet can we
not conceive it to be so far extensive as to fetch in God's peculiar. And
albeit we may give unto God that which is Caesar's, we must not give unto
Caesar the things that are God's; lest otherwise we fall under the guilt and
censure of the Heathen in the words of Tertulian Tertul. Apolog. cap. 27.
Majori formidine observatis Caesarem quam ipsum de Olympo Jovem; ye show more
respect and reverence unto Caesar then unto God himself. And in case this be
done, God who is a righteous Judge adjudgeth it as flat robbery; Will a man rob
his God? (a mere natural or Heathen man) but ye have robbed me in Tiths and
Osserings, Mal. 3.8. This robbing of God is a sin of an high strain and no way
inferior to Idolatry. Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit sacrilege?
Romans 2.22. where by Saint Paul's Clyma^^ or gradation, saeriledge is a degree
or step above Idolatry it self. And as theft is a capital crime and a deadly
sin to the Author by the law of the Land; even so is sacrilege every way as
punishable by the law of God. An accursed sin that carries a curse with it, and
that not only to particular persons, but to a whole Nation: Ye are cursed with
a curse, for ye have robbed me, even the whole Nation, Mal. 3.9. And it is
worth the observing how God has punished this sin even in Heathen men who knew
not God, in bewraying the irreligion and atheism of their dispositions and
their open dishonor and despite to their false and feigned Deities. I will
only point at a double Instance; the one of the Grecians, the other of a Roman.

The first Example is that of the Grecian who offered violence to the Temple of
Pallas.

Corripuere sacram effigiem manibusque cruentis,
Virgineas aufi Divae contingere vittas. Virgil. Aeneid.

And mark what followed.

Ex illo fluere, and retro sublapsa referri, spes Danaum. Ex illo fluere the
ruin of the Grecians flowed from hence as the immediate and the proper cause;
or ex illo fluere, from that very time they never dawned good day, nor held up
their head after.

The second Example is that of the Roman Fulvius the Censor, reported by
Lactant. de orig. error. lib. 2. cap. 8. Mente capius. est. and amissis duobus
filiis in Illyrico militantibus, sumno animi maerore consumptus est.
Lactantius, who having uncovered the Temple of Juno Lacinia, and taken from
thence marmoreas tegulas, certain marble tiles, therewith to cover his house;
he forthwith grew distracted, and bereaved of his wits: soon after lost his two
sons in battle as they were warring in Illiricum and himself consumed and pined
away to death. And this leads me to the fourth and last Proposition.

4. The fourth Conclusion.
The sins and punishments of our Ancestors should serve as so many signs and
examples unto succeeding generations.

There are sundry sorts of signs, signum militare, signum memoriale, sive
exemplare, A military, or memorial sign.

There is a military sign or ensign, the property whereof is to congregate
soldiers together, and cause their repair to their colors; and in this
respect the prophet foretold of Christ, he shall stand for an ensign to the
people, to it shall the Gentiles seek, Isa 11.10.

There is an exemplary or memorial sign, and of this kind was Lots wise, who
had a^ mark of remembrance set upon her forehead, remember Lots wife, Luke.
17.32. and was purposely turned into a pillar of salt, ut exemple suo nos
condiat, to season us with her example. Such a sign was Corah here in the Text,
as a public monument or memorial, Numb. 26.10. And the earth opened her mouth
and swallowed them up together with Corah, when that company died; what time
the fire devoured two hundred and fifty men, and they became a sign, exemplum
omnium oculis expositum sicut signum erecium: Junius in Loc.
an open example exposed as obvious unto everyl eye, like unto a standard set
up in the head of an Army, as Junius glosseth upon the place.

There are several kinds of punishments.

1. (...). 2. (...). 3. (...). Three kinds of punishments.


There are (...) that respect the instruction and correction of the party, and
there are (...) that seem to intend the confusion and destruction of the
offender. And there are (...) that serve as patterns and presidents unto others
Optat. lib. 1.
Deus in singulis rebus posuit exemplorum formam ut sit quod imputet
imitantibus prima peccata, says Optatus: God has set the seal and stamp of
examples upon the action and sufferings of wicked men, that so he might the
more justly impute unto those the imitation of former sins who will not be
forewarned and amended by their punishments. And it is very remarkable that God
never punished any sin in a more exemplary and severe manner then that of Corah
and his Rebels For the earth opened her mouth, swallowed them up quick, and
then shut her mouth upon them; Et ne beneficium de mortis compendi, consequi
viderentur, dum non essent digni vivere, iis nec mori concessum est. Optat.
lib. 1.
And lest the suddainness of their death should seem a benefit, as they were
not deemed worthy to live; so neither had they the privilege to die: They were
forthwith enclosed and shut up in the prison of the grave; Ante sepulti quam
mortui (as Optatus has it) and buried before dead. True indeed (may some men
say) it was so in former times, but such like instances are long since
antiquated, and out of date. There is now no earth to swallow men up quick, as
it did Korah and his Rebetious Rout; there is now no fire that comes down from
Heaven to consume men, as it did the two hundred and fifty that offered
incense: If there be any that reason in this manner, they may be returned the
same answer that was sometimes rendered by Optatus to Parmenion the Donatist,
Optat ibid.
An quia talis vindicta modo cessat ideo tibi cum tuis vindicas innocentiam.
And is it even so that because divine vengeance forbears to display and
manifest it self as in former times, therefore thou and thine presume
themselves innocent? nothing less: For even as Fathers are not wont to correct
their unruly children in the self same manner and fashion being grown up to
riper years as when they were young and tender; Even so God has not the same
discipline and method of punishment under the Gospel, which he sometime had
under the Paedagogie of the Law. It is St. Chrysostorus compatison, God does
not now so frequently scourge men with the rods of temporal chastisements, but
in the stead thereof inflicteth spiritual judgments, in giving men up to their
own hearts lusts, to vile affections, and which is worst of all, to a reprobate
sense (as he dealt with the Gentiles) and so reserves men to eternal
punishment. Optat. lib. 1.
Ad exemplu^ praesens poena praecessit, secunda judicio reservabitur, says
Optatus; As the place is well restored and corrected by Merick Causaubon, God's
present pnnishment goes before as an example; but as for the second it is
deferred and delayed, until the latter judgment.

I conclude all with the Oracle of the Wise man, Prove. 20.25. It is a snare to
a man who devours that which is holy.

There are three properties of a snare. 1. It is laid secretly. 2. It catches
suddenly. 3. It holds surely. And as a bird being taken in a snare is oft-times
held by the leg or wing until the evening, or the coming of the Fowler. Such a
snare is an usurpation of the office of the Ministry: such a snare is the
invading the part and portion of the Minister; wherein men may lie hampered and
entangled, till the evening of death, till the coming of God to a purticular or
a general judgment: Then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written,
It is a snare to a man to devour that which is holy, and will end in
destruction.

The Christian Man's TASK, EXPLAINED and APPLIED, IN TWO SERMONS: THE FORMER
Preached before the Mayor, and Court of Aldermen of the City of Norwich in
Newhall Chapel in the Forenoon.

THE LATTER, In St. Andrews Parish, in the Afternoon, the same day.

Nisi ego mihi quis mibi? and cum ego mihi, quid ego? and nisi nunc quando?
Hillel senex apud Drusium, Apothegm. Ebraeor. page 9. LONDON, Printed by T. C.
for Will. Rands at Fleetbridge. 1659.

The Christian Man's TASK.
PHIL. 2.12. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.
HOw beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that brings good
tidings, that publishes peace, The Introduction.
that brings good tidings of good things, that publishes salvation, Isa.
5^.7. And what the Prophet Isaiah styles the publishing salvation, the Apostle
Saint Paul who copies out the substance of the same sentence, Rom: 10.15.
renders the preaching of the Gospel of peace, the Ministry of reconciliation,
(...)
and the joyful message of man's salvation. And herein lies the difference
betwixt the terms and tenor of the first and second Covenant: The promise of
the first Covenant of works was life, Do this and thou shall live; as being the
just reward of Adams obedience, had he continued in the state of innocence and
integrity: But the privilege of the second Covenant of grace is salvation, and
runs in this mannen, Believe and thou shall be saved; which is the restoration
of a lapsed creature, a decayed and a destroved sinner, by wilful Apostasy and
disobedience And how beautiful are the feet of him that publishes salvation?
E^ si Pedes ^^d ora? and if their feet are thus beautiful, what then are their
mouths, that are as silver Trumpets to sound it forth in our ears? So that a
Gospel Text that treats of salvation, as the^ argument and subject matter,
cannot but fi^d welcome entertainment, and prove worthy of all acceptance. And
yet there is somewhat required on our part by way of Duty, to intere^ us in
this salvation, work out. And this duty has a condition appendant and annexed,
with fear and trembling. But I must not open my sacks by the way; and yet as
Joseph's brethren upon the opening of their sacks, found every man his money in
the mouth of it, Soluto sacco re uxit Argentum, as Ambrose speaks of that of
Benjamin; even so upon the first opening of the Text; there appears Silver in
the mouth of it, there is choice and precious matter contained in.

Not to trouble you, or spend time about the connection and coherence of the
words. Therein following the example of Wire drawers, who further and forward
their work by going backward.

The Text as it lies before you, contains in it an Apostolical precept and
injunction of a duty no less excellent (...), the sum and substance of all
other.

And herein there are two specialties.

1. The matter of the duty in the first clause, Work (...) salvation. The
Division of the Text.
2. The manner of the duty in the later, With fear and trembling.
In the matter of the duty, there are two circumstance, that present and offer
themselves to consideration.

1. The Means, Work out. 2. The End, and that double. 1. Finis cujus, The end
for what, Salvation. 2. Finis oui, The end for whom, Your own.
Or if you will you may branch them into these two particulars.

1. The exercise of the Act both in the intension and extension of it, Work,
work out. 2. The specification and appropriation of the object, Your own
salvation.
I shall make them up as they lie in order, and first of the exercise of the
Act in the matter of the duty; Work out.

Six things there are employed in the exercise of the Act or Duty, which is not
barely (...), but (...), The first general part of Text.
not work, but work out. Some in the worker, other in the work, or manner of
working. The matter of the Duty, and therein the exercise of the Act, Work out.


1. Liberty and fredom of will in the worker. 2. Necessity of the work, as the
means unto the end: no working, no salvation. 3. The difficulty of the work it
is a work, and that painful and toilsom, not a pastime or recreation. Six
things implied in the Act or Duty.
4. Industrious diligence in the prosecution and pursuance; it is not simply
work, but work out. 5. A proficiency in the work of sanctification, and a
progression unto perfection. 6. The duration and continuance of the work, till
we arrive and attain to salvation.
The first particular pointed out in the exercise of the Act, is liberty and
freedom of will in the Worker. First, liberty and freedom of Will in the Worker.


To Will is as natural unto man, as for the Sun to shed forth light: and
Liberty is as inseparable from the Will, as Light from the Sun. without which
it cannot subsist. Every creature works after the inbred principle of the
nature; natural Agents being determined unto one, without the inclining to the
contrary, or suspending the proper action, out of necessity of nature. And the
Will being placed (...) in the reasonable part of the soul is first set on
work by the deliberate act of the understanding, and then Non sicut in
lapidibus in sensatis, aut in iis in quorum ratura rationem aut voluntatem non
condidit Deus, Salute^ nostram oteratur. Aug de Pec. merit. and remis. lib. 2.
cap, 2.
acts in a voluntary manner: and were it not thus free, it were no Will at all.
But though to Will is a natural and essential property, yet so yet so far forth
as it respects a supernatural and a spiritual good, it is an effect of special
and saving grace; And albeit the Will is free of it self, yet till Christ make
it free it is not free indeed. Nor does it obtain grace by freedom, but freedom
by grace, as Humana voluntas non liberate gratiam, sed gratia consequitur
libertatem. Aug. de Correp. and Gratia ad Valent. c. 8.
Austin rightly resolves and states the question; even as a wall cannot reflect
heat, or light, till the Sun has first shined upon it; Nor the Ecco resound a
noise or voice, till the voice be first uttered; and the Wax could not receive
the impression of the Seal, unless the seal had been first stamped upon it; No
more can the Will move freely to a supernatural good, unless it be prevented
and determined by the work of grace. And the Text seems to import as much, Work
out your salvation, and not your conversion; For good works do not go before,
but follow after justification; neither is the Will an Agent, but a mere
Patient in the first Act of conversion. But being once Agis te ageris and tum
been agis, cum a bono ageris. Aug. de verbis Apost. Sermon. 13
acted it acts, and first moved of God, it then moves it self; when God has
once touched and tuned us like unto a musical instrument, we then yield a
melodious harmony; when the Spirit of God, the wind that blows where it
lists, imbreaths us with the fresh gales of his grace, we then turn, about
like a Mill. The regenerate being once wrought by grace, do then freely work
according to grace; even as the point of a Needle being once touched with a
Loadstone, moves toward it of its own accord. Nor does Saint Paul's exhortation
presuppose any inward strength and power on our part, though charged upon us as
an express command: for as he that affirms there is virtue enough in the pool
of Bethesda to heal an infirmity, if a man had power enough to put himself in,
does not thereby grant that a man has strength for performance; Even so Divine
promises and precepts, and this amongst the rest, show only what we ought, not
what we can; our obligation, not our ability; and they are not the measure of
our strength, but the rule of our duty.

There is not any thing of greater excellency then the grace of God, and is
fitly resembled by the Prophet, Isa 55 1, 2. To Wine, Milk, Bread, Waters, for
the sufficiency, all sufficiency that is to be found in it, as being both meat
and drink, a full and perfect nourishment, all in all unto the soul. And that
which is required on our part for the procuring and obtaining of it, is only
to thirst and come, He every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, verse.
1. and both these are from God Fulgent. ad Monimum Lib. 1.
Ab ipso nobis est quod ad fontom sitientes venimus and qui se nobis tribuit ut
bibamus, says Fulgentius. It is God that affords aquam and sitim (as regory
speaks) that gives water to quench our thirst, and thirst to desire water.

There is a preventing and a following grace within, yet without us, in us, and
with us, and both grounded upon that Text of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 15.10. By the
grace of God I am that I am; And his grace which was bestowed upon me was not
in vain: but I labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the grace
of God which was with me. Being and working both come from Grace; it is Grace
that lays the foundation of this mystical Temple, as Zerubbabel did of the
material: And it is grace too, that sets up the roof after his example; And he
shall bring forth the head stone thereof with shouting, saying, Grace, grace
unto it, Zach. 4.7. Not nature nor free will nor merit, but grace, grace to it.
And howsoever Saint Paul's exhortation runs in the Active, Work out in the Text;
yet are the words elsewhere rendered in the Passive Act. 2.40. (...), Be ye
saved. And the Apostle Saint Paul puts the matter out of question, Ephesians. 2.8. By
Grace ye are saved through Faith, Hoc est opus Dei, ut credatis in eum quem
misit ille. Joh 6.29. Non dixit hoc est opus vestrum, sed hoc est opus Dei, ut
credatis in illum quem misit ille, ut qui gloriatur in Domino glorietur, Aug.
in Joh. Tract. 25.
not of your selves, it is the gift of God.

This was the common opinion of the Heathen, that there was a principle of
virtue implanted in man's nature, without going out of himself, and borrowing
ability from another. Deorum munus est quod vivimus, nostrum quod faelicem.
Senec.
That we live is the gift of God; fancte vivimus. Turpe est fatigare Deos: Quid
votis opus est? Fac te Epist. 31. that we live well is of our selves. And to
what end should we trouble and tire God with the importunity of our prayers;
Fac te saelicem, Thou may be happy if thou will. Eum ut faceret homines
liberos, jecisse sacrilegos. August. de Cicer. De civit. Dei. Lib. 5.
Thus while they made men free, they made them sacrilegious.

And there is much of the sum rank blood, that runs in the veins of professing
Christians, the Pelagian and the Papist: and if we compare the words of the
Text with those that follow, they will soon stop the mouth of both. The
Pelagian challenging Saint Paul's precept even at the first syllable, (Work out)
as a pregnant proof of the liberty of the Will; And the Papist concluding the
merit of Works from the working out of our salvation. And yet both cunningly
suppress what Saint Paul subjoins and immediately inferrs; For it is God that
works to will: He does not give power alone, and leaves the will to elicite its
own Act, but works (...), where then is the Free will of the Pelagian? And to
do; how then can the Papist evince their Works to be meritorious? Let no man
then put asunder these two parcels of Scripture, whom St. Paul, yea God himself
has thus joined together. And as our Savior speaks in another case, Joh. 5.17
My Father works hitherto and I work, so Gods working and man's working, his
efficiency and our concurrence and cooperation must both go hand in hand; for
though it be God that works the Will, yet are not we stocks and stones, that
have no Will at all; and albeit it be he that works the deed, Totum ex Deo non
tamen dormientis, non quasi ut non conemur, non quasi ut non velimus. Aug. de
verb. Apost sermon. 15.
Non quasi ut dormientes, non quasi ut non conemur; yet not that we should
snort after the manner of sleepers; Qui fecit te sine te, non justi^^cat te,
sine te. Ibid.
and no way second it with our endeavors: That God who made us without us,
will not save us without us, but we likewise must work out.

Secondly,, Necessity in the work.
the Act of working imports the necessity of the duty for the attaining of
salvation as the end. It is the speech of Eliphaz in Job 5.7. Man is born to
trouble, as sparks fly upward: that is, naturally and of their own accord. And
many men by nature are of an unquiet and restless disposition; like unto
Quicksilver, that has a principle of motion but not of rest: Or as a Mill if
no grist be cast into it, it then grinds it self. There is no earthly commodity
that can be procured or purchased without the price of labor: No penny can be
expected at night, unless men take pains in the vineyard, and bear the burden
and heat of the day. Nor will the penny of eternal life be afforded upon other
terms and conditions; no salvation without working.

It is not enough to desire it, and to let fall Balaams wish, Number. 23.10. Let
me die the death of the righteous, and my last end be like his. Yea, it is
altogether unreasonable and preposterous to bestow an hankering and faint
velleity upon the end, without the lawful use of the means. Nor must we say of
the water of Life, as David sometime spoke, of the water of the well of
Bethlem, 2 Samuel 23.15.16. O that one would give me to drink of the water of the
well of Bethlem, which is by the gate: But as the three mighty men brake
through the Host of the Philistines, and drew water, and took it, and brought
it to David; Even so we must not long and linger after David's example, O that
some would give me to drink of the water of Life; but we must break through all
opposition and intervening difficulties that obstruct and block up the way; and
hinder us in the undertaking. For as in nature the concupiscible and irascible
faculties are both joined and twisted together, like to several threads of the
same cord and cable in the inferior and sensitive part of the soul; So must
the desire of the ultimate end, be enforced and seconded with the use of the
most propoitionate and proper means in the working out of our salvation.

God has three several places in the World, says Saint Basil.

1. Heaven, that is (...), Gods Storehouse, or Treasure, the place of reward
and recompense. 2. Hell, that is (...), Gods Jail, or Prison, where men are
fast bound in chains of darkness. 3. Earth, a middle place betwixt both, and
that is (...), Gods Workhouse for the working out of our salvation.
The necessity whereof is commended unto us, under a threefold consideration.

First, To evidence the truth of our profession.
to evidence and exemplify the truth of our profession by the effects and
fruits of it; for as Faith justifies the person in the sight of God, so do
Works justify our Faith in the eyes of men. And hence it is, that as Saint
Paul's former Epistles contain and confirm at large our entire justification by
faith alone, against the legal and Jewish Justitiary; so the later Epistles of
Saint James, Peter, and John precisely press, and earnestly urge the exercise
of Works and new obedience against the carnal Gospeller, and loose Libertine,
as is well observed by Chemnitius.

It was a scornful Sarcasme that was cast upon the professors and profession of
Christianity, by him who was a second Elymas, full of all subtilty and
mischief, that enemy of all righteousness, Julian the Apostate, (...), as
Gregory Nazianzen reports it, You Christians have nothing else at your tongues
end, nothing in your mouths and hearts but Faith, Faith, Believe, and then all
is well. And the self same charge and challenge that stale frump and jeer, is
renewed by our Adversaries of the Church of Rome the Papists, who stick not to
proclaim us to the world, with a full and foul mouth, as Solifidians and
Nullifidians; and to brand our Religion with that odious nickname; Calva
Calvini sides, The bald faith of Calvin: This they affirm (...), with a bare
and ^ald head, and therein show that they have not so much as one hair of
honest men: An impudent and shameless calumny purposely devised by him, who is
a liar and the Father of it, and most opprobriously and injuriously obtruded
upon the Protestant party, and reformed Churches: The sounder part whereof,
Sicut substantia sundamentum est omnium accidentium; sic fides omnium virtutum
and donorum. B^navent. Sermon. de Sanclis. Ex fide crumpurt ^^ra op^. a. Luther.
reverences Faith as a spiritual Dorcas, that is full of good works, with which
it is evermore attended and accompanied, as individual and inseparable
companions. And in case works be wanting, they make no other account and
reckoning of such a kind of Faith, then a bare name without a thing, a sign
without a thing signified, a shadow without a substance, a body without a soul,
A dead faith, as St. James makes out the comparison, Jam. 2.26. For as the Body
without the Spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also; A mere
Sceleton and carcass of it. Faith indeed is a more inward and radical grace, of
a spiritual nature, without flesh and bones, as our Savior concludes of every
spirit; But good works are Fides incarnata (as Luther styles them) Faith
manifested in the flesh, which may be seen and felt of others. And in this
sense though somewhat beside it diverse of the Ancients expound those words of
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.46. That is not first which is spiritual, but that which
is carnal; referring it to faith and works, and preferring works before it. Not
to enter the list of a comparison, which of them should be the greater, a
question that sometimes happened amongst Christ's Disciples, and yet a little
to illustrate the matter by a similitude; Faith is as the inward wheels of a
Clock that move it, and make it go: Works are as the Hand or Fingen of the
Dial, which though it be no cause of motion, yet is it an evident sign how the
Clock goes within, and outwardly points forth the hour of the day to the
Traveller in the streets. Thus is Faith discerned and descried by our Works.

Secondly, To improve and increase grace.
working is necessary for the improvement of grace received, which though free
y given, yet must it be increased by our pains and industry in renewing and
repeating the several acts of it: Even as the sire that came down from Heaven
upon the Altar, yet being once kindled it was maintained by the addition of new
wood and fuel. Council Nicen. 1 part. 2. cap. 31.
(...). Though we receive grace without labor at the first, yet can we not
preserve it without labor, say the blessed Fathers of the first Nicene Council.

Thirdly, To attain and gain salvation.
working is necessary for the attaining of salvation, as a condition of an
obligation, as motion unto rest, as the way to the end of the journey, and the
means unto the end. For as in nature there can be no passage from one entream
to another, but by a middle that intervenes and comes between, and so unites
and joins them together; No more can we be translated from a state of
corruption, to a state of happiness, but by working as the means. We must not
look to commence in Heaven, per salt^^m, to skip and leap into it; neither
nature nor grace allow it.

The greater part of the world would have glory without grace, and happiness
without holiness; like to the Roman Dictator Sylla, that had rather be surnamed
Foelix then Pius. Fain would men receive the wages, and yet not do the work,
but in vain and to no end; For life eternal is resembled by a Crown, which they
alone wear that run, yea so run that they may obtain. And as the old Romans
gave the obsidional Crown to him that had delivered a City from the siege of
the enemy, and that made of the grass and flowers of the besieged City; Even so
does God reward men according to their works, and sets them as a Crown upon
their head. Let this be granted as an undoubted truth, that salvation is a
reward, yet such a reward as issues out of mere bounty and liberality, no wages
or due debt. Nor is it given Propter factum sed pacium, not for the worthiness
of the deed done, but by a Bona opera non sunt causa rogni sed via regnandi.
Bernard. de Liber. Arbit.
promissory obligation and engagement, by way of covenant: working is the means
whereby, not the cause why we come to salvation: and though it be styled our
salvation, yet is it as Faith and Repentance are termed ours, being in us, but
not of us: and actions and passions denominate the subject, and not the cause.
God only is the efficient cause and author, and man the proper subject, or
object of it.

For though works be never so necessary in themselves, both in regard of their
presence and instrumental efficiency, as a condition, means, and way, ordained
by God that we should walk in, yet must we not set so high a rate upon them, as
if they were a suficient price for Heaven, any way adaquate and equivalent in
proportion to the recompense of reward. This alone is fitly compared to the
penny in the Gospel, and money (as the wise man speaks) answers all things, and
is the measure and rule of all, but is not to be bought and sold at all. It was
the sacrilegious error of Simon Magus, to conceive that the gift of God might
be purchased with money: and it has a spice of his sin, and may so pass for a
kind of spiritual Simony, to think that salvation which is the gift of God may
be procured with our labor. The Papists indeed have coined a counterfeit and
base money of merit to buy Heaven withal, and though it has none of Gods
image and superscription, yet would they give that unto God which is none of
Gods: as if they were to truck and chaffer and barter with him by way of
merchandise, and to deal with him upon the strictest terms of commutative
justice. Hear them speak in their own language; Opera bona mercatura regni
coelestis, says Bellarmine, Heaven is as due to good works, as Hell to bad: So
Andradius, Coster, and the Rhemists on the New Testament. Let Andrew Vega that
proud Jesuit, as the foreman of the Jury give in the Verdict for all the rest,
Gratis non accipiam, He will rather lose it, then take it as a free gift.

Nor do the Papists offend more on the right hand then the Canisius lib. 1. de
corrupt. verbi Dei. cap. 10.
Flaccians, and the rigid Lutherans on the left; who decree them as
unnecessary, as hurtful, as dangerous; who pray for Faith without Works, and
pass upon them that desperate and damnatory sentence: Ad Satanam spectare
Christianos; cum operibus bonis. Lutherani in colloquio Altenburgens^. Ista
qnom docun que excusentur, certe ma^nam vin habent ad persuadendum simplici
papulo, non esse facien da bona opera. Bellar. de Justisic. l. 4 c. 1.
Ad Satanam spectare Christianos cum oper bus bonis. That good Works are a
Christians Posport to send them packing to the Devil. Thus is the Doctrine of
good Works strangely perverted and corrupted betwixt the Papists on the one
side, and the Antinomians and Libertines on the other; As corn is bruised and
broken betwixt the upper and nether Millstone: And the trutth of Christianity
suffers amongst them, as Christ was crucified betwixt two Thieves.

Thirdly the Act of working shows the difficulty of the duty, it is not (...),
but (...), no matter on the By, not a slight, or easy task, but a work, yea a
working out.

3. Difficulty in the work.
And if that of the Philosopher be true Aristot. Ethic. li. 2. c. 8.
(...). It is matter of labor to become a mere moral honest man; what then
shall we think of being a Christian, of advancing and aspiring to salvation?
surely this must needs require industry and Labor virtutis processus. Ambros.
in Psalm. 119.
diligence, labor for the meat that indureth unto everlasting life, Joh. 6.27.
tugging and wrestling, strive to enter in at the straight gate, Luke 13.24.
violence and contention, the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the
violent take it by force, Mat. 11.12. Not on common swashbucklers who are but a
word and a blow, and as if they were of Lamech's race, will kill a man in their
wound and a young man in their hurt; these are not the violent men here spoken
of Non qui aliu sed voluntatibus suis praeclaram inferunt violentiam Bern. in
oct. Punct. Punct. 6.
not such as exercise violence toward others, but those only who offer an
excellent kind of violence to their own wills, as Bernard glosses upon the
place; yea faith it self, which of all other seems most casie, is a work,
though it justifies not in that respect Ideo noluit discernere ab opere fidem:
sed ipsam fidem di cit esse opus Dei. Ipsa enim est, quoe per dilectionem
operatur, August. in Johan. Tiaila 25.
this is the work of God that ye may believe, Joh. 6.29. neither can this work
but be exceeding difficult, as being so cross and contrary to our natural
inclinations, a cutting against the grain: A rowing against wind and tide: the
elimbing and clmbering of a lofty Hill: like unto that of Jonathan and his
armor bearer, upon their hands and feet, betwixt two sharp rocks, Bozer and
Zeneh: carnal security and presumption on the one hand, and dreadful despair on
the other. It is an easy matter to run down an high and steep hill, where the
declivity of the place, and the propending weight of the body facilitates the
motion and precipitates the descent; But to move and mount upwards so as to
rest in Gods holy Hill, (as David styles it) his labor, boc opus est; this is
an hard and a sore travel, a painful and toylsome work; and though heavy fowls
fall down naturally and drop Hell-ward of their own accord, yet must they be
even compelled to heaven above, with a kind of force and violence.

Fourthly, Diligence and earnestness.
yea, great have and speed; for the Apostle suith not only (...), sed (...),
that is (...), as Chrysostom. Homil ad Philip.
Chrysostom expounds it, with a sollicitous care and study: Give all diligence
to make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. (...), ply you or make
have like unto Travelers, who being to measure a long tract of ground in the
streights of time, they gather up their feet the faster: or like unto runners
in a race who being nimble of body and swift of foot, after the manner of
Asahel, they leap from place to place as a young Heart upon the mountains of
Bether: they press themselves forward, yea stretch forth their whole body, as
St. Paul alludes in his own person, (...) Phil. 3.13. striving to reach the
goal, and to lay hold upon the garland, if it were possible before the time:
for a Christian if he gains not ground he loses it, he is soon cast away if he
pauses and stops and gives in never so little; he is soon cast behind like unto
a Mariner that sails or rows against wind and tide, ad ima relabitur, nisi ad
summae conetur: if he work and work not out his salvation, he can not but work
toward his destruction.

Fifthly, Working imports a proficiency of the work of sanctification, and a
progression to perfection, Magis magisquo operamini, Proficiency and
progression.
as the word is rendered in the Syriack translation; the path of the just is as
the shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day, Prove. 4.18.
This is the property of the righteous, like unto that of the morning light,
which is of a growing and waxing nature till it come to the meridian light, and
shines forth in his full might: and it is the high commendation of the Church
of Thyatira, that her last works were more then the first, Rev. 2.19. There is
no (...) or consistence of height and stature in grace, as in nature, and it
fares with the soul in a spiritual sense, as is reported of the Crocodile, that
it grows as long as it lives. And old Age which brings with it sterility and
barrenness, as the natural and proper effect, adds to the increase and
fruitfulness of the Faithful, They shall still bring forth fruit in old Age;
they shall be fat and flourishing, Psalm. 84.14.

Sixthly, Constancy and continuance. Conficite. Bez. Ad finem usque opus
perducite. Zanch. in Loc. (...) est rem effectam dare, Romans 7.18 (...) Camero.
Praelect. in Loc. Tom. 2.
go thorough stich with it says Beza, bring it to an end says Zanchy; as
being not only a working but a working out. To effect this without all
interruptions, Chasma's or lesser breaches is altogether impossible: it may be,
nay it must be without long discontinuance or palpable dec inations; beginnings
be they never so good, are but the preface of goodness, and foundation of
virtues at the best, and so prove no foundation, unless men build upon them.
And albeit a worthy enterprise and undertaking may pass as current for half the
action; Dimidium facti qui been coepit habet, yet God will not be served by
halves, that which is but almost done is not done at all; nor can ought be
presumed to be done so long as it remains unfinished. It is a Maxim in the
civil law Quicquid in calore iracundiae vel fit vel dicitur. non prius ratum
est, quam si perseverantia apparuit judicium animi fuisse Regul. juris ex
Digest.
whatsoever is done or spoken in hot blood or anger, is of no effect or force,
as being a sudden and rash act, unless it be further confirmed and ratified by
a deliberate resolution; So they that are religious only in heat of blood,
hot-spurs in devotion, by fits and starts, and most violent for a turn or two;
who follow the chase eagerly till they meet with the honey, as Jonathan
sometimes did these I say are of no account and estimation, except they approve
and declare themselves to be so in their cold blood, by constancy and
perseverance For it is not the receiving but keeping of faith, that quickens
the dead soul; they are not the beginnings but the end, that commend a
christian: and Tertullian is peremptory in the case Nemo Christianus nisi qui
ad finem usque perseveraverit. Tertul. Praescr. adv. Haer. cap. 3.
there cannot be a true Christian that perseveres not unto the end; what is
this but to look out of Sodom with Lots wife, to go out of Egypt with the
dissembling Israelites? to put the hand to the plow, and then look back to
begin in the spirit and end in the flesh, with the foolish Galatians to work,
and not to work out? what is this but to render our selves like unto blazing
stars or fiery Meteors, that yield a short blaze and shine, and forthwith
vanish in smoke and smother? to flirt up from the ground with the frisking
Grasshopper, and presently to fall down upon the earth; this is it that argues
men foolish builders with him in the parable, and affords matter of open
contempt and scorn; This man began to build, but was not able to finish it,
Luke 14.30.

2. The second thing considerable in the matter of the duty. The specification
of the object; Your salvation.
and that is said to be our salvation: were there no reward for the righteous,
as David infers with a note of certainty, doubtless there is, then were they
(as St. Paul reasons the case) of all men most misorable: were the reward
severed and separated from the work Mercedem si tollas, nihil in vita hominum
tam inutile tam stultum videri potest, quam virtus, Lactant. de Justit. lib. 5.
cap. 19.
nihil tam inutile tam stultum quam virtus, says Lactantius, there were
nothing more vain and unprofitable then Christianity, and true religion: were
it any trivial or light commodity, an ordinary or inferior kind of good, it
were more then questionable whether it would recompense our pains, much less
satisfy our expectation; and that to pursue it with so great toil and travel,
were not to tread in their steps or wanderings who sweat out the spirit and
life, of their most stately steeds of great price and value, to gain it may be
with much hazard and uncertainty, a small quarry of a small or no price at all?
meeting with more pain in the chase, then they find pleasure or profit in the
purchase, which scarce entertains them with a supper? And lest such like
jealousies should damp and daunt our desires, or rebate the edge of our
endeavors; the Apostle tells us, we work for salvation, which will
sufficiently requite and repay us for our pains? there is not so great
difficulty or tediousness in the work, Two things in the object. 1.
Excellency, Salvation. 2. Property. Your.
but there is far greater dignity and duration in the reward, so that he ven
and earth, time and eternity are not more differenced and distanced each from
other if St. Paul may be judge, 2 Cor. 4.17. For our light afflictions which
are but for a moment, (...) (which is the word of the text) works for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

There are two things that are the common attractives of affection, and are
wont to excite and provoke love, Aristot. 2. Pocit. cap. 2.
(...) says the Philosopher, property and excellency when the object is amiable
and lovely in it self, and when it is proper and peculiar to the party, both
meet together, and kiss each other in the Apostles precept: such is the
excellency that it is no less then salvation: and for the property it is our
salvation, a common salvation indeed as St. Jude styles it in the extent and
multitude of possessours, yet proper to the owner: and that best becomes every
one, that most properly belongs to him; and property and interest is the ground
of care and diligence: and where excellency and property fall in each with
other, they cannot but whet on industry in the most secure and sluggish
dispositions, and set every man to work.

The very name of salvation is a short notation and description of the
excellency, as being the Elixar and quintessence of perfection, the adaequate
object, and ultimate end of man's desire. This is the whole man, and without
this every man is altogether vanity.

The Syriack and Arabic translations, turn the word (...) into life; and so
seemingly neglect not only the Emphasis but the efficacy of the speech; For
though salvation be a life, yet all life is not a salvation: And God himself
who is blessed for ever, and the glorious Angels, lead a happy a thrice happy
life, and yet are no way capable of salvation, (...) est ca vita quae miseris
and deploratae spei, and perditis homini bus obvenit. Cameron in Loc. Myroth.
Evangelic.
which is proper unto those which were sometime wretched and miserable and
utterly lost in themselves, and there is a double consideration of it.

1. As an Immunity or Freedom. 2. As a Dignity or high Privilege.
First, Salvation is an immunity and freedom.
sin, death, and eternal damnation. It is not safety only but salvation; and
betwixt these two there is a broad and wide difference. That man may be said to
preserve another who prevents his ruin and destruction; But he only can be
said to save, that recovers and restores it being lost. Which moved the
Orator, to break forth by way of admiration; Hoc quantum est! ita magnum ut
uno latino vocabulo exprimi non possit. Is est nimirum Soter, qui salutem
dedit. Cicer. lib. 2. cont. Verrem.
O how great a thing is this! so great; that it cannot be expressed in one
Latin word. Is est nimirum (...), qui salutem dedit. He saves who gives life
to the Dead.

Secondly, Salvation is a Dignity and high Privilege; in the several degrees
and steps of it.

1. In the inchoation and beginning. 2. In the consummation and perfection.
First, A dignity and high privilege.
The foundation whereof is laid in this world, but the roof set up in another:
Who has saved and called us with an holy calling, Tim. 1 9. Salvation and
calling go hand in hand, In the inchoation and beginning.
and effectual vocation is the first fruits, the earnest, the Livery and seizin
of our salvation. This day is salvation come to thy house says Christ to
Zachous, Luke 19.9. That man who is not saved in this life, by receiving Christ
into his heart, as Zacheus into his house, shall never be saved in another, by
being received into those eternal habitations.

Secondly, In the consummation and perfection.
Salvation is a dignity and high privilege in the consummation and perfection.
An aggregation of all good, a confluence and affluence of all comforts and
contentments: The making us free. Denizons of the new Jerusalem, the
possessors of the highest Heavens, the linking us in society with Saints and
Angels, the beatifical vision of God, and divine transformation into the image
of his glory. Salvation is one of Saint Paul's (...), 2 Cor. 12.4. It is all we
can conceive and utter, and all we cannot conceive and utter: coelum non
patitur hyperbolem, the highest hyperbole cannot reach the highest Heaven. We
can never speak enough, or too much of it. As therefore Gregory Nyssen,
treating on the Preface in the Lords Prayer, Our Father which art in Heaven,
wished himself wings, wherewith to mount and fly a pitch proportionable to the
height of the Argument; So were there need of (...), winged words in preaching
of salvation, to soar a loft according to the sublimity of the matter. And as
Hierom reports of the Monks in Egypt, that when they heard any mention of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and of the glory of the world to come; they all stole a
secret sigh, and lifting up their eyes to Heaven repeated the words of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 55.6. (...). Naz. Orat. 17.
Quis dabit mihi pennas sicut columbe; Oh that I had the wings of a Dove, then
would I fly and be at rest. Even so the devour meditation of that great
salvation presented and held forth in the Text, should work as vehement a
desire in us to fly unto Heaven; not with the wings of a Dove, but with the
most ardent affections and extatical raptures, which are the wings of the soul,
that so we may have a full fruition and enjoyment of it.

Thus have you heard the specification and appropriation of the object, and
what it is; We must work out our own salvation. But least I should seem to
leave so mysterious and sublime a point, so excellent and so necessary a Truth,
like unto Ezekiels dry bones, without life and breath: Give me leave to
prophecy to these dry bones, and breath upon them once more, with the spirit
of Application. And to collect and gather from hence a threefold Corollary and
Conclusion.

1. By way of supposition. 2. A threefold. Corollary, or conclusion.
By way of inference. 3. By way of exhortation.
First, First, by way of supposition.
as the reward of our obedience; And salvation is an immunity and freedom from
the state of sin and misery; We may from hence observe, That all men by nature
are at a loss, and in a destitute and desperate condition. For as the Apostle
reasons the case, 2 Cor. 5:14. We thus judge, that if Christ died for all, then
were all dead. Had not we been dead in trespass and sins there had been no
outward cause or motive reason in the object, That the Captain of our
Salvation, and Lord of Life, should purchase our life with the price of his own
death, had not we been the lost Sheep, and the lost Groat in the Parable, there
had been no need for Christ to go after that which is lost, and to seek
diligently till he find it. This was the end of his coming into the world, as
himself professes, Luke 19.10. The Son of man is come to seek and to save that
which was lost. Salvation necessarily presupposes and implies a loss on our
part, sins guilt and a just obligation to wrath to come. And as we are lost in
our selves, so must we find our selves to be such in our own apprehension. We
must be deeply sensible and thoroughly convinced of our woe and wretchedness, we
must hunger and thirst after Christ's righteousness, and even look and long for
his salvation. Being ready to sink into the bottomless gulf of despair, each
one in his own person must cry out with Saint Peter, Matthew. 14.31. Lord save
me; Being tempested upon the Sea of God's fierce wrath, and the ship of our
souls well near covered and overwhelmed with the stormy waves of his
indignation; we must go unto Christ, awake him with the importunity of our
prayers, and say in the language of Christ's Disciples, Matthew. c. 8. v. 25.
Lord save us, we perish.

Secondly, A second Corrollary by way of inference:
Then may we from hence deduct and infer, That it is lawful to do good out of
hope of reward; as an incentive of desire and duty, and a spur unto diligence:
An Argument that God propounds and holds forth in the School of Christianity;
Even as prudent Schoolmasters, are wont to train up, and draw on their younger
Scholars, with fair and gentle promises.

-- Pueris dant crustula blandi
Doctores, elementa velint ut discere prima. Horat. Sermon. lib. 1. Satyr. 1.

Licet omnium consensu in operibus temporalibus spectare temporalem finem; ut
pharmacum sumerigratia sanitate. arare, and serere spe fructus percipiendi,
currere vel decertare in stadio causa chrinendae victoriae: Cur igitur non
liceat in opere spirituali, in cursu and certamine ab ipso Deo proposito, ad
pramium supernae vocationis attendere? Bellarm. de Justit. lib. 5. cap. 8.
It is not only lawful but laudable, and in some sort necessary to have respect
and reference to the fruition of our own happiness, as the guerdon of our
labors: even as he that runs in a race, has his eye full fixed on the
Garland: and the most generous soldier in the hottest shock, the most fierce
and fiery encounter, has his thoughts prepossessed and swallowed up, in the
hope of victory; For salvation being the End of our operation, as Saint Peter
speaks of it, 1 Pet. 1.9. Receiving the end of your faith the salvation of your
souls. It must needs be first in intention and efficiency, not by any proper
motion of its own, but only metaphorical of love and desire, whereby it excites
and stirs up the Agent unto work, and gives life and being to each enterprise
and undertaking. It is indeed but a subordinate and inferior end, Finis sub
fine, or rather a means in respect of God, who is the chief and ultimate. Et
tota ratio amandi medium est congruentia cum fine, says the School: yet in as
much as it conduces and leads unto God, as the means unto the last end, and is
the end of our service, though not of God whom we serve; It may well suit and
stand with the single sincerity of a Christians affection, and the integrity of
the obedience, to propound it as the scope of our employment and recompense of
our endeavors. Even as the cunning Archer directs the sight of his eye to the
white or mark, but glances in the second place at the Butt; Thus may a
Christian have salvation in his eye as the Butt whereat he shoots, though he
punctually aims and levels at God as the white: Neither can we fasten our
arrows in the Butt, and participate of salvation, but we must needs hit the
white, and enjoy the beatifical vision and presence of God himself.

True it is, that the blessed Angels and Spirits of just men made perfect in
the Heavens, serve God out of a reverential and servent love, with an ingenuous
and free spirit: and the more we are spiritualized and made heavenly in our
affections, the nearer we approach to their excellence and perfection. Like as
the Elements the nearer the are conjoined unto the Heavens, are so much the
purer in their substance and inclined to their motions; And yet as the Elements
have a double motion, The one ad conservationem sui, The other ad
conservationem universi: even as water descends of its own accord, and yet
violently ascends ad vitandum vacuum, for the eschewing vacuity and emptiness
which is repugnant to the nature of the whole: In like manner the servants of
God have a double inclination for the more general and universal good, which is
the glory of God; and for their private and personal interest, the benefit of
their salvation.

And yet nevertheless this does not justify the Devils challenge and
indictment preferred against Job, Does Job serve God for naught? nor argue them
of a mercenary and Nolite esse sicut servi qui serviunt Domino mercedis ergo;
sed petius estote servis similes qui serviunt Domino, sed non causa mercedis.
Antigonus Sochaeus apud Drusium, Apothegm. page 5.
servile disposition, unless they regard their wages, as the principal or only
motive of their obedience. And as he that abstaius from evil for fear of
punishment Qui tantum timet est inimicus justitia. Aug. Epist. 144.
alone; so he that serves God for hope of reward only, is an enemy of sound
righteousness. Observe we but these two conditions, that we do not reflect upon
our own Blessedness, as the main or only reason of our Duty; Like unto little
children who will hardly be persuaded to pray for their daily Bread, except
they be first allured and invited with the promise of their Breakfast. And then
have we a cloud of Witnesses and Examples to direct and regulate our practice;
For had not Moses respect to the recompense of reward? (...). says the Text,
Heb. 11.26. he looked upon it (as the word signifies) in a curious and
intentive manner, and with the eye of admiration. And did not Saint Paul solace
himself with this assurance, 2 Timothy 4.8. From henceforth is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness. Yea, our blessed Savior himself, a Pattern without
Parallel, and beyond all exception, endured the Cross, and despised the shame,
and that for the joy that was set before him, Heb. 12.2. And thus may we work
out our salvation.

Thirdly, Be we exhorted to take up the duty, A Third Corollary by way of
Exhortation.
and that is to work out our salvation. This is all that God requires by way of
Duty, who sets forth the Kingdom of Heaven Venale habet regnum Deminus, preeium
ipsius labor est. Aug. in Psalm. 93.
to sale, and the price of it is our Labor. If we consider it in the nature,
it is salvation; A freedom from misery. And as it is the greatest misery to
have been once happy, so it is the greatest happiness that is ushered in by a
foregoing misery. Light though sweet and pleasant in it self, becomes more
pleasant and delightful after the blackness of darkness. Health is more welcome
after a lingering and languishing sickness; to have passed from Death to Life,
doubles the nature of the Benefit.

If we look upon it in the Adjunct, it is not a temporary but an eternal
salvation. Duration and continuance commend every thing, as it did the garments
of the Israelites which waxed not old for the space of forty years in the
Wilderness: And if length of Time enhaunces the Honor of a Blessing, much
more eternity: The Apostle takes up a comparison from the example of the
Heathen, and those Isimian games among the Corintoians, and argues a fortiori,
if they, much more we. (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 15. in Matthew. Erubesceo Paula,
Ethnicae comparatione superaris: melior est ancilla Diaboli, quam mea.
Hieronym. Epist. ad Paul.
Know ye not that they which run in a Race, run all. Now they do it, to obtain
a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible. 1 Cor. 9.24, 25. Not a crown of
Laurel, or wreath of Baies, and Flowers, Spectaculi and spiraculi res, good
only for sight and sent, yet withal of a fading substance, But (...), as Saint
Peter styles it, 1 Pet. 5, 4. A crown of glory that fades not away. If Glasses,
Beads and Bugles, those transparent and brittle vanities be so much esteemed;
of what price and value is that precious Pearl of life eternal? If men purchase
damnation at so dear a rate, shall they not be at the same or far greater
pains to work out their salvation? Nauseabit ad Antidotum, qui hiavit ad
venenum? Quid gravatum pati nunc homo ex remedio, quod non est tunc gravatus
pati ex vitio? Displices occidi in salutem cui non displicet occidi in
perditionem. Nauseabit ad Antiditum, qui hiavit ad venenum? Tertul Scorp. adv.
Gnosticos, cap. 10.
What shall they kick or strain at the Antidote, who have opened their movths
wide, to swallow down the poison.

Secondly, it is our salvations; and property is the indearment and engagement
of affection. The loadstone of love, and whetstone of courage and resolution:
what is it but property that moves a Nation to sight pro aris and focis, and to
withstand the incursion and inroad of a common enemy, with the hazard and loss
of their own lives? what is it but property that prevails with corporations and
Cities to appear in the maintaining of their charters, and defense of their
local privileges? what is it but property that invites particular and private
persons so earnestly to contend for the securing their estate and substance?
this meum and tuum, is the soul of the lessur world, that animates and informs
it, and affords both life and motion; nay more, it is the soul of religion that
intitles us unto Heaven, and interests us in God himself; toll meum, and toll
deum: Take away mine, and take away God likewise. There is a politic and state
Maxim, and has been as politickly handled of later years, Cicero 3. de
Legibus.
Salus populi suprema lex, the safety of the people is the supreme law; sure I
am that Salus. propria suprema lex, a man's personal safety and salvation is the
supreme law, the highest of all other.

2. The second general part of the Text, with fear and trembling: The manner of
he Duty. With fear and trembling.
betwixt these two there is this difference, Metus internus, tremor externus
est, as Cajetan glosses upon the place. Cajetan in Locum.
Fear is an inward affection of the heart, arising from the apprehension of a
future and imminent evil; trembling is an outward effect of that inward fear;
which causes a concussion and agitation, a quaking and quivering in the body
there is a disease in nature which is known by this name, the palpitation and
trembling of the heart: and herewith God threatens his rebellious people by
way of punishment, Deuteronomy. 28.65. The Lord shall give thee a trembling heart.
This was that mark which God set upon Gain, least any man finding him should
kill him, Genesis 4.15. which was nothing else (as some conceive) but a quotidian
ague of an astonishing and amazing fear, a continual rattling of his bones, and
an uncessant shaking of the several limbs and joints of his whole body; so
that cursed Cain was the first Quaker that we find upon record, and that even
appeared in the world? but besides this natural affection, there is a spiritual
fear which may be distinguished in to two forts and kinds. Two sorts of Fear.


1. A fear of distrust and diffidence. 2. A fear of sollicitous care and
diligence.
First, There is a fear of distrust and difference. A Fea of distrust and
diffidence.
Not of our own power and strength, that holiness and righteousness that is in
us, which is a holy frame and temper of spirit, and disposes it unto perfect
blessedness, and in this sense that of the wise man: is most true, Pro. 28.14.
Happy is that man that fears always a but it is a distrustful fear of the
riches of Gods grace and mercy, the un-sufficiency of Christ's merits, and
plenteousness of redemption: this kind of sear we leave to Popish Justitiuries
and Merit-mongers, those Doctor of doubting, which they press and urgo as
essential to the rupture of faith; and condemn a particular persuasion and
consident assurance under the censure of high presumption. These are the men
that vie merits with Christ, that stand upon their tiptoes, as if they hoped to
reach heaven, and to lay hold upon it with their finger; that challenge it as a
due debt by way of condignity of the intrinsic worth and value of their works,
holding a kind of proportion and equality with the glory that shall be
revealed: and yet when these men come to the way gate, and their souls sit
hovering upon the tip of their tongues, ready to take their flight into another
world; then all merits of Saints and Angels, and the blessed Virgin her self
are laid aside: then Christ comes to be in request and credit with them and no
other prayers drop from their mouths, but such as are directed to him as their
Savior, with a Bone Jesu instead of an Ave Maria, O been Jesu esto mibi Jesus;
O sweet Jesus be thou unto me a Jesus: witness their Cardinal controversor
Beltarmine, who having tugged hard in the traversing of the question and
sweated out many arguments for the support of their idel Dagon, justification
by works; he is at longth enforced to a short retractation, and to draw a
cross line over all that he had wrote at large in defense of it thorough the
compass of five whole books, si.
Bellarm. de Justif. lib. 5. cap. 7. Tertia propositio.
propter incertitudinem propriae justitiae, and periculum manis gloriae,
tutissimum est totam fiduciam in sola Dei benignitate and misericordia
reponere: that in regard of the uncertainty of our own righteousness, and vain
glory; it is the safest course to place our whole trust and confidence in the
alone mercy and benignity of the God of our salvation.

Secondly, A fear of solicitous care and diligence.
an awful reverence of offending God in contracting the guilt of the least sin:
this is the souls scout or sentinel, placed in the heart as a watch tower to
foresee and prevent the assault of danger; the guide of our lives which has a
general influence into all virtues, and into each holy and religious duty; fear
is faiths antidote and preservative, that keeps it from spiritual pride and
presumption: thou stand by faith; be not high minded but fear, Romans 11.20.
It is fear that serves as an allay to qualify and temper our joy, that it
degenerate not into a wanton or wild looseness and dissoluteness: serve the
Lord with Sit timor innocentiae cunos, ut dominus qui in mentes nostras
indulgentiae coelestis allapsu clementer influxit in dnimi obt rectantis
hospitio iusta operatione teneatur. Cyprian. Epist. 2 Dovato. laudo timorem
dili^o verecundiam: timer hominis, dei honor est. Tertul. de paenitent. cap. 7.
fear, and rejoice with trembling, Psalm. 2.12. and it is the grace of fear that
confirms and establishes the Saints in the state of grace, and is given them
to that end as a condition of that everlasting covenant, Jer. 32.40. I will put
my fear in their hearts that they shall not depart from me. And whereas some go
about to evince the apostasy of believers, and to coisclude an a mission or
intercision, and if not a final yet at least a total falling away from God,
from these and such like instructions and admonitions; Let him that thinks he
stands take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor 10.13. And work out your salvation with
fear and trembling. This caution and fear here spoken of, is not opposed to
religion, considence or to the certainty of faith, but to carnal security and
presumption; and is joined with an assurance that God will work both the will
and the deed of his good pleasure: as it follows in the next verse, and is
annexed as a reason of the duty. For how can our taking heed of falling infer a
necessity of falling away? which is ordained of God as a (...). Aristor.
sovereign means to prevent it; And if we do these things we shall never fall,
2 Pet. 1.1. how can the fear of watchfulness, and diligence render them less
watchful and diligent in the work of the Lord? and albeit that of St. Cyprian
has its truth Cyprian. Epist. 2. Doato.
accepta securitas indiligentam parit: security being once conferred breeds a
lither kind of laziness or supine sluggishness: yet is this verified only of
Aiunt quidam se salvo m^tu and fide peccure; hoc est salva castitate matrimonia
violare, salva pietate parenti venenum temperare; sic ergo and ipsi salva venia
in gebeunam detrudentur, dum salvo metu peccant. Tertul. de Poenit. cap. 5.
carnal security, that makes men retchlesse and negligent, not
spiritualsecurity, which is evermore attended with sedulity and assiduity in
the use of the means, and in giving all diligence to make their calling and
election sure, omnia tuta timet, that is the property of it: it fears what is
most safe.

There are two grounds of this fear and trembling in the work of our salvation;
Two grounds of our fear and nembling.
I mean that of sollicitous fear, and watchful diligence, I shall take them up
as they are laid down by Bellarmine. Bellarm. loco citats.


1. Incertitudo proprie justitiae. 2. Periculum inanis gloriae.
1. The uncertainty of our own righteousness.
for howsoever the gifts and calling of God are without repentance, Romans 11.29.
The foundation of God abides sure, having this seal: the Lord knows who are
his, 2 Timothy 2.19. And they that trust in the Lord, shall be as mount Sion, that
cannot be moved, but abides for ever, Psalm. 125.1. Yet simply considered in
themselves, they are but as a reed shaken with the wind; as Christ speaks of
John the Baptish, and might not only be shaken but even bruised and broken in
pieces, if left to their own liberty. The stoutest and strongest Christians are
but as Samson when his locks were shaven, weak and like unto other men, Judge.
10.17. And as they fall, so should they be uttterly cast down: but that the
Lord upholdeth them with his hand, Psalm. 37.24. And keeps them by his power
thorough faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. Work out your salvation with fear
and trembling; for it is God that works to will and to do of his own good
pleasure; That is the reason which implies the necessity of fear and trembling
in the working out of our salvation; Cajetan. in locum.
quia nec velle nec operari consistit in nostris viribus: says Cajetan upon
the place, because neither will nor doing proceeds from our own power; and we
must therefore fear lest Propterea timendum ac tremendum est, ne Deus subtrahat
operationem qua in vobis haec operatur. Cajet. ibidem.
God should withdraw his graoe and cease to work in us. Add hereunto the
consideration of the might and multitude of our ghostly enemies, in their nume,
nature, and infinite advantages; Principalities, Powers, and spiritual
wickednesses in high places: the thought whereof may justly move us to take up
the speech of Elisha's servant, when he beheld the City compassed with horses
and charets: Alas my master how shall we do? 2 Kin. 6.15. and to confess in
the words of good Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles 20.12. O my God we have no might against
this great company that comes against us: neither know we what to do, but our
eyes are upon thee.

2. The second ground of our fear and trembling, The danger of vainglory.
is the danger of vain glory: why does the Apostle say with fear and trembling.
(says St. Augustine) and not rather with security, if God work both to will
and to do; unless it be in regard of our will, without which we cannot prove
what is that good, and perfect, and acceptable word of God. It may soon come
into man's heart to conceive, that what he does well to be his own work, and to
say with the Prophet David I shall never be moved: therefore he who gave power
to his will turned his face for a while from him, that he who said so might be
troubled; August de natura and gratia contra Pelagium. cap. 17.
quoniam ipsis lest ille tumor sanandus doloribus, because that tumor and
tympany of swelling pride, was to be he healed with the bitter sorrows of a
troubled mind: what is virtue but a medicine, and vice but a wound? and yet we
have so often wounded our selves by our medicine, that God has been fain to
make wounds medicinable, to cure by vice, where virtue has stricken, to suffer
the just man to fall, that being raised he might be taught what power it was
that upheld him standing. The great Apostle St. Paul had a thorn in the flesh a
messenger of Satan sent to buffet him, lest he should be oualted above measure,
2 Cor. 12.7. whereupon St. Austine cries out by way of admiration, O venenum
quod non curatur nisi veneno, caput caedebatur ne caput extolleretur; O the
malignity of that deadly poison, which was not to be cured but by another
poison the head was buffeted, that the head might not be exalted. And herein
lies the difference betwixt pride and other sins, which are ranked and numbered
among vices; whereas pride takes place in good works, even in the best of our
services; and great cause we have (as Luther well advises) to take no less heed
of our duties, then of our sins.

Faith and fear are of the same use in the soul, with the cork and lead in the
silhermans net, both which are joined together, and fastened to each other; the
cork makes the net to float and keeps it from sinking: the lead causes it to
sink downward, and to settle to the bottom; even so the grace of faith is as
(...). Pindarus.
cork unto the soul inabling it to swim above water, in the depthe of greatest
miseries and extremities, by a firm recumbency and a sure reliance upon God;
but as for fear it has the property of lead to lay low and even sink the soul
thorough self-denial, and distrust of its own strength, lest otherwise it
perish by presumption.

Give me leave therefore to draw the Saw back again the same way, The
application.
and to reinforce the foregoing exhortation, by taking up the duty in the Text
entire and whole: work out your salvation with fear and trembling. Let us be
jealous over our hearts with a godly jealousy, as St. Paul was affected to his
Corinthians, and say we of our hearts, as Job speaks of his children, when they
had feasted each other in their several houses: It may be my sons have sinned
and cursed God in their hearts, Job. 1.5. L^^ us fear all our works after Jobs
example, Job: 9.28. So as not to repos^ any trust and con^idence in them and
utterly to renounce all opinion of merit by them and seeing there was no
sacrifice without dung, fear we the wants and weaknesses, the sinful defects
and imperfections, that adhear and cleave to our best actions; say we every one
of us with the devout affection of holy Bernard, Bernard. in Cantic.
Horreo quicquid de meo sum, ut sim meus, abhor we whatsoever it ours, that so
we may be ours; and not so much ours as Gods. This sollicitous and watchful
fear, will not be a means to impain, but improve, not to shake but to
strengthen our security. That which one sometimes told the Senators of Rome,
Ego sic existimabam patres conscripti, uti patrem meum saepe praedicantem
audiveram; qui vesiram amicitiam colerent, multum laberein suscipere, caeterum
ex omnibus maxim tutos esse; As I have often heard my father acknowledge, so
did I ever think: that the friends and favorers of this state, barged
themselves with greatest labor, but no man's condition so safe as theirs; the
same may we a great deal more justly say in this case, our Fathers and
Prophets, yea our Lord and Master have full often spoken, and by long experience
we have found it most true; as many as are retained in this service, Eosmaximum
laborem suscipere, they have taken upon them a laboursome, a toy lesome, a
painful profession, sed omnium maxim titos esse; but no man's security like
their.

If then there be any that propound and move the jaylours question, Act. 16.30.
What must I do to be saved? I shall return no other then St. Paul's answer,
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved; provided always
that we forget not St. Peter's rule, 2 Pet. 1.5. and besides this, giving all
diligence, add to your faith virtue: and that we take along with us St. Paul's
charge to Titus, 3.8. this is a faithful saying, and these things I will that
thou affirm constantly; that they which have believed in God be careful to
maintain good works. This is the duty of every Titus, of each faithful Minister
of Christ to hold forth faith and good works in the course of their public
Ministry: and it is a duty of as high concernment to the private Christian, to
join says and good works in their personal practice. These are the two pillars
of Religion, whereon it relies and rests; like unto Iachin, and Boas, that
supported Solomon's Temple; and are like unto Rachel and Leah which two did
build the house of Israel, Ruth. 4.11. and by both these we must edify and
build up our selves, in the working of our salvation. As therefore holy
Br^^lford cried out frequently in the ears of this Nation; Repent, Repent,
Repent. And that other Martyr, was wont to call upon his followers; Pray Pray,
Pray. So let me bespeak you, I say not with the bare ingemination, but trebling
of the duty, Work, Work, Work. Let us begin, and set upon the work to day, this
present hour and minute I now speak unto you. And let us go on with the work
the next, and the next, yea all the days of our life. And being at the point
of death, let us say with that dying Emperor Severus; Is there yet any more
work to do? Let us not cause the work to cease, till we cease to be any more;
Till we rest from our labors; and our good works follow us; not to the Grave
alone, but to the highest Heaven. I close up all with the repetition of the
context, and what Saint Paul made use of as a Preface, shall serve me instead
of a Conclusion.

Wherefore my Beloved, as ye have always obeyed not as in my presence only,
but now much more in my abfence: Work out your salvation with sear and
trembling.

VNVM NECESSARIVM, OR CHARITY Is ALL in ALL A SERMON Preached before the Mayor,
and Court of Aldermen of the City of Norwich in the Newhall Chapel.

Vnum opus est; id est, unum necessarium est. Non unum, quasi singular opus:
sed opus est. expedit: necessarium est. August. in Evang. secund. Lucam. Sermon.
26. de Martha and Maria. Propterea unus sanabatur in illa Piscina: and quisquis
alius descendebat, non sanabatur: Ergo iste unus, commendat unitatem Ecclesiae.
August. in Evang. secund. Johan. Tractat. 12. LONDON, Printed by T. C. for
Will. Rands at Fleetbridge. 1659.

VNVM NECESS ARIVM, OR CHARITY Is ALL in ALL.
1 COR. 16.14. Let all your things be done with Charity.
A Concise and short Text, a small Ray or Sparkle, The Introduction.
like unto that of a precious pearly or orient, Diamond; but of great price and
value: A drop of Words, and yet a sea of Matter. Tertul. de Orat. cap. 1.
Quantum substringitur verbis, tantum diffunditur sensibus; as T^rtullian
speaks of the Lords Prayer. It is not mord compendious and contracted in form
of speech, then copious in sense and substance. The words are very few in
number, and but five in the original, (...) And may fitly be resembled to Saint
Paul's (...) so, highly commended, 1 Cor. 7.19. In the Church I had rather speak
five words with my understanding, that by my voice I may teach others also,
then five thousand in an unknown tongue. And surely these n^r. (...), the five
words of the Text, being solidly and judiciously handled, might prove more
edifying then five thousand employed upon some other Theme and Subsect. But far
be it from me to presume or promise it in my own behalf. And yet what is
wanting in the sufficiency, and abili^ie^ of the speaker, is abundantly
supplied in the worth and weight of the matter. An argument that commands and
calls for your awakened attention and most serious observation. That what I
preach and press, you may practice, and while I spear of, you may hear with,
charity: therein rendering yourselves exampies of the Apos^es rule even in this
present exercise; Let all your things be done with Charity.

The Apostle Saint Paul spends a whole Chapter, from the beginning of the
thirteenth, to the end, in a large and liberal commendation of the grace of
Charity, describing it in fair and fresh colors, from the several marks and
characters. And it is Saint Chrysostoms earnest request and obtestation of the
Reader, that they would not pass over so lively an image and pourtraicture in a
cursory manner, but exactly consider every line and lineament in so beautiful a
piece, as a most exquisite Picture drawn by the hand and pencil of a Curious
Limner. And here in the words of the Text the Apostle reassumes the same
subject; not like to an unskilful Ridetur Cythar^ dus. chordn qui seirper
oberrat eadem. Har. de art. Poetiea. A double reason of the Precept.
Musician, who by striking double and trebble upon the fume string, is justly
exposed to censure; but as a prudent Physician, he prescribes it as a
Catholicon, a Catholic Medicine, an Universal Receipt and Remedy of all
spiritual Maladies and Diseases.

There is a double reason, why the Apostle is so frequent and importunate in
urging and reinforcing the grace of Charity.

The one respects the Corinthians, Epistle, The first respects the Corinthians.
who were men of an active spirit, a pragmatical and busy headed people; such
as were split asunder into strange Sects and Schisms, into several Rents and
Ruptures in the Body of Religion, and Church Discipline, which should have been
like unto the Now the coat of Christ was without seam, woven from the top
throughout. Joh. 19.23. Desuper Texta, quid significat nisi charttatem, Desuper
Texta Tunica, quid significat nisi unitatem. Aug. in Joh. Tract. 13. Sacramento
vestis and sign declaravit Ecelesiae unitaetem. Cypr. de unit. Eccles. cap. 6.
Coat of Christ, without seam. Every one of you says, I am of Paul, and I of
Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ. Is Christ divided? 1 Cor. 1.12, 13.
Surely not in himself; yet was he divided among them, by means of their
differences and distractions. When ye come together in the Church, I hear there
are differences among you, and I partly believe it, 1 Cor. 11.18. Nor were they
only broken in pieces, and crumbled into Factions and Fractions In Sacris, in
the worship and service of God; but they were of an unquiet and restless
temper, of a litigious and troublesome disposition, and immoderately affected
vain-jangling and wrangling in vita communi, even in civil affairs and
business. Now therefore there is utterly a fault amongst you, that ye go to Law
one with another, 1 Cor. 6.7. So that strife and contention was their proper
and peculiar sin, the Dalilah and darling lust of these Corinthians. And there
could be no Doctrine more appliable to their condition, or snitable to their
necessities, then to hear a Lecture or Lesson of Love and Charity.

The second reason concerns the incomparable worth and excellency of the Duty
it self, The second Reason concerns the duty it self.
as the Morning or Evening Star, or the Moon amidst the lesser Lights. Saint
Paul was wonderfully in love with the Grace of Love, and seems to express and
profess his affection to it, as David did to Jerusalem, Psalm. 137.5, 6. If I
forget thee, let my right hand forget her cunning. If I do not remember thee,
let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth. (...). He could not forget to
give the Corinthians some brief intimation and hint of Charity, both in the
beginning and end of this Epistle. That is never too much spoken of, which is
never learnt enough.

The Text contains in it an Apostolical Precept and injunction, consisting of
these two specialities.

1. The Duty commended and commanded, and that is Charity. 2. The parts of the
Text, two.
The extent of the Duty, in reference to the Object or Subject of it, (...),
Let all your things be done with charity.
I begin with the Duty laid down in the end, and the very last word of the
verse, Charity.

Charity is one of the three Theological Virtues, The first part. The Duty
commanded, Charity.
says Altisiodorensis, and are famously known to be these, Faith, Hope, and
Charity: That is a supernatural and infused Habit, a sanctifying and saving
Grace, which comprizeth and comprehends the love of God, and of our
Neighbor, as the several Branches. Not to speak any thing of the love of God,
which is no part of the Apostles charge, nor any way falls within the verge and
compass of the Text. And as for the love of men, it is either that general
affection that belongs unto men as men, the not hiding of our selves from our
own flesh, as the Prophet Isaiah phraseth it, Isa. 58.7. such as partake and
share with us in the common interest of Humanity; or else it is that special
degree of Christian love, that we own and exereise to our Brothren, either by a
visible and external profession of Religion, or a vital participation of the
spirit of Grace and Holiness. Which are thus distinguished by Saint Peter,
under several names and titles, Brotherly kindness and charity, 2 Pet. 1.7. And
in the vulgar and common acception of the word, Charity is that part of love
that is exhibited to men in misery and distress, and is all one with mercy and
compassion. And herein the good Samaritan, who bound up the wounds and poured
in oil and wine, approved himself a Neighbor to him that fell among Thieves;
which was ingenuously acknowledged by the Lawyer in answer to our Saviors
question, and by him propounded as a pattern for our imitation, Go and do thou
likewise, Luke 10.37.

Saint Paul compares the three Theological Virtues together, and gives the
right hand of Fellowship unto Charity, 1 Cor. 13.13. And now abides Faith,
Hope, and Charity: these three, (...), but the greater, or greatest of these is
Charity. The comparative degree being put for the superlative; and yet not
simply and absolutely the greatest, but in some respects, in the several acts
and offices, and those two in number.

1. The Latitude and breadth. 2. The Longitude and length of it.
1. The Extent. 2. The duration and continuance.
You have them both recorded in the former part of the Chapter. Charity greater
then Faith and Hope, in two respects.


First, First, in the latitude, or breadth of it.
This the Apostle makes good by a particular enumeration, and rehearsal of
fifteen several Attributes and Properties, partly Negative, in the careful
eschewing and avoidance of whatsoever is offensive and hurtful; And partly
Affirmative, in the sollicitous procuring and promoting the good of our
brethren, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7.

For whereas Faith is the receiving band of the soul, which apprehends and
applies Grace offered, and is narrow handed and close listed, and will in no
case part with what it has formerly laid hold on, and seized to its own use;
The operation whereof is wholly terminated in a man's own person for his private
benefit and advantage: Have thou Faith, have it with thy self, Romans 14.22.
Charity is a communicating and giving hand, and that wide and open, in
distributing to the necessities of others, Hoc habet, quodcunque dedit.

Accounting and reckoning that only as her own possession, which it has
disbursed and expended. Her wants are her wealth, and her losses her greatest
gains. Charity is kind, 1 Cor. 13.4. not to those only that are nearly related
and allied, but even unto strangers, and professed enemies; like unto a
sparkling fire, which heats and warms the bystanders, and the flames likewise
reach unto those of remote distance. And being a common good, it is so much the
more excellent. There is the same difference betwixt Faith and Charity, that is
betwixt the Root and Branches. Faith is as the root of the tree, that attracts
and sucks in the juice of the earth, to conserve and preserve the life of it:
But charity is as the boughs and branches, down laden with plenty of ripe
fruit, which stretch out, and as it were, spread forth their arms to as many as
are willing to take the pains to pluck and gather them.

Secondly, Secondly in the longitude and length of it.
(...), 1 Cor. 13.8. charity never fails, neither in this life, nor in that
which is to come. It is but a Popish gloss of Caietan upon the place. Take heed
when you read these words, that you fall not into that error, Charitatem semel
habitam nunquam amitti. Charitas quantum est exparte temporis nescit casum.
Caiet. in locum.
That charity once bad, cannot be lost. And yet that which he adds is sound and
Orthodox, wherewith he strangles and cuts the throat of what he had formerly
laid down for a sure conclusion: charity knows no loss nor end, in respect of
time. For whereas Faith and Hope shall determine and expire in another world;
Faith being turned into a Vision, the beatifical vision of God; and Hope into
Fruition: yet both Faith and Hope shall be swallowed up of Love, which then
shall be consummate and made perfect. Appetitus inhiantis erit amor fruentis.
August.
The thirsting desire of the soul after happiness shall be then exchanged with
the full fruition, and perfect enjoyment of Love through all eternity.

And hence it was that Henry Nicolas the Founder of the Family of Love, was
wont in a most prodigious and blasphemous manner, to boast among his seduced
Sectaries, Se nimirum Mosi and Christo praepenendum, eo quod Moses spem
docuisset, Christus fidem, ipse vero cbaritatem utraque majorem. Jo. Laetus
Camp. Hist. universal. page 583. Calvin. in Locum.
That he was every way to be preferred before Moses and Christ upon this ground
and reason, That Moses taught the people of Israel the grace of Hope; Christ
the grace of Faith; but he the grace of Love, which is greater then both: And
so pronounced by the definitive sentence of the Apostle, Now abides Faith,
Hope, and Charity, these three, but the greatest of these is Charity.

Nor does this any way allow or privilege the corrupt gloss of the Papists,
that if charity be the greater grace, it must needs have the greater hand and
stroke, and proves more availsome then faith it self in point of justification.
A strained and forced inference, an inconsequential and unconcluding argument:
and it is all one (as Calvin well observed) as if they should reason in this
manner; Therefore the King must till the ground more knowingly then the
Husbandman; and make a neater shoe then the Shoemaker, as being far above
both: therefore a man must ran swifter then a Horse or Dromedary, and bear an
heavier weight and burden then an Elephant, because he surpasses them in worth
and dignity: therefore the glorious Angels must afford a better and brighter
light unto the earth, then either Sun or Moon, as being creatures of greater
excellency. For the force and efficacy of justifying Faith, is not to be
measured by any intrinsic and inherent quality in the nature, but by the
proper place and office of Faith, whereunto it is designed; wherein it has no
coparcener nor corrival. In this respect Faith has the pre-eminence, even as
Charity is the greater in the forementioned parti^ulars, the Breadth, the
Length; the Extent and Continuance.

This is the reason why the spirit of God every where inculcates and inforces
the duty, with a reiterated and a zealous vehemence, (...), Above all things
put on charity, which is the bond of perfection, Colossians 3. verse 14.
Therein resembling it to an outward garment that is put over and covers the
other apparel, that is larger and wider, that is more comely and costly then
the rest; and serves to distinguish the several Orders and Ranks of men,
according to their different capacities and conditions. Such a spiritual
garment is charity to the soul, a proper badge and cognizance of a Christian,
the livery of Christ's Disciples: By this shall all men know that ye are my
disciples, if ye have love one to another, Ioh. 13.35. And it is not without
cause that the Apostle styles it, the bond of perfectness; it being of the
same use unto other virtues, that the bond is unto the faggot, that holds the
sticks together and keeps them from severing and falling from each other: and
to the Church of God in common, which is the mystical body of Christ, it is in
the place of the nerves and sinnewes in the body natural, which connect and
join the several members, and make them mutually helpful, and serviceable to
each other: this is St. Paul's commendation, Above all things put on Charity.
And that leads me to the second speciality, that was promised, the extent of
the duty in reference to the object (...) let all your things be done with
Charity.

Every sacrifice shall be salted with salt, such a salt is Christian charity,
which must season every sacrifice and so make it well pleasing and acceptable
unto God, The second speciality. The extent of the Duty all your things.
and beneficial and profitable unto men: charity is a spiritual leaven, which
affords taste and savor to the whole mass of dough, that it may prove toothsome
to the palate, and wholesome, and nourishable to the body. Charity is the soul
of religion, and like to the soul in the body, it is Tota in toto, and tota in
quelibet part, and is well translated by the Apostle in the words of the Text,
Let all your things be done with charity. And would you know the comprehension
of this (...), and now far the All things extend and reach: you may have them
explicated and enlarged in a foursold consideration.

1. In our diligent enquiries and researches after truth. These all things
enlarged in a fourfold consideration.
2. In passing judgment and censures upon others. 3. In the exercise or
forbearance of our Christian liberty. 4. In all our affairs and business, the
whole series and course of our conversation.
First, First, In our diligent inquiries and researches after truth.
and moderate in all our disputations; (...) Ephesians. 4.15. following the truth,
(as the vulgar Latin renders it) speaking the truth, (as our English
translation reads it) which way soever we turn the words, whether we speak the
truth, or follow the truth, it must be in love. It is good to be zealously
affected always, Gal 4.18. provided we take in the Apostles caution, (...) so
it be a good thing, and regulated in a right manner: there must be light and
heat in the fire of our zeal; the Zelum tuum inflammet charitas, informet
scientia formet constantia. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 20. Zelam tuum lauao modo non
desideretur mansuetudo; vinum and oleum in suo tempore infundendum.
Evangelistam non tyrannuum legislatorem praestes. Oecolamp. Epist. ad Gul.
Farrel.
light of discretion to direct and guide it, that it prove not blind, like unto
metal in a blind horse; and love to correct and temper the fiery heat, least
instead of warming, it scorch and burn yea utterly destroy and devour: for
though we must earnestly contend for the faith ( as St. Jude exhorts Jude. 3.
(...), like unto wrestlers that tugg and grapple, or champions and combatants
that run for a wager; yet we must herein follow the example of the ancient, of
whom it is well observed; Sanctorum patrum disputationes, non contentiones sed
collationes erant, The disputations of the fathers were brotherly collations
and conferences, not contentions: rational discourses and debates no
uncharitable divisions or separation. We may, yea we must strive and fight
under truths Banner, as being of Incomparabiliter pulchrior est veritas
Christianorum, quam Helena Graecorum. August. Epist. 9. ad Hieron.
incomparable worth and beauty: yet not after the manner of soldiers, b^
laying hold on sword and buckler, and making use of other carnal weapons; we
must subdue and conquer our enemies in opinion, (...), (as Nazianzen Orat 14.
Four rules observable in our enquiries after truth
Nazianzen well advises) Not by force of Arms but by force of Arguments; and
herein we must take along with us, and take up in our practice a four fold rule
and direction.

First, We must heedfully beware of curious speculations, perverse disputings,
nice and needless questions which minister matter of vain jangling, and profane
babbling rather then godly edifying in the faith: like unto Spiders cobwebbs,
(...). That are artificially woven with a very fine thread, but good for nothing
save to catch flies.

1. The first rule to beware of nice and needless questions.
This was the folly and vanity of the Statum lacessunt omuipollentis dei,
calumniosis litibus. Fidem minutis dissecant ambagibus, quoquisque lingua
nequior solvunt ligantque questionum vincula per Syllogismos plectiles. vae
caeptiosis Sycopbantarum Strophis. vae versipelli astutiae. Pradent. (...)
Repreh. Infid.
Schoolmen, who were even sick about questions and strife of words, men of
corrupt minds and destitute of the truth; (as St. Paul speaks of such) who
turned all divinity non in usum, sed in utrum; not into use and practice, but
impertinent queres and questions, and with the Stoics of old; they were more
careful to dispute, then to live. But far be it from us to be like unto them,
to fall in travel with Mountains and to bring forth a silly Mouse, to put our
selves to an anxious toil and trouble about mere toys and trifles; if we must
needs contend, let it be for the This was one of the three things, whereof
Constantius the Arrian Emperor repented before his death, (...). Nazianzen.
Orat. 21. page 389.
faith once delivered to the Saints? if we will be provoking one another, let
it be (as St. Paul advises) Heb. 10.24. (...), a provoking, and (as the word
implies) a whetting to love and to good works: let us make that solemn
prosession of Hierom to Austin Hyeronim August. Epist. 18.
Sit inter nos pura germanitas, and demeeps non question^m sed charitatis
scripta ad nos mittamus; let all English Divines turn pure Germans, and
Christian Ministers prove cosen Germans in this respect; and henceforth
employ their Tongues and Pens, not in Preaching or Printing controverted
questions, but exercise them in commendation and practice of the grace of
charity.

2. The second rule not to pursue victory more then truth.
and not to Christ; we must not pursue victory more then truth, nor captivate
men's judgments to private opinions, rather then to the faith. There cannot be a
nobler conquest then when the truth gets the victory over our selves or others;
this was the firm league and covenant that was jointly agreed on betwixt Hierom
and Austin in the heat and height of their altetercations, Cumque tu viceris,
and ego vincam si meum errorrm intellexero: and e contrario me vincente tu
superas. Hieron. August. Epist. 11. Vt ille mei victor est, ita ego triumphator
erroris. Caecil. Octavio. Minut. Fadix, page 128.
ut inter nos contendentes veritas superet, That truth may be the conqueror;
that whether the one or other win, they may both win by a right understanding
of their errors.

Thirdly, The third Rule. Not to cast dirt and mire, upon the Persons or
Professions of others.
We must seriously refrain and forbear all Qui loquacitatem facundiam
existimet: and impudentiam constantiam deputet: and maledicere singulis,
officium bonae conscientiae judicet. Hermogenes apud Tertull. lib. 1. cap. 1.
reproachsul invectives and defamatory Libels.: Not seeking to enhaunce the
Honor of our own names, by casting dirt and mire upon the faces of others; by
aspersing their persons, or bespattering their professions, no not when we are
most exasperated and provoked. That Text of Saint Peter may well serve as a
Christian Motto: Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing, 1 Pet.
3.9. That of Oecolampadius to Favel in a monitory Epistle of his was good
counsel; Oecolamp. Epist. ad Favellum.
Evangelizatum non maledictum missus es. You are sent not to rail but to
preach. And it was a notable speech of Calvin, having had an ample experience
of the acrimony and sharpness of Luther's style, who was wont to put too much
Gall and Coppress into his Ink, having to deal with them that dissented in
opinion; Saepe dicere solitus sum; etiamsi me Diabolum vocaret, me tamen hoc
illi honoris habiturum, ut insignem Dei servum agnoscam: qui tamen ut pollet
eximiis vi^tutibus, isa magnis vitis laborat. Hanc intemperiem qua vbique
ebullit, utinam froenare studuisset, vehementiam autem, quae illi est ingenita,
u^inam in hosts veritatis semper contulisset, non erian, vibrasset in serves
Dominr. Calvinus Epist. Bullingero. page 383.
though Luther should call me foul fiend and Devil, yet would I most willingly
acknowledge him as a famous instrument of God's glory.

Fourthly, The Fourth Rule. To keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace.
without breaking this bond asunder. And in case of breach, there cannot be a
more honorable work, then to be called A repairer of the breach, Isa. 58.12.
to close the rents and ruptures of the Church of God; and to bind up her wounds
with the good Samaritan. Shall I provoke you to emulation, with the example of
the Primitive Christians, of the first and best Age of the Church; I might put
you in mind of the memorable behavior of Irenaeus, in compounding the
difference betwixt the Eastern and Western Churches, about the precise Time of
the celebration of Easter: who therein showed himself a true Irenaeus: And as
he was (...) Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 23. page 70.
peaceable in his name, so was he a peacemaker in his Disposition, (as Euseb^us
speaks o^ him.) I might tell you of great Saint Basil, and Gregory Nazianzen,
who were (as it were) miraculously raised up in the Church of God, being then
miserably rent and torn asunder, with strange Divisions: Nazianz. vita, page 13.
(...): Like unto Runnels that is poured into Milk, that makes it curdle, and
unites the dispersed and scattered parts together. And let me add hereunto that
Elogium of Calvin, Non aliter in ^cclesias quantumvis remotas affectus, quam si
illas humeris gestaret. Beza, in vita Calvin.
That he had no less tenderness, no less feeling even of remote Churches, then
if he had born them on his own shoulders. And it was a noble Resolution of his;
Ne december quidom maria; That it would not grieve him to sail over ten Seas to
settle an uniform draught of Religion in the Church of God. Seeing therefore we
are compassed about with so great a cloud of Witnesses, let us follow the
direction and guidance of it; as the people of Israel did the motion of the
pillar of the cloud in the Wilderness; and walk in the light of their Example.
Learn we from so many goodly patterns and presidents, not to make the like use
of dissensions and distractions in Religion, that the superstitious Pharisees
did of their Apparel: (...); who made broad their Phylacteries, and enlarged
the borders of their garments, Matthew. 23.5. But let us rather shorten and
lessen them, let us bring them into as straight and a narrow compass as may be,
and as much as lies in us, utterly out them off, by an unfeigned and zealous
endeavor after peace and unity.

Secondly, In passing judgment and censures upon others.
This must not be a precipitate, a headlong, a rash and unjust judgment. Judge
not after the appearance, but judge righteous judgment, John 7.24. where
appearance and righteous are contra-distinguished to each other. And then may
men be said to judge according to appearance (...), (as the word is) when they
judge after the sight of the eyes, which Christ himself did not, lsu. 11.3.
Looking only upon the face and outside, as Samuel did upon Eliabs countenance
and the height of his stature, without prying and piercing into the hidden
cause, and the inward truth of the matter. And herein we must observe a
difference in the judgment of things and persons; as is well noted by Aquinas,
the honor of the Schools; In rerum judicio debet aliquis niti ad hoc ut
interpretetur unumquedque secundum quod est. In judicio ant^ personarum, us
interpretetur in melius. Aquin. 2da. 2da. quest. 60. Artic. 4.
In the judgment of things we must be exact and accurate, and cut a hair if it
were possible, by interpreting them as they are in themselves, without any
addition, or substraction: But in the judgment of persons, there is a greater
latitude and liberty allowed, in rendering them to the better, by commenting
upon the Text with a fair gloss, and setting it off, with a favorable
Interpretation. That man who makes another worse then he is, makes himself
worse then be. And in matters of Fact, of an evil color or consequence, it is
a point of charity to apprehend or suppose them not done at the first: For:
charity, as it believes all things, so it hopoth all things, 1 Cor. 13.7. and
evermore presumes the best, where there is not pregnant and proving Evidence to
the contrary, and favors the suspected or accused party, in cases of an
ambignous or doubtful nature, that they are done out of weakness not
wilfulness, a common passion of humane frailty, not any deliberate resolution
or propensed malice; and not so much out of any propending affection and
inclination to the sin in their own persons, as the importunate solicitation
and instigation of others, and a prevailing power of a sudden and strong
Temptation. And howsoever we may spend our judgment upon wieked and ungodly
men according to their present state and condition, and deal plainly and
roundly with them in an Apostolical manner; Romans 8.13. If ye live after the
flesh ye shall die. If ye live and die in your sins, ye must needs die for your
sins; yet we must not desinitively pronounce any peremptory and damnatory
sentence touching their final and last estate. For who art thou that judge
another man's servant? to his own Master he stands or falls, Romans 14.4. This
is an Abortive kind of judgment, that comes before the time; and is justly
dissuaded by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4 5. Therefore judge nothing before the time,
till the Lord come. And for men who were never empannell' d^by God as his Jury,
to come in as a Quest of Life and Death, and to give in a Verdict of Reprobates
and Castawaies: Tertullia. Apolog. cap. 19. de Excemmun.
Summum futuri judicii praejudicium est. A strange kind of Prolepsis and no
less uncharitable then presumptuous preoccupation of the latter Judgment.

Thirdly, In the exercise or for hearance of our Christian Liberty.
It is Saint Paul's advice, 1 Cor. 8.9. Take heed lest by any means this
liberty of yours become a stumbling block to them that are weak. All manner of
offense and scandal, that is given though not taken, be it in things morally
evil, or an indifferent and middle rank, is either in the nature of the thing,
or the intention of the Doer, a spiritual stumbling block laid in the way of
ignorant or doubting Christians, that hinders their going forward in the way of
holiness: as the dead Body of Amasa, stopped the mareh of Joab's Army. Or else it
proves an outward occasion and impulsive cause of their fall into sin: and that
either by stumbling or staggering their judgments, the sadding and perplexing
their spirits, the intangling and puzling their consciences with doubts and
scruples, and the utter ruin and overthrow of the whole man. This the Apostle
exemplifies by instancing in meats and drinks; which are both clean in
themselves, and in the judgment of those that are sufficiently instructed and
informed touching the nature and use of them; but prove unclean unto those that
through ignorance or error misapprehend them to be such; and yet partake of
them, being encouraged and emboldened by their examples, who out of
supercilious scorn, or the ralliness of indiscretion at the best, adventure on
them in their fight and presence, to the open violation of Christian charity.
That is Saint Paul's resolution in the case. Romans 14.15. But if thy brother be
grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not charitably. Destroy not him with
thy meat, for whom Christ died.

For Actions of this nature in the use of things indifferent, must be ordered
and measured by a double Rule. Two Rules in the use of our Christian liberty.


1. (...). 2. (...).
1. Duty. 2. Decorum.
1. Lawfullness. 2. Expediency.
1. Necessity. 2. And edification.
And there must be regard had not only to the strength of our own knowledge,
and the steadfastness of our persuasion, but a tender respect shown to the
infirmity and weakness of others. An arrogant knowledge may swell our spirits
and make us carry our heads on high; but it is an humble charity, that must
cause us to submit and stoop; to the necessities and advantagos of our
Brethren. This is the excellency of Charity above that of Knowledge in the
different effect of it, 1 Cor. 8.1. Knowledge puffs up, but charity edifieth.

Fourthly, In all our affairs and business.
in the whole series and course of our civil conversations. Many are the works
of charity in order to our converse and commerce with men; And should I treat
of them at large and in particular, yet might you justly affirm even after the
enumeration and rehearsal, what the Queen of Sheba sometimes spoke touching the
report of Solomon 's wisdom; the half was not told us. I shall therefore bind
up an handful of gleannings, or rather some few Eurs out of a large and wide
Field; And reduce these works of charity, to four Heads. Four works of charity,
in the course of our civil conversation.


1. The concealing and hiding the natural infirmities, or moral and sinful
imperfections of others. 2. A Christian (...), and meek-spirited condescension
to those that are beneath us, for the avoiding of superfluous quarrels and
contentions, and for the procuring and promoting of peace and unity. 3. A
liberal communicating and distributing with a free heart and open hand to the
necessities of our brethren. 4. The exercise of benevolence and beneficence, to
such as are most alienated and estranged from us; the persons of professed
enemies.
1. The first work of charity; The concealing of natural or moral imperfection
of others.
or moral and sinful imperfections of others: this is the proper and immediate
effect of it, and is laid down by St. Peter as the Basis and groundwork of his
exhortation, 1 Pet. 4.8. (...), Above all things have fervent Charity among
your selves: for charity shall cover a multitude of sins; not that charity
covers our sins in the sight of God, or hides them from the all-seeing Eye of
his Vindictive and Avenging justice, which nothing else can do, but the
glorious Robe of Christ's unspotted and perfect righteousness imputed unto us,
for the remission and covering of sin, which are both one in David's account;
Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is
covered: but as for our righteousness, and charity which is a part of it,
Pallium breve est, it is a very short cloak, and mantle, that will not reach
down to the Ankles, and palliate the spirtual nakedness of the soul; and yet
nevertheless charity covers the sins of others by not divulging and spreading
them abroad; not lending an open and listening ear to reports and rumors, that
are dispersed and scattered by others; by denying, defending, justifiing,
excusing, extenuating, qualifying what soever is capable of a candid and a
courteous construction, and so far as it is compatible and consistent with the
rule of charity. Like unto Shem and Japhet, that took a garment and laid it
upon their shoulders, and went backward and covered the nakedness of their
Father, Genesis 9.23. or as the Emperor Constantine, who in case of detecting the
miscarriage of an Ecclesiastical person, full sore against his will, he would
Se^paludamento obtecturum scelerarum faciuus, ne forte cui cernentium illud
visum noceret. Theodoritus Hist. lib. 1. cap. 11.
(...), says the Historian, and taking the royal Robe from his own back, cast
it upon his fault and folly. Such a cloak is that of charity, a wide and side
cloak, and (as St. Peter speaks of it) covers a multitude of sins: there cannot
be a more demonstrative argument and evidence of our love then this, and if we
will credit the wise man Solomon, he who covers transgression, seeks love,
Prove. 17.9.

2. The second work of charity. A meek spirited, condescension to those that
are below us.
for the better avoiding of unnecessary quarrels and contentions, and for the
procuring and preserving of Peace and Amity: a notable example whereof we have
in the Patriarch Abraham, who though he was Uncle to Lot, and every way his
superior in age and dignity; yet does he leave it to his liberty, for the
settling his abode, and for the choice of his habitation: Is not the whole land
before thee? separate thy self I pray thee from me: If thou will take the left
hand, I will go to the right: or if thou depart to the right hand, then will I
go to the left, Genesis 13.9. And that which moved him to yield so far, and stoop
so low; was a sollicitous care to prevent, and cut off all occasion of strife,
that sounded ill in the ears of the Gananite and Perezzite, that then dwelt in
the land. And Abraham said to Lot; let there be no strife betwixt me and thee,
and betwixt my Herdmen, and thy Herdmen; for we are brethren, v. 8. thus does
Abraham conjure his Nephew Lot with a charm of love and charity. And the
Apostle St Paul severely reproves and taxes this spirit of debate and
division, in the many headed Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.7. Now there is uttterly a
fault among you, because ye go to law one with another; why do ye not suffer
wrong? why do ye not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? this was the
(...) the spiritual impotency and infirmity of their dispositions, that they
did not voluntarily relinquish, and in some measure recede from their own
right, thereby to piece and flitch up differences out of a zealous desire and
endeavor after brotherly love and concord. This was very remarkable and signal
in Gregory Nazianzen, who when the Council of Constantinople was split in two
about the choice of a Bishop; he took his leave both of the Council and of his
Bishopric with this farewell speech, (...). Gregor. Naz. vita.
If I be the cause of this dissension, I am not better then the Prophet Jonas:
cast me forth into the sea, so shall the sea be calm unto you; only remember
that of Zachary, love the truth and peace.

3. The third work of charity is a liberal communicating, and distributing with
a free heart, and an open hand, to the necessities of our brethren, who so
has this worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and shuts up his
bowels of compassion from him, ^how dwells the love of God in him, The third
Work of Charity. A free distributing to the necessity of our Brethren.
1 Ioh. 3.17. and then do men shut their bowels of compassion, when they shut
their hands, and are close fisted; and in so doing how dwells the love of God
in them? and the Apostles interrogation has in it the force of a vehement
negation; that there is no love at all.

It is a gross yet common error of the Papists, to confound good works in the
general, with works of charity and liberality: as if the part, and the whole,
were all one, and there were no other works besides: and yet almsdeeds are
good works; good in their kind and nature, Good and profitable unto men, Titus,
3.8. And much more profitable unto our selves: for howsoever works of charity,
are not either efficient or meritorius causes, entitling or interessing us in
the Kingdom of Heaven; which descends upon us as an inheritance provided by
our Father from all Eternity, and purchased in the fullness of time by the blood
of Christ: Yet are they a necessary condition, and an effectual means of our
entrance, and actual possession of that Kingdom; the rule and measure of
Christ's award in pronouncing and passing that definitive sentence, at the great
and general judgment of the latter day, Mat. 25.34, 35, 36. Come ye blessed
children of my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning
of the world. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye
gave me drink: I was a stranger. and ye took me in: naked and ye clothed me: I
was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Thus will
Christ entertain and welcome men into his Kingdom at the day of his appearance.
And that is the reason of Saint Paul's charge to Timothy, Why those that are
rich in this world, should be rich in good works; Ready to distribute, willing
to communicate: Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation, against
the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19.

4. The fourth Work of Charity. The doing good to our Enemies.
to such as are most alienated and estranged from us, the person of professed
Enemies. And that whether enemies in Opinion, Affection, Action; we must
according to our Saviors counsel, Love, Bless, Pray, Do good to them, and by
all means possible intend and further their temporal, and much more their
eternal welfare. This is the Genius of the Gospel; the discriminating character
of Christianity, from all other professions and all Religions. Amicos diligere
est omnium, inimicos autem solorum Christianorum. Tertul. ad Scapulam, cap. 1.
For men to love their Friends is common to all: but to love their Enemies is
proper and peculiar to Christians. And herein must we express and evidence our
charity to enemies, by an unfeigned earnest desire of their conversion to the
unity of faith and love. If that a member be dissected and out off from the
society of (...). Chrysostom. (...).
the Body, (...); we forthwith carefully closs and bind it up, and use the best
means of art and skill to incorporate it with the(c) fellows, (...). It is St.
Chrysostom's comparison. Even so should all our attempts and endeavors aim and
level at this main project and design, The Application, in a threefold
Consectary and Inference.
to reunite and combine our most enraged and implacable Enemies in the bond of
Christian communion and Brotherly fellowship, from which they are severed and
divided for want of Charity.

1. Paul's Aphorism sound Divinity? Let all your things be done with charity?
The First affording matter of Grief and Sorrow.
That which we may from hence observe in the first place, is matter of grief
and sorrow. Private grief and public sorrow; A copious Theme and subject,
large enough to make up a full volume of the same Argument with the Roll of
Ezechiel' s prophecy that was written within and without, with lamentation, and
mourning, and woe. And just cause there is now if ever, for every man in his
own person, to renew and take up that melting desire of the pathetical Prophet;
Jer. 2.1. O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I
may weep day and night, for the want of this grace and charity. Oh Charity, the
map and mirror of Excellency, the glory of graces, the bond of peace the bond
of perfectness, the desire and delight of Angels, the lively image and
portraicture of God himself? which is everywhere styled, The peace of God, and
the God of peace; Nazianz. Orat. 14. page 214.
(...), says Nazianzen. Which is of God, and is God. For God is love, 1 John
4.8. Not only causally in us, but formally in himself, though not as an
Affection, but as his Nature. Oh thou highly beloved and lovely Love, the
fairest among virtues, Beautiful as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem? What is
become of thee? where do thou abide and dwell? Have thou quite left this
habitable world, and art ascended and gone up to Heaven? there to enjoy the
sight of Gods blessed Face, and to repose and rest thy self in his Bosom from
whence thou first came? Nazianz: Orat. 14. page 214.
(...). It is the passionate complaint of Gregory Nazianzen.

O dear and precious peace? a Grace that is generally commended and cried up by
all, but observed and practiced by a very few; Where have thou forsaken us for
so long time? And when, oh when will thou return unto us? oh Christian Religion
the clear fountain of peace and union, How do thy distractions turn thee into a
puddle of quarrels and contentions? How are thy wells become Esek and Sitnah;
thy waters Massah and Meribah; that were once another Siloe flowing in a still
and gentle current. Thy sacred Scripture is made (...): Thy Blessed Sacrament
(...). The cup of Blessing, a cup of controversy. The means of our spiritual
communion, an occasion of disunion and separation. The Lord's Supper purposely
ordained by our Blessed Savior to conjoin our affections, has disjoined our
judgments: and is to be feared lest our long quarrels, about the manner of
Christ's Presence, cause the matter of his Absence, for the want of our charity
to receive him. It is our Saviors prophecy and prediction of the last times,
Matthew. 24.12. And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax
cold: That malice shall turn and charity frieze every day more and more. The
decay of natural heat in the Body is an inseparable concomitant and companion
of old age: and the want of Christian charity, the spiritual heat of the Soul,
is an infallible mark and token of the last and worst Age of the World. Herein
resembling that of David, who was grown old and cold; And they covered him with
clothes, but he gat no heat, 1 Kings 1.1. And what is that a bundance of
iniquity foretold by Christ? whereunto may we refer those swarms of suits and
quarrels, excess of strife and contention; those wild distempers, and wide
distractions, not only in civil matters, but even in point of Religion? Gerson
de praecept. Decal. cap. 8.
Where, in a penniworth of strife, there is not half a penniworth of love, (as
Gerson complains in his time) Whereunto (I say) may we impute them as the true
and proper cause? but that the love of many, very many is grown cold: yea, not
only cold but dead. And as Martha spoke concerning Lazarus, whom Christ came to
recover and raise out of his grave, John 11.21. Lord if thou had been here,
my brother had not been dead; So certainly if the grace of charity had been
present, and the peace of God ruled in men's hearts, those deformed and misshapen
Monsters, of all kind of Sects and Schisms, had not so much infected and
infested the Church of God: All which have had their first Rise, growth and
continuance from the want of Charity* which has been utterly lost of later
years, in our unkind differences, unbrotherly discord and dissension. Na^ianz,
Carm.
(...),
(...).
As Nazianzen warbles it out sweetly. That fierce and fiery zeal of some; a
zeal of God but not according to knowledge, as Saint Paul testifies of the
Jews, has not only strained and stretched, but loosed and cracked all the
strings of Love, and utterly marred the melody and harmony of Christian
concord, and left us no more of it then the bare Name and Title. And as the
Turkish Emperor being some years since prevailed on by our Ambassador to hear
some of our English Music, from which, (as from other Liberal Sciences) both
he and his Nation, were naturally averse and abhorrent; It is so happened that
the Musicians were so long in tuning their Instruments, that the Great Turk
distasting their tediousness, went away in discontent before their music
begun: Even so may it probably be presumed, that the difference and dissensions
betwixt christian Churches, (being so long in reconciling their Discords) will
breed in Pagans such a disrelish of our Religion, as that they will not be
easily invited to attend and give car unto it. This is it that renders the
Reformed religion, an Object of shame and scorn, that makes it a common
Byword, and a parable of reproach. Vestem persecutores non consciderunt
Christiani Ecclesiam dividuet August in Evang. Johan. Tract. 13.
This is it that exposes it as matter of offense and scandal to her dearest
Friends, and an hissing astonishment and amazement to her deadly Enemies; that
a foreign for cannot wish us a greater mischief, or themselves a grcater
advantage, then Domestical dissensions. And every subdivision in cause of the
Religion (as the Author of the Council of Trent well observes) is a strong
weapon in the hand of an Adversary: And encouraged the igra^th Turk to let fall
that politic, but sad story; Richterus Axiom. Polit. page 866.
That his fingers would sooner be all one length, then Protestant Princes of
one mind. And as for Solomon the Great, one of that rank and number, he proved
a truer Prophet of the dismembered and disjoined condition of Christendom, then
his false Prophet Mahomet; (...). Naz. Orat. 1. de Pace. Scissura domestica
turbat Rem populi, tituatque foris, quod dissidet vitus. Prudent.
Christianorum accasus intestinis disidiis corroboratur, The declining and
utter downfall of Christians is occasioned and caused by their intestine broils
and quarrels; Their dissensions portend their dissolution. This is a
Lamentation and shall be for a Lamentation.

Secondly, A second consectary affording matter o just reproof Two sorts of men
reprovable.
as notoriously violate this Apostolical Maxim, and offend against Truth and
Charity. I shall range them into two Files or Ranks.

The professed Papist.
The professed Protestant.
The first sort that offend against the rule of charity are professed Papists,
speaking lies in hypocrisy (as Saint Paul prophesies of them) doctrinal,
practical lies; Who have taught their tongues to utter falsehood, and may be
condemned out of their own mouths, with the evil servant in the Parable. For as
the Testimony of an enemy in point of justification, is a strong evidence and
presumption of Truth: So in matter of accusation an enemies tongue is no
slander; And strong affirmations are but weak proofs. If it were enough to
accuse one another, who then should be innocent? Sure I am, that if the
Protestant party should be tried at the Bar of the Papists, They would be
condemned when they are judged; and found guilty of Heresy, Blasphemy, or if
there be any thing more criminal, or capital in the nature. Hear them speak in
their own language, Protestants articulum omnin nullum tenent symboli
Apostolici. Andr. Iurgervicius, lib. Tet. Evang. quinti professores. Calvini
Pseudo-Evangelium, Alcorano esse in nullo melius, in multis tetrius and
flagitiosius. Decan. Gifford, Praef. in lib. D. Reynoldi Wrights Articles.
Artio.
What should I tell you of Protestants, Atheism set forth by Possevine, and
William Reynolds Calvino Tureisme approved and prefaced by Dean Gifford. Books
so entitled and commended to the Christian world under those names: The
Protestants have no Faith, no Religion, no Christ; They are the words of our
Country man Wright in his Articles. Let Preston and Coster and Campian bring up
the rear, and charge through and through far more furiously and desperately
then the former: Their Religion is error, themselves Heretics, their end
destruction: one Heaven cannot hold them and us hereafter, nor one Church now.
That if we be not damned; they will be damned for us. This is the charity of
the Papists. And it would be no breach of charity to apply Jacobs imprecation
against Simeon and Levi, Brethren in evil, Genesis 49.7. Cursed be them anger for
it was fierce, and their wrath for it was cruel. And I will pray yet against
their wickedness.

A second sort that offend against the rule of Charity are professing
Protestants, Professing protestants.
and those of both sides and parties, the Lutheran and the Calvinist; but
especially the Lutheran. And albeit they are distinguished into Rigidi and
molles Lutherani, Rigid and gentle Lutherans; yet for the generality and
greater part, they are Esaus, and Edoms, red and hairy all over like a garment,
and are as rough and rugged in their dispositions, as he was hairy in his body.
Such is the bitterness of spirit, and acrimony and sharpness of style, that
possesses and transports some of them: that Isaiahs Prophecy seems to be
verified and fulfilled in a spiritual sense, Isa. 9.20, 21, 22. No man shall
spare his brother; they shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm. Manasseh,
Ephraim; and Ephraim Manasseh. The Lutheran against the Calvinist, and the
Calvinist against the Lutheran; and that with such animosities and heats of
Passion, that they A Calviniana fraeternitate libera nos Demine. Lutheranus
quidam apud Prolaeum. Fasc. cap. 1. q. 7.
pray against the brotherhood of the Calvinists. And if Adam Contzen the
Jesuit may be believed, and an enemy deposes as a legal witness.) Si quisquam
Lutheranorum libros erislicos contra Calvinianos, vel illerum centra Lutheranos
legere velit; non hominum in h^mines invectivas esse, sed Daemonum contra
Daemonas furores and rugitus sibi persuad ebit. Adam. Contr. Polit. lib. 2.
cap. 19. sect. 6.
Whosoever will spare so much time, as to peruse and turn over the Polemical
Writings of Lutherans against Calvinists, or Calvinists against Lutherans; he
will not conceive them as the invectives of men, but the rage and roarings of
Devils. This is the charity of professing Protestants.

Nor can we of this Church and Nation be acquitted and discharged from being
guilty of breach of charity; And there are so many faulty in this kind, that I
may say of them as Leah at the birth of Gad, A Troop or company comes: Lo a
multitude of all sorts and kinds. I shall instance only in these two. Two
sorts of professing protestants.


1. The hotheaded Pastor. 2. The giddy-headed People.
The first sort who are guilty of the breach of charity, The hotheaded Pastor.
who neglecting the well tempered gravity, and Mediis consiliis vel Author, vel
Approbator semper Bucerus. Calvin. Epist. Bu^ero. page 81.
meek spirited moderation, that so well becomes the Ministers of Christ in the
dispensation of the Gospel, are every way more indulgent to their natural
passion of sudden anger, the boiling of hot blood about the heart, then
affected with true zeal; they rather scald then warm men's consciences; and in
stead of a cutting reproof of men's corruptions, they fall foul upon there persons

These men instruct the people, as Gideon taught the men of Succoth, with
thorns and briars, Judge. 8.16. by pricking and scratching, by rending and
tearing, and by drawing blood of the Hearers. The Pulpit, while they are in it,
is nothing but thunder and lightning, all in a burning flame, like mount Sinai,
when the Law was given upon it; Or rather like mount Aetna, that breaths forth
Fire and Brimstone, to the a^tonishment and annoyance of such as are afar off,
and the utter endangering, and swallowing up of those that draw near. All their
Sermons are sharp Satyrs, fierce Philippicks, violent Declamations, and are
seemingly used to evacuate and empty spleen, to vent and void choler, in that
they abound and run over with Gall and bitterness, reproachful and reviling
speechs. The old Donatists are long since dead; yet do they seem to live in
this generation. And what Optatus in his time affirmed of the one, may fitly be
applied to the other: Nullus vestrum est qui non convitia nostra suis
tractatibus misceat. Lectiones Dominicas incipitis, and Tractatus vestros ad
nostras injurias explicatis; profertis Evangegelium facitis absenti Fratri
convitium: Auditorum animos: infigitis odia, inimicitias fuadendo, docendo
suadetis. Opt. cont: Parm. l. 4.
There is none of you, but inserts and interlaces, the personal disgrace of
others with your own works and writings: you begin the reading of the word of
God, and expound it in our wrongs and injuries; you take a Text out of the
Gospel, and comment upon it with railing; you in til hatred into the minds of
your Hearers; you persuade Hatred, yea you persuade by your teaching. Such were
the uncharitable usages of the old Donatists; and one egg is not more like
another, then our actions resembles theirs.

2. The giddy-headed people.
are the giddy-headed people; unstable as water, as Jacob said of his first
born Reuben, Genesis 49.4, And they have this property of water, that they are
very hardly contained within their own terms; but most easily within the bounds
of another substance: who schismatically divide and cut off themselves from the
unity of the Church, and gather separate Churches apart by themselves, and so
set up Church against Church, and Altar against Altar, with the old Donatists.
An evil as ancient as the Apostolic times, and timously forewarned and
forbidden by St. Paul, Heb. 10.24, 25. Not forsaking the assembling of our
selves together: and then may men be said to forsake the assembling themselves
together, when they withdraw and separate from Christian communion, and
fellowship in doctrine; breaking of bread, and prayers, Act. 2.42. which are so
many essential parts of it, and wherein as to the public exercise, it consists
and stands; as the manner of some is, and unmannerly manner, and that taken up
in St. Paul's days. And let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to
good works: as it is in the foregoing verse, whereupon this is inferred: so
that to be friends and favorers of a separation, is by the Apostles argument,
to be enemies to love, and to good works: and then are our works good when they
are well done; and they cannot be well done in schisms and faction, to gratify
and please a party, to support and uphold a private interest. And would we have
our works well pleasing and acceptable unto God; August in Psalm. 83.
Ponenda sunt ova in nido Ecclesiae, Vade prius reconciliare fratri tuo, and
tunc veniens offer donum tuum Mat. 5.24. Plus deus diligit concordiam nostram
quam sua munera-Author Oper. imperf. in Math.
(as Austin well advises) We must lay our Eggs in the nest of the Church;
thereby to preserve the natural heat and warm'th of the Eggs, and to hatch and
bring forth the Birds. And for this very cause the Chickens of the Heathen.
(that is their virtues) were trodden under foot, in that they were not hatched
in the nest of the Church, (says the same Author:) and so will our works be
abhorred and abandoned, yea utterly refused and rejected at the hands of God,
if if not seasoned with peace and unity, and done in love and charity.

3. Let me bespeak you all in St. Paul's words, Heb. 13.22. I beseech you
brethren, suffer the words of exhortation, and think not ye suffer when ye hear
it: the same Apostle has provided it and brought it to my hand, 1 Cor. 4.1.
(...), follow after charity. Not as St. Peter followed Christ into the high
Priests hall, (...) afar off: but pursue and persecute it, as the word (...)
implies, let us seek it in case we want it, and if it runs from us, let us run
after it with a vehement and earnest violence: and let us herein assure and
settle our belief, that we are as fully and firmly obliged in point of
conscience; to preserve unum ac verum, Pacem ac Fidem, Unity as Verity, and
Peace as well as Truth; as being twin virtues a lovely pair and couple, and
both jointly and equally commended to our Christian care and study, Zach. 8.19.
love the truth and peace. And there will be little difference at the day of
reckoning, whether we have wounded Christ our Head with Heretical opinions, or
rent and torn in pieces, the Church which is his Body with schismatical
distractions; that body which Christ esteemed most dear and precious, who
exposed and offered his natural body unto death, to ransom and redeem his
mystical. I say and protest (says an Ancient) that no man may plead ignorance,
Chrisost. ad Ephesians. Homil. 11;
Ecclesiam scindere non minus peccatum est quam in haerestu incidere: Schism in
the Church is as great a sin, as Heresy: all impiety is the heresy of life,
and want of charity is impiety in a high degree, and so must needs be a great
heresy; and if we would follow after charity, we must follow St. Paul's advice
and counsel elsewhere, Phil. 2.3, 4. Let nothing be done thorough strife or
vainglory, but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better then
themselves. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the
things of others. And therein the Apostle disswades them from several sins,
close couched and laid together in sundry rules or precepts, which are so many
Make-bates and Peace-breakers among men, and they are three in number.

1. Three make-bates, and Peace-breakers among men. The First Peace-breaker,
Perverse and peevish strife.
Perverse, and peevish strife. 2. Supercilious, and scornful pride. 3. Sordid,
and self ended covetousness.
1. The first Makebate, and Peace-breaker, is perverse and peevish strife; as
will easily appear by comparing the rule of the Text, with that of the Glass
and Comment. For if all our things must be done with charity, then let nothing
be done thorough rise and vain glory: there must be no fishing in troubled
waters, no living in the scorching flames of broylos and contention, after the
manner of the Salamander: a duty that concerns all men in the general, but in a
more especial (...), the Ministers of the Gospel who should be peaceable in
their private temper and disposition, and Peacemakers in their place and
office. There is no greater misery or mischief that can befall a Nation, then a
Factious or seditious Clergy: who are the Bellows to blow the coalos of
discord and division; The silver Trumpets to sound the Alarm of War; and the
common Bountefou's and Incondiaries of States and Kingdoms. So that in this
respect, we have great cause to make use of Luthers Letany A Doctore glorioso,
pastore contentioso, and inutilibus questionibus liberet Eclesiam sua^^
Dominus. vita Parei page antepenul.
from a vainglorious Doctor, a contentious Pastor, and unprofitable questions,
good Lord deliver us.

2. is supercilious and scornful pride; The second peace-breaker supercilious
and scornful pride.
which so far disables men from esteeming others better then themselves, that
Diotrephes like they do (...) love to have the pre-eminence, and to surpass
and excel others: what will not pride of spirit attempt and aspire into? what
earboyles and combustions will it not soment and kindle? if we inquire after
the Original cause of Reubens heats, Deborah the Prophetess will resolve us in
her Divine Cantick Judge. 5.15.16. The Divisions of Reuben were great thoughts
of heart. And would we discover and find out the common parent of emulation,
and discord; the wise man indigitates, and points it out unto us, Prove. 13.10.
Only by pride comes contention; this is it that breeds it and brings it up.

3. The third and last Makebate, and Peace-breaker, is Sordid and self ended
covetousness; The third Peace-breaker sordid and self-ended. covetousness.
whereby men do (...), intend and mind their own things, as the mark or white,
whereat they aim and level, and fasten all their arrows. For all differences
and debates arise from an unequal distribution of Frivola illa verba, Meum and
Tuum quae tot bella mundo invexerunt, erant ex sancta illa Ecclesia
exterminata; inhabitaturque non aliter terra quam ab Angelis caelum. Christ. de
Eccl. Arist. Homilia oportet Haereses esse.
mine and thine; it is division of estates, that makes division of affections,
self is the main stickler in every controversy, which renders men resolute and
pertinacious in defense of property, and possession; and that oft-times with a
general disrespect and gross neglect of common safety: Not caring what becoms
of the Ship of Church or State, whether it float or sink, so they may save
themselves in the Cockboat of their private fortunes; and oft-time with that
silly Swain or poor Pesant they set the whole house on fire, to roast their own
Egg.

These are the several Make-bates, and Peace-breakers, that we must take heed
and beware of, as professed enemies unto charity. And give me leave to
reinforce the duty, and to conjure you as St. Paul does his Philippians by
whatsoever is divine or sacred, Phil. 2.1, 2. If therefore there be any
consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit,
if any Bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having
the same love, being of one accord, of one mind. The Conclusion.


I began with a Text out of the first Epistle, and shall make an end with
another out of the second to the Cor. 13.11. and take the same leave of you
that St. Paul. does of them.

Finally, Brethren farewell, be perfect, be of good Comfort, be of one mind:
Live in peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you. Amen.

FINIS.

