TITHES Ended by Christ WITH THE Levitical Priesthood.

And therefore no Maintenance for a Gospel Ministry, nor Lawful for Christians
to Pay or Take under the Dispensation of the GOSPEL.

Being an Answer to two Reviling Pamphlets written against the People of God
called Quakers, because they Refuse to pay Tithes. The one by C. N. a
Presbyterian; and the other by Cress Wheatly, an Episcopal Priest. The said C.
N. and C. W. are herein justly Rebuked for their Enmity and Lies against the
People of God, and their Arguments and Plea for Tithes considered and fully
answered. And the People of God Vindicated in their Refusing to pay Tithes.

By the Servants of the Lord, T. Rudyard and W. Gibson. Also a Postscript by
George Watt.

Also some brief Observations upon some Passages in a Book, Entitled, Christ's
Call to Professors, by W. G.

The Priesthood being changed, there is also a Necessity of the Change of the
Law, Heb. 7. 12. Freely ye have Received, Freely Give, Mat 10. 8. Ho, every one
that thirsts, come ye to the Waters, and he that has no Money, come buy and
eat Milk and Wine, yea, without Money and without Price. Why will ye spend your
Money for that which is not Bread, and your Labor for that which does not
satisfy? Isa. 55. 1, 2. The Spirit and the Bride say, Come, and let him that
hears say, Come; and let him that is a Thirst come; and whosoever will let
him take the Water of Life Freely, Rev. 22. 17. 21. 6. Printed in the Year,
1673.

TO THE Considerate READER.
FRIEND,
THink it not strange, that Contests of this kind should be 'twixt Us and our
Adversaries: I must tell thee, It Is not a Quarrel of Yesterday, but bares date
from men's Apostasy from the true Faith of Jesus. Therefore have we in the
Protestants Book of Martyrs, Fox Acts and Mon. 1 Tom. fol, 618. An. Dom. 1401.
amongst others, the Complaint of a good Christian W. S. on this wise; "Whereas
(says he) Christ's Law bids to minister Spiritual Things Freely to the people;
the Pope with his Law sells for Money after the quantity of the Gift, Blessing
Sacraments, Preaching to the People, as is known amongst them." The Professors
of Religion at this day upon frequent Occasions pride themselves not a little,
yea, loudly b^ast of the faithful Testimonies of these Men, yet blush not
openly to appear in Opposition to their Doctrine, and to stab their Testimonies
by their contrary Practices ( Pharisee-like, Garnishing the Sepulchers of the
Prophets, whom their Fathers wickedly slew) Mat. 23. 29.

The Person who now contends for this Forced Maintenance is one Clement Nedham
of Saxelby, in or near the Vale of Bevoyr alias Beaver in ^eicester-shire; he is
a Stranger to me; only this I hear of him, that he is of no small Account in
those Parts, having been an eminent Captain in our late Civil Wars, and has his
House Licensed for Presbyters or Independants to preach in. How suitable a Work
it was for him or them to set their hands unto at this day, I leave to the
Judicious to consider.

Had Tithes been his or their Gospel-Maintenance under their present
Nonconformity, 'twould have been Color of Quarrel: Had the old Antipathy
'twixt them and the Conformists been worn out, then to have pleaded for their
Friend, had been tolerable: But without any such Pretense, Cause or
Provocation on our part (Reader) has his Work been to tell our Adversaries, we
are Thieves, Robbers, Liars, Slanderers, and such like; and what Ground he has
for it, let God and Good Men judge. Read his Charge and our Defense, and then
thou wilt know his Mistake and our Innocence. It Is probable thou know our
Sufferings have not been a little in this Cause; weigh but the Circumstances of
the Man, and his Work, and thou will see how much his End is to Incense, when
more he cannot act against us.

Farewell, Thomas Rudyard.
Lumbar-Street London, 4th Month, 1673.
FRIEND,
THy Letter, bearing date from Saxelby, 18 Feb. 1672 directed to thy Neighbors
of Claxton, has been considered: The Matter therein laid down is no new thing,
but thy Manner of Argument rather a Novelty, which in its place I may take
notice of. Thou art pleased to entertain thy Reader with an Account of thy many
Years Observation of the Contests 'twixt th^se called Priests, and those called
Quakers concerning Tithes, the one Demanding, the other Refusing the Payment
thereof; in and for which the former have under-gone bitter Declamations, and
the latter grievous Imprisonments and Sufferings from their Adversaries. Whence
its no hard Matter to conclud thee rather a Stander by, then one interested in
the Quar^el; yet not so far to exclude thy Concern, but to a^knowledg thy
Affections lean to one Party, as the Stress of thy Lines clearly evidence. I am
with many more of o^e mind with thee, That as God will blast all Men's Divised
Services to him (of which number was this of Ty^hes) so also their pretended
(not real) Conscience-Sufferings for him: And the Lord God is evidencing them
in these days, although the Blind see it not; and of this are there many
Witnesses.

But having read thy pretended Serious and Conscientious Concern for Persons,
whose grievous Imprisonments and Suffe^ings (under Pretense at least of
Co^s^ience) as thy own words are) have affected thee with Comp^ssion, I
exp^cted no les^ Effect of such Affections, then a Case of Conscience seriously
Stated, and solidly R^solved, as a fit Medium for the Determination of the
Justness or U^justn^ss of their Testimony, supposing, that under less weighty
Consideration no Ingenious Man would attempt a Resolve of that Great and Old
Case of Contest* 'twixt the holy Martyrs of Jesus and the Popish Prelates in
the Ages and Generations p^st, now revived 'twixt us and their Successors in
Cruelty. In this thou seem noval.

Thou art pleased among many more (in behalf of Tithes) to appear an Advocate
against us; but whether the King, Priest, Pope, Presbyter, etc. have in thy
Sense Right to them, is yet in Resence, but we Thieves and Robbers for taking
and detaining what is not our own; strange severe Judgment. So that from a
pretended Compassionator of our grievous Sufferings, thou pr^sently shows thy
self an open Accuser of the Oppressed; and how Justly, I question not to
manifest in its place.

Thou put this Question, What Right in the People to Tithes? alleging,
That if the People have not Right, 'twill not concern our Consciences, whether
King, Priest, Pope, or who will take them. A strange Assertion; the like to my
Knowledge I never before met withal. What I not concern the Conscience of a
Christian, whether the Tenth of his Labor, Industry, and all he has and enjoys
by the Blessing of God, be given up to the Praise of his Maker, or to the Pope,
Priest, Belial, Devil, who will take them? I do really demand of thee to search
all the Dark and Hellish Traditions of the Jews, that made void the Law of God,
and all the Decretals of Popish Councils and Prelatical Synods since the
Apostasy, and find the like Instance of Atheism. To say, It matters not who has
Right, is begging the Question, that will never be granted. For certainly, if
part of my Strength, Daily Labor, Sweat of my Brows, Yearly Increase of that
Substance, which God makes me Steward of here to his Praise, shall be demanded
of me, it is but Reasonable I should know, who he is, that requires such
Servit^ds? else, wherein I should be God's Freeman, I may be the Devil's Slave.
In my Apprehension it had been most Just and Reasonable, first to have asserted
the Pope, Priests, Presbyter, etc. his Title to the things in demand; and when
their Propriety had been sufficiently demonstrated, it had been early enough to
have insinuated the Quakers Th^eves and Robber^ for refusing to work and labor
under such Tusk-Masters.

But here thou proclaimest to the World a Design to stigmatize others, rather
then to clear the Innocence of thy own Party: so without Breach of Charity
thou wilt incur the censure, a Partial Controvertist.

And now to the Question, What Right have the People to Tythes^ I might answer
by this Question, What Right has any others to them? For certainly the Law
presumes every Man to have a good Right to what he possesses, till his Opposer
Out him by showing a better Title. Therefore have we a common Anglicism, That
of Twelve, Possession is Eleaven Points of the Law. And that Man has good
Right to enjoy the Fruit of his Labors, Strength and Industry, as to those
outward Concerns, wherewith God has blessed him; and to be accomptable to his
Creator is most consonant to the Rule of Holy Scriptures and Right Reason. This
in general; but to thy Particulars.

Thou proposest in thy Plea for Tithes, That all manner of Right and Propriety
must needs be conveyed to Men in or by some of these five Ways, viz.

1. Either Free Gift, or Donation from God or Man to Man. 2. Or Right of
Inheritance from Ancestors. 3. Or Purchase, -- one Man from another. 4. Or
Compact, Bargain or Release 5. Or Possession, or Occupancy.
I shall not oppose thy Distinctions, but grant, that these or such like must
be the Ways, whereby Right ought to be conveyed, and Propriety settled amongst
Men; adding only, that its still absolutely necessary in every of these,

1. As to the Gift, that it be not given to a void End, and so becomes null.

2. That there be a Lawful Heir, that claims by Inheritance.

3. That for a Purchase, Compact or Bargain 'twixt Man and Man there be a Real
Consideration given, and Vender has right to sell.

4. That Right attend the Occupancy or Possession.

Give but these their due Place, and Reason shall be Judge betwixt us, Whether
Pope, Priest, or their Assigns have absolute Right to the things in demand, or
we whom God has made Possessors of them? And truly, if under any of these
reasonable Titles our Adversaries had made their Claim, and we refused to
render Right, it had been color of Censure. But to declaim against a People
for detaining that which no Man claims (for ought appears by thine) is Unjust
Clamor. Bear with me, if I term thy Proprietor No Man. For its a Common
Maxim, Idem est non esse, and non appavere; it is the same, not to be, as not
to appear. And when the Priest, Pope, Presbyter, or any, who will produce a
better Title to Imbondage, then we have to evidence our Freedom, I question
not, but we shall avoid to be justly censured for detaining what is not our own;
But that we, as well as others, shall have all manner of Evil spoke against us
falsely for the sake of our Master, no wise doubt.

And although our Possession be a Plea sufficient against the Decimators Cract
Title to the things in demand; yet to remove all Scruple relating to our Just
Interest, I shall be willing to enter into Examination of what is offered
against us, and descend to the Particulars, as laid down in thy Letter.

1. First, Of the first, viz. Donation of God or Man. Here thou tellest us,
That thou presumest, that we denying them to be a Divine Right to the Clergy
will not so claim them.

Answ. Here I must tell thee, that thou grandly Mistakes us* For I answer, We
claim (as the free Gift of God) our Understanding, Strength, Ability to Labor,
the Product and Increase of the Fruit of our Fields and the Fleece of our
Flocks (out of which our Enemies would extort a Tenth) which we know the Lord
God above gives, and thereof has made us Stewards, requiring us to be faithful,
that when he calls we may render unto him (who is the Giver of all) a Just
Account; And not to be found as Prodigalls wasting our Substance amongst
Harlo^s, but that with all we have and do enjoy we may render unto him the
Praise of all, who is worthy, having laid a holy Constraint upon our Souls not
to put into the Mouths of Pope, Priest, Presbyter, or such like, who are
Enemies unto his Truth: Nor we cannot own those Laws of Pope, Priest, etc. to
be Just that would take away from us what God freely gives unto us, to uphold
their false Worships: So is our Testimony from God against them and their Laws,
although to the Loss of our outward Liberty and Estates, and to the incurring
of such bitter Censures as thy self utters forth against us. And as to Man's
Donation which thou counts to be considered under thy next Head, may be there
taken notice of.

2. What right (say thou) is due to Men by Inheritance from Ancestors.

Say thou to clear our Understanding in this Question it is necessary to
enquire into the Strength or Truth of that common Objection. viz. That Tithes
were originally a forced Payment by Injustice of humane Laws; and that what is
Unjustly taken at first, can never be made Lawful by Duration of Time, or
Possession. For Answer of which Objection thou tellest us, its worthy
Consideration, whether the Objection strikes not more at our Nine parts then at
the Clergy's Tenths of the things in Contest; undertaking to demonstrate it
from the Norman's Conquest of this Nation, by foreign Force, distributing the
Lands to Natives, or others, to hold of him as chief Lord, reserving Rents,
Duties, and Services, then continuing the Tenths to the Clergy, forcing the
Lands in great part from the Owners, gave them to others, of whom we purchased,
alleging further, that Ethelwolph a Saxon Conqueror, four hundred Years
before, conquered this Nation, and enriched the Church* viz. the Clergy, with
Tithes of all Lands, Goods, etc. since which time they have held them without
Force, or not so forced as the other Part of the Conquests.

Answ. How little this makes for thy Party, or against us, will appear upon
Examination. I observe to this second Question, of what Right is due to Men by
Inheritance from Ancestors? thou first offerest this.

1. That common Objection, that Tithes were Originally forced by Injustice of
humane Laws, and that what is unjustly taken at first, can never be made
Lawful by duration of Time or Possession.

2. Endeavors a Solution of it, by alleging, Our Estates were Originally
forced by often Conquests.

3. A Conclusion to thy own Discourse, that Tithes were never so forced. Thief
being the Substance of that Paragraph, lets examine them apart, and in order.

1st. Whether the Strength or Truth of the Objection be removed, that ( in thy
Sense) defends ours, or that Allegation proved and made good which defends our
Adversaries Title?

Answ. 1. I admit, the Objection is full to the Purpose; and clear thy Tithes
from the Strength and Truth thereof, and the Case is altered, from what I have
understood it to be.

2. Thou give us an Historical Discourse of England's often Conquests and
Invasions, particularly by the Norman, who dispossessed a great part of the
Inhabitants of their Lands, which was a Force upon the Inhabitants and a Piece
of Injustice done them, gave much of it to his Vassals or Subjects, of whom we
purchased. Therefore infinuates, we have more Reason to question all ours, then
the Decimat^rs Part; and this thou would have thy Reader take for Solution of
the Objection; Alas! its not thy Dixi, but Reason in others, that must
conclude, on which side the Balance falls? What have thou said that is true,
but would have been granted without such Pains, to write what is otherwise,
might have been spared. Yet all that said little to the End proposed, viz. to
remove the strength or truth of that Objection.

1. I grant, that the Nation was Invaded and Conquered by the Norman.

2. But say thou, He forced the Lands in great part, at least, from the
Owners, and gave to his Vassals.

What thou meanest by [great part at least from the Owners] I acknowledge my
self Ignorant: A strange sort of fraimed Expression! But thy after words would
explain.

Say thou, From these Vassal^ Sales have been made from hand to hand, till
they are come down to you and I.

So by the words [the Lands in great part at least from the Owners] we must
understand in thy sense, All the Lands in England, without Exception. Here I am
sure thou have abused thy Reader; for History speaks no such Matter, many
Families having the Titles of their Land, by which they held them before the
Conquest confirmed unto him, as thou alledgest Tithes were to the Clergy.

Its true, Those who are in Actual War in such Revolutions, are often debarred
of the Enjoyment of their Estates, as late Experience has shown in this
Nation; but that all were Outed their Possessions, nothing less. So upon an
Uncertain, Fictitious and Groundless Supposition thou have drawn that strange
Conclusion.

Yet have not weakened or removed the Objection. For I observe, thou neither
denyest, or wavest the latter part of the Objection; but it yet remains upon
thee, What is unjustly taken at first, can never be made Lawful by Duration of
Time or Possession: but opposest the first part of the Objection by telling us,
that Tithes were never so forced. The Contrary, if proved by us, will evidence,
whether has been Injurious we or thee in this Matter^ and that falls to be
considered under the 3d Head.

Say thou, Tithes were not so forced.

Answ. I have not a little wondered at thy ^xpression, which is no better then
a direct Untruth, by what thy self writest* for in a few Lines after thou
make the Force of our Nine Parts and the Clergy's Tenths so parallel, that I
cannot see the Difference. Say thou, Ethelwolph, King of the Saxons was of
Foreign ^ace, and came in by Conquest, as did the Norman. What then alters
these Cases, that they differ in thy sense, I know not. But let us query a
little.

1. Was Ethelwolph the first Possessor or Planter of this Nation? Nothing less.

2. Does it appear, that Ethelwolph was Peaceably, and without Force possessed
of this Land? Say thou, he Conquered it, as did the Norm^n?

3. Had he an Authority and Jurisdiction over the Minds, Persons,
Understandings, Estates, Labors and Industries of the People, whereby he could
grant and dispose such a Share to one, and such to another, as he pleased?
Unreasonable to believe.

4. Nay, further, Had he these without Force or Violence? No; nor with it.

5. Were the Tenths of all these separate from the People's Nine Parts (as thou
termest them) whereby the Force and Violence of Ethelwolph could not touch
them? Reason denies it. Yet thou say, These were not so forced, I must tell
thee, this is to thy Reader a Ridiculous Riddle, yea, mere Nonsense.

6. But Sixthly, That thou may know the Sacredness of this King's Grant, read
the History of those Times, and 'twill inform, what Condition Ethelwolph was
in, when this Royal Grant was made:

1. When he was under the Horror of Conscience for the Innocent Blood shed by
him.

2. The heavy Pressures of Danish Invasions.

3. The Land under intestine Wars.

Then said Ethelwolph, Promeo Remedi^, Animae and Regni, etc. to remove the
sore Judgments that were upon him and this Land, I give the Tithes of all the
Land unto God and his Servants, as the Phrase then was.

So under these Circumstances of Horror, Wars and Distraction did the Zeal of
this King offer up the People's Just Interest, and Propriety, as a Sacrifice to
his Devotion, and that in the Midnight of Popery.

And if Ethelwolph's Conquest was not as Violent and Forcible, as the No man's
yea m^re, I unde^stand nothing. For, say thou, The Saxon took the whole Land
into his Deme^zn; Which the Normans ^^ver did; so for more Cruel to its
Inhabit^nts, out of which he granted a lenth to the Popish Clergy: If this was
not Force, what is Freedom?

So that the Tenths appear not only to be so forced as our Estates, but under
Instances of more dism^l and (...) C^mplections; so that I see not the least
color of Doubt, but that Tithes were originally a Forced Payment by Justice of
huma^e Laws. So by thy own Showing Duration of ^ime cannot make them Lawful.

Say thou, But admitting it true, that T^thes were forced from the true
Owners of the Lands. It will not concern the present People, you or me, unless
we peruse our Lineal Descent from the Persons, to whom the Injustice was first
done.

Answ. 1. Then it is granted, that the Persons Line (...) Heirs, who have
suffered such Wrong at first have Reason to b^ Righted: Why then, since there is
good Reason to believe, this Nation's Anci^nt Inhabitants have many of their
Right Heirs yet living, why were not they excepted out of that Promiscuous
Censure of thine to be Thieves and Robbers for detaining what possibly might be
their own? Here thou have been Uncharitable.

2. But surely thou can not be Ignorant, that if I purchase an Estate of
another, I have as absolute Right, Interest and Title to have and enjoy all and
every the Rights, Interests and Privilege which the Seller of Right had at the
Time of the Sale, yea, as much as any former Heir or Possessor of the Land had,
has, or ought to have; so I that purchase, am in the state, stead and place of
the Right Heir, and have all that he has, or ought to have. In this Matter
also thy Objection is of no Force.

Say thou, If you or I came in by way of Purchase, since that Injustice
done, had Abatement in the Purchase for the consideration of the Tenths,
therefore but Nine Parts ours; and put a Case of two Fields of an equal
value purchased one Tythable, the other Not, we pay a Rate accordingly.

Answ. 1. Generally thou drawest a positive Conclusion from an uncertain
Effect, which is Falacious Argumentation. Say thou [ If you or I came in by
way of Purchase, etc.] which concludes not, that so we came in, but might be
Heirs Lineally descended; which I shall now let pass, and answer thee in thy
own Sense more particularly.

2. Then 2dly, The Fallacy and Abfurdity of this Position of thine appears thus:

1st, As to the Purchase, We never purchased Nine Parts of Ten, as thou
affirmest, but the Whole, with the Rights, Members and Appertenances thereof.
For if but Nine; why then do not the Decimators take their Tenth themselves. I
demand of thee, if ever thou saw in all thy Observation such a Deed of
Purchase? Yea further, Had there been such a Reserve of the Tenth Part to the
Sellor or Holy Church, as the Pretenders to it termed, thou had had Color of
Exception.

2dly, Consider what Tenth is demanded? Not of the Land, the Soil, or the
Renewing Grass of the Field only, which we purchased; but the Tenth of our
Labor, Industry, Understanding, Corn, Grain, Flocks, Herds, the Produce of
whatever Care and good Husbandry (with the Blessing of God) improves toward a
Livelihood, these were the People's or our's before Pope, Priest or Presbyter
had any footing in them; and these we purchase not of the Seller of the Land.
So that if they have any Right in these, it must be by that old Claim the
Churches Jur^ Divino, as has been their Plea for many Centeries; for our
Labor, Industry, etc. as before we never purchased at the Hands of Pope,
Presbyter, Vassal, or any others. But

3dly, Was this Injustice done our Predecessors? Well then, is it Just to
intail it to their Heirs and Successors forever? Was my Father and Grandfather
oppressed by ill Neighbors, must I therefore undergo the like Bondage, and not
seek a Remedy, because they endured it? That were offering Violence to Reason.

Say^st thou, We had Abatement in the Purchase, therefore it concerns us not to
scruple at the Encumbrance.

Answ. I Will put one (of many Cases) Parallel to this Purpose, then judge of it,
viz. In many Parts of this Nation, particularly in Kent, by reason of the many
frequent Robberies committed on Travelers, whose Relief is to Implead the
particular Hundred or Neighborhood, where such Injustice is done. By reason of
the frequent Suits brought against them their Lands are sold 1, 2. or 3. years
Purchase under the Rate of their Neighbors; Now I appeal to thee, Whether it
be Unreason^ble that the Inhabitants should concern themselves to prevent such
accustomed Robberies, because they or their Predecessors had a former Abatement
in the Purchase? Compare but the Cases, and thou will easily discern the
Complexion of thy own Assertion, viz. That it concerns not us, because we had
Abatement.

The next Argument thou drawest is, That ^e that conveys the Estate to us by
Deed, sells the Estate under such Rents, Duties and Services, as are chargeable
at that time upon it; and we that purchase set our Hands, as Parties, to such
Conveyances, implying our Acceptance of the Lands with all known Encumbrances,
of which Tithes are one

Answ. 1. I ab^^lutely deny, as absurd, that Tithes are Part of the Rents and
Services reserved Purchase, and admire thou should impose that upon thy
Reader, which probably thou must or may know to be clearly otherwise. Read
but the Clause in our Deed of Purchas^, and it will explain it self, viz. To be
holden of the Chief Lord, or Lord of the Fee or Fees of the Premises for the
Rents and Services therefore Due, and of Right Accustomed. Ask but the meanest
Man of Reason, and he will correct thy Understanding, if thou pleadest Ignorance
in this Point.

So that I shall conclude this Head (that Tithes being originally a Forced
Payment by Injustice of Humane Laws, which thou have not evidenced to the
contrary; and that, What is Unjustly taken at first, can never be made Lawful
by Duration of Time or Possession; which thou layest down, and denyest not) and
is certainly true, That whatever our Ancestors were abused in by Popes Bull^,
Tyrannical Impositions, Unreasonable Bondages of Prelatical Decrees, it is
consistant with Reason we should be cased thereof, and is no Plea or Ground for
their Continuance; Right being our Due, not Bondage our Inheritance from
Ancestors.

3d Head. Say thou, What Right by way of Purchas^? To answer this, it being
an Appendent upon the former, thither thou referrest thy Reader back, rather
Repeating then Adding to what was said before; alleging, Our Ancestors
purchased their Lands with this Imposition of Tithes.

Answ. 1. I answer, That they were Rightfully imposed, or Justly settled,
there is nothing offered; but much to the Contrary. And that our Ancestors could
purchase Injustice, and intail it to their Successors, I absolutely deny, and
thou provest not: If that were practicable, what would have become of their
Successors by this day? Reflect at Leisure upon those Violations of the
People's Liberties, that have in former Ages been frequently acted upon the
Stage of this Nation, some of them under Color of Law, See Cook 2 Inst.
by no less then by an Act of Parliament, Mag. Charta.
yet not Authority to Entail Injustice to after Generation

2. And if I purchase an Estate, I buy it with all the Right, Interest, etc.
which the Vendor has or ought to have in, to, or out of the same; and if any
pretends, he has an Encumbrance upon my Estate, he must evidence, it was righly
charged, viz. That there was a valuable Consideration for such Charge upon it;
which, certain I am, none was given for this Demand or Encumbrance of Tithes.
Yea, what Value could be given to part with what God gave Man, and expects from
Man, to he knows not whom? God requires his Service all the Day long: Shall he
work one or two Hours thereof for the Devil; and answer God, He was Hired, as
his Forefathers were Hired; or a Covenant was long since made with Hell and
Death by some other Persons, that had as assumed a Jurisdiction over us, it
concerns us not? But a Covenant from us he never had, nor can our Adversaries
pretend it: Where Is then the Reason for such Encumbrance? So unless thou do
produce one, whose Pretense to the Tenth of my Estate, Labor, Industry, etc.
is backed with Reason (The Law has a Maxim, C^ssante rati^ne cessat ipsa lex)
such as is a Valuable Consideration for his Demands expect no less, then that
the Right I have purchased will defend me from all other Trivial and Unjust
Claims. And except thou find a good and just Foundation for the first
Stablishment and Imposition of Tenths upon us, look not to Impose either the
Use of former Tenants Custom of the Nation, Antiquity of Popes Decretals, backed
with Humane Laws, since all manner of Wickedness, Cruelty and Oppression have
in one Age or other had as equal Colorable Authority to enforce their
Continuance and Imposition upon the People. Then which I see nothing offered by
thee.

4th Head. To thy 4th Head, What Right by Compact or Release from Man to Man.

Answ. I see no more in this then thy be^ting again the former trodden Path The
Tenant has the Leaser's Right, the Farm is the Tenant's, the Rent the
Land-lord's; and whatever was the Leasor's Right to have is in the Lease, as to
the Land he holds, paying his reserved Rent. But the Tenants Strength, Labor,
Industry and Understanding, the Increase of Stock, is not by Lease from the
Landlord, but by the free Gift of God (as was said before) of and from whom he
holds it. If Priest, Pope, etc. have a Tenth of the Land, why does he not sow
it and improve it to his own Advantage. It Is that only we claim under the
Landlord, If he pretends to a Right to the Tenth of our Labor, Industry, etc.
let him produce his Title; and if it precede, or be superior to our's, we
shall condescend: till then, our Land-lord's Title has set us free from Priest,
Pope, Presby^er, or whoever claims by, from, or under them.

5th Head. What Right by virtue of Possession or Occupancy? This ( say thou)
is a Proper, Natural and Just Claim to the first Planters and Possessors of any
Part of the Earth, not before possessed or planted.

Answ. It Is well then, from the beginning it was not so: And how then came this
Course to be altered? The Great God gave Man the Fruit of his Industry, Wisdom
and Understanding; the Pope took part of it away, and gives it to his
Creatures; was not this Inv^ntion of Man (that altered the Course that God had
made) Evil, God's Law made void by Man's Traditions? So Tithes entered; Man
coming to God and his Law again, denies Tithes, that the Devil had settled
contrary to the Pure Holy Law. And here is the Quarrel 'twixt the Priest, Pope,
Presbyter, etc. and the People called Quakers, who cannot put into their
Mouths; so Priest, Pope, Presbyter, etc. prepare War against them. And we do
respect the Intention of Buyer and Seller, Donor and Donee, he that made us
Possessors, and he that would Dispossess; and conclude, as Christians, That in
despite of Popes Decrees, Priests Canons, etc. we are free from all their Dark
and Superstitious Gifts and Impositions whatsoever.

And he, who will take the Pains to enquire, may be well Informed, That this
Imposition of Tithes was not the Fruit of Christianity, but an Effect of the
Christian^ Apostasy from the Faith of Jesus: For the Christians many Hundred
Years after Christ knew no such thing as Tithes, till the Popes and Prelatick
Authority imposed them by their Bulls, Decrees and Canons: But that these
Bulls, Decrees and Canons did meet with many Oppositions from the Faithful
Martyrs of Jesus, is plentifully set forth in History, Fox Acts and Mon. p.
564, 605, 607, 621.
as of many more we may instance John Wickliff, John Huss, William Thorpe;
William Swinderly, Walter Brint, and many others bear their Testimonies against
this Antichristian Imposition, and all other Unjust and Forced Priest
Maintenance, which for Conscience sake toward God they could not (no more then
we) submit unto; yet in all their Conversation toward Men were Blameless;
whose Faithfulness will be had in Everlasting Remembrance with them that fear
the Lord, and bear Witness to his Holy Name, which is set up as a Standard to
the Nations, and those that put their Trust in him is he precious, although a
Stumbling-Stone, and a Rock of Offense to all such who have and do wilfully
D^spise his Tender of Mercy, and this his Day of Visitation.

In case thou be an Enquirer, I doubt not thy Information; if an Imposer
upon others, I do not in the least suppose its Prevalency with such, whose
Hearts are toward God. However, if there yet remains a Spirit in thee to
oppose us, take the Pains to consult the Learned Rabbis of thy Party and
Persuasion, and fairly state this Case of Tithes, and plainly tell your
Opinions and Judgments, 1. Whether Priest, Pope, or who else have Right to
them, 2. Who are to pay them, and for what?
3. By what Authority? whether of God, Holy Scriptures, Edicts and Decrees of
Popes, Princes, Parliaments or Councils, by which of them are they to be paid?
who has set them up, and when set up? Let us understand the Title plainly by
which they are claimed.


And if upon a solid Stating the Question, and sober Resolve, we are found
detaining that which of Right belongs to a Just Proprietor, whether of our
Daily Labor, the yearly Produce of the Earth, or Increase of our Herds, or
what else God has made us Stewards of here, we shall be ready to receive
Instruction, and exercise our Conscience in being content with our own, which
according to that Wisdom God has given us hitherto, we have, of which the Lord
is our Witness. And until we have otherwise learned, we must believe, it is
rather thy Mistake, than our Just Desert, that censures out Sufferings as the
meet Reward of Thieves and Robbers; who have in this Case kept a Conscience
void of Offense toward the God of our Peace; with whom we have Peace and
Satisfaction, although in the World we (a^others, who have been alike Faithful
in this Matter) have had Trouble.

Thy Friend, Thomas Rudyard.
London, 3d Month, 1673.
An Answer to C. Nedham's second Letter.
FRIEND,
THy Former came to me in Manuscript; as I intended its Answer this Latter in
Print, before which I neither saw or h^ard of it: However, it may please thee
or thy Party (its against my Desire) to trouble the Press; and whatever thy
Hopes may be, in sowing such Seeds of Contest, sure I am, thy Joy will be small
in Harvest. I have not backed thy Question, though as subtle as our Enemy could
forge it; For I am sure, Reason and Truth's on our side, which has and yet
will plead our Innocence, and prevail, whatever Dirt thou attemptest to cast
upon us.

Thou informest in thy Second. That thou have read the Case of Tithes reviewed
by F. H. written in 1655. to which thy main Objection is, That there is not
therein any one Argument or Reason to prove the People's Right to Tithes.

Answ. Consider but what Tithes are; and 2d, F. H's manner of writing; and that
will remove thy Scruple.

1. Know, that Tithes are no distinct and separate Part of a man's Estate, as
the Tenth Acre, etc. but part of that Increase which man's Labor, Industry,
Care and Prudence which the Blessing of God has brought forth. Nor can Pope,
Priest, etc. without Consent of the Farmer, take the Tenth, or any one Sheaf,
etc. as his own; but is by Law a Trespasser, yea, in such a Degree that he is
Inditable for Theft and Robbery, as one that sets upon the Person or House of
another to extort that by Violence he supposes his Due: For its not their's in
the Sense of the Law, before Separation made by the Party; without which Pope,
Priest or Impropriator cannot say of one Blade of Grass or Ear of Corn, It is
mins. Which clearly evidences not only Possession, but the Propriety and Right
to be solely in the Farmer. And as a clear Proof see the Statute 2 E. 6. it
gives the Priest no such Title as he can bring his Action, De placito quod
reddat ei decimas, of a Plea that he render unto him his Tithes, but only an
Action of Debt for not setting forth the Tenth, which Jure Divino these
Lawmakers supposed was the Priests Right and Propriety. But had Pope, Priest,
etc. such a Propriety as thou would Insinnate, they might separate or set
them out themselves, or bring an Action, Quod reddat, etc. which by the Law
they cannot, as the meanest Country-Practitioner may inform thee. So that
Question of, What Right in the People to Tithes, is but a noval start up Query:
yet in F. H. his Treatise wants not Answer, if persons will take Reason for
Answer. For

2. Observe the manner of his handling that Case of Tithes, it was according to
that sure Maxim, Errores ad sua principia refer -- est refellere; To bring
Errors to their First is to see their Last. He has clearly demonstrated how
Wickedly they were Introduced at first; how Cruelly Maintained for many after
Ages; the Faithful Testimonies that English Martyrs and Foreigners have born
against them all along; and that such Forced Maintenance is no
Gospel-Maintenance; Where Is room left then in Gospel-Days for Scruple? But
against Causless Cavils there is no Fence, of which I desire with many others to
see an End.

I can omit to observe how frequently thou re-itteratest that Appellation upon
us as Thieves and Robbers for taking what is not our own: What is there that we
take with Violence, or otherwise? How do we take what another never had?
without taking thou supposest no Theft or Robbery, as its very true; so call
thou it taking to prove us Thieves? (for a Detainer without Taking is no Theft)
Most Horrid Abuse. Nay, were we Debtors which is the most thou can pretend
to, and more then can be proved against us, must every one be called a Thief
and Robber that pays not what his incensed Adversary charges upon him as a
Debt? I am sure thy Party cannot deny but in this thou have been egrediously
Abusive, yea those Appillations which in the Front of thy former Letter thou
termest, Bitter Declamations in our Mouths against our Cruel Adversaries, is
by thee utterred familarly against us, and with how much Reason let the
Impartial judge.

The next Exception to F. Howgill's Discourse is, That after his Account of the
several Kings by name, who had granted Tithes, etc. he alleges, that they were
Popish Kings, and gave them to Popish Priests; and that the Poor had a Share of
them. To all which thou make Four or five Demands.

The First, Whether every thing that was given by Papists to Papists for that
Reason becomes the People's?

Answ. I answer in short, It does not.

The Second, being an Explication of thy First, I grant in the Affirmative.

The Third, Might not Popish Kings do what they would with their own? Does
their baslowing them to Bad Uses give you or me a Right to them?

Answ. 1. I answer, What was their own, they might dispose of as they would,
not Prejudicing the Interest of another. But that the People's Labors,
Industries, Understandings, etc. were their's, is opposite to the real
Privilege of a Christian, and a Freeborn Englishman, that owns no such
Bondage of working for he knows not whom, nor yet for what.

2. To the second part of thy Demand I answer, That my Right preceded their
Wrongful Imposition. I claim not merely because of their Bad Uses, but because
my Right was not in their Power to bestow or continue to any Use against my
Will. So I claim not under their Ill Uses, but by my Title, which was above and
before them, and shall be when their's is not.

Thy Fourth, If the Clergy ought to give the Poor a Share with them, and do
not, is the Fault yours or their's? How are your Consciences conoerned? Are
Tithes therefore yours, etc? Your selves pay neither Poor nor Priest.

Answ. I answer, Thou can not make us in Fault for the Priests Covetousness;
but how long they have Robbed the Poor is app^rent. But the End of F. H's
instancing the Poor had a Share at first, was to show how fairly and speciously
the Pope and Devil introduced this Imposition of Tithes; I am persuaded, much
like the Daily Collections at the Doors of the late Licensed Separatists
Meeting-places for the Release of Poor, and Defraying the Charge of their
Gospel Ministry, as they term it; of which Contributions sober Men believe the
Poor have but a small Share allowed them.

Thy Fifth, Say thou, May such M^n as are Tenants to Hospital Lands say,
They will pay no Rents, because the Founders were Papists, and gave them to
Poor People to Pray for them when Dead.

Answ. I answer, The Case is no way parallel. If I take Land of a Person, I Will
pay him his contracted Rent; let him do what he please with his Money.

But who is my Landlord for Tithes? Of whom do I take a Lease? To whom is Rent
reserved?? Unto whom came I into Covenant? This Case of thine is so foreign to
the Matter, that it has not the least Alliance.

Next, Thou tellest thy Reader of thy Thanks to F. H. for thy Information of
Stephen Bish^p of Chichester, and W. Clifford, page 10.
their giving the Tithes of some particular Lands for the Pardon of their Sins,
Health of their or their Fa^her's Souls. From all which thou obse^vest, as if F
H. having told thee, that Tithes were a Forced Maintenance, here himself ^ath
proved them to be a Free Gift.

Answ. 1. There might be sufficient Exception taken against thy warring the
point, for which the Instances of R^^tephen, etc. were brought, 'twas to prove
the Evil and Superstitious Ends for which those Tithes were given, which thou
om^ttest to answer.

2. Here also thou bring a false Conclusion from his Discou^se, and so
abuses that Author. What! because some particular Tithes were given, must
Tithes in general be a Free Gift, as thy words insinuate? But

3. I answer Further, What was in their Power to give, as the Tenth of their
Manors, etc. or the Tenth of the Rents, etc. relates not to us, but was free
for them to give: but to give the Tenth of Man's Time, or his Labor, etc. was
not their's, and they could not intail it to after Generations, as I instanced
before; and this is no Proof against us, or Matter of just Exception against
him.

Yet upon this Trivial and Groundless Exception, attended with thy strained
Observation, art thou pleased to make Four or Five further Demands, which as
they require I shall return an Answer.

The Substance of thy First is, Whether if we or thou should give a Ninth Part
of our Estate to Teachers of our Persuasion, page 10.
and then sell the Eight Parts, and abate the Buyer proportionably in the
Price, would not we account the Buyer a Thief that should take that Ninth, and
call it his own? Tell me whether this be the Case?

Answ. 1. I answer, Its not our Case; yet

2. I grant that I may sell or give a Ninth, Eighth, Seventh, a Quarter, or
Third, or what part or parts I will of my Estate, and make him to whom I give
or sell an Unquestionable Title (respecting the Law, etc.) as also the
Remainder to whom I please, provided hereby each knows his own, then let them
dispose of it to what Uses they please, one hurts not the other: But I cannot
sell or intail the Labor, Strength, Industry, etc. of any Man to the Service
of another, or to Evil, or to my supposed Good Uses.

But if he whoh as any of the parts, tilling his own for that part, or in
Consideration of that Land, according to the Mind or Will of the Giver, Worship
an Idol, pray for a Soul departed, etc. or with the Increase and Profits
thereof sacrifices to the Devil or Heathenish Godds, it concerns not him who
has the other: yet if I sell the whole to one, as all our Deeds of Purchase
are, having dedicated a Ninth or Tenth to one or other Godd of my Imagination,
this shall not obliege him to whom I have sold to Pray for, Worship his Godd,
Labor for his Deity, or such like, to the Infringing of his Just Liberty, or
Imposing upon that Person whom God in Christ has made a free Agent to Labor
for him All the Hours in the Day, and the Days of his Life, and to dedicate
the Fruit of his Industry to the Lord only, to whom he is accomptable, So I
agree a Ninth of the Land, which is certain, I may give or sell, which is
certain and partionable; but part of Man's Labor, etc. neither give nor sell I
can, its not to be partitioned or divided; Man cannot serve two Masters, God
and the Devil; for he is wholely the Lord's. I gave him not his Strength, his
Industry, etc. I cannot require it of him without his Consent.

I set him, or Lease him Lands, I may require it from him according to my
Contract, and do him no Wrong. And here is the Difference; so that if Men have
been so Wicked to give or grant, or thou or we be so Wicked and Unjust to give,
grant or sell what is not our own, our grant is void, and hurts not him whom we
would Wrong: And he that is so Injurious is the Thief and Agressor, and not he
that denies to subject himself to such Injustice. And this is our Case.

Thy Second Demand is but a Repetition of a former, which had its Answer in its
place; page: 10.
so I shall pass it over.

Thy Third Demand is, Whether we may not as fairly teach such as are Tenants to
Papists at this Day, or to vicious Landlords, p. 10, 11.
to pay no Rents, because employed to Popish or Profane Uses, etc?

Answ. I answer, We neither teach others, nor deny to pay our Rents to our
Landlords for being Vicious in their Conversation, or being Papistical,
Episcopal, Presbyterian, etc. in their Judgment; nor does the Evil Uses to
which they employ their Rents (which we are not probably privy, much less
accessory unto) when in their hands concern us or them as Tenants. But Tithes,
if we pay, we know the Uses and abet them, and cannot plead Ignorance to God
and Man; as I may instance a short Case, As if I delivered a Knife this day to
one, and to morrow he kill a man therewith, I (having neither been in his
Counsel, nor abetted such Action) am not guilty of such Blood, nor an Accessory
in the Law: But it is otherwise if I give it to that End, or abet such Design,
the Blood will then also lie at my Door. The Case then of Rent to Landlords
and Tithes to Priests differs in this; the first abets not, but is Ignorant
of the Evil Use or Murder, so Innocent; the second knows them, and is an
Accessory thereto, so Guilty of the Fact. Therefore do we Pay the Former, but
Deny the Latter.

Again, Thou queriest, Do not Contracts between Buyers and Sellers of Land
equally obliege, as between Land lord and Tenant?

Answ. I answer, They do equally obliege. I perceive this Query is but a Relick
of the former mistaken Assertion in thy former Letter, That Tithes are part of
the Rents and Services reserved in our Deeds of Purchase, which has Answer in
its place. And he that is but a N^vice of a Conveyancer knows very well, that
there is not one Clause in our Deeds that oblieges us to pay Tithes; but to pay
Rent to the Landlord be sure there wants not such a Covenant in our Lease.

And further, that I may explain to thy Understanding, That Tithes, for which
thou pleadest, and the Priest persecutes, are neither a Reserved Rent nor a
Tenth of my Estate, that I never purchased, nor a distinct Part that the Seller
reserved upon the Sale to some other Proprietor, as thou would insinuate,
appears in this, that they differ from the nature and tenure of all such
Proprieties and Interests; as for Instance.

1. If I have a Third or other Part of a House, Land* etc. which I have
purchased, I can have Writ of Partition for such part, and know my own. 2. If
Landlord, I can enter, and Seize for my Rent. 3. If chief Lord of the Fee, I
can make a Distress for the chief Rent, etc. 4. If Title to any part of Land in
others Possession, I can bring an Ejectment, or other real Action, and Recover
my Interest.
But the Priest, Pope, Presbyter^ etc. for Tithes can neither Distrain, Re
enter, Seize, Eject, or Enter upon any man's Possession; which shows the
Mistake thou have run upon throughout thy whole Discourse, and that they have
no such Interest as Tenth, one or other part or just Propriety in our Estates,
as thou supposest, and do unadvisedly suggest. And here is the mistaken
Foundation thou have unadvisedly built upon.

Thy Fourth Demand is rather framed into a Resolve then a Question, alleging,
(although others have esteemed T^thes due to God of Divine Right, etc.) thou
hopest, we are not required, nor do we believe them Spiritual.

Answ. I agree with thee, we do not, nor moral neither, under the Gospel.

But to end this Paragraph thou tellest thy Reader, That some think, that if
they were indeed Spiritual, neither we nor the Priests would strive for them.

Answ. A Quaint Observation: And must we believe, that those Spirituals of thy
Cast should only palate them, if they were such? If that be thy Judgment, why
so much Contest about such Carnals?

But I pass it, to thy Fifth Demand (Unto F. H. his alleging, That the Law
gives no Man a Property, but preserves men's Rights, etc.) thou excepts, That
Laws are made for Maintenance of the Poor, etc.

Answ. I answer, They are good Laws; and it is Equal and Just the Poor should
have Relief. And to give to the Poor was a Law before men made a Statute to
enforce the Justness thereof; which if Tithes had been to a pretended Preacher
of the Gospel, the Cases had been parallel, which now hold no Equality.

But say thou, The Author viz. F. H. has not yet proved, why Laws may not
be admitted for Maintenance of Ministers, as well as Poor?

Answ. To which I answer, Thou requirest a mere Absurdity of him: What! to
prove a Negative? Wise Men will tell thee, He who affirms must prove. Make but
good the Affirmity, which hitherto thou have not, and we will grant thee the
Negative. Its a Task I question not when set about will cost thee Pains; and
there I leave it.

I have not willingly avoided any Question or Query thou have put or desired
Answer in; but according to my Understanding given thee a plain Resolve to
whatever might probably remain a Debt or Scruple in the Mind of thee or thy
Friends concerning us, and our Testimony toward God in this Matter.

That any of our Persuasion in London should have their Reason vanquished in the
Strength of thy Arguments, as thou affirmest, I assure thee, it appears to me
strange, if not incredible: I must be plain to tell thee, I rather judge the
Over-Fondness of thy own new Notions, occasioned thee to mistake the Persons or
their Judgments in this Case of Controversy. And however thou may
conceitedly term our Sufferings in this Cause Acts of Prodigality, we know its
not for Self, but for the God of our Life that we undergo such Spoil and
Hardship from our Merciless Enemies.

And I must tell thee, That I have not only weighed thy Arguments against our
Testimony, which have their Answer; but also that Address thou make to our
Friends, which without due Observation I cannot let slip, the reading whereof
brought to mind that Parallel of Judas his Salutation of our Savior (when he
betrayed him into the Hands of the Priests) Hale Master, and kissed him. So it
pleases thee to give us the Appellation of thy Dear Friends, and with smooth
words to tell us, Thy Soul truly pitties us; when alas, it is but a Mask to
cover that Face that would either Blush or wax Pale at such Actions. The Wise
Man tells thee, He that Hates Dissembleth with his Lip^, and lays up Deceit
within him, Prove. 26. 24. Whose Cause pleadest thou against us* Into whose
Hands would thou betray us after thy smooth Salutation? Is it not into such
Hands as Judas did his Master? why tellest thou us not? Art thou ashamed in
plain words to discover? yea, not improbable that is in secret reserve. But its
not difficult to guess who desires to be Executioner: What! thy Dear Friends,
and yet charging us, p. 13 14.
That under a disguise of Godliness for many years we have been highly guilty
of those Wicked Sins of Stealing, Slandering and Lying, and what not; yea,
insinuating, That we are more Criminal before God and Man then Common Notorious
Thieves: And shall not we know what Mercy thou have in store for thy Dear
Friends after all? yea; say thou, Malefactors suffer Death by Law for
stealing things of small Account, but your Robbery is often of great Value; p. 14.
Here Is the Judgment, which thou want a New England Law to execute. For the
Laws here (say thou) are very Favorable: Yes, they extend only to the
depriving us of our Civil Liberty, Imprisonment of our persons, and
Confiscation of our Goods and Estates ( Life excepted) too easy a requital for
such Facts as thou would make thy Dear Friends guilty of. What shall be said
to this? but as the Wise Man, That Violence covers the Mouth of the Wicked,
and his Tender Mercies are Cruel, Prove. 10. 6. 12. 10. If this be Entertainment
for thy Friends, what Quarter must Enemies expect at thy hands?

Much more might be added, or returned upon thee; but whether we or thou and
thy Party have uttered a Reproach or Slander, or are guilty of Lying, Stealing
and bearing False Witness against our Neighbor, let God's Witness in the
Unpr^judiced amongst, them that have heard thy Charge and our D^fenc^ give a
Judgment.

And now I must tell, I take it well from thy Hands or the Printer, that have
been so kind to place J. Wilfford's Letter to close thy Discourse,
notwithstanding it seems to thee as nothing to the Question; I am satisfied,
the Simplicity of his will wound, where thy Sophi^ry cannot, and shall have a
place in the Consciences of such who are at this day real Enquirers after the
Good Old Way and Promised Land.

And now since I have been so fair to answer thy Question, What Right the
People have to Tithes? judge it not an Unreasonable Demand to answer me, Who
has that Right thou denyest us? Let Us know whether it be the Popish, Episcopal,
Presbyterian, etc. Cause thou pleadest? If thou be an Advocate to a Just Cause,
never be ashamed of thy Client. How consonant the Cause is to thy late
Profession in Civil or now Religious Matters, I leave to thy own Consideration:
I shall forbear Reflection, and request thee, That if any thing yet remains,
wherein thou may suppose Writing or the Press Serviceable to thy Interest;
rather chose solid Arguments then severe Reflections to convince the Reader;
nor let thy Prejudice pass Judgment upon a supposed Offender till thou have
heard his Plea and Defense; it is possible his Innocence may correct that
Prejudice which leads to False Judgment.

And to conclude remember the Wise Man's words, It is an Honor for a Man to
cease from Strife; but every Fool will be meddling, Prove. 30. 3. If thou have
done Foolishly in lifting up thy self, or if thou have thought Evil, lay thine
Hand upon thy Mouth: the forcing of Wrath brings forth Strife, Prove. 30. 32,
33. This at present may suffice (till I have thy Reply) from him who is a Real
Friend to thee and all Men

Thomas Rudyard.

TITHES NO Gospel-Ordinance.

OR, A Justification of all those, whonot only in this Age, but in the Ages
past since the Apostasy, have for Conscience sake born their Testimony against
TITHES.

Wherein is Demonstrated, That it is directly contrary to Christ's Commission
given to his Ministers, and contrary to the Apostles Practice;

Occasioned through C. N's Unreasonable and Unchristian like Contending for the
Lawfulness of Tithes.

By G. W. a Lover of the Truth.

He that Justifies the* Wicked, and he that Condemns the Just, are both an
Abeminaiion to the Lord, Prove. 17. 15. Printed in the Year, 1673.

TITHES No Gospel-Ordinance.
MAN by Wisdom knows not God; neither can the Things of God be found out by
Man's Wisdom, but are altogether hid from it; they are of too pure a Nature for
that Eye to see, or for that Heart to receive: But there is an Eye, that God in
his Loving Kindness has opened, that can with great Delight behold those
Glorious Truth^ that he has promised; and there is a Heart that can Rejoice in
the sensible Feeling of the opening of that Wisdom that the World by all their
Wisdom cannot see or know: This was it that caused Abraham to Rejoice, who saw
the Day of Christ, his Eye affected his Heart, he rejoiced at what he saw; and
blessed Paul counted all things Loss in respect of this True Wisdom and
Knowledge, which only is to be found in Christ Jesus, through the Death of the
Cross, which crucifies unto all this World's Wisdom and Glory, so that Death
having past thereon, that New Life may be witnessed wherein all things become
New; and into this Life has the Lord our God begotten a Remnant, which are
accounted to him for a Generation, unto whom he has revealed his Counsels, and
his Wisdom is with them, and by it are they made able to judge of things that
differ; and in which Judgment we certainly find where Men's Standings are, the
Lord being come in Numbers of his Saints to Judge the Inhabitants of the Earth,
so it was in the Apostles days, and so it is now in the True Church: For the
Spiritual Man judges all things, yet is ^e Judged of no Man; and without all
Doubt the Apostle in those Days, by the Wise Men of this World, was esteemed a
Boaster, yet was he certain of what he said, knowing, that in the True Wisdom
of the Spirit of God, they could fathom all Men, but could not be fathomed by
them that were out of this Wisdom: The Wisdom of the Servants of the Lord is in
the Light from above; but the others is in the Darkness from below, which
cannot comprehend the Light, nor those that live therein: Yet Vain Man in this
Fallen Wisdom will be a Judging and speaking Evil of the things he knows not,
among whom is found C. N. although to his great Infamy and Confusion; who has
wedded the Cause that Antichrist by his Servants has supported against the true
Christians in many Ages; and has justified that Ungodly Generation, and
condemned the Generation the Righteous, who in the Patience of the Lamb, and in
his Living Testimony, have born their Testimony against that Carnal Imposition
and Maintenance of Tithes, as do testify Records in Ecelesiastical Matters;
witness that Truly Noble-Minded William Thorpe, who among the rest of the
Testimonies he had for the Lord, this was one against Tithes; he lived in the
days of Henry the 4th of England, and was persecuted by Thomas Arundell, the
then Arch Bishop of Canterbury, a Man highly infamous for his Envy to the
Truth, and to those that followed the Lord according to the Measure of Light
they had then received; where Thorpe openly declared, "That although Tithes
were brought in and ordained by Gregory the 10th, yet it was not consonant nor
agreeable to Truth; nor the Practice of the Apostle Paul, whose Example (says
he) all ought to follow, even as he was a Follower of Jesus Christ, who
received no Tithes, neither did his Disciples; but God opened the Hearts of
those they went unto, so that they had no Lack; and some wrought with their
Hands, that so the Gospel might not be thought Burthensom by any, such Care
took they of the Gospel." The whole Discourse of William Thorpe with Thomas
Arundell touching this Matter would be too tedious to insert here, although it
is truly deserving our Knowledge, and may be found at large in Fox's Acts and
Monuments in his Universal History, fol. 669, 700.

Thus we may perceive, that the Honest-hearted, not only in this Age, but in
several Ages, have born their Testimony (...) this settled and forced
Maintenance, as being bad in its Original; and that that is Bad in its Root
cannot be Good in its Fruits: It was a Work brought forth in the fallen Wisdom,
because directly Contrary to that Way that Christ ordered his Ministers to walk
in, for when they were to go forth, they were not to make any Provision, but to
rely on the Lord that sent them forth; and when they returned, their Answer
was, That they lacked nothing: And the Apostles, who were the true Ministers in
the true Church, followed the same Example, who had the Lord to take Care of
them, who always takes Care of his own.

But the Wisdom of this World has fashioned out to it self a Church, some
after one Fashion, some after another, so that the whole of their Inventions
makes up a Spiritual Babel; and all her Likenesses and Imitations are truly
discerned by those that follow the Lamb, her gilded Cup cannot deceive them;
the Elect of God cannot be deceived, it is not possible they should; neither
can thee C. N. deceive them, although thou appear with a very fine spun
Thread of Babel's Wisdom: yet in the Wisdom of the Lord, which is with his
People, thou and the rest of you that are concerned in this Work are found out,
and weighed in the Balance of God's Sanctuary, and found to be of one Spirit
with the former Builders of Babel that were in times past, whose Names stink to
Posterity, and thus have brought on your own Heads all the Righteous Blood that
has been shed on this Account; and it does cry to God for Vengeance, because
you have opposed the Righteous Seed in many Ages, and still do, notwithstanding
that the Lord has very eminently appeared for and with his Servants on this
Account, by enabling them in the Virtue of his own life, to testify against
the Hireling and his Ways; who cries to the People, Hear the Word of the Lord,
and they have it not, neither has the Lord sent them: But Christ's Sheep knows
his Voice, and a Stranger they will not follow; and therefore it is, we cannot
follow thee C. N. thy Voice is a Strangers Voice, thou savourest not the things
that are of God, but of the Serpent, wherefore we may justly say to thee, get
thee behind us Satan; For what do thou aim at? Is it not to save thy self? or
is it not that thou would provide for the Hirelings of thy own Fraternity,
hoping that you shall yet see such days as you despise, and therefore plead
for them at a distance? but the Lord to his everlasting Praise has delivered us
out of the Hand of that Lordizing Generation, and has given unto them the
Reward of their Works, even Shame and Contempt.

And Friends and People, since we have to do with these Workers in Mystery
Babylon, if we would know them aright, we cannot know them truly but in their
Ground, in their Rice, in that that is hid like a Snake in the Grass, that that
covers itself with a Fig Leaf of Self-Righteousness, they appear like Sheep,
but at last manifest themselves to be inwardly Ravening Wolves, and secretly
smite the Righteou^ in the hinder parts, as they are in their Travel toward
the Holy Land, as the Enemies of God and his People did in the days of old
that Cursed Race of Esau (who no doubt could claim some Right in Abraham to be
their Father) yet they were in one Spirit with the Philistines* and would both
of them have hindered the true Israelite: to enter and enjoy the Possession that
God had Provided for them. Oh Foolish M^n, and Unwise I Know you not, that none
of your Weapons against God's Inheritance shall prosper: And do you Professors
still go on from one degree of Wickedness to another, till you meet jointly in
Unity of spirit with the Wicked Enemies of God, that have been in many ^ges,
and still are, and to strengthen the Hands of those that should be weakened,
and seek to weaken the Hands of those that should be strengthened, the Lord God
of our Life, that you have opposed, will c^^tainly remember you, and all you
Workers in Mystery Babylon shall be stripped naked to the loathing of your
Professions: For in you is found the Blood of the Saints, you being found in
the Unity of spirit with the Former and Latter Persecutors. The Day is come
that God is revealing the Secrets or Men by his Son Christ Jesus; and the
hidden things of Babylon, which you plead for, are brought to Light by the
Brightness of his coming, from which you cannot be hid. And he has brought in
an Everlasting Priesthood; and has put an End to that old Priesthood, and its
Maintenance, which in God's Day and Time was Glorious, of which Priesthood you
never were; and therefore with what Confidence can you plead for that
Maintenance that never did the Work of that Priesthood? And it is most manifest
that that Priesthood is now changed from whence the Apostle pleads a Necessity
of a Change of that Law, since the Priesthood was changed, and you your selves
confess that that Priesthood is changed; and wherefore then will you plead for
keeping that part of the Law? the Reason hereof is so manifest (that it is
Self-Interests) that you cannot hide your selves; for having not your Call from
God to be Ministers, you cannot depend on him for a Livelihood; and so being
unacquainted with the Life of Faith, but living in that wisdom that is from
below, will be assured of that Maintenance. And thus it is plain, who it is thar
pleads for Tithes; it is Man's Self in his fallen Wisdom; and if Self be not
answered, Self will persecute for it, if he has it not; and this has been
their Practices for many Ages, and still are.

And further, Consider what the Effects of this Settled Maintenance have been
all along since this Settled Maintenance was imposed; Do not Histories at large
acquaint the World with the Clergies unsufferable Pride, living in Excess and
Wantonness, and in the Venities of the Heathen; insomuch that those that feared
the Lord could do no less then cry out against them, and lamented the Cursed
Fruits that were produced by this Settled Maintenance of Tithes, to be no
Preduce of any Gospel-Ordinance, but the Invention and Fruits of the Fallen
Wisdom of Man, and so clearly out of the Way of the Lord's Ordaining, who sent
his Ministers out without any of these Provisions, and they lacked nothing, and
that was Christ's Way, hereby teaching his Ministers to live by Faith; and tha^
as they had Freely Received, so they were Freely to Give; and he that goes
forth otherwise has not Christ's Commission.

Therefore harken all you that are concerned in this Work with C. N. Consider
whom it i^ you serve; for herein the Lod bears me witness; You are of
A^tichrist: Let your Covers be what they will, the Lord by his Spirit has
found you out, and you are of that Man of Sin whom Christ has revealed by the
Brightness of his Coming, and will destroy by the Breath of his Month; your
Works have been the Works of Babel's Brats, whom God has meeted out for
Destruction: And Blessed shall those Men be, that in pure Love to God have
their Hearts sitted, as the Spiritual Archers of God, to shoot at you, oh you
Sons of Babel! Blessed be our God, who has made our Bow to stand in Strength
against you* and in the Power of his Might we shall not spare, emptying our
Quivers at you, because God is on our side; and in God we believe, that in his
Strength we shall remain Conquerers; For our Faith stands in the Power of
God, which Power is over you all.

This was the Plea of the Wicked in the days past, We have a Law; by which
they crucified the just; it is the same still with the Children of the same
Father: when they are argued with in Matters of Tithes, by Christian Arguments
are, put to their Wits End, say they, We have a Law for our Tithes* and we will
have their; and this is that that C. N. has to say, They have a Law for it,
etc. But it is evident, that this was no Law of Christ's Institution, nor of
his Apostles, whom we are to follow, as they were Followers of Christ.

And further observe, That Persecution, Pride, and Arrogance, and the like,
have been the Fruits of such as have and do Contend most for it; and if
according to Christ's Doctrine, we are to judge of the Tree by the Fruit, this
must be an Evil Tree, that has produced such Bad Fruit. But what is the Reason
that C. N. with those of his Brotherhood, concern themselves now for Tithes?
They are they that are generally displaced from them: But have they not an Eye
to Reversion? a Hope to get into the Saddle if they could ^et the Riders off?
And is it not therefore you would keep the Beast in Readiness, that you might
get on as soon as Occasion shall offer? Has not God let some of you have a
Trial of your Hearts already in such a Condition; and who abounded more in
Pride and Idleness then your Families? Who were Examples of more Vanity then
your Wives and Children? And are you not the same still, where you can? And as
you then Lordized over such as beard you, so do you still if any one do but
Contradict you, and Conscientiously Contend with you; therefore may we not
conclude, that your Desires to be in the Rooms of those that are now in, is not
because they are Worse then you, but because you would Eat the Fat, and Drink
the Sweet, and Live in Idleness, as you did before? It is high time for you to
refrain your lusting after the Onions and Garlic of Egypt, this
Egyptian-Maintenance, that gratified their and their Families Lusts? And if you
were come unto the Wisdom of God, that teach^th to profit by every
Dispensation, you would consider, God's Hand has been lifted up against you,
and for what; has not your Evil Entreating the Tender People of the Lord, some
of them for Refusing to Pay Tithes, some for other Causes, been the Reason of
it, etc? But as in the days of Old, so now; they will not see, although the
Lord's Hand has been lifted up against them; and it is vident to some that
knew some of you in the days past, that at some times some Good Desires after
God were begotten in some of you, until they were choked by your Coveting and
Complying under your Fat Benefices; and this the true Witness of God in your
Consciences will bear you Witness of in the Secrets of your own Hearts; and
Glad should (...) be to hear or see that such were returned to those Desires
again: but how few of you are come to be sensible of what you have done, and to
cry out, That you have offended the Lord and his People; but on the contrary,
your Desires are (...) after that Sweet Morsel that you have lost, and after
your Lordizing Power, which God in his Mercy has delivered his ^^ple from.

Happy were it for you, that yet you would consider, why the Lord has and does
Contend with you, if that peradventure your Eyes might be opened, your Ears
uns^opped, and your Hearts affected, before this Glorious Day pass over your
Heads, wherein God in his Great Loving Kindness has visited Thousands,
otherwise you shall ^ remain in your Estate of Darkness, whilst others dwell in
the Light, and are at Unity with him that is True Light, whose Light many of
you have opposed, and many of you have Blasphemed, by speaking Evil of it. Yet
I would make a Difference of you, and in the Fear of the Lord would be content
to be made an Instrument to pull some of you, as Brands out of the Fire, that
you might be saved, and might come to know that Blessed Fellowship that is in
the Light, and with those that walk therein, that so you might become Ministers
indeed, Ministers of a Savory Life, Savory to God, and Savory to the People of
the Lord; but you are too wise in your own Wisdom to receive him that is
esteemed Foolishness to that Wisdom that is from below; you are too high to
receive and believe in the True Light, by whom all Men are lightened that come
into the World, who is the Way to the Father, and in which Light there is Life,
which Life Leavens the Soul to God; this Light you have stumbled at; and there
is no coming to the Father but by it; he is the Way, and the Truth: But it is
the Poor that have received the Gospel, which is the Power of God; They were
the Master Builders that rejected him, as not fit for their Building; but to
the True Builders he was, and is still the Chief Corner Stone, on which is
founded all God's Holy Building in all Ages of the World, both Prophets, and
Apostles, and all the holy Martyrs: he is the Way, the Inward Way; the Light of
Life, that quickent unto God; and those that have experienced it can t^ll what
its Goodness and Worth has been to their Souls. Wisdom is justified of her
Children, And could you, as the Apostles, count the Loss of all your
Attaintments Gain, that you might find this Knowledge, and this Wisdom; then
would you be Happy, in coming to know this Only True Teacher, the Light, which
many of you in Pride and Arrogance have Opposed ^; and it will show you all
that ever you have done; and what plainer Evidence can you have? is not this
God's Salvation to the Ends of the Earth, to whom all are to look unto, and be
saved: For to as many as received him, he gave Power to become the Sons of God;
and he that has received the Light, and has Unity with it, has Unity with
God, with Christ, and with his People: And thus Christ is known to be a
Savior, who shall save People from their Sins.

Therefore whilst it is called to day, and the People of the Lord have any
Desires to God for you, when the Light of the Lord dawneth in upon your Hearts,
refuse it not, but open unto him, and he will show you his Salvation, he will
lead you in a Way that you have not known, through the Paths of Judgment unto
the Land of Everlasting Rest, which otherwise cannot be known.

So all of you know, That the true Priesthood is known, which differs from the
Old both in Services and Maintenance; and unto this New Priestood all are
invited, to his ^nward Teachings, who is the New and Living Way, Life is in
Christ Jesus, who is our Head, and from him does his Members receive Life;
because he lives, we do live also; and he that receives him, receives us
whom he has sent* and yet of our selves we are nothing, but as he is pleased
to operate in us, that so the Glory might be the Lord's, and that he might have
the Pre-eminence over all, who is God blessed forever and ever.

And as for the particular Answers to the Articles of C. N. it is another's
Work, I meddle not with it; but having found C. N. a Blasphemer against God,
and his Holy City, who have born their Testimonies in the Spirit of the Lamb
against that Forced Maintenance of Tythers, in many Ages of the World, I was
not clear of him, nor of those that are at Unity with him in this Work, until I
had laid God's Judgments over their Heads, and there must leave it: And
remember this for all that you have done, Vengeance is the Lord's, and he will
certainly repay; and conclude with Desires of Good Will to all Men, warning
them, that they join not with thee C. N. or any in thy Spirit in this Cursed
Employment of seeking to strengthen the Hands of Persecutors against God's
Inheritance; for his People that serve him are precious to him, and they that
touch them are as they that touch the Apple of his Eye: The Lord upholdeth the
Righteous, and makes them as Pillars, supporting the Truth, against which the
Gates of Hell shall not prevail.

George Watt.

TITHES

