SIR BENJAMIN RVDYERDS SPEECH; Concerning BISHOPS DEANES And CHAPTERS. At a
Committee of the whole House.

Printed in the year, ^^^^

SIR BENJAMIN RVDYERD HIS SPEECH.
Mr. HYDE,
WE are now upon a very great business, so great indeed, as it requires our
soundest, our saddest consideration; our best judgment for the present, our
utmost foresight for the future.

But Sir, one thing does exceedingly trouble me, it turns me round about, it
makes my whole reason vertiginous, which is, that so many do believe, against
the wisdom of all ages, that now there can be no reformation without
destruction; as if every sick body must be presently knocked in the head, as
past hope of cure.

Religion was first and best planted in Cities, God did spread his Net where
most might be caught, Cities had Bishops and Presbyters: Presbyters were the
Seminaries out of which were sent laborers by the Bishops to propogate and
cultivate the Gospel. The Clergy then lived wholly upon the free will
offerings and bounty of the people.

Afterward, when Kings and States grew to be Christians, the outward
settlement of the Church grew up with them. They erected Bishoprics, founded
Cathedral Churches, endowed them with large possessions: Landlords built
Parish Churches, gleab'd them with some portion of land, for which they have
still a right of presentation.

I do confess that some of our Bishops have had ambitious, dangerous aims,
and have so still, that in their government there are very great enormities:
but I am not of their opinion who believe, that there is an innate ill quality
in Episcopacie, like a specificall property, which is a refuge, not a reason. I
hope there is not original sin in Episcopacie; and though there were, yet may
the calling be as well reformed, as the person regenerated. Bishops have
governed the Church for fifteen hundred years without interruption: and no man
will say, but that God has saved souls in all those times under their
government. Let them be reduced according to the usage of ancient Churches in
the best times, so restrained as they may not be able hereafter to shame the
calling. I love not those that hate to be reformed, and do therefore think
them worthy of the more strict, the more close reformation.

We have often complained, that Bishops are too absolute, too singular.
Although Cathedral Churches are now for the most part but receptacles of
Droanes and Nonresidents, yet some good men may be found or placed there to be
assessors with the Bishops, to assist them in actions of moment, in causes of
importance; there is maintenance already provided for them. If either in
Bishoprics, or Cathedral Churches there be too much, some may be pared off,
to relieve them that have too little. If yet more may be spared, it may be
employed to the setting up of a preaching Ministry through the whole Kingdom.
And until this be done, although we are Christians, yet are we not a Christian
State. There are some places in England that are not in Christendom, the
people are so ignorant, they live so without God in the world, for which
Parliaments are to answer both to God and Man. Let us look to it, for it lies
like one of the burdens of the Prophet Esaias, heavy and flat upon Parliaments.

I have often seriously considered with my self, what strong concurrent
motives and causes did meet together in that time, when Abbeyes and Monasteries
were overthrown. Certainly Gods hand was the greatest, for he was most
offended. The profane superstitions, the abominable idolatries, the filthy
nefandous wickedness of their lives did stink in Gods nostrils, did call
down for vengeance, for reformation A good party of religious men were zealous
instruments in that great work, as likewise many covetous ambitious persons,
gaping for fat morsels, did lustily drive it on.

But, Mr. Hyde, there was a principal Parliamentary motive, which did
facilitate the rest: For it was propounded in Parliament, that the accession of
Abbey lands would so enrich the Crown as the people should never be put to pay
subsidies again. This was plausible both to Court and Country. Besides, with
the overplus there should be maintained a standing army of forty thousand men
for a perpetual defense of the Kingdom. This was safety at home, terror and
honor abroad: the Parliament would make all sure.

Gods part; Religion, by his blessing, has been reasonably well preserved, but
it has been saved as by fire: for the rest is consumed and vanished: the
people have paid subsidies ever since, and we are now in no very good case to
pay an Army.

Let us beware, Mr. Hyde, that we do not look with a worldly, carnal, evil
eye upon Church lands, let us clear our sight, search our hearts, that we may
have unmixt and sincere ends, without the least thought of saving our own
purses. Church lands will still be fittest to maintain Church men, by a
proportionable and orderly distribution.

We are very strict and curious to uphold our own propriety, and there is great
reason for it: Are the Clergy only a sort of men who have no propriety at all
in that which is called theirs? I am sure they are Englishmen, they are
subjects.

If we pull down Bishoprics, and pull down Cathedral Churches, in a short
time we must be forced to pull down Colleges too; for Scholars will live
and dye there as in Cells, if there be not considerable preferment to invite
them abroad. And the example we are making now, will be an easy temptation to
the lesse-pressing necessities of future times.

This is the next way to bring in Barbarism, to make the Clergy an unlearned
contemptible vocation, not to be desired but by the basest of the people; and
then where shall we find men able to convince an adversary?

A Clergy man ought to have a far greater proportion to live upon, then any
other man of an equal condition. He is not bred to multiply threepences, it
becomes him not to live mechanically, and sordidly: he must be given to
hospitality. I do know my self a Cleargyman, no dignitary, whose books have
cost him a thousand pounds, which when he dies, may be worth to his wife and
children, about two hundred.

It will be a shameful reproach to so flourishing a Kingdom as this, to have
a poor beggarly Clergy. For my part, I think nothing too much, nothing too
good for a good Minister, a good Clergy man. They ought least to want, who
best know how to abound. Burning and shining lights do well deserve to be set
in good Candlestickes.

Mr. Hyde, I am as much for reformation, for purging and maintaining Religion,
as any man whatsoever: but I profess, I am not for innovation, demolition, nor
abolition.

FINIS.

