TWO SERMONS Preached at the Meeting of the COUNCIL OF George Heriot's
HOSPITAL, At EDINBURGH,

EDINBVRGH, Printed by George Mosman, in the Year 1695.

TO THE READER.
AMong the Sermons lately Preached, at the Meeting of the Governors of George
Heriot's Hospital, Some who heard them thought fit to publish the two
following, Hopeing they may be useful to excite people to Works of Charity
especially such good Works, the Fruit of which is extended to many, and more
particularly such as tend to promote the Education of Young Persons, who have
none to care for them, and who may be afterward useful, whither by public or
more private service to the Church or Nation: It has been observed of late
Years, since this course of Preaching on such subjects began, more such Charity
has been given in this City then in many Years before, And that Fond designed
for Erecting a Hospital for Maintenance and Education of Orphans of the Female
Sex has much increased, to which many Pious Persons both Men and Women have
contributed Liberally, beside other pious Mortifications and Donations made in
the City for other public Uses. The hope, that these and other Sermons of the
like Tendency may (by Gods Blessing) have further influence on well disposed
Christians to whom God has given Wealth, that they may also have a Heart to
use it, for his Glory, and to serve the Lord with their substance, and that
people may be persuaded thus to show their Faith by their Works, Is that which
moved the Publishers to send these two Sermons Abroad.

A SERMON Preached by Mr. GILBERT RVLE Minister of the Gospel, and Principal of
the College of Edinburgh. Monday, December 3d. 1694.
Psalm. 112. ver. 9. He has dispersed, He has given to the Poor, His
Righteousness endures for ever, His Horn shall be exalted with Honor.
THIS Psalm Informs us of the Great Blessings that attend the Godly; As the
Apostle also tells us, that it has the Promises of this Life, and that which
is to come: And that it is profiteable for all Things. 1 Timothy 4. 8. And the
Psalmist does also give us some of the Characters of the Man that shall be thus
Blessed, that he is one that fears the Lord ver. 1. Aweful Thoughts of the
Holiness, Goodness, Power and Majesty of God do Influence him in the Course of
his Life, Also He delights in God's Commandments ver. 1. his Will and
Affections are gained to the practice of Holiness. It is not barely the
Terrors of a Natural Conscience that trouble him; He is called an Upright Man,
ver. 4. an Unbyassed Man, who singly minds Duty and the Glory of God.
Likeways he is called a Good Man, ver. 5: a Benign Person, and of a Loving and
Lovely Disposition. He is also Righteous ver. 6 Inclined to do Justice to all,
and give every one their due. But the Commendation of this Happy Man, that the
Psalmist does here most insist on, Is his Charity, his Affection and Regard to
the Necessities of Men; which makes him bestow liberally for their Relief, so
far as he is able ver. 4. 5. and in the Text.

In the words read we have two Things to be considered. 1. The practice of the
Good Man. 2. The Blessings that follow on this practice, The practice or Duty
is set forth in two Expressions 1, he has dispersed. The Chaldee Paraphrase
has it, He has Dispersed his Money or Goods (...) for that is indeed meant,
his work is not to scrape and hoord, and to keep, as they who set their Heart
on the World, but as he is duly careful to get by good Means, and to beware of
wicked Lavishing; so his great care is, how to lay out for the Glory of God,
and the good of Mankind; This word imports. 1, The Good Man's communicating of
his Goods, neither laying them up, not bestowing all on himself, his Pride,
Vanity, or other Lusts; he believes that as God made him not for himself, so he
should not live to himself, but for God's Glory, and the good of Men: this
Communicating is enjoined Heb. 13. 16. 2dly. It implies not a Spareing, but a
Liberal Giving, he has a large Heart and an open Hand, according to his
Ability, and the Necessities of the Objects of Charity: It was counted
Liberality in the Poor Widow to give a Mite or two, but it were penuriousness
in a Richer Person. See 2 Cor. 9. 6. 3dly It implies giving to many, as
Eccles. 11. 12. Not to make one poor-Body Rich; and let many Starve, there is
Discretion to be used in Charity* Psalm 112. 5. The other Expression qualifieth
this Dispersing of our Goods, the Good Man disperseth his Goods by Giving of
them to the Poor. There are some who disperse their Estate very fast and
profusely, they quickly (as the saying is) let the Wind among their Heaps of
Treasure and Great Estates, but it is by Drunkeness, Whoredom, Gameing, spent
on their Back and Belly, or on mistaken Credit; and Honor; on high and
Luxurious Living: Some peoples Clothes, and Household Furniture Eat up what
they should lay out on the Necessitous Poor: Others disperse on their
Superstition, and out of a mistaken Zeal for Religion, as Isai 46. 6. They
lavish Gold out of the Bag: what incredible Riches has the Blind Superstition
of Papists furnished some Churches and Monasteries with, while many Poor want
Bread: here is a dispersing with a Witness; but the Good Man's dispersing is
Giving to the Poor for their Relief: Which dispersing does not use to Ruin
Estates, and bring the giver to poverty, as the other does. The 2d. part of the
Text is the Blessings that follow on this Liberality. 1. His Righteousness
endures for ever, Some expound it thus: Bounty or Mercifulness (so the word is
used, Dan. 4. 27. and often in the Old Testament) shall never want a Fond, his
Riches shall be like a Springing Fountain that goes not dry: Others, the
reward of his Bounty shall never fail: Others, his Bountiful Disposition will
continue: Others, the effect of his Bounty is often abiding and conspicuous to
the Glory of God, and Commendation of the Liberal Man, even after he is laid in
the Dust. Many times the good works of Men that are bountiful are a lasting
Monument: an instance of this, We have in the Famous Hospital that gives the
occasion to this Meeting: how many great Estates of Citizens, and others, which
they had with great care gathered, are wasted by prodigal Heirs, since this
Hospital was founded, while it is yet lasting to the use, it was appointed for.
2dly. Another Blessing, his horn shall be exalted with honor, That is,
Strength, Prosperity and Honor shall be the Fruit of such a practice; In a
word, the Psalmist would have us look on this, as the best way to raise, and to
establish a Family, which many are Ambitious of, but they take the wrong way to
compass their Design, by defrauding the Poor of what the Lord has made their
due out of Men's Estates. Several practical Truths may be here observed, which
time will not allow to insist on, I shall sum up what Doctrine the Text
affords, in this one Proposition, Liberality, for the Relief the Poor, is a
Duty, that God requires and will Reward.

For clearing this, and convincing you of this Truth, I shall first prove this
in the General, and then shall prove some particular Truths, that are
comprehended under the General Doctrine

For the General proposition, It is plainly, peremptorily and frequently
commanded* Lev. 25. 35 Deuteronomy* 15. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. Isai 58 7. Luke 11. 41. Luke.
3. 11. 1 Timothy 6 18. Heb 13. 16. If the Authority of God have any weight with us,
this we will make Conscience of.

2ly. The Lord has declared Himself well pleased with this, as a Christian
Duty. Heb, 13. 16.

3ly. It has always been esteemed in the Church, and pressed by the Faithful
Pastors of it. The Papists, it is true, carry it too high, make it Meritorious,
and insist mostly on it, perverting the peoples Charity, which should relieve
the Poor, to feed Idle Monks, and adorn and Enrich Monasteries: But the
Fathers, and the Faithful Ministers in all ages thought it their duty to press
this good work on the people: So does the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8. 1. and 9. 1. And
with what Earnestness and strength of Argument, do the Fathers in their
Sermons, and Epistles urge this Duty on the people? Augustine says, The poor
Man is a Fruitful field, it quickly yeildeth Fruit to the Sower, Again, If thou
be a good Merchant, an excellent Usurer, give that which thou can not keep
always, that thou may receive that which thou can not lose; give a little,
that thou may receive a hundredfold; give a temporal possession, that thou
may receive an Eternal Inheritance. Ambrose, he is truly Blessed out of
whose house the poor never goes empty* Again, to withold relief from the
Indigent for saving his Life is to kill him, Beware that thou hoord not up in
thy Bags the health or safety of the poor; That is to Bury him, in thy heaps of
Silver; Another says, he does in vain stretch forth his hand to God in Prayer
who stretches it not out to the Poor by giving.

4ly. Nature teaches this Duty. The Heathens both commended and used this
practice; to the Shame of many, who own the true Religion; I shall forbear
instances to spare time, only I cannot pass that of Xenophon, who used to say,
That it was more Glorious, for one to leave many Deeds of Bounty behind him,
than many Trophies of Victory.

5ly. For this end, The Lord (who could have levelled all the World) has made
some Poor, and others Rich, That the one may Exercise Dependence upon God, who
feeds all, and the other might show their obedience to him in feeding the
Poor, See Deuteronomy. 15. 10, 11 The Lord has made the one His Stewards, and the
other His Receivers.

6ly. It is the constant and unfailing Fruit of the Grace of God, And the
footsteps that God's Flock has always walked in: Abundance of Instances may
be given. See Prove* 21: 26. Obadiah is one Instance. 1 Kings 18* 13. Also Job*
31. 16. And Zacheus Luke 19: 8. Cornelius Act: 10 12* 13. 4 Dorcas Acts 9 36*
The Church of Jerusalem in the time of great Persecution, had all things common
Act: 2. 44, and 4 34. And we Read of Churches sending Relief to other Churches
in Distress.

Under this General Truth, some particulars are to be proved, for further
clearing the matter* 1st. It is certain, that this Liberal bestowing is not
left at Liberty, it is not only a commendable thing, but a necessary Duty;
Actual Giving, is necessar to all* as they have occasion: and a Disposition or
Inclination to it: is necessary in all Simply. This is clear, first, from the
command of God, of which before considering, especially that breaking of one
Command, is a Breach of the whole Law, being a despising of Gods Authority, See
Jam. 2. 10. 11.

Also from the Threatenings of the Wrath of God, against Neglecters of this Duty
Prove. 21. 13. and 28. 27. A Curse not only from the Poor who are defrauded, but
from Angels and God Himself shall be on him, says Gejerus (a Learned
Interpreter) Matt, 25. 42. it brings a Consumption on peoples Estates, Prove.
11. 24.

Another Truth here comprehended is, As People must give account to God of all
other Actings, or omissions; so especially of this, how they have employed what
God gave them in the World, you are not Accomptable to Men, how you spend what
is your own (Though it is a pity that profuse Wasters are not punished as Posts
among Men, and Destroyers, or Weakners of the Commonwealth) yet God will surely
call you to an Account* And particu^arly what proportion of your Goods you have
given to the Poor, or whether you have eaten your Morsel alone; This is no
doubt a part of our Stewardship, or trust, that we have from the Lord, of which
we must give an Account. Luke 16. 12. And that this is designed in that Parable
may be gathered from verse 9. where the Application of the Parable is, That Men
should make Friends of the Mammon, (or Riches) of Unrighteousness (Riches are
so called, because much Unrighteousness is Acted in the World in getting, in
keeping and in useing them) in order to Everlasting Habitations; The meaning
is, that people should use their Riches, or what they Enjoy, with respect to
their appearance at Judgment: Which if it were minded, the Poor would get a
better share then they do; That this is aimed at, is also clear from ver. 11.
12. Where Faithfulness in useing Worldly Goods is mentioned, which could not
be, if these were not a Trust, that Men have from God, the Giver of them, of
which they must give account to him: This Truth is also manifest from the
account we have of the last Judgment, Math. 25. Where peoples Charity, in
relieving the Poor and distressed, is the one thing mentioned about which God
will Reckon with Men: And surely it will be in a special manner taken notice of.

A Third particular included in the Doctrine is, God will reward this
Liberality to the Poor, the Text is a plain proof of this* Also Prove. 19. 17
where ye see, that they that lay out their Goods thus have Gods Word for a sure
and abundant payment, and his Word is surer than Men's Bond, Yea then the surest
Right, or even possession that ye can have, Mat. 10. 42. Heb. 6. 10. Ecl. 11.
1. And this Giving is called Sowing, which uses to yield a plentiful Crop,
much more income, then is laid out. 2 Cor. 9. 6. Prove. 11. 24. Gal. 6, 7, 8, 9.
10. Prove. 3. 9. 10* This Reward is not of Debt, as if our Charity could merit,
but of Grace; The Lords Gracious Testimony of approving so good a Work. The
Blessings that are the Reward of this Good Work, are always real and sure, and
to them who do it aright, and from a good Principle, they are Eternal: But
often they are visible and observable by Men; sometimes the Lord Blesses such
with Riches and Increase of Goods, Whereas there is a secret Moth and invisible
Consumption upon the Estates of them, who do no good Works this Way.

A Blessing to posterity is often the fruit of this Grace, Psalm. 112: 2. It is
spoken of the Charitable Man* Instances of this may be given; if it were fit to
mention the Names of persons so publicly.

It is the way to raise or to Establish a Family, A good Name, Praise and
Esteem among Men is often the Reward of this good Work, the Remembrance of such
is savory and with respect; The Hospital hard by is an Instance of this, George
Heriot is Remembered with Honor, when the Names of Hoording Misers, and profuse
Wasters, on their Lusts, do Wither, are forgotten that they were on Earth, or
are only spoken off to their Disgrace. And not only the founder, but such as
have improved and promoted this good Work, and made this Charity to extend to 4
or 5 times as many more as could have the benefit of it a few Years ago, Tho.
Fisher Treasurer.
such I say God will Bless, and Man will praise.

Use. That which I shall chiefly insist on by way of Application is* To press
this Duty on them that hear me* many things which may be used as Motives are
already and occasionally mentioned: And I believe none of us, when we consider
the Duty in it self, will deny that it ought to be our care to perform it, but
most Men notwithstanding make a shift to excuse themselves and quiet their
Consciences in the shameful neglect of it, I shall therefore speak but to Three
Heads here. First. What Charitable Liberality should we use. Secondly, Who
should use it. Thirdly, What usually hinders it.

For the First. These Works Regard the Bodies of People, or their Souls, or the
public state of the Nation or Church. Charity to Peoples Bodies is manifold.
By giving Liberally to the Weekly Collection at the Church door, it is God's
Ordinance, 2 Cor. 16. 1. 2. And it is the stock out of which many Poor are
Relieved. Giving to particular needy persons, The Widows, the Fatherless, the
Strangers, the Sick, and Infirm, these who by any cross providence have had
any such losses as brings them to need the Charity of others, poor Families
who do what they can to live, and yet cannot subsist without the help of
others. Lending to some without usury is as really a Duty, and as great a Work
of Charity, as giving a little to others. Psalm. 112. 5. Breeding of Young Ones,
Boys, or Girls. If every Family that is Rich, or can live well, should take a
Young one and feed them, and Cloth them, and breed them in Religion, and to
such Learning as they are capable of, or is fit for them, and put them to
Trades, what a Blessing would it be to the Nation? There would not be so many
Idle persons, Theives and other Debauched persons, who are a burden to City and
Country, and it might entail a Blessing on such Families.

2dly. We should mind that Charitable bestowing that contributeth to the good
of peoples Souls, such as giving somewhat for the propagation of the Gospel in
places of Ignorance and Barbarity; As great Men might contribute much to the
Propagation of the Gospel in the Heathen and Turkish parts of the World, so
Mean Men might do somewhat toward advancing Religion among our Highlanders: An
excellent and worthy person in our Neighbour-Nation, has lately caused print
the Bible in the Highland Language, and sent a great quantity of them to be
distributed among that people O! that some among our Selves would imitate so
worthy a Pattern. Ways enough may be found how such Charity might be well
employed; ^ 's a good Work to contribute to the placeing of Ministers, where
they are wanting, and Encourageing them where they are placed: Alas the
Covetousness and perverseness of Men in some places of the Country does much
obstruct the Gospel, Some keep places, as long vacant as they can. Others
defraud Ministers of what is their due, so that in some places there is a
necessity of removing Ministers for want of Maintenance, as the Levits in
Nehemiahs time Neh. 13* 10, 11. Its sad when there is none to show Charity in
such a case, in setleing a Maintenance where it is not, and sadder when
justice is wanting in getting of what is due, and that to the great detriment
of the Souls of People, It Is an Act of Charity to buy Bibles and practical
Books, and give them to the poor: as some have done, and sent them from London
unto the Remotest places of that Nation, to be distributed.

3dly. Public Charity is a good Work, That is highly commendable, such as
Building and Endowing of Hospitals for the poor, the Sick, the Aged, Strangers,
but especially for Breeding of Young Ones, whether Boys or Girls. Examples of
this kind are rare and followed but by few: In the Hospit^l, that gives
occasion to our meeting to day, we have a great instance of public Charity for
Breeding of Boys. And I understand there is a design on Foot in this City for
the like Charity for Breeding of Girls, which is a pious and commendable work,
and which every one that is capable should contribute toward setting it
foreward, as some to their great Commendation have already done: It is a work,
that may not only be of advantage to the poor Young Ones, and their necessitous
Parents, but may be of public advantage (if wisely and faithfully managed) by
furnishing the City and other places with persons fit for service in Familys,
and for all other Employments that are competent to that Sex, instead of a
great many Theives and Whores, and persons good for nothing, which grow up
without being bred either to Religion, or to any thing else that is good, It is
a good Work to improve what is thus begun, and to make it as useful and
extensive as possible, for the ends that it is (...) for. And when such
Donations are embezled or dilapidated, whether by unfaithfulness, or
Negligence, it is a Heinous Sin. It is als^ for the public good to Erect
Schools and Colleges to (...) Bursarys, whereby many good Spirits, which
through poverty might be lost, are trained up for the public Service; and they
who cannot do thus, might take a poor Student into their house for a time: Also
helping of public Libraries and augmenting them, that they may be stored with
all the best Books for the help of them, that cannot buy of their own: It is
very strange, that this age is so far short of former ages, in all these sorts
of Liberality.

2dly. The second thing proposed is, Who should be thus Liberal^ for private
Charity all are obliged to it, according to their Capacity: public Charity is
out of the reach of many, and there are more who do not what they well might do
this way, it is true, it is only to be expected from them who have somewhat to
spare from the Maintenance of their Familys: But if people were less profuse
that way, they would have more to give for a pious and good use. I shall then
show you from whom such Charity might be expected, First, from Childless
persons, it is they who have been ordinarily most Eminent in these good Works,
especially if they have few necessitous Friends to relieve, and even they who
have these; The public Necessities should have a good share of their Means.
Secondly, They who have much Wealth and few Children, it is a great evil in
many, that they think nothing enough to provide for their Children, many give
to their* Children so much, that it is a snare, makes them mind no Industry
nor Virtue, yea they destroy it and their Souls to the boot, in spending what
their parents have laid up for them: Therefore it is the wisdom of Rich parents
to give their Children what they may comfortably live on, useing Industry and
Frugality, and the rest to lay out for good uses, especially if Children be not
so wise, Sober, and Religious as they should be, they are to be entrusted with
the less.

3ly, Thirdly, Even they who have much Wealth and many Children, they should
not be wholly wanting to this Duty, a little taken off every Child's portion and
piously laid out may entail a Blessing on the Children to their greater Wordly
Advantage, See Prove. 20, 7. If (...) would consider that it is the Blessing of
the Lord that makes (...); and it is that Blessing that raises and preserves
great Families, they would be more careful to lay up a Blessing for them, then
to lay up great Riches for them.

3ly. The third thing is, What does usually hinder this Charitable Liberality.
The Love of the World: The Heart cleaving to it, too high esteem of it, whereby
having it is preferred to the Souls good and peace, and to pleasing God.

2ly, Want of, or defectiveness in the Love of God. 1 Jo, 3, 17.

3dly. A narrow selfish temper, want of a public Spirit; many act as if
nothing were to be regarded but themselves, as if themselves were their last
end.

4 Fourthly, Distrust of God's providence: people will not believe that their
Bread cast on the Waters shall be recovered, or that if they Sow they shall
Reap, they have no such persuasion of the Truth of the Word, as that they can
venture any thing upon it.

5* Fifthly, Pride and Luxury: People that overvalue themselves and despise
others, think nothing enough for themselves, and any thing too much for others,
and people that profusely spend on their pride, Vanity, pleasures and Lusts,
can spare nothing for any good use; It has always been observed, that they who
have done most good, were such as were Frugal in their Expenses on themselves,
they who spend least needlessly, do bestow most Charitably.

6. Sixthly, It has been often a let and discouragement to Liberal Charity
when it is observed, that what is given that way is perverted or used amiss, by
them who were entrusted with it, this, as it is a great guilt in it self, being
Theft and Sacrilege, so it is the Ruin of public good Works, but it will be a
Mo^h, wherever it is found, and it is the part of them, who are in Capacity, to
retrieve what others have done amiss this way; (...) some are endeavoring to
do.

Use 2. What other Exhortation may be given on this occasion is often spoken
to, wherefore I hint at but a few words. 2ly. Then, let Overseers of the
Hospital and of other Mortifications, take care that what is given for so good
Ends, may be employed to the best advantage, according to the will of the
Donor, it is a trust laid on them by God and Man, and they must Answer for it;
It is not only the duty of such Trustees, to see that the Charity of others be
not lost, or if lost, that it may be recovered, but also that it be not
mis-placed, either on such as need it nor: Exact Conscienciousness (is to be
used here, so as not to be biased by any Interest, or Entreaties) or on such
as are wickedly inclined and debauched: (when such evils appear in them they
should be turned out) nor on them who are incapable to learn or neglect to
learn, what they are bred to: Benefices should be taken from such and conferred
upon them who are like to improve them bette

Use. 3 Another Exhortation is to the Governors and Teachers of the Youth, who
are partakers of this Charity for their Education* It lies on you to teach
them carefully what they ought to Learn, especially the grounds of Religion,
that they may not only Repeat the Catechism, but understand it: you should put
them in mind to pray and to Read the Scriptures daily, and curb any budding of
Vice that may appear in them, as Swearing, Lying and such like: your
Faithfulness or neglect in this may have much influence to attain the ends for
which this Charity is given, or to defeat the design of it.

Use. 4 The last Address shall be to the Young Ones on whom this Charity is
bestowed, and for whose good it is bestowed, Acknowledge God's goodness in
providing so for you: Labor to fear God, without which it had been better for
you ye had never been Born, or that ye had Starved in stead of being cared for:
And if ye can apply your Minds to think on what is to come* Think what will
become of Your Souls for ever, And consider also how ye shall live in the
World, if you neglect and mis-spend your time, wherein ye should be sitted for
Serving God, and providing for your selves, ye are like to live Miserably* and
in Contempt all (...): And if ye give your selves to Wickedness now, Satan may
go such hold on your Hearts as never to leave Tempting you, till he bring you
to a woeful End; Pray that the Lord may win your Hearts to him betimes.

FINIS.

