AN ACCOUNT FROM THE City of Chester, OF A Barbarous Persecution, INFLICTED
Upon one of the King's Peaceable Subjects, commonly called a QVAKER. ONLY For
his Lamenting the great Sin of Pride, and Calling the People to Repentance.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street,
and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-street, near the Market, 1700.

The King's Proclamation.
WE do hereby strictly Charge and Command all our Judges, Mayors, Sheriffs,
Justices of Peace, and all other our Officers and Ministers, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, and other our Subjects, whom it may concern, to be
very Vigilant and Strict in the Discovery, and the Effectual Prosecution and
Punishment of all Persons, who shall be guilty of Excessive Drinking,
Blasphemy, and Profane Swearing and Cursing, Lewdness, Profanation of the
Lord's Day, or other Dissolute or Disorderly Practices, as they will answer it
to Almighty God, and upon pain of our Highest Displeasure.

Note, The Prosecution and Punishment is to be of Persons Guilty of the
aforesaid Evils, and not for Lamenting Pride, and Calling People to Repent of
them, that God might not be offended, the Law broke, the King disobeyed, nor
the Justices troubled.

An Account from the City of Chester, OF A Barbarous Persecution, etc.
It Is well said, in the Account of the Reformation of Manners, published with
the Approbation of Twenty Nine Lords, Nine Bishops, and Seven Judges, p. 160,
161.

When Religion is despised, and Virtue is lost, in a Nation -- how easy a Prey
will it prove to its Neighbors. -- And a just God rewards Righteous Nations
with Prosperity, and executes Justice upon those that are Wicked. --

We are acquainted, that before God destroyed the Old World, P. 102.
he saw the Wickedness of Men was great upon the Earth, -- and their Sin is
given as the Reason of their Destruction.

And the Impiety of the Jews, that have for so many Hundred Years been a
Despised and Vagabond People. And does not History tell us, That as the Pride
and Voluptuousness of the Babylonians, P. 103.
so the Lewdness of the Persians, and Luxury of the Greeks, seemed (with their
other sins) to be the Remarkable Causes of the Ruin of those Empires. And the
Romans, P. 104.
-- became so very Degenerate and Debauched, before the Devastations and Ruin
of their Empire, by the Goths, Vandals and Huns; that gave occasion to a Father
to cry out, That the Name of Christ became a Scorn, and the Christian Religion
was Reproached by the Lives of Christians. -- And,

If a Visible Contempt of the sincere Practice of Religion, P. 107.
and a barefaced, insolent and unrestrained Wickedness, -- and a deep
Insensibility, and imminent Danger of Judgment, are sad Indications of Guilt;
it cannot, I think, be denied, but that this was too near the Dismal Case of
England. -- 'And nothing, I think, can be reasonably supposed sufficient to
remove our Guilt, than some considerable and remarkable Reformation; and
perhaps carried through Ranks and Orders of Men, through all parts of the
Kingdom.

Having thus endeavored to prove the Common Obligation which lies upon All
Men, as Christians, and as Members of the Community, P. 110.
to use their sincere Endeavors for a General and National Reformation, and
the Special Obligations of Governors and Ministers, of Subordinate Magistrates
and Inferior Officers, from either the Nature of their Office and Trust, or
their express Oaths to this Purpose.

As also, with Regard to the Parliament's Address, the King's Proclamation, and
the Queen's Letter, formerly mentioned in the said Thomas Rudd's Case.

I shall proceed to give a short Account, how the Magistrates of the City of
Chester, by account from thence, have answered what is above briefly hinted.

The said Thomas Rudd is by Trade a Miller, and his Habitation near Settle in
Yorkshire, and one of the King's Peaceable Subjects, called in scorn a Quaker,
of a Sober Life and Christian Conversation; and, by his Estate and Trade, is
sufficiently able to maintain his Family, and to Render to Caesar, and all Men,
their due, and pays Lot and Scot in the Parish wherein he lives; and therefore
cannot justly, nor in the Eye of the Law, be esteemed a Vagrant Person, nor
ought to suffer as such.

But this honest Conscientious Man, having a Concern upon his Spirit, that Vice
and Wickedness, Pride, Drunkenness, Immorality, and all Profaness, might be
abandoned by all his Countrymen of this Nation; being the Duty of all that
profess Christianity, and pretend to a Reformation, and Sobriety, the Fear of
God, a Christian Life, and an Humble Walking with God, through the teaching and
assistance of his Grace and good Spirit, and greatly desires all might come
thereinto, wherein they might enjoy God's Blessings, and truly Pray to Him, to
avert those severe Judgments, that (as is before hinted) it has been
observable, the Lord has frequently brought upon People and Nations, that have
lived in Pride and Impiety; and therefore on the 23d of the 3d Month, 1700. he,
the said Thomas Rudd, did go about in the Streets of the City of Chester, and
Exhorted the People to fear God, and depart from Evil; which, notwithstanding
it is the Duty and Interest of all People, that would have God's Blessing here,
and Live for evermore, to depart from Evil, and do Good, and fear God; yet he
was put in the Stocks near two hours, and then taken out; And he again
Exhorting the People, when let out, in like manner was committed the same day
to Prison, by Henry Lloyd Alderman and Justice of the Peace in Chester, by
Trade a Clothier, there remained until the 6th of the 5th Month following,
called July, 1700.

And on the 7th of the 5th Month, he was Concerned again to go into the Streets
of the said City of Chester, and to their Cathedral, with this Lamentation: How
does Pride abound? People, how does Pride abound? For all their Teachers
teaching, how does Pride abound? A Forerunner of Destruction, how does it
abound: Where the Bishop, and William Bennet, Mayor of that City, by Trade a
Shoemaker, ordered him to Prison again, and thither in a Rude and Violent
manner was he halled, and close locked up in a back Room, to prevent him from
speaking to the People out of the Prison; as if it was a Crime to Lament Pride,
and Call to Repentance. But when let out, he went again into the Streets, and
at the High Cross, near that called St. Peter's Church; then they took him
again, and had him to the Mayor's Court at Pendhouse; and after Threatening him,
the Mayor, Priest, and Constable, Signed a Warrant, that ordered himto be
Whipped as a Vagrant, and to send him from Constable to Constable toward the
place of his Birth.

And the said Constable did strip him, and rent his Shirt; and in a most Cruel,
Barbarous, Tyrannical Manner, without Mercy, did they whip him on his Naked
Body, with a Whip of strong Cord, and many knots in it; and after they had
Whipped him for a considerable time, they desisted, and then called to the
Mayor for fresh Orders, which he readily granted, and then they whipped him
until his Flesh was bruised like a Jelly; Note, Punishment should not exceed
the Offense.
so that it may be well said, The tender Mercies of the Wicked are Cruelty.

Yet this poor Innocent Man neither moved nor shrunk at all; and when they
halled him away, he continued in his Innocent Testimony, against their ungodly
and wicked doings, in great Love, Life and Zeal; the Lord carrying him through,
and by his Power bore him up over all their Cruelties.

And it is recommended to the Serious and Christian Consideration of all that
shall Read this, whether these Cruel, Illegal and Uncharitable Proceedings, do
not give just occasion for the Name of Christ to become a Scorn, the Christian
Religion to be Reproached; and whether it does not tend greatly to demonstrate,
That the Professors thereof are Degenerated and Debauched, and to bring Ruin
upon the Nation, and a Visible Contempt of the sincere Practice of Religion;
and is it not a barefaced Insolency in these Magistrates, and Wickedness that
ought to be restrained, proceeding from a deep Insensibility, thus to do? And
may not this tend to bring us under imminent Danger of Judgment, and be an
Indication of Guilt? And can this be denied to be too near the Dismal Case of
England? And if nothing can be reasonably supposed sufficient to Remove our
Guilt, as is before said, than some Considerable and Remarkable Reformation,
through all Ranks and Orders of Men, in all parts of the Kingdom, Ought not
these things to be Addressed and Amended? Considering it was Impiety, Pride,
Voluptuousness, Lewdness and Luxury, with other Sins, that was the Ruin of the
Old World, the Jews, Babylonians, Persians, Greeks and Romans, as is before
noted. And is it not to be Lamented, that any of the Church of England, her
Magistrates, Bishops or Priests, should be found so cruelly using any, that
Lament the Pride and Wickedness of the People? And is it not a great Indignity
and Contempt offered to the Parliament's Address, the King's Proclamation, and
the Queen's Letter, against Profaness and Immorality, for any Magistrates to be
found thus Acting against an Honest and Innocent Man, instead of putting the
Laws in Execution against Profaness and Immorality, Cursing, Swearing, Whoring
and Gaming? And how many has this Mayor, the Justices, Bishops or Priests,
punished for the Evils aforesaid, let the Inhabitants of Chester, and their own
Consciences, Witness? Or does it bespeak, that they do herein faithfully
discharge their Oaths, or that common Obligation that lies upon them? And do
they use their sincere Endeavors for a General Reformation? Or have they a due
Regard to the Special Obligations that lies upon Magistrates, and Inferior
Officers, according to their Nature and Trust, so Barbaroufly to use a Man, for
Lamenting of Pride, a Forerunner of Destruction, and calling People to
Repentance, a thing so greatly Needful, and truly Christian? Yet this poor Man,
for so doing, was, on the 9th Instant, again Committed by Henry Lloyd
aforesaid, to the Northgate Prison in Chester, where now he remains a Prisoner,
for Exhorting the People to Repentance, and Amendment of Life.

A Copy of his Mittimus here follows.

To the Keeper of the North-gate, or his Deputy.
City of Chester.
I have sent you Thomas Rudd, a Vagrant Person, that obeys not the Laws, and
disturbs at the Churches in the City of Chester: Therefore in his Majesty's
Name do you keep him safe in your Custody, until he be delivered by Law.

Given under my Hand and Seal this 9th day of July, 1700. Henry Lloyd.
Vera Copia.

Oh! How is the King's Name abused, who approves not of such Severity we
believe? And yet such was the Rage and Enmity of these Men at Chester, that
they told, He deserved to be Hanged, instead of Whipping, and for no other
Fault, but what is aforesaid, if that be one.

Oh! That these things may be truly considered and amended; for surely those
that are found in such cruel Practices, are not led by God's Spirit; and
therefore let all consider whose Children they are, and what will be their
Sentence and Portion hereafter, if they Repent not. The Lord therefore, if it
be his will, give them Repentance, and forgive them their Sins for Christ his
Son's sake, and bring them truly to believe in God and Jesus Christ, and to
walk in his Light, that they may know his Blood to cleanse them from all
Unrighteousness, and his Spirit to Sanctify them, is the hearty desire of the
Sufferer that has been so evilly entreated by them, that so they may escape
the Punishment of Eternal Flames, and being turned into Hell, where the wicked
and all that forget God shall be turned.

Again, Excellent is the Advice in the forecited Book, p. 27.

Let our learned Rabbis, the great Disputers of the World, and that makes
Profession of Religion, but give little better account of it, than by
expressing a Feirce and Uncharitable Heat against those that Differ from them,
in some things relating to Religion, but not Essential to it; wherein all Men,
equally wife and good, have, I doubt, never yet been fully agreed: Think
seriously with themselves, whether they might not employ some share, at least,
of their Parts and Zeal, to much better purpose, in furthering the Reformation
of Men's Lives, and of the Manners of the Nation, by suppressing of Profaneness
and Vice, than by raising and keeping up, with an Unchristian Temper; to the
manifest Injury of the Christian Religion, which is an Institution of Love --
All Religions being, I think, agreed, that bad Men are a scandal to the best
Religion; and that they cannot, if they continue so, be saved in any.

POSTSCRIPT.
NOTE, That the Warrant, for the whipping the Sufferer Thomas Rudd, was signed
by William Bennet aforesaid Mayor, and Peter Newton Priest of that called St.
Peter's in Chester, and Richard Lee an Alehousekeeper Constable; and a Copy
being earnestly desired several times, but could not be obtained.

And from his last Commitment he was discharged the 22d of the 5th Month,
called July, 1700. So he was Prisoner in the City of Chester about Eight Weeks,
only for Exhorting the People to fear God, and depart from Evil; and calling
them to Repentance and Amendment of Life; and Lamenting Pride. And yet this
City which is said to be concerned in the Reformation of Manners, and
Suppressing of Vice and Immorality, have thus severely Punished one, that in
Body and Spirit labors and prays for the good of all Men; and that Holiness
and Righteousness might abound in his Native Country, in and among all the
Inhabitants thereof. And when he was Discharged, did again go, into the Streets
of Chester, to Call to Repentance and Amendment of Life; and another time he
went to the Cathedral, where the Dean came and pushed him away, and called him
Coxcomb. And therefore, as the aforesaid Account begins with Quotations out of
that Book, entitled, An Account of Reformation of Manners, signed by 29 Lords,
9 Bishops, and most of the Judges of the Land: I the Sufferer, shall end this
Pestscript with a Quotation out of the said Book, p. 157, 158. Let us not then
Fellow Christians, who would be accounted faithful Soldiers of Jesus Christ,
Isal. ^1.7.
be afraid of the Reproaches and Railings of such profane and profligate
Wretches; but let us rejoice in them, and in any other Persecution, which we
may undergo in so glorious a Cause. Let us consider, that this Life is the
proper season for Service and Suffering, and the next of Reward and Happiness.
Let the Lives and Deaths of the Martyrs and Confessors of Old be much in our
Minds. Let us remember, that the best Christians in all Ages have been derided
and contemned; that our Blessed Savior himself, Isal. 53.3.
the Captain of our Salvation, who was rejected and despised of Men, has
commanded us not to be afraid of them that kill the Body, Iuke 12.5.
and after that have no more that they can do; but to fear, Him, that has
power to cast into Hell; and has said, That whosoever shall be ashamed of him,
Mark. 8.28.
and of his words; of him also shall he be ashamed, when be comes in the Glory
of his Father, Mat. 5.11.
with the holy Angels: But that if we are Reviled and Persecuted for his sake,
our Reward shall be great in Heaven.

Thomas Rudd.

THE END.

