RULES FOR SELF-EXAMINATION, Extracted out of the Writings of an Eminent
Divine, very necessary for Christians at all Times, Especially at their
Preparation to Recieve the Sacrament of the LORD's SUPPER; that so they may
become Worthy Receivers thereof.
Necessary to be set up in all Men's Houses for the Spiritual Benefit of their
Families.
Sins against the I. Commandment.
1 ATheism; which is, when men either think there is no God, or live as if
there were no God. 2 Idolatry; which is the having of a false God. 3 Ignorance,
uncapableness of Knowledge, Errors and Heresies. 4 Forgetfulness of good
things, especially those that most concern us, and chiefly at that instant when
we should make use of them: Secondly, remembering of evil things, especially of
those that may most corrupt us; and chiefly then, when we should be most free
from the thought of them. 5 Unwillingness unto good things principally to the
best; readiness unto, and wilfulness in evil, especially the worst: Secondly
impatience under crosses. 6 Distrust of Gods power, mercy, etc. promises, and
providence; whence carnal fears are wrought and cherished, and the true fear o^
God is expeld and banished. 7 Presumption upon Gods mercy. 8 Carnal confidence
in Wit, Learning, Wealth, Strength, Friends, etc. Thinking our selves the
better, or safer, simply for them; whence arises pride and security. 9 Much
love of evil; as also of our selves our Friends, our pleasure, profit, credit,
etc. Secondly, little love of God and of goodness, and of Gods Servants and
Services. 10 Hatred of God and goodness: Secondly, want of hatred against our
own and others Sins. 11 Abundance of worldly sorrow, shame and coffeehouse:
Secondly, want of spiritual grief and indignation against our own and others
transgressions: Thirdly, not lamenting for the calamities of Gods People,
private or public 12 Immoderate carnal mirth: to little spiritual joying ^ ing
things either without, o^ against the Rules of the World.
Sins against the II. Commandment.
1 BAse and unwarranted conceits of God, as when we frame any Image of him in
our minds 2 Worshipping of Images 3 Adoration of Ange^s or S^s observing
Holidays in devotion to them, swearing by them, etc. 4 Approbation of
Idolatry, by presence, speech, gesture, silence, keeping of superstitions
Relikes and Monuments, keeping company with Idolaters etc. 5 Neglect of any of
Gods Ordinances as of Preaching, Hearing* Reading* Meditation* Conference, the
use of good Books, and of good Company, of private and public Prayer, Fasting,
making of Vows, etc. 6 Supersticious Fasting rash Vows, Breach of lawful Vows,
abuse of Lots, etc 7 Want of sorrow, for being born of Idolatrous Forefathers.
Sins against the III. Commandment.
1 PRofession, joined with profaneness, whereby Gods Name is dishonored. 2
Abasing of Gods Word: First by fruitless speaking of it: Secondly* framing
jests out of it, or against it: Thirdly, maintaining of Sin by it: Fourthly,
applying it to charming etc. 3 Abasing the Names or Titles of God: First, by
admiration as by saying in our common talk, O Lord, O Jesus, etc Secondly by
cursing, etc 4 Swearing vainly, outragiously, falsely, etc. 5 Blaspheming. 6
Taking a lawful Oath, without due reverence and consideration. 7 Praying
without faith, feeling reverence, serven^ not waiting for an answer etc Asking
evil things: A^ing more in our requests at the relieving of our necessity, than
at the advancement of Gods glory 8 Hearing, reading, meditating, conferring,
singing of Psalms, and receiving the Sacrament, without preparation, attention,
reverence, delight, and profit. 9 Light passing over of Gods great works of
Creation, Preservation, Redemption, as also of other his mercies, and
Judgments. 10 Abuse of our Christian liberty, to the hardening, ensnaring,
perverting, or just grieving of any.
Sins against the IV. Commandment.
1 NEglect of preparation for the Sabbath, before it come, and of fitting our
Hearts for Holy services, when it is come. 2 Profane absence from, or
unfruitful presence at Gods Ordinance. 3 Excessive eating and drinking, which
causes drowsiness, and unfitness for Gods worship. 4 Doing any ordinary work
of our Calling. 5 All Recreations, which distract. 6 Vain and worldly speeches
and thoughts. 7 A secret desire that the Sabbath were over. 8 Neglect of
calling our selves, or others, to a Reckoning after Holy Exercises. 9 Giving
liberty to our selves in the night before the whole Sabbath be ended.
Sins against the V. Commandment.
Sins of Inferiors, as to Superiors.
1 WAnt of reverence, inward or outward. 2 Neglect of Prayer. 3 And of humble
submission.
Sins of Superiors.
^ 2 Failing in Prayer. 3 And in giving good example.
Sins of Children as to Parents.
1 D^ience. 2 Murmuring at their Parents corrections, though unjust 3
Contemning of them, for any defect of body and mind 4 Unthankfulness in not
relieving them, not standing for their deserved credit, etc.
Sins of Parents.
1 Negligence, in not instructing their Children betimes. 2 Not correcting them
till it be too late; or doing it with bitterness, without compassion,
instruction, and Prayer. 3 Giving them ill example. 4 Neglect of bringing them
up in some lawful Caling. 5 Not bestowing them timely and religiously in
Marriage. 6 Light behavior before them, and too much familiarity with them,
whereby they become vile in their Eyes. 7 Loving Beauty, or any outward parts,
more than Gods Image in them. 8 A Sin peculiar to the Mother, is, refusing to
nurse them.
Servants Sins as to Governors.
The three First Sins in Children, may be in Servants as also these that follow.
1 Idleness in their Calling. 2 Un^stiness and unfaithfulness in dealing with
their Masters goods and affairs 3 Stealing, priv^e defrauding of them, etc. 4
Eye serv^ce.
Diverse Sins of Parents are found in Masters, as also these that follow.
1 Unadvised entertainment of Sinful Servants. 2 Not using religious exercises
with them: not admonishing nor correcting them, or doing it in an evil manner:
grieving more when they fail in their business, than when they are slack in
Gods service. 3 Not recompensing their labors, by giving them a due reward
when they are with them, and when they part from them. 4 Neglect of them in
sickness: unjust stopping of their wages for that time. 5 Not relieving them
(if they be able) in their age, who have spent their youth in their service.
Sins of the Wife as to the Husband.
1 Failing in reverence: which appears in froward looks, speeches, or
behavior. 2 Disobedience in the smallest matters.
Sins of the Husband.
1 Not dwelling with his Wife. 2 Neglect of Edifying her, by Instruction and
Example. 3 Denying her comfortable maintenance, and Employment.
Sins common to them both.
1 Want of love. 2 Bewraying one another infirmities: Discovering each others
Secrets. 3 Jealousy. 4 Contention.
Sins of the People, as to Ministers.
Disobeying and opposing against th^i(...) ^ (...) wronged.
Sins of Ministers.
1 Slackness in Preaching. (...) 3 Giving ill Example.
Sins of Subjects.
1 Rebellion. 2 Refusing to pay dues.
Sins of Magistrates.
1 Carelessness in establishing and promoting true Religion. 2 Of maintaining
peace, and providing that Malefactors may be punished, and well-doers be
encouraged.
Sins of Inferiors in gift or Age.
1 Not acknowledging, nor reverencing, nor imitating the Graces of their
Superiors. 2 Despising of the Aged.
Sins against the VI. Commandment.
1 RAsh Anger, Envy, Hatred, Malice. 2 Brawling, Reviling, Threatening, and
provoking of others. 3 Fighting. 4 Cruelty in punishing* oppressing etc. 5
Murdering of our selves, or others, or consent thereto. 6 Immoderate worldly
sorrow: Neglect of Physic, of wholesome diet and exercise, surfeiting and
drunkenness; all which are enemies to the health and life of Man. 7 Cruelty to
our own or others Souls.
Sins against the VII. Commandment.
1 ADultery Fornication, Incest, Rape Sodomy* 2 All wantonness, secret or open,
alone, or with others 3 Nocturnal pollutions lustful dreams etc. 4 Unholy
Marriages in regard of Religion, Age, nearness of blood, want of Parents
consent, etc. 5 Abuse of the Marriage Bed, not observing the time of natural
separation, Lev. 18.19. solemn humiliation. 6 Nourishing of the causes and
occasions of Wantonness as impare Lusts, Surfeiting, Drunkenness, Idleness,
lascivious Apparel, society with lascivious persons, lewd Books Songs, or
Speeches, wanton Looks, Pictures, Stage Plays, Dancing Dalliance, etc. 7
Wearing Apparel, contrary to our Sex. 8 Unlawful Divorce.
Sins against the VIII. Commandment.
1 COvetousnes, and all desire of our Neighbors goods, albeit through fear or
shame we cannot get them. 2 Church robbing. 3 Robb^ng of our selves by
wastfulness in Diet, Apparel, Gaming, etc. by Idlenese, unadvised Suretiship,
N^ggardliness, etc. 4 Robbing of others, taking away the smallest things:
First, by fraud: Secondly, uncharitable enclosure: Thirdly, dealing wrongfully
with the goods of the deceased: Fourthly, deceit in buying and selling:
Fifthly, with holding either things committed unto us, or things found, lent,
earned, or otherwise due 5 Not making of restitution. 6 Counselling, or
consenting to others in Theft.
Sins against the IX. Commandment.
1 FAlse witness bearing in public or private, or consent thereunto. ^
(...)ane reports o(...) 3 Rash suspicion; hard judging interpreting things in
the worst sense. (...) 4 Aggravating and discovering others infirmities,
without care of their credit, others edi^ication, or our own good. 5 Flattery.
6 Lying, though in jest, or to a good end. 7 Boasting 8 Injurous charging of
our selves to be Hypocrites in time of temptation. 9 Want of care of our own
and others good name, that God might have more glory.
The breach of the X. Commandment.
MUltitudes of evil thoughts and motions against our Neighbors, and scarcity
of such as are good.

These Rules are framed (as you see) in reference to the Breach of each
Commandment in the Decalogue, which by the Apostle St. James, is called The
Law of laberty; not that it gives the least encouragement to, but frees us from
the Bondage of Sin and Corruption as it is managed in the hand of a Mediator;
by which if we judge and condemn our selves, we shall not be Condemned with the
world.

FINIS.
LONDON Printed by Ge^rge Cr^o^n in T^ street, over against ^y ^'s Cas^ 1685.


