PRINCE RUPERT HIS REPLY TO A PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, The Parliaments Vindication,
in answer to Prince RUPERTS Declaration. Published by His Excellencies special
command, To inform all His Majesty's good Subjects, what false aspersions have
been cast upon him.

Printed at Oxford by Leonard Lichfield, and now reprinted at London for
Humphrey Blundevill. 1642.

Prince Rupert his Reply to a Pamphlet, entitled, The Parliaments Vindication;
in answer to Prince Ruperts Declaration.
I Made it almost a miracle that the world should see me in Print, when I set
out my Declaration, to expurge my self, and disabuse the world from the
calumnies which have been so maliciously cast upon me. But that which was
voluntary before, is now enforced out of me against my disposition; I am
engaged once more to appear in Print, to return back those notorious and
scandalous lies which an unknown Esquire, ashamed to express his name more
then S. W. in an answer to our Declaration, which he calls The Parliaments
Vindication, has fixed upon my name and honor, upon himself: and certainly
were he known to me, or one worth my anger, I should shape him a language in
another Dialect: but though the wretch be so worthless, I cannot so much
decline my blood and birth, as to make it a business to inquire him out; yet
slanders (like a fatal poison) defuses it self unseene, and blasts men's
memories. And as an ambush against the contagious venom of his aspersions, I
shall divulge to the world the apparent forgeries in that Vindication, and the
impertinency of it, as an answer to our Declaration. And certainly, in
conscience, the honest men of the world must needs rather credit me a Prince,
then the bare assertions of a namelesse fellow, who answers nothing at all
positively, but circumstantially, and conjecturally to our former Declaration.

First, he says (and thinks there he kills my integrity dead) that I spare
the Press for publishing my Declarations, and am more merciful to Paper than
to men; and that this Declaration pend in my own favor, can no way right me.
Is this any the least show of reason? What can more right any man injured, then
a real explanation of his innocence? It was all I aimed at, not to satisfy
such worthy Gentlemen as this Pamphleter is, but to give the noble and brave
spirits, and honest minded Gentlemen and Citizens that are against us, a full
and true intelligence, how much my fame had been traduced and vituperated by
such Rascals, as this seems to be; whose apparen tuntruths so honorably I
conceive of the Parliament, though they love me not) could it know the audacious
author of them, Its Justice would severely punish, and that he knew well
enough, when he only set two doubtful letters instead of his whole name
before his Pamphlet.

And to that truth which I charged the Lord Wharton with, with an impertinent
supposition he replies it may be answered, that my Lord Wharton knew the great
advantage gotten at Edge Hill, had many concurrent Causes, and what that
concerns my charge against that Lord, let all the world be Judge; and then in
flat railing he comments upon, but not answers the sense of our Declaration; he
tells the people that Prince Rupert and his troopers plundered the Country, and
bids them ask the men whom we had plundered, and their general affirmation
would confute our particular assertion, and certify the world, Prince Rupert
cannot be innocent of these outrages; and that my Lord Wharton may be
vindicated by that testimony, to have spoken nothing but truth: And that my
Lord durst tell me to my face, that I was a plundring Prince, and with his
sword make proof there is nothing but forgery and falsehood in my Declaration:
but surely the fellow, though he may have been in my Lord Whartons company,
is none of his Counsel, promising more in his behalf then I believe his
Lorship will ever venture to perform. I could wish he durst or would verify
his Champions words, I should, waving all the disparity betwixt our bloods,
gladly entertain the motion and the success should speak who was guilty of
the untruth; but I fear his Lordship is not yet furnished with so noble a
resolution, in time perhaps he may be persuaded into it: but let my most
severe enemies be my witness, how plain, and without the least blemish my
Declaration yet stands: for all the tedious circumstance this Esquire (for
ought I know of the Damsels) has cried against its verity. It is a proof
sufficient, that I have plundered houses, because he affirms it from the
testimony of men in the Moon, for (surely upon this earth they have no
residence. Where are those men that will affirm it? in what County or Town
stood those houses, by me or my sufferance betrayed to that misery of rapine?
let him but name them, and I shall not deny mine own act, when I am so
palpably convinced; it were an impudence beyond all former examples. For the
faintheartednesse of their soldiers at Keynton, which I touch in my
Declaration, it seems the answer of it would make men believe the goodness of
their cause must in point of necessity exalt their courage to the height of
daring; in Gods name, let him strive to sooth the people with a conceit we
were vanquished, I wish at no time better success against any of his Majesty's
enemies then we had at Keynton, or at Worcester. But as if this gallant had a
privilege for his railing untruths, he comes upon us with questions as
ridiculous as false, namely, who it was that compelled diverse of their eminent
Captains to ride stark naked? who it was that drove their men like beasts
before our Army? and then affirmatively he says, they took a religious
Gentleman at Thisleworth, and fastened a cord to his feet, and dragged him about
the town, and then shot him with a pistol. I shall do the good Gentleman the
honor to answer his questions, which, if they were true, yet what am I
concerned in them? For if the soldiers did as the law of arms allows them,
strip some of their Captains, was I engaged either to prohibit them the
making the best of their prisonem? or obliged to recloth those Captains that
were divested of their apparel? For driving their men like beasts before our
army, belike the said Gentleman imagines we are bound in courtesy to go a
foot, and give their men (our prisoners) our horses. If we did drive them like
beasts, we were not much to blame to use them according to what indeed they
were; but that they took a religious Gentleman at Thisleworth, and used as
aforesaid, what They those were, is altogether beyond my knowledge, much more
therefore distant either from my command or connivence; but it should seem his
ipse dixit is enough to render me guilty, because he affirms it is well known
we continually use it in our army, and then with unnecessary digressions and
repetitions he runs on railing at my particular cruelty, saying, that I would
make them believe I am just and merciful, which they may sooner credit of a
Butcher, who kills Sheep for the goodness of their flesh; and so Prince
Rupert murders the Kings Subjects for their good affections to the King and
Parliament. An excellent purity, and worthy such an author as has no name he
dares be called by: where, or by what means, private or public, have I sought
the death of any of his Majesty's Subjects? who is it can testify this against
me? certainly, were I arraigned before the severest and most partial Juries in
the world, they would acquit me, this man's bare asseveration would not condemn
me. Perhaps, as it is warrantable both by the laws of heaven and nations, in a
lawful war, to endeavor to destroy as many of ones enemies as come within his
reach, that I must confess I did at Keynton, and elsewhere, when I was called
to it by just occasion, but that is no way a confirmation to his Butcherly
comparison. Then as if he would convince me for the notoriousest liar in the
world; he tells me it does not become the son of a King to stretch his words
beyond belief beyond his belief, be means, who (only because himself fancies
it so) will conclude and averrest to the world, that whatsoever I have
protested is false, But I hope some man of quality, and all indifferent souls
beside, will not let it be beyond their belief, and then I shall not trouble
my self to think on so abject a persons calumny, who without fear of heaven
or hell, or punishment for his impudence, goes on taxing me for an Incendiary
of these wars, inciting his Majesty, my royal Uncle, to a civil war against
his loving Subjects: but I attest heaven and his sacred Majesty, as my
witness, it is a crime I never was guilty of in thought, but always desired
that a fair atonement might (if it might with the honor of my royal Uncle
have been effected) suddenly have proceeded betwixt him and his Parliament, and
for that purpose have often been an humble intercessor to his Majesty: For my
taking away the Majors plate at Reading, and other places, if I had done such
an action, by the law of arms it might have been justified; but I must needs
ask this fellow what those other places were? or where got he the
intelligence of my plundring the Mayor of Reading? he will answer, they said
it; but who they were, he knows not: in truth nor I neither, nor no man else;
for if the Mayor of Reading were put to his oath, I have so much confidence in
the honesty of the man, that he would not only acquit me of that action, but
report honorably of me, that I used him with all respects befitted a person of
his worth to receive from one of my quality: and whereas he says, my actions
contradict my words, or else are not full of that sense they ought to be,
surely the man is either very mad, or foolish, or both, he could never be so
impudent else, or ignorant of the meaning of my words, which are plain and
perspicuous in my Declaration, namely, That I will never fight in an
unrighteous quarrel; nor have I hitherto, nor ever will hereafter violate that
promise, whatsoever aspersion this or the like slanderous Pamphlet shall cast
upon me.

And whereas in the end of my Declaration I say, I should repute it the
greatest victory in the world to see his Majesty enter London in peace without
shedding one drop of blood or plundring any of one farthing: at that weapon he
thinks to pay me home, demanding how any reasonable man can believe that I
should desire it, when it is supposed I have been the chief agent to provoke
the King to advance his Army so near it, and that I and my Cavaliers had
divided the streets among us before our coming hither. This of all calumnies
(with which his saucy false vindication is stuffed) is the most malicious and
untrue, when I take heavens for my voucher in this truth, that there is no City
in his Majesty's Dominions, nay not in Europe, that I bear more unfeigned
respects to, then to that famous and noble City, which I have always accounted
the most eminent appendix to my gracious Uncles Crown, his Chamber and chief
residence, and have always thought of its Citizens as loyal and valiant men,
and as well exercised in martial discipline as any soldiers in Christendom.
But I lose time in minding a thing so ridiculous as this vindication, much more
in answering its contumelious falsehoods severally: nor might it beseem the
dignity of a Prince to have taken notice of so infamous a Libeller as this
unknown Esquire is, had not the importunity of some friends prevailed above
mine own will with me, nor doubt I; but all the world will credit my
asseverations, when they shall really consider the improbability and untruth of
those of my accusers.

FINIS.

