PRINCE ROBERT HIS SPEECH TO THE EARL OF ESSEX The morning before he marched
forth with his Forces: AND HIS EXCELLENCES Answer thereunto. Also the manner of
his marching out with his Forces from Northampton on Monday Sept. 19. and the
number thereof. Likewise the manner of the disarming of the Papists and
ill-affected persons in Lincolnshire (by the Earl of Lincoln and Gentry of the
County) and causing them to subscribe for money and horse for the King and
Parliament, with the like proceedings in Yorkshire.

LONDON, September. 21. Printed for T. Cook. 1641.

PRINCE ROBERTS MESSAGE to his Excellency the morning before he marched forth
with his Forces, and his Excellencies Answer thereunto.
Also the manner of the disarming of the Papists and ill-affected persons in
Lincolnshire, and causing them to subscribe to find money and horse for the
Parliament, with the like proceedings in Yorkshire.
ON Monday the 19. of September the Earl of Essex having received Letters from
the Parliament to advance his Forces from Northampton caused Drums to be beated
up at four a clock in the morning, to call the soldiers together* and about
six of the clock in the morning all the Colonels and Commanders attended on his
Excellency, signifying that their soulders were in a readiness to march with
his Excellency: which they had no sooner done, but there came a Message from
Prince Robert to his Excellency the Earl of Essex, intimating that he had
received certain information, that the said Earl of Essex was in a traiterous
manner raising forces against his Majesty and had advanced forward and
approached near unto his Majesty's person with force and Arms making war
against his Majesty and his good Subjects, and that he heard the said Earl
intended to march tewards Coventry which if he did he would give him the
meeting at Dunsmore Heath and would be well provided against his coming
thither.

Whereupon his Excellency returned answer, that the manner of his raising
those forces that were then with him ready to march under his command was a
thing not now to be disputed upon between them, the occosions* and legality
thereof being already determined by both houses of Parliament, neither had he
undertaken that Command with an intent for to leavy forces or make war against
his Majesty's royal person but to obtain a peace between his sacred Majesty
and his great Counsel of Parliament and all the rest of his Majesty's
faithful dutiful and most loyal Subjects against any persons whatsoever that
should oppose and resist the same and that he feared not to meet the said
Prince in any place that he should appoint or make choice of.

And thereupon about ten of the clock the same day his Excellency advanced his
Forces, consisting of about two and twenty thousand Horse and Foot, intending
to march about eight miles that night; which the Country people inhabiting
thereabouts having intelligence of, came in great multitudes to express their
true love and unfeigned affection to his Excellency and his honorable Person,
and also to show a testimony of their love and earnest desire of the good
success of that cause which he had undertaken, the greatest part of the Gentry
of that County coming thither in great pomp and state to attend his
Excellency, and marched before him out of the town, and the meaner sort of
people expressed themselves with great acclamations of joy, to see his
Excellency accompanied with such a number of brave, resolute, able men, which
number the country would have been glad to have doubled, their affection was
so great to this service.

It is credibly reported, that the Kings Majesty is gone into Staffordshire,
and from thence is intended to take his journey unto Shrewesbury, because some
of his carriages are gone thitherward already, where also his Majesty expects
great supplies of aid and assistance to come out of North Wales, about two
thousand of them being come down into Shropshire and Cheshire already, but none
of them dare come into the town of Shrewsbury, because the townsmen do threaten
to beat them out again if they come thither, or at least to do by them as the
Citizens of Chester did by three hundred Welchmen that the Lord Strange had
bileted there, who when they went forth of the City to exercise, shut the gates
against them, and kept them out.

It is reported his Excellency will march with Forces directly toward
Coventry, and in his passage thither he is to march over Dunsmore Heath, where
it is conceived that the great Challenger Prince Robert will play least in
sight; for he knows it is not firing of houses that will there serve his
turn, which is the way wherein he shows his greatest valor: but he might have
done better to have retorted that piece of Art upon the Spaniard, who by that
means wrought the great ruin in the Palatinate.

The Earl of Lincoln, with many Gentlemen and Freeholders in the County of
Lincoln, considering the dangerous estate in which this Kingdom now stands,
have gathered together in that County, and have searched all the Papists and
ill-affected Protestants houses of any worth in that County, and have not only
taken away their arms, but have also forced them to subscribe to maintain
horse and moneys for the King and Parliament, so that this County is now
secured for the Parliament, the greatest part of the Country being so much
incensed against the Cavaliers that they say, if any of them come again
thither, they will be their executioners.

In Yorkshire they are very quiet, Sir John Hotham having lately defeated some
troops of the Earl of Cumberlands. The City is all for the King and
Parliament, they hope that other Countries will take warning by their
ignorance for at the first they being ignorant of the cause of the devision
between the King and Parliament and of the insolent behavior of the Cavaliers
had some relish of an indifferent good opinion of their cause which made many
of them decline from the Parliament at that time which being now better
informed are for it, and although this County sends forty Members to the
Parliament, and there is not above three or four of them that has continued
firm and constant to the house yet now we hear diverse of them are changed in
their opinions and would gladly be received again into the house, we are here
about to take the course amongst those that are Popishly affected and of the
malignant faction, as they have done in Lincolnshire and although we shall not
tender any oath of association yet we intend to make such a tie between them
and the Parliament that they shall not get off without forfeiture of that which
they will be unwilling to loose.

FINIS.

